REASON AND RELIGION.

OR THE CERTAIN RVLE OF FAITH, Where the Infallibility of the Roman Catholic
Church is asserted, against Atheists, Heathens, Jews, Turks, and all Sectaries.

WITH A REFVTATION OF Mr STILLINGFLEETS Many gross Errors. By E. W.

Author of the Book called, PROTESTANCY WITHOUT PRINCIPLES

Poteram..... Omnes Propositionum rivulos, vno Ecclesiae sole siccare. Hier.
contra Lucifer. c. vlt. fine.



PRINTED AT ANTWERP, By MICHAEL CNOBBAERT, in the Year 1672.

Permissu Su^

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
REligion, that choice Evangelical Pearl. Matthew 13. the best Inheritance, and
richest Treasure God has bequeathed to Christians, though found and strongly
guarded, meet's yet with many who long since, had their weak attempts
prevailed, would have thrown it out of the world. Atheist's deny a Deity, the
only fundation of Religion, Jews oppose Christ, the great Master of Truth, and
Heretics band against an euidenced universal Church, that large field wherein
this precious Jewel is found. These Adversaries we encounter, and our design is
both to vnbeguile and silence them. In the first place we attaque those grosser
Enemies, Atheists, Jews, Turks, and Infidels. This done, we enter upon the
main matter, and freindly treat with our Modern Sectaries by the force of plain
and undeniable Principles: If these stand (which none can shake) Protestancy
falls to nothing. I call this Treatise the Rule of Faith, where you have the
Inducements, which lead to the knowledge of true Religion clearly proposed, and
strongly Maintained against all Opposers, whose cauils and Calumnies repugnant
to truth, will appear as they are vain and forceles, after due ponderation of
the Principles we rely on.

The prudent search after Religion is ever made and first begun with Reason, or
a rational discourse, for I hold this Principle indubitable. None can assent to
the high revealed Mysteries of Faith, without preuious evidence had of their
Credibility laid forth to reason* Now because Atheists, Arians, and all
Heretics, hold what they teach reasonable, it is necessary to distinguish
between false and true Reason, as also rigidly to Examine what ever belongs to
that whole Matter, which is amply done in the 14th. 15th. and, 16th. Chapters
of the third Discourse, where we prove that Religion is only Reasonable, which
Heaven it self declares reasonable, by such visible, sensible, and illustrious
Marks as have gained Millions to believe in Christ, and no other but God's
Infinite Power and wisdom, can produce. Hereupon, we lay forth the signal Marks
of the Roman Catholic Church, clear Cognisances of an Infinite Power and
Wisdom, Miracles most evident, Conversions of Nations wrought by Her,
Succession of Pastors, ever since the Apostles preached, with a strict unity of
one Faith in all that Professed Her Doctrine. We look next upon this late risen
Protestancy and find it naked, utterly stripped of all supernatural Motives: No
Miracles, no Conuersions, no unity in Faith to countenance the Nouelty, and
therefore conclude that the Professors of it who seemingly stand for Reason,
and slight an euidenced Church, are most unreasonable, and as daily experience
teaches, mere Scepticks in Matters of Religion.

Clemens Romans in Recog: D. Petri. hereafter cited, gives this wise Counsel to
every prudent seeker after Truth. Before all things examine well by the light of
rational Motives; whether one that pretend's to speak in the name of God, and
call's himself a Prophet sent to preach, proves himself to be really so. Thus
much learned (and the knowledge is easily gained, because grounded upon
evidence) believe boldly all he teaches, though his Doctrine be sublime, and
seems difficult to weak reason. The first converted Christians were thus
induced by the Luster of our Saviors glorious Miracles and other Signal
wonders, to own him as he was, a great Prophet, or the true Messiah sent from
God, and afterward believed what ever Doctrine he taught, upon his own
Infallible word. Apply what is here said to the Roman Catholic Church, you
will find this great Truth made manifest in the following Discourses. viz. That
as no Prophet, no Doctor, ever came near Christ our Lord in the wonders he
wrought, so no Society of men since the world stood, was, or is Comparable in
Miracles and other Cognizances of truth, to the Roman Catholic Church. She as
I now said, and no other Society, shows you a Continued Succession of Pastors,
of Princes, and People since the first Plantation of the Gospel. She and no
other, has been always reverenced all Nations over, and was never opposed by
Orthodox Christians. She gives you a large Catalogue of Innumerable Professors
eminent in learning, in wisdom, and sanctity of life. In Her the ancient
Predictions of Prophets, are literally fulfilled. Her universal extent far and
near, is evident; The Conuersions wrought by her, Evident. The Courage and
Constancy of Martyrs who dyed for her Faith, Evident. Her ancient Possession of
truth (for Confessedly she was once Orthodox) is undeniable, And this is the
Church, Gentle Reader, our Sectaries would destroy, This Oracle, though
signalized with so many Illustrious Marks, and Indications proceeding from God,
inspite of Heaven, they injuriously Calumniate as Idolatrous, and Heretical,
And Consequently make those Millions and Millions, who both living and dying
zealously sought to serve no other but the great God of Truth in this blessed
Society, Fools, Madmen, Idolaters, and Heretics. I say Calumniate, for all
they have done hitherto, or can do for the future, comes to no more but to a
flat injurious Calumny, as is euidenced in the third Discourse. C. 19. where
you are told, that whoever impeaches an ancient Church (once acknowledged
Orthodox) of Idolatry, and proves not his charge, by clear and undeniable
Principles, Calumniates must unjustly, and sin's damnably, Protestants do so,
as is there largely proved, and the truth is manifest in their own writings.
They tell us the Roman Catholic Church though once right in Faith, changed Her
ancient Doctrine, we justly urge them to prove the Assertion by some
unquestionable Principles, more convincing, or of greater weight and strength
to persuade what they assert, then the public judgment of all sound
Christians living at that time, to persuade the Contrary; And Mark a strange
Proceeding, the Calumny it self is returned upon us, without either Proof or
probable Principle to uphold it, but their own bare and proofles word. We are
told again, there was ever a Catholic Church without blemish, at least in
fundamentals, (for that Article of the Creed. I believe the Holy Catholic
Church was true in all Ages) We seriously demand where, or in what part of
Christendom that Orthodox Church (distinct from the Roman Catholic) had its
being at that time, when the Roman fell from Christ, and became Idolatrous?
There was such a Church which censured and condemned the supposed Roman
Errors, or not; If not, the world upon those supposed errors, was wholly
Churchles. Grant an Orthodox Church distinct from the Roman, She certainly
opposed those Imagined false Roman Doctrins, which then began to infect the
Moral Body of Christians, and Consequently that Opposition was a thing as
notoriously known, as loudly noised some Centuries since, as it is Notoriously
known and noised, that our Sectaries have now espied those false Doctrins. We
urge them to bring to light that public known Opposition of their Imagined
Church, against the Roman Catholic Society fancied a Changling, And what have
we? Deep silence from some, and from such as dare speak, false Suppositions for
Proofs, unworthy Calumnies for an Answer. Please to se this Argument fully
handled. Disc. 2. C. 6.

Time was, the world knows well, when our Adversaries avouched they could
prove their Protestancy, and refute our Catholic Doctrine by plain and
express-Scripture, we come to the true Trial in this Treatise, and in lieu of
God's word, find their Books full fraught with mere far-fetcht Glosses. Not one
Passage I boldly assert, (and put Sectaries to the Proof) favors this
Protestancy, as it is distinguished from Popery, and the known Heresies of
former Ages. Now that nothing from Scripture can be alleged Contrary to our
Catholic Doctrine, is manifest upon this one Principle, which none shall
overthrow. What Scripture faithfully interpreted teaches in these weighty
matters of Religion, some Orthodox Church delivered in foregoing Ages: For
example. If Scripture deny Adoration to Christ in the Blessed Sacrament, or
Transubstantiation, an Orthodox Church, which cannot clash with the verities of
God's word, in some Age or other maintained these Protestant Tenets, and
published them to Christians, But no Orthodox Church ever sided with Sectaries,
or taught such Doctrins, Therefore their pretense to Scripture against our
Catholic Tenets is frivolous, and implies no more but a false supposition for
a Proof. And this strain of turning bare Suppositions into proofs, which never
go beyond the strength of their own unproven Assertions, so universally
trancends all their Polemicks that I stand astonished, to se men who will be
accounted learned, wholly busied in doing Nothing. Reflect I beseech you a
little. They have been told, and I remind them of it again in this Treatise,
that whoeuer makes the Roman Church Idolatrous or Erroneous, must hold the
supposed Idolatry and error so remediles an Evil, that none on earth can
redress either, because all the Proofs or Principles whereby the Reformation
should be made, will evidently appear less ponderous to Euince this Church
guilty of error, then Her sole Authority is to persuade the Contrary, viz.
That she never erred. Wherefore Sectaries Confessedly fallible men, desperately
adventure to reform us, and cannot but spoil all they go about to mend, whilst
they Evidence not, whilst they plead not, by the Authority of an Ancient
Orthodox Church which taught that very Protestancy they teach now, and decryed
these Supposed Popish errors as loudly as they decry them: But to do thus much
is impossible, as manifestly appears by their own writings, For tell me I
beseech you, whoever yet heard Protestant in all those weak skirmishes made
against Catholic Religion, Say plainly and prove it. Such a Church reputed
Orthodox five or Six Ages since, taught as we teach, sensed Scriptures as we
sense them, Christians then universally believed no Real Presence, No sacrifice
of the Mass etc. Has ever Protestant, I say, gone thus groundedly to work? No,
Most evidently, No. I shall highly extol the man that will dare to proceed so
ingenuously, but find none engaged in this right way of Arguing. Its true, some
who leap over the heads of all their more Immediate Ancestors, between Luther
and the three or four first Centuries, tell us those Primitive Christians were
good Protestants like them. Ill luck Say I that Protestancy had, not to be
intailed upon some Successors in following Ages, for most certainly since those
days, the world never saw Protestant before Luther. In a word the Assertion is
a loud untruth, an unworthy begging of Question, and besides implies a fancied
supposition for a Proof. To show this, we reduce these ranging Spirits to a
lesser compass, and oblige them to name but one Protestant, nearer their
shameful Revolt from our Catholic Society. Here they stand grauelled, as mute
as fishes, and are highly angry, because we touch them where they are most weak.

This want of a Church to ground Protestancy upon, makes their Polemicks to be
as they appear, rambling, faint, shallow, and so dissatisfactory, that great
patience is requisite to peruse them. VVonder nothing, they can do no better,
Rebels they are against an ancient Church, and their handling Controversies
may well be compared with the proceeding of Rebels in a Common wealth, who
curiously mark, and diligently attend to what ever may seem welcome to your
ignorant, seduced, and disgusted Multitudes, That, be it what you will, is
fomented, that is laid forth, and inculcated. It is no news to tell you, that
our Ministers in England now for a long time, have had a number of seduced
People bread in their own rebellious bosoms, and brought up in a spirit of
Schism, who God knows have heard little, but of the Idolatry, of the
Superstitions, and wickedness of some Professed Catholics. O, say these
Incendiaries, we will nourish this Popular humor with food suitable to its
palate, we will write Books of this Popish Idolatry, we have tongues and can
poison with delight, we will lay forth in folio what we conceive of the Roman
Superstiti^ns, and the wickedness of Popes. We know well to Cauil, and how to
ensnare the vulgar, on whom we depend, when our Cauils are once out, though
neither reducible to Principles, nor subject to the Censure of any Judge (for
we own none) let them shift for themselves. Our only care is to talk on, though
we prove nothing, And chiefly to be wary in one particular, It is never to
mention any thing of a Church which taught Protestancy before Luther, meddle
with that Mischiuous difficulty we are undone, for really we have no such
Church. This in a word (and much worse) is Protestancy, as is amply declared
in the following Treatise, where you also have the distinctiue Cognisances of
Christ's true Church, the Rule of Faith, and the Properties of a Rule
explained; vvithall, an easy way whereby to put an end to these unfortunate
Controversies. You have moreover the Infallibility of the Roman Catholic
Church asserted, Faith resolved into its true Principles, Mr Stillingfleets
grosser Errors discovered, The Reasonableness of Catholic Religion laid forth
to every rational man, And to omit other Questions (all cannot be hinted at in
the narrow compass of a Preface) you have this great Truth proved. viz. That
if the Roman Catholic Church has taught but one false Article, and obliged
all Christians to believe it under pain of damnation, there neither is at this
day, nor was before Luther any true faith in the world. Wherefore Sectaries
who have made it their chief business to impeach our Church of Idolatry, and
Heresy (and the louder they cried, the more they thought to destroy us) have
done their utmost to ruin all the Churches on earth, and prove themselves
thereby both Faithles and Churchles. But enough for a Preface. Open and read.
Approve or condemn, as reason shall guide you. In case you Condemn, please to
say, Why, and show me where I err in Principles. Pardon the faults of the
Printer which are many (he is a stranger to our Language) except against mine
boldly, if you find any, but do it with Charity, and still, for this I must
inculcate again and again, Remember Principles.

Farewell.
AN ADVERTISEMENT FOR Mr STILLINGFLEET
Sr.
PLain dealing is the best, you shall have it in this short Advertisement from
a friendly Adversary (no Enemy I assure you) who desires to do you good,
against your will. If I be rightly informed, Both you and some others find your
selves dissatisfied upon this score, that your Rational Account (as it is called)
comprehending the Grounds of Protestant Religion, remain's yet untouched, or
not answered. Before I reply to these complaints, I shall take the boldness to
request one favor at your hands (you will much oblige me by it) which is to
point out that Chapter or Paragraph through your whole Book, wherein the hidden
treasure of these Protestant Grounds lie, and to give me in a few lines, one or
two of them plainly set down in half a Sheet of paper. I speak of Grounds for
Protestancy, as it is your peculiar Religion distinct from Popery, and all
known Condemned Hereties. Fob me not off, I beseech you, with any general talk,
Tell me not I must seek better and shall find, For, Sr, I assure you though I
have made a diligent Search after your Grounds, they are yet so far removed
from my sight, that I cannot find one. Wherefore, because you are more
Conversant in your own writings then others, and, Plus vident oculi quam
oculus, I beg to be enlightened by you. If you fail to do this, the world will
judge as I do, that you have abused the Reader with a Title, whereunto nothing
in your voluminous Book answer's. I mean you have no more touched upon Grounds
for Protestancy (as Protestancy and mark my words) then for Arianism, or any
other false Religion.

In the perusal of your Book I se what beguiled you. You, Sr, thought to throw
that little dirt (wherewith some have furnished you) in our faces, was enough
to make your bad cause Specious, and to prop up your Protestancy, as if
forsooth to Cavil at us, were to establish your Novelties. Know good Sr, that
both Arians and all other gone Heretics, were as fierce in their Cauils
against the Church as you are, but did they therefore either ground or
establish their false Doctrins contrary to Gods Truths? It is a gross error to
think so; For as it is one thing foolishly to brandish a Sword, and another
fitly to use a Buckler, so it is a quite different business slightly to impugn
Catholic Religion, and another to defend Protestancy. Tht first you have
attempted like your old Heretics, and with as ill success; But the second,
which is to maintain Protestancy, or to settle that upon solid Grounds, neither
is, nor was, nor ever shall be done by any, wherefore I tell you in* this
Treatise (read it if you please) This Protestancy is wholly ungrounded, God
never revealed one Article of it (as Protestancy) nor did ever ancient or
modern Orthodox Church teach so much as one of your Particular Tenets, And for
this reason I say, its falsely called the reformed Religion, having neither
Essence, nor the Properties of Religion belonging to it.

Now for as much as Concern's your Clamours, because you think your Book
neglected, or not yet Answered. First, give me leave to tell you, it is a great
Vanity to rise to so high a conceit of your self or of your Book (as if you
were the only Defender of your Faith) and a greater to publish it to the world.
what think you, Cannot Protestancy be impugned without taking you or your work
in hand? Its little wisdom to judge so. A Soldier, good Sir, who intend's to
invade an enemy takes no directions from him, how to enter his Country, much
less busies his thoughts about removing every straw, or every little block that
lies in his way, but marches on, as he thinks best to compass his Design. To
overthrow your Protestancy is our Design, and you most unreasonably prescribe,
what we are to do, That is, we must either attaque your Fort and meddle with
your Account, or you think nothing is done. Why so I beseech you? Grant, which
is not true that those who have written since your Account saw light, passed by
it without much notice, they might well do so, looking on it as a Block not
worth removing, unless, as I say, you will have them to obey your Commands, and
assault what Outwork you please. It is Sr, your Cause we more mind, then your
Account. 2. Why do you (or some body for you) not only shamefully stopp all the
Presses, in so much that scarce a sheet of paper can appear in public; But
moreover, why have you (when all liberty is granted to scrible and print what
you please) omitted to Answer those Books, which directly impugn your Doctrine.
That excellent Guide of Controversies is the One, and Protestancy without
Principles, the other: And you have done this with much uncivil scornful
Language, with a mere forced Pish from the teeth outward at the end of a
Preface, as if, forsooth, you would be thought to Say; You Could Answer but
will not, vvbereas the naked truth is (at least wise men Judge so) you would
Answer but, Cannot. Sr, believe me, it would have been much to the purpose, and
far more satisfactory to your Protestant Brethren, had you, when you saw your
Protestancy (to speak moderatly) well shaken in those two Books, replied to
some particulars, and showed where either the Principles were false, or their
Discourses failed, But you Cowardly quitted the field, sat down silent,
busying your self with reprinting a few Sermons, whereof the world had no need
at all. And this (it is thought) was done to cloak your Lazines, your ignorance
or both, because you could not Answer, yet we are called on to quarrel with
you, whilst you like a Privileged Person exempt your self from meddling with
us. That is we must speak, and you say nothing.

But, Sr, let us come nearer the point and tell you truth. Whatever you account
substantial in your Book, has been answered by your two scorned Adversaries,
and if any thing be yet wanting, it is amply supplied in this Treatise. To
conceive what I would prove, please to Note. There are two ways in answering a
Book. The one is to follow an Author step after step, by examining severally
each piece of the Whole: The other is to Consider the Principles whereupon the
Whole relyes, showing them either false in themselves, or not connex't with
those Conclusions which should follow from them. Destroy Principles, you
destroy all. Thus the Motion of a Watch may be spoiled two ways, either by
disordering every wheel in it, a part, or by breaking the Spring. The fairest
Palace ever was, is ruine'd, if either you separate every stone from stone, or
if you undermine the fundation and blow up the whole Fabric, though many of
the stones strongly Cimented, cling yet together. The first way of answering by
piecemeal, is tedious and obscure, and as things are with us (by reason of the
difficulty in Printing and transmitting Books into England) almost impossible,
The other is clear and easy, both are satisfactory to every rational man, and I
hold the second most necessary, For, in all our Discourses there must be some
firm Principles laid whereunto we reduce, and from whence we draw what we
Assert, which several ways of discoursing, Compose the two different Methods,
Analytical and Synthetical, obserucd by Philosophers and Divines. Neither is
the Foundation more necessary to a house, or the weight to a clock, then
Principles are to a Discourse, which then is good, when the grounds stand firm,
and the Deductions of the particular Conclusion from them, clear: But if either
the Principles be false and alien, or the Deductions not Coherent, the whole
Discourse falls to nothing.

Apply what is here said to your Account, or rather to the Religion it Asserts,
and you have all I would Say. Your Account, Sr, was writ to vindicate
Protestancy, and must stand upon the same Principles with that Nouelty,
therefore whatever shak's and ruin's the Principles of Protestancy, necessarily
shak's, and ruin's the Principles of your Account, But your Supposed Principles
or Grounds of Protestancy are broken, yea demonstrated no Grounds at all, in
the Book intitl'd Protestancy without Principles, where they arc proved either
false, or no Principles peculiar to your Religion, as it is distinct from the
Doctrine of other Societies, called Non-Protestants, And consequently when true,
they have no Connection with Protestancy, nor can lead in any conclusion for
you, And where they are false, their falsity is laid before your eyes, and an
utter subversion of your Cause, and Account with it, because neither can stand,
when your supposed Principles are destroyed, or rather found never to have had
Being. And thus your Book is solidly Answered. If you desire to se more ruin
yet fallen upon you, read this Treatise, and be pleased to reflect upon these
three things in your Account. The length of it, The Objections against
Catholic Religion, and finally your Principles for Protestancy. We find two of
them, but miss the third. The length mighty tedious, and (too often without
substance) wearies a Reader, God help him (say I) that undergoes the druggery
to turn over all the uneven stuff which lies heap't up there. Your Objections,
usually borrowed from Mr Chillingworth and some other Protestant Writers, are
for the most part common, and such as have been answered over and over: Where
you think them peculiar to your self (as they lay in my way) I have reioyned,
and if some be omitted, that is only to Say, every stone in your Fabric is not
touched, or meddled with, But for as much as concerns your Principles in behalf
of Protestancy, I Assert Confidently, you have none, and upon this ground, I
say once more your Account is answered.

Go on therefore, and vilify the works published against you as you please,
call them Wool sacks, Rats, or Flies, add more opprobrious language to gain you
credit among your simple and too credulous Vulgar, with Intelligent Readers you
preuail nothing, who well perceive, it Matters not to your Intent, if those
Wool sacks receive and break the force of your greatest shot against our
Church; if the Rats gnaw the best ligaments woven in your Account, if but one
of these flies enter your throat, and bereave you of breath (some report of a
great man stifled by a Fly) And truly it seems by your deep silence, or not
answering since these Books came forth, that some of the greater sort have
half chok'd you. But enough. To say more after this strain, were to rallie
like you, and to offend the learned world, which requires substance in these
serious matters, without contempt, flowting, and empty words. Had you, Sr, gone
the right way to work, you should either have kept in your disdainful language,
or taken Protestancy without Principles in hand, Showing, where the Author
mistook your Principles, Or whether his exceptions were blamable, because he
thought them either Common, and not belonging to you* that is* wholly alien
from your cause, wholly impertinent to Maintain Protestancy. This proceeding
had been Satisfactory, but difficult and above your force, Therefore you wisely
waued it, knowing well it was easier to gi^e sharp words, and snarle at your
Adversaries, than to come near and bite, with pinching Arguments.

My proceeding with you, Sr, is quite contrary, I slight nor your person, but
say plainly where your great mistake lies in handling Controversies. You run
headlong into the deep Mysteries of Faith by the ill conduct of your weak, or
not well sighted reason, and after a few stagg ring thoughts spent in weighing,
and musing upon the difficulties, which appear to you in the Mysteries, you
will needs tell us what is true, what is false, and therefore boldly take, and
reject, as you like best. It is a perplexed way, Sr, which will never make, you
either Good Christian, good Divine, or so much as a mean Proficient in Christ's
School. In following it, you are just like one (as I tell you in the Treatise)
that takes wholesome Pills into his Mouth, chewes them, find's them bitter, and
spitt's all out. Hence it is, you spit at the Doctrins of Transubstantiation,
of Purgatory etc. because forsooth, they are distastful to sense and shallow
reason. And truly, Sr, it is wonderful, that you have not long since by this
procedure, cast off the Doctrine of the sacred Trinity, For most certainly might
sense and weak reason plead the Cause here, far greater difficulties would
occur against that sublime Mystery, then ever Protestants yet proposed against
our other Catholic Tenants. In a word, Sr, if you desire satisfaction in
matters of Religion, busy not your head with the examination of the Divine
Mysteries Considered in themselves* they are above your reach, but
contrariwise, consider well, how and by what means they are made Credible to
reason, which is done as S. Austin, cited afterward, tell's you, by first
finding out that clear marked, and signalized Church, whereby God speaks, This
Oracle once discovered (and the Discovery grounded upon Evidence, is easy) Hear
and Believe Her, She is wiser then you, and never think to shake so strong a
Fortress, by devising pcrty Arguments against Her Doctrine (no sooner seen then
solued) because, forsooth, you cannot Comprehend it.

But it is high time to end and I shall do so, with one word more of good
advice. Fools they say may sometimes give a wise man Counsel. Sr, if you
intend to write any more, Consider for your own sake, what you write, weigh
things well in your thoughts, before they pass your pen. Have always this one
reflection in mind. Its easy to Cauil, easy to talk much, but most laborious to
make sure what you say, by sound Principles, And Principles your Adversaries
ever have an Eye to. Had you complied with this Advice, the greatest part of
your Account (if not all) might well have been spared. Never rely on the vain
praises of your vulgar Readers, all is not gold that glisters in their Eyes,
nor do they always speak as they think. For as much as concern's your self,
show, sr, rather the strength of a Father in loving your works, then the
weakness of a fond Mother that hugg's her Brats, though most deformed. I am
told, you imagine it a great Acchieuement, and your self the conqueror, in
having gained onc private man T. C. to follow your triumphant Chariot, Abuse
not your Judgment there is no such matter, for in good sober earnest by what I
have perused in T. C. his book rather seems to be an answer to yours, then
yours to his. Abstain hereafter from opprobrious Language, lest you meet with
some ruffing Adversary that will pay you in your own Coin. Please to use your
Buckler better in behalf of Protestancy, and tell me when your Negative
Articles are thrown away ( as not revealed) what essential Truth remain's
within the Compass of Protestancy, revealed by Almighty God, and necessary to
Salvation. If you think it the wisest Course, not to take notice of what is
proposed against you in this Treatise, vouchsafe to clear your self of the
Contradictions charged upon you. And because I find you much entangled in your
Resolution of Faith, and have laid your mistakes open to public view; when the
Spirit of answering falls upon you again, Answer I beseech you, to the
difficulties Objected in the third Discourse, But above all Answer to God with
a hearty repentance, for the wrong you have done his Church, and own me.

Sr Your friendly Adversary.

THE CHAPTERS IN ORDER.
THE RVLE OF FAITH Wherein the infallibility of the Roman Catholic Religion is
established against Atheists, Heathens, Jews, Turks, and all Sectaries.
CHAP. I. Whether true Religion be in the world? The Affirmative proved
Against Atheists. Atheism, evidently Shewd'improbable. 1 CHAP. II. Reason
reiects all sects or Religions not Christian. Whether Gentilism, Judaism; or
Turkcism, be erroneous and improbable? 13 CHAP. III. Christianity as it stands
in opposition to Jews, Turcks, Infidels and Heretics, is the only true
Religion. 21 CHAP. IV. Whether Christian Religion since its first Propagation
has not been in like manner preserved pure, and further spread by Divine
Providence, above the Power of Nature? 25 CHAP. V. Whether all called
Christians Believe entirely Christ's sacred Doctrine? And whether means be
afforded to arrive to the knowledge of true Christian Religion? 29 CHAP. VI. Of
our Sectaries error in their search after true Religion. As also of Mr
Stillingfleets inconsequent way of Arguing. 32 CHAP. VII. More of this subject.
Doubts concerning the several editions of scripture. None extant more pure,
then the Vulgar Latin. Abstract from Church Authority, there is no Certainty of
the best Edition. Sectaries Comparing the Present Copies with the more ancient
gives no assurance. A word with Mr Stillingfleet. 42 CHAP. VIII. How necessary
it was to have one lection of Scripture in the Church. A word of the Sixtine
and Clementine Bibles. Of Mr Stillingfleets mistakes and inconsequences
concerning them. Objections answered. 55 CHAP. IX. Proofs demonstrating that
Protestants have not so much certainty of Scripture, as excludes a possibility
of reasonable doubting. A word of Mr Stillingfleets weak discourse with a
Heathen. 67 A Discourse between a Heathen and a Christian. 71 CHAP. X. The
first and easiest way to find out true Religion is not by Scripture only,
though all Christians had moral certainty of the right Canon, and sense also,
which is to say, the mere owning Christ's Doctrine, is insufficient to prove it,
to all sort of People. 80 CHAP. XI. The Protestant takes away the only means to
know true Religion by. His proofs, whether He defend's Protestancy or impugn's
Catholic Doctrine, are vnreducible to Principles, and never go beyond the
weakness of his own unproven Assertion. Mere glosses support all He says, which
is euidenced by a brief handling one Controversy, touching the B. Sacrament.
Theodoret wronged by Sectaries, cleared. His Doctrine is most Catholic. 85
Theoderets Testimony alleged above, Contains most Catholic Doctrine. 94 CHAP.
XII. A Digressian concerning the Real Presence: The Fathers plainly assert it.
Sectaries glosses frivolous. The agreement of the Church and Fathers make a
Doctrine indubitable. The Catholick's certain Principle. A word with Mr
Stillingfleet. 102 CHAP. XIII. Mr Stillingfleet grossly abuses the Fathers that
assert the Real Presence. His vnprincipled glosses are not only dubions, and
therefore worth nothing, but moreover highly improbable. 119 CHAP. XIV. It is
further proved that neither Scripture alone, nor any other Principle distinct
from an Unerring Church, can with certainty decide Controversies in Matters of
Religion, or Regulate Christian Faith. 138 CHAP. XV. The other mentioned
Principles above, are insufficient to decide controversies, Or to Regulate
faith. 152 CHAP. XVI. One word more of Mr Stillingfleets Glosses, and his
inexcusable abuse of other Fathers. 159 CHAP. XVII. Why the Glosses of
Sectaries are impertinent and weightles? Mr Stillingfleet misinterprets other
Fathers. Of his unskillful Speculation concerning Idolatry charged on
Catholics. CHAP. XVIII. The Protestant after all his Glosses can not ascertain
any, of true Religion. He would make Controversies an endless work. 180 CHAP.
XIX. The last design of Sectaries Glosses discovered. They end nothing. The
clear way to end Controversies of Religion. A distinction between Authority and
Principl'd Authority. Of the improbability of Protestancy. 192 CHAP. XX. A word
to one or two Objections. It is further proved, That Controversies are ended
with Protestants, who have no Essence of Religion, but false opinions only. 205
CHAP. XXI. Protestants granting Salvation to Catholics by a clear Inference
drawn from their Concession, end Controversies of Religion. What force their
concession has. Why they granted so much. The Argument is clearly proposed.
Mr Stillingfleet return's no probable Answer. A full discovery of his
fallacies. 217
THE SECOND DISCOVRSE, OF The Church and Rule of Faith
CHAP. I. Necessary Principles premised relating to the Controversy now in
hand, concerning the true Church And Rule of Faith. 241 CHAP. II. The Rule of
Faith assigned: The properties of a Rule. What is meant by the Church? Ancient
Fathers Assert that the Church is easily found out. Her marks, more clear, than
Her Essential Doctrine. 248 CHAP. III. The Protestant has neither Church
euidented by Marks of Truth, nor true Doctrine made credible to reason. His
whole Faith is built upon Fancy. 256 CHAP. IV. The one and only true Church of
Christ, was, is, and shall ever be the Holy, Apostolical, and Catholic Roman
Church. Her Antiquity and Constant Perseverance in the Ancient primitive
Doctrine, without Alteration, prove The Assertion. 266 CHAP. V. A second Reason
showing, That if the Roman Catholic Church erred but in one Article of Faith,
there is now no Fundamental Faith in the world. Were Error in this Church, it
is a remediless Evil, and cannot be amended by any, least of all by
Protestants. 276 CHAP. VI. Other Evidences of the. Roman Churches Perseverance
in the Primitive Faith, without change or Alteration. Whether wickedness of
life necessarily induces Error into the Church? The Donatists and Protestants
Argue, and Err alike. 285 CHAP. VII. Manifest and most undeniable Miracles
peculiar to the Roman Catholic Church only, prove Her Orthodox, withal show
that She still retain's the Primitive Doctrine. 296 CHAP. VIII. Miracles evident
in the Roman Catholic Church, No less induce All now to believe Her Doctrine,
Than Apostolical Miracles Anciently Persuaded to believe that Primitive
Doctrine. The Denial of Miracles Impossibilitat's The Conversion of Jews and
Infidels. 302 The Admirable cure wrought by Blessed S. Xauerius in the Famous
City of Naples, upon a worthy Religious Person called F. Marcellus Mastrilli,
a Noble man by birth, and by Profession of the Society of Jesus. The Proof
hinted at above, reassumed. 312 CHAP. IX. A word to a few Objections, as also
to Mr stillingfleets unworthy Exceptions against that evident Miracle wrought
at Zaragosa in Spain, 321 CHAP. X. Other Marks and Signs, peculiar to the
Roman Cathollick Church prove her Orthodox, And make Her Doctrine evidently
credible. These laid forth to Sense and Reason, distinguish the true Church
from all Erring Societies. Inferences drawn from the Doctrine Here delivered.
333 CHAP. XI. Christ and his Church made manifest to a Heathen. No Prophet
comparable to Christ, no Church comparable to the Roman Catholic. Our glorious
Christ Jesus Exhibits a glorious Church. He is proved the Only true Messiah,
And the Roman Catholic Church His only true Sponse. How the Heathen
Discourses, if rational, And Prudent. 349 CHAP. XII. The Adversaries of the
Roman Catholic Church plead unreasonably. A Discovery of their fallacies. The
cause of all Error concerning Religion. The only means to remedy Error. 363
Arguments drawn from what is said. Reflections made upon the premised Doctrine.
377 CHAP. XIII. Other Inferences drawn from the precedent Doctrine. Atheists and
Heretics Argue alike. The Motives of Credibility lead to a total Belief of
what ever the true Church Proposes. A word of Mr Thorndicks Mistakes concerning
the Church. 181 A Word of Mr Thorndiks Mistakes discovered in His Book of
Forbearance. 387 CHAP. XIV. Whether there be a Church of one Denomination
infallible, not only in Matters miscalled Fundamental, but in all and every
Doctrine She Proposes, and Obliges Christians to believe, as Faith? CHAP. XV.
Divine Faith in this present State of things, necessarily requir's a Church
infallible. The Reason hereof. The Church neither Defin's, nor can Define by
Humane Authority only. Her Definitions, more than morally certain, are
Infallible. Sectaries Recourse to Moral certainly in Matters of Faith, a most
frigid Plea. Their Fallacy is discovered. Objections Answered. 408 Other
Objections proposed by Sectaries, Solued, More of Moral certainty. 419 CHAP.
XVI. Principles premised to the following Doctrine. The Roman Catholic Church
is a Church of One Denomination. She, and no other Society of Christians, is
Infallible. Othet Grounds of Her Infallibility laid forth. The Infallibility of
Councils maintained against Mr Stillingfleets Supposed Truth and Reason. There
are no Principles whereby Approved Councils can be proved fallible. Sectaries
Convinced by their own Doctrine. 423 CHAP. XVII. More of this subject, A further
Search made into Errors called intolerable. Whether the Roman Catholic
Church must be supposed by Sectaries to have already Committed intolerable
Errors, Or only, whether She may for the future Err Intolerably? The Doctrine
of Protestants proved False, And most inconsequent. 443 CHAP. XVIII. Two
Adversaries mainly Opposite to True Religion. The last and most urgent Proof of
the Churches Infallibility taken from the Necessity, the Notion and Nature of
true Religion. Mr Stillingfleets Objections found weak and weightles. Most of
them already Proposed and Dissolved by others. A short Reflection made upon
some few. 452 CHAP. XIX. Certain Principles, where upon the Churches
Infallibility stand's firm. The End of Divine Revelation is to teach all
Infallibly. Every Doctrine revealed by the fiast Verity is no less infallible,
then true. Its one thing to teach Truth, another to teach Divine and Infallible
Truth. Sectaries Strangely ungrateful. A word of Mr Stillingfleets weak
Objections. 465
THE THIRD DISCOVRSSE OF The Resolution of Faith:
CHAP. I. Some chief Contents in this Discourse briefly declared. Mr
Stillingfleets weak attempts against the Churches infallibility and the
Resolution of Faith. The Catholic way of resolving Faith, the very same with
that of the Primitive Christians. Of the mistakes which run through Mr
Stillingfleets whole Discourse. 477 CHAP. II. Mr Stillingfleets 5.th Chapter.
Part. 1. examined, is found VVeightles. The weakness of his Arguments
discovered. His First and chiefest Argument retorted and solued. 483 CHAP. III.
More of this subject. Objections Answered. A word to Mr Stillingfleets
forceless Instances. Motives of credibility ever Precede Faith. Whether the
rational Evidence of the Truth of Christ's Doctrine, can be a Motive to believe
it. 493 CHAP. IV. More of Mr Stillingfleets Errors. Of that odd kind of Faith
he seems to maintain, grounded on Moral Certainty. What Influence the Motives
of Credibility have upon Faith? Other Parcels of his Doctrine Examined, and
refuted. Objections Solued. 505 CHAP. V. More quarrels Answered. Mr
Stillingfleets endeavor to catch Catholics in a Circle, demonstrated both
vain and improbable. His Objections are forceless. A word to an unlearned
Cauil. 516 CHAP. VI. Mr Stillingfleet solues not His Adversaries Argument: A
word of his tedious Shuffing. The Motives of Credibility both distinguish the
Church from all other Heterodox Communitier, and prove Her Infallible. The
Agreement with the Primary Doctrine, no Mark of the Church. More Mistakes and
Errors discovered. Of Mr Stillingfleets double Faith who Belieues, but not
upon Divine the Testimony, That the Books of Scripture contain Gods word in
them: Yet Belieues the Doctrine in those books, to be Divine. 523 Whether we
Square Circles in our Resolution of Faith. The other mentioned Points in the
Tittle of the Chapter, discussed. Upon what ground those Articles called the
fundamentals of Faith are believed, in the Opinion of Sectaries. 534 CHAP. VII.
Necessary Principles premised to the Resolution of Faith. God can Speak in a
Language proper to Himself. His external language is twofold. When God speaks
not immediately, He must be heard by his Oracle. What the exact Resolution of
Faith implies? 545 CHAP. VIII. The main Difficulty in the Resolution of Faith,
Proposed. What Connection the Motives have with the Divine Revelation? Of
their weight and efficacy. God's own Language not imitable by his Enemies.
Faith transcend's the certainty of all Motives, The main Difficulty solued. Of
our great Security in Believing God, Though we have not Evidence of the Divine
Testimony. CHAP. IX. the whole Progress of ^aith Explained in order to its
last Resolution. Of that which the Fathers Call the light of Faith. Its
wholy different from Sectaries Private Spirit. From whence Faith has
Infallible Certainty. Objections Solued. 560 CHAP. X. The easiest way of
resolving Faith, Laid forth in two Propositions. The evidence of Credibility
further declared. Sectaries have no Evidence of Credibility. It is as evidently
Credible that God now speak's by the Church, as that He did anciently Speak by
the Prophets. 570 CHAP. XI. Sectaries Objections solued. The fallible Agreement
of all Concerning the Canon of Scripture, no Proof at all. No universal Consent
for the Sectaries Scripture, or the Sense of it. How the Church is both the
Verity believed, and the Motive, why we believe. Other Difficulties Examined.
580 CHAP. XII. The last Objection Proposed. Whether the Churches Testimony may
be called the Formal Object of Faith. Other Notes and Chnsiderations,
Concerning The Resolution of Faith. 588 CHAP. XIII. Protestants have no Faith
to resolve, And upon that account are freed from a vicious Circle. Some yet are
in a Circle. Two Sorts of Sectaries refuted. 596 CHAP. XIV. The Mistakes of
some Sectaries in this Controversy. Its necessary to distinguish between true
Reason, and fallacious Reasoning. Private Reason liable to Error. Principles
presupposed to the Decision of this Question. Reason easily finds out true
Religion, by a rational Evidence preuious to Faith. 603 CHAP. XV. From whence
the Evidence hitherto mentioned Proceed's? That Religion only is reasonable,
which Heaven declares reasonable. The Declaration is evidently made in behalf
of the Roman Catholic Religion. Who is the misled reasoning Man? Other
Particulars handled. The readiest way to Convince Sectaries. 615 CHAP. XVI.
Objections solued. Sectaries pretending not to Se the Churches Evidence, are
either blind, or wilfully shut their Eyes. The Assertion clearly proved. A
Parallel of the Primitive, and the present Churches Evidence. How far Reason
may be said to Regulate Faith. 625 CHAP. XVII. A Digression Concerning Doctor
Stillingfleets Discourse, Where he treat's of the Protestants Faith reduced to
Principles. He is all a long quite besides the matter handled, and Says no
more for Protestancy, than for Arianism, or any other Heresy. 639 CHAP. XVIII.
The Doctors Inferences, proved no Inferences, but untrue Assertions. Having
answered his Principles and Inferences, Satisfaction is required to some few
Questions proposed. 652 CHAP. XIX. The supposed grounds of our Protestants
Reformation manifestly ouerthrown. Protestancy no Religion but an improbable
Nouelty. The conclusion of this whole Treatise. 665
COURTEOUS READER.
YOu will soon perceive by the many literal faults in this Treatise, that a
stranger to our language printed it, and that the Cortector used not diligence.
Such errata as these are (have for have* Sponse for Spouse, Prosylite for
Proselyte. Suspense for Suspense. symtons for Symptons. City for City
Christians for Christians. Church for Church which for which, hansom for
handsome Religion, for Religion must for most, with many more like them) I
leave to your charitable Correction.

Some greater faults are here noted.

PAge. 2. For ciuillized. Read ciuiliz'd. line 22. read an universal. Page. 3.
l. 33. r. voluntarily. P. 4. l. ^2. for nonne. r. none. p. 5. l. 14. r
strictly. p. 10. l 3. r. Crimes. l. 11. r. then. and l. 27. for whem. r. when.
Synogogue, for Synagogue, Cod for God, hypoericy, for hypocrisy. distinguiched
for distinguished, and the like Errata following I omit. P. 12. in the Title.
By reasonable. r. by reason. P. 18. l. 31. r. it has p. 20. l. 19 For Elisi r.
Eisi. and l. 13. r Alcoran. p. 35. l. 5. dele. the. p. 36. l. 5. r. Concern.
and l. 23. r. Churches care. p. 58. l. 31. r. perfected. p. 62. l. 23. r. (...)
p. 72 l. 10. r. meaning. p. 101. l. 21. r. have it, p. 104. l. 26. r. full p.
107. l 21 r. Innumerable. p. 116. l. 2. r. saying. l. 6. r. reply, and l. 13.
r. Fathers. p. 122. l. 29. r. Mali. p. 129. l. 32. r. (...). p. 144. l. 6. r.
is it p. 161. l. 15. r. Say I is it. p. 164. l. 1. r. Romanos and. l. 2. r.
whose Faith. p. 167. l. 3. r. desperate. p. 173. l 4 dele: p. 174. l. 20. r.
Speculation. p. 179. l. 9. r. Apotheoses, and l. 16. r. sense, and. l. 26.
dele. a. p. 185 r. gleanings. p. 187. l. 4. r. suspense. p. 189. l. 20. r.
decides. p. 191. l. 23 r. obsolete. p. 190. in Titulo. r. ascertain. p 199. l.
15. r. guesses. p. 200. l. 1. r. standing. and in the Title r. way. p. 214. l.
7. r. Title. and l. 36 r. discourse: p. 224 l. 9. r. Solution. p. 228. in marg:
1. Concession. p. 231. l. 3. r Mass in the Church, and l. 4. dele the word
Church. p. 236. l 3. read for very the name. p. 239. l 3. r. pen to paper p.
236. l. 23. r. hinted at. p. 266. lin. vlt. r. Evident. p. 275. in Marg r.
unanswerable. p. 276. in the Title of the Chapter. r. world p. 335. l. 12. r.
Christ's kingdom. p. 341. l. 8. dele the. p. 343. l. 25. r. Apostasy.
Afterward you have Divide for divide. Mossias for Messiah. Apostasy for
Apostasy. Fabrik for Fabric. Sensuallity for sensuality, Exceptor for
Acceptor. Legardemain for ledger. peccadilio for peccadillo Cherubins for
Cherubims. Seraphins for Seraphims. Numbertles for numberless. Nauatiani for
Nouatiani. Commissoned for Commissioned. Test's for rest's banding for
bandying, yets for yet rhus for thus. Chimera for Chimaera p. 369. l. 5. r.
blaspheme and Contemn Parall'd for paralleled. p. 390. l 21. dele which. you
have moreover. rancked for ranked. Physicians for Physicians. physic for
physic. bountiffully for bountifully. aparition for apparition. limitated for
limited. lewish for Jewish. traitorously for traitorously. Afterward for
afterward. upward for upwards. Acquiese for acquiesce. All plain Errats and
easily corrected. p. 506. l. ^^. for believe. r. belief. p. 610. l. 17. r.
without so. p. 612. l. 16. for there. r. three. p. 626. l. 4. dele comma. There
are yet many, and very many faults in Orthography and interpunctions
uncorrected, courteous Reader as you go along, vouchsa^e to correct them with
your pen.

Disc. 2. after p. 353. please to correct the Error in the next Page, and read
p. 354. p. 341. l. ^. dele the. p. 383. in the Titler. Chap. 13. And p. 481. in
the Title for. 19. r. Chap. 1. p. 516. in the Title of the Chap. r. unlearned.
p. 677. l. for thy r. this. and in the Advertisement p. 7. l. 24 r.
Achieuement* in the Preface. P. 9. l. 17. r. transcend's.

THE FIRST DISCOVRSE, Of true Religion.
TO attain a clear knowledge of true Christian Religion is the chief Design
of this whole Treatise. We are therefore in the first place, to discuss
matters seriously with Christ's professed Enemies, and to prove that the
propagation of our Saviors sacred Doctrine, has been a Divine work above the
force of nature. Thus much performed, we Show how Sectaries err it their
Search after Religion, and euince that it is not found by their private
pondering Scripture alone, much less by any vnprincipl'd Glosses. Lastly, in
this Discourse, we lay forth an easy way, whereby all these unfortunate
Debates concerning Religion, may come to a happy period.

THE RVLE OF FAITH,
Wherein the infallibility of the Roman Catholic Religion is established
against Atheists Heathens, Jews, Turks, and all Sectaries.
CHAP. I.
Whether true Religion be in the world? The Affirmative proved Against
Atheists. Atheism, evidently Shewd'improbable.

1. THe question may perhaps seem doubtful to many, upon Different judgments
Concerning true Religion
these grounds. First. Who ever admit's of Religion must either hold it true
upon the Authority of others, or because he is persuaded it can be found out by
his own search and industry. If he relies on Authority, He meet's with as many
Pretenders to truth as there are different Professors of Religions on earth.
The The most of men pretend to it.
Jew pleads for his as the most ancient, the Christian for his, the Turk for
his, the Heathen for following the light of nature, and every one thinks well
of his own way, and votes his own Religion best. If therefore a searcher after
truth relies on Authority, He can no more (say these) take the Christians word
than the Heathens, the Heathens then the Jews, the Jews then the Turks, the
The diffically about the choice.
Arians then the Catholics, the Catholics than the Protestants, and
Consequently ought in prudence to reject all Religion.

2. On the other side, if He choose a Religion by the force of his private
judgment only, or own industry, He is cast into a Labyrinth and shall never
find an exit. He is obliged in prudence to make a diligent search into all the
different Sects which are, or have bin since the first creation of things: He
is carefully to examine the causes of them, the grounds they rely on, the
connection or coherence they have with one an other; He is to converse with the
learned of these different Religions, or read their books, and then to pitch by
his own erring judgment on what likes him best, which perhaps may be worst of
all. This task you see is immense and no less unsuccesful than laborious, man's
life is spent, before half the work be done. Therefore it seems, none can come
to the certain knowledge of true Religion either by Authority or reason. Ergo,
says the Opponent, there is no such thing as true Religion in Being.

3. Contrariwise I say. True Religion most evidently is in the True Religion is
in being. The reason of the Assertion.
world. The Assertion is grounded on this certain verity: God eternally
existing by himself without cause, and infinite in all perfection is in Being;
therefore true Religion cannot but be also. For Grant such a Being as God is,
necessary of himself without any superior cause, it follows He is to be
adored by all rational creatures essentially inferior to him, and not by any
false, or mock-worship, but in Spirit and Truth, for such an adoration only
suites his Divine nature. Of the adoration due to God.
This reason is reinforced by the light of one indubitable Maxim. Quod
universis videtur, est verum. What appears to all, or at least, to the most
Civillized Nations to be a Truth, is so: for such a universal consent of nature
is the Dictamen and voice of God the Author of nature; But all Nations ever
owned some Religion, therefore this agreement of God and nature is a Truth. The
minor is evident All civillized Nations own a Numen.
(to say nothing of Christians) out of the very writings of Heathens who assure
us, though people are found so barbarous as to live without laws, learning, or
civil government, yet no whole nation was ever yet heard of, but owned some kind
of Numen, some sacrifice, some homage, some worship due to a power either
falsely or truly judged worthy of Reverence and honor. Neither is the One
difficulty removed.
force of the Argument infringed by saying, many and very many Nations erred in
the Truth of Religion, which may seem as great an Evil as to have none, for
thus much is only proved at present, that the voice of nature more easily ownes
Religion then it professes one true; That therefore being the universal
Testimony or General consent of all, cannot be false. Haec testimonia animae
(its Tertullians Doctrine which S. Cyprian borrowed from him) quanto vera, tanto
simplicia, quanto simplicia, tanto vulgaria etc. This general Truth by how much
more pure and simple, by so much it is more vulgarly known, by how much more
vulgarly known, by so much its more common, by how much more common, by so much
it is more natural, by how much more natural, by so much it is more Divine. Omni
literatura notius (says Tertullian) omni Doctrina agitatius, omni homine
Majus, It Is a learning more known and resolved in man's mind than all other
learning, greater then man is, and therefore a certain truth settled in all by
the Author of nature, God himself. Now that many err in the truth of The cause
of Mistaking true Religion.
Religion, proceeds without doubt too often from want of instruction: sometimes
from pride, ignorance, or Malice in the Teacher, which is the deplorable case
of condemned Heretics: Sometimes, and this is most usual, it comes from an
obdurance of heart begot, by a custom of sinning and transgressing against the
very light of nature. For, this custom bring's a punishment with it, that it
darken's the mind notoriously, and makes reason a stranger not only to weighty
rational motives which forceably draw us to good, but more over it so
stupifies, so dulls and indisposeth a soul, that the impressions of grace (not
wanting to the most barbarous) touch, as it were, on flintly rocks, and produce
either a weak barren fruit, or rather no penitential fruit at all. Would
therefore the most obdurate Scythians, or any other uncivilized People yield to
the ordinary grace allowed them for the avoiding of sin, known contrary to
nature: God who illuminates every man in the world, would give more light,
until they came to the knowledge of truths necessary, necessitate medij, to
attain salvation. For this is an undoubted Maxim of Divines. God is not wanting
in necessaries, and, Facienti quod in se est non denegat gratiam. He denies not
grace to such as endeavor by the ordinary means afforded them to avoid sin
contrary to nature, but if careless of that duty which nature obliges to, they
voluntarily plunge themselves into an Abiss of horrid transgressions, the
obdurance now mentioned follows: The powerful operation of grace lies stifled,
and much deaded in such hardened hearts, and Consequently sense and love of
pleasures bear greatest sway there, which makes reason a stranger to Gods
truths, and from hence gross errors concerning Religion take their rise and
have their origin. The objection above, purely fallacious, supposes those
different Pretenders to true Religion to be all of equal Authority, and casts
man's weak and erring reason on too long and laborious a work. True Religion is
known with less Ado, then these Adversaries Imagine, as we shall show
hereafter, and solve the objection in its due place.

4. I argue 2. from the assumed principle. God exist's Therefore true Religion
is, and discourse thus. There are and ever have been several Religions
professed in the world, and all are not false, for if all were false, God,
whose existence we now suppose, would see himself not at all adored in spirit
and truth, but rather Universally scorned by an erroneous worship, as if men
had been created for this end to mock and abuse their Creator; And this seems
contrary to the light of reason. Now further. All Religions are not false, From
false Religions, one only true, is proved.
ergo, one only is true, because two or more which hold Contradictions can not
be true; and if one be true, every rational creature is obliged to follow that
when it is clearly proposed, and to worship his maker by a right way of Homage:
but this obligation must suppose the truth of Religion in being, because no one
can be obliged to embrace a foolery, or to worship God by a mere nothing. You
will say, one may be bound to follow an error or an erroneous Conscience,
therefore the proof taken from this obligation, evinces not the actual truth of
Religion. Answ. When we are bound to follow an error in a matter of chiese
Concern, the Contrary truth, which all should assent to, so really is, that we
may be unbeguiled, and set right; but if all Religions are false, there is none
true supposable, and Consequently the Universal error of all is a remediless
evil. If therefore God requires a true exhibition of worship from his Creatures
He cannot permit all to err Universally, and for this reason true Religion is
in being. You may reply. God is independent of us all, and need's not our
Homage, or adoration. Very true, but man depend's upon God, and by the instinct
of nature, is obliged to adore him in truth, which instinct as we shall prove
presently, originally proceed's from the Author of nature, and therefore God
also obliges all to pay him the true tribute of praise and no Counterfeit
worship. Some Perhaps, may object. Religion seems not Capable of a
demonstration, because that which is true de facto depend's on God's free
Revelation, the Credibility where of can be evidenced, but not the truth. I
answer, in the general assertion already made, we abstract from the particular
proofs relating to true Religion; we treat with all, who own a Deity, and say,
these (if God had not elevated man to supernatural, beatitude, or, omitted to
reveal the sublime mysteries, of faith) had, in that State been obliged to
adore their Creator with no false homage and thus much reason evinces, although
we cannot (as the objection proves) strici^ly demonstrate the truth of
Christianity, but only its Credibility, whereof more, and very amply,
hereafter. In the mean while

5. Methinks I hear some, who stand much for reason, say, that Atheists
(rational men) oppose all Religion, and why may not their Plea be heard in so
weighty a matter? Answ. Its not my intention Atheism proved most unreasonable.
at present to combat too long with Atheists, they are utterley overthrown by
the learned Arguments of innumerable grave Authors I have other Adversaries to
treat with: However, because their pretense is reason, observe, how they
destroy not only Religion but reason also, yea, and extuinguish the very light
of nature with it.

6. The ground of Atheism is this prodigious accursed Principle. There is no
God, no supreme Power, no Numen, no Providence (for The accursed Principle of
Atheism.
acknowledge a God and Providence, reason evidently concludes, He is to be
adored in spirit and truth, and this worship or Adoration we call Religion.)
This Assertion then, God is not, is a prime truth, or the first verity with
Atheists, whereon all their human actions depend, by this supposed verity they
are regulated during their mortal lise. Contrariwise, This Assertion. God is an
eternal Being by himself, is a prime Loud falsehood with them, to be scorned by
every one. Hence I argue. That first supposed verity. God is not, depraves the
will, extinguiseth the light of nature, makes men execrable, enormously wicked,
impious, sacrilegious, takes of all fear of future punishment and hope of
reward, For if there be no God, or no supreme power to punish heinous offenses,
the most hideous sins imaginable would cease to be pernicious, and consequently
every one might without check or torment of Conscience, if it served his ends,
kill and destroy all he meets with. No wrong, no open injustice, no Treason, no
rebellion, can be invented so monstrous, but may be done without reproof of
Conscience, if this Principle has influence upon what we act. God who can
neither punish, or reward, is not in Being. And thus you see, how that first
Atheism destroys the light of reason.
Arch-truth of Atheists. God is not, horridly depraves and vitiates the will,
makes it savage, and brutish, which ex terminis is evidently falls, for Truth
considered as truth, is a perfection of the understanding, and cannot per se
pervert nature, or wrest the will in man to all wickedness. On the other side
you see, that this Arch-falsity of Atheists. God is an Eternal Being, by its
own force and light rectifies nature, makes men upright, just, obedient,
submissive to laws and government; which is impossible; for such a grand error
settled in man's intellectual faculty, is by it self as wholly unmeet constantly
to produce such laudable effects, as Truth is to deceive, or cold water to warm
us. You see. 3. that unless villainy and wickedness be deemed wisdom, and virtue
and justice be accounted of as madness, Atheists must change the Propositions
and say: God is, remains a supreme Truth. God is not: is a supreme error, and
withal Conclude, that the first intellectual Truth cannot make men wicked, nor
the first error make them virtuous.

7. Some perhaps will reply against our first inference. Nature it self
abhorres the impieties now mentioned, (and that is the Atheists Rule) although
God were not in Being. I answer. Nature does so Nature has her impressions from
God. without God, no truth can be-known.
now, because it receives those impressions from God, the Author of Grace and
nature, but destroy this first Author, Eo ipso, you abolish those very first
lights of nature, and make it stupidly brutish. The reason hereof a Priori is
most convincing. Nature is endowed with these first lights, because it receives
them from an indefectible, and unerring intellectual Being, for if this first
Power or Being, which gives existence and light to nature, could err, or be
deceived in such universal Notions, nature which takes its Being from this
first intellectual power, would lose those communicated lights, and fall to
nothing. For example. Here is a participated light, or a Truth common to all
rational men. Do as you would be done by* and nature universally approves it. I
ask why is this a supposed Truth? You answer because all agree in it. Be it so.
But I say, if all those who agree in it, receive the light from a power that is
defective, ignorant, orliable to error, this very consent of nature like that
first erring Principle, cannot but be defective, and ignorant, because no
effect exceed's the virtue or perfection of the cause it comes from.

8. Will you see this clearly? Suppose that a Casual meeting or concourse of
Atoms made man rational, as Atheists will have it, and endued him with the
Truth now mentioned, without the influence of a supreme intellectual Power.
This rational thing called Dull Atoms impart not knowledge to any.
man, judges, discourses, defines, and delivers, as he thinks, certainly the
first natural verities. Very good. But we inquire further, and Ask from what
cause he had this power of judging, and defining truly? For, if he received it
from one that is dull, ignorant or deceiptful in all he judges, and defines, He
cannot but participate of the nature of that first Principle, which is dull and
ignorant. Thus much is clear. For if I receive my knowledge from one who is
distracted mad, or false in his conceptions, and regulate my self or others by
such a communicated light, all I know or teach by virtue of that knowledge,
transcends not the nature of that Principle which is now supposed, ignorant,
erroneous and deceiptful.

9. Summon therefore all the Atoms together which made man rational, and
imprinted on him the first lights of nature, I demand of those Atoms, could
they Answer, How it came to pass, that a company of Dull insensible things,
void of reason and discourse could by mere chance, produce man intellectual, and
not only intellectual, but unerrable also in some Principles called natural? I
say all that this man judges is false, because the Principle which gave him
being, (void of light and understanding) cannot indue him with unerrable
Truths. For, Nemo dat quod non habet; No cause gives The reason why none can
judge truly, if God exist not.
to its effects, what it precontains not. Insensible Atoms therefore, cannot
make man sensible, nor irrational Atoms, reasonable, nor stupid Atoms, devoid
of truth imbue him with the first true Principles. Therefore man is no more to
be believed in these first lights of nature, than if Apes or Parots should
speak them, because, as we now suppose, they proceed not originally from any
intellectual Power, but only from mere dust or insensible things, void of
understanding. The Sceptiks therefore erred not, when upon the supposition The
Sceptiks erred not upon one false supposition.
that God made not man, they concluded: we know nothing, we judge of nothing
truly, but what might be excepted against, and rationally opposed. If therefore
nature err's not in these first Principles, now acknowledged true and rational,
ascribe it to nature, but leave not of there, but say these lights come from
God the Author of nature, who neither will, nor can deceive us. Here then is
our grand Principle. God and nature cannot err, therefore the verity and
certainty of these first known truths depending on God and nature, are free
from error. And

10. Hence we have an other clear demonstration against Atheists. Either God
endowed man with reason and these first lights of nature, or all of us, even
Atheists may be justly deemed mad, and besotted An other demonstration against
Atheists.
with fooleries, but all (including Atheists) are not mad, nor erring in these
first lights of nature, Ergo God endued man with those first lights. I prove
the Major. It is perfect madness in the judicative power of man to deny the
truth of those first lights, but the truth of them must be denied, in case we
receive our judicative faculty from a Power inferior to God, for, if we
receive it not from an infinite Being, we have it from some inferior erring
cause, which may deceive. (Atoms for example) but neither atoms nor any
inferior fallible Power, can tranfuse into us a certainty of not erring in
those first lights. The reason is given. The lights we have, go not beyond the
perfection of that cause which imparts them to nature; This cause, what ever it
be is inferior to God, and therefore cannot but be liable to error, and may
deceive us. Observe this discourse well, for it is the ground a Priori, of the
Churches infallibility, whereof more hereafter.

11 You have other arguments most concluding against Atheists, but I cannot
insist on all. Here is one and a A speculatiue Argument.
speculation of a great Divine. A Being existing by it self infinitely perfect,
or without mixture of imperfection, is ex conceptu suo formali, or, Apprehended
under that Notion no chimaera, nor impossible Object (as impossible objects are
distinguished from possibilities) therefore it is possible. I prove it. All
Chimaeras or Impossibilities essentially imply imperfection, because they
cannot be, and consequently upon that account want perfection, but this
infinite Being conceived by man wants no perfection (I say conceived, for I
neither yet prove nor suppose any thing, but only speak of an object thus
represented to an understanding, and say that object is no impossibility
because infinitely perfect, without appearance of flaw or imperfection.) Now
further; if such an object ex terminis be possible, and not impossible, it is
of necessity actually existing, for if it have not an actual Being, it wants
perfection, and requires a more perfect cause to produce it, which is contrary
to the nature of that which I conceive, and form in my understanding; But if it
be actually in Being, I have all I seek for. Ens actu existens, an actual
existency without any superior cause, infinitely wise, without blemish or
imperfection, and this we call God, the Origin of all things, Creator of Heaven
and earth. But I wave these speculations, moral arguments without them have
weight enough, and could we say no more Moral Arguments in-this matter sway
most.
but thus much only; That Atheists in a matter of Eternal salvation (the
weightiest point imaginable) deliberatly embrace that Doctrine which can never
do them good, If true; and eternally damn them, if falls; it were enough.
Observe well. Were Atheism true, the Professors of it dye like dogs, and so do
all others with them, these men therefore will not hereafter laugh at Belieuers
for adoring. a Deity; but if their Doctrine proves falls in the other life, all
true Christians may scorn their impudency, or rather deplore their eternal
misery which will follow, not only upon the account of Atheism, but for other
enormous sins committed against God and nature. Now if the Atheist says he
followed the Dictate of his reason, this (were it so) at most excuses him from
the sin of Atheism, but frees him not from damnation, if guilty of other criems
against the light of Nature. If he say again, he fully enioyes his pleasures in
this life, whilst those who believe a God, live in restraint and fear. He
pleads Good Christians in this life have more content then Atheists.
Nonsense, for a good Christian, if we exclude some horrid sins which nature
ex ecrat's, may have his dignities in a common wealth, his lawful pleasures,
and recreations as much as any Atheist; herein he has no pre-eminence before
others, no nor so much content as is allowed good Christians; Therefore on all
accounts he is in a worse condition them Christians, for he lives contemned
here the whole world over, and can expect no happiness hereafter.

12. Others argue and methinks very solidly. Though Gods existence were not
demonstrable, Atheists may never the less be not only convicted of error, but
justly also looked on as in a damnable state, upon the account of their
Atheism. Here is my reason. The very rules of nature and ciuility oblige us to
respect all according to the outward appearances of their quality and
condition, when we have no just reasons which render them suspected. It would
be open injustice to treat any Atheists convicted of errors though a Deity were
not demonstrable.
one, either in language or actions like an inferior fellow, whose train or
garb speak's him a Prince, or nobleman. I should certainly err in justice and
morallity, should I deny any one that respect which the Common reputation of
his virtues and accomplishments, has gained him (though perhaps not deserved)
whem I have no Conuincing proofs, that he is not what he seems. There is no
Atheist of them all, but would think him self highly injured were he slighted
in this nature, and with good reason too, for the mere possibility of being
deceived in a man's quality or virtues, can be no sufficient warrant for any to
deny him that honor, which his virtues in all appearance challenge as his due.

13. I say therefore, were the Deity supposed indemonstrable, that cannot excuse
the Atheist from performing those duties which such a Being, in all appearance,
most infinite wise, and omnipotent may challenge, of praise and Adoration,
proportionable to his worth: For, if the Atheist exact's all punctilios of
respect from others, which the exterior garb of his dignity may entitle him
to, he cannot without the highest wrong, and violating the law of nature ( Do
as you would be done by) deny to God, after so many signal appearances of his
dignity, the due respect and honor, whereunto that supreme excellence most
justly lays claim. Wherein the excellence of God appears.


14. Now if you make inquiry after the appearances of that supereminent
excellence in a Deity, they far surpass all those other appearances which can
possibly concur to create in any an opinion of man's greatness, virtues, or
accomplishments. No Monarch, no Prince, no Potentate, no nobleman can give so
many evident signs of worth and excellence (duly laid claim to) as God
evidences of an infinite greater supereminent worth, due and proper to himself.
Every one knows, that wisdom, power, and worthy actions, enoble man; and beget
in all a universal fame of excellence. What think ye? Does not the creation,
the continual preservation, and admirable Oeconomie of this visible world
loudly speak the wisdom, power, and noble works of a Deity? Do not these raise
in all a universal fame of his Being? Have not all ciuilized nations (agreeing
in the truth) the very best of philosophers in past ages, and all Christians
(the most wise and learned body of men which the world ever yet saw) purchased
to God, upon evident appearances, more immortal honor and renown, than ever
Prince or Monarch gained suitable to his state and dignity? If therefore to deny
a Prince to be what he seems, when all imaginable appearances speak him
Prince, be most justly deemed a crying injury contrary to the light of nature;
much more to deny God his Being is a greater wrong, when all the testimonies of
grace and nature proclaim him God. One word more and I end this point. So many
eminent and signal miracles both before and after our Saviors coming, which
could proceed from no other cause but God, either evidently demonstrate his
Being (as we shall seepresently) or make the truth so apparently credible,
that, it is a degree of madness to deny it. The Atheist therefore, who without
proof or principle denies God, and depriues him of that respect which ought to
be paid upon outward signs and evident appearances of his excellence, impiously
opposes right reason, and sin's damnably; Nor can the supposed
indemonstrability of God, more excuse him from damnable irreligion, then the
possibility of being deceived in any man's worth or accomplished virtues (whem
apparent signs make them evident) from wrong and open injustice, as is now
said.

15. Lastly the Atheist who pretend's to believe nothing, belieues (it is true
differently) as much, yea and as hard things, as any Christian does. The
Christian belieues a God he never saw, The Atheists believe differently, but
more difficult things then Christians.
and the Atheist an infinite series of causes, or a strange concours of
invisible Atoms he never saw. The Christian belieues the soul he never saw to
be immortal, the Atheist, who yet never saw so much, holds it vanishes into
nothing. The Christian says an infinite wisdom rules the world, The Atheist
says no, but either fate or chance, (as much imperceptible to sense as God is)
Gouerns all. You see therefore, how these men who pretend to believe nothing,
believe as much as any, for we all believe, but with this difference, that the
Atheist imprudently judging incredibilities belieuable fastens on them, and
leaves to Christians a belief of verities not only prudently credible, but most
true and certain. Mark their blindness and a just judgment of God with it.
They reject things credible, and in lieu of these pitch on most desperate
improbabilities, and this ineuitably: for, not to believe credible verities
forces them to believe the contrary, incredible fooleries. The Atheists
arguments run all upon falls suppositions where of see more In the second
discourse. God they say, seems careless in governing the world, whilst He
suffers the innocent to be oppressed, and unjust men to enjoy much happiness.
Mark first, They suppose some innocent, and others unjust, whereas if we deny
God, there can neither be innocence nor injustice, as is now demonstrated. 2.
They measure Gods infinite wisdom in governing his creatures by their short
fallible Conceptions and suppose him unable to punish the wicked, and to reward
the just in a future life. But enough of this subject, most amply handled by
others.

CHAP. II.
Reason reiects all sects or Religions not Christian. Whether Gentilism,
Judaism; or Turcism, be erroneous and improbable?

1. WE here exclude professed Atheists vowed enemies of all Religion, And now
treat with other Adversaries but very briefly, they are either Heathens, Turks,
or Jews, list if you please with These all condemned Heretics, as Arians,
Pelagians, Donatists and the like rabble of Aliens from truth, who really
deserve not the name of Christians. Heathens now, of no account.


2. The Gentiles or Heathens that adored many Gods as Mars, Jupiter, Apollo, and
therefore plain Idolaters, (because they make deceased men Gods) are now of no
account in the world. Turks, Jews, Christians and all other decry their
vanity, or to speak in S. Chrisostoms worts: ipsius Christi virtute dissipati
sunt, They are wasted, dissolved, and brought to nothing by the virtue of
Christ our Saviors preaching, Diuturnitate temporum perierunt, Time has worn
them out, we need say no more.

3. Turkcism which has gained a great part of the world, and a far greater,
then* ever any particular Heresy gained, is evidently no more but an open
Tyranny. The sword, no word of God, does all. Power, and carnal pleasures,
which corrupted nature easily embraces, uphold this Religion. More cruelty
follows the Professors of it, then Justice, fidelity, or any moral virtue; yet
moral virtue, grounded in nature, ever accompanies true Religion. Again, and
here is a Demonstration against Turkeism. Mahomet (who held himself a Prophet
only, and no God) appeared some centuries after Christ, yea and owned both A
demonstration against Turkeism
Christ, and Moses to have been great Prophets, sent from God. Hence I argue.
If sent from God; the Doctrine they delivered was true. Therefore Mahomets
Alcoran is false, which contradict's not only Christ's Doctrine, but that also of
Moses and the Prophets. The contradiction is evident by the Alcoran: and the
inference, Ergo, The Alcoran contradict's God himself, speaking truth by these
Prophets, is as clear. Therefore either God contradict's him self, saying one
thing by these Prophets, and reuoking it by Mahomet, (which is impossible) or
Mahomet is a liar. Yet more. Let Mahomet judge as he pleases of Christ and the
Prophets, He and his, are obliged to satisfy one Demand: viz. What Doctrine that
was, whereby men were saved, before his preaching? And I speak of Doctrine, not
of Ceremonies or temporal positive Laws. He will not say, all from Adam to his
days were damned for want of true Doctrine, nor can he have recours to the
Multiplicity of Gods owned by Heathens, these He reiects: Therefore he must
acknowledge true Doctrine taught before his being in the world, but this
Doctrine, Moses, Christ, and the Prophets truly delivered, or there was none
taught in the world, This saved souls anciently, therefore, if believed, it
saues them still; once it was true; therefore it is now and will be ever so, But
Mahomet opposes him self to this true revealed Doctrine, therefore He opposes
God speaking by these Oracles. Hence I argue. Mahomets error Very late,
opposite to ancient truth.
A Religion which began fifty ages after truth was taught in the world, and
expressly contradict's that taught truth, is false; Mahomets Religion is
evidently such, ergo it is false. I say that contradict's the ancient true
Doctrine, to prevent an objection which may arise out of ignorance. For some may
say: Christ our Lord long after Moses and the Prophets, delivered Doctrine
contrary to them, therefore the Argument against Mahomet conuinceth not. I
answer; It is one thing to reueal Truth a new not anciently believed, and an
other to abrogate ancient received verities. Christ, besides cancelling the
Ceremonial law delivered more truths, then were explicitly declared by the
Prophets, but never contradicted any Doctrine proceeding from God, by the mouth
of his Prophets, as Mahomet did. Hence S. Austin and other Fathers Affirm, that
Christ's Church reuerences the Doctrine of Moses and the Prophets, and that faith
has ever been the same from the beginning of the world.

4. The Jews who make their Religion most ancient, are notwithstanding clearly
convinced of error, and here is my first The Jews a dispersed People without
essence or form of Religion.
Argument. A People dispersed up and down the world, that have had now for 16.
ages neither Essence nor Form of true Religion, nor the effects or fruits of
it, cannot profess true Religion, and consequently are not the lawful heirs of
the Prophets ancient Faith. But the Jews are thus evidently dispersed, and
want the Essence, the Form, and effects of Religion, Ergo. I prove the Minor. A
sacrifice essential to Religion which could not, according to their law, be
offered but in Jerusalem only: A Temple and Priests also evidently fail them
(for no Sacrifice no Priest) Judges, Prophets and miracles, cognisances also of
true Religion, which never failed in their greatest Captiuities, now by the
just judgment of God leave them, therefore the very Form and order of Religion
wholly reuersed, manifest this people, once, Populum iam non populum, heretofore
blessed, now accursed for their obstinacy. And if we speak of other effects, or
fruits of Religion, their Thalmudick Fables, their insatiable avarice, their
cheating and Cozening others, their open Hypocricy (for gain They exteriourly
profess any Religion) now Catholics, now Protestants, now Arians, or what you
will. These effects I say, demonstrate a want of the very Soul, of the life of
virtue, and Religion in them: All which is manifest to our eyes and senses.

5. To add force to this most weighty Argument. S. Cyprian chiefly in his first
book Aduers. Iudaeos, shows all along how Their dereliction foretold in
scripture.
they were fortold by the very law and ancient Prophets of their losing
Religion, and future dereliction, after Christ's coming viz. That Their first
laws and carnal circumcision were to cease, and a new law with spiritual
circumcision to succeed. Isay. 8. Mich. 4. That an other order and a new
Testament should be given, Ier. 31. That the old Pastors were to leave of their
teaching, and new Doctors come in their place Ier. 3. and. 31. That no other
but Christ himself was to be the true Temple and house of God, 2. Reg. 7. That
the old sacrifices of lambs and beasts should not be offered. Isay 1. That the
old Priesthood was (...), and a new Priest and king reign for ever. Ps 109. 1.
Reg: ^ That the greater People, the Jews, should become the less, and the
Gentiles far lesser become greater Genesis 15. Osee, 2. That a Church once barren
should have more Children than the Synogogue ever had. Isa. 5. 4. upon those
words. Iucundare sterilis. Thus S. Cyprian through those several short chapters
of his first book. And we see all these prophesies literally fulfilled after
the coming of our Savior, and the establishment of the Christian Church.
Those hearts are stupid, and eyes blind, that perceive not the Jewish synogogue
utterly abandoned. Yet more. If you will see this Christian verity amply laid
forth, read the 9. chapter of Daniel, where the Holy Prophet after a large
declaration of the Peoples the prophet Daniels prediction.
iniquities and a just affliction laid on them for their Sins, an Angel told
him that Christ should come, and be slain, and v. 26. that those were not to be
his People, who would deny him. verse 27. He fortold the ceasing of their
sacrifice, and v. 24. denotes 4. things: Forgiveness of sins, infusion of
Justice, fulfilling of Prophesies, and the anointing of the Holy of Holies:
All which particulars literally and most exactly agree to our Savior, and to
him only. Thus the Prophet Daniel. But that which I would have every one to
ponder is the prediction of Christ our Lord Matthew. 21. in the parable of the
vineyard, where speaking to the chief Priests and Pharisees, he clearly
prophesied of their ruin and reiection before it happened. A certain
householder, says the The parable of the vineyard.
Gospel, planted a vineyard etc. and let it out to husbandmen, when the time of
fruits drew nigh, he sent his servants to receive the fruits. Those husbandmen
seized upon the Servants, Beat one, killed an other and stoned a third. Here
our Savior clearly alludes to the slain and stoned Prophets. Again this
Householder sent forth other servants more then the former, who were treated in
like manner. Lastly he sent his own Son to them, saying, they will reverence my
Son, but, says the Text, They apprehended him also, cast him out of the
vineyard and killed him, and thus the Jews abused and massacred Christ our
Lord. Next our Savior proposes this question to the elders amongst them. When
therefore the Lord of the Vineyard shall come, what will he do to these
husbandmen? They answer. Malos male perdet. He will bring these naughty men to
naught, and let his vineyard out to other husbandmen, that shall render him
fruit in due season. Now follows the very life and soul of the The force of
that parable.
whole parable. Jesus said to them, have you not read in Scripture, the stone
which the builders rejected, the same is made into the head of the corner? This
is done by our Lord, and it is merueilous in our eyes; Ideo dico vobis,
Therefore I say to you: The Kingdom of God shall be taken away from you, and
shall be given to a nation, yiedling the fruits thereof. etc. The Chief Priests
and Pharisees, says the Gospel, knew he meant them. The kingdom therefore
whereof our B: Lord spoke, and fortold should be given to an other, appears
manifestly Gods own glorious work, laid open to our eyes and senses in the
Christian Catholic Church.

6. Hence Tertullian lib. aduersus Iudaeos C. 8. draws an Tertullians
Discourse.
other forcible argument against the Synogogue, from the large extent of
Christ's glorious Kingdom, now established. Observe well. It was prophesied,
says this learned Doctor, Daniel. 7. that Christ should reign every where, not
like a Solomon in the Confines of Iudaea, nor like a Nabuchodonosor from India
to Aethiopa, nor like an Alexander of macedonia, who was never Master of so
ample a Dominion as Christ Jesus possesses. No. Christi regnum (they are his
words) vbique porrigitur, vbique creditur, vbique regnat, vbique adoratur. The
Kingdom of Christ is extended every where, is believed every where, reigns
every where, and is adored in all places. And thus, the Roman Catholic
Religion, though never so strongly oppressed, is every where, whilst
Mahometisme and Heresy are restraind to such and such Dominions) If Therefore
the Jews own a Messiah, Christ our Lord who has founded such a kingdom, is
the only true Messiah. I prove it. Were he not, but that an other is yet to be
expected, God could not have permitted those manifest Miracles, signs and
wonders wrought by him to have introduced an error in place of the ancient
true Religion, which the Jews professed. Judaism therefore would have stood
still unshaken in its ancient vigor, had not Christ Jesus powerful works,
brought it to an utter ruin. But these, (and its Christ's own Argument,) John
15. If I had not done works amongst them etc.) far suspassed in worth, Majesty,
and greatness No prophet so potent in miracles as Christ.
all the wonders of Moses and the Prophets: For none of them ever raised
themselves from death to life again. None of them revived one like Lazarus 4.
days buried. None had the sea and Elements at command like Christ. None showed
such wonders at their death, as our dying Lord did. None fed so many thousands
in the desert with five loaves and two fishes. None cured any with the hemm of
their garments. None wrought such strange Conversions, as Christ etc. I pafs
over other signal wonders related in the Gospel, as the Prophets miracles are
recounted in the old testament, and briefly Argue. Where greater signs and
miracles, which cannot but proceed from God, evidence Religion, there is true
Religion. But most undeniably, Christ showed greater signs and miracles at the
founding of his Kindom, then either Moses or the Prophets manifested, therefore
he taught true Religion, and by virtue of those wonders reuersed Judaism, and
made it improbable. I say greater and mark well my Reason. Had not Christ's
illustrious works most eminently surpassed those of Moses and the Prophets, but
been as it were equal with them, Christ's glorious Kingdom could never have
come to so mighty a growth, to so vast an extent as now it is, The reason of
our saviors Large extended Kingdom.
it could not have wrought such strange conuersions as we see it done, the
whole world over. why? A lesser or equal Evidence for Truth can no more obscure
or lessen an other greater or equal Evidence, then one candle darken on other,
(as we see the light of the sun does.) Therefore that evidence which made the
Synogogue credible to the Jews, was to be taken away with a far greater light
of manifest signs and wonders, showed to Christians. For If we suppose the
Evidence equal in both cases (seeing no Religion is manifestly true of it self
without antecedent motives) we might all yet as securely profess Judaism, as
Christianity, and Therefore our Blessed Lord spoke a most profound Point of
Doctrine, when he said. Had he not wrought greater wonders amongst them, then
ever any did, they would have been excusable and without sin, which Doctrine
implies this great verity, that true Religion where ever it is, pleads most
powerfully for it self, yea dead's and vanquishes error by a most clear
Evidence of glorious works, and Miracles. And mark well this Discourse, it is
destructive of all Heresy, as shall be proved here after.

7. Who ever desires more of this subject may vouchsafe to read that excellent
Epistle of Rabbi Samuel Marrochianus then a Converted Christian, to Rabbi Isaac
an Israelite. You have it Tomo. 2. Biblioth. Patrum Collain print saeculo 11.
page 421. He writ the Epistle after the year 1000. 6. Centuries since, or
there about: and it contains, 27. short chapters. The work is admirable, and
most express for Christianity. In the first The Excellent discourse of
Marrochianus converted to Christianity.
Chapter he lays forth the horrid Transgressions of the Jews, their Idolatry
and killing of the Prophets, and says Gods wrath was appeased for these sins,
as Scripture assures us, when our people (says he) were set at liberty. But
now we have been dispersed and scattered a thousand years and more, and Gods
indignation yet follows us every where, nec in Prophetis promittitur finis,
and there is no end promissed in the Prophets, be cause of our wickedness: And
if you ask what enormous guilt that was? He answers in his 6. Chapter,
pondering these words of the Prophet Amos c. 2. upon three crimes of Judah I
will Convert, or as the Rabbi reads, transferam, put away, but upon the fourth
I will not convert, because they have sold the just for silver. Paueo Domine. I
tremble, says Marrochianus, when I read this sentence, for this just man was
not Joseph sold into Egypt, nor the fourth heinous wickedness (which he proves
manifestly) but was the just Lord Jesus, whom the Jews sold for silver, and
here is the greatest and most crying sin for which we are punished. In the 19.
Chap. (I cannot insist on all) He says, that Prophesy of Zach: C. 13. strike
the shepherd and his sheep shall be dispersed, was fulfilled, when the
Israelites smit that great Pastor of the Apostles, Jesus, then it was that
they, anciently his flock, were scattered up and down the face of the earth,
and that the Apostles succeeded in the place of our Prophets: For since that
Time we Jews have had no Pastors, no Prophets, no visions, no sacrifice, no
observance of Moses law, no Holocaust, no form of Religion etc. Thus he
discourses through several Chapters, and in the last, the 27. after he had
declared what great respect the very Turcks and Saracens show to Jesus Christ,
and his blessed Mother Mary: Of Christ, their Alcoram says, that He is the
true Messiah, yea and prefer His Genealogy before Mahomets, for Mahomets
parents were Idolaters and had their Origin from Agar the handmaid, Christ
descended by a lineal succession from Isaac and the Prophets by a right line,
to the blessed virgins birth. The Alcoran more over says, that Elisi (in the
Arabic tongue it is Jesus) knew all things, the whole book's of Moses, the
secrets of men's hearts, had power given him to work Miracles, to cure all
diseases, to cast out Devils, and therefore own him as a mighty great Prophet,
and the true Messiah. Much honor and respect also is given by the Turks to our
blessed Lady, as you may read in that Chapter. After, I say, a larger Discourse
of these two subjects, our Christian Samuel concludes, that the Jews have been
a deserted People for a thousand years, we may add 600 to them. The Turks
Jews abandoned.
yet daily increase by the force of arms, and Christians also strangly
propagate by the power and virtue of Christ, both oppose us. Nos autem nihil
proficimus, testimonium multorum stat contra nos, we Israelits yet advance
nothing, in so much that the malediction of Ruben light's upon us. Non crescas,
we are still, and shall be ignominious, we prosper not. Such is the judgment
of God against us. This and much more, Marrochianus delivered Six ages since
against his Nation.

CHAP. III.
Christianity as it stands in opposition to Jews, Turks, Infidels and
Heretics, is the only true Religion.

1. THe Assertion is an evident Inference out of the former discourse, for if
true Religion be in the world, and not found amongst Heathens, Turks, or Jews,
Those only called Christians enjoy that blessing, or there is no Religion at
all in being. Though the Proposition stand's firm on this sole proof, yet 'Ile
strengthen it with two Conuincing Arguments. The The first Argument.
first. Where we evidently find the marks. cognisances, and signs of true
Religion, there it is, but Christ's Doctrine only which we call Christianity is
undeniably manifested by clear signs and cognisances of truth, and therefore is
the true Religion. I prove the Minor. A cause is best known by its effects, the
tree by its fruits, the sun by its light, Faith by its works, and the Existence
of God by the emanation of his creatures. But no other Religion whether it be
that of Jews, Turks or Heathens ever showed to the world the like effects of
Truth, the like glorious Miracles, the like austerity of life, the like
contempt of transitory Goods, the like efficacy of Doctrine, or, brought so many
Infidels from incredulity, so many from sensuallity to a holy virtuous life, as
Christ and his Apostles gained soon after the first promulgation of the Gospel:
Therefore these most illustrious marks and cognisances of Christianity, as
clearly convince that God delivered truth by the Preaching of our blessed Lord,
and his Elect Apostles, as any effect in nature demonstrat's the cause it comes
from. The Marks are manifest to our eyes and senses, and plead most powerfully
for our Christian Doctrine. No other sect falsely called Religion, has euidenced
the like signs, and this, I am sure no Christian can deny.

2. A second argument is so weighty, in the behalf of Christ's sacred Doctrine,
that though we had no knowledge of God or Providence upon other Principles,
that which I am now to propose, would make both most undoubted. I argue
therefore. That An Other taken from the miraculous propagation of Christian
Religion.
Religion whose Author, Founder, and chief Preserver is God (we here suppose
with Jews and Turks the actual existence of a Deity) is manifestly the true
Religion, for God cannot found or teach falsehood, but Christian Religion, as
taught by Christ and his Apostles, had and has God for its Author, Founder, and
Preserver, therefore it is the only true Religion. I prove the Minor. A Religion
drawn into a law of living holily, which Miraculously began, and was spread the
whole world over, above the power and force of nature, is manifestly from God,
and subsist's by Divine virtue only, (Devils never helped in so pious a work)
but our Holy Christian Religion, was and is still thus miraculously spread and
preserved also, all Nations over, above the power and force of nature, therefore
it is from God, and subsists by his Divine virtue. To prove that it began
miraculously, and was propagated above the power and Four things Considerable
in the propagation of the Gospel.
force of nature, we are to ponder these four things. 1. The sublime Doctrine of
Christian Religion. 2. The condition of those first Masters who taught it, and
in what difficult circumstances. 3. The Quality and number of souls gained to
believe it. 4. By what means they were induced to Assent. Observe well: You
will find in every particular a Prodigious work above the force of nature, and
no other but Gods powerful hand concurring with it. Thus it is.

3. When the world lay as it were in a dead sleep of sin and ignorance
thoughtlesse God knows, of casting so much as a thought toward Heaven, or of
loving any good, but what sense and corrupted nature liked of. A new Doctrine
sad to sense, and mighty difficult to reason was heard of. Blessed are the poor
in spirit. Humility scarce heard of before, was then cried up for a great
virtue: wrongs were to be forgiven, laws obeyed, justice observed etc. But was
sensuallity only thus Crossed in its propensions? No. A load of high Mysteries
besides, was laid on Reason also, which seemed to rack and torture it. God one
in essence and three distinct persons. God an Infant born of a virgin. A Lord
Jesus, true God and man, after a wearisome life Scourged by impious hands and
finally Crucified. such (with much more) was the strange Doctrine of
Christianity. How ever (and here is the Miracle or prodigious work) it got
ground, spread it self far and near, and though contrary to sensuallity, and
above Reason, yet millions of souls so firmly believed it, though austere and
hard, that innumerable have dyed for it. Now if this be not a wonder, or a
prodigious work above the force of nature, we may well conclude with. S. Austin
lib. 22. de Ciuit. c. 5. This to be the greatest Miracle of all, that God
converted the world without Miracles.

4. The. 2. consideration yet increases the wonder of this admirable work. We
know great effects require proportionable causes of like strength, and virtue.
A weak child lift's not up a weighty burden, nor can a mean handful of naked
men defeat a puisant Army. Ponder well the Propagation of Christ's Gospel, and
the Conuersions of Nations to Christian Faith, visible to our eyes, the work is
without dispute, great, noble, and glorious. But say by what cause, by what
instruments, or Ministers did God effect it? Did he send Angels from Heaven to
preach a Trinity, a Crucified Savior, etc. or force Christians to a belief of
those Mysteries by strength of arms; No. Rex noster Pacificus, Our Divine Jesus
is the God of peace. Non in Commotione Dominus. No tumultuous spirit brought in
his Doctrine. Caluins tragical proceedings in the late begotten Heresy was not
heard of, when Christ our Lord and his Disciples preached the Gospel. Some
perhaps will say that Gods great intention when he first laid the foundation of
Religion, was to destroy Idolatry and to establish a Ty what instruments the
Gospel was dilated.
new law against Judaism, and therefore proceeded as the world usually does, in
weighty matters. He surely made choice of most expert Advocates, of the wisest
Philosophers, of the profoundest Judges, and most eloquent Orators on earth,
and by these pleaded for Christianity. It Is an error, all was contrary: Our
ever glorius God did his own work by twelve poor Fishermen, ignoble, ignorant,
friendlesse and destitute of all that the world makes account of, yea, and he
showed this power more by these weak Instruments; and their successors in after
ages, than he did before whilst he lived with them, to manifest that the work
was his Principally, and theirs instrumentally This Doctrine is so fully
delivered by the great Apostle of the Gentiles, that we need not S. Chrisostoms
Eloquent Discourse on the subject in his sermon. Christ is God. To illustrate it
further (though that also merits a serious reflection) I will destroy, says S.
Paul 1. Cor. 1. 19. The wisdom of the wise, and reject the prudence of the
prudent etc. Has not God made the wisdom of the world foolish? for because in
the wisdom of God, the world did not by wisdom know God, it pleased God by the
foolishnes of Preaching to save them that believe etc. For that which is
foolish to God, is wiser then men, and that which is the infirm of God, is
stronger then men. See your vocation, Brethren, that not many wise according
to the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, but the foolish things of the
world, God has chosen, that he may confound the wise, and the weak things of
the world, that he may confound the strong; and the base things of the world,
and the contemptible, God has chosen, and those things which are not, that he
might destroy those things which are, that no flesh may glory in his sight.
Which is to say humane power had no hand in this glorious work, and therefore it
is as manifestly above the force of nature, as if Christ Jesus had sent 12.
little Children to convert the world, for it is no less a miracle to see so
great a work done by 12. poor fishermen, then by 12. young Children.

5. 3. Consider the number and quality of souls gained to our Christian belief,
and ask whether they were a few only, or of so flexible a temper as to credit
any thing upon hearsay. You will answer they were not few. Witness the
conversion of whole nations, and if we Consider nature, no less. obstinate
than numerous. Incredulum illud genus humanum, says Arnobius lib. 1. Contra
Gentes. Mankind most stubborn and incredulous, contrary to its former liberty
and education, submitted to the yoke of Christ, which truth, The number gained
in numerable.
as this Author observes, were it not as evident as day light, would have been
thought impossible. Perhaps you will say (though many), they were yet simple and
ignorant and therefore easily wrought on. No. A Learned Dyonisius, a Clemens
Romanus, and innumerable other great capacities, called on, came in to the
Church, such choice ones, (God cooperating with his weak instruments,) were
drawn out of error and darkness, to the light of the Gospel. Now if you ask
in the last place, by what means these conuersions were made? The Gospel
answers Mark 16. 17. By signs and manifest wonders from Heaven. Going into the
world preach the Gospel to all creatures etc. and them who believe, these
signs shall follow. In my name they shall cast out Devils, speak with tongues.
as the Apostles did, in the feast of Pentecost. They went forth, says the
Text, preached every where, our Lord working with them, and confirming the word
with signs which followed. Signs therefore and Miracles works of Divine virtue
without violent hands or humane industry cast down Idols, outed Judaism, and
induced Aliens from Christ to believe his sacred Gospel. These Arguments, as I
now said, so forceably evidence a power above nature in the establishing of
Christianity, that if we had no other Proofs for the Existence of God, these
alone without dispute Convince most sufficiently, the being of a Numen above
us, who has demonstrated his providence in laying the foundation of Christian
Religion, so firmly.

CHAP. IV.
Whether Christian Religion since its first Propagation has not been in like
manner preserved pure, and further spread by Divine Providence, above the power
of Nature?

1. I Answer Affirmitiuely and say, that the Augmentation or further growth of
Christian Religion, is to be esteemed no less a work of providence and Divine
Assistance, then its first establishment was. One reason is. The Doctrine
preached to Christianity further Spread above the force of Nature.
innumerable People not Christian in the Apostles time, was the same sublime
learning (of a Trinity, of the Incarnation, and other difficult Mysteries) The
stubbornness and incredulity of those who heard it (at last induced to believe)
were alike in them, as in the first converted Christians, Propensions to
sensuallity which they quitted, as strong, and violent; The number of those
after gained souls, you may hold far more, their wisdom not inferior to the
former, and the quality of innumerable (witness so many Emperors, Kings and
Princes) drawn in following ages to Christianity, much exceeded those first
converted by the Apostles. Clear and manifest miracles (effects of Gods power
only) have been more numerous, in the Centuries since the Apostles preaching,
then before. What ever therefore proves the first Propagation of the Gospel
miraculous, or a work above the strength of nature, as forceably conuinceth the
Truth we here plead for. Now if some object! These later Preachers of the
Church sent abroad to preach Christ's Doctrine, had much more of the humane
learning, then those first great masters of Christianity, and therefore might
well by natural Eloquence and humane literature gain many without Divine
Assistance. I answer, when the Poets persuade me that Orpheus harp and harmony
tamed wild beasts and moved stones, 'Ile believe (and not Sooner) that wolves
became lambs, that the stony hearts of Infidels were softened, and made subject
to Christ's sacred law, by the power of humane learning only. What? that natural
knowledge, got by industry, could vanquish Idolatry, obscure Judaism, and draw
innumerable Heathens to deny sensuallity, to live a mortified life, and believe
in a crucified Savior? is not only a Paradox above expression, but a vast
improbability?

2. You know there are two things the world stand's for, Pro aris and focis,
that is for Religion and earthly commodities. Religion, you see, has the
Pre-eminence. Imagine now, that a Heathen Prince should send the most Eloquent
and learned Doctors within his Dominions upon this hard enterprise, To gain a
foreign Monark and People highly auerse from him, his laws, and comands,
Withal; to abandon their old Religion and admit of a new one, without the
least hope of any worldly interest; Nay contrary, most assured to lose much,
which nature seek's after; Would such a Policy (think ye) take? or could these
Doctors though never so Eloquent have confidence to bring about their design,
by wit or learning only? No. You will judge it impossible to gain so humane
learning, notable to Convert souls.
much as one sole Province, when no motive of earthly commodity enters, but
much against it. Here is our very case. The Church of Christ in ages following
the Apostles, sent abroad her Missioners, and These commissioned Preachers,
have not only destroyed Altars erected to false Gods, most obstinatly defended
by Gentiles, but introduced a new sacred Religion in place of them, mightily
opposite to sensuallity and what ever the world loves: (here is the tribute
paid to Christ) can we therefore think that wit did this work? or persuade our
selves, that a little breath drawn only from natural knowledge, threw down
these Altars? No. a Divine virtue, and that most Powerful did the deed, God
only wrought these Conuersions, no less admirable, then Evident to our eyes.
When S. Peter, as we read in the Gospel Luke 5. 4. launched forth into the deep
at Christ's command, and drew up great Multitudes of fishes, both he and others
stood amassed at the Miracle: And more justly may all admire the far greater
multitude of men, drawn out of a gulf of sin and ignorance then fortold, Ex hoc
The draught of souls out of perdition, miraculous.
iam eris homines cap^ens. by the labors of those first Masters and their
Successors. Say therefore, was the draught of fishes great, and all cried a
Miracle, And the draught of souls out of perdition far greater, and nature only
did it? No certainly. Believe it, Had the Pastors of Christ's Church toyled only
by that weak instrument of humane knowledge, the Idols of the Gentiles would yet
have stood, and all of them might well have bemoaned their lost labor with S.
Peter. Magister per totam noctem laborantes nihil cepimus. Master all night
long, we have been hard at work, and got nothing.

3. And here briefly (to say a word in passing) is the true reason why our
modern Sectaries are so unlucky in any conuersions, not only of Heathens, but
of others also named Christians, to their new Religion They launch forth, it is
true, but without commission, and therefore work not by the virtue of Christ's
command, wit alone and a little wordy learning do all, make a noise, and their
books to swell, but draw none of judgment to the(...) ^^les liberty and a rich
Benesice (two powerful Preachers to corrupt nature) catch some. The thing is
evident, for wh^ have we such signal conuersions wrought by Sectaries without
^ope of any worldly fortune, as now (to Of particular Conuersions.
omit ancient times) (...) very days, and late ones too, show us? Where have
they one like that Generous and learned Queen Christina of Sweede^ who quit^ a
Kingdom to become Catholic? Where have they such a Prince as yet lives, the
grand Turks own Brother, not only Catholic, but more, a Religious man of
Blessed S. Dominicks order? Its needless to give you in this place a Catalogue
of many German Princes, true members now of the Roman Catholic Church, who
were not gained by any worldly motive to abandon Heresy (as they have done) but
strongiy called on by Gods grace, without delay obeyed the summons, as now
lately did that great Commander in France Count Marishal Turene, whose glorious
Conversion witness his Profession of Faith, was grounded on serious thoughts
relating to Eternity, and not upon any humane interest. These very few, but
great changes, before our Eyes with others innumerable known to the world, are
plain effects of supernatural grace, and manifestly show, that more than wit or
humane knowledge had a hand in them.

4. Hence I argue. That Religion is from God, and therefore true, which He
concurres to, and propagates by his special grace and virtue? The Christian
Cathoiick Catholic Religion miraculously propagated, therefore true.
Religion only, has been thus propagated by Gods special grace and virtue,
therefore it is true. To add more weight to this argument, I ask whether those
Conuersions wrought by the Apostles them selves are to be held miraculous, that
is above the force of nature, or not? If you deny, blot out those words of the
Gospel, as most untrue Mark 16. 20. Domino cooperante etc. Our Lord cooperating
with them, and say all Apostolical conuersions were wrought by natural causes
only, And grant next, Mahometism and Christianity thus far equal, that as
Mahomet drives all to his belief, by the sword (the cause is natural) so the
Church draws all to it by wit, policy and humane learning, and this means is
altogether as natural. Now if you say those first Conuersions were truly
effects of grace, and wrought by Gods special assistance, This sequel is
Clear: The like made in after ages by the Church, far more numerous, as
difficult and wholly as glorious, proceed from the same fountain of Goodness,
God's Divine grace and special Assistance. And note, I speak here of real
Conuersions, wrought in Belieuers upon solid motives (the Church shows you
millions of them) not of hypocritical changes pretended hypocritical
Conuersions* not Valuable.
for God and Religion, when worldly interest has a hand in them. These are as
soon distringuished by their false luster, as a comet from the sun, they last
not long, but fall like blasing stars. We meddle not with them. Thus much of a
short digression which makes way to an other querie, and it is as follows.

CHAP. V.
Whether all called Christians Believe entirely Christ's sacred Doctrine? And
whether means be afforded to arrive to the knowledge of true Christian
Religion?

1. THese questions largely handled in the other Treatise, are soon resolved
upon certain Principles. I say therefore first. All called Christians believe
not truly and entirely Christ Sacred Doctrine, and prove it; If Hymenaeus and
Alexander Timoth. 1. c. 1. 20. once true Belieuers made shipwreck of their
Faith; if the Arians Monothelits, Pelagians, Donatists, and such known
Heretics named Christians, have fallen also, and lost true belief of Christian
verities sufficiently proposed? This sequel is evident. All of them though
named Christians, have not Faith entirely good, nor indeed any Divine Faith at
all. See the other Treatise Disc: 3. c. 3. n. 4.

2. I say. 2. All and every one may with ordinary diligence come to the
knowledge of the true Christian Religion, I prove the Assertion. Divine Faith,
without which we cannot possibly Means sufficient to know true Religion.
please God, is determinatly necessary to salvation, and consequently the
Religion where true Faith is taught, is also necessary. Therefore both these
after Ordinary diligence used may be known; unless we will say, that God first
makes such things necessary to salvation, and then remoues them so far out of
sight, that none can know by prudent ordinary diligence what these necessary
things are. I say necessary to salvation, not to dispute with Melchior Canus
and others of the necessity of faith to the first justification of a Sinner.
This difficulty we wave, and Argue. 2. God as we now suppose with all
Christians, yea with Jews and Turks also, is the Author of true Religion,
which he revealed to the world, for no other end but man's happiness, and eternal
salvation, therefore if he desires all to be saved by true Religion, which is
the final end thereof, He cannot, unless his Providence fail, but afford means
to know where it is professed, otherwise (which ill beseem's an infinite
wisdom) he would set us all on work to gain Heaven by the belief of true
Religion, and withal leave us so in darkness, that we cannot with all prudent
industry, come to the knowledge of it; which is to say, He will have us know
the end of Religion, and yet conceal the means leading to the knowledge of it.

3. Again I argue. 3. God who obliges not to impossibilities, lays a strait
command on all to believe true Religion (and not to assent to any falls sect)
therefore it may be known, and clearly distinguished, at least from the errors
of infidels, Jews, and Turks. Known I say, but how? Not by its internal light
immediately, for no Religion ever yet was its own self-euidence ex terminis, or
prudently got admittance, because the Professors of it Cried it up as true.
Therefore the credibility of true Religion, which must be True Religion is not
its own self evidence.
laid open to Reason by force of Conuincing motives, is made as well
discernable from Heresy (destructive of salvation) as from Turcism, or Judaism,
yea, and may be no less clearly discovered by its proper signs and luster
than a true Miracle; for example, that of S. Peter, from Simon Magus Sorcery.
This cannot be denied, unless God, as I now said, either command's
impossibilities, viz, to find that out, which cannot be found, or licenceth us
to embrace any Religion called Christian, whether good or bad, true or falls (it
imports not) because the best, if it can be found, is no more but a mere
Probability, or like uncertain opinions in Philosophy, which may be rejected or
followed according to every private fancy. This execrable Doctrine of the
indifference to any Religion, learned in the Devils school, is now a days much
in the mouths of many, and, I fear, too deeply rooted in the hearts Nor a thing
indifferent.
of some later Sectaries. But of this more here after. In the mean time you may
conclude. If true Religion be in the world, its made discernable not only from
Judaism but Heresy likewise; and if it have this discernibility it can be
known, if known, it induces an obligation to be believed with Divine Faith, if
it grounds certain Faith Subiectiuely taken in him that belieues, it is no
Opinion, and considered Obiectiuely it implies the highest certainty
Imaginable, settled on God's Revelation as is largly proved in the other
Treatise. Disc. 1. c. 5. n. 6. 7.

CHAP. VI.
Of our Sectaries error in their search after true Religion. As also of Mr.
Stillingfleets inconsequent way of Arguing.

1. ONe error common to all condemned Heretics, is in the first place to find
out true Religion by the book of holy Scripture alone. A most improbable way,
as the ancient Tertullian learnedly observes lib de Praescrip. cap. 9. 15. but
chiefly cap: 19. at those words often cited. Ergo non ad Scriptu^as prouocandum
etc. The reasons of my Assertion well pondered are most conuincing, 1. The
Sectary lays hold of a book which he says teaches truth, and yet knows not
in his Principles nor shall ever know infallibly, whether the book he own's
contain's the Doctrine of true Religion, or ought to be valued as Gods assured
word, which is to say in other terms; He learn's infallible truths of a Master,
before he has infallible certainty of this Masters teaching truth, infallibly.
That the Sectary wants infallible assurance of his book is evident, for he
says, no word of God, written or unwritten, no infallible Tradition, no
infallible authority on earth, ascertain's him of the Scriptures Divinity. So
Mr: Stillingfleet in several places chiefly part 1. c. 6. Page 170. Therefore he,
can have no in fallible Assurance of the Doctrine contained in Sectaries have
not infallible assurance of their Bible.
Scripture, and consequently no Divine Faith grounded on that Doctrine, as I
shall show hereafter. How ever, grant him an indubitable assurance in a general
way of some books of Scripture, he has not yet so much as moral certainty of
that precise. Canon he receives, excluding other books which he denies as
Scripture, For no Orthodox Church, no universal Tradition, no consent of
Fathers, no definition of any Council, approues his Canon, or explodes those
books rejected by him, therefore the sectaries Canon, whereof there is so Much
doubt, can give no moral assurance of Gods revealed verities, unless it were
without dispute a liquid truth, that their Canon only is Gods word, which
cannot be supposed, whilst so learned and numerous a multitude of Christians
oppose it, as defective and imperfect. Yet more. Suppose he gives you the exact
number of Canonical books, he gain's nothing, because the very Doctrine of
these books is no more but a Translation, and therefore unless the Translator
or Printer, have faithfully complied with their duty, and preserved the books
in their ancient purity, no Protestant can assure himself or any, that what we
now read, is without change or corruption, pure in the very necessary points of
Faith. If you say you compare them with the ancient Original Copies of the
Hebrew and Greek; I answer; the very best Originals men can light on now, are
no more but mere Transcriptions, and consequently may have been corrupted by
the Transcriber, The best Originals now extant, are only transcriptions.
the Printer, or Librarian. Therefore the Sectary has no Moral certainty of
the bare letter in Scripture, if he cannot show us the hand writing or
Autograph's of the Prophets, and Apostles, whereof there is no danger, because
he never saw any. Hence I argue. He who has not infallible certainty of the
very letter of Scripture, want's infallible certainty of the Doctrine contained
in Scripture, but the Protestant has no infallible certainty of the letter of
Scripture, Therefore he want's infallible certainty of the Doctrine contained in
Scripture: for no certainty of the letter, no An argument against sectaries.
certainty of the Doctrine drawn from thence. But if he has not certainty of the
Doctrine he can have no infallible faith grounded on it: Therefore Scripture
alone is an unmeet means to teach him, what either true Faith, or Religion is.

2. Mr. Stillingfleet to solve this unanswerable Argument Part. 1. c. 6. p.
196. says, we beg the Question, when we require an infallible Testimony for
our believing the Canon of scripture, yet grants such a certainty, as excludes
all possibility of reasonable doubting. and Chap. 7. p. 211. declares himself
further thus. Give me leave to make this supposition, that God might not have
given this supernatural Assistance to your Church, which you pretend makes it
infallible; whether men through the universal consent of persons of the
Christian Church in all ages, might not have been undoubtedly certain, that the
Scripture we have was the same delivered by the Apostles? I answer, if you take
leave to make that supposition, license me to tell you, you have not that
certainty of Scripture which Divine Faith both supposes and requires. And here
is one reason (to omit others insisted on here after) Deny this infallible
assurance of the books of Scripture, you have no greater certainty, that God
endited those words we now read, than you have assurance that Aristotle wrote
his Topics, or Caesar his Commentaries; And dare you, or any say, that we
receive Mr. Stilling: answer, dissatisfactory.
our Bible upon no surer ground? Or can you Imagine, if Christians accept these
books upon a Testimony less then vndubitable, it may not be suspected that a
thousand gross errors have entered the Copies by the negligence, or
inaduertency of such as transcribed them? Believe it. Were Aristotle's Topics
matter of Divine Faith, none would die after the fallible conueyance of them to
our age, upon this persuasion; that nothing substantially first writ by that
Author, has been changed or altered Since; and the same I assert of the Bible;
unless you say that the words of Scripture were writ in some celestial and
incorruptible Matter, yet to be read by all, or grant, which is truth; that as
God by special Providence caused them to be writ pure, so also he yet preserues
them without blemish, and now witnesses the truth by the Testimony of his
infallible Church, whereof more largely hereafter. At present I will only answer
your difficulty about that fallible certainty, which you affirm, excludes all
possibility of reasonable doubting, and say first. The universal consent of
persons of the Christian Church in all ages, never approved the entire Canon of
your Scripture: for not only the present Roman Catholic Church, but the
ancient councils also, received books which you reject. This truth is so
manifest that it need's no further proof, therefore your Canon want's the
approbation of the whole Christian world, and consequently you have not so high
a certainty of Scripture, as excludes all possibility of reasonable doubting. I
answer. 2. And it is a demonstration against Protestants, who say the whole
Christian world for a thousand years at least, erred in Doctrine contrary to the
verities of Holy Scriptures, for, if we go up from Luther to the 4.th or 5.th
age after Christ, you will find none but condemned erring Heretics and Roman
Catholics, no less actually guilty (say Sectaries) of these professed errors:
Of praying to Sain^s, of an unbloody Sacrifice of the, the A further Argument,
taken from the papists supposed errors
real presence etc. Thus much supposed; I both answer and Argue against you. If
the whole Christian world was for that vast time so strangely infatuated, as to
mantain errors contrary to Scripture, when the true Doctrine thereof no less
concerned their eternal Salvation, then the true letter; it cannot possibly be
supposed upon any weak Probability (much less on such a certainty as excludes
all reasonable doubt) that these besotted Christians preserved the letter of
Scripture pure and entire, whose errors are now imagined most gross against
the Doctrine contained in God's word. Observe my reason. It is much more easy to
conceive (if all held corrupted Doctrine) that the very letter of Scrtpture was
by negligence or ignorance of these Corrupters of Doctrine, also corrupted, then
to imagine the records preserved pure, and Millions of Christians to read them,
and after the reading, grossly to mistake Gods verities registered in that book.
And here I must mind M. Stillingfleet of his proofless and inconsequent way in
Arguing.

3. You Sr. say first. The whole erring multitudes of Christians before Luther
preserved Scripture pure, yet forsooth, these silly men taught one Doctrine
after an other, contrary to Scripture. They perused the book interpreted it,
yea preached it, to their own confusion, and condemnation. You say. 2. It is
not possible that Mr. stillingfleets arguments retorted
these writings could be extorted out of men's hands by fraud or violence under
their eyes, or suffered to be lost by negligence: Yet you make it not only
possible, but grant the Doctrine thereof to have been lost and perverted by
fraud, negligence, violence, or all together. You say. 3. These ancient
Christians were professed enemies to the corrupters of the Bible: yet you hold
them dear friends to the deprauers of Gods verities, registered in the Bible.
You say. 4. The interest of eternal Salvation made these Christians careful to
preserve the Bible in its first integrity: And yet you make them supinly
careless in preserving the verities contained in Scripture, as highly necessary
to salvation. You say. 5. The eternal concerns of all Christians so depended
upon the safe preservation of these Sacred Records that if they were not true,
we are all most miserable. And I reply. The eternal concerns of all Christians
as highly depend's on the pure Doctrine of Scripture as on the outward secured
Records; for what auails it to have pure Records, and draw poison out of them?
You grant the whole world was miserably infatuated with false Doctrine for ten
whole ages, though it had the letter of Scripture pure, and yet the purity of
that book prevented not the misery of mischievous errors. You say. 6. When
once I see a whole Corporation content to burn the public Charter, and
substitute a And further urged against him.
new one in its place, and this not to be suspected or discovered; When I shall
see a Magna Charta foisted, and neither King nor People be sensible of such a
cheat, when all the world shall conspire to deceive themselves and their
Children: I may then suspect such an imposture as to the Scripture, but not
before. Answ. Ex ore tuo te Iudico, and retort the Argument in your own words.
When. I see not only a whole Corporation but a whole ample learned Church, wast
or deprave the old Legacy of Christ sacred Truths bequeathed to it, and a new
learning substituted in its place, and this change not to be suspected and
discovered: when I shall see that Magnum Depositum of his Doctrine once
committed to the Church escare to be foisted, and neither King, nor Prelate,
nor People found, sensible of the cheat: when all the world shall conspire to
deceive themselves and their children by teaching falls Doctrine in place of
Christ's verities: Then I shall, and must in prudence suspect an imposture, a
change, an alteration in the very book of Scripture. This later you shamfully
grant to have happened, when upon the pretense of hideous errors you abandoned
all other Christian Societies in the world, and unfortunately made a Schism with
Luther from the true Roman Catholic Church, therefore you may not only weakly
suspect, but must most justly fear the first, which is, that you have not true
Scripture.

4. Hence I say, what ever Argument proves the book of Scripture hitherto
preserved pure, proves likewise the Doctrine of the present Church as faithfully
transmitted and Conveyed pure from An inference from what is said.
age to age to our very days. Contrariwise, if there were any Principle (as
there is none) whereby this Doctrine could be showed false or stained; All might
(if reason have place) jointly acknowledge a non-assurance of the Scriptures
purity; For that Corrupters of Christ's Doctrine may more Easily Corrupt the
words of scripture.
Church which may lose true faith and Corrupt Christ's Doctrine, may more easily
lose or corrupt Christ's Scripture, unless you grant, which is horridly
impious, that Gods special Providence had only care to keep a Bible incorrupt,
and at last, like one careless, permitted the Doctrine of that book (whereon
Salvation essentially depend's) to be extorted out of the hearts of all
Christians for a thousand years together. Ponder these truths Mr: Stilling:
and Confess ingenuously, if your Principles hold good, you have not so much as
any probable certainty of your Bible.

5. Perhaps one may say if the letter of Scripture be corrupted the very
foundation of Faith is shaken, but if supposed pure and unaltered, though all
Christians, Papists, and Heretics erred in the Doctrine thereof, yet they may be
reclaimed from error by the pure Euangelical preachers, now swarming in
England. Pitiful. what no help then for a besotted world before these late men
appeared, who here speak at random? They first tell us upon a mere supposition
without any semblance of proof, that Scripture was ever preserved pure though
all Christians abused its Doctrine; whereas we contend upon most grounded
reasons, that if all erred in the doctrine drawn from Scripture, the letter
cannot be supposed pure, because a Church carelessly negligent in the
preservation of Christ's Doctrine, cannot be thought careful enough in preserving
the true Records of his Doctrine: Now the Answer without proof is, though all
erred Doctrinally, yet none of them maimed or marred the Bible, which besides a
Moral impossibility, implies a pure begging of the Question. See more of this
particular in the other Treatise Disc. 2. c. 2. n. 8. Again. If these
Euangelical men pretend to Convince us of our errors What sectaries are
obliged to.
by a pure book of Scripture, they are obliged to show us some one Copy at
least, whereof we may have such certainty as excludes a Possibility of all
doubting. But this no Protestant can do, who If God assisted the Transcribers
of scripture, much more he assist's the Church.
reiect's all editions now extant except perhaps his own. The Vulgar latin,
which Mr: Stillingfleet call's the great Diana of Rome, of high credit in the
Church for a thousand years, pleases not, The Clementine and Sixtine Bibles,
not different in any Material point touching Faith, are undervalued. Set these
aside, I desire Mr: Still: or any Protestant, to show me a Copy, whose
Authenticalness is so agreed on by the consent of all Christians, as may
exclude reasonable doubting of its purity. It is utterly impossible. If these
men answer, we must have recourse to the Autograph's, or ancient Manuscripts of
the Hebrew and Greek, I deny their supposition, for these now extant, are no
first Originals, in a word no more but Transcriptions. What greater security
therefore, have we of such copies then of the Vulgar latin? unless you say
that the Transcriber (who ever he was) because he wrote Hebrew, Caldee, or
Greek, could not tell a lie, or was determined to follow in every Material
point of Faith the Hagiographers Copy most faithfully. Grant this, and I Argue:
If God by special Providence so assisted the memory, the will, and hands of
these Transcribers, as to write nothing but what was exactly found in the first
Original Scripture; with much more reason will He ever assist his Church to
admit or approve of no Scripture, nor Doctrine, but what is genuine, pure, and
Orthodox.

6. To reinforce this argument. I license Mr: Stilling: to choose amongst so
many lections of the new Testament as he says, are collected by Robert
Stephen, one or two he likes best, and then I demand whether that lection
agrees with the vulgar latin or differ's from it? If It agree, there is no
reason to quarrel with the Vulgar; if it be different in any material point, we
are cast upon the greatest uncertainties immaginable, for the dispute will then
be, whether that Copy which he follows, ought to be preferred before the
Vulgar Latin? And here, Sr. you and I must come to clear Principles. We say
first. The Vulgar latin translated, or at least Corrected at Pope Damasus
Command by that learned and profound Doctor S. Hierom, has been read in the
Church The vulgar latin of long use in the Church.
without reproof, for a thousand years and upward. None but one Rufinus (and
this only at the beginning whilst S. Hierom lived) excepted against it. S.
Austin, all know. Lib. de ciuit. 18. c. 4. 3. highly commend's S. Hieroms great
labors, and learning in the three tongues. Not any in the ensuing ages found
the work reprehensible, innumerable worthy Authors have approved it. And now, O
strange time! a few Nouellists whose whole industry is only to pull down, to
build nothing, disdainfully call it Romes great Diana. Be pleased, Sr. to
answer and give me as strong a proof for the Authenticalness of that Copy you
follow (if any difference be) as I give you for our Latin Translation? If you
say the S. Hierom defended, against Cauils.
Copy you follow is not the same which S. Hierom used, it is more then you
know, He had as many lections, and perhaps more, than you have seen, and can
you say which he followed, and which he did not? Well. But suppose he made use
of an other Copy different from what pleases you, the Question is, whether
that be of less credit then yours? And this sole point cannot be decided in
your favor by any probable Principle. If you say, S. Hieroms Translation
seems contrary to the Authentic Greek Copies. I answer first, you do not only
avouch more then you know, but utter an improbability; for if there had been
any Material difference between his Translation, and the Greek he made use of;
innumerable learned Doctors in the Catholic Church would have espied the
error, and discovered it, before you were born. Pray you remember your own
discourse P. 215. and. 216. where you say; you may be sufficiently assured that
no Material corruption is in the Books of Scripture without our Churches
Testimony, because Catholics of old were always as vigilant to preserve the
Scriptures purity, as Heretics ready to deprave it: For you say, when Marcion
began to clip the Text Irenaeus presently took notice and rebuked him, and so
did Tertullian, and Epiphanius respectively to others, who rescued Scripture
from the violent hands of such as attempted to falsify it. Lay then yours on
your breast and once speak ingenuously, can you persuade your self, if any
considerable error had been in our Vulgar Edition, either contrary Catholic
authors would have noted errors in the vulgar, had there been any.
to Faith or Good manners, that those many worthy learned Catholics in the
ages after S. Hierom would not have noted it, and released it from Corruption?
What? For a thousand years, was there no Irenaeus, no Tertullian, no
Epiphanius, no Ambrose etc. that took notice of so important a matter whereon
the salvation of souls depended? Again (And this Argument ever pinches) was
there no Irenaeus, no Tertullian, in all those ages, (when they saw the Doctrine
of Scripture go to ruin by these supposed erring Papists, that rescued the
Doctrine from error, as they did the letter of scripture from corruption?

7. You tell us. 2. That among those multitudes of lections in the new
Testament observed by Robert Stephen, which were perhaps occasioned in the
general dispersion of Copies by the Multitudes of Transcriptions, through the
ignorance or carelessness of the Transcribers, there are none which seem
material or entrench upon the integrity of Scripture, as a rule of Faith and
manners: They are therefore, say you, but racings of the skin, but no wounds of
any vital part. And is it possible? Can you find more then such racings in the
Vulgar Latin? can you discover a wound in any vital part thereof? I challenge
you to speak to the cause in this particular, but I know you cannot. Why
therefore may not the Vulgar be admitted amongst the rest? The reason of my
assertion is. You cannot find such a wound in the Vulgar, unless you produce a
Copy of Scripture more genuine and pure without Dispute, but this, whether you
have recourse to the Greek or any Latin translation will, be more doubted of by
whole multitudes of learned men, then the vulgar now read in the Church:
Therefore you cannot come to so much certainty of any Scripture as excludes a
possibility of all reasonable doubting. Which truth seems so evident ad
hominem that it needs no further proof, but this only, The Sectary says, our
Vulgar translation is not pure, we say and prove it, his English Bibles
different from the Greek in the new Testament, are Corrupted, (see many of
these errors noted before the Rhems Testament), Therefore if the Protestant
reiect's the now Authentic latin Edition he has no such certainty of any The
vulgar Latin rejected, Protestants have not Certainty of any Translation.
Translation extant, as excludes a possibility of all reasonable doubting,
unless he makes his own parties opinion for what he says vndubitable and our
contrary assertion improbable, which is foul play.

8. Some sectary may reply; He excepts not against the Vulgar Latin which is
our Sixtine and Clementine Bible, as guilty of any Material error, but of
lesser faults only, and with such charitable eyes he look's on all other
versions Thus much integrity, I hope, Sectaries must approve the Vulgar latin
Bible.
Mr. Stilling: allows it p: 216. where he takes notice of a peculiar hand of
Divine Providence in preserving the Authentic Records of Scripture safe to our
days. By the way: it is pity he omitted to note also the like providence in
preserving the Doctrine of Scripture pure so long: But hereof we have said
enough already. All therefore I note at present is. 1. If God showed a
particular Providence in preserving Scripture, pure to our days, the Vulgar
Latin according to Mr: Stilling: Cannot be guilty of any material error, for
were it guilty, this peculiar Providence would have failed in the great moral
body of the Roman Catholic Church, which has read this Scripture, and held it
incorrupt for ten whole ages; And Consequently Mr: Stilling: must acknowledge a
want of special Providence in order to the preservation of all authentic
Records every where. Grant thus much, and no Sectary can have so great moral
assurance of scripture as excludes all reasonable doubting, for, if God has
permitted a whole ample Church to be deluded with a Bible notably corrupted:
The Certainty of Scripture, which excludes all reasonable doubting, fail's the
sectary, who either must admit of an other latin Translation distinct from
ours, or have recourse to the Greek Text, but he approues of no latin
Translation as totally pure and incorrupt, (though S. Hierom observes in his
praeface to the Gospels. Tot sunt Exemplaria quot Codices, there are many of
them) Therefore He must have recourse to the Greek, which is usual.

9. Hence I argue. If God showed not particular Providence in preserving our
latin Edition from notable error, so diligently reuiewed by S. Hierom, and
approved also not only by many learned Writers in after ages, but by a whole
Church; it is no less then temerarious to allow greater security to any Greek
Copy; for can the Sectary An Argument in behalf of our Latin Edition.
say, that Gods peculiar hand of providence alwais so attended the Transcriber
or Printers of the Greek Copies, that nothing could be written but pure
Apostolical Scripture, and with any countenance own a want, a defect, a
subtraction, of this peculiar providence to a Scripture, approved of by a whole
Church? Observe well the difficulty. Where Gods special Providence is, there we
have infallible assurance, you grant God's special Authentic records had not
come safe to our hands) therefore you cannot rationally deny it to that
Scripture, which the Church approues.

CHAP. VII.
More of this subject. Doubts concerning the several editions If this
digression Concerning the different Editions of Scripture seem tedious to the
Reader, he may pass to the 9. Chapter, where he will find our Discourse
Continued against Sectaries.
of scripture. None extant more pure, then the Vulgar La-Latin. Abstract from
Church Authority, there is no Certainty of the best Edition. Sectaries
Comparing the Present Copies with the more ancient gives no assurance. A word
with Mr. Stillingfleet.

1. THe first proposition. If the Protestant reiect's our Vulgar Edition as not
Authentic, or as viciated in any material point touching Faith and manners, He
improbably pretend's to have so much certainty of Scripture as excludes a
possibility of reasonable doubting. To prove the Assertion I will here give you
a few Postulata usually held indubitable by most learned men, who have writ
large preludes (called Prolegomena) to holy Scripture. Neither Catholic nor
protestant shall rationally except against my suppositions. First it is
Certain, that the greatest part of the old The first supposition
Testament was Originally writ in Hebrew, but whether that ancient Copy has
been ever since preserved pure, chiefly after S. Hieroms time, or notably
corrupted by negligence or malice, is very doubtful. Learned men stand for the
Affirmative, and none, I think, can deny some lesser errors when greater are
pretended. You may see these different opinions of Authors in Prolegomen: Ad
Biblia Maxima, And the particular supposed errors largely noted by Salmeron
Prolegom: 4. It would be too long a work to insist on this subject, and not for
me to determine what is true: All I contend for here, is an uncertainty whilst
great Authors are opposite, and this is done, to conclude, what I intend
against Sectaries.

2. It is again certain that the greatest part of the new Testament was writ in
Greek, but here we meet with the same difficulty, and inquire. Whether the
Greek by chance or inaduertancy has been corrupted since the Apostles time?
This at least (if not more) is The second supposition.
doubtful: Grave Authors hold the Affirmative. See Serarius in Prolegom: Cap.
13. and Bonfrer, c. 14. and the errors noted. If Protestants deny them, or
think their own authority weighty enough to Contradict our Doctors, the matter
in Controversy, is still doubtful. So much I plead, and no more. 3. It is
certain that all other Bibles are only Translations, or Transcriptions of The
third.
the Original Hebrew and Greek. The Greek version of the 72. interpreters out
of the Hebrew (or as we usually (...)ak the 70.) is only a Translation wherein
many doubts occurr. One is, whether that Translation be the first, For Clement
Alex: and Eusebius: cited Bibl: Max: sect. 18. c. 2. seem to hold an other more
ancient, before the time of Alexander the great. How ever, admit, which is
perhaps true, the 70. version to be the most ancient, we have yet matter enough
of Dispute concerning it, and one great Question is whether at this day, that
version be yet preserved pure, The ancient Archetyps whereof, more probably are
not now extant, but when or where lost, remains uncertain. See Bib: Max: sect.
18. c. 10. Authors say, it is corrupted through the ignorance or negligence of
the Librarians, or the Printers. See Bib t Max. c. 8. 9. Restat ergo. Whence it
was, that those Laborious Doctors of Alcala, at the persuasion of Cardinal
Franciscus Ximeno The version of the Septuagint.
Archbishop of Toledo, and afterward, the Doctors of Louain, making a diligent
search after many Greek Copies, corrected no few faults in the then extant
transcribed Copy of the Septuagint, yet this very correction was far from the
purity of that ancient version, which the Fathers used. See Bib: Max: now
cited, where upon that other version of the 70. taken out of an Ancient
Manuscript of the Vatican Library, Anno Dom. 1585. Came forth by the industry
of Cardinal Anton: Caraffa, wherein most learned men labored nine whole years,
and it was perfected about the beginning of Sixtus 5. Reign. The greatest
difficulty yet remains. It is most certain, the version of the 70. Interpreters
differ's so notably from the Hebrew Text, chiefly in the computation of years,
or point of Cronology, that our venerable Bede, though a great Scholar and one
as humble as learned, ingenuously confesses, Venerable Bedes Judgment.
he cannot reconcile those Antilogies. See Bib: Max: c. 8. fine. Who then can
tell me when we find these lections of the Hebrew and of the Septuagint
opposite to one an other, which is to be preferred? Most learned men stand for
the Hebrew, as many for the 70. You may see these dissenting Authors quoted in
Proleg: Bib: Max: Sect: 18. c. 11. and how some to accord them, say, That the
Holy Ghost would have the Septuagint now to add to the Hebrew, now to diminish
according to his good pleasure. See Bib: Max: cap: 8. fine.

3. But let us proceed to a further matter of doubting. Long after the Edition
of the Septuagint, came forth three other Translations made by three ungodly
men. Aquila, Symmachus, and Theodotio. Aquila Pontinus, once a Gentil became
Christian, but denying Christ, soon turned Jew learned the Hebrew language, Of
other three Translations.
and too critically translated the Hebrew into Greek, almost word for word. His
spleen against the 70. Interpreters was so great, that contrary to the verity
of Scripture, He rendered some places speaking of our Savior, most perfidiously
and wrested all to a confused and sinister sense. Symmachus one of Samaria,
twice circumcised became at last a Professor of the Ebion Heresy, and
Translated the Hebrew into Greek, not as Aquila did Ver^at^m, but rendered the
sense more perspicuously. Theodotion first Baptized, then a Sectary of Marcions
and Ebions errors, lastly a Prosylite, embraced Judaism (and therefore S.
Hierome in 3. Habacuc call's these three, now named, Semi-Christianos, half
Christians) followed a middle way between Aquila and Symmachus and translated
Scripture with greater Simplicity, more agreeable to the 70. version.

4. An other Edition ascribed to Origin, not because he made Origens great
industry.
a new version, but with an immense labor, to conserve the 70. Greek pure,
first composed his Tetrapla or a Bible branched into 4. Columns. The first
contained the 70. version, the 2. Aquilas; The 3. Symmachus his Translation.
The 4. that of Theodotion. Afterward this great Doctor, learning the Hebrew
language, made his Hexapla, that is a bible with 6. Columns. The first
contained the Hebrew Text, the 2. the Hebrew in Greek Characters, the other 4.
the Version of the 70. of Aquila, Symmachus, and Theodotion. Now because there
were two more Greek Versions called the fifth and Sixth Editions, Origin composed
his Octopla, or Bible distinguished into 8. Columns. If you will have more of
the 5. Edition, called by some Hierecuntina, or of the Sixth named Nicopolitana,
as also of the Lucian and Hesychian Lections, read Bib: Max: in Proleg: Sect.
18. Cap: 9. and Bonfrer. in Prol: c. 17. These two later were only corrections
Doubts relating to these versions.
of the 70. no new Translations. Concerning all these versions many doubts
occurr as you may see in the Authors now cited, and you will meet with no fewer
concerning the Caldee Paraphras of the new Testament, called Targum. The
Syriack version or interpretation of the new Testament extant in that noble
laborious work of Arias Montanus called Biblia Regia, is not without blemish;
Se Serrar: c. 15. nor the Author of it well known, and I believe our Sectaries
will not approve several Titles or inscriptions mentioning what was wont to be
read on certain feast days, as on the veneration of the Holy Cross, and in
certain fasts, and the Commemoration of faithful souls departed this life etc.

5. To speak here of the many latin Editions and several doubts concerning
them, would be too long work for my design (which is only to point at
difficulties concerning both Originals and Translations) That ancient one
called by S. Austin. Itala, highly commended lib: 2. de Doctr: Christi. and
read in the Church before S. Hieroms time, has no known Author. The The Itala
version, commended by S. Austin.
more late amongst Catholics, are Santis Pagninus his version of the old
Testament out of the Hebrew, first corrected by Arias Montanus, though the
Correction pleases not Bonfrerius, and it was most pitifully corrupted by
that Runnagate Printer Robert Stephen, whereof see more in Bib. Max: Sect. 20.
Cap: 2. and Bonfrer: Cap. 18, Sect. 1. An other you have of Isidore Clarius,
which neither Canus nor others approve. A third, of Francis Vatablus Doctor of
Paris, and a sound Catholic, but the ungodly Robert Stephen corrupted that
version, as you may read in Bonfrer. and Bib. Max. now cited. I mention nothing
in this place of the Armenian and Gothic Bibles. Se Bib. Max. Sect. 20. cap.
3. And am as silent of the Tygurin version printed anno 1539. by Christopher
Froschonerus, a most corrupted Translation by Heretics, (whereof you may see
more in Bib. Max: now cited cap. 3.) Read also if you please Serrarius cap. 18.
9. 1. Of Sebastian Munsters, of Bliblianders, of Castalions and the Geneua
Translations etc. You will find none of them of any account, but with Sectaries
only.

6 Thus much briefly premised (for we have not said half of what might be
alleged) concerning the doubts and uncertainty of various editions, I here
appeal to every distinteressed judgment Reflection made upon these doubts.
and ask whether it be not mighty difficult, or rather impossible, to say
absolutely by the force of our private fallible knowledge, by wit or humane
industry only: This book, This Edition is Gods true sincere word, as it was
writ by the Hagiographers? And here I must mind Mr: Stilling: of his not well
considered Doctrine, who P. 196. seems to own so great certainty of Scripture as
excludes the possibility of all reasonable doubting, and page 215. asserts. We
may be sufficiently assured that there are no Material Corruptions in the books
of Scripture, without your Churches Testimony. Good Sr. leave of these
generalities, and tell us plainly of what Edition you speak? What particular
version have you, which must be supposed so authentic, or so free from all
error, as may exclude a possibility of reasonable doubting, before you have
the Churches Testimony or toleration for it? Name one, and much A question
proposed to Sectaries.
is done. Will you follow the Hebrew and Greek Copies now extant? You see most
learned men, whose knowledge and Authority is not inferior to yours, say both
are corrupted, and thus much alone weakens the certainty you pretend to? Will
you admit of the 70. Translation as pure and Authentic? Be pleased to
reconcile the Antilogies, between that and the Hebrew Text, or say that the
Septuagint, though ever of great veneration in the Church, has its errors.
Will you plead for what Aquila or Symmachus have done? These are evidently
corrupted, and in points most Material touching Christ our Lord. Will you say
that all Copies, none excepted, all Translations whether Greek or Latin now
extant are pure Scripture in the Materials of Faith and manners? It is highly
improbable, and therefore hitherto we come to no Solid Principle, to no
certainty which excludes the possibility of reasonable doubting. O says Mr:
Stilling: to prove that no Material Corruptions stained the Scripture now
extant, We (that is Sectaries) diligently compare the present Copies with the
most ancient M S S. we observe the citations of Of sectaries Comparing
Scripture with the more ancient Copies.
those ancient Fathers who lived when some Autograph's were extant, and then
(most likely) we have the pure word of God. You compare? Pray you answer? were
there not others in the Catholic Church before Sectaries troubled the world,
as industrious in comparing Copies and Manuscripts together, as you have lately
been? Was S. Hierom, think you, negligent in this particular? Or did the
Primitive Church before S. Hierom when it read that ancient Edition called
Itala, and preferred it before all other Lections, fail to examine which Copy
was best? Yet more. If we come to later times and ponder well, what diligence
what vigilance, what industry attended the Correction of the Sixtin and
Clementine Bibles, Sectaries may blush at their Oscitancy, and too slight
Cauils at our Vulgar latin. Read the preface to Sixtus 5. Edition, Antwerp
print 1599. with other reflections made in Bib: Max: Sect 20. c. 4. and you
will see so great a care and industry used in this correction, that humanly
speaking more could not be desired.

7. Many Copies and old M S S. were at the Popes command sought for, and
brought to Rome, Not only some chief and selected Cardinals in the time of Pope
Pius the 4. but other great scholars also, profoundy learned in the knowledge
of Scripture, and skilful in the Hebrew, Syriack, Chaldee, and Greek, began the
Great diligence used in the Correcting the Vulgar.
Correction of the Vulgar Latin, and to accomplish the work, diligently
examined these ancient books, these M S S, the best Originals of Hebrew and
Greek, and commentaries also of the most ancient Fathers etc. Speak therefore
of humane industry, we may boldly say, our Vulgar Latin has been reuiewed, and
corrected with greater care, than ever version was set forth by Sectaries. But
if these men will still pretend to find any Material error in the Vulgar, I
only ask by what more Authentic Copy can they, so much as probably hope to
amend it? By the Hebrew and Greek? Toys. Dispute the Question rigidly, there
is less assurance of these supposed Originals integrity, then of the Vulgar
Latin so industriously examined not only by the best Hebrew and Greek Copies
now extant, but also by other ancient M S S. and commentaries of the Fathers.

8. I cannot therefore imagine what Mr: Stillingfleet aims at, when he tell's
us page. 215. that Doctor James who had taken the pains to compare not only the
Sixtine Clementine Bibles, but the Clementine Edition with the Louain
Annotations, makes it appear, there are 10000. differences in the Louain
Annotations from the Vulgar Latin, and that these differences arise, from
Comparing it (that is sure the Vulgar Latin) with the Hebrew, Doctor James
opposed.
Greek, and Chaldee- What would the man have think ye? Will he suppose first,
that Thomas James hitt's right in every thing he says? The learned James
Gretser whose authority is every whit as good the whole world over as that of
Mr. James. Tom. 1. Ad lib. 2. Bell: page 1060. denies all this, with a Mentitur
tertio Thomas James, December millia verborum etc. Read Gretser I cannot
transcribe all he has. Again will he say, that the Vulgar Latin is to be
corrected by the Louain Annotations, or these by the Vulgar, if any thing were
amiss in either? Or 3. If these pretended differences arise from the comparing
all with the Hebrew, Greek, or Chaldee, can Thomas James be supposed to know
the last energy and force of every Hebrew, Greek, or Chaldee Rational
exceptions against Mr. James.
word (when there is controversy) better then the Authors of the Louain, and
Correctors of the Vulgar Latin? Here we may come to an endless wrangling about
the Genuine signification of words, but decide Nothing. God help us, if the
knowledge of true Scripture depend's on such petty Nicities, and fruitles
quarrelling. 4. And this is to be noted. Were these differences more then are
made by Mr. James, The question would then be, whether they imply any Material
alteration concerning Faith or Manners, or introduce notable error contrary to
God's revealed verities, or finally be mere verbal differences, grounded on
the obscure signification of Original words? If Mr: Stilling: only pretend's
this later, let him remember his own expression of racings of the skin, and
know, that there was never Translation in the world, which may not be thus
Cauilled at. If any Material alteration be pleaded he both speaks a loud
untruth, and contradict's himself, when he takes notice of a peculiar hand of
Divine Providence in preserving the Authentic records of Scripture safe to our
days. 2. He is to name that Authentic Copy, either Original or translation,
by the indisputable integrity whereof, these supposed errors may be cancelled,
and Gods pure revealed verities put in their place: But to do this after so
immense labor and diligence used in the correction of the Vulgar, will prove
no less than a vain attempt, or rather a desperate impossibility. Upon this
ground.

9. I say first. Who ever denies the Vulgar Latin to be Authentic true
Scripture, has, Eo ipso, less assurance of any other Edition now extant, and
consequently, not so great certainty of Scripture as excludes a Possibility of
all reasonable doubting. I An Assertion proved.
prove the Assertion. That man may rationally doubt of Scripture who reiects
the strongest assurance imaginable, and makes choice of a weaker, But this is
done, if he doubts of, or denies the Authenticalness of the Vulgar. The reason
is first because He has no other Edition, as is now said, examined with more
care or greater industry, and this ground's the highest humane assurance
conceiuable. 2. Because the Vulgar is approved by God's Holy Church which gives
infallible certainty. if therefore the integrity of the Hebrew, and Greek be
not unquestionably authentic, he wants that certainty which excludes a
Possibility of doubting, And Much less assurance has the Sectary of his own
later iarring Editions of Scripture, which breed nothing but confusion to the
very Authors, and all who read them.

10. I say. 2. If the Sectary hold's the Vulgar Latin Authentic Scripture, yet
makes it guilty of some lesser faults, and therefore endeauours to correct it
by a more authentic What if lesser faults be pretended in the Vulgar.
Copy, he cast's himself upon mere uncertainties and, labors in vain. The
reason is. To do thus much, he must suppose that other Copy he would correct
by, to be more pure than the Vulgar, and this cannot be proved upon any
received Principle. Now if you object. Authors Commonly deny not some
obscurities or lesser verbal faults to have been in the Vulgar, I answer that is
nothing to the purpose were all true, for it does not therefore follow, it can
be corrected by any other Copy which is more Authentic Scripture, A less
authentic Bible may help herein, when other lections are accuratly examined,
yet may be faulty in greater matters.

11. I say. 3. No Tradition no Testimony which is fallible and may be falls, can
give so great assurance of Authentic Scripture as Divine Faith requires, or
that assurance which excludes a possibility of reasonable doubting, which is to
say in other words: The infallible Testimony of the Church is absolutely A
Testimony in fallible, is necessary to ascertain Scripture.
necessary to ascertain us of Authentic Scripture. The conclusion is directly
against Mr: Stilling: who page 226. makes the certainty Christians have of the
books of Scripture so fallible, that it may be false, yet enhaunses the
certainty of the Doctrine there contained to a note higher, of infallibility. We
shall see the leuity of this distinction fully discovered hereafter, and our
Assertion proved in a more proper place. All I will say at present, is. No man
can be certainly assured of true Scripture unless he first come to a certainty
of a true Church independently of Scripture. Find out therefore the true Church
and we have all we seek for, I mean true Scripture with it, unless one tend's to
a high degree of madness and Assert's, that the true Church of Christ cheated
into an erroneous Bible, was deprived of pure and authentic Scripture.

12. And here I will propose an Argument for the Vulgar Latin which Mr:
stilling: shall not answer. In what ever Society of Christians we find faith
entirely true, we have there Authentic Scripture: But from Luthers time upward
to the 4. or 5. age faith entirely true, was only found in the Roman Catholic
Church, and in no other Society of Christians, Therefore the Roman Catholic
Church which read so many ages the Vulgar Latin as Authentic, had true
Scripture. I prove An argument proving the Vulgar Latin Authentic.
the Minor, wherein only is difficulty. If the Roman Church erred for so vast a
time in any point of Divine Faith, there was no faith entirely true the whole
Christian world over, because all other Societies denominated Christians were
known condemned Heretics, and consequently had not true faith, Therefore
either the Catholic Roman Church enjoyed that blessing, or we must grant a
want of faith for ten ages the whole world over. But if this Church had Faith
entirely true, it preserved also Authentic Scripture (for where true faith is
there you have true Scripture) If not; it follows that we have no assurance
at all either of the one or other. Therefore if all Churches universally erred
in points of faith, no Church can give so much assurance of authentic
Scripture, as excludes a Possibility of reasonable doubting. See more here of
in the other Treatise Discourse. 2. c. 2. n. 8.

13. Now we are to solue a difficulty which may arise from our former
discourse, where 't is said. If one rely on humane authority which is fallible
and may be false, so much mistrust, so A difficulty proposed, and solued.
many doubts occurr concening the Originals and various Lections, that none can
have indubitable assurance of Scripture, How therefore could the Church without
moral certainty (and greater too) had of the Authentic books, antecedently to
the Councils declaration, determine so peremptorily, this Edition of the Vulgar
to be Authentic, yea and to prefer it before other Latin Copies? I might here
first by the way demand, upon what certainty can the Sectary prefer his Edition
(take which he will) before the Vulgar Latin? What ever moral assurance he has
independently of the Church's Testimony for his Bible, the Church has greater
for Hers. But to solue the difficulty positiuely. I say the Church after all
moral diligence, proceeded in this particular upon an The Catholic Principle
ascertaining Scripture.
undeniable Principle, which is, that God by special Providence preserved as
well Scripture free from Material corruption, as Church Doctrine pure and
orthodox: in both, we Catholics rely on peculiar Providence, and all must do
so, unless they, will rob Christ's Sponse of all the treasure she has, and
violently take from her not only Orthodox Faith, but Scripture also.

The Church therefore in her Declaration depended not on a mere Moral fallible
certainty, which may be false, but upon infallible Tradition. This gave
indubitable assurance of the Scriptures purity, free from all material error.
Here is her last Principle. And thus you see a vast difference between the
Church and Sectaries. The Church plead's possession of Authentic Scripture
upon Gods gracious Providence, and has it warranted by indubitable Tradition,
the Sectary reiect's this infallible ground, and run's away, with no man knows
what Certainty, and in doing so, cast's himself upon the greatest doubts
imaginable concerning scripture.

14. Perhaps you will say, Mr: Stilling: p. 213. relies in this matter on the
universal consent of all Christians, and Therefore includes the Testimony of
the Roman Catholic Church. I answer first. He has not the consent of this
Church for all those Editions He approues, and Consequently the greatest part
of a universal consent fail's. I answer 2. He Sectaries Cannot rely on the
Churches infallible Testimony.
neither does nor can (remaining Protestant) admit of the Catholics surest
Testimony or Tradition, for our Church own's in this most weighty matter, an
infallible certain Tradition, Mr: Stilling: reiect's that, therefore he has
nothing from our Church which favors his Assertion, drawn from the most
assured consent of all Christians concerning Authentic Scripture. And here by
the way, I cannot but take notice of this Gentleman's weightles objection Page
216. who grants, there can be no certainty as to the Copies of Scripture, but
from Tradition. But think not to fob us off (says he) with the Tradition of
the present Church instead of the Church of all ages, with the Tradition of
your Church, instead of the Catholic etc. with the ambiguous testimonies of
two or three Fathers instead of the universal consent of the Church, since the
Apostles times Answ. I verily persuade my self He The surest principle to know
ancient tradition.
speak's not as he think's, for tell me upon what surer Principle can men now
possibly be better informed of Church-tradition in all ages, then by the
tradition of the present Church? You see, He slights the Testimony of two or
three Fathers (needed we relief from them) and I am sure the unanimous
agreement of all Fathers makes no where the consent of the Church in all
antecedent ages, contrary to our present Churches Tradition. From whom
therefore shall we learn? On what vndubitable Principle can we rest, or say
such was the Tradition concerning Scripture in pas't ages but from the present
Churches Testimony? It is impossible to pitch on any other Proof which is
surer, or half so sure.

15. What follows is yet worse. Fob us not off with the tradition of your
Church instead of the Catholic. Good Sr. design you, or name plainly that
Catholic Church distinct from the Roman Catholic in all ages, and (to use
your own words) we shall extol you for the only person that ever did any thing
memorable on your side; but if you do not this, as I know you cannot, (for all
other before Luther were professed Heretics) it is you that iuggles and fob's
us off with mere empty words. He still goes on thus, worse and worse. If I
should once see you prove the A weak Argument re^orted.
infallibility of your Church, the Popes supremacy, Invocation of Saints, the
Sacrifice of the mass etc. by as an unquestionable and universal tradition as
that is, whereby we receive Scriptures, I shall yield my self up as a Trophey to
your brave attempts. Contra 1. ad Hominem. If I should once see you prove all
Churches fallible, the Pope no supreme head, No Invocation of Saints, no
veneration of Images, no Sacrifice of the Mass etc. and the rest of your
negative Articles: If I could once see you prove two Sacraments only,
Justification by faith only, Christ's not real presence in the Holy Eucharist,
by as unquestionable and universal Tradition as that is whereby Scripture is
received, we would yield also to your brave attempts. Answer this if you can,
or for bear hereafter to weary a reader with evident improbabilities. And mark
well why I call them so.

16. Have we not a more unquestionable universal Tradition for the books of
Scripture, if Tradition be drawn from the voice of all called Christians
(whether Catholics or Heretics) then there is for the very primary Articles
of true Catholic Faith? A Trinity for example, the Incarnation, the necessity
of Tradition more and Less universal.
Grace, Original sin etc. Yes most assuredly, for innumerable Sectaries
admitted Scripture, and yet denied these essential Articles, therefore as their
Denial made the consent and tradition of all called Christians less universal,
for such Doctrins, so their admitting Scripture with others, heightened that
Tradition, or made it more general. Say now, Sr. Had those Heretics argued as
you do, how little would they have gained? If we should once see you prove a
Trinity, Or Original sin etc. by as universal a Tradition as that is whereby
Scriptures are received, we would acquiese, but this is not possible, for both
you and we admit Scripture, and consequently make that tradition more
universal, yet we deny your primary Doctrins, and therefore all tradition is
not so ample for your Doctrins, as for the books of Scripture. Here is your
unreasonable reasoning Mr. Stilling: You know well Heretics who owned
Scripture with us, denied a Sacrifice of Mass An unreasonable way of aryuing.
Invocation of Saints and other Catholic Articles, and you will have us to take a
tradition from these men, to uphold the Doctrins they denied: Just as if an
Arian should bid me prove a Trinity from all Tradition, even of his Church,
when he admit's Scripture and denies a Trinity. If you reply, you urge us not
to bring in the tradition of all known Adversaries of the Catholic Church for
these now named Articles, but only the universal Tradition of the Catholic
Church in all ages, we have already answered, that is best known by the present
Churches Testimony, no other proof can parallel it. And thus much of the
Authenticalnesse of our Vulgar Edition free from all material Corruption. A
further difficulty may yet be moved concerning lesser faults, and the
preferring it before all other Latin Copies.

CHAP. VIII.
How necessary it was to have one lection of Scripture in the Church. A word of
the Sixtine and Clementine Bibles. Of Mr: Stillinfleets mistakes and
inconsequences concerning them. Objections answered.

1. NOte first. It was very meet to have among so much confusion and various
sections of Latin Copies, one certain, approved and set forth by the mother
Church, to the end her Children might be vnius labij of one tongue and speak
one language in their reading, preaching, and public expounding One lection of
scripture, necessary.
Holy Scripture. Note. 2. Though the Council of Trent sess. 4. declares this
Edition of the Vulgar to be Authentic, and preferr's it before all other latin
Editions, Quae circumferuntur, which are now abroad, it does not thereby
detract any thing, from the credit and authority of the ancient Hebrew, and
Greek Copies, whereof Authors dispute (whether they be pure or no) whilst the
Church is silent and defin's nothing. Neither does the Council reject the
Version of the Septuagint, or that ancient Latin Copy called Itala, (read in
the Church before S. Hierom) as Vnauthentick in any material point: for this
Argument is conuincing to the contrary. As it is madness to say. Christ's Church
had not true Scripture since S. Hieroms time, so is it a desperate
improbability The Church had in all ages true Scripture.
to assert, She wanted that, in the ages before S. Hierom, which is to say: The
Church had ever authentic Scripture. Moreover, shall we (think ye) judge,
that God, whose Providence never failed, suffered his own spouse to be beguiled
with false Scripture for 15. ages, and that now toward the end of the world he
will provide us of a purer book, by the hands and help of a few scattered
Sectaries.

2. Note 3. Translations may be faulty three ways chiefly. 1. More ambiguity
and darkness may lie in a translated word than in the Original, and this fault
(if any) is remediless, because the latin, or a Vulgar language reaches not
alwais to the full Energy and signification of an Hebrew or Greek expression,
whereof you have some examples in that learned Preface to the English Rhems
Testament anno 1600. 2. Corruptions How Transtations may be faulty.
may creep into a Version by the inaduertancy or ignorance of the Translator,
who is neither supposed prophet nor infallible, and thus Authors say, that S.
Hierom, though prodigiously learned, was not every way infallibly secured from
lesser errors, yet this Providence God has for the good of his Church that he
will nor permit any considerable deprauation to remain in all Copies. If
therefore one be faulty, all cannot be thought so, and the faults of one, by
carefully comparing it with many, and a diligent inspection into other Copies,
may be corrected. See Greg. de Valent: lib. 8. Analy. C. 5. puncto 4. 3.dly
Lesser deprauations often enter a version through the mistakes of Printers
Librarians etc. Of these you had many in the Vulgar Latin before the correction
of the Sixtine and Clementine Bibles, and they are scarce auoidable chiefly
after several reimpressions, as we daily see in other books. Thus much premised.

3. Listen a little to Mr: Stilling: strange inconsequences and groundles
exceptions against the Corrections of Sixtus and Clement. He says the one
Bible differs from the other, as Of Mr Stilling (...) g^^und (...) exceptions.
appears by those who have taken the pains to Compare them, in some thousands
of places. A great number indeed. But the first question will be whether these
Pain-takers ought to be believed upon their bare word, without further
examination? This, Sr. you suppose which cannot well pass, before the
particulars come to the test, and bear the censure of your Adversaries, wholly
as learned as you have any. But say on. Are these supposed differences any more
but like the racings of the skin; or do they give any mortal wound to the Vital
part of Scripture? If you only assert the first, you may not only Cauil at your
English Bibles, but also at all the latin translations used in the Church both
before and after S. Hieroms time, for they have some verbal differences, which
you may call petty and inconsiderable faults. Now, if you assert that the
Sixtine and Clementine Bibles are Materially corrupted in points of Faith and
manners, or to use your phrase, Vitally wounded, what is become, I beseech you,
of that peculiar hand of Providence you own, in preserving the authentic
Copies of religion safe to our days? Or (which much imports you to answer) by
what other more authentic Copy can you without endless disputes and
uncertainties, correct the Vulgar? This one particular will give you work
enough, before you come to a certain decision of the difficulty. In a word,
because I think, many know not too well, all that concern's these two Editions
of the Sixtine and Clementine Bibles, I shall add here a few notes to improve
their knowledge, and perhaps yours also.

4. Learned men, discovered lesser faults in the Vulgar Latin; and that which
was found. 4. Regum. c. 14. v. 17. seemed a chief one. Vixit Amasias silius
Ioas Rex Judah, postquam mortuus est Ioas filius Ioachaz Regis Israel 25 annis.
For thus the Louain Bibles Lesser faults discovered in the Vulgar Latin.
anno 1572. and other Copies usually read 25: annis, before the Correction of
Sixtus. Yet Abulensis upon that place Quaest. 15. noted the error, and said
for that number 25. we are to substitute 15: as appears. 2. paralip: c. 25.
And so also the Hebrew text, the Septuagint and Chaldee read, yet Michael
Paludan: cited Proleg. ad Bibl. Max: Sect. 20. c. 4. seems to reconcile both
these lections, saying Amasias lived 25. years after the death of Ioas, but
reigned only 15. which helps little to our present purpose. To amend this, and
other slighter faults, the Church, as I said above, and you may read in the
preface to the Sixtine Bibles, has used the greatest industry imaginable. Pope
Pius the fourth caused not only the Original languages; but other Copies to be
carefully examined. Pius the 5.th prosecuted that laborious work, but brought
it not to a period, which Sixtus the 5.th did, who commanded it to be put to
the Press, as appears by his Bull which begins. Aeternus ille celestium etc.
anno 1585, yet, notwithstanding the Bull prefixed before Sixtus Edition (then
printed) this very Pope (as the preface made anno 1592. tell's us) after
diligent examination found no few faults slipped into his Bible, by the
negligence of the Printers, and therefore, Censuit atque decreuit How Corrected
by Sixtus and Clement.
both judged and decreed to have the whole work examined and reprinted, but his
too sudden death prevented that second correction, which Clement the 8.th after
the short reign, of other Popes happily finished, answerably to his
Predecessors desire, and absolute intention. Whence it is, that the Vulgar now
extant, is called the Correction of Sixtus because this Vigilant Pope began it,
which was recognized and prefected by Clement the 8.th and therefore may be
deservedly called the Clementine Bible also. Both are now read in the Church
after Clement's Recognition as authentic true Scripture, and make up the Latin
Vulgar Edition.

5. Some object first. If Pope Sixtus made a Brieue, whereby he commanded his
Edition so accuratly recognized, to be received for indubitable authentic
Scripture, and therefore free from errors, How could he afterward find such
faults as caused him to intend a new impression of the whole work? Answ: It is
not said, He intended to do so upon the account of greater faults, which
essentially vitiate Scripture either in Faith or manners, for No substantial
error in the sixtine edition
mention is only made in the Preface of lesser errata's Espied, when the work
was done with this restriction, Preli vitio. That is, of Typographical faults,
and these almost unavoidable, cannot stain the purity of an authentic Copy.
But grant more, that Sixtus who had Choice of various lections of Scripture,
followed perhaps less circumspectly some darker or more ambiguous Copy, which
Clement the 8.th after a diligent search into other Editions, brought to
greater Clarity, and therefore read's a little differently. Nothing is yet so
much as probably alleged, causal of any error in Faith, or Contrary to the
essential verities of Scripture. For as Tannerus well observes Tom. 3. Disp. 1.
9. 5. Dub. 2. n. 79. Where diverse lections vary, locus esse possit
disceptationi and crisi. There may be place for Critics to debate, which is
the best, or to be preferred, And n. 83. Certe, says he, in hoc genere
transigendo etiam inter limits recti, magna potest esse varietas and latitudo.
Certainly, in such kind of matters, there may be well be variety and a
latitude, within the compass of what is right Variety of expressions with in
the Compass of truth.
and true. And this Principle Sectaries must admit, unless they deny truth to
their own Translations, as they ought to do. For do not they usually translate
(...), Ordinances, we, Traditions. They (...), Elders, we Priests. They (...),
Images, we Idols? And is it not evident that we follow the obuious and genuin
signification of the Greek, as well in these as in a number of other
particulars? Whilst therefore Sectaries differ from us, they either err or, not,
if they err; let them correct what is amiss, If contrary to conscience they deny
the error, they are forced to grant that, inter limits recti, with in the
limits of Truth there may be a latitude, a variety, or different expressions,
and you will not find so much between Sixtus Edition and that of Clement, nor
any Corruption destructive of Faith or manners, but slighter differences only,
which alter not the genuin sense of Scripture intended by the Holy Ghost, if
we exclude Typographical faults, which hinder not the integrity of a Version.

6. Upon these grounds, Mr. Stilling: objections page 214. Come to nothing,
where he first tell's us, and truly, of the infinite pains which Pope Sixtus
took in his Correction, and after So much ado, shall we (says he) believe
that Sixtus never lived to see his Edition Complete? Answ: You must believe it
upon humane faith, for it is certain, God took him out of the world before he
saw it perfect, though his intention and aim Mr. stilling* fleets objections,
solued.
was, to recall the whole work to the press again. Now this Recognition, His
Successor Clement made, answerable to his wish and design. Mr. Stilling:
objects 2. Sixtus his Bull now extant (and therefore sufficiently proclaimed)
inioins that his Bible be read in all Churches without any the least
Alteration. Answ: This Iniunction supposed the Interpreters and Printers to
have done exactly their duty every way, which was found wanting upon a second
reuiew of the whole work, such commands therefore when new difficulties arise,
not thought of before, are not like Definitions of Faith, unalterable, but may,
and ought to be changed according to the Legislators prudence. What I say here
is indisputable, for how could Sixtus after a sight of such faults as caused
him to intend an other impression inioyn no alteration, when He desired one,
and what he could not do, his Successor Clement the 8.th did for him. Now
whether the Bull was sufficiently proclaimed, matters not, for had Sixtus lived
longer, He would as well have changed the Bull in order to the particulars now
in controversy, as amended his Bible.

6. Mr: Stilling: objects. 3. All that Sixtus pretend's for the
Authenticalnesse of that Edition, is the agreement of it with the ancient and
approved Copies both printed and M S S. than which, there can be no more firm
or certain Argument of the true, and genuin Text. Answ. After all his labor He
pretend's this, but How and what Sixtus pretend's.
with a caution often repeated in the Bull, quoad eius sieri potest: prout
optime sieri potuit etc. That is as well as then could be etc. The firm or
certain Argument therefore is. The Church ever preserved true and Genuin
Scripture, which is either to be found in the ancient approved Copies both
printed and manuscript* or no where, These, Pope Sixtus diligently searched
into, therefore his Edition is true genuin Scripture, which no Catholic
denies, if by true and genuin Scripture we understand, not an Exclusion of all
lesser faults, but of greater contrary to the purity of Faith and Religion, and
so far Sixtus Edition is blamlesse, although as Tanner now cited. n. 83.
observes, perhaps not altogether so circumspectly done, nor every way fit to
the public edification of the Church, Wherein there is a latitude within the
Compass of truth, and integrity. And who ever read's Pope Sixtus own Bull
before his Bible, can force no more out of it but this truth, that many faults
which had got into other Copies, are accuratly corrected in his Edition, whereof
no man can doubt; with all, Many faults amended by Sixtus
that it contains the Vulgar Latin Edition amended at least, in many things,
and consequently is authentic Scripture. Sixtus says not, he amended all
lesser faults whereon Religion has no dependence, but rather disclaimes busying
himself with so small a service.

8. Mr: Stilling: objects 4. The vast difference between the Clementine and
Sixtine Bibles lay in this, that Clement corrected the Vulgar Latin according
to the Original in above two thousand places, when the contrary reading was
established by Sixtus. Answ: Here is no proof but only three improbable
Assertions. Who assures you, Sr. of any vast difference between these two
Editions? Or inform's you so exactly of above two thousand different places?
Or, why finally do you tell us of a contrary reading established by Sixtus? A
reading, Good Sr, may be different, No Contrary Reading in Sixtus his Edition.
and yet not contrary in any material point of faith or manners, and so far
Sixtus is defensible. If there be any other difference or Contrariety not
touching on Faith and Religion, because the expression is longer or shorter,
less clear in the one, and more significant in the other version, this
concern's us not, both may be right within the compass of truth, and without
any material fault. But says Mr: Stilling: if the Latin Copies be a sure Rule
to judge of the authenticalnesse of the Text by, much more shall the ancient
Copies of the Original Hebrew and Greek be a surer Rule. Answ: Had we now the
authentic true Copies of the ancient Hebrew and Greek we should soon
acquiesce, but Sectaries know well this is more then doubtful, yea almost
certain that both are corrupted, how far I say not, but morally speaking the
Hebrew cannot but be corrupted by reason of the great similitude in The Hebrew
text, liable to Corruption.
many letters, and the access of points added by the perfidious Masoreths after
S. Hieroms age, which may change the sense of Scripture, and very notably. See
Gretserus Defens. Bellar: Tom 1. lib. 2. c. 2. I wonder why Mr: Stilling: is so
earnest for the Greek, which our English Sectaries utterly leave when it is for
their purpose. I have told you enough already of Images translated for Idols:
Elders for Priests: Ordinances for Traditions etc. And might add more, that
Beza thinks those words (...) Luc. 3. 37. of Cainan to no purpose in the Text,
and therefore leaves them out. Others when the Vulgar Latin makes for them
follow that, and not the Greek: Take only this one instance (Authors give many
more.) The Vulgar reads Rom 8. 37. certus sum enim I am certain: The Greek
(...) for I think, or am probably persuaded. Now some to assure themselves of
their Predestination, read I am certain, with the Vulgar, not I am persuaded as
the Greek does. It would be endless to tell you of Luthers ill dealing with both
the lections of Greek and Latin. After the wicked man had perfidiously added
that particle, Solam, to those words Romans 3. 28. per fidem, and read by faith
only. He omit's whole sentences of Holy Scripture in his Translation, as that.
Mark 11. 26. If you will not forgive, neither will your. Father that is in
Heaven forgive you, your sins. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 5. That you abstain from
fornication, is wholly omitted by him, and that whole sentence also 1. Joan. 5.
7. There are three that bear record in Heaven etc. You will find no such
Grosnesse in either the Sixtine or Clementine Bible. Yet more. Luther is
excellent in the mincing or changing the proper signification of words Isay. 9.
v. 6. to please the Jews, where the Hebrew Text gives the name of God El to
Christ and the Greek (...) Luther read's in Dutch stafft fortitudo. To lessen
the Blessed virgins plenitude of grace, whereas the Greek Luc. 1. 28. read's
(...) properly full of grace, Luther puts a Dutch word, which as I am told,
signifies one pretty well gracious and no more. You have an other notable
corruption of the Greek Text Galat. 3. 10. But enough of these abuses, I cannot
prosecute half of them. See Tan. Tom. 3. page 319.

9. Mr: Stilling: last objection is a f^at Calumny. The Pope, says He, took
where he pleased the marginal Annotations in the A Calumny, for an objection.
Louain Bible and inserted them into the Text. Answer. who would not when he
read's this disingenuous and fraudulent expression, Where He pleased, but
judge, that the Pope without more Ado picked what he listed out of the Louain
Annotations, and made that Scripture at his pleasure, which is an open
slander. In a word here is the truth. Those worthy Doctors of Louain with an
Immense labor placed in their margents, not their own Annotations or Comments,
but the different Lections of Scripture, yet determined not which was best, or
was to be preferred before others, for they well knew, the decision of such
causes belongs to the public judicature, and Authority of the Church. The Pope
therefore, omitting no humane diligence compared Lection with lection, and
those lections, (which usually differ most inconsiderably, or very little, as I
have often observed in perusing the Louain Bibles) Clement made use of, and
after mature weighing all, preferred that which was most agreeable to the
ancient Copies. And here is all Mr: Stilling: Cauils at, which yet was
necessary to be done, to have one uniform Lection of Scripture in the Church
approved by the sea Apostolic.

10. Some may yet object. We say the correction of Sixtus An objection.
though in some things faulty contains nothing material contrary to Religion^
or manners: Clements Correction is only so far faultless and no farther, for
many hold both these Editions may yet be corrected in some less and slighter
errata's occasioned by the Librarians or Printers. Nay, perhaps it is not yet
in every particular most perfect, Therefore Clements pains was to no purpose,
or amended little in the Sixtine Bible. That these lesser errata's are found in
both Copies, and may, if the Church please, be yet corrected, is granted by
great Authors. Read the Proleg: ad Bib: Max: sect. 19. C. 8. Gretser. Tom. 1.
lib. 2. Defens. Cap. 11. Bell. Salmeron. Vega. And others quoted in Bib. Max.
Answ: The Preface before the Sixtine Bible reuiewed by Clement, and Sixtus his
own Bull, give ground enough to solue this difficulty. The preface declares the
Edition of Sixtus and Clement to be corrected Quanta fieri potuit diligentia,
with as great diligence as could be then used: yet to say it is absolutely
perfect every way, respecting humane weakness, is difficult. Howeuer it is to be
preferred before all other Latin Copies set forth to this day, as the more
pure, and better amended Copy. Again, it is said. In hac peruulgata lectione
sicut nounulla consulto mutata sunt etc. In this Vulgar Lection, a there are
many things purposely changed, so there are others which seemed to be changed,
left on set purpose, without alteration. And you may see four reasons hereof in
the following words of the Preface, Pope Sixtus his Bull speak's as clearly.
Neque: enim ignoramus says He etc. We are not ignorant, but that there are
many who thought, no few words and locutions of this latin Edition might have
been translated by the latin interpreter, more properly, more Elegantly, more
perspicuously, or more Copiously, measuring, as it were, words with words.
Verum de his, minuta nimium and angusta concertatio ridetur. But to insist on
these, seems a strife too minute, or worth little. Neque enim ta^ti sunt etc.
Neither are they of such consequence, but that the Religion of the ancient
Church, and the Authority of most holy Fathers ought to be preferred before
such Niceties, it being unmeet and unworthy, as S. Gregory faith. Vt sub
Do(...) regulis verba Caelestis oraculi restringantur. That the words of a
Heavenly Oracle be tied to the laws or rules of a Grammari^^. Thus, and much
more Pope Sixtus. And hereby you see the The difficulty, solued.
weakness of the objection proposed. Sixtus corrected many faults in the old
Vulgar Latin anciently used in the Church (Sixtus never said, He corrected all
the lesser errata's) Clement purged it of more, and restored that ancient Copy
(so far as diligence could do) to a greater integrity. Was not this work
laudable and praise worthy in these two worthy Prelates? Neither of them can be
taxed of any error introduced contrary to faith, or the purity of Religion,
And we urge Sectaries to speak a probable word against our Assertion.

11. By this and the precedent discourse you may learn first, that Mr:
Stillingf: speaks at random when he tell's us p. 213. of an abundance of
Corruptions in the Vulgar Latin, and yet cannot find so much as one Contrary to
Faith and Religion. You see. 2. Not one Corruption. in the Vulgar, Contrary to
Faith.
He amuses and abuses an ignorant Reader, whilst he asserts there are some
thousand of places wherein Sixtus and Clement differ. There is no difference at
all in any one point that is essential or material, other differences which
arise, either from the Printers errors, or diversity of Lections, as long as
we read what is true and the Church approues, is neither liable to Mr:
Stillingfleets Censure, nor can be justly blamed. You see. 3. That when Mr:
Still: talk's, of Thomas James his comparing the Sixtine, Clementine Bibles,
with the Louain Annotations, and then mentions ten thousand differences from
the Vulgar Latin, which differences arise from the comparing it with the
Hebrew, Greek, and Chaldee, He vnderstand's not Matters too well. Because
neither Sixtus nor Clement were obliged to regulate themselves* by the Hebrew,
Greeck, or Chaldee What these two Popes chiefly intended.
Their industry only being to correct the old Latin ( Italae) Lection, called
by S. Gregory the ancient Translation (most Authentic Scripture) which,
howeuer was done, both after a diligent search into the Hebrew and Greek, and a
careful inspection also into other Copies. And here by the way, you may perhaps
discover a piece of Mr: Stillingfleets cheat, about the ten thousand
differences men^ioned above. Be pleased only to peruse the first words, of
Gene^s where you will find a different sound of words. The Vulgar read's In
principio creauit Deus Caelum and terram, and so it is in the Chaldee and
Samaritan Copies. The Roman septuagint: In principio fecit Deus. Others ascribe
this Lection to the 70. Deus creauit in principio, Some out of the Hebrew read
Creauit Iudices. Aquila read's. In Capitulo fecit Caelum. The Syriack. Creauit
Deus esse Caeli and esse terra. An other Syriack. In sapientia Creavit. The
Arabic. Primum quod creauit Deus fecit Caelum etc. Others, Creauit Elohim and
Caelos. Others Lections seeming different are not always disferent.
for in Principio, read, cum Principio. All which imply no more but mere
triuial verbal differences, and these perhaps with many like them through the
whole Bible, made Thomas James number swell up to then thousand. Most petty and
pitiful doings, whilst nothing appears of greater consequence. If any desire
a litteral exposition and reconciliation of these and other lections through
the whole Scripture, He may peruse the Author of Bibl: Max: Comprehending
ninteen great volumes. You see, 4. If the Church had true authentic Scripture
before the corrections of Sixtus and Clement (whereof no man ever doubted) she
has it still after the Council of Trents approbation, much more free from
lesser faults, than formerly. You see, 5. If the Sectary reiect's the Vulgar
Latin now corrected, he has no such assurance of any true Bible in the world,
as excludes a possibility of doubting the Scriptures integrity, and
consequently, that Scripture serves him not to find out true Religion, or build
true Faith upon with security. You see. 6. that all the exceptions sectaries
make against the Correction of Sixtus and Clement, vltimately examined, empty
themselves into no more but only into flight, torpid, and insipid Calumnies,
unworthy men of judgment and literature. You see. 7. the Sectaries Carping at
every thing, is just like him who said. Quicquid Our sectaries Spirit.
dixeris impugnabitur. Had the Church not at all corrected these lesser faults,
the sectary would have blamed it as negligent, and looking to nothing, now it
has done that good Service, it is found fault with. so it is. Quicquid dixeris
impugnabitur. Help it who can. I say God help them who find fault, where there
is none. If any desire to have a solution to some other Silly difficulties
against the pretended solaecisms and Barbarisms of the Vulgar, let him read
Gretser now Cited. Bib. Max. sect. 19. C. 4. and Serrarius. C. 19. quest: 143.
And thus much of a digression.

CHAP. IX.
Proofs demonstrating that Protestants have not so much certainty of Scripture,
as excludes a possibility of reasonable doubting. A word of Mr: Stillingfleets
weak discourse with a Heathen

1. LEt us if you please suppose, that we and Sectaries had now in our hands
the very Autograph's of the whole Bible, as it was once writ by the Prophets
and Apostles, or if you would rather, Imagine the book dropped down from Heaven
pure, and every way incorrupt. I say the Sectary has not probable assurance of
Scripture, much less such a certainty as excludes a possibility of reasonable
doubting. The ground of my Assertion is this undeniable Principle owned as well
by Protestants, as Catholics. Viz Scripture solely considered according to the
exterior letter, unless the true sense intended by the Holy Ghost be had, is
no Scripture to the Reader. For example: Because the Arian read's that sacred
truth. My Father is greater then I, and stand's merely upon the bare sound of
words without the sense intended by the Holy Ghost, He has no true Scripture.
Whence it is, that S. Austin sermon: 70. Temp. hold's Heretics most unhappy,
because they take the words without the sense, have a body without Words
without the true sense, no Scripture.
a Soul, the bark without the sap, the shell without a kernel etc. S. Hierom
also in cap. 1. ad Gal. v. 11. speak's to this purpose. Ne putemus etc. Let us
not think, that the Gospel lies in the words of Scripture but in the sense of
those words we read, not in the out-syde but in the pith and marrow of it.
There is no need of quoting more Fathers. The Principle is agreed on by all,
and most indubitable.

2. Hence I argue. Nothing is more essential to scripture than the sense
delivered by the Holy Ghost: but the Protestant, where he is most concerned,
has not so much assurance of the sense intended by the Holy Ghost, as excludes
a Possibility of reasonable doubting, and I prove it. He is most concerned,
when he opposes our Catholic Doctrine and stand's up in defense of his own
opinions, but in neither has he such an indubitable assurance of the Scriptures
sense, as excludes a possibility of reasonable doubting, and this I say is
evident, For he cannot have so much assurance if as weighty, yea a far more
weighty authority contradict's his sense. But it is clear that not only the
present Roman Church, but other particular Churches in former ages reputed
Orthodox, contradict that sense the Protestant draws from Scripture, But
Sectaries have no Certainty of the sense.
(when he opposes Catholic Doctrine or defends his own singular opinions)
Therefore he has not so much certainty of the Scriptures sense, as excludes the
possibility of reasonable doubting. Now, that the sole judgment of our present
Catholic Church (to dispute the thing no higher) is as great upon all
accounts, as the judgment of Protestants, seems undeniable; And that the
Testimony of our Church weakens the assurance of that sense of Scripture which
Protestants lay claim to, is most evident, as we see in school opinions (when
contrary to one an other) for no man, whether Philosopher or Divine, can
prudently hold his opinion so certain as excludes a Possibility of doubting
when as many, wholly, as learned yea more learned and numerous, after a full
knowledge had of it and long Study also, deny that certainty. Thus much I say
is evident. Now if the Protestant tells' us, the Authority of his party weakens
as much that sense we make of Scripture, as the contrary judgment of our
Church lessens his, I answer. The reply here is to no purpose For all I prove
at present is, that he want's this certainty, whether we have it or not, is an
other quaestion, and clearly decided for the Catholic cause in the other
Treatise. Disc. 2. c. 9. per totum. Again, were all granted the objection would
have. Thus much (which is most falls,) only follows, that neither of us know
assuredly the sense of Scripture, which touches not the difficulty now in
controversy.

3. My 2. Argument is so demonstratiue that if the Protestant A 2 Argument*
most Conuincing.
will please to solue it, I Will never trouble him more with difficulties. To
propose it clearly, know only thus much. That when the sectary read's Scripture
and would have it to his purpose, He either over reaches the Text, or falls
short of its meaning. For example. To those words of S. Math. This is my body
he adds this, as good sense. This is a sign, or figure only of my body. Mark
well: We both read the same words, but Catholics deny that to be Scripture,
not because we deny the words, but his sense we say is no scripture. To that of
our Savior. I am with you always to the end of the world. He adds, I am with
you always by a fitting, but no infallible assistance: We say this is no
Scripture. To that of S. James. A man is justified by works and not by Faith
only, He adds, he is justified not before God, but before men, we still deny
this to be Scripture. And thus sectaries proceed with us in all other
controuerted Texts of Holy writ. Whence I argue.

These Additions of a sign only, of a fitting Assistance, of justification
before men etc, are either the true sense intended by the Holy Ghost or
Sectaries fancy, but most evidently they are not the sense intended by the Holy
Ghost, for this must either be gathered out of Sectaries glosses and additions,
not scripture.
so many express words of Holy writ which is prodigiously false, or must arise
from the Holy Ghosts infallible assistance whereby Protestants, as people
Illuminated above all others give us the true meaning of Scripture; and this
besides the Paradox, when a whole learned Church contradict's the assertion, is
most destructive of the Protestants own Principle: For they say, the Holy Ghost
interpret's by none, enlightens none, teaches none to deliver the true sense of
Scripture, but such as do it infallibly, which Truth is most undoubted. They
say again, when they give the sense of Scripture, or interpret God's word, they
do it so fallibly, that it may be false, or if they interpret infallibly; and
cannot err, Eo ipso, they are so far infallible, which they utterly deny. See
Disc. 2. c. 9. n. 8. what then remains but that the sense of Scripture proposed
to us by such fallible Teachers, is only the thought of their own fancy.

5. Some may reply. Protestants after long perusing Scripture, and comparing
several Texts together, judge the sense of these and No more are their
deductions.
other controuerted places by a lawful deduction, to be as they declare. I
answer first. They shall never come to so much as a probable deduction, and I
earnestly press them to make their sense good in the passages alleged, when we
now stand to Scripture only. I answer. 2. such dark inferences drawn from
comparing Texts together not grounded on the very words, ever imply a mixture
of humane discourse, which therefore is fallible and may be false. Whence it
follows, that Sectaries can believe none of these senses by Divine Faith,
because the last Motive or formal object of their Assent, is a fallible
reasoning only, and this may err. And here you may learn how necessary an
infallible Interpreter of Scripture is, without which we are cast upon mere
uncertainties, and unavoidable improbabilities.

6. The Sectary may yet answer. To the comparing of Texts together, He add's
the sentiment of some Fathers for his sense: I say of some, for it is evident He
has not all, much less the Universal consent or Tradition of the Church in
every age. If this be the reply, I may well oppose it in Mr: Stilling: own
words page 216. Think not to fob us off with the ambiguous Testimonies of two
or three Fathers instead of the universal consent of the Church since the
Apostles time etc. But what will you say, if he has not one clear Testimony of
a Not on^ ancient Father Clear for protestancy. The reason is given.
Father for him? I boldly assert it, and urge him to produce but one. The
reason is. What-euer Testimony of a Father is alleged for his sense, will be at
most (if it come thither) so notably ambiguous that weighed with all
circumstances, it may well have a Catholic meaning: That sense therefore must
stand good without contest, when it answers to the judgment of a whole learned
Church, and the Sectary has nothing to draw it to his particular opinion
(neither universal Church nor universal Tradition) but only a few ambiguous
words capable of interpretation, and his own fancy to boot* Nay I say more, He
has not so much as any little appearance of ambiguous words for his sense.
Pray you tell me, (and let Protestants shame me if they can) where has he any
hint of a Fathers doubtful words for his minced fitting assistance only allowed
the Church, Positiuely excluding infallible assistance? For justification by
Faith only? For two sacraments only? For a sign only of Christ's presence in
the Eucharist? yet these senses he vend's as the genuin meaning of the Holy
Ghost, without proof or probability, therefore fancy only plays here. And thus
you see the first part of my Assertion demonstratiuely proved viz. That
Protestants have not so much as a weak probable assurance of that which is the
very life and essence of Scripture, I mean, of the true sense intended by the
Holy Ghost: Yet you know Tertullians judgment.
Tertullian says. Lib. de Praescript. cap. 17. Tantum veritati obstrepit
adulter sensus: quantum and corruptus Stylus. A falls sense depraues Scripture
as much, as if the words were corrupted. Thus much premised and so fully
proved, that sectaries cannot return a probable answer, I Will add one
consideration more to confirm what is said.

A Discourse between a Heathen and a Christian.
7. Imagine that a well disposed Gentil Philosopher half persuaded of the truth
of Christian Religion, addresses himself to the most knowing Protestant, or
Arian (and not to dissemble the force of the Argument) to some learned
Catholic also. He find's them strangely divided about their Canon of
Scripture, about their Translations, and which is to our purpose now, at high
difference concerning the meaning also. The Arian tell's him he has the How
men called. Christians differ about scripture.
true sense, so does the Donatist, the Protestant, and Catholic likewise. The
wise man is not so foolish as to believe any of them upon their bare word,
although Stentor-like they cry, this and no other is Divine Doctrine. Therefore
he concludes, if reason may have place, This way of finding what he would know,
without the help of some other Principle distinct from Scripture, and the
fallible Assertion of particular men opposite to one an other, is so highly
dissatisfactory and wholly insufficient, that it cannot settle him in the truth
of Christianity. Nay, he may well argue further. If I, yet no Christian, cannot
so much as know these very books to be Divine because you say they are so,
when we Gentiles and Jews (in part) hold them only humane; If I though I own
them as Divine, can learn from none of you, what they say (for I find you all
at high contradictions about the sense) How will you induce me by this your
Bible only to become Christian? Or, how can you when you dispute with one an
other, so much as propose a probable Argument out of Scripture in behalf of
your different Tenets, For The Heathens Discourse.
none of you yet know by Scripture only the true meening of it? You first
suppose a sense and then argue, whereas you should clear the sense and prove it,
or your Argument falls to nothing. For example. The Protestant find's in
Scripture, that the Holy Eucharist is called Bread, supposing Bread to signify
natural bread or at most bread deputed to a holy use, the Catholic denies this
supposition, and sense also. He reads again in S. James c. 4. T(...) is one
Lawgiuer and judge who can destroy and free. Ergo says the P(...)stant, there
is no other visible judge in the Church to end Co(...)ersies. As odd an
inference as if one should conclude, because it is said in Scripture. Be not
ye called Masters for your Master is one, Christ, no other ought to be called
Master, and therefore this sense and supposition in also denied. And thus it
must needs fall out, whilst the Sectary has not one express word of Scripture
for his novelties, whereas, says the Gentil, the Texts seem clear enough for
Catholic Doctrine taken in an obuious sense, yet not so clear, but that a
peevish Glosser may pervert all by his wilful fancy.

8. Yet the Gentil Argues. You Christians say, there is true Religon amongst
you, and that God, the Author of it, has allowed The Heathens Argument Clearly
proposed against sectaries.
means abundantly sufficient to knowit, Means I say whereby not only Gentiles,
Turks, and Jews, but Arians and other Heretics also, may be reclaimed from
their errors. Thus much you must grant, or say that Christ has left an
unbelieving world under an impossibility of being converted. And if this be
true, that is, if means be wanting to know the verities of Christian Religion,
The Gentil may blamlesly remain as he is, and so may the Turk, Jew, and
Heretic also. Now says our Heathen. It Is evident, Scripture alone without
further light, is no meet means to reclaim any of them, for the Gentil slights
your whole Scripture, and can that by it self draw him off his contempt? Again
The Bonzij in that vast Kindom of China pretend to an other Bible, writ long
since by their supposed great Prophet called Confusius (and the book is not
like the Turks Alcoran stuffed with fooleries) but as I am informed, some who
lived long there, and knew the language well, say, it contain's most excellent
moral precepts tending to the preservation of justice and a Civil life. The Jew
denies the new Testament, The Arian and others the sense of our Scripture. How
therefore can Scripture alone prove efficacious to convert these aliens from
Christ, or be supposed a fit means obliging all to believe, when yet they know
not without more light what they are to believe, or why? An other way therefore
must be found out, whereof more afterward. In the mean while.

9. I truly stand astonished, when I consider how pitifully Mr stillingfleet
return's no probable Answer.
Mr: Stilling: endeauours to soul this most conuincing Argument. Read him who
will. Part. 1. Chap. 6. from page 175. to P. 179. and he shall find him
tediously running on, but never a whit more forward in his journey where he
ends, then at the beginning. It Is all a long a pure Petitio principij, and
worse. The Question moved, is, How the Protestant can convert a Heathen, or
prove infallibly that the Bible is Gods word. Mr: Stilling: Answers, his Lord
Primate undertakes not this task in the first place, nor offer's to Convince a
Heathen that the Bible must be infallibly believed to be Gods word. No, but
first, the excellency and reasonablenes of Christian Religion Considered in it
self is to be proved, by showing, that the precepts of it are just, the
promises such as may induce any reasonable man to the practice of those
precepts, that the whole Doctrine is very wisely contrived, that nothing is vain
and impertinent in it, that those things which seem most hard to believe in
this Doctrine are not such things, ^s might have been spared out of it, as
though God did intend only to puzzle men's reason with them. And thus he goes on
in his draught, or Idea of Christianity, and so proves the Truth of
Christianity by telling a Heathen, What it is, or what it teaches. The Heathen
most justly except's against These proofs (so may a Christian too, if no more
be said) and professes all this talk hitherto besides a mere begging the
Question, seems to him a pure cheat, and fallacy. You proceed strangely, says
the Heathen, for what is a supposed He makes a mere supposition his Proof.
verity amongst you Christians, you turn into a proof against me that denies
your supposition. You labor to take my difficulties away, by proposing to me
those very things, which cause them. Mark well.. You first make the excellency
and reasonableness of Christian Religion in it self a fit medium to prove
Scripture Gods infallible word, whereas that supposed reasonableness of your
Religion, is as dark and obscure to me, who am no Christian, as the
infallibility of your Bibles Doctrine. Therefore you prove one unknown thing by
an other wholly as much unknown. I deny both your Bible and reasonableness of
your Religion, prove the one or both, or you speak not one word to the purpose.

10. You suppose. 2. a Principle which neither Catholic nor protestant ever
yet owned. viz. That, that which you call Christian Religion is known ex
terminis to be true by a mere declaration of its Doctrine, whereas no Doctrine,
even the most Primitive was ever made discernable from error by a bare saying
it was true, without Evidence of Credibility laid forth to reason before
belief.
some precedent Evidence of its credibility laid forth to reason: And therefore
you are told in the other Treatise against Mr: Poole. ^ 21. That if Christ and
his Apostles had appeared in the world, and only preached the high Mysteries of
our Faith, or spoken as you do, of the excellence and reasonablenes of its
precepts, or promises, without further evidence, they would have no more drawn
Jews or Gentiles to their Doctrine then twelve little Children could now draw us
to the belief of many other verities, (not yet revealed) had God inspired them
to teach without miracles, or any other supernatural wonders. My reason is. As
the Bible evidences not it self to be Divine scripture, so the intrinsecal
reasonableness of Christianity is no first evidence to it self, both therefore
must be proved by Clearer Principles. Believe it. Had Christ and his Apostles
only insisted upon the reasonableness of Christianity, the very Jews would
have silenced them alleging greater preuious evidence for their Religion,
showed by Moses and the Prophets. 3. Says the Heathen, because you dare not
meddle with the motives of Credibility which you Scornfully call a Grand Salad
too often served up by Papists you speak at random, when you give me no other
satisfaction to my difficulties than by telling me, they are worth nothing. You
Affirm. 4. Nothing is impertinent in Christian Religion. I answer. The belief
of a Trinity, of God made an Infant; Your whole story of a Serpent tempting
Eve, and of Sampson, Mr. stilling: proofs found weightless.
with your Mysterious book of Apocalypse, seem to my humane understanding not
only impertinent, but improbable. You tell me. 5. of Christian Religion
agreeing with those books you call the Bible, That is, you would say, the
Christian Doctrine of the Bible agrees with the book, which is idem per idem and
therefore highty dissatisfactory, unless you prove both the Bible and Doctrine
by further Arguments. You say 6. The Heathen ought to believe some thing
besides that, he has heard or seen upon the report of honest men. He answers,
he does, so far, as those reports move him to assent, and therefore denies not
the matter of fact, that there was once such a person in the world as Christ,
but because you say all this Testimony is no more but moral, and may be false,
the Heathens belief goes no higher. Just so the Turks believe there was such a
man as Mahomet, the Chinese such a man as Confusius, but what get we, by
judging there were such persons as these in the world? Does it here upon
follow, all they taught, Nothing yet proved.
was true or infallible Doctrine? No such matter. You say. 7. The Heathen must
believe that Christ dyed, rose again, wrought many miracles, and sent his
Apostles to preach his Doctrine. etc. He answers, these being Articles of your
faith registered in Scripture, you, Sr, either urge him to believe them, as you
ought to do certainly and infallibly, and this you cannot exact, for you
believe them because they are in Scripture, and yet you have not proved to the
Heathen so much as probably, that Scripture is of Divine inspiration, Therefore
you suppose what he denies, and pitifully beg the Question.

11. Or. 2. You will have him yield an assent to them upon the humane testimony
of many Christians which you say is fallible and may be false, and that auail's
nothing, for thus the Turks believe the Alcoran the Chinese their bible upon
the Testimony of innumerable witnesses. You say. 8. None can question whether
the Doctrine be Divine, when the Person who declared it to the world was so
Divine and extraordinary a Person holy in his conversation, wrought vnparalled
miracles, rose from death to life, conuersed with his Disciples, and gave
evidence of their fidelity by laying down The question Still. begged
their lives to attest the Truth etc. Contra. 1. Replies the Heathen. Here is
again the same Petitio principii, for either you believe these particulars
because Scripture record's them, and then you suppose Scripture to be true and
Divine, which he denies, or because fallible men report them (you own no
infallible tradition) and this aduances not your cause at all, for the Turks
and those of China talk as much of their Mahomet, and Confusius upon fallible,
and perhaps false reports also (for yet the Heathen knows not what Religion is
true) And next wonders why you speak of miracles, of power over evil spirits,
of men laying down their lives etc. when, you Sectaries either deny, or slight
all the miracles evidently done in the Catholic Church, as also the power She
manifest's in casting out Devils etc. And if we mention Martyrs, Catholics
have more, who laid down their lives in defense of the Doctrine of this one
Church, than suffered for Christ, whilst the Apostles preached to the world.
You hint some thing at miracles (like one half afraid to meddle with such
Motives) and say these wonders prove the truth of Apostolical Doctrine. Pray you
Sr Answer? When you plead by miracles Do you only allow those which Scripture
relates, or others By what miracles Sectaries, plead.
also known by History and humane Authority? If you rely on the first, you
suppose what now is in Question. Viz. That Scripture is infallible* and of
Divine inspiration, If you own miracles registered in Ecclesiastical history,
and the lives of Saints, you have, as I now said of Martyrs, a greater number
wrought in the Roman Catholic Church in the ages after Christ, than were done
whilst he and his Apostles lived. Slight such a Cloud of witnesses as attest
these later wonders, and speak no more (as you do) of any certainty grounded
upon the report of honest men; Own them upon humane authority as morally
indubitable, and you prove by virtue of these Miracles, that the Doctrine of the
Catholic Church, is still Apostolical and Orthodox.

12. Now here by the way I must lay open your fallacy, A dilemma, which forces
Sectaries to a vicious Circle.
when you recurr to miracles recounted in Scripture only, and reject others
wrought by the Church. Thus I argue. Either you suppose and believe the Doctrine
of Scripture to be Divine, because you find the Miracles of Christ and his
Apostles recorded there, (and propose these as the first Motive, and inducement
of your believing Scripture) or independently of Scripture Miracles, you prove
the Doctrine to be Divine; yea, and the very miracles recounted there, to be
indicted by the Holy Ghost. If you believe the Divinity of Scripture induced
thereunto by Miracles related in that Holy book, you advance nothing, for all
you say is, that you prove Scripture, Divine because it recounts these wonders,
which are as obscure to a Heathen as the Divinity, or the sacred Doctrine of
Scripture is, Therefore you make a most vicious Circle, for you prove the
Divinity of Scripture by Miracles internal to the book, and the Miracles
themselves (not otherwise known) by the Divinity of Scripture. Now if you say
you know the Scriptures Divinity antecedently, or before you recurr to Miracles
related there, Scripture-Miracles are vseles to your purpose, for, if the
supposition stand, They are yet no more but objects of Faith, and therefore
cannot serve you as motives and inducements to believe that very Divinity,
which is now supposed known aliunde, and most sufficiently without them.

13. One may ask, if God had never done any other Miracles but such as
Scripture relates, whether these are not sufficient to work belief in all? The
Heathen answers negatiuely, and makes them insufficient, because Scripture is
not proved Miracles related in Scripture Convince not a Heathen.
Divine by them. And all may answer so, if Scripture be not otherwise first
proved Divine, before we have recourse to miracles internal to the book.
Howeuer, admit gratis they were sufficient, the most you can infer is, That,
the Primitive Church which showed them was Orthodox, but whether any other
Church yet preserues the same pure Doctrine, may be well questioned by a
Heathen. And here in passing, you may note a singular Providence of God, who
age after age has illustrated his Church with most manifest and undoubted
miracles, whereof more largely hereafter. Disc. 2. C. 8.

14. You say lastly. That which God chiefly requires from a Heathen is the
belief of the Truth and Divinity of his Doctrine. He answers he is ready to do
so, when you prove the Doctrine to be Divinely inspired, and infallible. But
hitherto you handle things so faintly, that though the matter you treat be
excellent in it self, yet your proofs (most disatisfactory) come not home to
convince it. Your mishap is just like that of an ill lawyer, who has a good
cause in hand, but knows not how to handle it. Your whole Method is
vnmethodical, your proofs prooflesse, your iumbling most intolerable. In a
word, you give no rational A Good Cause ill handled by Mr: Stillingfleet
account of the reasonableness, of the Truth, of the Divinity, or of the
infallibility of Christ's Doctrine. Therefore says the Heathen, I Will suspend my
judgment till I meet with a more knowing Adversary, who I hope will not prove
Truth by simply saying he speaks it, but Convince it upon undeniable Principles.

15. But our Heathen has not yet done with Mr: Stilling: for he says plainly,
Though all the proofs hitherto hinted at might pass, or were supposed valid,
yet there is not one word spoken to the purpose, in behalf of Protestancy. If
you wonder at the bold Assertion, ponder well his reason. You, Mr: Stilling:
have treated all this while of the excellency and reasonablenes of Christian
Religion, considered no man knows how. Pray you lurk not in such General
terms, but tell me particularly what Christian Religion is thus good,
excellent, and reasonable? If good and excellent, it must be now found in the
world. Is it Arianism? Pelagianism? Donatism? Quakerism? These sects profess
Christianity Are they all excellent and reasonable? Affirm it openly if you
dare? Perhaps you will say no. Is it Popery? By no means. For may your word be
taken, it mantains false Our Adversary Cannot say, which a mong so many
Religions is excellent and reasonable.
and erroneous Doctrine, and that is neither excellent nor reasonable. Is it
Protestancy? Yes surely. This is the excellent and reasonable Religion. And is
it possible? Can you persuade your self without further proof than your own
prooflesse word, that the perfect draught or Idea of Christianity lies so fair
in the new Nothing of a few iarring Protestants, which all other Christians in
the world decry as false and improbable? Can you think that a foul-mouthed
Friar as ever lived, and a Nunn sacrilegiously coupled together, laid the first
foundation of this excellent and reasonable Christian Religion? Speak out, and
tell us what you judge, or hereafter leave of to vent such improbable
Paradoxes? I speak of a Religion now extant in the world or known. 4. hundred
years agone to prevent your wonted subterfuge of running up to the Primitive
Church, a most unreasonable plea when you cannot say probably what that Church
taught, but only by the Tradition of the present, which you most causlesly and
unworthily reject. But hereof we have said enough in the other Treatise.
Perhaps you will reply. You defend that Church which hold's Doctrine agreeable to
Scripture, I marry, Sir, but where shall we find it out? Amongst you They own
on un known Church.
Protestants think ye? when you know not probably the sense of scripture in
one only controuerted Text, much less so fully, as excludes a possibility of
doubting, nor shall you ever know, whilst you own a sense Contrary to the Roman
Catholic Church, as is already proved.

CHAP. X.
The first and easiest way to find out true Religion is not by Scripture only,
though all Christians had moral certainty of the right Canon, and sense also,
which is to say, the mere owning Christ's Doctrine, is insufficient to prove it,
to all sort of People.

1. THe Assertion may seem strange had we not an evident proof at hand, and
it is thus. The Jews, Turks, and Pagans (although all Christians now and ever
agreed in some chief verities concerning Christian Religion, as that Jesus is
our Redeemer) reject the Doctrine as falls, and foolish 1. Cor. 1. u. 23. We
preach Christ Crucified, a scandal to the Jews, and a foolery to the Gentiles.
Whereby you may well learn, how enormously Mr: Stillingfleet erred above when
he told us, that the mere excellency and reasonableness of Christian Religion
carries with it its own proof. Our Assertion is contrary, and grounded upon
this The proof of our Assertion opposite to Mr. stillingfleet.
Principle. The Mysteries of Christian Doctrine considered in themselves,
transcend all humane Capacity, and as the Apostle says scandalize weak reason,
Therefore the Mysteries merely laid forth to a Jew or Gentile are no
conviction, because they are above the reason of the very best Belieuers. Now
if you say, they ought first to be believed by faith without any preuious
inducement, This is the worst of fooleries, for none of the Primitive
Christians, so much as believed Christ or admitted Apostolical Doctrine, without
rendering first some satisfactory reason (distinct from their faith) why they
rejected the ancient Sinagogue and assented to that then new preached learning.
Some preuious light therefore, distinct from these abstruse Mysteries, which
God lays before the eye of humane reason induces all, whether Jews or
Gentiles, to the true belief of Christianity, and Consequently the mere supposed
verity of the Doctrine only, dark in it self, is no absolute mark or first self
evident Principle, The rerity of Christ's Doctrine no self Evidence.
whereby we are immediately moved to believe such high secrets. Pray you tell
me, should any one go amongst some vnciuilised People, who either have heard
nothing, or very little of Christ, and only relate the story of his sacred
Birth in a poor stable, of his obscure life from the 12.th year of his age till
he began to preach etc. Would such Barbarians, think ye, assent to these
strange things either by the force of humane reason, or Divine Faith, without
further proof or motive to make all good? No certainly. Yet all is true and
very true, yea, and most reasonable, but the verity alone is insufficient to
persuade any that it is true.

2. From this short discourse, whereof more in the second part, these
undeniable inferences follow. 1. That Sectaries assert they know not what, when
they make the true Preaching of the Gospel and right use of Sacraments to be
marks of the true Church. For the true Church (be it where you will) has ever
its marks antecedently supposed to the true preaching of the word, which marks,
first manifest that mystical body (at least in a general way as I shall
presently declare) and thus known by a natural evidence, she proposes the
Mysteries we believe. Here The Church is known by her marks, before we believe.
is the reason a priori of my Assertion. That which is the first object of our
Faith cannot be the first object of our knowledge, the Mysteries of our belief
laid forth by the preaching of Gods word, are the first objects of Faith, (for
these we believe, and as believed they are obscure) therefore they cannot be
the first objects of knowledge (if we speak strictly of knowledge) or marks
preuiously inducing reason to believe. Whence it is, that reason has its
evidence or prudent inducements laid forth upon other extrinsical Principles,
before we believe. Belief therefore, whether you take it for the object
assented to, or the act we assent by (being as I said obscure) can be no mark
to it self or to the true Church we believe in, for a mark is ever more known
than that object is whereof it is a mark, or which is pointed at.

3. Some perhaps will say. The Church is usually defined. An Assembly of those
who profess the true Doctrine of Christ, therefore An Objection.
true Doctrine most essential to the Church, must necessarily be known before we
know the total essence of the Church. Ergo true Doctrine or the preaching of the
word is a mark whereby we first find out the Church, and consequently the
Church marked with evident clear motives, is no inducement to believe true
Doctrine. The Argument is an evident fallacy. First because the Illiterate and
simple Christians believe in the Church and have faith sufficient to salvation,
though they never arrive to an explicit Briefly solued.
belief of every particular Doctrine taught by it. 2. They either explicitly
believe all these particular Doctrins by Faith, and this is impossible, because
all of them were never proposed explicitly, or, know them ex terminis to be
Divine Truths by humane reason, when they are proposed, and this is most
untrue. For who can say that this truth. Christ is God and consubstantial with
his Father, is a verity more known ex terminis by humane reason, than the
contrary error of the Arians is? You see therefore the objection is forceles:
For, as one who reads Aristotle or Plato knows what is said, or the substance
of the Doctrine by the sense of their words, yet remains ignorant whether it be
true or falls, without further reasoning and inspection, so a Gentil that reads
our Christian Doctrine in the bible may know much of its sense, or what is said,
yet he must both discourse and reason well, before The judgment of
Credibility, not attained by examining the Mysteries of Faith.
he come to this settled judgment. All I read (not evidently true ex terminis)
is yet indubitably so. Now this judgment is not first got by examining the
particular verities which Scripture or the Church teaches. No. There is a far
easier way whereby reason, after a further discourse concludes: that either God
has cheated the world by the Miracles, the sanctity, The blood shedding of
Martyrs, and all those conuersions wrought by the Church, or we must grant,
That, what the Church teaches is true, And this general judgment arising
immediately from a due Ponderation of the motives of Faith (which is Science)
disposes an understanding to believe this great Truth. God speaks his eternal
verities by that Church (be it yet where you will) which Christ Jesus founded.
And in this sense we say, a general Notion or knowledge of the Church
manifested by supernatural signs, is usually necessary to the belief of every
particular Doctrine delivered by it, and consequently particular Doctrins can be
no first mark, or sign of this Oracle. Thus much is here briefly hinted at to
solue the objection. Hereafter, the whole Analysis shall be most particularly
discussed in its due place.

4. A. 2. inference. True Religion is first found by its marks The true Church
is known before we can know the books of scripture.
and cognisances, before the pure and incorrupt books of Scripture can be owned
as Divine. We come therefore to a knowledge of these incorrupt books by the
help of that Christian Society where true Religion is taught, and cannot first
know where true Religion is by the books of scripture only. I say. First know.
For without all doubt when incorrupt Scripture together with the sense is once
admitted upon the authority of Christ's Church, we argue and forceably as the
Fathers anciently did, against Sectaries by Scripture: But all such arguments
presuppose the Books proved Divine, and sacred. The reason of the inference is.
These Books only contain a simple narration of our Christian verities, which
both Jews and Gentiles slight, therefore though we cry never so loud Scripture
is Divine, and written by the Holy Ghost, we effect nothing with these Aliens
from Christ, unless we first convince the truth by proofs distinct from
Scripture it self. And as little is No disputing by Scripture only, without the
Canon and sense be agreed on.
done, if Christians of a different belief dispute by Scripture, when neither
the Canon, nor the sense is agreed on. For example. Marcion produces his
Bible, The Arian his, and his sense, A third a Scripture without S. James
Epistle, or that to the Hebrews, Our Sectaries Crowd in with their book,
whilst others as learned reject their Canon, and much more that sense they
force from it in a hundred passages. What is to be done in this Confusion? Must
we admit of Marcions Bible, or submit to our Sectaries Canon, and new sense
also? No certainly, it Cannot be expected. Perhaps they will say. we are to
dispute the question, and rigidly examine who has the true Canon and sense of
Scripture, They or we, This ends the difference. Very good. But say on I
beseech you? And first give us a sure Principle (a doubtful one in so weighty a
matter help's little) which may bear up the controversy, and at last end it,
for unless this principle be agreed on, the result of our dispute will be
nothing but a fruitles wrangling. O the Fathers and Antiquity well pondered
cannot but decide the debate. I answer, may we judge by the effect, the
assertion is most untrue: The ancient Fathers perverted by sectaries, end not
Controversies.
For have not we and Sectaries now read and pondered the Fathers and Antiquity
for one whole age, what can be alleged on both sides, as well for the Canon as
the sense, has been said, and after all, are we not still as much at variance
as far off from ending the controversy, as when we began it? Say Now, but upon
a solid Principle, who is in fault? The Sectary thinks we understand not the
Fathers, and we are sure, he abuses them with far fetched glosses. He says
their words are clear for his sense, and we profess, the Contrary. Hitherto we
come to nothing like a Principle* The Controversy therefore driven on no
further, but to the sectaries bare, Yea and our, No, hangs yet in the air
wholly undecided. The reason is. Though the Fathers words be never so plain for
our Catholic verities, yet after the Sectary has laid his glosses upon them,
they are most unworthily made by him as doubtful, and a matter of as great
contest, as the very sense of Scripture is, which both of us would have cleared
by the Fathers testimony. That is. There is as much ado (may Sectaries glosses
have place) to understand, what a Father teaches concerning the sense of
scripture, as to understand Scripture it self, before we have recourse to the
Fathers. To recurre therefore to their interpretation in Controuerted matters
whilst Sectaries as much darken that by their glosses, as they obscure the
Scripture we dispute about, is The matter in Dispute, no meet Principle to end
it.
evidently a most unfit way to end any Controversy, unless that which is the
very matter of Dispute between us, can be supposed a meet and sufficient means
to end it, which is impossible. Now if the sectary blames us because we reject
that sense, he draws from either Scripture or the Fathers, and he also reject
ours, what have we but wrangling? Both parties hitherto only word it, and stand
chafing at one an other, without Principles. God therefore has provided us a
surer and easier way to end debates about Religion, whereof more in the sequel
Chapters.

CHAP. XI.
The Protestant takes away the only means to know true Religion by. His proofs,
whether He defend's Protestancy or impugn's Catholic Doctrine, are vnreducible
to Principles, and never go beyond the weakness of his own unproven Assertion.
Mere glosses support all He says, which is euidenced by a brief handling one
Controversy, touching the B. Sacrament. Theodoret wronged by Sectaries,
cleared. His Doctrine is most Catholic.

1. NOte first. If God as I said above, once established true Religion among
Christians, He made it so discernable from all false sects, that it may be
found out by prudent reason. Omni literatura notius says Tertull. lib. 1. de
Testimonio animae. Its more known then any other learning. For to say on the
one side, That an infinite wisdom has planted true Religion in the world,
which shall not perish, and on the other, to assert it cannot be proved or
found out, is first to cast a blemish on Providence, and next to free all from
the obligation of embracing it, because none can be obliged to embrace that
which cannot be known by reason, or rational arguments. Note. 2. The Doctrine of
Christ which essentially constitutes true Religion, stand's most firm upon
indubitable Principles appliable to the Belieuers reason. If therefore a Want
be found of such proofs, and doubts arise, whether Christ's Doctrine be taught
or no; None can by doubtful or ambiguous Proofs of true Religion, easy and
Conuincing.
Principles only, absolutely say. This is Christ's Doctrine, and Consequently the
proofs of true Religion answer to the weightines of the matter, that is, they
are clear, conuincing, and exclude a possibility of reasonable doubting. Thus
much supposed.

2. I say first. who ever endeauour's to show by arguments what Tenants of
Religion now held amongst Christians are pure and Orthodox (when the matter is
of Controversy,) and cannot The sectaries proofs, as dark as his Doctrine.
bring his proofs to a Clearer Principle, then the particular assertion is
which should be proved, argues improbably. The Protestant in all the discussed
matters of Religion does so, that is, he never goes beyond the strength of his
own weak assertion, but eludes all by talk wholly as dark and weightles as the
very Assertion is, which should be proved; therefore he Argues improbably.

3. To prove the Minor proposition wherein the difficulty lies. Take a veiw of
all our Protestant Tenants as they differ from Catholic Doctrine, or Constitute
this new reformed Religion and ask, what Protestant dare appear and venture to
prove, That Faith only iustifies: The like I say of his other negative
Articles, Of no real Presence, of no Invocation of Saints of no Sacrifice of
the Mass. etc. I absolutely affirm, He cannot make one of these Articles good by
any undoubted Principle, or establish any of them by a proof which is clearer,
than that dark article is, which should be proved. One reason is. These
Doctrins opposite to the Latin and Greek Church also, are not evidently known
as truths by the light of One reason of our Assertion.
nature, or by any received Principle grounded on Revelation. No ancient Church
reputed Orthodox held them 7. hundred years agone, and Consequently no
universal tradition is for them. The only difficulty is, whether Holy Scripture
or the Fathers generally patronize such Doctrins? And to favor Sectaries all
that is possible, we will here move no doubt of the letter of their Bible, but
withal assure them, it will be impossible to draw such new learning out of
that Book, and the impossibility will be thus manifested. As long as these men
cannot prove their new Doctrine to be transmitted to them from as good and
assured authority as their book of Scripture is transmitted (but upon less sure
grounds, or less assured tradition) so long their doctrine is naught and stands
vnprincipled. But this is so, as we shall see presently. And you may by the way
note here the difference between the Catholic The difference beween the proofs
of Catholics and Protestants.
and Protestant. The first, proves every particular Tenet of his Faith by as
sure a Principle as he proves his Bible to be Divine, (the Church assures him
of both) but the Sectary ever falls short in this and cannot give you so
strong a proof for his particular Doctrine, as he does for the very letter of
his book, which he supposes teaches that Doctrine.

4. But let us come to the point which chiefly urges, and take one particular
Controversy (we cannot insist on all) and ask the Protestant. How he proves
that the real presence of Christ's sacred body (as Catholics assert) is not
expressed in the literal sense of those words. This is my body. His negative
assertion most evidently is not there in plain terms. We therefore urge him to
make it good by a proof that is clear or more conuincing than his own dark and
yet unproven Negative is. And is he not obliged think ye to produce a strong
proof indeed, when he has so many powerful Adversaries to contrast with? 1.
The clear words of Christ now alleged 2. A long Catalogue of most ancient
Fathers usually cited by Authors opposite to him. 3. The Authority of the Greek
and Latin Church, for both Churches mantain the real substantial presEnce to
this day. 4. The express Doctrine of general Councils, which define our Doctrine
positiuely, and The grounds of our Catholic Tenets.
condemn the figurative presence of Sectaries 5. Evident Miracles wrought in
confirmation of the Mystery, related by authors of most indubitable credit.
These are no slight grounds of our Doctrine. Let us see by what strong received
Principle the Sectary endeauour's to weaken them, or (which is immediately to my
purpose) proves his new negative Position. Has he the express letter of
Scripture for his Negative: Christ is not substantially present in the
Eucharist? Not one word in the whole Bible is like it, much contrary. Does the
sense of Scripture after all places are compared together favor him? No. What
ever sense he draws from thence seemingly to his purpose, will be as obscure
and remote from the nature of a proof or any known Principle, as his own
improbable position is, and therefore most unfit to persuade it. Has he as
universal Tradition or the unanimous consent of Fathers for his negative, (or
for that sense he would force out of Scripture), as he and we have for the
letter of the Text now cited? Nothing at all. And to show you how justly I
propose this question, call to mind what Mr: The Sectary answers not to any.
Stilling: exact's of his Adversary Part. 1. c. 7. P. 216. If I should, says
he, once see you prove the infallibility of your Church, the Popes supremacy,
Invocation of Saints etc. by as unquestionable and universal tradition as that
is whereby we receive the Scriptures, I would extol you for the only person
that ever did any thing considerable on your side. Thus he speaks after this
precaution given. Think not to fob us off, with the Tradition of your Church in
stead of the Catholic, with the ambiguous Testimonies of two or three Fathers,
instead of the universal consent of the Church since the Apostles times. Your
own words Mr: Stilling: shall here condemn you. The Question is whether your
Negative, Christ is not really present in the Eucharist, as Catholics affirm,
be Orthodox Doctrine? We exact as rigid a proof from you, as you demand of us,
but fob us not off with your own talk (Tradition you have none) nor with the
ambiguous Testimonies of two or three Fathers, but give us the universal
consent of the Church since the Apostles time, as What we justly require of
Sectaries.
clear for your negative, as you demand of us for the articles now mentioned;
Or if this be too much, give us but only the indubitable sentiment of any
Church, reputed Orthodox, four or five hundred years past for this your sense
and assertion, and I will applaud you as a most singular person. But this you
shall do, when you have turned all faith out of the world; that is never. I
say therefore you have no more but the ambiguous Testimonies of two or three
Fathers (nay you have not so much) for this Negative Doctrine; which upon that
account prove nothing, because they are as dark for your sense, as the Doctrine
is, which you would prove by them.

5. For example. You may allege some passages out of S. Austin, chiefly that
contra Adimant. C. 12. Our Lord doubted not to say, This is my body when he
gave a sign of his body. The obuious sense whereof without torturing the Text,
is thus. Our Lord gave unto his Disciples the Consecrated species and accidents
of bread, which were a sign of his Body there contained, and doubted not to
say, that what he gave them under those accidents, was really his body. Let now
any one probably infer, that his S. Austin's words favor not Sectaries.
sacred body was not then present under the accidents of bread, because S.
Austin says those accidents were a sign of his body not absent, for a sign or
figure implies not the absence of the thing signified by it. Well, but grant
contrary to truth all you can wish, The words at most are ambiguous, and
therefore no fit Principle to ground an article of faith, as is now noted. You
may next allege that known Testimony in Theodorets Dialogues. The Mystical
signs after the sanctification recede not from their nature, but remain in
their first substance, figure and form; are seen and touched as before. I
answer, Theoderet plainly speaks of the Mystical signs More of Theoderet
afterward.
which are seen and touched, not of the inward substance of bread and wine,
which are no immediate object of our senses, those signs recede not from their
nature, but remain in their form and figure as before; and it is Catholic
Doctrine whereof more presently. But grant the utmost. The words are only
dubious and therefore insufficient to assure us of an article of Faith, when
contrary to the received Doctrine of the present Church. I assert yet more.
Though any Father should say, That the substance and nature of bread and wine
cease not to be, there is nothing yet concluded against us, for by these words
substance or nature, the outward Massinesse, or Corpulency of bread and wine
may be well understood, which as Theoderet says remain. The reason is. In
ordinary Speech we often give to qualities which flow from the essence or
nature of a thing the very name of the thing it self. Thus we say an excessive
heat is fire, a Massy heauiness is lead, or a stone, whereas heat and heauiness
in common philosophy, are only natural qualities or properties distinct from
each substance, respectively. Such locutions, were they found, are at most
dubious, but we stand in no need of any far-fetch't glosses.

6. Lastly Tertullians speech lib. 4. contra Marcio: cap. 39. ex Cap. 21. Lucae
contain's no difficulty. Christ taking bread into his hands and distributing it
to his Disciples made the same his body, Tertullians sense, most plain and easy.
saying this is my Body; That is, a figure of my body. Observe the words. Made
the same his body, and all is clear? What did he make so? I answer. That bread
which in the old Testament was a figure of his body (according to the words of
the Prophet. Mittamus lignum in panem eius. Let us put wood into his bread,
that is a Cross into his body) he makes now in the new law most truly and
really his body. Whoeuer read's Tertullian, will find this to be the genuine
sense of his whole Discourse in the place cited, where first he ieer's Marcion.
Faciebat ad vanitatem Marcionis vt panis Crucifigeretur, Then says, Marcion
vnderstand's not, that bread in the old Testament was a figure of Christ's
body, as the Prophet Ierimie speak's. Conijciamus lignum in panem eius,
scilicet, (They are Tertullian's own words) Crucem in Corpus eius. That is a
Cross into his body. See Pamelius his learned notes upon this passage, chiefly.
n. 662. and. 667. and you will easily free Tertullian from all ambiguity in
Speech. There are yet other Authorities much weaker produced by Sectaries, but
these now quoted seem sufficient for my chief aim, whereof more presently. In
the interim I expect from these men a clamorous reply.

7. They will certainly tell us the sense and explication now given to these
Fathers are no more but mere unproven guesses, or A reply of sectaries.
answered.
thoughts of our fancy. I might first answer. This sense immediately flows from
the plain words which we admit, according to the rigid grammatical
signification of every particular sentence. But let us wave this, and ask,
whether the contrary sense of sectaries be any more but merely their unproven
glosses, or thoughts of fancy? I say they are so, and consequently as dark, and
wholly obscure, as that Negative Proposition is, which should be proved by
them. They storm, and say the sense is clear for them, I stiffly deny it, and
assert the conttary. They perhaps will urge me to prove my sense; I urge them
to prove theirs, which cannot be done by the Fathers own words without a surer
Principle; For, you see, the words occasion the quarrel, but that which is the
cause of our dissentions can never end them, or bring us to any acquiescency,
without a further Principle. And thus we stand Andabatarum more, winking and
fighting. The one says. Yea, The other. No. without fruit or further progress,
and are yet far from ending difficulties.

8. Now here is that which I would have all to reflect on, for it is of mighty
importance, viz. That controversies between the A reflection necessary for all
that write Controversies.
Catholic and a sectary, cannot but be an endless work, if both endeavor to
decide them by Principles, and vary as much about the sense of those
Principles, (which are supposed to end the Dispute) as we do about the very
matter in question. This is ever so, whilst the sectary reiect's an infallible
Church or her universal Tradition. Observe well: The matter now in question is,
Whether Christ be really present in the blessed Sacrament? We allege his own
Sacred words. The Sectary says we mistake the sense, and consequently will not
have the difficulty decided that way. To know the Truth, both of us examine all
the other passages in Scripture relating to the Mystery, both read the
originals, and the different versions, both compare Text and text together,
nothing is yet ended; Still we stand at variance about the sense, which should
decide matters between us. Next we read the Holy Fathers (for our Sectaries
like not Tradition) they produce their How Disputes are made endless.
Testimonies; we interpret. We produce ours; They also interpret. Observe well
I say. Are we not as much at variance about the sense of these Fathers, which
are supposed a Principle to end our debates, as about the very meaning of Gods
word? And does not the matter in question still remain undecided? Most
evidently yes. Therefore, unless some other means be afforded whereby we may
come more easily to the knowledge and belief of the revealed truth in this
Mystery, (may Sectaries glosses have place) all are cast into a labyrinth of
seeking, without hope of finding what God will have us to believe. In a word
the plain truth is thus.

9. Sectaries will have us to dispute of Religion, but on such Terms as shall
be sure never to end one difficulty. That is, they will have us to reason about
matters of highest consequence, and with it destroy the best ground of all
reasoning. I say therefore. If Religion were to be proved by Scripture only
(add to Scripture the authorities of Fathers) when every one makes that sense
of scripture orthodox, which he conceiues to be so; Religion ere this day had
been long since destroyed. For the Arian would have his sense pass for truth,
The Pelagian his, The Monothelite his, The Protestant his. All these different
senses admitted, destroy the very Essentials of Christian Religion. And for
this reason I would fain learn of any knowing man, What that owned Principle
is, whereby the Sectary proves the sense he gives of Scripture to be more
certainly a revealed Truth, than that gloss is which either Arian or Pelagian
forces out of the very book which Protestants read? I assert boldly, they are
all alike: Guesses and mere fancies guide A just parallel between Arians and
Protestants.
them, and nothing else. The Arians sense is not clear, no more is the
Protestants: The Arian has no universal Tradition for his sense, no more has
the Protestant. The Arian has no universal consent of Fathers, no more has the
Protestant. The Arian has no Church ever reputed Orthodox which owned his
sense, no more has the Protestant. Now if the Protestant recurr to the
Primitive Church, The Arian will go higher to the very Apostles preaching, and
avouch that his sense was taught by those first Masters of the Gospel. I say it
once more, they are all alike, there is no difference between them. The Arians
gloss is as good as the Protestants, and the Protestants wholly as bad as the
Arians*

10. Hence I say. 2. The Protestant cannot advance any thing like a proof in
behalf of his own new opinions, and he is as far from Principles, when he
opposes Catholic Doctrine. You have the reason given already. No proof, less
sure than the true sense of Scripture, taught and delivered by a Church
confessedly orthodox. No proof, less firm than that Church's authority and her
received Tradition, can indubitably ascertain any of Christ's Sacred Doctrine.
But it is evident Protestants want such proofs, when they either plead for
their own opinions, or impugn Catholic Protestants Condemned by their own
writings.
Doctrine, And to make good what I say, I appeal to their own writings and ask
every judicious Reader, whether he ever yet heard Protestant whilst he asserts
no Transubstantiation, (for example) No Sacrifice of the Mass no Invocation of
Saints, say plainly and positiuely upon a solid ground: Such an ancient Church
reputed Orthodox confessedly denied Transubstantiation, Invocation of saints,
the Sacrifice of the Altar etc? Such a passage of Scripture sensed and
interpreted by that Orthodox Church, or general consent of Fathers agreeing
with known Scripture and Church Doctrine, decried these In what manner Sectaries
handle controversies.
Catholic Tenets, as we Sectaries do now? Has ever Protestant I say, gone thus
plainly to work? No God knows. I Will highly extol the man that shall offer at
it. What then is their strain of writing. All a long a mere cheat. They either
argue negatiuely. We find not, forsooth, Such Doctrins in antiquity (which is
false) and, though true, it is to no purpose; Or, they cite you two or three
ambiguous Testimonies of the Fathers, gloss, and sense them as they please, and
then cry victory. Thus Mr: Stil^ingfleet proceed's as you shall see presently.
I say, No such mat^er. An ambiguous Testimony of a Father glossed or sensed by
^ou, is wholly insufficient to ground faith upon, or to assert ab^lutely: This
is Christ's Doctrine, without an ancient Orthodox Church, which indubitably
maintaine'd the Position and that ^nse you would draw from a Father. And mark
well what I say, ^or we shall afterward end all controversies by it. In the
mean ^me who is there so far from reason, that can persuade himself, ^t I or
any ought to reject what my Church teaches, because a Sectary offer's to draw
some few Fathers to a new sense which no Orthodox Church ever heard of? When
all know, or should know, that no private man's opinion, no doubtful Text, much
less Sectaries glosses added to an ambiguous sentence, can assure me what
Christ's Doctrine is, which, as I said, ever stand's firm upon vndubitable
Principles, or a Belieuer ought not to own it as Doctrine truly revealed.

11. But before I press this point further, and show upon what certain
Principle the Catholic relies, when the Scriptures sense (the like is of the
Fathers) is debated, I must needs entertain you a little (because it much
auail's to my present purpose) with a few known Authorities of Fathers which
either convince our Catholic Doctrine of Christ's real Presence in the
Eucharist, or (we may boldly say) no truth was ever established by those great
lights of the Church. I say only a few: for it is not my intent to collect half
of what is usually quoted by Catholic Authors, my chief What is chiefly
intended in Citing the Fathers.
aim being thus much at present, to make this truth manifest. That as long as
Sectaries iarr with us about the sense of Fathers and only deliver opinatiuely
their contrary Sentiments, so long they do no more, but without fruit beat the
air and dispatch no work. Recourse therefore must be had to a clearer
Principle, whereof we shall afterward treat at large. Now as I promised one
Authority is to be examined.

Theoderets Testimony alleged above, Contains most Catholic Doctrine.
12. Whilst I was in hand with this Chapter a Gentleman ^ our Nation pleased to
tell me of a late little book, called to h^ remembtance, The Rule of Faith,
wherein one passage of Theoder^ is much urged and thought unanswerable. After
some Discourse I showed him my notes in the other Treatise. Disc. 4. C. 7. n. ^
whereunto He replied modestly, Surely Theoderet says more who either must
suppose the very inward substance of bread ^ changed at all, or his Conference
with the Eutichian Heretic becomes What Sectaries would force from this
authority.
forcelesse, and this the little book presses most. Sr, said I. It seems very
strange, that your late book bring's again to light such stale objections, long
since answered by one (to say nothing of many others) of our own Nation, the
learned Brereley. Please to read with me Theoderet's own words first, and
Brereley afterward. We turned to Theoderet, Paris Print 1642. Tom. 4. Dialog:
2. called Inconfusus Dialogus, and began with the page 84. Next I produced
Brereley of the Liturgy of the Mass Colain Print 1620. dedicated to our late
Soueraign Charles the first, then Prince of wales. Tract. 2. Sect. 8. P. 208.
and sect: 11. page chiefly. 252. Having perused both, the Gentleman wondered his
little book passed over so slightly the main thing considerable in this
Dialogue, and that no word of answer was returned to the observations of Mr.
Brereley, adding, it would do well to make the truth a little better known,
which is my intent at present.

13. First, it cannot be doubted, but that the Eutychian Two Contrary positions.
Heretic concealed under the name of Eranistes, held our Lords whole Sacred
body after his Ascension changed into his Divinity. Contrariwise, Theoderet
called, Orthodoxus, oppugn's the Heresy, and says, Christ's body remain's as it
was before, true humane nature most glorious, and not converted into the
Divinity. Again, all who have read the Dialogue know well, that the context to
our present purpose is as follows. After the Orthodox had professed his belief
of the Holy Eucharist to be the true body and blood of Christ, Eranistes the
Heretic begin's his plea. In good time has't thou mentioned these Divine
Mysteries, for from them I will show Where the Heretics seek's advantage.
thee, that our Lord's body is changed into an other nature. Answer therefore
to my question? Ortho. I will answer. Eran: How call'st thou that which is
offered before the invocation of the Priest? Ortho: I may not speak plainly,
for it is likely some are present, not yet admitted to the Mysteries. Eran:
Answer darkly or aenigmatically. Ortho: It is yet, when offered, that meat
which is made up of such seeds. Eran: And how do we call the other sign or
Symbol? Ortho: That is also a common name, which signifies a kind of drink, or
cup. Eran: But after the Sanctification how dos't thou call them? Ortho: The
body and blood of Christ. Eran: And dos't thou believe that th^^ What the
Orthodox and the Heretic believed.
receiues't the body and blood of Christ. Ortho: (...) So I believe, Here upon
Eranistes infer's. As therefore the Symbols of our Lords body and blood are one
thing before the Priests invocation, and after his invocation are changed, and
made other things, even so the Lords body is changed into the Divine substance.

14. Stay a little, Gentle Reader, and speak your thoughts freely. Is it not
evident from this part of the Dialogue (the rest you shall have presently) that
both the Heretic and the Orthodox did here suppose the verity of Christ's real
presence in the sacrament, as a known Doctrine received in the Church? The
Heretic supposed it; otherwise he had been more than senseless to have proved
his pretended Transubstantiation of Christ's humane nature into the Godhead, by
urging a parity taken from that other Doctrine of the Transubstantiation of
bread, into Christ's body. His inference had been without life most languishing,
had he drawn the false Doctrine of his conceited change, from an other as false.
viz. From no real change made in the bread after consecration. For how lame an
inference would this have been? Bread in the Sacrament remain's, as it was
before, substantially bread, only deputed to a holy use, that is, not really
change^ The Heretic supposes a true Change in bread, according to the
Catholic Principle.
at all, yet from thence I will conclude, that Christ's humane nature is really
changed into the substance of his Divinity. As who should say. Because bread is
not substantially changed into Christ's body, I will infer that the humane
nature is changed into the Godhead, which is pure nonsense. And as gre^
Nonsense would it have been, had he only supposed the extrinsid sacramental
change of Protestants or from thence drawn his inference, that Christ's body was
really changed into his Divinity: For the most which can be inferred out of
this sacramental chang^ only, is that Christ's humane nature admit's in like
manner o^ some new extrinsecal denomination.

15. Now that Theoderet or the Orthodox supposes also the known Doctrine of the
Church in this Mystery is manifest upon these grounds. 1. You see how he was
provoked by the Heretic to deny the real presence and change of bread into
Christ's body. After sanctification how do thou call them? Again. Do thou
believe that thou takes the body and blood of Christ etc? Observe I beseech
you. Might not Theoderet thus strongly pressed, have quite ouerthrown his
Adversaries argument, had he believed as Protestants believe, that the inward
substance of bread is not changed into Christ's body? For upon this supposition
he should have replied. Thou ask'st me what these things are after
sanctification? I answer they are substantially bread Theoderet also supposes a
real change.
and wine, though signs of Christ's body and blood. I answer, I take not Orally
the true body and blood of Christ, but bread and wine only made a Sacrament. If
therefore they still remain bread, and wine as before, I acquit my self
clearly, and render thy argument forcelesse, for thou cans't not infer, because
I and the Church hold bread and wine, not substantially changed in the
Sacrament, That Christ's humane nature is really and substantially changed into
the Divinity. But Theoderet, as you hear, return's no such answer, but
positiuely asserts the contrary plainly enough. They are the body and blood of
Christ. I receive that body and blood. etc. Though he warily forbeares to
express the change too significantly, because perhaps of some present, not yet
admitted to the Mysteries. Again. And here is my. 2. ground. Theoderet who was
an Orthodox Father, penned this Dialogue, and therefore as the learned Brereley
observes, neither could nor would have propounded Clear reasons prove that
suppos^tion.
the heretics Argument upon the Churches then received Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, (which we see manifestly done) had that Doctrine been then
strange, unknown, or reputed false. Much less could he have wrote as he does.
That the Symbols after the Priest's invocation are changed and made other
things had our Sectaries Doctrine of no Transubstantiation been then taught by
the Church and reputed true. 3. Theoderet's great circumspection was needless.
I may not speak openly, for it is likely some are present etc. If he had
believed no other presence of Christ in the Sacrament, than that, which
Protestants call Sacramental: He might well without scruple in that opinion,
have declared their sense, and said openly. The Sacrament before consecration
was a plain piece of bread, and so it is substantially bread afterward. Thou
speak improperly Er^nistes, whilst thou supposest the Symbols changed and
made other things. I tell thee, they are not changed intrinsecally, but totally
remain in their inward substance as they were, only signifying Christ body and
blood as they are deputed to a holy use. Thus the Orthodox should have both
answered, and excepted against his Adversary, had Protestant Doctrine been in
those days owned by Christians, but he goes on in a quite different strain, as
is already declared. Hence I say, this part of the Dialogue is so invincible a
proof against Protestants in behalf The Centurist's Censure Theoderet.
of the real Presence that it cannot be answered, and therefore the Centurist's
with other Heretics quoted by Brereley. page 111. and page 258. having charged
S. Chrysostom with the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, censure Theoderet upon
the same score as one that speak's dangerously in the matter. These men it
seems, saw no great force in the later part of the Dialogue which our modern
Protestants so much urge, and follows thus.

16. When Eranistes had asserted that the Symbols by the invocation of the
Priest are changed and made other things, and from that change inferred, that
our Lords body after his Ascension, was converted into the Divine substance.
The Orthodox Answer's. Thou art caught in the netts, thou have wouen,
Theodoret's Assertion.
For, the Mystical symbols after Sanctification go not away from their nature*
For, they remain in their former essence, and figure, and form, and ^^y be seen
and touched a^ before. But yet they are understood to be those things, which
they are made, and believed and adored to be those things, as they are
believed. Thus the Latin interpreter render's Theoderet's words (you shall have
presently an other Lection) though truly to read them as you see here, after
due reflection made upon the precedent part of the Dialogue, is so fully enough
to ascertain every one of this learned Father's meaning, that I wonder any
judicious Man can scruple at it. The genuin sense is. Thou Eranistes maintain's
that the visible circumscribed body of our His whole sense declared.
Savior was after his Ascension swallowed as it were up, or totally changed
into his Godhead. To illustrate this thy Doctrine, thou take a proof from the
Mystical signs or Symbols of the blessed Sacrament, and not only from the
inward substance of bread, which thou acknowledgest changed. I tell thee thou
art caught in thy own net, the parity fail's there, for the Mystical signs
remain to sense as before in the same exterior form and substance, they are
seen, felt etc. Dare thou Eranistes say, Christ's sacred body retain's yet
the same exterior form it had on earth? Has it yet in Heaven the same
dimensions, as these symbols have after Consecration? Is it visible, or
extended? Answer as thou please. Here is an unanswerable Dilemma for thee.
Either thou maintains't that A dilemma.
Chris'ts glorious body is now visible and extended as the Symbols of the
Sacrament are, Or, contrariwise, not sensible, not seen, not extended. Grant
the first: Thou denies't thy own Doctrine, and must assert that his whole
glorious body is not converted into the Godhead. Grant the second, or say, it
has not the same exterior form, the same visibility and extension, Thy
instance, and proofs taken from the Symbols of the Sacrament, are Eo ipso made
null, and forcelesse, for these signs keep the same form as before, they are
perceptible to sense, extended etc. and thus thou art both caught and convinced.

17. By what is now said you find Theoderet's discourse most solid against the
Heretic, who would needs infer, grounding himself upon the change made in the
Sacrament, that Christ's whole humane nature was converted into the Divinity.
Thus much says Theoderet, is evidently false, for these Symbols remain in
their exterior form, unaltered, but Chris'ts humane body with thee remain's
not so, for all in it, the very exterior is changed into the Godhead:
Therefore thy proof, taken from the symbols Theoderet only speak's of the
Species or accidents remaining.
of the Sacrament, not changed at all, is void of strength, faint, and
weightlesse. Now that Theoderet speak's only of the outward symbols of the
Sacrament, is manifest. First by what is noted already, where he says we are
partakers of the true body and blood of Christ. 2. By his answer, to the
Heretic, where he openly professes, that though these symbols are seen and
handled as before, yet to the understanding, and Faith, they contain the things
we truly believe. That is Christ's real body and blood. And thus much He
proves in the following words where he asserts, that they are to be adored no
otherwise than Christ's immortal body is now adored, sitting at the right hand
of His Father, for in both places, as you may read in the text, the same word
of Divine honor is referred to Christ in the Sacrament, and now glorious in
heaven.

18. You must here have a word of the other Lection already hinted at which
clear's all, and takes away the least shadow of a difficulty. The most eminent
and learned Cardinal Perron propound's it, and proves it also absolutely the
best, by six strong Arguments Liu. 2. De L'Eucharistie Chap. 12. P. 539. First
Theodorets Text, dubious*
says he There is certainly in Theoderet's Greek Text a dubious form of
speaking, perhaps used on set purpose because of some Auditors present, not yet
initiated, or first instructed in these Mysteries. The Original words are thus.
(...) etc. That is. The symbols remain in their former essence, and figure, and
form and may be seen etc. But read them thus says the Cardinal, by a
Transposition. (...) etc. That is For they remain, and, i^ the form, and, in
the figure of the first substance, and all difficulty How the Cardinal read's.
ceases. For by this construction Theoderet only says, the accidents or
species of bread and wine remain, intimating nothing at all of any inward
substance of bread remaining, nay, his whole context supposes the inward
substances changed into Christ's body.

19. If this Construction be admitted, so that the Genitive case (...), be as
it is a Genitive, and the other two follow in form of Latin ablatiues, you have
this Connatural sense. Manent in pri^^^ essentiae and forma and figura. The
Symbols remain in the form and figure of their first essence, which preiudices
nothing the real Transmutation of bread into Christ's body, but much confirm's
it. But such a Construction, add's the learned Cardinal, or Transposition of
words is not only possible, but very frequent in the Greek Language, whereof he
gives examples, and one out of Theoderet. (...). That is. The body of our Lord
of the nature. In lieu of saying. (...). id, est. The body of the nature of our
Lord.

20. The Cardinal maintain's the construction now given both as the more
elegant, and most agreeable to Theoderet's whole context, for many sound
reasons. Here is one taken from the Authors very next words. But they are
understood to be those things which they are made, and believed and adored. How
Adored? As they are truly believed: That is, as containing the true body and
The reason why he read's so.
blood of Christ. For were this not really so, Christ could not be adored. For
as none can adore one that merely takes upon him the Majesty of a King, who is
not; with an Adoration due to that Majesty, so none can honor or adore Christ
in the Eucharist with an honor due to Christ, when truly and really he is not
present, but says Theoderet Christ is to be really adored in the Eucharist,
and Consequently he is really present there.

21. For the rest I remit the Reader to C. Perron who in the following Chapters
dissolues, and most clearly, what ever can be objected against his Doctrine. To
end this point, be pleased to reflect upon this one particular. Had Theoderet
said. The Symbols remain in their first essence, figure, and form, and included
in that very speech, as our Adversaries will have the One reflection more.
very substance of bread, He had spoken most improperly which ill beseem's so
learned an Author, for upon this supposition he speak's as incongruously as if
one should say. Peter this very hour who is himself both Soul and body,
remain's in him self, that is, The Cardinals reading clear's all.
in his Soul and body. But if you read with the Cardinal Thus. Car ils
demeurent, and en lae form, and en la sigure de la premiere substance. They
remain and in the form, and in the figure, of the first substance of bread
(before Consecration really formed and figured by them) the Construction is
good, the sense most clear, perfect, and without exception.

22. Thus much I have noted to satisfy the Gentleman, and hope never to hear
Theoderet objected hereafter against Transubstantiation. If I do, I shall say
an old observation of mine always proves true, and it is, That the best
Arguments of Sectaries, Printed and reprinted in their little books, are like
old threadbare garments quite out of fashion cast off and rejected, I mean,
answered over and over by Catholic Authors, yet Brusht up, must appear as new.
And this, less blamable, may pass (for they can do no better,) but methinks it
is intolerable, that they bring again to light such worn-out stuff, as you see
now done in this particular, and dare not inform the Reader, how often it has
been torn a pieces. Yet the worst of all remain's; Viz. That they build their
faith upon sand, one dubious Authority of a Father (if yet dubious) supports
it, and seems to these new spirits ground enough, to foment Schism, to
maintain a rebellion against as ancient Church, which never believed as they do.

CHAP. XII.
A Digression concerning the Real Presence. The Fathers plainly assert it.
Sectaries glosses frivolous. The agreement of the Church and Fathers make a
Doctrine indubitable. The Catholick's certain Principle. A word with Mr:
Stillingfleet

1. BEfore we produce these Testimonies and lay open Mr: Stillingfleet's
Mistakes, turn I beseech you to his Account of Protestancy. Part. 3. c. 3.
page. 567. Where he treat's of Transubstantiation and calls it an unreasonable
Doctrine because repugnant to sense and reason also. It seems contrary to
sense, for sense tells us, what we see and taste is bread after consecration;
and reason upon that sensible suggestion, ought to conclude, it still remains
substantially bread. Observe I beseech you, how the Gentleman to maintain his
proofs drawn from sense, is not only forced to reject the plain sense of
Christ's words according to the letter. ( This is my body which is given for
you: This is the Chalice of the new Testament, which is, or shall be shed for
you) But more Mr Stilling: quarrel's with all Christians, except a ferr
Protestants.
over, how he is thrown into a desperate quarrel wherein he will never come off
hansomly; For, he is engaged to make not only the Professors of the Roman and
Greek Church, who indubitably believe the Real presence, more than stupid
(because opposite to that he call's sense and reason) but besides, He contrast's
with a far greater moral body of Christians; I may rightly style it the
Representative of all named Christians in the world, excepting a few
Protestants. I Will show you how. At this day there are in that famous Temple of
Jerusalem dedicated to the Holy Cross (called the Church of the Sepulcre)
Catholics, Graecians, Abyssins (those most ancient Christians) Syrians,
Maronits, Georgians, and others. All have their Altars in one and the same
Church, and all (though different in some Doctrinal points, and Ceremonies)
unanimously believe a true unbloody Sacrifice, and with it the real presence of
Christ, after Consecration. No modern sectaries have place here witness
Prince Radziuill in his Ierosoly Peregrin. Antwerpe Print 1614. Page 109. Nay,
they are so meanly thought of, that when the Prince named Lutherans, Zwinglians
etc. The party he conuersed with, demanded whether they were Christians. What
Christians said he? and have no Priest, no Altar no sacrifice offerred up to
god in this sacred place, where Christ wrought our redemption? you may see more
hereof in the following page of this Author. In the mean while shall any say
that a Representative, of so many Christians are to be deemed fools upon this
account that they contradict sense and reason? It is so vast a Paradox, that
though Mr: Stillings: should write volumes on this subject, He would never
speak a probable word against such a cloud of witnesses. You may add hereunto
if you please, those many Christians converted to our The Chinese difficulty.
Catholic Faith in that vast Kingdom of China (a People, the whole world
knows most ingenious) All of them, as I have heard from two worthy men, a long
time Missioners there (the one is yet living) who reclaimed many from their
errors, raise most difficulties before their conversion against that one
Mystery of our Faith, the Incarnation of the Divine word, but after
satisfaction received in this particular, they submit easily to the belief of
other Catholic verities, and never Scruple in the least at the Mystery of the
Eucharist, as a Doctrine Contrary to sense and reason. And they proceed most
rationally, for in real truth, there are incomparably Most Concern's the
Incornation.
greater difficulties in this one Mystery of the Incarnation, to say nothing of
the Trinity, (might weak reason decide the case) than in the other. What? That
God who is essentially immutable becomes man by a union betwixt the Divine word
and humane nature, which union touches so intrinsecally on that Divine Person,
that we must truly say, This word is now intrinsecally affected otherwise then
he was before; and to conceive all this done without a real change (may the
Common notion of mutation stand. Mutari est rem aliter se habere) is a
difficulty so great, (say good Diuins) that it has racked many a strong wit,
and yet can scarce be well solued. Vtramque enim Substantiam in vnam conuenisse
personam. etc. (They are words of S. Leo Sermo. 9. de Natiu. Dmi) nisi fides
credat, sermo non explicat. That is the Mystery is very abstruse. I verily
believe Mr Stilling: Metaphysick will not reach so high as to give fall
satisfaction herein, though he is pleased to plead evidence drawn from sense
and reason against the B. Sacrament, as if forsooth, the full portion of both,
were like a legacy Mr stillingfleet argues Improbably.
bequeathed him and a few Sectaries, whilst so many Fathers, so many Schoolmen,
so many profound Doctors of our renowned Church, must have no small share
allowed in either, but are as you see censured like men senseless, and
unreasonable

2. Say, I beseech you. Who can persuade himself that those three worthy
eminent Cardinals, Bellarmin, Perron, and Richelieu (all have writ on this
subject, and are famous the whole world over for their great wisdom and
learning) who dare, I say, without a measureless audacity, cast these (could we
urge no more) into the Catalogue of dull, sensles, and unreasonable men? None
would have ventured on such a vast improbability but one who either knows not,
or cares not what he says. Now add to these the consent and acknowledgment of
the whole Orthodox world, you may justly say, it is much harder; or there is
more violence offered to man's understanding in conceiving, that God who is
essential Verity (and therefore inclined to preserve the Church he founded in
truth) should permit all those millions of Christians who have believed the
Real presence, to be so long deceived in their Faith; than to submit upon so
great authority, to the very mystery we believe. Reason more racked, by
denying, then believing the Mystery.
For by submitting to the mystery, we proceed rationally, and prudently judge,
that an infinite power can do more than our weak capacities reach unto; but if
we say, his Goodness has permitted the Church to be seduced by a gross error
age after age, or that so many Christians have been cheated into a false belief
of so high a Mystery; we force our understandings more, we clash with an
evident Principle, and must assert, that God has no care of his Church, or of
man's salvation. The blame therefore if we be in error, would at last redound
to God, as I shall amply prove in the next Discourse.

3. Thus much noted, Let us look a little into the strength of Mr Stillingf:
weak argument, which must run thus. What I see seems, or is bread to the Eye
and taste, yet it is not bread but Christ's sacred body, therefore the Mystery is
contrary to sense. One distinction overthrows this lame discourse. I answer in
a word. What I see seems, or is the inward substance of bread, I deny it, What
I see seems, yea really is, the outward accidents or species of bread, I grant
that. Therefore the Mystery is contrary to sense, I deny the consequence. The
Argument purely fallacious supposes Our Adversaries fallacy, solued.
the immediate object of our sense to be the inward substance of bread, which
yet as every Puny knows is not so in common Philosophy, for the immediate
object of the Eye is color or light, and so much remain's after consecration,
as well as other accidents do, but these sensible objects are in known
Philosophy distinct from the inward substance of bread, which is not immediately
visible, tangible, or tastable. Mr Stilling: therefore gain's little by this
dreaming way of arguing. Now a word to his plea of Reason.

4. He may say. Reason tell's me there is bread still after consecration. Why
so? surely the answer must be, because sense upon the discovery of its
immediate objects, color, quantity etc. induces reason to conclude there is
bread under these accidents. I answer. Reason thus far would well conclude,
were it not that a stronger Principle enters here, which ouerawes (as it were)
weak reason and bids it yield. Pray you tell me. Did not sense and reason also,
assure Christ's Disciples Matthew: 14. before S. Peter was seen walking on the
water, that, that liquid substance could not bear up a weighty body without
sinking? yes most assuredly: yet they saw him walk, and reason following the
guidance of their eyes checked that other natural discourse, and acknowledged a
Miracle. And thus weak reason must yield in the present Mystery when a Strong
Principles where upon our Faith relies.
stronger Principle interuen's, and forces it to submit. Thanks be to God.
Habemus firmiorem propheticum sermonem. 1. Petr. 2. we have yet a stronger
Principle to up hold our cause than weak discourse is, The spirit of eternal
truth. The express words of Christ which the wit of man shall never draw to any
other sense, but what we Catholics own. 2. The constant professed Doctrine of
the two Churches, Greek and Latin, yea, and I say more, of all other called
Christians, as is now declared. 3. Might we here introduce the known
Testimonies of most ancient Fathers, They are so numerous, and so fully
significant, that would a Catholic study to set down the truth of this
Doctrine, he cannot do it in clearer language.

5. Good God says S. Chrysostom. lib. 3. de Sacerd: Cap. 4. What a wonderful
miracle is this? how great is Gods love toward mankind? Behold who sitreth
above with his Father, in one and the same moment of time is touched by the
hands of us all, and gives himself to such as are desirous to receive and
embrace him. Theophilact c. 4. in 26. Matthew. Bread is transelemented or
transformed by an ineffable operation, The ancient Fathers speak in our behalf.
although to us it seems bread. Because we are weak and have horror to eat
raw flesh, especially the flesh of man, for this reason bread appears, but in
the essence and substance it is not bread. Again, Christ said not, this is a
figure, but this is my body, for by an ineffable operation, bread is changed
etc. Indeed it appears Bread, but it is really flesh. Yet more. How often do
the Fathers, S. Cyril of Jerusalem, S. Chrysostom and others exhort us not to
come unto the Eucharist as unto simple bread and wine, for say they, it is the
body and blood of Christ according to our Lords affirmation. Although sense
suggest the Contrary, yet let faith confirm thee. Judge not of the thing by thy
taste etc. Again. know this and with full certitude believe, that the bread seen
is not bread, though it seems so to the taste, but the body of Christ, and that
wine seen is not wine, though taste judge it to be wine, but the blood of
Christ. Though, says S. Chrysostom, what we see, seems to our sense and
thinking to be bread, Let Gods saying (This is my body) Master our sense and
reason. Let us do this in all things especially in the Mysteries, not
regarding alone the things, which lie before us, but holding fast to his words,
For by his words we cannot be-cousened, our senses may be deceived, his words
cannot be untrue, our sense is often time beguiled etc. Thus these Fathers
known to every one (to omit in numerable others) speak and believe, thus the
Church of Christ speaks and belieues also, and both as you see, stand opposite
to Mr Stilling: weak plea drawn from Sense and Reason.

6. I might yet cite S. Chrysostom. In. 1. Cor: hom: 24. Other Authorities.
Chrisostom. Pachasius Damascan.
who says. The kingly body in heaven, is set before us on earth. We touch it,
and do not only touch it, but eat it. This body, the barbarous Magi after a
long journey adored with fear and trembling. Thou (add's the Saint) See him
not now in the manger, but on the Altar, not held in a woman's arms, but by a
Priest present etc. Therefore in his Oration of S. Perhilg: he explain's
himself further. Truly, this table supplies the place of the manger, for here
also is our Lords body laid. Paschasius a latin author, who lived about the
year 800. is so express for the real Presence and Transubstantiation in his
book De Corp. and Sanguine Dm'i. that the Centurist's Cent. 9. C. 4. Col. 215.
Praetorius de Sacramen: Page: 288. and other Sectaries, charge him with the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation and oral eating of Christ's body. No less plain
and express is S. John Damascen. lib. 4. Ortho. Fid.: whose discourse on this
subject though long, is most significant. As bread, says he, naturally meat,
and wine, and water by drink* are changed into the body and blood of him that
eats and drink's. So this bread proposed, the wine and water also by the
invocation and coming of the Holy Ghost, are in a miraculous manner converted
into Christ's body and blood, neither are they two, but one, and the same. Our
Lord himself has said. This is not a sign of my body, but my body. This is not
a sign of my blood, but my blood. Hence Praetorius now cited P. 288. reiects
the Doctrine, and call's this miraculous Transubstantiation held by S. John
Damascen slight and fabulous, sodo other Sectaries with him also.

7. There are yet more ancient authorities most pressing to our purpose, were
it not Actum agere to say again what has been so often The Testimony of S.
Ignatius Martyr, clear.
noted. First the Testimony of S. Ignatius Martyr who lived with our Savior
and was Scholar to S. John, seems to me unanswerable. Epist. ad Smirnen: not
far from the beginning. They, says he (that is certain Sacramentarians) admit
not Eucharists, and oblations, because they do not Confess the Eucharist to be
the flesh of our Savior Jesus Christ, which flesh suffered for our sins, and
his Father graciously raised from the dead. So Theoderet, 12. ages since. Tom.
4. Dialogo. 3. reads. And Iaac Vossius who follows the Florentine Copy,
differs little, or rather nothing at all. None can reasonably call the Epistle
into doubt which Vossius places before the other Epistles and the sense as you
see is most clear.

8. The second authority as pregnant, is taken out of S. Justin Martyr in his
Apology for Christians, usually called the 2. S. Iustin's also most significant.
Apology, Paris print 1615. Toward the end at those words. (...). etc. For we
take not this Eucharist as common bread and common drink, but as Jesus Christ
our Savior by the word of God was made flesh, and haed for our salvation flesh
and blood; so also after the same manner, we are taught, that the food which by
the prayer of the word is by him consecrated with thanksgiving, of which food
our flesh and blood are by transmutation nourished, is the flesh and blood of
that Jesus Christ which was Incarnate. And for proof hereof, he allegeth
Christ's own words. This is my body. This is my blood. Thus S. Justin speak's
who lived not long after the Apostles about the year 150. and nothing can be
more express in behalf of Catholic Doctrine. I know some Sectaries Cauil at the
expression. (...). by transmutation, The sectaries Cauil, answered.
and think Justin held the Eucharist to be food for the body, but his sense is
clear, for he says only, That the same food which nourishes our bodies by real
transmutation, is made after consecration the very body of Christ, and
therefore Gaspar Laurentius a learned Caluinist in his Orthodoxus Consensus.
Page: 368. translates Iustins S. Iustin's true sense.
words out of the Greek thus. Sumimus autem hunc panem and hunc potum non vt
Communem, sed eo modo quo edocti sumus, Iesum Christum seruatorem nostrum,
habuisse pro salute nostra, carnem and sanguinem: sic etiam cibum illum ex quo
nostra Caro and sanguis aluntur, post benedictionem ipsius, esse carnem and
sanguinem Domini. That is in plain English. The bread or food which naturally
nourishes our bodies is by virtue of Consecration made the sacred body of our
Incarnate Savior. Conformable hereunto, Gelenius also quoted in the
Annotations upon S. Irenaeus aduersus Haereses lib. 4. C. 24. n. 26. renders S.
Iustins words. Sic per verbum precationis and gratiarum actionis, sacratam ab
ipso alimoniam, quae mutata, nutrit nostras carnes and sanguinem, Illius
Incarnati Jesus carnem and sanguinem esse didicimus. The Interpreter also I
follow, significantly renders the same sense. Alimoniam, vnde etc. The food
from whence, from which, or where with, we are nourished, this very aliment is
by Consecration made the body of our Incarnate Jesus. Well, but admit that
Iustine call's the Eucharist nourishment to our bodies, How some Fathers call
the Eucharist Nourishment to the body.
he makes it not therefore Corporal food, but Spiritual, which nourishes them
to a joyful resurrection or to immortality, and thus the other Fathers, chiefly
S. Irenaeus now cited c. 24. versus finem speaks. Quomodo, says he, rursus
dicunt etc? How do these Heretics plead again, that our flesh shall come to
corruption, and not take life from the body and blood of our Lord, where with
it is nourished? Again. Sic and corpora nostra etc. and thus our bodies
receiving the Eucharist, are not corruptible, having hope of a joyful
resurrection. But enough of these authorities. Whoeuer desires more may peruse
Cardinal Perron in his. 2. book of the Holy Eucharist. Out of what is said
already, I argue.

9. Either the now quoted Fathers and the Church also, have most impiously
betrayed Christ's cause in delivering false Doctrine contrary to sense and
reason, or worthily defended a Christian verity; Grant this second, we have our
intent. But if Sectaries say these Fathers cheated the world into a false
belief, and impiously erred in their expressions: Ponder first, what a frontles
impudence accompanies the reply. Next make this true inference. It is
impossible, that such a supposed universal error should ever be rased out of A
Conuincing Argument.
the minds of men, by the force of any thing which has the likelihood of a
received Principle. For, what proofs or undoubted Principles can possibly
outweigh the express words of Scripture, our Tradition, the sentiment of the
Church, and the judgment of the Fathers which Sectaries Cannot answer.
now alleged? Therefore if we be in error, the wit of man cannot vnbeguile us
upon rational proofs and Principles. And here I urge Mr Silling: to bring to
light his contrary Principles as full and significant (that is, Scripture as
clear, Fathers as clear, Tradition as clear, the Judgment of some owned
Orthodox Church as clear and undoubted) for the opinion he hold's, as we now
allege in the defense of our Catholic verity, Believe it, if he suppose, as he
certainly does, the Church to have erred so grossly for a thousand years, The
Fathers to have beguiled the world with their mistaken and most improper
expressions on this subject, when they meant no such thing; He ought to fasten
upon sound Principles indeed before we yield; and must not think to overthrow
What sectaries are obliged to.
our Doctrine or foil us, with a few gleanings picked here and there out of
antiquity, set forth with a hundred false and fancied glosses. Volumes may be
filled with such slight stuff, which comes no nearer to Principles, than
improbability to Evidence. Will you hear in passing one of his improbabilities?
If a man, says he. P. 567. may be bound to believe that to be false which
sense judges to be true (he means which weak reason upon the discovery of sense
judges true, for our outward senses make no judgment) What assurance can be
had of any Miracles wrought to confirm the Christian Doctrine? A word to our
Adversaries strange demand.
Or what assurance had the Apostles of Christ's resurrection, if their sight
might be deceived about its proper object etc? I am astonished to read this,
and answer briefly. Christ's Resurrection, (the like I say of Miracles) was
most undoubted upon the discovery which sense and reason made in the presence
of such objects, because no contrary Principle, so much as weakly, stood
against that evidence, and therefore reason could no more doubt of what was
objected to sense, then I now doubt of writing these lines. But all is contrary
in the present Mystery. For here the unanswerable words of Scripture, the
Authority of my Church, the Clear Testimonies of Fathers, the voice and vote of
Christianity force submissions on me to believe the Divine Revelation, which is
either certainly known upon these grounds, or we boldly say, no Christian
verity was ever yet known upon any sure Principle. What, if sectaries deny
Church authority and explicate the Fathers?


10. Perhaps Mr Stilling: may roundly grant, that the Greek and Latin Church
erred in this Doctrine of the real presence for many ages, and consequently that
innumerable learned Doctors have not only been besotted them selves, but
moreover have basely drawn millions of Christians into a damnable heresy of
believing that to be Christ's body, which really is not: Howeuer, he will honor
the Fathers so far, as to afford them the favor of his glosses. Contra 1. If
the Church and all Christians erred so vast a time in professing this Doctrine,
Mr Stilling: is obliged to name some Churh reputed Orthodox. 3. or 4. hundred
years past (for then there was a true Church in the world) which held his
opinion, or as expressly denied the real Presence, as our Church, both then, and
now mantains it, and this will cost him more pains than to writ an other
Account of Protestancy, for I am sure there was never any such Church on earth.
Contra. 2. If He interpret's the The Church and Fathers speak alike of this
Mystery.
Fathers, He may as well interpret our Church Doctrine, and make all believe,
that we Catholics hold not yet the real presence. Observe the same language in
all. That which in seen is not bread, though it seems so to the taste, But the
body of Christ. Our sense may be deceived, Gods word cannot deceive us. The
bread indeed ^ made the flesh of Christ, and the wine his blood etc. Thus the
Fathers deliver their sense. and it is the Churches language also. If therefore
Mr Stilling: can so gloss these words of the Fathers, as to make them speak
Protestancy, or not to deliver our Catholic Doctrine, I should not wonder, if
in the next book set forth he adventures to draw the very Definitions of the
Council of Trent to his Protestant opinion of no real presence. If he did so, I
am sure his attempt would prove as vnsuccesful in the one case, ^ in the other.

11. Well. But permit him to interpret the Fathers, and to fall foul as he is
wont to do, upon our supposed Church errors; what is the utmost that follows?
Thus much only. Mere talk without Principles. For I ask upon what Principle may
I or any know, that his glosses (which strive to dead the very, obuious sense
of the Fathers plain words) implie not altogether as little satisfaction, as
little assurance, as the very Doctrine does which he would defend by it? If so
(and so it is most evidently) as his Doctrine before his glosses was improbable
to the rest of Christians, so his interpretations go no higher, but are every
whit as improbable.

12. I must therefore tell Mr Stilling: that unless his explanation Sectaries
glosses vnprincipled, worth Nothing.
of Scripture and Fathers rely on a certain Principle disti^ct from, and
extrinsick to his glosses, they are worth nothing. For what auail's it me to
read his glosses, when no received Principle up* hold's them but fancy? Reflect
a little. I read in Scripture* This is my body. My Church tell's me the literal
sense is true. The Fathers as you have heard, and the Tradition of two Churche^
confirm this sense: Now comes Mr Stillingfleet and first reiect's my Churches
authority, then begins to strain the Fathers Testimonies with his glosses.
Stay, Sr, say I. I except against your glosses, and justly ask whether they are
true or Counterfeit Coyn^ If true, they stand upon Principles now briefly
hinted at. Prove this and I Will reverence your glosses, but if you fail (and
fail you must) your Doctrine and glosses are both alike Counterfeit, and
thoughts of fancy only.

13. He may reply. When Protestants cite, the Fathers against the Real
presence, For example, That of S. Austin, or Theoderet mentioned above, we
Catholics explicate them, and now (which seems foul play) we except against
his Glosses, For, If we interpret, An Objection.
why may not He do so also? A word only in passing conformable to what is
noted above. If to decide this one Controversy of Christ's Real Presence,
recourse be had to the Fathers, and the two adverse Parties do no more but load
such Testimonies as are alleged with their private interpretations, the Dispute
will never be ended, Because private glosses leave the two Dissenters as much
at iarrs as they were before: God therefore, as I have often said, affords an
easier means to know his revealed Truths. Now my Answer to the objection is.
The Catholic then only blames the Protestant's wilful interpretation, when it
sham fully out-faces, the clear words of a Father, and when the Glosser has no
vndubitable Principle distinct from his gloss whereon to settle his Doctrine, as
he has not in our present Controversy. Observe well. The Fathers say, What we
see is not bread, but Christ's very body. The Sectary interpret's. That we see
is not common bread indeed, but Christ's body Figuratively or Sacramentally. The
Fathers say, it is not figuratively only, but really his body. So Theophilact
Answered, and the reason given.
and S. John Damascen cited above. Had the Sectary who interpret's thus, an
undoubted Revelation for his Gloss, delivered by any Oracle of Truth,
Scripture, Traditions or Orthodox Church, there would be good reason to give
him hearing, But when we evidently see, that the best and only proof of his
Doctrine is no more, but the very gloss he makes, without Further Principles, we
justly except against him, and hold such glosses improbable.

14. Now all is contrary with the Catholic who never interpret's any Authority
but when it is dubious, and if it be so, it neither help's the Sectary, nor
hurts the Catholic, and therefore ought In reason to be cast aside as either
impertinent, or as weak and forcelesse in all disputes of Controversies. The
fundamental Christ's Doctrine not proved by glosses, or any ambiguous Testimony.
Reason already hinted at, is. The true Doctrine of Christ, is not proved by
Glosses or any doubtful Testimony, but stand's most firm upon known and
indubitable Principles (or, if in order to Christians it want's such supports,
it cannot pass for Christ's Doctrine). An ambiguous Testimony therefore which
seemingly opposes this true Doctrine Certainly Principled, is most impertinently
alleged against any Tenet of our known and owned Catholic Faith.

15. Upon this one sole ground now clearly laid forth, I confidently Affirm,
all Controversies in Religion might be easily ended, would Sectaries please to
lay Prejudice aside, and follow manifest reason. I Will show you how. Write down
first the two contrary Tenants of Catholics and Protestants. Christ is really
and substantially present in the Eucharist. Christ is not really and
substantially present. Next examine well the Principles whereon these Contrary
Doctrins rely or are supposed to rely. The Catholic urges first, Christ's
plain words. 2. The Authority of his Church and says, his Churches Doctrine is
the very same that Christ words literally taken, express. 3. He ponder's the
clear Testimonies of The Catholic Principles:
Fathers, and discourses thus. When I find the most significant expressions of
Fathers consonant to our Sauiour's plain words, and to the owned Doctrine of my
Church, I must assuredly rest on these, as indubitable grounds, or Confess,
that There neither is or was ever any Principle for the soundest Article of
Christian Faith. Examine next the Sectaries Principles. Has He any words in
Scripture as clear as mine, or to this sense? This is not my body, b^ a Sign
only of it? Evidently No. Has he any Church esteemed Orthodox by the Christian
world, which without Controversy taught this Doctrine of a sign only three or 4.
ages since? Name Sectaries have none such.
such a Church, He will speak's to the purpose. Has he Fathers so numerous, so
express and clear, for his Sign and figure only, as the few Testimonies now
alleged are in behalf of Catholic Doctrine? If he have let him please to
produce them. I Will do no more but lay my Testimonies by them, and if after the
perusal, or a just Parallel made of both, All the world judges not those I
quote, to be most conuincing (may the literal sense stand) and his both dark
and ambiguous, I will undergo any Censure. You have heard how loud and express
the Testimonies briefly hinted at, and innumerable more are for our Catholic
Verity. I challenge Mr Stilling: to Confront them with others as openly
significant for his opinion. I verily think he will never go about to do what
is desired, but fob us off with killing flies, and no man knows what.

16. In the interim I Argue. I am either obliged to renounce An Argument drawn
from our Catholic Principles.
the obuious sense of these Authorities which I see evidently Consonant to the
words of Scripture, and to the Doctrine of my Church; or, by force of these
Proofs am still to believe as I do. Grant this second, I stand on secure
ground: But, if I am obliged to renounce the obuious sense of Christ's words, my
Church Doctrine, and the expressions of these Fathers etc. Our Adversaries are
bound, if a spark of Charity lives in their Hearts, to plead by stronger
Principles which may settle me in an absolute Renuntiation of my Doctrine, and
withdraw me from the supposed error I live in. Is not this justice and Charity
think ye? And is not the Compliance most easy? For, if their Doctrine be
Christ's Doctrine, and mine not, Theirs stand's, as I now told you, upon clear
and indubitable Principles, And Principles of that nature are easily laid forth
to every ordinary understanding. Now I subsume: But it is evident, the Sectary
has no such conuincing Principles, which can oblige me to renounce the plain
literal sense of Christ's words and the Fathers already cited. And this I prove.
What ever Principle obliges me to renounce, or to deny the plain literal sense
of such words, must give assurance, that those expressions literally Why none
can remove me from our Catholic Tenet.
understood are dangerous, and apt to induce Christans into gross error, for
if literally taken, they do no mischief, or be not apt to induce into dangerous
error, why should I Deny their obuious sense, because Ptotestants will have me
do so? But there is no Principle so much as meanly probable, whereby these
expressions are proved false or inductiue into dangerous Error; for were this
really so, some Church or Author of Credit, would long since have noted their
over much vehemence, in sayng more then was true concerning this Mystery, which
none ever yet did. Therefore I may still and without Reproof hold where I am,
and adhere to their literal Doctrine, which my Church teaches.

17. Some may teply. Sectaries urge us not so crudely to reject the Fathers
Testimonies, as only to moderate or rectify their sense by the help of our
Modern men's glosses, which is a blamles proceeding, for we do so with Gelafius
and other Authors when they seemingly make against our Doctrine, and Protestants
do no more. Answ. Protestants do more, for their interpretations ever imply a
peremptory and absolute denial of that very literal sense which the Father
words express. For example S. Cyril says. Catech. Mystag. 4. He that changed
water into wine by his sole will, has also A reply of sectaries answered.
changed wine into blood. The expression inuolues a parity, and implies thus
much. That as water was really changed into wine at Cana in Galilee, so wine
was really and substantially changed into Christ's blood. Sectaries as
peremptorily deny this real and substantial change of wine into blood, as if
one should now deny the Real and substantial change of that water into wine.
Consequently they renounce both the parity, and open sense of the words, And,
(which is ever to be noted), wilfully do so, when they have nothing like a sure
Principle distinct from their gloss to ground their denial on. Contrariwise,
the Catholic in this debate denies no express sense of any Fathers Testimony,
but only makes Inquiry into the Signification of words, which are confessedly
dubious. Take here one instance Gelasius says. The substance or nature of
bread and wine cease not to be. First I make no account of this Gelasius,
Author of the book De duobus naturis Christi. Contra Eutich: He was not that
holy Pope so called, but rather Gelasins Cizicenus as Bellarmine notes de
Scriptoribus Eccl: Howeuer these two particles substance and nature may, ex
placito, indifferently signify either the inward substance or outward
Massinesse of bread and wine, for natural qualities which flow from an Essence,
have, or often sustain, as was noted above, the name of that Essence they come
from. Now the Catholic renounceth no obuious sense, but only contends that
Nature and substance may signify, as is most Of Gelasius. How much his
authority is worth.
usual, the outward corpulent forms of bread and wine which cease not to be,
And he gives this signification to these two words, because Scripture Church
and the Fathers, whereon his Doctrine irrefragably depends, forces him to it,
And he does well when it cannot be proved by any probable Principle that
Gelasius relates to the inward substance of bread and wine. Thus much may be
said, if that authority were worth any thing. Read, I beseech, you Brereley, In
his Lyturgy of the Mass cited above page: 259. you shall find there this
Authority most exactly examined, and that in very truth, this Gelasius who ever
he was, speaking against the Eutichians as Theoderet did, undeniably defends
our Catholic Doctrine of the Real presence and Transubstantiation also. Open
the book and read, you will be satisfied. I cannot dwell longer on these long
since defeated Objections.

18. There is yet an other Reply. Sectaries may say, we suppose all this while
Scripture and Fathers clear for our Catholic Doctrine. The Supposition is
denied, because they quote (it is true not many) but some Fathers and Scripture
also, to countenance their new opinion. By the way here is occasion again, to
reflect on what is often noted. viz. We quote Scripture and Fathers, and they
explicate all; They cite also; and we do the like; and if nothing but a Return
of explications thus pass from one to the other, we are as much iarring as we
were before, without hope of ending Controversies this way. Now my Answer to
the first part of the Objection is. We Catholics suppose nothing, but only The
answer to an other reply.
take the very words of Scripture and Fathers in a literal sense, and say their
expressions are exactly conformable to the Doctrine of the Roman Catholic
Church, which was never censured by any Orthodox society of Christians. Upon
these Principles therefore, Scripture, Church, and Fathers we stand immovable.
To that which follows I Answer. Sectaries have not one syllable of Scripture
in favor of their Nouelty (and to omit a rehearsal of those triuial Arguments
drawn from certain passages, where they conceive the Sacrament is called bread
the fruit of the vine etc.) I convince my Assertion by the positive ground
abready established, which none shall overthrow. If this be the true sense of
Scripture, when An Argument which Sectaries Cannot solue.
it speaks of the Blessed Sacrament. Christ who is above in heaven is not
really present on the Altar, but in his sign only, Or, that the bread after
Consecration is really what it was before natural bread, only deputed to a holy
use; If this, I say, be the true sense of Gods word, Christ's Orthodox Church
expressly delivered it to Christians as the true meaning of the Holy Ghost some
few ages before Luthers Revolt, for then their was an Orthodox Church on earth:
But no Orthodox Church then taught so, or sensed Scripture as Sectaries do now,
Therefore unless that Church was ignorant and knew not the meaning of
Scripture, or Malicious, and concealed it from Christians, our Sectaries sense
is not Scripture. To confirm this Reason. All know, that the Roman Catholic
Church then, as well as now, absolutely renounced the sense which Sectaries
force out of Scripture, and for that cause was not (say they) Orthodox in this
particular Doctrine, but no other Church confessedly Orthodox, taught it at that
time, Therefore, it was not thought the Scriptures true meaning. All I would
say is briefly laid forth thus.

19. The true Church of Christ's ever delivers the true sense of Scripture at
least in weighty and fundamental Matters, so much Protestants grant, But, No
true Church delivered this their sense three or four ages before Luthers
revolt, Ergo it was not the true meaning of the Holy Ghost, but a whimsy lately
invented. This Argument I hold demonstratiue. You will perhaps ask, What is
that these men can pretend to, having neither Scripture nor Orthodox Church to
rely on? I Will tell you in a word. They allege How Sectaries endeavor te solue
it.
first two or three weak and ambiguous Sentences of Fathers, which the
Catholic admit's, not in the sense of Nouellists, yet according to the clear
plain and obuious signification of words, as is now declared, and He prudently
gives this signification to ambiguous words, because the Doctrine he owns
stand's firm upon other indubitable Principles, Scripture, Church, and Fathers.
The Sectary evidently wants such Principles, and therefore vapors as well as he
can with a few most weak and vnconcluding Authorities. The next thing relied
on, is much worse and purely nothing but fancy. He reads Scripture and those
evident Testimonies of Fathers (as manifest for our Church Doctrine as it is
clear that the Church teaches it) and these, forsooth, he endeauours to obscure
by a number of his own improbable glosses, without the least shadow of any
distinct Principle, which gives so much as a Color to his fancied
interpretations. You shall see this truth most manifestly proved in the ensuing
Chapter.

CHAP. XIII.
Mr: Stillingfleet grossly abuses the Fathers that assert the Real Presence.
His vnprincipled glosses are not only dubious and therefore worth nothing, but
moreover highly improbable.

1. THough I am very loath to spend time on trifles and as unwilling to catch
flies, as Mr Stilling: is to kill them, (It Is his own phrase) yet I must do so
in some measure, or permit a number of foul improbabilities to pass
unexamined, which are laid forth in a pretended Rational account of
Protestancy. I shall only entertain you with a few of the Grosser sort, wauing
many of lesser moment, and I do thus much to defend a Christian Verity which
my very Soul Adores, For I am well assured, If our belief of Christ's real
Presence in the Eucharist be an error, Christ and his Church and innumerable
Fathers also, have deceived us.

2. One Authority alleged against Mr. Stillingfleet, you have in his own page
568. And it is a known passage of S. Cyprian de Caena Dmi, or of some other
Author not much inferior to him, if we believe Mr Fulk against the Rhem's
Testament. In 1. Cor. 11. and Erasmus his Annotations upon S. Cyprian, Basil
print anno S. Cyprians Authority, examined.
1558. fol. 287. Mr Stilling: contend's it is of a later Date, yet is pleased
by an Addition of his glosses to vnsense the words as well as he can, and at
last make them to speak Protestancy.

3. The Authors words are These. This common bread changed into flesh and blood
gives life. The bread which our lord gave to his Disciples being Changed. Non
effigy sed natura, not in outward form or semblance, but in its inward nature
or substance, by the Omnipotency of the word, is made flesh.

4. Mr Stilling: Asserts all this proves not Transubstantiation, first, because
the Author Says Christ's words. Unless ye eat the flesh Mr stillingfleets
reasoning, not solid.
and drink the blood of the son of God, you shall have no life in you, are not
to be understood after a Carnal sense. Answ: That Is true, yet your Inference,
Sir, is most improbable. The Principle you must rely on, is. None are to think
as the Capharnits did, witness S. Austin, that they were to cut into pieces
Christ's Sacred flesh, and eat that as we do Common meats, And your inference
ill deduced run's thus. Therefore the inward substance of bread is not changed
into his body. This inference, I say, is null, for both these are eternal
truths and well consist together. Bread is changed into Christ's body, yet we
neither cut that body a pieces or eat it, as the Capharnits grossly imagined.

5. He argues again and more improbably. This Author (says he) by the effects
attributed to the Sacrament, calling it His second Argument, more slight.
food which nourished to immortallity, cannot possibly be conceived to speak if
Christ's Corporal presence, because we Catholics confess Christ's body remain's
no longer in our body, then the Accidents of bread and wine are there. I verily
think the man was busied with other thoughts when he wrote these lines. For what
sense have we here? Christ's Sacred body really present gives grace and is no
longer present then the Accidents of bread and wine remain, Ergo, bread and
wine are not Really changed into his body. This I say is a most improbable
inference. For the effects of the Sacrament which imply the production of
Grace, may and must stand with Christ's real Presence, though that production
of grace Sacramentally given, last's no longer then his Blessed body is under
the forms of bread and wine.

6. But an other doughty Argument is drawn out of S. Cyprian's words, which Mr.
Stilling: cites in his Margent. Sed immortalitatis alimonia datur a Communibus
cibis differens, corporalis substantiae retinens speciem, sed virtutis diuinae
inuisibili efficientia probans ad^sse presentiam. His third Argument proves
nothing.
And He unworthily renders them thus in English. That immortal Nourishment is
given us which differs from common food, that it retain's the Nature of a
Corporeal substance, but proving the presence of a Divine power by its
invisible efficiency. So that, says he, what presence of Divine power is
there, is showed in regard of the effects of it, not in regard of any
substantial change of the bread into the body of Christ. Sr, I utterly deny
your prooflesse, So That, and say your deduction is more then improbable. This
Author says expressly common bread changed into flesh, by the omnipotency of
the word gives life and immortal nourishment, which is Divine grace, and
therefore the Divine power appears in both, first in the substantial change of
bread into Christ's body, next in the effect, or production of grace in a worthy
Receiver, and you improbably conclude, it shows it self in regard of the
effects only.

7. Like one half guilty of iugling you go on. I know you will quarrel with me
for rendering Corporalis substantiae retinens speciem: By retaining the Nature
of a Corporeal substance. Answ: I do so indeed, and will prove you a cheat for
your pains. First, because you make this Author speak nonsense, for if
Corporalis substantiae The fallacy discovered.
retinens Speciem, may be Englished. By retaining the nature of a Corporeal
substance, you may as well render it by retaining the substance, of a corporeal
substance because nature and substance are here synomima's, And if this be
sense, we have a pretty Tautology or rather nonsense with it thus. It differ's
from Common food, yet retains the substance of Corporeal substance, or common
food, and in real truth is still natural bread or Common food. Whereas if we
read. It differ's from common food, yet retain's the outward forms or external
Accidents of a Corporeal substance or common food the sense is good, clear, and
open to every Reader. But we must go on. You contend that the word Species in
this place Signifies Nature or a solid body, and not the external Accidents
because Species an^nariae, Species largitionales, Curator Specierum, whereof we
read in the Civil law express the substance of things not the Accidents; and so
S. Ambrose must be understood, when speaking of our Saviors changing water
into wine, he faith. Vt rogatus ad nuptias aquae substan^^am in vini speciem
commutaret. Now no man will say, that he changed the substance of water into
the external Accidents of wine, but into the nature of wine, Therefore Species
may sometimes signify substance. Answ: All this is true, yet nothing to the
purpose, What the word Species signifies.
for can you or any man prove, because Species signisies sometimes kind, or
substance that it always does so? We read in Scripture. Daniel 13. Species
decepit te. Isa. 53. non est ei Species neque decor. Daniel 10. Species mea
immutata 1. Tim. 3. Habentes Speciem pietatis etc. Will you translate Nature or
substance has deceived thee? There was no nature or substance in Christ of
whom the Prophet speaks. My nature or substance is changed. Having piety in
nature or substance? All is ridiculous, and therefore though Species may
sometimes signify substance or kind, unless that signification hold
universally, these instances of Species annonariae and Species vini prove
nothing. You will ask perhaps, because the word is ambiguous, how we may know
whether in our present Controversy, Species, signifies shape, form, Accidents,
or substance* Answ: This rule is certain, when the word Species stand's in
opposition, or is distinguished from an invisible Nature or essence, it must of
necessity signify the external shape or form of a thing and not the substance:
So when the Apostle exhorts us. 1 Thessalonians. 5. The true signification in this
place, given.
22. Ab omni specie mala abstinete vos. The sense is. Abstain not only from
inward malice. but (and here mark the opposition) from all Show or semblance of
evil. And when S. Cyril says Orat 4. Mystag: under the Type or species of
bread is given the body of our Lord, he evidently distinguishes the Form or
shape of bread from its substance. And so S. Cyprian does in the words alleged.
Corporalis Substantiae retinens Speciem, retaining the exterior shape or form
of a Corporeal substance, and mote plainly thus. The bread being changed not in
its outward Form and semblance, but in it is inward nature and substance by the
Omnipotency of the word, is made flesh.

8. Mr Stilling: again page 570. in his Answer to S. Cyprian. This common bread
is changed into flesh and blood* says, we Protestants do not deny a
Sacramental change of the bread into the flesh and blood of Christ, but only
that substantial change which ye Papists assert. Pray you, Sr, tell me what is
the Terminus a quo, and the Terminus, ad quem, of this your mysterious change?
You acknowledge some thing Protestants cannot say, what is changed into Christ's
body.
changed into the flesh and blood of Christ? Is the substance of bread the
terminus a quo, or that which is changed into the flesh? No, it is too plain
Popery. Is bread made a Sacrament, or a Sign of Christ's body changed into the
flesh of Christ's? Evidently no, for neither the Sacrament, nor that which you
call a Sign of Christ's body is changed into flesh. Note well the Emphasis of
your own words, of something changed into the flesh of Christ and say on Gods
name what it is? You may reply, you speak only of a Mystical and Sacramental
change. That Is not to the purpose now, the Emphasis of your words point at
something created or increated, changed into the flesh and blood of Christ,
tell us plainly what that is, or in good earnest your expression fal's too
short of any intelligible sense?

9. In case you run on trifling with your Mystical and Sacramental change only,
made upon the accidents or substance of bread, the Author now cited positiuely
asserts more. viz. Panis non effigy sed natura mutatus. The bread which our
Lord gave to his Disciples being changed, not in Outward form, and appearance,
but in its inward nature and substance by the Omnipotency of the word is made
flesh, where it is plain your extrinsecal sacramental change passing only upon
the accidents of bread, or on the substance S Cyprian reiects the Protestants
extrinsec^l. Change.
(which you say remains) is excluded, and a Real Conversion of the inward
substance of bread is positiuely asserted by S. Cyprian. You Answer. Some great
Critics have assured you that the place is corrupted, and that the ancient
Manuscripts read otherwise. Non effigy nec natura mutatus, neither changed in
outward form nor substance. You see to what desperate shifts these men are
driven. It Is wonderful they cite not some great Critics for a Contrary lection
of Christ's words. Hoc non est corp^ meum This is not my body. Well. I say
first, if those nameless and unknown Critics err, and the Author speak sense
as we now read without the Critiscism. ( Non effigy sed natura mutatus, not
changed in outward form but in its nature) Transubstantiation is asserted, and
your contrary Doctrine is condemned. I say. 2. This Criticism is improbable, and
not only turn's the words out of sense into pure Nonsense, but moreover implies
an impossibility. I Will show you how. The Criticism will have us read thus: Pan^
iste quem Dominus Discipulis porrigebat non effigy nec natura mutat^
Omnipotentia verbi factus est Caro. This bread which our Lord gave to his
Disciples being changed neither in its outward form nor inward substance, is by
the Omnipotency of the word made flesh. Observe well. This bread remaining
bread in outward show and inward A Criticism exploded.
substance, is made the flesh of the Son of God. An utter impossibility. For no
more can bread remaining bread in shape and substance, be made flesh ( factus
est caro) than Lots wife remaining what She was flesh and blood in outward
form, and inward substance, be made a pillar of salt. The Omnipotent power of
God cannot change one substance remaining what it is, into an other. It Is true
Luther said Christ's body was really present with bread, but never thought of
making bread remaining bread, to be that other substance of Christ's body.

10. Mr Stillingfleet tell's us more. P. 572. that Substance and nature with
the Fathers (and we confess it) are not always taken properly but sometimes
more largely for Accidents. Why therefore may not these words. Sed natura
mutatus in S. Cyprians Context bear that improper sense? I Answer and ask
first. Why may they not also be taken properly? When they clearly deliver a
Doctrine conformable to a whole learned Church, and your contrary forced gloss
has no Principle to stand on but fancy? Had you any ancient Orthodox Church,
universal Tradition, or the plain consent of Fathers for what you assert, you
might speak more boldly, and I would then say S. Cyprians words are false, but
without such helps, to torture a Text as you do, to turn good sense into
nonsense and this without proof or Principle is more then intolerable. Now here
reflect a little on what has been often noted. You say, the words are improper
and render your sense. I say they are proper and significantly speak what the
Church teaches. Pray Answer. By what Principle shall you and I come to a
decision of this one difficulty? Hitherto, if nothing be added, we have no more
but our two contrary, iarring opinions. And are not Controversies, (may this
strain hold) made an endless work? To add more I Answer. 2. If this Author speak
sense. Not changed in its outward form but in nature. Your gloss is Nonsense.
Observe well. He speaks of The reason why we reject it.
bread held in a Priests hand, and says first. This bread is not changed in
its outward form or Accidents. Then he put's his Aduersatiue. Sed. but it is
changed in nature and substance If therefore Nature here, signifies as you
would have it, the outward form or accidents of bread, you must read the words
thus. Bread is not changed in its nature and Substance yet it is changed in
nature and substance, which is nonsense. I prove it. Nature and substance with
you import the exterior form or Accidents of bread, bread is not changed in
this exterior nature and substance, says the Author, yet you say it is
changed in this very nature and substance. Yet more. S. Cyprian asserts a
change in one thing, not in an other. I ask what is changed, and what is not
changed? If the exterior Accidents of bread, as contra distinguished from the
Sectaries cannot say what is here changed wat not.
interior substance be changed, this interior substance of bread, as
distinguished from accidents, is not changed, and if, (which is true), this
interior substance be changed, the form and accidents of bread are not
changed. Take which you please, and talk no more of your Accidental Sacramental
change made after consecration, For I ask again what is thus Sacramentally
changed? Are the outward Accidents only changed or made a Sacrament? Grant
this; and it follows you have but a very lean Lords supper consisting only of
a few Accidents after your wordy Consecration, which reaches not to the inward
substance of bread, Consequently this inward substance is not so much as
Sacramentally changed. For the Author says, one thing is here changed, and not
an other. Imagine therefore, He speak's of your extrinsick Sacramental change,
you will never force sense out of his words, whilst he lays a change on one
thing and excludes it from an other. For, if he says the inward substance of
bread is Sacramentally changed, he denies that to the outward accidents, and if
he say these Accidents are Sacramentally changed, he denies that Sacramental
change to the inward substance of bread. Let then nature and Substance signify
either the accidents or substance of bread as you please, let us also falsely
suppose, the Author speaks of your Sacramental change only, you can never make
sense of his words. One thing is changed, but not a^ other. By all now said you
see, Sir, how slight your objection A brief Answer to a weak objection.
is, when you Argue. Either nature and substance in the Fathers, are always
taken properly, or some times not so, but improperly for accidents; if always
properly, we have three Fathers (say you) against Transubstantiation. If
sometimes improperly, Nature in this place though we read, Non effigy sed
natura mutatus, may well signify not substance, but the outward form or
accidents of bread. I have now Answered, though Nature or Substance may
sometimes have that signification yet here it cannot, because of the evident
opposition betwixt that, and Accidents, and the inevitable nonsense which
follows if nature in this place signifies Accidents. But what a loss of time
is it to follow these vast improbabilities? I must make shorter work with the
ensuing Authorities.

11. The. 2. Testimony cited P. 572. is that of S. Gregory Nyss Tom. 3. Orati.
Catech C. 37. and stand's thus in Mr Stilling: With good reason do we believe
that the bread being sanctified by Gods word is changed into the body of the
word S. Gregory Nyssene abused.
of God. Again. The nature of the things we see being changed, Or
Transelemented into him etc. And Mr Stilling: Assert's those expressions are
utterly insignificant for Transubstantiation, for says he. We Protestants deny
not a change in the elements after Consecration, but say it is Sacramental, and
you (Papists) say it is a Substantial change. Answ. And we follow the Energy of
the plain grammatical sense. Bread is changed into the body of the word of God.
Bread is Transelemented, You insist only on an extrinsecal and Sacramental
change, which you admit in the water of Baptism cast upon an Infant, yet you
dare not say that water is Transelemented, or changed into an other Substance.
This to your Confusion S. Gregory assert's in our present Mystery, and you say
it still remain's to be proved that the substance of bread is changed. What
trifles are these? I prove it by the very words, thus. Bread is a substance,
the Saint tell's you into what it is changed, into the very body of the word of
God, Ergo he says one substance is changed into an other. Here is the proof.
You yet go on. The word (...), is frequently used by the Fathers and S.
Gregory himself for an Accidental change, when It Is not capable of any other
sense. So S. Gregory speaking of the shining of Moses face, says it was (...)
Instances impertinently applied.
a Change into that which was more glorious: Again, affirming, the souls of
men (...), to be changed into that which is more Divine by the Doctrine of
Christ, he can surely intend no other but an Accidental change. Answer. Had I
no more against Mr Stilling: but the manifest trifling I here See in a serious
matter, that alone might most justly displease. Pray, Sir, reflect. Does S.
Gregory by these Instances of Moses face changed into Glory, or by the Souls of
men changed into that which is Divine, so much as seemingly favor the mere
extrinsecal change which you ascribe to the Sacrament? Evidently No. For these
changes were Real and intrinsecal in their respective Subjects, And proved
impertinent.
Glory was really in Moses face, as light is now in the sun. This fained
Sacramental change in the Sacrament is only Moral, and extrinsecal, Therefore
such instances are to no purpose. For can you make this probable inference?
Moses face was intrinsecally changed as the air is when it receives light, ergo
we have the like intrinsecal Physical change in the Sacrament, when by your
Consecration bread is made an outward Sign only of Christ's body. Does that
bread really shine like the face of Moses? Or will any say when a Counter is
set for a Crown, as bread with you stand's for Christ's body, that it is
intrinsecally changed as Moses face was?

12. In a word the whole cheat is plain. You lay hold of the word Accidental
which is ambiguous, and may either signify a Real intrinsecal change made in
Subjects as is now declared, (and this with you has no place in the Sacrament)
or merely an extrinsecal accidental Denomination, whereby bread is made a Sign
or Sacrament, And this you own, which God knows, has no similitude with the
Real changes where of S. Gregory speaks. Could you make a right Parity you
should say; That, as Moses face was really changed by a glorious light, and a
Soul by Regeneration, so bread after consecration (made in trinsecally more
glorious) is really changed either in its accidents, or substance, or both; But
this you cannot pretend to. O, but it is made a Sacrament and now is what it
was not before. And you Sr, are made a Bachelour of Divinity and are not as you
were before, is your face, your substance, or Accidents so really changed in
you, that they appear intrinsecally more glorious to men and Angels? Well, but
perhaps the word (...) may be accommodated to a mere extrinsecal Accidental A
reply answered.
change, as when one of a common Citizen is made a Magistrate. Answ. Whether so
or no it imports little, for in the instances now alleged, and in this
Testimony of S. Gregory, such a signification has no place, where the Terminus
a quo, and, ad que^ (Bread is changed into Christ's body) are Real, not only
Moral; intrinsecal, not extrinsecal. Yet one word more. I wonder extremly with
what face you can cite Snares, as if he favored your late invented Accidental
mutation, for you say he affirms, these expressions of Fathers are more
accommodated to that. Sr. I have read this learned Author in the place you
quote. 3. part: Disp. 50. sect 3. and perused also his 4.th Section, where he
Snares abused.
treat's largely of the Conversion of bread into Christ's body, and expressly
mantain's a Real action necessary in this Conversion, and calls the change Real
and Substantial, and it must be called so, when the Terminus a quo, and ad quem
are, as they are in this Mystery, Real and Substantial: It Is true he cites
Divines who say, the Adduction of Christ's body under the forms of bread is
sufficient to verify a Real change (Bread ceasing to be, because of Christ's
body present) without a new action or production terminated upon that body, and
it is a probable opinion in Schools, but as remote from your Accidental
extrinsecal mutation as Heaven is from earth, and to as Little purpose as an
other wise question is, when you Ask whether those who are changed by
Regeneration A quaestion answered.
may* be said to be Transubstantiated by it? Frivolous. Sr. when the Terminus
ad quem in conuersions is substance, it bears properly the denomination of
Transubstantiation, or Transelementation; when its merely an Accident or
quality, as in Regeneration, the denomination follows the nature of the
quality produced, and is rightly called an intrinsecal accidental change, but
not Transubstantiation. Had you reflected on what is here said your pretty
Criticism where you torture a poor Greek word and learnedly examine whether
(...) in S. Gregory comes from the Noune (...) or from the verb (...) might
well have been spared. I give you your Choice take whether you will, your cause
lies where it was, nothing at all advanced. But really I am weary of this
sport, which is more irksome to me, then to kill the flies you so often talk
of. Howeuer I must have patience, and briefly say a word to one or two
authorities more, pitifully abused by you.

13. That known passage of S. Cyril of Jerusalem. Catech: The Testimony of S.
Cyril of Jerusalem.
Mystag. 4. occurr's next in your 573. page. The words are. He (Christ our
Lord) changed water into wine at cana in Galilee by his sole will, and is he
not worthy to be believed that he changed wine into blood? For if invited to a
marriage, he wrought then that stupendous Miracle (viz of changing water into
wine) shall we not Confess that much more he has given his body and blood to
the Sons of the Spouse? wherefore (...) let us take with all certainty the body
and blood of Christ And he gives this reason. (...) etc. For under the Type or
Species of bread his body is given thee, and under the type or species of wine
his blood is given thee, that by taking this body and blood of Christ thou
may be made partaker of his body and blood ((...)) and so we shall be
Christophori, Carrying Christ when we receive his body and blood into our
members. Soon after he says. Do not therefore consider this as mere bread and
mere wine, for it is the body and blood All along most clear and significant.
of Christ according to his own words; for, although sense suggest that it is
bread and wine) yet let faith Confirm thee, and do not judge of the thing by
thy taste, but hold this most certain by thy Faith, that the body and blood of
our Lord are given thee, so that there arise no doubt at all in thee. Again,
toward the end of this 4. Catechesis, he repeat's and most energetically the
verity he would have us learn. (...) etc. Knowing and holding it most certain
that the bread which is seen by us is not bread, but the body of Christ; and
the wine which is seen by us, although it seem to the sense of our taste to be
wine, The Church Speak's not in clearer terms.
yet is it not wine, but the blood of Christ. Thus this ancient Father and
worthy Bishop speaks so significantly, that the wit of man shall never force
on him any other sense but that which the Roman Catholic Church taught in the
Council of Trent, and teaches to this day.

14. Now listen a little to Mr Stilling: glosses and say in Conscience, whether
they have so much as a seeming probability? Mr stilling: glosses improbable.
First he tells us it is evident (and it was for his purpose to cry Evidence at
the beginning) that Cyrills design here is to persuade the Catechumens (from
whom the Mysterious presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament was wont to be
concealed) that the bread and wine were not mere common Elements, but designed
for a higher use, to ^xhibit the body and blood of Christ to Belieuers. Is
this, Sr, your Evidence? Is it evident that Cyril here intended to instruct the
Catechumens only? We read that the Saint was a laborious Preacher and complied
with that Charitable duty every Sunday, and day in Lent. Surely all who heard
him were not Catechumens, and why may not these instructions contain part of
that Doctrine he publicly delivered to his Auditors? All you can prove is that
his first Catechesis was to the lately Baptized, but that this of the B.
Sacrament concerned them only, is not probable. Turn to the Edition of S. Cyril
Paris print 1609. You will find after the Dedicatory Epistle under this Title.
De scriptis Cyrill. That in his last five Mystagogical institutions he gave
solid food and explicated the Divine Mysteries of our Faith, of Baptism,
Chrism, the Eucharist, and that great Sacrifice of the Mass, which Certainly
belong to Christians of riper knowledge than Catechumens were. Again. I'ft be
evident that S Cyrill is made to m^sse of his aim.
the Saint in this Catechesis concealed the Mysterious presence of Christ in
the Sacrament, He missed extremely of his intent, for no Catholic can speak
now with greater clearity of the Mystery, or more fully express the Churches
sense then S. Cyril did above thirteen ages since. Yet one word. Say I beseech
you what need was there then of concealing this Mysterious presence, i'ft be no
more but as you say, a piece of bread deputed to a holy use, or a mere sign of
Christ's body present? Such a Mystery requires no secrecy at all, Catechumens
might as well have heard of it without torturing their understandings, as now
they hear of the Sacrament of Baptism. Lastly is it evident, that S. Cyril
aimed at nothing but to show that bread and wine were not mere common Elements
but things designed for a higher use, or as you say, to Exhibi^ the body of
Christ to Belieuers? It Is improbable, First because you add that to the Text
which neither the words, nor the sense bear. S. Cyril says. Do not consider
them as mere bread and wine, Then he tell's you positiuely what they are. For
they are the body and blood of Christ. Now your Gloss, designed for a higher
use to exhibit the body and blood of Christ to Belieuers, first Deads the very
life of Cyrills words, and then run's into nonsense. I therefore Ask whether
What is bread and wine to exhibit the body and blood of Christ?
this gloss: Bread and wine exhibit the body and blood of Christ to Belieuers,
says. Bread and wine really changed out of their nature, as water was at Cana
in Galilee, are after that change as really Christ's body and blood, as that
water was really wine after Christ's Miracle? If your gloss say thus much, you
are a plain Papist; if less, its none of S. Cyrills Doctrine, for the Saint
delivers this as significantly, yea and more fully, then I now express it. I
well understand S. Cyrills sense by his words, but for my life I know not what
you mean by your particle. Exhibit. Tell us I beseech you? How do bread and
wine Exhibit the body and blood of Christ to Belieuers? Do they only mind us of
his body and blood? A Crucifix representing our Lord bleeding on a Cross can
well serve for so much. Do they show or point us out a Real presence of the
same body and blood upon the Altar which are now in heaven? If so; Belieuers
have an object of Faith and that truth to fasten on which the Church teaches,
but if your word Exhibit says, or signifies less then this, or, only expresses
your ever yet concealed Sacramental presence, you cheat the world with
ambiguous dark Term's, and in good earnest know not what you say.

15. Answer therefore? What is Christ's body and blood to be Sacramentally
present, when really they are not upon the Altar, but absent in Heaven only?
The question deserves an Answer, For you, Sr, distinguish between a Sacramental
and a Corporeal Presence, you grant the first, and deny the second. That which
you grant is a Presence of Christ's body and biood distinguished from the
Catholic Real (or as you call it) Corporeal Presence: Vouchsafe to enlighten
us a little concerning it, which you page 574. seem to Our Adversary is urged
to declare his sense.
make real? There is, say you, a Real presence of Christ in and with them (that
is, in and with bread, and wine) to the souls of Belieuers. Very good. Give us
I beseech you the total Object which these Souls have before them when they
believe a Real presence of Christ in and with bread and wine upon the Altar? Is
this object Christ himself whom they pull, as it were, by Faith out of Heaven
at the time they receive your piece of Bread? No. Christ still in Heaven, is
yet Locally distant and therefore not really present in and with bread and
wine, Unless he be in two places at once, And Consequently the Faith of these
Belieuers has no real Object present to fasten upon. Is it that Christ is
present in the Signs of bread and wine, as Caesar is in his Image? Pitiful. He
is thus present in every Crucifix, though really distant millions of Miles,
This, no way makes him actually there in and with bread and wine, as you
Assert. Does finally this your Obiectiue presence imply only thus much, that
Christ by his power (though really absent) work's the same effects in a worthy
Receiver, as if he were actually there? No. For he works the same effects, and
(though absent) produces grace by the Sacrament of Baptism as if he were
present, dare you Therefore say he is in as peculiar a manner Really present,
in and with the water of Baptism, as he is in this Sacrament in and with bread
and wine? Yet more. Such a Moral The Sectaries Sacramental Presence
contradict's all Authority.
Presence directly contradict's Christ's words. This is my body. It directly
contradict's S. Cyrills words. Though it seem to the taste to be bread it is not
bread, but the Body of Christ's. It directly contradict's that unanswerable
Truth: As water was changed into wine, so wine is changed into blood etc.

16. And thus, Sr, you see how impossible it is to give your poor Belieuers any
thing like a Real object, which may be called a true Real Presence; though I
hold you obliged to help both them and me to a clear Notion of it: Because
Christ's Sacred body and blood are Real things, you attribute to these two Real
things a true real Presence in and with bread and wine (which cannot but
denominate them really present with these two Substances upon the Altar)
Therefore you are obliged to tell me, what that is A part rei, which I once
more say, is impossible; For, as your Sacramental presence, in your sense, is a
word no man vnderstand's, so your Doctrine is as wholly unintelligible. Yet I
have not said all. In this your discourse of a Sacramental and Real presence,
you would fain take some advantage against us by other words of S. Cyril. Do
not consider them as mere bread and wine, for they are the body and blood of No
advantage given Sectaries by any other words of S. Cyril.
Christ, according to his own word. Hence you infer, it is plain, He speaks of
a Sacramental presence, for he does not oppose the body and blood of Christ to
the substance of bread and wine, but to mere bread, id est, That they should
not look on the bread and wine as naked signs, but as Signa efficacia or
efficacious signs. Answ. First The Saint has not a Syllable of either Signs
or Signae efficacia. Next, your Speculation about mere bread, is a mere
nothing. For mere bread, is bread without Consecration, S. Cyril opposes the
body and blood of Christ present, to mere bread, Ergo He opposes them to bread
without Consecration, but bread without Consecration, or mere bread, is the
very Substance of bread, Therefore he opposes the body and blood of Christ
present, to the substance of bread, unless you can find the Meerness (might one
speak so) or nakedness of bread distinct from its substance, which is not only
improbable, but impossible.

17. Upon this solid and undeniable Ground, it imports your A mere quibble
about a word.
cause nothing, whether (...) in S. Cyril signifies, Species, as it is commonly
rendered by Interpreters, or as you say, that which does figure or represent,
for, as long as this verity stand's undoubted, that under the Type or Species
of bread Christ gave his own body, and That, that body is opposed to the very
Substance of bread, the expression is so clear and the same with our Catholic
Doctrine, that were a hundred Glosses more laid upon the word (...), All would
not do, nor rack it to any contrary meaning. You Reply S. Cyril speak's of such
a presence as has relation to the Receiver. Speak out Sir. What is it, that
has relation to the Receiver only? The very body and blood of Christ under the
Type of bread and wine (which are changed out of their nature as water was at
Cana in Galilee) These substances of his body and blood, as really present,
work their effect in a worthy Receiver, where you evidently see, that the Real
Presence of Christ's Sacred body and blood is presupposed to the effect or to
grace wrought in a Soul: Therefore to talk of a presence which has relation to
a Receiver only, without the true supposed real verity of Christ body and blood
present, is no more then a perverse and an improbable Gloss, if S. Cyril speak
sense.

18. Your next Gloss upon these words. ( It is not bread though it seem to the
taste to be bread but the Body of Christ) is worse if worse can be, For you only
frigidly say. Hereby is meant no alteration i^ the Substance of it, but only
that it is not That common Bread, it was before. Sir, the contrary is now
demonstratiuely proved against The change made in Chrism wholly different from
that in the Eucharist.
you. But you hope to help your self by an Instance which S. Cyril has of
Chrism in his 3. Mystag. Page 525. where he Seems to Parallel the change made
in Chrism, or holy ointment, with the Change of bread in the Eucharist. By the
way. If Chrism be so sacred a thing, it is a shame you have no more use of it
in your Church, but let that pass, and mark the Parallel and your own mistake
with it. A change there is in both, bread and common ointment, but as different
in Themselves as they are differently expressed by this Father. The one change
is Real and intrinsecal made in the Substance of bread and wine, The change of
common ointment is not so, but Moral, into a grace, or Gift or Christ. S
Cyrills words take away all ambiguity. See, says he, That thou think not this
ointment to be common or mere ointment, For as the bread of the Eucharist after
the Invocation of the Holy Spirit is no longer common bread, but the body of
Christ (here is the real change) So this holy ointment, is no longer naked or
common ointment after it is consecrated (...). S. Cyrill's words denote the
difference.
but a grace or Gift of Christ, and the Holy spirit, which operates through the
presence of the Divinity. Here is the other and a quite different change. Bread
is made the body of Christ, Chrism his holy and sacred Gift. The Parallel or
parity therefore, as I now said, lies in this, That both bread and Common
ointment are changed from what they were (and this is enough for Cyrills intent
who only proves Chrism to be a holy thing) but it fail's when he positiuely and
expressly diuersifies the nature of these changes, of bread into Christ's body,
of Common ointment only into a grace or a gift of Christ. And Hence, Sr, your
Question, whether we may not as well prove a Transubstantiation in the Chrism
as we do in the Eucharist, is both fond and frivolous. We Answer No, because
the real change of bread into Christ's body fully expresses
Transubstantiation, the Terminus a quo, and ad quem, being Real, and
Substantial. The other Change of ointment into a Gift of Christ, denotes a
moral change quite different and nothing like the other, which is most real. S.
Ambrose next cited, no less abused then others.


19. Your next and last Gloss. abuses S. Amb. De ijs qui initiantur. C. 9. who
says. Bread is no longer that which Nature has framed it, but that which the
Benediction of Consecration has made it. You Answer. It is the body of Christ,
but not in our gross sense. Pray Sr, Inform us a little of your more quaint
meaning? Say, how bread is Christ's body if it still remains as substantially
bread after the Benediction, as water in Baptism remain's substantially water?
Does the water wherewith an infant is washed, cease to be water because it is a
Sacrament? No certainly, yet bread if S. Ambrose speak truth, cease to be
that which nature framed it. You endeavor to make These words forceles,
because S. Chrisost. in Act: Hom. 23. says of Baptism, I'ts virtue is so great
that it suffer's not men to be men, and then you wisely ask whether we will
grant it Transubstantiat's them? Frivolous. The Saint only speaks of the virtue
of Baptism, which, as he observes makes us sons of Adoption, That is, it
Changes a soul from the miserable state of Sin into a happy state of grace, and
so permit's not men once infected with that leprosy, to be men as they were
before, unregenerate. And therefore, he adds in the ensaing words. The great
power of the Holy Ghost is that it Transform's our Manners and makes them
composed. What is here of any thing like Transubstantiation, or of a ceasing of
that which nature has framed? But enough and fully enough of Mr Stillingfleets
most improbable glosses, so I must and will term them, until some surer
Principle than fancy gives them more strength which shall never be.

20. To end. I Will say a great Truth. Had this Gentleman twenty Cyprians, twenty
Cyrills, twenty Austins as clear and express for his Opinion of the Sacrament,
as the Testimonies Had this Adversary so much Authority for hy opinion, as we
Produce in behalf of Catholic Doctrine No man Could believe any thing.
now cited are significant for Catholic Doctrine: Had he a Church reputed
Orthodox which as indubitably mantain'd his Opinion five or six ages since, as
the Catholic Church then held, and yet hold's our Catholic Doctrine; Finally,
had he Scripture as plain for his Sign or Figure of Christ's body, as it is
evidently clear for the Real Presence, I verily think no prudent man could or
would believe any thing of this great Mystery, And consequently all might
rationally doubt of every article in Christian Religion: Because Fathers upon
the Supposition, are directly contrary to Fathers, Church, stand's against
Curch, and Scripture against Scripture. But now when he has not one Clear
Testimony of a Father, much less the Sentiment of any Orthodox Church, nor so
much as a word of Scripture contrary to our Catholic Position; I must Conclude
that his Glosses already laid on these Fathers are not only improbable, but
more than highly improbable.

21. Perhaps Mr Stillingfleet* may reply. His glosses, It Is true, because they
are the Sentiments of a fallible man, are indeed liable to error; but He bidds
me look well to my Refutations, and beware of setting to high a value on them
whilst I oppose him, For my Opposition, (because I may mistake) amount's to no
more, but to a weak degree of Fallibility, so that, Hitherto He and I stand
upon equal Terms. Answ. If the contest be thus much only, whether his Glosses
are not clearly refuted, the Judicious Reader after a due Ponderation of my
Replies, is so far to judge between us. But here is not all, I must Say more.
Though I am as fallible in excepting against His glosses, as he is in making
them, yet my Faith depend's not upon my Exceptions but upon the Doctrine of my
Church, The express words of Scripture, and Fathers, These oblige me under pain
of damnation to believe as I do, But all that Mr Stilling: has for his Faith,
is only the uncertainty of his own No man builds faith upon his own Glosses.
conjectures (ancient Church he has none, nor express Scripture, nor one Clear
sentence of any Ancient Father) And will he Dare to oblige me under pain of
damnation to believe his Glosses (or the opinion he would mantain by them) upon
no other Ground but his weak Conjectures? I appeal to his own Conscience for an
Answer. Well. Be it how you will, thus much is evident (and It Is the only thing
I aim at in this whole Discourse) if Scripture and Fathers be interpreted in
high matters of Faith by two Adversaries of different Religions, when no surer
Principle is at hand to rely on, but the fallible Glosses of the One, and a
contrary fallible* combating with those Glosses in the Other, they may both (as
the world goes now) sit long at the sport, before one Controversy Other mean^
to end Controversies then mere Glosses.
be ended. Therefore God, as I said above, has Provided us of an easier way to
end these weighty difficulties, or, we may All turn Scepticks. Some may say;
The old mode of the World was to dispute by Scripture and Fathers, dare we
reject this way of arguing as insufficient? Answ. No truly: It is an excellent
way amongst Christians (though insignificant to Heathens) when the Adverse
Parties can Clear the sense of Scripture and Fathers upon certain Principles,
But if the very sense of Scripture and Fathers be called into Question As now a
days it is by Sectaries, We must of necessity have Recourse to an other more
Clear, easy, and indubitable means of ending all Debates ever in use among the
Holy Fathers, Whereof more afterward. In the Interim the ensuing Chapter may
give you entertainment.

CHAP. XIV.
It is further proved that neither Scripture alone, nor any other Principle
distinct from an Unerring Church, can with certainty decide Controversies in
Matters of Religion, or Regulate Christian Faith.

1. THis Assertion not slightly proved in the other Treatise. Disc. 2. C. 4. I
hold so certain, That the wit of man shall not rationally contradict it. And to
give yet more light to what is there said, Be pleased to exclude, or mentally
only to cast aside All thought of an unerring Church, of her infallible
Tradition al so, of the Definitions of General Councils, For all these (which
Sectaries hold fallible) are Essential to an unerring Church, If any such thing
be in the world, whereof we shall Treat afterward. Next look about you, And
consider well what remain's to end Controversies withal, or to regulate Divine
Faith. You have What Principles Sectaries Can Pretend to, distinct from an
Infallible Church.
first Scripture which a Pagan wholly and a Jew partly reiects, Yet with such
Aliens from Christ, a Christian can argue rationally yea and clearly convince
them, as I shall prove in the second Discourse. After Scripture, you have the
sublime Mysteries of Faith, the Fathers Doctrine laid forth in their Volumes,
and the History of the Church. Here are all the Principles imaginable left
Sectaries, besides their private Spirit, which can be no more a sound Principle
to them, than the contrary Spirit is to Their Adversaries.

2. Let us now See how weakly the Sectary endeauours to end any Controversy by
these Principles without an infallible Church, And be pleased ever to attend to
the Adversary he Treat's with. If he attempt's to do good on a Heathen by
Scripture, or bring's in the Reasonableness of Christian Religion, The Heathen,
and Jew also laugh at his Folly, And wish him to prove his Book to be Divine.
If he proves that by the Universal Tradition of all Called Christians, the
Heathen perhaps will not yet quarrel with him (as I may hereafter) about the
Fallibility or Infallibility of Tradition, but desires him to go among the
Chinese and lay his Bible down by That book which their supposed Prophet
Confusius wrote, full of excellent Moral Precepts. Thus much done the Contest
Begin's. The Sectary says his Bible is Authorized by a great Prophet, called
Christ. A learned Bonzius Answer's, and his is also. Authorized by a great
Prophet called Confusius. The Sectary says all Christians own his book (upon a
never interrupted The Protestants Contest with ^ Heathen Concerning the Bible.
Tradition) to be indicted by the Spirit of Truth, The Bonzius replies, All
China of a mighty vast Extent age after age, has the like perpetuated
Tradition for his Bible. What follows but that These two Adversaries, peruse
their Bibles? The Bonzius read's ours, and Reasonably ask's, whether the
Sectary can infallibly prove such strange Mysteries as are registered there,
(for example, a Trinity, the Incarnation of the Divine word) to be Truths
Revealed by Almighty God? The Sectary answers. All the infallible certainty he
has of these particular Verities lastly Relies only upon Scripture it self.
For what ever Principle can be imagined distinct from that written word whether
Church or Tradition, is Fallible and may deceive. If so, says the Heathen your
Bible gain's no Credit with me, Because you prove the Mysteries contained there
by that which causes my doubt, or is the matter in Question, for you say all I
read, is of Divine inspiration because your Bible relates them, and therefore
make that a proof of your Doctrine, which is the Matter in question, or causes
my doubt. O says the Sectary read on with Humility and you will find, that the
very Majesty of the style, the Energy of the words will quit you of doubting;
And to ease you of too much pains, know we Protestants hold That the Belief of
a very few chief Articles, or simple Truths ( as that Jesus is the Christ: The
Divine Word is incarnated etc) is faith enough to gain Heaven. Contra. The
Heathen except's against the Protestants plea.
Replies the Heathen. I see no other Majesty in the Style of your Bible than in
mine, and other pious books. The exterior Syntax or joining of words together
is common to all such Writings. But above all I wonder why you talk to me of no
man knows what splendour shining in the bare Letter, when you say that shines
not to Pagans, but only to those who have the Spirit of God, and are the Elect
amongst you. Now to what you Add of a few chief Articles necessary to be
believed and no more, I answer first. Your Scripture says no such Thing, nor
tell's me or you which Articles are necessary, which not, and if it did so, you
are only where you were before in darkness, Since you prove not so much as one
of these few Articles to be of Divine Revelation, but by the book which records
them; And this you do whilst I justly question not only the book, but the Truth
of this very article, which you make Divine, because it is in your Bible. But
enough of this subject at present, whereof see more C. 9. n. 7. All that is
said there and further enlarged here, makes this Truth not only probable but
demonstratiuely evident, That Scripture alone is no universal Means to end
Controversies debated between Christians and no Christians (which is the only
Thing we now insist on) yet Jesus Christ has left sufficient means whereby
such Aliens may be reclaimed from their Errors, and attain salvation.
Scripture does it not for all, Therefore a more satisfactory way must be
thought of.

3. Now if we begin to speak of the Fathers with a learned Heathen, it is labor
lost, for He who belieues not the Divinity of The Fathers of no Authority with
a Heathen.
Scripture will little regard the Fathers Authority. To tell a Heathen of the
high Mysteries of our Faith augment's his Difficulties, puzzles Reason, and
rack's his understanding. To weary him with a long narration of Ecclesiastical
history is most impertinent, when as yet, He neither belieues Scripture, nor
Fathers: Yet this man may be converted to Christian Religion if he follows
Reason, Unless we say which is intolerable to hear, That our Lord Jesus will
have this poor man lost, or left without means to attain Salvation by.

4. The next Adversary the Protestant may attaque shall be, if you please, a
Roman Catholic (we will here to gain time omit his Contest with Arians and
other Heretics) And his whole The sectaries attempt upon Catholics, vain, and
why.
endeavor, if he go Closely to work, must either be to Establish his own
Protestant Tenets by Scripture, Fathers, and Antiquity, or forceably to
dissuade all by virtue of these Principles from the Belief of our Catholic
Doctrine. I say it is impossible to do either, Because the Sectary has not in
the whole Bible one clear and express Text for any one Tenet of Protestancy as
it is reformed; Nor so much as one clear and express Text against any one
Doctrine of the Roman Catholic Religion. Therefore, as Scripture cannot Pass an
obligation on him to believe one Article of his new Faith, so it cannot oblige
him or me to disbelieue one Article of our Roman Catholic Doctrine, For upon
this supposition, it never meddless with the one, and often omit's to speak of
the other, in plain, open and significant Terms. For example. Scripture neither
expressly denies Transubstantiation with the Protestant, nor in that plain open
Term affirm's it with the Catholic: it neither clearly Says there are Two
Sacraments only, nor in express Words allows of Seven: It neither clearly
denies Purgatory, nor under that express word asserts it. How then can the
Protestant when he has not one clear syllable in Scripture for what he hold's
in these particulars, nor a word against our contrary Doctrins, ever probably
venture Not one Text in Scripture clear for Protestancy nor one against
Catholic Doctrine.
to decide these and the like controuerted Matters by the plain and express
letter of the Bible? It is impossible. The Reason is, it cannot determine that
whereof it speaks not clearly, nor become an intellectual Rule, or Measure
whereby we are to judge what is true, or what is false concerning these
controversies, if it Meddles not with them in express Terms. I say in express
Terms: For what ever is less then that, or not express, must either be the
Sectaries Gloss or his fallible Deduction, I reject both, and appeal to him who
wrote the original Book with all it is candor and simplicity. If I find
Protestancy there, well and good; If otherwise, no Gloss no Deduction shall
preuail with me to believe the Nouelty under pain of damnation, unless he who
tampers with a Text, first, bid's me believe under pain of damnation that he is
an unerring man, or that his Glosses or deductions are infallible, which I am
sure is not God's command. Again, If I find nothing plain and express in
Scripture against my Catholic Doctrine (but much for it) I should be worse then
foolish to change my ancient Faith upon the slight ground of farfetch't Glosses
and fallible inferences.

5. Shall I say yet more clearly what I here aim at? Some Christians there are
now in being who Believe the true Doctrine of Christ so firmly, that though an
Angel preached Contrary (Galat: 1. 8.) They ought not to be removed from it; if
therefore Protestants believe their own Doctrine so steadfastly, and say that
Papists (for The Asss^rti^n, proved.
example) err in the Belief of Christ's true Doctrine, they are to Evidence it
by a more indubitable Principle, than that is which the Apostle vnderstand's by
the preaching of an Angel, But such a Principle can be no other nor less
certain than plain and open Scripture, How Therefore can the Protestant so much
as weakly hope to dissuade from Popery and persuade to his opinions by mere
guesses, weak inferences, weightles conjectures etc. without plain Scripture?
Now to show you he has no more but, guesses, Let him please to Discuss rigidly
with me but one point in Controversy by Scripture only. That of
Transubstantiation wherein he think's to have most Advantage, may perhaps
occurr, and like him best. I say after All he can allege for his opinion, or
against our Catholic Doctrine shall be no more but mere Conjectures, improbable
Glosses, uncertain Topics, false Suppositions and the like; And are these
think you weighty enough to establish his Opinion which he mere Conjectures are
Protestants only proofs.
hold's to be revealed Doctrine? No certainly. The Doctrine of Christ stand's so
sure upon certain known Grounds that an Angel though he preach otherwise, is
not to be believed, and if it be not thus steadfastly founded, it is not as I
observed above, Christ's Doctrine. How easy were it for the Sectary to end much
of these debates by a due examination of this one Controversy. I urge him to
it, yet you will see, he will refuse this Modest Challenge.

6. Wherefore I shall never comprehend why these men trouble the world as they
do with writing Controversies. What is their aim? Is it to draw any one Soul
to Protestancy, or only to give a proof of wit, and show that they can speak
against God's truths which an Angel cannot Dissuade from? If this later be
intended, the Arians of old did so before them, And the Devil can do it much
better than either Arian or Sectary: If it be to convert men to Protestancy,
The Attempt is desperate, unless they come strongly armed with plain, express,
and Significant Scripture, Whereof there is no fear at all; For had they clear
Scripture against one sort of their supposed erring Christians (Papists for
example) they would not spare us one whit, but most willingly Silence us with
Gods own plain language. This we look for, but in lieu of it, what have we?
Fancies, Conjectures, Glosses, frivolous Discourses. And thus forsooth Popery
must down (I marry) and Protestancy be thought the pure and most refined
Religion.

7. By what is said already you see how unluckily these men run Sectaries argue
improbably.
out of the way of all probable Arguing, whilst Scripture is made so clear,
that by the light thereof, All Controversies now raised amongst dissenting
Christians, can be determined. Is it so conuincing and clear? Prove you no
Purgatory, no Invocation of Saints by plain and express Scripture. Is it so
conuincing and clear? Prove you plainly that to deny Purgatory or
Transubstantiation, is as necessary to Salvation as to deny a Quaternity of
Divine Persons. Now if it be not clear in such matters. Why keep you a coile
about these Negatiues? Why do you threaten us with God's judgments for
mantaining the Contrary Doctrins? Why have you not only made an vproar in the
world about Doctrins merely unnecessary, but more (which may lay sorrow at your
hearts) why have Negative Opinions, the cause of Sectaries Separation*
you shamefully separated your selves from an Ancient Church, whereof your
Ancestors were members? And this is desperately done for a Company of Negative
Opinions, Though it import's not one straw whether they be believed or no.
Contrariwise, if you make the Belief of these Non-Articles necessary to
Salvation they must be proved by the plain and express word of God, which is
utterly impossible, and therefore I said right, that Scripture cannot end
Controversies between dissenting Christians, Catholics for example and
Protestants.

8. And thus much in effect our Newer men grant who talk much of a few simple
Truths sufficient to salvation called fundamentals. Is is not enough says Dr
Tailor in his. 2. Disswasiue. P. 168. That we are Christians, that we put all
our hope in God who freely gi^es us all things by his Son Jesus Christ? That we
are redeemed by his Death, that we are members of his body in Baptism* that he
gives us his spirit that we do no Evil, that we do what good we can etc. Is not
this Faith ru^e Righteousness, and the Confession of this faith sufficient unto
salvation? Observe well. If such a faith of a few Nouellists, and the like
simple Truths which no Arian denies under such general Terms Of Sectaries
simple Truths.
(and cannot be proved sufficient by plain Scripture) be enough to Salvation,
what need had Sectaries to Calumniate our ancient Church, and expose
Christianity to the scorn of Jews and Atheists for lesser Matters (as they
think) than these fundamentals, or few simple truths are? Do we disown any of
them? No. We are Christians as well as they, we put our hope in God, we say all
things are given us by his son Jesus Christ, we are redeemed by his Death etc.
Wherein then lies our Offense? O, we hold strange Novelties, Invocation of
Saints. Purgatory, Transubstantiation. I d^^y they are Novelties, but be it as
you will, They are out of the (...) ^f your simple Truths, and in your
Principles no more but Opinions, and can you have such cruel hearts as to
persecute us, banish us, and shed our blood for mere Opinions? Where is your
Ch^rity* Again I argue Ad hominem. If to hold a Purgatory be only ^ Opinion,
your denying it is no more but an opinion also, Therefore you cannot prove your
Negative by plain and express Scripture, for if you do so, it well be no longer
an Opinion, but a (...) led Truth, and certain Doctrine. Convince this if you
can and the tell us that Scripture decides all Controversies between us, or his
an obligation on us to believe more then These few simple Truths (...) No
Purgatory for example, No Transubstantiation; or say plainly, that Scripture
does not put an end to these Controversies; which Truth is evident by manifest
Experience.

9. It is strange to see how endless Sectaries are, and to no purpose at all,
in quoting Fathers for the Clarity and sufficiency of Scripture in all things
necessary, but afterward spoil all with a new Scripture says not how many are
necessary.
Whimsey, For they make just so much as they please (a few Simple Truths serve
the turn) to be Necessary and sufficient. Here are three insuperable
difficulties. First. They speak without book, For God never told them in
Scripture how many or how few of these Truths, are necessary and Sufficient;
Therefore if I admit this Principle, the Protestants sole Word must secure me,
though I know well, that their word is neither a necessary, nor a sufficient
warrant for my salvation. Hence. 1. I urge them to show by plain Scripture the
number of these fundamentals precisely necessary. 2. I must tell them. If
Scripture be clear in a few Fundamentals and so much only be necessary and
sufficient, this reasonable Quaestion may well follow. What Is the rest of the
Bible good for with them? Most certainly the far greater part of it, where it
speak's not of these few Necessaries, may be cast away as useless and
impertinent. 3. These Nouellists Pronounce, and Prove against themselves, in
all such Controversies as are now in debate between them and Catholics, For,
if Scripture which tell's us of all Necessary and Sufficient things to
salvation (comprised in a few simple Truths whereof there is no strif now)
omit's, whilst it mentions Sectaries prove against themselves.
these, to speak plainly in behalf of our Protestant Opinions. N^ Sacrifice. No
Transubstantiation. etc. With what Conscience can they tell us (and They have
often said it) that this Book alone can decide these controversies, and recall
us from Popery to their new mode of Protestancy? I would willingly have
Satisfaction to this one difficulty.

10. Well: To answer all they can pretend to out of the ancient Fathers for the
Clarity and sufficiency of scripture in order to things necessary; be pleased
to observe, that the learned Tertullian against Marcion (but chiefly in his
book de Praescript: cap. 16. at those words. We are not to recurr to Scripture,
wherein there is no victory, or a very uncertain one etc.) And S. Austin. S.
Chrysostom with others, may perhaps seem, to a less diligent Reader, to be of
contrary judgments. Tertullian now cited, says Scripture is insufficient to
decide Controversies concerning Religion amongst Christians. S. Austin. De
Bapt. Contra Donat: lib. 2. C. 6. plead's much for it is sufficiency. I say here
is no Contrariety: both speak well, both deliver Catholic Doctrine. Know
therefore, that Scripture is divided into two Parts or Sections, as you may
read in Sixtus Senensis. Two parts of Scripture, distinguished.
Lib. 6. Bibl. Annot: 152. Who cites S. Chrisostom for it. The one usually
called Pars Directa, or direct part treat's of the abstruse Mysteries of
Christian Faith, and this (which is Matter of Contest between us and Sectaries)
Tertullian reiect's, and hold's insufficient to end disputes, And so does S.
Austin also. Epistola. 49. Ad Deo gratias. The other named, Pars reflexa and
the clearer which speak's of the Foundation of Christian Religion, of the
Extent of the Church diffused the whole world over, of its marks and Signs, of
its Perpetuity, and infallible Assistance, of Nations flocking to it, etc. This
part, I say (the book being once admitted as of Gods Divine word) is so
perspicuous, and clear that it silences all Sectaries and evidently subuert's
their Errors. But to tell me, it is clear and sufficient enough to decide
differences, when we dispute with contentious men about the particular
Mysteries of Faith (the Trinity, for example, Transubstantiation, the number of
Sacraments etc.) And the very sense of Scripture, which should end all, is not
agreed on by the two dissenting Parties; To assert this I say, is not only a
Paradox but a manifest improbability contrary to all experience, And therefore
I will extort this confession from our Adversaries (may they please to answer)
that as they shall never prove one of their Protestant Opinions, so, they shall
never oppugn one Catholic Doctrine, by clear and express Scripture.

11. Some object S. Austin disputing against Maeximinus an Arian, S. Austin's
Discourse. with an Arian.
who faith. Lib. 3. C. 4. 14. Sed nunc nec ego Nicenum etc. B^rnob, neither I
ought to allege the Nicene Council, nor thou that of Ariminum, for neither am I
bound to the Authority of the one, nor thou to the Authority of the other. Let
us contend by the Authorities of scripture which are common witnesses to us
both. Here two things seem clear. First. That S. Austin rejected the Authority
of the Nicene Council, as Sectaries do now the Church. 2. That He held
Scripture a sufficient Rule to convince an Arian. A word only in passing. Dare
the Sectary offer thus much, or dispute with the Catholic for the supposed
Observe the question here proposed.
Truths of pure Protestancy, or his Negative Articles by Scripture only, as he
here supposes S Austin did Argue in other Matters with Maximinus? I would
willingly see some attempt made this way, but am sure, He will not dare to do
it. Because he says His Protestancy, or these Negatiues are not revealed, but
only a number of inferior truths which cannot be proved by Scripture. To what
purpose then is it to allege any Testimony which makes Scripture sufficient to
decide Controversies, when the Protestant ingenuously grant's he can prove
nothing of his pure Protestancy by plain Scripture? Hence I Say all the
Quotations of Fathers haled in to prove the sufficiency of Scripture, help not
the Sectary at all. Irenaeus, for example, call's it the Rule of Faith. S.
Austin. A Divine Sectaries quote Fathers to no purpose.
Balance. Theophilus Alex: A firm foundation. Gerson, A Sufficient and
infallible Rule. Most true if we speak of the scriptures Clearer part, yea and
of the obscurer also, when it is interpreted by an infallible Oracle. But what
makes all this for pure Protestancy, or for its Negative Opinions? Does
Scripture regulate this new Faith, whereof it is utterly silent? Does it weigh
such Negatiues, or tell us what they are worth? Is it a firm Foundation to
establish these Fancies? A sufficient and infallible Rule which measures us
out, No Sacrifice on the Altar, No purgatory. No Transubstantiation? Toys,
trifles. There is not a word spoken in the whole Bible contrary to the opposite
Verities of Catholic Religion, or in behalf of Protestancy. Therefore though
S. Austin appeald to Scripture against an Arian, and had his reasons for it,
yet our new men's Plea is more then impertinent, when after their Appeal they
find not one sentence for Protestancy, or against Catholic Doctrine. Now to S.
Austin.

12. I say first, The Saint rejected not the Authority of the Why S. Austin
waued the Nicene Council.
Nicene Council which he ever honored, but only waued that as an unmeet
Principle in his contest with Maximinus, who no more regarded the Nicene
Definitions, than Sectaries now do the Council of Trent, Therefore as we Argue
not from that Council against them, so S. Austin then argued not from the
Nicene Definitions. Thus our Catholic Witers have answered a hundred times,
yet we must have this Crambe recocta served up again, as a new unsavory
Objection. I say. 2. S. Austin by his Appeal to Scripture recurr's not to the
bare letter, which, he Says, is a body without a Soul, but to the true genuine
Sense Thereof, which he supposes known in that Scripture which we call the
Reflex part, and yet is more clearly known by the Universal consent of Christ's
unerring Church: For it is one and the same thing with S. Austin, to believe
the Churches sense of Scripture, and to believe Scripture it self, which most
manifestly commend's unto us Church Authority. Had then the Saint argued thus
against his Adversary, He had convinced him by the Clearer Part of Scripture.
Though thou exceptest against the Nicene A clear Conviction.
Council, yet thou cans't not deny, but that Scripture commend's a Church
founded by Christ, diffused the whole world over; what ever Therefore this
Church delivers concerning the sense of Scripture, That is the sense of the
Holy Ghost, And can be no other, for a Church which swerues from the true sense
of Gods word, is no Church founded by Christ. But the Vniuersael Sentiment of
this Church opposes thy error, Therefore the true sense of Scripture which
this Church plainly delivers, stand's opposite to thee also, And thus thou art
convinced by Scripture it self.

13. Perhaps you will ask whether if S. Austin had argued from the Obscurer Part
only which treats of a Mysterious Trinity, one What if S. Austin had argued
from the Direct part of Scripture?
God in Essence, and three distinct Persons, not so plainly expressed there, He
could then have convinced his Arian Adversary of error? None can better
satisfy the doubt than S. Austin himself. Lib. contra Cresconium C. 33. where
he speaks of an other Matter of Faith. viz. of Baptism conferred by Heretics,
which though not clearly expressed in Scripture, is yet held a true and valid
Sacrament. His words are. Proinde quamuis huius rei certe de Scripturis
Canonicis non proferatur exemplum etc. Although no example of this thing (the
validity of Baptism by Heretics) can certainly be Shown by Scripture yet the
Verity of these Scriptures is held by us in this particular. Cum hoc facimus
quod vniuersae iam placuit Ecclesia, when we now do that which pleases, or is
agreeable to the Universal Church, which Church, the Authority of Scripture it
self commend's. Vt quoniam, As that because the Holy Scripture cannot deceive
(whilst it commend's the Church) and every one fear's to be deceived in the
obscurity of this Question: Eamdem Ecclesiam de illa consulat. Let him consult
the Universal Church of this particular, Which holy Scripture without all
ambiguity Does demonstrate. Thus S. Austin himself Answers.
most profoundly S. Austin. And he gives an Answer to the present difficulty.
viz. That if the Obscurer Part of Scripture speak not plainly in the debate
betwixt him and an Heretic, the Heretic is to address himself to the Church
and learn by Her what the sense of Scripture is. Without light borrowed from
the Church, we have only words about these high Mysteries, but not fully sensed
words, chiefly when we argue with contentious Sectaries, whose glosses deprave
the plainest Passages in Holy writ, as the Protestant does Christ's clear
Proposition. This is my body. If therefore we go on in such a contest with
words not fully sensed, we may well end our lives, as S. Austin notes, before
we end one Controversy.

14. And thus you see, as the One Part of Scripture is a body without a soul
before it be received by the Church; so the Other Part is also, before it be
both received and sensed by this Oracle of Truth. Upon this ground all those
other Testimonies usually alleged by Sectaries out of S. Austin against the
Donatists, Of Optatus Meleuitanus, and S. Chrysostom for the clarity of
Scripture are clearly solued, for here is S. Austins Principle. The sense of
Scripture intended The sense of Scripture and the Church always the same.
by the Holy Ghost, and the sense of Christ's true Church concerning Scripture,
can never clash, but is one and the same. If therefore I know the sense of the
Church, I have with it the sense of Scripture also, but with this difference,
That what Scripture often expresses less clearly, Christ's Church delivers more
fully, and Explicitly. Whence it follows that if the Churches sense conclude
against these Sectaries, the Scriptures sense, where it is obscure, is in like
manner concluding.

15. You may object Scripture is in the noblest manner infallible, For it has
its infallibility from God immediately, and may well be a distinct Rule, or
Principle, from that sense which the Church gives of it. Why therefore should
not Sectaries have recourse to that first and noblest Principle without relying
on the Churches interpretation? I have answered, because they know not (guess
they may and miss) what Scripture says in a hundred difficult Passages.
Therefore they are to recurr to the Church, or must make use of their own
fancies to sense it. The Argument, purely fallacious, is much to this sense.
Christ our Lord when he taught his Disciples was in the noblest manner
infallible, being Truth it self, the Apostles were only infallible in their
teaching and An Objection answered.
further Explanation of those Verities they learned, by a Singular Grace or
participation of Infallibility. Why then should not Sectaries rely only on the
first sure Principle, Christ's own words flowing from the Fountain of
infallibility, without depending on the Apostles Doctrine, not so eminently
infallible? Now be pleased to hear S. Austin pondering those words. Psalm: 57.
Alienati sunt peccatores etc. Where he makes this Parallel betwixt Christ and
the Church, and solues the Difficulty. Ex veritatis ore ag(...) Christum ipsam
veritatem. Taught by the mouth of Truth, I acknowledge Christ Truth it self, ex
veritatis ore agnosco Ecclesiam participem veritatis. And by the same mouth of
Truth, I acknowledge the Church partaking also of Verity. That is, I own the
Church to be, not Truth it self, not Scripture it self, but a Copartner of
Truth, with Christ, and Scripture. I own it to be, not Infallibility it self,
yet so eminently infallible by a singular grace or participated Infallibility,
That to dispute against it is most insolent madness: Witness the same S.
Austin. Epist. 118. C. 5. ad Ian: If he dare to do so, Says the Saint, Sermon:
14. de verbis Apost. C. 18. or rus^ violently against this impregnable wall of
the Church, let him know his doom. ipse confringitur He is shattered in pieces.
Hence you see first, that no man's private Judgment can be contrary to the
Churches sense given of Scripture, without thwarting Scripture it self. You
see. 2. That Scripture and the Church are not two Principles, looking as it
were different ways, but one and the same, in order to our direction and
regulating Faith. whereof Scripture and the Church in order to all, is one
Principle.
more Hereafter.

16. In the mean while you may ask, why our Sectaries keep such a Coile about
the Clarity of Scripture concerning things necessary? It is hard to say what
they drive at, For if all this pretended clarity diffused it self through every
passage of Holy writ, worse it is for them, and to their utter confusion.
Observe My reason. The more clear Scripture is made by Nouellists, the greater
is their shame, whilst they cannot prove by it is supposed clarity so much as
one Protestant Doctrine, nor probably oppugn one Article of our Catholic Faith.
Therefore nothing is gained this way: Nay all is los*t by Their casting off
Church Authority, when after that wicked Fact, clear Scripture leaves them as
Scripturelesse, as Their own malice has made them Churchlesse. It is true. I
see some Color for their Pretense to Scripture, and thus it is. Like men
lawless, they have shaken of all other received Principles of Christian
Religion. Speak of a Church, She is fallible, and has actually erred. Cite
Fathers, some pitifully gloss them, others roundly reject them as men merely
Fallible. Mention Tradition, the very word is odious. Now for stark shame,
whilst they bear the name of Christians, it is hard to throw away all Christian
Principles. What Is done therefore? Why Sectaries take recourse to the bare
letter of Scripture.
I Will tell you. They lay hold of a body without a Soul, I mean, the bare letter
of Scrrpture without the Sense, and this is all that is left them. I say without
the sense, whereof you have seen enough already, for when the sense of God's
word is controuerted between them and us, and their sense run's contrary to the
received Church Doctrine, no probable Principle can make it defensible, and upon
this Ground I said right, They are as Scripturelesse as Churchlesse All this is
most true, and I well understand it. But why these men labor so earnestly to
make the Bible plain, when not so much as one plain passage is found there for
Protestancy, or against our Catholic Doctrine, is a Riddle above my reach, I
understand it not. Let then as much as you will of the book be clear, whilst
the Clarity fauour's not one of our Sectaries forged Novelties, nor
Contradict's one of our Catholic Tenets, it neither help's the Protestant nor
hurt's the Catholic. In the next Discourse we shall treat of the Church, and
more oportunely solue there a few objections of Sectaries.

CHAP. XV.
The other mentioned Principles above are insufficient to decide controversies,
Or to Regulate Faith.

1. THe next Principle after Scripture, we named the Mysteries of Christian
Religion, which certainly cannot regulate Faith, or determine Controversies
concerning Religion. For a Rule is the measure whereby we judge what is true
and what is fal^^, but no man judges this by the Mysteries themselves Believed,
because these proposed without further light, are not only obscure but highly
Transcend all natural discourse, And therefore Reason would reject them, were
it not curbed and rectified by an other Superior most certain and infallible
Rule, distinct from the Mysteries. I further ground and more a Priori is. That
man who Judges of Religion by the Mysteries believed, makes, in real truth his
own fancy or weak reason to regulate Faith, and is sure to err. ^le show you
how. Give me one, as yet not settled in any Faith, that cast's his thoughts upon
all the different Religions now Professed in the world, Judaism, Mahometism,
and Christianity. He call's them all to the Tribunal of his Reason which is
guided by the Mysteries of each Profession, And is resolved to pitch on so What
weak Reason would embrace^ If left to it self.
much, as seems suitable to his Judgment. Reason certainly, if it proceed
Reasonably. will only pick out of every one, such Mysteries as are Facile, and
no way torture an Understanding. Much may displease this Seeker after Truth in
Judaism, yet perhaps not all. The filth and Fooleries in Turcism like him not,
yet something he may approve. Finally he falls upon Christianity and there
find's those insuperable difficulties of a Trinity, the Incarnation, Original
sin etc. These suite not with his Reason, and consequently are rejected,
Therefore (if Christianity be true) a false Religion cannot but have more sway
with him, than the undoubted revealed Verities of Jesus Christ. Thus much
seems clear. Perhaps you will ask why I instance in an Vnbelieuer, who is yet
to choose his Religion? When I should show that Christians, even those we call
Sectaries, ought not to end Controversies or to regulate their Faith by the
apparent easines, or difficulty of Mysteries within the bounds of Christianity,
whereof many are in dispute between them and Catholics. Answ. I have instanced
thus on set purpose to lay open the great Error of all Sectaries, who leaving
the These who yet believe nothing and Sectaries, are alike in their Choice Of
Religion.
Conduct of Christ's Church run along with this supposed Vnbelieuer. For as he,
after a consideration had of several Mysteries found in the Religions now
named, takes out of each what is easiest, and best likes his Fancy, or weak
reason; So Sectaries ptoceed, Though they walk in a lesser compass, and for the
most part limit Themselves to something taught by men called Christians,
whether true or false, imports not. Within such bounds they take and leave as
freely what pleases, as any Vnbelieuer does, and usually throw off Mysteries
most difficult to sense and Reason. Thus the Arian reiect's a Trinity because
it is a hard Mystery, and not plainly expressed in Scripture. The Pelagian
denies Original sin upon the same ground, and Protestants thunder against
Transubstantiation, because the word is not in Holy Writ, and the Mystery
seems repugnant to their Reason. All therefore are alike as ill Self-chusers
with in such a compass as any Vnbelieuer, who makes a new* Religion on his own
head, guided by no other Rule, but fancy, or what seems to him reasonable. The
sole cause of this Self-chusing, is the Sectaries falling off from the conduct
of Christ's unerring Oracle, The Church, which tell's them what God speak's.
This unfortunately slighted, They make him speak just so much as they think
fit, or seems good to their weak and fallible Reason.

2. The next Principle, Sectaries may lay hold on for a sufficient, or at least
a Subordinate and concurrent means to decide Controversies, and regulate Faith,
is the Authority of the ancient Fathers. Though Catholics highly honor these
great Lights of the Church, And no way decline the trial, yet they Protestants
do and must except against the Authority of Fathers.
think an easier Rule can be assigned for all, and know well that Protestants
do and must except against this very Rule. One exception is. The labor is
immense to peruse exactly the large volumes of Fathers (the like is of
Councils) which can only be done by the more learned of different Religions.
Howeuer, suppose the work performed by a learned Catholic and a learned
Protestant, and that both diligently read the Fathers, The satisfaction given
to the Generality of other Christians is very little or nothing, who first must
Hear, what These two men report, and next credit their dissenting Judgments.
And can such judgment think ye thus at variance (as they have been for a
hundred years) certainly regulate Divine Faith in a Seeker after truth, or end
debates whereon Salvation depend's? It is impossible. Again These Fathers with
Sectaries, even all of them put together, are fallible and may teach False
Doctrine: Nay more, They have actually taught it, say Protestants, and grossly
erred, whilst they openly mantained a true Sacrifice upon the Altar, prayers
for the dead; Invocation of* Saints, Translation of Saints Reliq^es and their
worship, Pilgrimages because the Fathers are fallible, and teach Popery.
to Holy places, Auricular Confession to a Priest, un written Tradition, vowed
Chastity, the Hallowing of Altars, of Churches, of water, bread, oil, candles,
And the great virtue of the sign of the Holy Cross. etc. These say Protestants,
and innumerable others have been the foul mistakes of Fathers, and Therefore
Mr whitaker plainly affirm's Popish Religion to be a Patched couerlet of the
Fathers Errors sowed together* And D. Humfrey highly blames Mr* Jewel for his
so bold Appeal to the Fathers, saying herein he gave the Papists too* large a
Scope, was injurious to himself (And) after a manner spoiled himself, and the
Church etc. The words of these two Sectaries are cited, as I relate them, in
the Protestants Apology. Tract 1. Sect. 3. subd* 14. Page (with me) 128. And
never Adversary could yet Tax that Author of a false Quotation, who also
through the Several passages of his book shows, how Sectaries ascribe the now
named and supposed errors to the Fathers. It would be tedious, to expose all
his laborious Collections on this subject to common view again. Who ever
desiers further Satisfaction, need's only to bring eyes, to open the book, and
read his Marginal notes. Thus much premised.

3. I say. The Fathers that are not only fallible, but also supposed by
Sectaries to have actually wronged Truth, can be no Appendant or subordinate,
much less any sufficient Rule of faith for them, when these conceited Errors
are so numerous Recourse to Fathers in Fundamentals most insignificant.
That all along they stick most Close to our Catholic Doctrine, as is largely
proved in the Protestants Apology. Some perhaps will say we must have recourse
to such passages of Fathers as only treat of Fundamentals, and so far are
vnexceptionably plain: Answ. what need of this, when Protestants say there is
no great difference between us in Fundamentals? But suppose this done, which
yet cannot be done, whilst Sectaries remain in their wonted Labyrinth
concerning Fundamentals, what light have we from these Fathers to try
controversies now in Agitation, when they grant that Popery is made up of the
Fathers Errors? The final sentence is past, the just Censure already given.
The Fathers were, as we are now, plain Papists. I easily grant all.

4. Shall I yet say more concerning the trial of Protestants Opinions, or the
supposed errors of Catholics by Fathers, and tell you? Sectaries have no
Gusto to it at all. And because it mainly import's first, to discover their
want of Evidence and next their fallacious proceeding in this particular, I
will briefly do both and remit all here noted to the prudent Censure of every
Judicious Reader. Thus it is. There is not one controversy now Protestants
never offer to plead by a General Consent of Fathers.
disputed, in which our Protestants do so much as offer to plead by a General
Consent of Fathers, (and Mr Stillingf: likes not to be fob'd off with Two or
three Testimonies) Read their writings of the Real presence of Prayers for the
Dead, Invocation of Saints, of a Sacrifice upon the Altar, of the infallibility
of the Church, and tell me after you have perused all, How many Fathers you
find clear and express for Protestancy? A sight of four or five would help
much, But hereof there is no danger, for you have not one clear and expres (I
say more* not one so much as probable) against the Infallibility of the Roman
Catholic Church, Against praying for the Dead etc. And therefore wonder not
that Mr Stilling: Part. 3. C. 6. P. 641. where he treat's of Purgatory, talk's
much of the Fathers Fancies and Imaginations* And of an itching Curiosity some
have to know more concerning the future state of souls, than God has revealed,
But after all produces not one Testimony either clear or probable against our
Catholic Doctrine.

5. Do you desire to see more of this want in behalf of Protestancy, And how
little there is to countenance the Nouelty? Turn again, to Mr Stillinf: Part.
2. C. 1. P. 293. Where you find a Title threatening ruin to us all. The Roman
Church, not the Catholic Church. Say, I beseech you, who would not have
expected after such a clap of Thunder, a whole Torrent of Fathers to have
followed for his purpose? But in lieu of these Imptij words given in lieue of
^athers.
what have we? Marry, He tell's us First. His Bishop makes a great deal of
difference between The Church, And A Church, and some difference also between a
True Church and a right Church, next he falls foul on his Adversary, for his
not well considering what the Primate had said: Lastly (to pass by a few ieers)
he speak's much of the Universal spreading of the Churches Doctrine and Unity
thereof, which is due to the Roman Catholic Church only, But after his long
Discourse and the rapping Title with it, you have neither sentence nor syllable
of any Father, which so much as meanly insinuates, That, that ancient Moral
body (as it comprehend's all Christians united in one Belief) is not the only
True and Orthodox Church in the world: Yet her^ had been a most fit place to
have pleaded by plain express Authorities (I mean such as directly prove the
Roman not to be the Catholic Church) Believe it, were there any such in the
Fathers Volumes, Mr Stilling: to make his margents glorious, would have brought
them to light with a witness, But of this main point he is utterly silent,
because he had nothing to say, And therefore wisely Slip's aside to other
By-Matters, and leaves his Title to shift for it self.

6. Hence you may well conclude that our Sectaries are driven into strange
Straits; when we urge them to prove their Protestancy. Of the straites
sectaries are Cast into.
We first call them to plain Scripture for a Final decision in this particular,
but wanting where with all, they fit us right with a return of Antiscriptural
glosses. We press them again to name any orthodox Church, which five or Six
ages since professed their Novelties: Not a word is Answered. We make Inquiry
after Councils held by Protestants before Luther, for the Protestant Religion.
Silence, deep Silence, not one is found. Mention only Oral Tradition; they
storm at you, because they know Protestancy has none We appeal to the authority
of the most ancient Fathers, you see how we are served, with words and empty
Titles Nothing is or can be alleged clear, Nothing expres, Nothing probable.
Finally, to leave them without all excuse. We call them again to an account,
and Ask whether they will have their cause tried and judged by their own
Doctors, Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius and the like? No satisfaction is found here.
Luther condemn's Calvin more violently, than the Prelatick Party in England
does the Quakers, and Send's the Associates Protestants irreconciably
Contradict Protestants.
of Calvin to Hell, for denying the Real presence of Christ's body in the
Sacrament, And Calvin is as fierce against Luther in this particular. And thus
all Sectaries have opposed one another from the very beginning of this woeful
Reformation. Some plead for our Catholic Doctrine, Others are contrary as you
may read at large, almost in every Page of the Protestants Apology. We
therefore know not what these Nouellists would or can believe, whilst these
endless differences about Belief thus turn their heads, and make them to believe
just nothing, but what every fancy pleases. What a Religion have we here? View
well it is exterior, you have only Horror and confusion to look on. Altars
pulled down, Cloisters demolished, Bious places profaned, Stately Churches
turned into sluttish barns, by a barbarous Reformation. Enter into the
Interior, or cast a serious thought on that which should essentially
constitute Religion, you find this Protestancy a mere new Nothing, as Scripture
Neither Interior nor exterior valuable in protestancy.
less as Churchles, without Tradition, without the consent of Fathers, or any
Christian Principle to uphold it, yea (and this utterly ruin's all) without any
Agreement in Doctrine amongst themselves. May we not Therefore justly deplore
the sad condition of Thousands now within our once most Catholic England, to
see a Thing which stand's on no Principles but fancy, most earnestly stood for,
by men of excellent natural parts, and these English too, whose Progenitors
(the world knows it, fully as wise as They) were all Roman Catholics? But
what will ye? Good Revenues, A merry life, a hansom wife, and Self Interest
will have it so. And thus much of the want of clear Authorities in behalf of
Protestants.

7. We are now to speak a word of their fallacious, or rather open injurious
Proceeding with the Fathers. And to make good what I am about to Say, you may
please to reflect upon the Notes in the other Treatise, Chiefly. Disc. 4. C. 2.
n. 23. 24. Where you are told That the great work of Protestants, is not so
much to prove Their own Religion, as to spend time in cauilling at ours, And by
superficial Glosses to drive sense out of the Fathers most significant Doctrine,
and then to tell the world, they are not for Popery. And (thus (may their
glosses have place) no Religion (neither theirs not ours) can be proved by the
Fathers. This most unworthy Sectaries proceed unworthily with the Fathers.
Procedure with these, great Lights of the Church lenghthens Protestants books,
And makes Mr Stillingfleets Account to swell into the bulk you see. Might I
here (by the way) speak my thoughts concerning it; I verily believe there was
never Book set forth, which less deserved it is Title, than this. He call's it:
A Rational Account of the grounds of Protestant Religion, yet if any one, after
a diligent perusal of the whole Work, can show me but one Article of
Protestancy proved by plain Scripture, by a General consent of Fathers, by any
ancient Church Doctrine, or universal Tradition, I do at this present engage, to
euince by my Answer, That he is grossly mistaken. The fairest Occasion Mr
Stillingfleet had to speak home for Protestancy, was. Part. 1. C. 7. Where he
treat's of their way of resolving Faith, yet even here he falls so utterly
from the Cause, that he says no more for Protestancy, than Arianism. See the
other Treatise. Disc. 1. C. 9. You will ask perhaps wherein then lies the
Substance of his book? I Answer in two things chiefly. First in a tedious wordy
quarrel Two impertinences Constitute the subslanet of Mr Stilling: Account.
with Catholic Religion; (His flurting at it is endless) 2. In a gross Abuse
of the Fathers by his intolerable Glosses. Of neither shall he give a rational
Account to God at the day of Judgment. To prove what is here hinted at, Read I
beseech you the following Chapter, which I place here on set purpose to lead in
a further discourse concerning the Glosses of Sectaries, Withal to lay forth
their emptiness and fraud; And finally to show whither these Vnprincipled,
life-less. Whimseys, tend at last. Thus much performed, you shall see
Protestancy appear like it self, a mere Nothing.

CHAP. XVI.
One word more of Mr Stillingfleets Glosses, and his vnexusable abuse of other
Fathers.

1. THough much is said of this subject already, yet because here is Occasion
again, I shall briefly point at two or three of Mr Stillingfleet's notorious
Abuses. To prosecute all or the half he has, would make this Treatise as big as
his volume. We begin with that known Passage of S. Hierome. Epist. 57. Ad
Damasum, where the Saint says. The Church is built upon S. Peter's See, and
whosoever is out of the Communion of that Church (whereof Pope Damasus was then
head) is Profane, an Alien, and belongs to Antichrist etc. This in brief is
the Substance of S. Hieroms Doctrine. Mr Stilling: Part 2. C. 1. P. 311. Imputes
not plainly these Expressions to heat or flattery, although, S. Hierome abused.
Says he, it look's the more suspicious, because at that time S. Hierome had a
great picque against the Eastern Bishops, And then tell's us to no purpose,
what occasioned the Quarrel. Reflect good Reader. Is this hansom, to make a
Saint and most profound Doctor to Speak in so weighty a Matter against Truth,
and his own conscience, moved thereunto by flattery and no man knows what
Imagined Picques? Suppose he earnestly stood for Truth against those Bishops,
must He Therefore be thought either to flatter or to deny truth now, when he
writ's to a Pope, his lawful Superior? Upon what Principle does this
ungrounded calumny Stand? Pray you Answer.

2. After some Parergons, not worth the mentioning. Mr Stilling: Says. When S.
Hierome Pronounces those Aliens and Profane, who are out of the Communion of
the Church, it either belongs not to the particular Church of Rome, or if it
does, it makes not to our purpose. What mean these words, The particular Church
of Rome? The sole Diocese of that City? No. S. Hierome speak's of the Church
built upon S. Peter, or of all Churches united in Faith with that See, where
Damasus then sat, which only (excluding Aliens, That is all heretical
Societies) make up the true Universal Orthodox Church, as shall be demonstrated
hereafter. Well says Mr Stilling: Suppose I grant that S. Hierome spoke of the
particular Church of Rome (he means, or it is Nonsense, of all Churches of the
same Faith with the Roman) yet this comes not home to the purpose, unless we
Catholics prove our Church to be as Orthodox now, as She was in those
Primitive times. We prove, Good Sr. Prove you on God's name, to Mr Stilling:
demand impertinent.
whom proving belong's, That this Church is less Orthodox now, than formerly.
Who ever stand's in a known old path as we Do, ought not to prove he stand's
there, ( Olim possideo prior possider, is his proof) but one that start's
aside, and takes to a new way (as you have done) should tell us, why he left
the other high Road wherein his Ancestors walked? No prince proves his Right
and Title to a Rebel, but if any be so ungracious as to rebel, that man must
show why he did so, or suffer for it. But of this subject so much is said in
the other Treatise that I hold it unanswerable, More shall be added in its due
place. In the mean while you see a pretty way of arguing, which run's upon an
idle Supposition. viz. That the Roman Church is altered from it self, since S.
Hieroms time. The improbable Supposition is first to be proved, before the
Argument have any force, till then we may lawfully judge, that S. Hierom's
Testimony concludes against this Adversary. Pray tell me, If I, upon a bare
Supposition, should assert that Mr Stilling: is no good Divine, and thence
infer, he is His false supposition not proved.
unfit to write Controversies, might he not most justly be angry, and well deny
my Assertion, because the Supposition whereon the Assertion stand's is not
proved? No more, say is it is proved in the present Matter. viz. That our Church
Doctrine is altered from it self since the primitive times. Prove that upon
sound Principles, and you will do more then Ever Protestant did hitherto.

3. Hence all Mr Stilling: following talk of Paralogisms falls to nothing. It
is he says, our perpetual Paralogism, when the Fathers are cited in praise of
the Church of Rome although sometimes their Rhetoric swelled too high in their
Encomiasticks, (They are his words) That we will needs have these praises to be
understood as well of that Church in our present age, as in the Fathers time
when it better deserved them; And he add's. As though, it were not possible for
a Church to be eminent for purity of Doctrine in one age, and to decline from it
in another. Answer. All this is worse than a Paralogism or any captious way of
reasoning, for it tend's to nonsense unless the main Supposition be proved, to
wit, That the Roman Apostolical Catholic Church, once certainly pure in
Doctrine has or Can decline from her Purity in afrer ages. Mr Stilling: knows
well that Catholics, who hold their Church infallible, make the receding from
its Purity a thing impossible. How sensles then is it in this place, where that
Question of Infallibility is not handled, first to suppose our Church fallen
off from its old Doctrine, and then to tell us the Fathers Encomiums have Still
that is Supposed which should be Proved.
nothing to do with it in this present state? I argue thus, and Mr Stilling: P.
314. seems to approve it. Upon the Supposition that the Roman Catholic Church
has not swerued nor can swerue from it is first pure Doctrine, The Fathers
Elogiums are in this age as due to it, as in any other. But the Supposition
must stand firmly built, as you shall see hereafter, upon sure grounds and
Principles. But contrariwise this way of arguing is Nonsense? I Will suppose
upon no grounds, the Roman Catholic Church to have erred, and then I Will do an
open injustice and deny it the due Commendations given by the Fathers. It is
just as if one should say. I Will suppose a man hitherto reputed honest, to be a
thief and then I Will deny him justice, and hang him up.

4. I say upon no Grounds. And to prove my Assertion, ask? With what Church
then visible in the world were Christians obliged to Communicate, when all see
S. Hierome will have them to Communicate with some Church? Mr Stilling: Answers
with the Catholic Church. Very Good. I Ask again, whether the Roman Church,
and all other Churches united in Faith with it, were rightly called the true
Catholic Church? Grant this you yield the cause, And Confess that Christians
were then obliged to be in union with the Roman Catholic Church. Contrariwise,
if you deny that to have been then the true Church, you are cast upon No other
Church Catholic but the Roman.
endless difficulties, and here is one which cannot be solued. Upon the denial
you, Sr, are obliged to denote, or name an other Catholic Church distinct from
the Roman, more pure in Doctrine at that time, than She was, And that not only
the Romans, but all others were Aliens and Profane who eat not the lamb or
communicated not in faith, with your new found fancied Church in the air. I
say fancied, for to point at such a Church on earth is as impossible, as to
prove known condemned Heretics to be good Catholics, whereof see more in the
other Treatise. Disc. 3. c. 1.

5. Mr Stilling. to shift off the difficuIty will perhaps say, When S. Hierome
wrote This, The Roman Church was truly Orthodox, and that He accounted all
Aliens and Profane who communicated not with it. Most true Doctrine: But see
what follows. Be pleased to fall lower to the third or fourth Age after S.
Hierome, There was then, I hope, a Catholic Church in the world, wherewith
Christians Communicated in Faith; but most evidently there was not any T^en
reputed Orthodox, if we exclude the Roman from being so, For all other
Societies nameable, In the ages after S. Hierome, no Church Orthodox but the
Roman.
though called Christians were professed Heretics; With these no man was
obliged to communicate, Therefore all were either bound to Communicate with the
Roman Catholic Church, or with no Church at all. Hence I infer that the
Fathers Elogium's given to the Roman Catholic Church were ever most justly
due, not once only, during the Primitive times, but now also and in all Ages:
Withal I assert, That Mr Stilling: denying this Truth, speak's his own fancy
without proof, or the least appearance of any probable Principle. And he will
be as wholly vnprincipled, if I first suppose (as I may if my Creed be true)
That there is now at this very hour a true Catholic Church on earth, and
should next demand, where that Church is, in whose union I must live and dye?
Will He pitch, think ye, upon an union with the Arians, Graecians, Abyssins
Anabaptists Protestants or Quakers? Light where he pleases, he can only vent
his fancy without Proof or Principle. Now cast as it were this fancy into a
balance with those most weighty significant Testimonies of ancient Fathers,
who positiuely press for communion with the Roman Catholic Church, and you
will see a strange vneauen Parallel (conceited whimsyes, And strong reasonable
Arguments, laid together). Yet wonder nothing, for weak fancy is the strongest
Adversary Catholic Religion has S. Cyprians Testimony proposed.


6. You have yet an other Authority grossly misvsed by Mr Stilling: Page 315.
And it is a known Passage of S. Cyprian in his 55. Epistle to Cornelius, where
he complain's of certain factious Schismatics, who dared to sail to the chair
of S. Peter, and the Principal Church from whence Priestly unity had its
Origin, and carry letters from Profane and Schismatical persons. Nec cogitare
eos esse Remons etc. not thinking them to be the Romans ( whose Faith the
Apostle commended) ad quos perfidiae haebere non possit accessum, to whom
falsehood, untruth, unfaithfulness, cannot have Access. Thus S. Cyprian And I put
much force in those words. Eos esse Romanos. Those who then lived to be the
Romans, prophetically commended by the Apostle, which words taken in an obuious
sense argue, that true Faith should never part from the Sea of Rome. But Mr
Stilling: conceal's this force, and translates. Not considering that the Romans
etc. No less energy lies in the other following words. To whom unfaithfulness
can have no Access, which seem to exclude a possibility of falsehood from the
Roman Church.

7. Now listen a little to four strange Glosses laid upon this one Text. Three
of them are the Bishops, and one Mr Stilling: Vain Glosses Laid upon The
Testimony.
lays claim to, The Bishops says first. Perfidia can hardly stand here for
error in Faith. And why not my Lord? He Answers. It properly signifies
malicious falsehood in matter of Trust, or in fact against the Discipline And
government of the Church. And I say, it as properly signifies Unfaithfulness, or
Untruth, And therefore excludes error in Faith from the Romans; yea it must
have this sense here, because its opposed to the Faith of the Romans so much
commended by the Apostle, which was true Christian Faith. Perfidia therefore
fignifies the quite contrary, that is error in Faith. But grant the sense to
be as the Bishop glosseth, it excludes at least from the Romans to whom S.
Cyprian wrote, a Possibility of doing any thing against the Discipline and
Government of the Church, or of being maliciously false in Matter of Trust. If
this be so, much more are they secured by virtue of these words. ( Ad quos
persidia non possit habere accessum) from a possibility of erring in Faith, for
what auail's it to have a Church guarded from unjust dealing in Matters of
Trust, if you make it liable to Error in the main Essential, which is true
Faith, the very ground of Salvation, And Principle cause also of just
proceeding amongst Christians? Perhaps these men will say. S. Cyprian in his
Elogium respected only the first Romans commended by the Apostle, not Those who
lived in his An other Gloss refuted.
time. Contra 1. That is not only said without Proof, but improbably falsifies
the Saints express words. Eos esse Romanos, as is now noted. Contra. 2. If S.
Cyprian only relate to the Romans whom the Apostle taught, what need is there
to keep a coile about the signification of Perfidia, when those first
Christians had for their Instructor an Infallible Apostle. If therefore S. Paul
could not err in faith, Perfidia, may well exclude all misbelief or error in
Matters of Faith from that Apostolical Church. And here we make way to discover
the Bishops leuity in his second Gloss.

8. Suppose says he, it be granted that, Perfidia, Signifies error in faith,
or Doctrine, yet it belongs not to the Romans absolutely, but with a respect to
those first Romans, whose Faith was commended by the Apostle. Contra 1. Upon
what certain Principle does this confident Assertion stand? It belongs not
absolutely to the Roman Church? Prove thus much by a sure Principle, and
something is said to the purpose. But without a solid Probation we look on it
as a whimsey only, or a thought of fancy. Yet more. What mean's his Lordship by
those dark words. With a respect to those first Romans? Will he say that the
first Romans were infallible in Faith and make those others to whom S. Cyprian
wrote fallible? This must be his meaning or nothing, A second and third Gloss
rejected.
For if both were equally infallible, or both alike fallible, he gains nothing
by the word, Respect, to the first Romans. Therefore he must hold that ancient
Church of Rome to be more infallibly founded in Faith, than the later Romans
were to whom S. Cyprian wrote; Admit this, He makes the Saint not only to
flatter a whole Church, but to speak Nonsense also. For in effect he says thus
much. Your Ancestors the Romans, were so secured from error in Faith, that
they could not decline from Christ's Doctrine, but you now are in a very
tottering Condition, for you may swerue from the Faith of your Ancestors, you
may perhaps believe as they did, and perhaps not, Howeuer I will sooth you up
and praise you, as a Church impossible to err with, an Ad quos Perfidia habere
non possit accessum. You are men so faithful that no Misbelief can touch you.
The last Gloss of the Bishop is thus. S. Cyprians Elogium seems rather a
Rhetorical insinuation, than a Dogmatical Assertion. Mark the proofles word,
Seems, it is only a thought of my Lords fancy, which I am sure seems far from
a dogmatical Assertion. What? That a Saint and worthy Bishop should Rhetoric
it in so weighty a Matter? But enough of this nothing.

9. To make something do at last, Mr Stilling: Page. 317. lays his Gloss by
my Lord's, and has a good opinion of it. To Mr Stilling: misinterpretation.
give every man his due, it is better than any of the Bishops. He says in a
word, (after a relation of the present state of Rome at that time, when those
Schismatics, Felicissimus and Fortunatus came thither) that, Perfidia, may
well denote the Falsness and treacherous dealing of those two Persons, who
seemed good Catholics, but were not so, and sought to ioyn in Communion with
Cornelius and the Catholic Party, but meant it not. Now such Iuglers should
have no Access to the Principal Church, or to those Romans, whose Faith the
Apostle so highly extolled, so that Perfidia Respects not the Romans, nor
excludes Error from that Church, but lays falsehood (as was well deserved) on
those Schismatics. This I take to be Mr Stilling: meaning. Contra. 1. The
Gloss, every one sees, violently strained, makes the allusion between Fides and
Persidia, Both Strained and inconsistent with S. Cyprians sense.
insignificant. 2. It is inconsistent with the Authors whole sense, who speak's
(not of perfidious men but) of Falsehood and Untruth, which could not have
Access to that principal Church. For it is evident, that perfidious persons, as
Mr Stilling: tell's the Story, actually had Access, And therefore could
certainly have it, when Fortunatus and Felicissimus came to Rome. 3. Make the
most you can of this Gloss it reaches no further but to a mere far-fetcht
Guess, and what is gained by That? Can Mr Stilling: establish his Opinion of
the Churches fallibility on no surer grounds? Can he hope to drive me by
guesses and Glosses, not only from the Obuious sense of these words, but also
from the clear Expressions of innumerable other Fathers who stand openly for an
infallible Church? It is a disperate Improbability. Yet so it is: These
selfconceited Glosses and nothing else, Uphold Protestancy in every controuerted
Matter. The infinite number of them, and the Stories Mr Stilling: tell's to no
purpose at all, so enlarge his Rational account, That if you fling these away,
you may easily put the remainder of that Book, into a small Decimo sexto.

10. Be pleased to observe a little. We say, and Christ said it before us, Hell
gates should not preuail against the Church founded Glosses opposed to manifest
Proofs.
by Divine Providence, But fancied Glosses disputes it at last into a
Possibility of being perverted by Hell, and Heresy also. We say, it is the
Pillar and ground of Truth, but Glosses laid upon these words must be thought
so strong as to shake it all in pieces. We say, Christ will be with his Spouse
to the end of the world. Hold there, say Sectaries, our Glosses tell you, No,
For this promise was only Conditionally True, in all that succeeded the
Apostles. A fitting Assistance we allow it, such as pleases our fancies, But no
more. We say with S. Cyprian S. Hierome, S. Irenaeus and other Fathers, that
the Church never depart's from what She once held; that in Her is the Rule and
square of Faith; that in Her, is the Spirit of God, That She is the welspring
of truth, The dwelling place of Faith etc. But a company of Glosses spoil all
this Doctrine, And so rack the sense of these clear Expressions, that one may
boldly swear, the Gloss and Text are sworn enemies.

CHAP. XVII.
Why the Glosses of Sectaries are impertinent and weightles? Mr Stillingfleet
misinterprets other Fathers. Of his unskillful Speculation concerning Idolatry
Charged on Catholics.

1. MVch is said in the Other Treatise. Disc. 4. C. 4. n. 8. of our Protestants
Glosses, Here you have a further discovery of their weakness, And it is the only
thing aimed at in this, And the precedent Chapters. In a word thus I conclude.
That man who in Matters of Controversies defend's a Doctrine upon no surer
grounds then mere doubtful And uncertain Glosses are, added to Scripture and
the Fathers, (which An assertion clearly laid forth.
seem contrary to his Doctrine) most evidently stand's vnprincipl'd, proceed's
weakly, and proves nothing. But the Protestant makes his weak, and doubtful
Glosses, charged on such Authorities as are produced for our Catholic Tenets,
the sole Support, the only Proof of his contrary Doctrine, Therefore He proceeds
unreasonably, and proves nothing. You shall see this euidenced in the present
Matter now briefly hinted at, of the Infallibility of the Roman Catholic
Church. Mr Stilling: Asserts, She is fallible. I ask how He proves the
Assertion? What? By express Scripture, universal Tradition, the unanimous
Consent of Fathers, the Definitions of any ancient Church or Council? These are
excellent Principles: Could He settle How Sectaries proceed to weaken it.
his opinion upon all, or upon any one of them we have done and must yield. But
he proceed's strangely, and I must needs tell you How. The man hopes to weaken
our proofs drawn from the Fathers in behalf of the Churches infallibility, And
thereby to establish his Position. She is fallible. I demand, how can our
Proofs be weakened? His Answer must be (for he has no other) I will so tamper
with these your alleged Texts that at last I Will make them prove nothing for
your Churches Infallibility, And consequently I may hold my Contrary Position
(of her Fallibility) very well established. The inference is worth nothing, but
let it pass. I Ask. 3. What is it he will tamper withal, or how can he make
null those manifest Texts which clearly lie open to every eye east on the
Fathers, And euince, (as we shall see hereafter) that the Church is infallible?
Mr Stillinfleets strain through his whole book (For, Facta loquuntur,) return's
the best Answer. My Guesses (says he) And Glosses laid on the Fathers, when
seemingly contrary to Protestant Doctrine Shall make them speak another
language, no way favoring the Churches infallibility.

2. Here we come to the point, And demand in the last place. Whether these
Glosses are so clearly their Own Selfe-Euidence, that by their very light they
lay a Truth before an understanding Their Glo^ses no self Evidence.
not to be contradicted. For example. Whether S. Cyprian in the Passage now
cited, gave only, as Mr Stilling: says, a taste of his old office of a
Rhetorician, And spoke not dogmatically? Is this I say an undeniable Truth?
Most evidently no. For stretch it to the furthest it can be no more but a most
doubtful and uncertain Gloss, I say it is highly improbable. Now be pleased to
reflect. The Assertion concerning the Churches fallibility is no Self-euidenced
Truth nor clear Ex terminis (no more is our contrary Doctrine of the Churches
infallibility) To give it Therefore proof and weight, these Glosses are cast
upon the Fathers, who seemingly at least favor infallibility; But these very
Glosses which should do that service are as vneuident, as uncertain, And
doubtful as the very Doctrine is, They should enlighten and lend proof too, Ergo
they advance not at all the Doctrine concerning the Churches fallibility. For,
proofs which are as uncertain as the very Doctrine is which should be proved,
can never raise that to a greater measure of certainty than it had before such
proofs were thought of. Please to mark what I say. The Doctrine of the Churches
fallibility here supposed by Sectaries is uncertain, and for that reason lies
in it is. Vneuidence, until solid Proofs clear it, or expel both the vneuidence
and uncertainty, But these Glosses when they appear, are as vneuident and
uncertain as the Doctrine is, Therefore they cannot raise the Doctrine to any
higher degree of certainty, than to mere vneuidence and uncertainty: I would
have this noted, For it is a ground whereby I shall show hereafter Protestancy
to be a most improbable Religion, And Therefore will deliver it once more in
these plainer Terms. If the Sectary has no surer Principle whereon to found his
yet vneuidenced opinion, of the Churches fallibility then Doubtful Glosses laid
on Scripture The force of our Argument more significantly expressed.
and Fathers; (as evidently he has not) And These Glosses, which should prove
that Doctrine be as deuoid of strength as remote from Principles, as uncertain,
or doubtful, as that very, yet vneuidenced Doctrine is; It follows clearly,
That both the Doctrine and the Glosses fall to nothing but only subsist by
fancy, which is a real Truth. From all now said I infer, that whoeuer
interpret's, must have his Doctrine firmly grounded upon certain Principles
distinct from his own interpretations (as the Catholic ever has) or nothing
is proved.

3. Mr Stilling: may reply, His intention whilst he interpret's these Fathers
is not to prove immediately his own Opinion of the Churches fallibility, but
only to show our alleged Testimonies come not home, or want force to prove Her
infallible. Now to show our proofs forceles in order to what we hold, is not to
make good his contrary Assertion: For these two things are very different; Our
Adversaries reply refuted.
To make null our proofs, And to establish his own Doctrine. Answ. I grant they
are different. But neither is, nor can be done. Not the first. Because these
Glosses are no S^lf-euident proving, That the Fathers sense is rightly hit on:
And Principles distinct from these Glosses, whereby it may be shown what
Doctrine the Fathers delivered in this particular, Mr Stilling: has not any so
much as meanly probable. To the second I Answer. If He offer's not to prove his
Tenet of the Churches fallibility by the little strength these glosses have, I
avouch it boldly, All further Probations fail him, and for that reason he is
either forced to make use of such, poor stuff to prove withal or must sit down
silent, And grant his Tenet cannot be proved. He may perhaps tell us our Church
has erred de facto, Ergo it is fallible: And here is his Principle. I Answer
its no Principle to me, but an Heresy; And as Asserted by him it is as much, yea
more, doubtful than all his glosses are laid together. He may reply. 3. His
Glosses may at least be thought probable. I utterly deny that, And here is my
ground. Solely considered they evidence not their own probability, But need
further proof and probable Principles to rely on; But such proofs are wanting
to found Probability upon, Therefore these glosses are supposed only, not
proved probable. Had Mr Stilling: plain Scripture, any Orthodox Church, or
Fathers clear for the Doctrine maintained by him, He might well talk of the
strength Of his Glosses, but to make Glosses probable, The Sectaries Glosses
not so much as Probable.
when no probable ground supports the Doctrine, for Whose sake he Glosses, is
not only lost labor, but share's much of Nonsense. Again. Were these Glosses
probable, (which I shall never grant) our Answers to them are at least as
probable; And what gain's either Party to their cause by skirmishing in the
dark with weak Probabilities only? Matters of Religion, which must stand upon
sure Principles (or there is no such thing as Religion in the world) would be
just like weak Opinions in schools Tenable or not tenable as different
judgments please to Opine, might. Topics, And probabilities only, sway in so
weighty a Cause.

4. Upon this ground you have Evidence enough, against these pretended
Probabilities of Sectaries (whereof more presently) Be pleased to observe it.
The Catholic says. The Roman Catholic Church is infallible. No, says the
Protestant. She is fallible. Here lies the contradiction. If both these
Adversaries Assert so boldly, each of them (supposing that God has revealed
the one or other part of the Contradiction) must solidly prove what he Assert's
in so weighty a Matter. And can any man persuade himself, that an Infinite
wisdom has laid That Truth whereon so much depend's and is now revealed to
Christians (whether it be the Churches fallibility or the contrary) in The
obuious truths of Christianity not proved by Guesses.
such Obseurity, or removed it so far from prudent Reason, That no man can find
it out or prove it, but by the dark glimpses of weak Guesses, of uncertain
Topics and Probabilities, which of their own nature easily throw men into
error? Grant thus much, We first do injury to Gods Revelation. Next we are
left in suspense, And know not what to believe. And here I ask whether Mr
Stillingfleet will oblige me under pain of damnation steadfastly to believe the
absolute fallibility of the Roman Catholic Church? If he does, no weaker
Principle then plain Scripture can be my Security, And this I require of him.
If he recoyle and produce not plain Scripture, He is more than imprudent, to
force on me a new Faith contrary to the judgment of a whole Church, upon no
stronger proofs than weak guesses are. Lastly, may Topics auail here, we lay
an impossible obligation on our selves whilst all must say, God will have us to
believe and with all certainty what he has revealed in this particular; Yet
when we come to examine the Grounds and Proofs of our certain belief, All Proofs
vanish away into Topics Proofs of Christianity no weak Topics.
and uncertain fancies. Hence I conclude, if the Protestant affirm's, as he
does, that our Church is fallible, He must prove the Assertion by indubitable
Principles, And the like obligation lies on the Catholic, who says. She is
infallible; And this by the grace of God shall be proved in the next Discourse.

5. In the interim if you desire to see more of much injury done to the ancient
Fathers, turn only to Mr Stilling: 3. Part. C. 3. P. 58. Where he oppugn's our
Catholic Doctrine of praying to Saints, And you may well stand astonished at
his Vnprincipled Glosses. He says first. The Expressions of Fathers which seem
most to countenance this Innocation, are only Rhetorical flourishes. Has the
Assertion any probability think you? Read only the Testimonies alleged by
Cardinal Bellarmin de Sanct: Beatitudine. Cap. 19. Br Cardinal P^rron (large
upon this subject) And Cardinal Richel e^. Traitte pour conuertir cenx qui se
sont separez de L'Eglise. Lib. 3. Chiefly Page 420. (It is not now my intent to
transcribe those many unanswerable Authorities alleged in behalf of our
Doctrine) And if after the perusal you see not plainly that both Mr
Stillingfleet and his Lord do grossly abuse the Fathers, deny me credit
hereafter.

6. To convince the first: of unjust proceeding, I Will only instance Mr
Stilling: again abuses the Fathers,
in one particular. P. 589. Where he says that S. Gregory Nyssen in his
commendation of S. Theodorus the martyr, made use of Rhetoric in his
Apostrophe to the Saint, without any solemn Invocation. It is utterly untrue.
The words of S. Gregory are These. Paris Print. 1615. Page 1011. And 1017. when
the Scythians threatened ruin to the Countery: Pray for us, make intercession to
him who is our Common Lord and King, As you are a soldier fight for us and
defend us, And as you are a martyr, speak freely for your fellow servants, A
few lines after. And if more Prayers be needful assemble together the whole
Quire of your Brethren Martyrs, and jointly intercede for us. Put S. Peter in
mind, move S. Paul and the beloved Disciple of our Lord, that They be
solicitous for the Churches, where they once were chains, passed dangers, And
finally dyed. Judge, good Reader, whether this recourse made to a Saint in time
of danger be only a Rhetorical flourish, when the very words imply a most
solemn and serious Invocation. Pray for us, Make intercession. Let all the
Martyrs jointly become Petitioners in our behalf in these our necessities, are
no flourishes but holy and hearty Inuocations. Yet more. When all the Fathers
in the Council of Calcedon. Act. 11. Tom. 2. Council Part. 1. P. 340. No less
publicly, in the Express for Invocation.
presence of the whole Council, than piously inuoked the Holy martyr Flauianus
thus. Flauianus post mortem viuit. Martyr pro nobis oret. Flauianus lives after
Death, let that Martyr Pray for us. Can any one in Conscience think that this
was only a Rhetorical flourish? Or that the learned Theoderet acted only a
Rhetoricians part, when in his History of Saints He concludes every life, as
Bellarmin observes, with an earnest Petition that by the holy intercession of
these happy souls, now in Bliss, he might have aid and divine Assistance? S.
Austin was a good Rhetorician, yet no man will say, he made use of flourishes
in that plain and devout prayer to our Blessed Lady. Tom: 9. lib. Doctrine at
least Collected out of S. Austin
Meditat: C. 40. Holy and immaculate Virgin Mother of God, Mother of our Lord
Jesus Christ vouchsafe to pray for me to him, Cuius meruisti effici templum,
for whom you have deserved to be made a worthy Temple: He mean's the Temple of
her sacred body, wherein her only Son our Savior, pleased to inhabit nine
months together. A whole volume would be necessary to allege other Fathers in
confirmation of our Catholic Doctrine. But these few manifestly prove that Mr
Stilling: grossly erred, when he said, that the Expressions of Fathers which
seem to Countenance the invocation of Saints, look only like Blossoms, and
pretty flourishe^ in Rhetoric, Withal, that his second Assertion (viz. The
Church did not then admit of the Invocation of Saints, but only of the
Commemoration of Martyrs) is no more but a dream, or a most improbable saying.

7. It is not now my intent, when I only touch a few, to tax Mr Stilling: of
many other gross mistakes in this one controversy, whereof I verily think his
own Conscience accuses him (but^ leave that to God). Howeuer, because contrary
to his vsu^l manner he enters upon a preculation, which I am consident he
vnderstand's not, I will do so much service as to vnbeguile both him and his
Reader.

8. Page 595. he says. I cannot possibly see but that kind of Mr Stilling:
Speculation, Examined.
worship which was given by the Heathens to their Damons, was defensible upon
the same grounds that the Invocation of Saints is now. Her^ is all. Mr
Stilling: see's not the difference: Ergo, There is none. Let that pass. Next
Augustus Caesar is brought in for an Instance. The Senate, says he, decrees
that Divine honors shall be given to Augustus, And we cannot think that by
virtue of this decree August^ assumed a Divine nature or, became absolutely God.
No indeed. For no decree of a Senate can make a Sinner either God, or Sa(...).
But the Question is, what honor the Senate intended to give that Roman
Emperor? You say it was Divine. What the Divine honor was, decreed as due to
him, neither you nor I, Sr, know too well, nor does it much import us to know
at present. Let that therefore pass also. We now come to the point. Suppose,
say you, that some Roman Catholic should believe Augustus to have been a
Saint: Next suppose the Heathen and Catholic to be at their prayers together
to Augustus, you, demand wherein lies so much difference, That the one is
Idolatry and the other not. Here, Sr, its clear you understand not your self,
For it is no more Idolatry to worship one as a saint that is none, then to
reverence one for a Father (or prince) who is not so. Idolatry is then
committed when we either adore a creature as God, or appropriate some
perfection to it which belongs to God. Should you therefore hold all John Foxes
(miscalled) Martyrs, Saints, And then invoke them, you would be upon that
account a false and foolish worshiper, yet no Idolatrer, whilst you Reverence
them as saintly creatures only, And attribute no perfection to them which
properly belongs to God: No more say I, would the Heathen and Catholic Commit
Idolatry, though they reverenced Augustus and prayed to him as a Saint.

9. This mistake discovered, I must tell you, Had you proposed the question
more ingenuously, And told us, whether the erring Catholic when he belieues
Augustus a Saint and prays to him is to be supposed mistaken by a Judgment
vincible or invincible Full of mistakes.
erroneous (The like is of the Heathen) you had solued your own difficulty, And
might well have Spared that after talk, which comes in Thus. Neither of them
supposes Augustus to be the Supreme God, both the Catholic and Heathen look on
him as having a middle kind of excellence between God and man, the external
actions are the same in both and their apprehensions of his excellency being
equal, the incl^nations of their wills to testify their douotion must be equal
too. Here is a two fold fallacy on foot again. One lies in those vnexplicated
Terms. A middle kind of excellence. An other (and that is worse) in concealing
the tendency of these supposed apprehensions, or Judgments rather, which may
be either vincibly or inuincibly erroneous: And mark well the distinction for
it discouers your whole mistake. Concerning the first. I ask, what that middle
Excellency is, which must be equally applied to the apprehension of the Heathen
and the Catholic? Must both of them be supposed to err so grossly, as to own
Augustus a Saint in Heaven as the Patriarchs and Apostles now are Or must the
Catholic only judge so? This later cannot be unless you make the Catholic
most inuincibly ignorant. Howeuer, such an error is possible, For as a man by
invincible ignorance may judge one to be a Prince who is not, in like manner He
may be so inuincibly beguiled as to think Augustus a Saint who is not, And so
may the Heathen (though it is very difficult) be deceived also. Upon this
Supposition of invincible ignorance which you, Sr, never reflected on, I
Answer. Neither the Heathen nor the Catholic do, or Invincible ignorance
excuses all Crime.
can commit (we must Still use your improper Phrase) Formal Idolatry, but
material only, The reason is evident. For though Augustus be really no Saint,
yet that middle kind of excellency now mentioned, is upon the Supposition
inuincibly apprehended by both as if He were one, And consequently the
apprehensions had of Caesar's Sanctity, the inclinations of their Wills to
Testify their devotion to him, And external actions may be equal, yea one and
the same in both, but without fear of any formal false Homage, because
invincible ignorance takes off that formal Crime, And thus far, if we speak of
sinful Veneration, there is no difference between them. The instance now hinted
at clear's all.

10. One comes among us from a strange Country nobly attended, demean's
himself like a Prince, or some great Person, and though in real truth he is no
more but a Counterfeit, yet He imploies his wit so well, dissembles so
dexterously, That all inuincibly judge him to be what he is not, a Person of
honor: They apprehend a middle kind of excellence in him between a great
Monarch and an ordinary man, Reverence him accordingly by their external
actions, and inclinations of their wills, and therefore commit (might one speak
so) some kind of Civil material Idolatry, But are excused from the formal
offense, because of their ignorance, which is both inculpable and invincible.
Thus the case is in our present Matter, whilst the Ratio formalis of the
Heathen and the Catholics Adoration is one and the same, that is whilst
Sanctity, or what else you will, is inuincibly apprehended in dead Caesar, which
is not.

11. Exclude then this case of invincible ignorance, which though dissembled by
you, lays open the whole cheat, The rest of your discourse comes to nothing.
Observe it. You talk of a middle kind of Excellence apprehended in Caesar
between Divine and Humane. You should have said plainly First. What this
excellence is as it stand's in the Apprehensions of a Heathen and Catholic?
You will have it. 2. To be some thing which neither belongs to the Supreme God
nor to a mere mortal man, Therefore what ever you imagine, is no real Object in
Caesar, nor any Excellence due to him. Whence it follows that all these
Apprehensions, or judgments rather, (for apprehensions solely considered are
neither true nor false) which attribute that middle Excellence to Augustus are
false in themselves, because not conformable to their Object. Now further: If
false in themselves, they are either vincibly and culpably false, and Therefore
ought to be laid aside; Or inuincibly false, because the judgment is
inuincibly deluded. Suppose the first case of vincible error, what ever prayer
or Adoration follows upon that judgment is both a formal and How the worship
may be sinful.
material Crime, because some kind of excellence is unworthily given to
Augustus which belong's not to him. If so; The Catholic and the Heathen
continue in their Idolatry. Contrariwise, if you suppose these judgments
inuincibly erroneous, which can scarce have place in the Catholic unless he be
strangely ignorant, what ever Adoration follows upon them is only a material
Offense without the Formal sin, as is now declared. Wherefore I verily think
you, Sr, understand not your self too well, when you first suppose the Ratio
formalis of prayer or Adoration the same in the Catholic and Heathen, And then
tell us, we are not to enquire whether the Apprehension be true or false, but
what the nature of that act of Religion is, which is consequent upon such an
apprehension.

12. Sr, in case of invincible ignorance, it little import's to inquire after
the Truth or Falsehood of the Apprehension, for neither the one nor other
(because out of the reach of one erring inuincibly) has influence into any act
of Religion, Aand therefore there can be no irreligious worship or formal sin
grounded upon such a judgment, if that Supposition stand. All then which ought
to be searched into though omitted by you is. How, or in what manner these
misled judgments tend unto their Object? If blameably, because vincible they
are sinful, if invincible and not in man's power to mend, They cannot hurt any.
In all other cases except this one of invincible ignorance you must enquire
whether the Apprehension or judgment be true or false. Suppose then it be
vincibly and culpably false, it is apt to beget false worship, And should be
laid aside. Suppose it true: It only says thus much. Dead Augustus was a wise
and gallant Commander (Here is all that can be truly apprehended of him) But
this judgment, as it find's no What is to be inquired.
excellence in that dead Prince deserving prayer or religious Veneration, so it
cannot incline the will to exhibit any religious duty to him.

13. And here we come to enlighten you a little, because you say. You see not,
but that kind of worship which was given by the Heathens to their Demons, was
as defensible upon the same grounds, as the Invocation of Saints is now. Can
you, Sr, Speak in earnest? What Now? in this present state, when men's
judgments are cleared of error and invincible ignorance, can you find no
difference? The difference is most palpable: For that Deity is not in being,
The Saint really is in Heaven. The Heathen adores his Demon misled by a false
improbable Opinion and Therefore commit's Idolatry, The Catholic worship's a
Saint, assured of the Truth by a judgment most certain, And therefore what He
adores is worthy Adoration, unless you can Vnsaint those who are in Heaven, or
prove they deserve no Reverence The diffrence between (...)e and f^^se worship.
in hat happy State. Finally, the Heathens judgment, because vn^easonable, and
against the light of nature, if it own's a Deity in Caesar, is culpably sinful,
and ought to be laid down: The Catholics Judgment point blank contrary, ought
not to be put away. Now, Sir, if you say. All the Heathens worship of their
Demons or inferior Gods, arose from invincible ignorance of their Excellence
(which is more then you can prove or probably maintain) Here is yet the
difference between them and Catholics, that These are neither formal nor
material false worshipers, The Heathens were at least materially so.

14. What follows in Mr Stilling: is not like his speculation any choice
Matter but vulgar only, refuted again and again. As. 1. That the Rites of
Canonizing Saints Answer to the Rites of the ancient Emperors Apoth^osis. 2.
The Formal reason of Idolatry lay in offering up those devotions to that which
was not God, which only belong's to an Infinite Being. Let the Expression
pass. Catholics, I am sure, offer up no such devotions to Saints as they
Adoration very different.
do to God, knowing well to distinguish by the internal Acts of their Will
between the Supreme Excellence and all other power inferior to That. 3. Says
Mr Stilling: it is not possible to conceive any Act which does more express our
sense of an Infinite Excellence, And the Profession of our subjection to it,
than Invocation does. Pitiful. He should have said, then such a particular
Invocation does, tending to an Infinite Majesty: For we inuoke and call upon men
now living to Assist us with their Prayers, And likewise Address our selves to
the Saints in Heaven. Yet no man can gather from such devotions any thing like
an acknowledgement of an Infinite Excellence in men now living, or the Saints
in Heaven. But enough of these weightles Arguments, to touch them is to refute
them. And thus much of this, And the other former Digressions. Now we are to a
prosecute further Two necessary points.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Protestant after all his Glosses can not ascertain any, of true Religion.
He would make Controversies an endless work.

1. YOu have been ofen told above, that Sectaries would fain make controversies
a long work, I must now give you the vltimate reason Thereof, And withal prove
it impossible to know in these men's Principles, what is a Christian Truth, and
what not, Their Glosses and impropable way of Arguing lays all which can be
said in darkness and obscurity.

2. To proceed clearly. I suppose first, that Christian Truths as revealed, or
Contained in Christ's Doctrine are infallible, and Principles supposed.
stand firm upon infallible Revelation. I may here also suppose. 2. That either
we Catholics, or our Protestant Adversaries, even in such Tenets as we differ,
Believe and profess Christian Truths. For example. Transubstantiation or no
Transubstantiation, is a Christian truth. The Infallibility of the Roman
Catholic Church, or Her fallibility is a Christian Truth, for they are
Contradictories held by Christians, Therefore the one or other must be owned
true, if maintained as Christian Doctrine. I suppose. 3. That neither part of
these Contradictions; Transubstantiation, or no Transubstantiation (in like
manner we discourse of all other opposite Doctrins) are held their own
Self-euidence or manifestly true Ex terminis like the first Principles in
nature, If Therefore assented to as Christian Truths by the one contrary Party,
or the other; They must be proved by sure Principles extrinsecal to the Doctrine
which each Party embraces.

3. Now you shall see What work Sectaries make in these Disputable Matters, And
how nothing can be certainly known by Them, or owned as a Christian verity. I
would say, It An Assertion Proved.
Can neither be proved in their Principles, That to deny Transubstantiation
(let this one instance serve for all) is a Truth, or, that to hold
Transubstantiation, is an Error. Here is my reason. When Principles whereon
solid proofs should subsist are not, Proofs must of necessity fail, But in
those Controuerted Matters Sectaries have no Principles at all to Argue by,
Therefore proofs must fail. The Minor is euidenced thus. All imaginable
Principles whereon Proofs can stand in this contest, must either be infallible,
or at least morally certain (Mere Probability want's strength to uphold a
Christian Truth) But the Sectary cannot prove by any either infallible or Moral
certain Principle, that his Tenet is a Christian Truth, And ours Contrary to
him is an Error, Ergo. The first part of my Assertion seems evident. For you
know what hauock the Sectary makes of all infallible Principles, Scripture only
excepted, (which I am sure speak's not a word in his behalf, nor against us).
All Churches with him, All Tradition, All Councils, All Fathers also are
fallible and may deceive. Therefore thus much is indisputably clear, He cannot
prove infallibly (I say no more yet) that his Tenets are Christian Truths; or
infallibly, That ours contrary, are Errors, For no man can more derive an
infallible proof from a mere fallible Principle, than fetch gold out of dross
or light out of Darkness. Whateuer Therefore he plead's by next, is under the
degree of infallible certainty. And what is it think ye? O, He has Moral
Assurance (and here is the Principle) that his Tenets are Christian Truths, and
Ours false or erroneous. Very Fallible Principles ground not infallible Doctrine.
good. I ask (Though moral certainty auail's nothings, as we Shall see
hereafter) How he proves no Transubstantiation to be a Doctrine morally certain,
When the Contrary is expressly defined in three General Councils, And held by a
learned Church? Has he any Council so renowned, as either the Latheran or
Tridentine, which ever owned his Negative, as a Christian Truth? Has he any
Church as Universally spread the whole whorld over as the Roman Catholic is,
which maintained his Doctrine three or four Ages since? Evidently No. Upon what
then, ground's He his Moral certainty? I Will tell you in a word. All he can
pretend to, or plead in This Controversy comes to no more, if it reach so far,
But to two or three dubious Authorities, taken from those Fathers who were
Professed members of the Roman Catholic Church; And this little slender part
He makes not only to strive against the whole Church, but moreover gives it so
much strength as to Impeach That great Moral body of error, And utterly to
ruin the Doctrine which has been taught age after age; That is to A part
Compared with the whole.
say. The lesser Part, (or rather a mere supposed part) must be thought so
powerful as to make a happy war Offensive and Defensive against that whole
Moral body whereof it was a member. Is not this a strange Simplicity?

4. Be pleased to take here one Instance from Civil affairs only. Suppose you
have a Parliament consisting of three hundred and three just, upright, grave and
most intelligent Persons, who first treat of some weighty Matter relating to
the good of a Kingdom or Common wealth, And after long deliberation Enact what
in prudence is thought best in order to its Setlement. Suppose withal, that
two or three of a different judgment withstand the Act, and hold what is
concluded not well done. Will any one think ye, not only ascribe a greater
moral Certainty to those three dissenting votes, Than to the other three
hundred But more over decry the far more numerous votes (though of Persons
equally wise) as unjust, impertinent, and remote from the meanest degree of
moral Certainty? And this is done, (reflect An Instance
seriously) upon no other ground, for no other reason, but because Three are
wilfully supposed, by a third Party looking o^, strong enough to oppose the
greater Part. If this instance like you better, make use of it. Imagine that a
Synod Consisting of 303. Protestant Ministers define as they think, What Is b^
to hold within the Compass of Protestant Religion: Imagine also that three
oppose Them, Can any of that Religion allow more Moral certainty to the three
votes, than to the other three hundred, if we respect Authority merely?
Certainly ^

5. Our very case is here sufficiently expressed, and the instances Applied to
our present purpose
easily applied to our present purpose. The Roman Catholic Church is, you
know, a great Moral body comprehending not hundreds, but thousands and
thousands, whereof innumerable are now and in past Ages have been most just,
upright, prudent, and without Controversy most eminently-learned. These
unanimously Enact as it were (whether in the Representative of Councils, or by
the universal voice and vote of the whole Church,) That Praying to Saints,
prayers for the Dead, or which we now insist on, the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, are not only Tenets morally Authorities not clear
impertinently alleged.
certain, But more over Articles of Divine Faith. Our Adversaries to oppose
this unquestionable certainty, produce three or four Authorities not clear (as
is supposed done in Parliament) but weak and strained, and hope hereby to
reuerse, to vnuote, what these thousands have decreed contrary. Three or four
witnesses, And these at most dubious, are here brought in against
Transubstantiation, to make our new men's opinion Morally certain, and yet These
thousands, most wise and learned, though they clearly vote and profess against
it, cannot, forsooth, gain so much credit with a few Sectaries as to advance
the Doctrine to moral Certainty, For here we wave the question of infallible
Assurance. What Doings are these? What days do we live in? The whole Catholic
Church teaches as She ever taught, that the very Substance of bread is really
changed into Christ's Sacred body, And now (o strange times) one Theoderet
though no way opposite is haled in, to reuerse the Doctrine. One, must strive
against, and conquer Thousands. It is, we say, a pretty feat to kill two Birds
with one bolt, But here we have a greater exploit, Theodoret is supposed to
leuel so right with a darker expressions (if yet dark) That he destroies the
Faith of two Churches at Once, the Greeck and Latin. Councils and eminent A
parallel of Authorities.
learned councils, have defined in our behalf, and one Tertullian, Though
herein he speak's most Catholickly, is picked out to plead against them. What Is
one against innumerable? Tradition both Ancient and modern delivers the Truth
we Propugn, And an unknown Gelasius, set up by Sectaries, must be thought
powerful enough to repeal and contradict our fore Fathers Tradition. What
Doings are these? Can the Sectary hope to beat down that strong Fortress
which Hell gates could never yet shake by such slight and forceless Armor?
Alas, go to single votes, we oppose our Iustins, our Cyrills, our Cyprians our
Chrisostoms, clear and express against one Theoderet were he doubtful. Now with
an Addition.
add to these The weight and grave Authority of our Church and Councils, There
is no Parallel no Comparison betwixt us. Yet more. Suppose these few
Authorities were clearly contrary to us, the Protestant only has at most three
votes, as it were in Parliament against Millions, and what gain's he by this?
His pretended Moral certainty stand's not firm like an vncontradicted Truth,
against such a Cloud of opposite witnesses. And.

6. Here you have a further reason of my Assertion. As long as this Principle
stand's sure in nature. A whole body is greater than a Part, and a Part thereof
less extended than the whole, So long it will be indisputably evident, That
the vote or voice of a whole moral body (I mean of a Universal Church far and
near extended) A further proof of our Assertion.
carries with it greater Moral certainty (For all this while we touch not upon
Infallibility) than a small and slender Part can have, were such a part found
so inuincibly ignorant as to contradict the whole. All I would say is. No more
can a few particular members (Though Angels for knowledge) contest with the
contrary judgment of our ample Church, Than three votes in Parliament, with the
Contrary judgment of a whole Kingdom. No more can the Authority of particular
men equalize, much less surmount in weight and worth, the Sentiment of a whole
Moral body, than a hand, For example, surpass in bigness the whole man. As the
one exceed's in quantity and Extension, so the other does in weight and
Intenfion.

7. Hence you see first. How poorly Sectaries play at small Game, when having
no ancient Church of their own to recurr to, They are fain to run for refuge to
a Few Fathers professed members of our Church, And here like people picking
Salads, gather up some small fragments which now they clip, now mangle, now
pervert, now Gloss, now dress after their new fashion, And at last serve all
The new mode of Sectaries arguing.
fairly up in the larger Margents of their little English Books. With these
they flourish and vapor as if, forsooth, a small parcel were able to contrast
with the far greater Moral body, or a few stolen gleaning (were all true they
say) sufficient to Vnuote what ever this Oracle of Truth has defined contrary.
Leave of, I besecch you Gentlemen this Trifling, give us weight for weight,
measure for measure, Please to plead by sound Principles or you lose the cause,
Doge not with us, we deal nobly with you.

8. We give you plain and express Scripture. The Church is a Pillar and ground
of Truth. She is founded upon a Rock etc. And you Scriptureless men, return us
your fancied Glosses. We quote innumerable Fathers most significant for our
Catholic Positions, And you fob us off with obscurities, with Criticisms and
such simple stuff. We appeal to Tradition, you have none. We, (And this mainly
import's) show you a Church, a Visible and a most glorious Church, which time
out of mind, Believed as we believe, And would gladly know where your Orthodox
Church was, The Sectaries Pleading impertinent.
which four Centuries since approved or published your Novelties; And you like
men losing your way, go wandering about till at last you fall upon Theoderet's
Dialogues, And with one single Passage ill espied and worse applied, hope to
undo the whole Catholic cause. It is not one nor ten Theoderets, though they
speak far more clearly than is done, That can prejudice our Doctrine, whilst you
have neither Church nor Councils for yours. These Principles we demand of you,
but you have them not. Therefore you are cast into an impossibility of writing
Controversies hereafter, For the few Shreds of Fathers unluckily cut out by you
are too slight, to obscure the greater Lights of our Christianity, of our
Church, of our Councils, of our Tradition and innumerable Fathers. Believe it,
had the Fathers you Quote so much Strength, as you imagine, others would have
read them before your eyes were open, better Judgments would have weighed what
force they had, before your Luthers and Caluins were in Being. But That wiser
world now gone to Eternity waued such Cauils, And knew well, That what a Titius
or a Ca^us says may be right, And may be wrong, But what the Church of Christ
Defines and teaches, cannot but be sound and Orthodox, if God speak's Truth.
Here is the Principle whereon Christians securely relied in past Ages, before
our later Sectaries troubled the world.

9. You see. 2. in what a pitiful case Sectaries are, when no more is alleged
against our Catholic Doctrine (And rest assured They have no more) but a few
scattered Authorities now taken Doubtful. Authorities, of no weight at all.
from one, now from another ancient Father.* Therefore I discourse thus. The
Authority is either expressly plain against us (which I never yet saw in any
Doctrinal Contest between the Catholic and Protestant) or Contrariwise,
doubtful, and ambiguous. If doubtful; it decides nothing, nor can the
Protestant though He Vow's it Clear, make it so, whilst the learned Catholic
auouches the Contrary; Hitherto both of them stand upon Opinions and end
nothing. Neither can the one or other yet absolutely Say by virtue of such a
Passage only. Your Doctrine is False, And mine is True, For a Principle
rationally apprehended dubious, determin's none to an absolute true judgment,
one way or other. Let us therefore suppose contrary to Truth, That the Sectary
produces a Father indubitably clear against Catholic Doctrine. Thanks be to
God These great lights of the Church are not so scarce with us, But that we are
able to confront that one Authority with the plain Testimonies of other Fathers
far more numerous. And thus much I here engage to do, may it please Sectaries
to come to a just Trial, and fully examine with me this one point of
Transubstantiation, now hinted at: And if after the Contest we do not only
match our Adversary, but quite outvie him with many more Testimonies fully as
clear and clearer, We may then rationally ask what is one clear Authority worth?
I say yet more. Though we falsely suppose these particular contrary Authorities
to lie even, or equal on both Sides, I mean, as pregnant for the Sectary, as
for the Catholic, yet I neither lose my cause, nor he gain's his, Because
neither of us can absolutely say upon what if authorities were equal on both
sides?
Moral certainty, which Doctrine is a Christian Truth, And which not. For in
this conflict of Authorities Supposed equal, both judgments are left in
suspense, The one says I quote clear Authorities for my Tenet: The other
answers He does so too, And Therefore hitherto stand so equally poised That
neither may cry Victory: Neither can yet pretend to so much Moral certainty as
excludes All reasonable doubting, because both Parties must doubt, whilst the
Authorities of the one abate the force of the other. What then follows from
the Fathers Testimonies were they thus equally divided; That is, if as many
clearly stood for the Negative of no Transubstantiation, And just as many
clearly for the Contrary Positive? I Answer, This follows. That we and
Sectaries must of necessity, ( will we know Truth) either appeal to a third
certain concluding Principle, or stand doubtfully opining (as is often done in
what follows upon arguing out of doubtful Principles.
schools) without a final Decision. For, to Believe any thing certainly as
Catholics believe, if that Principle be excluded, or, to know any thing yet
morally certain, as Sectaries pretend to know, is utterly impossible, Because a
Principle purely probable, is evidently too weak, either to Support any firm
Belief, or to ground so much Moral certainty of a Christian Truth, as excludes
a possibility of doubting.

10. You will Ask what then is there which may raise these two Adversaries from
that low degree of mere Opining to a higher degree of certainty? I shall fully
Answer the Question in the next Discourse, Here I say in a word. No Principle
can do this, But one only which the Sectary want's, And the Catholic has to
rely on, which is the Tradition, the Voice and open declared Judgment of
Christ's Catholic Church here on earth. This faithful Oracle raises us from the
supposed State of our guessing Probably, to the highest degree of not only
Moral, but also of Infallible certainty, Though now we press not that against
our Adversaries. The Sectary Therefore who disdain's to learn of this Oracle
what Christian Truths are, shall never come to his Moral certainty, though the
Supposition already made of Authorities equal stood in vigor. Judge then, I
beseech you, How desperate his Cause is now, How remote from all such certainty
De facto, (whether he impugn's our Doctrine, or plead's for his own opinions)
when he has nothing to rely on, but only a few dark and dubious Passages of
some ancient Fathers?

11. I say dubious Passages, for in Truth (if so much) they are no more, And
Therefore though we have hitherto supposed Authorities euenly laid on both
sides (To Show that nothing What the Sectary can Plead.
help's the Sectary* out of his labyrinth) yet now I must tell the Story as
it is. All he has in this world to plead, comes only to a few misinterpreted
Authorities, And with such poor Gleanings, Churchless man as He is, he thinks
to Out-braue a whole Church, To decry Tradition, to vnsense the Fathers, to rob
us of our right, And finally to throw us out of the Possession of those ancient
Christian Truths, which both we and our Ancestors have professed age after age
without Alteration. What think ye? Have a few racked and tortured Sentences
(Add to them as many Cauils, as many Criticisms as you please) force enough to
do such wonders? Can these gleanings, misinterpreted as you have seen, better
inform us of the ancient Primitive Truths, than the General voice or universal
consent of a whole Church now in being? It is improbable. Grant therefore
(which I do On what Principle the Catholic Stand's
not) That we know not too well the sense of one Theoderet, or of a Tertullian
etc. The Catholic cleares his Doctrine, And draws it from surer Principles.
viz. From the voice and open declared Judgment of his Church, And most
deservedly look's on the Sectaries attempt as highly improbable, who will needs
know what Doctrine we are to hold now, or, was anciently held amongst
Christians, by a Fathers Testimony, when the very sense is supposed doubtful,
And lies in obscurity. That is. He will know more than can be known* He will
force light out of darkness, And deri^^ the moral certainty of his Doctrine from
mere doubtful Principles, which is impossible. And thus these men proceed in
all other Controversies, though Conscious, that a whole ample Church decries
their Doctrine as false And the open abuse of Fathers also. O, says the
Sectary, I little regard what the Church decries. Ans^: And much less do I
regard what you cry against it, When the whole strength of your Clamours
vltimatly resolved, comes to no more but to fancied Glosses, laid upon
ambiguous Authorities. What in God's name would you be at? What can you pretend
The Church opposed to Sectaries Clamours.
or intend? Shall clamours, Think ye, and your few clouded Testimonies force me
to leave my ancient Faith, when I evidently know, That the Church I live in,
call's louder on me and more rationally command's me to Believe as I do? This
audible known voice of Christ's Church dull's your clamours, infinitely
Outweigh's your Glosses, your guesses, And the doubtful Sentiment of any
private Father.

12. The Sectary may reply. I have now supposed, without Proof, the Fathers
abused by him, whereas, if the Supposition hold's, its only doubtful whether it
be so or no. Answ: Thus much is only supposed doubtful, That neither of us can
learn by words precisely obscure, what Doctrine to embrace, or what to reject,
Before a surer Oracle speak's and decide, the Controversy. Catholics say this
Oracle is the Church, The Protestant who has no Church to recurr to, stand's
trifling with his obscure Passages, hoping at last to make something of
nothing, to hammer out of dark sentences the Clear Moral certainty of his new
Doctrine Though contrary to the whole Church, And thus He abuses both Fathers
and reason also, Because as I said just now, A doubtful Principle yields not so
much certainty. If He say. 3. His quoted Authorities are sufficiently clear to
ground the Moral certainty of his Doctrine against the Church, it is a
desperate, improbable Speech, For Moral certainty (which should pass as an
vncontradicted truth) most evidently loses that force, when a whole Church
manifestly contradict's it. But hereof enough is Said in the other Treatise.
Disc. 1. C. 6. n. 3.

13. You will ask perhaps, What is to be done if we meet with a Father so clear
and express against Church-Doctrin that he cannot possibly be brought to a
Catholic sense. I Answer. A doubt proposed and solued.
Suppose thus much, which I think was never yet heard of in any Contest betwixt
the Protestant and Catholic, I Will absolutely deny the Authority and adhere to
Church-Doctrin; For, as the whole body is greater than a part, so the judgment
of a whole Church is the stronger Principle here, and ought in reason to
regulate and bear sway, before the sentiment of any private man, who by weakness
or inaduertancy may slip aside into Error. I say through weakness or
incogitancy, for if he obstinately oppose the Church, He is no Father in that,
But an Heretic.

14. Whoeuer reflects well on what is noted already will see, I hope, How near
we are to an End of disputes with Protestants if the Contest arise from the
Authority of Fathers. Here is the Ground of what I am to Say. All the
Authorities which can What Authorities can be quoted?
be quoted in Points now Controuerted are either plain, or esteemed plain for
Catholic Doctrine both by the learned of our Church, and Sectaries also, As is
amply proved above: Or Contrariwise, are at most supposed doubtful. I Assert it
boldly, the Sectary has not one plain Testimony for him in this debated Matter
of Transubstantiation, And if one or two were granted plain that is nothing to
contrast with a whole Church and innumerable other Fathers.

15. Hence I Discourse. In case Authorities be Clear for Catholic Doctrine, the
Sectary opposes us improbably, if he seek to establish his Novelties upon a
Principle which plainly teaches what we teach, And quite ruin's his contrary
Opinions. If the Authority be doubtful, I have said enough already. viz* That,
that gives no Moral certainty, but leaves you where you were before in a state
of doubting. Observe now. All you get from the Protestant when the Fathers
plainly teach Catholic Doctrine, is either to deny the Authority, as the Elder,
And perhaps wiser Protestants have done, or, after Mr Stillingfleets new Mode,
How Sectaries Shift off Authorities.
to Gloss them. All you get when a passage seems dubious, is to squise more
out of it than it has. Whence it is, That you ever find the Sectaries Doctrine
(when He tampers with a Te^ seemingly doubtful) to ouerreach, or to go beyond
the strength of his Quotation That is, He speak's plainly what he would have
you believe, And the more plainly he speak's, the further he run's from his
Authority, which Therefore check's his Boldness, And Tell's him. I say no such
thing as you Teach. Take for example those words of Theoderet. The Mystical
Symbols remain after Consecration etc. O, says the Sectary the meaning is, the
inward Substance of bread remain's. Hold, Sir, there; That Is more then the
words allow of. Mystical Symbols may as well, yea far better, signify the
exterior Accidents, than the inward Substance of bread, Therefore you
ouerreach the Text, And abuse your Author.

12. Thus much premised. We shall come to our last intended Demonstration And
by the grace of God Evidence, How Controversies may be ended, Though indeed,
the Sectaries intricate way of handling Matters, makes them seem to a vulgar
Reader a work without end, For say I beseech you? What can be more slight or
more remote from Reason, than after a long Profession and quiet Possession had
of our Catholic Verities, To see a few Sectaries (late Strangers to
Christianity) step in amongst us, And after so many Ages, strutt up and down in
a corner of the world, As if They, forsooth By their bringing to light again
The procedure of Sectaries, Slight.
nothing but a list of old absolete worn-out Heresies, could now Ascertain
Papists, How much of their Doctrine is Orthodox, And How much not? And this (o
strange Boldness!) is done upon no other Principle, than upon a few misconstrued
words of some few ancient Fathers, without alleging plain Scripture or the
Authority of any Church, for this most uncouth and strange Proceeding. What can
be more slight than to follow the lesser Light (or rather no Light at all) And
to prefer That before the, Luminare maius, which hitherto has illuminated the
whole world? What can be more slight than to stand guessing at the sense of
Fathers, To Gloss their plainest Testimonies, when these guesses and Glosses
are vnprincipled and have no more Support, than the fancy of him who makes
them? You shall now see whither these Glosses tend, And an End put to
Controversies.

CHAP. XIX.
The last design of Sectaries Glosses, discovered. They end nothing. The clear
way to end Controversies of Religion. A distinction between Authority and
Principl'd Authority. Of the improbability of Protestancy.

1. NOte. When Sectaries Gloss Scripture or Fathers clear for Catholic
Religion, and after much tugging violently force some piece of their new
Doctrine from Passages less clear, Their aim is to keep us off from the last
sound Principles of ending What Sectaries aim at ^ by their Glosses.
Controversies. Mr Stillingfleet, like one haunted with two contrary Spirits,
has a rare Talent this way. Now He charm's a darker Passage out of all
obscurity, And makes it speak Protestancy; So he gives light to Theoderets
Mystical Symbols: Now He does the contrary feat, And cast's as clear words as
ever Father uttered into so much darkness, That it is hard to know what is said.
Take here one instance, You have it in his Page. 217. Where he Interpret's that
plain passage of S. Austin. Tom. 6. co(...) Epist. Fund: C. 5. I would not
believe the Gospel unless the Authority of the Church moved me thereunto, And to
obscure this most manifest and profoundly well expressed Truth, The Gentleman
spend's three whole pages in Guesses and conjectures, And all is to Unsay what
the Saint had most evidently Asserted. First, forsooth, he tell's us, What the
Controversy was which S. Austin then discussed. 2. What Church that was which
moved hi^ to believe the Gospel, Here He Guesses and Misses. 3. In what way and
manner, the Churches Authority did move him, And in this particular Mr
Stillingfleet err's grossly, who will needs persuade S. Austin very clear, made
obscure.
us, That S. Austin believed not the Divinity of Scripture upon the Churches
Authority, But only the Authenticalness of the writings of the Apostles and
Evangelists: As if to believe the Authenticalness of the Gospel, could be
separated from believing that very Gospel to be Divine. Its a whimsy As shall
appear afterward. In the mean while you see How all these Conjectures laid
together (I meddle not with them at present) are incomparably less clear than
S. Austin's plain words, Yet I must so far put out my eyes, as to esteem them
the only light to regulate my judgment by, and Consequently make Nonsense of
S. Austins clear Expression. Is it not reasonable think you, Before I do so, To
ask first by what Principle I may know That these Conjectures hit right?

2. Now here you have what I wish the judicious Reader seriously To reflect
upon. Suppose one should follow Mr Stillingfleet through all those windings and
Turnings wherewith he encumber's this one short Sentence of S. Austin, And
Answer step What the Reader is desired to reflect on.
by step to every Paragraph in order. Suppose He that undertakes such a Task
should in like manner proceed through all The Gentleman's Rational Account (as
It Is Called) And attend to his discourses, reply to every particular of his
endless Glosses, laid on Scripture and other Fathers. Suppose Thirdly, He should
rigidly Examine every circumstance related in the Stories of that voluminous
Book (Do only thus much and you draw the book dry For besides cauils you have
no more) How many volumes think ye would This way of Answering bring forth to
the world, before the whole Account were Answered? And when all is done, Much,
God knows, is not done to end Controversies with Satisfaction. Thus the
contest goes on.

3. Mr Stillingfleet like one afraid to meddle with sound Principles begins to
Gloss, His supposed Adversary, because no better stuff is given to work upon,
goes not yet deeper into difficulties, But turn's to the Scripture and Fathers,
Read's and Judges by His own Reading That much is interpreted amiss in this
Rational Account, Therefore Vnglosses as fast as Mr Stillingfleet Glossed, And
hopes He does very well. Mr Stillingfleet discourses; This Adversary does so
also, But finds, or pretends to find (I say no more yet) His discourses unsound
at the bottom, Much Confusion sollowes this way.
And too weak to bring in a good Conclusion. Mr Stillingfleet relates his
Stories, set forth with a number of circumstances; Our supposed Adversary
discouer's (As he thinks) many a Flaw, many a Mistake, much iumbling, much
disorder in the Narration of his Circumstances. Reflect well good Reader. Do
you not see here a strange Confusion? When after the utmost done by these two
Adversaries, You have two quite different Doctrins raised from the same
Authorities of Scripture and Fathers? And that after the recourse of both to
History, You have two as different Stories told you, as Yea, and No. In like
manner after Their long discourses, You have two contradictory Conclusions
drawn out, And laid before your eyes to read. Upon what Principle (if no more
be Said) can the yet perplexed Reader come to so much certainty of our
Christian Truths, as is necessary to Salvation? By what means shall He know,
whether of these Two, relates the truer Story, Glosses, or discourses better?
O, He must peruse Ecclesiastical History, Scripture also, And the Volumes of
Fathers And then judge. Pitiful. More than half the world want's means to do
this, And He who is able to comply with that laborious Task, must at last trust
to his own Judgment. Howeuer, give me one who will conform Himself to what he
Reads, and not draw all to a preiudicated Judgment, That man will find out
Catholic Religion.

4. Be it how you will, The Catholic has a better And far more easy Principle
to rely on in so weighty a Matter, whereof The Catholics Principle far more
easy and plain.
we shall Treat largely in the next Discourse. The Sectary has no other Ground
to set footing on, But his own private Fancy. And here is the true Reason why
he loves a life to stand dallying with you upon Authority and History. Go no
further, He is sure to have some Reply at hand, For it is easy to trifle a long
time, whilst you only give him this Authority And that Parcel of History to
quarrel with. The one, as we have seen, He wrest's to what Sense he pleases; On
the other He can put so fair a Varnish by concealing some Circumstances, and
iumbling others together, That the eyes of a vulgar Reader are easily dazzled.
In the mean time He warily waves (And is well content to do so) The last sound
Principles which only can end Controversies. Wherefore, Methinks one cannot fit
the Sectaries. Humor better, than to attaque him with Authorities, And next
leave the Glossing them to his fancy, To recurr to Antiquity, And permit him to
put an other face on the whole Story. Thanks be to God the Catholic Writers of
our own Nation (to say nothing of others) who handle Matters most profoundly,
And in real truth have already brought these debates to a Period, give no such
Advantage to Sectaries, But relying What Sectaries would be at?
on sound Principles, as learnedly reject these Glosses, as our new men
wilfully make them without Principles. Yet this is Truth. As nouellists can do
no more But Gloss without Principles, So as I said now, They are well enough
content if the Catholic will do something like them, And only interpret or
discourse upon Authorities; And this I call the less, or not the last plain way
of Ending debates. Go no further, they think Themselves safe. For example.
Read S. Austin in the place now cited. I would not believe the Gospel etc.
Ponder His whole Context, attend to his learned Discourse, Mark well how He
both disputes and proves: That he would not believe the Gospel as Gods Divine
Word but upon This solid ground, That the Authority of the Church, then when he
wrote, moved him to believe so. Descend yet to other particulars taken from his
most Connexed way of Arguing, Allege all plainly against the Sectary which has
been done and most landably again and again by Catholic Authors, Yet after
all, you see Mr Stillingfleet begins new Quarrels as fiercely, as if nothing
had been said, And if one should vnrauel what he has wouen in his three pages,
would not ^e, think ye, to prolong these unfortunate Strifes possibly find
something to except against you? And must not you to vnbeguile the Reader once
more reply, And except against all his new Exceptions? How long may
controversies not yet brought to the last plain Principles, run on without
ending? A shorter way Therefore must be thought of. And thus it is.

5. Take only that Positive Doctrine which the Protestant plainly makes his own
dogmatical Assertion, when he either Adds his The clearest way of ending
controversies.
new Gloss to an obscure Authority, or cast's one clear for Catholic Religion,
into darkness. If you will have Scripture, Quote that Passage of the Apostle.
The Church is the Pillar and ground of Faith. This is my body, or what else you
like best. If Fathers; Cite S. Cyril of Jerusalem. S. Justin Martyr, or any
other quoted above in defense of the Real Conversion of bread into Christ's
Sacred Body. This done. First consider well, what Church speak's most
Conformably to the obuious Sense of these Authorities. 2. Distinguish exactly
between the Sectaries Gloss, which contain's his Doctrine, And the plain words
of that Authority which he Interpret's; Withal, Ponder how little these two
look like one another, How little their Gloss. This is a Sign of my Body, has
to do with our Saviors clear Expression. This is my body. 3. Stay not too
long upon the Energy of a Testimony Though plain in your behalf, nor weigh over
much the Circumstances wherein it was spoken, For though both be well done, yet
This fitt's the Sectaries Humor, Who waits for such By-Matters, And in his
Answers (as I have often observed) To shift off what mainly urges, will give
you work enough, with his Suppositions, his May-b^^s, And endless Winding^. What
is then to be done when he supposes his conjectures or Glosses to be true
Doctrine? This way I am sure is very solid.

6. Propose with all moderation These following Questions. Have you, Sir, any
Orthodox Church ever since Christianity began The Sectary is urged.
(I am sure you have no express Scripture) which without dispute as plainly
delivered the Doctrine contained in your Gloss, as you now plainly Teach it?
Have you any Orthodox Council which without Exception as Clearly defined it, as
you now Assert it? Have you any Tradition, which by a continued Succession Age
after age conveyed unto you the Tenets you pretend to find in some few Fathers,
And now publish to the world as Christian Truths? If you ground your Glosses or
Doctrine on such excellent Principles, we Catholics are certainly in Error,
And ought to conform to your reformed Gospel, But if you fail (and fail you
must) to do thus much, if you only give us empty Glosses without further
Proofs, we look on them as slight things cast off by the Orthodox world, as
both vnprincipled and vnpatronized. Therefore Scriptureless as they are,
Churchless as they are, they fall of Themselves to nothing, And bring utter
ruin to your new Machin of Protestancy.

7. I do you no wrong when I draw you off your Glosses To point at his Church
and Councils which taught Protestancy.
to an Orthodox Church. (The world was never without one). Say therefore, in
Gods name, where, or when was such an Orthodox Christian Society in Being that
positiuely taught no Transubstantiation, No sacrifice of the Mass, No
invocation of Saints etc? Where or when were your Councils which positiuely
defined these Doctrins etc? You may Answer, and truly. You have indeed neither
Church, nor Councils, Nor Tradition Express for these your Negatiues. Very
right. Therefore I wrong you not in saying, your whole Cause subsist's upon
Conjectures, cauils, And Glosses, Because now you cast your selves into an
Impossibility of pleading by any better Principles than mere guesses are. Thus
much supposed, Say, I beseech you, What auail's it, if, when an Authority is
plain for Popery, that you can by a nimble gloss darken it? Or if obscure; You
have A Fiat lux, at hand, and can charm it into so much Clarity as may suffice
to dazzle the eyes of a vulgar Reader? What Satisfaction have I here, or what
gain you by this Proceeding, when you know we have more witnesses ready to
attest, yea to dye for our Catholic Verities, than you have hairs on your
head, or Glosses in your book? What gain you to your cause could you
missinterpret all the Fathers that ever wrote, when you without the warrant of
any Orthodox Society have yet a whole learned Church, Her Councils and
Tradition against you? And all the store of Ammunition left you to attaque this
great Oracle of Truth, is very small; no more, God knows, but a without them
no satisfaction is given.
flash of lightning borrowed from the Ignis fatuus of your far-fetcht Glosses.
Gloss on, Cauil on, conjecture on to the worlds end, As long as no known or
Owned Principle distinct from Glosses and conjectures Support's them, You only
beat the air, or, (to use a pretty late phrase amongst you,) lapwing-like Pew
most when furthest from the nest. I mean, you are most fierce to end
Controversies, when you are furthest off from Principles, which only can end
them.

8. Thus then you should proceed had not God and Truth silenced you. I, E. S.
B. D. declare to you honest Papists, That in the Sixth or seventh age after
Christ, His true Orthodox Church, positiuely taught no Transubstantiation. Such
a Council, either in former or later Ages expressly defined so. Then, and before
also, Church Tradition was universally for my Doctrine, And thus much I can make
good to the learnedest Romanist among you. Wonder not Therefore when you quote
your Iustins, your Cyprians, your Chrisostoms, seemingly contrary to my Church
Doctrine, That I interpret all; I am forced to do so, or against conscience
must desert my old Mother Church, Her Councils How Sectaries ought to plead.
and Tradition likewise, From which You have too licentiously swerued, to side
with your Iustins and I know not who else. Could the Sectary plead after this
manner, His Glosses would have force, But he never meddles with the First main
Business, That is, never ground's his Doctrine upon any thing like a
satisfactory Principle, But, as if He minded to tire Ones patience, run's on
headlong with Glosses, When he has no Principled Doctrine to Gloss for. Just as
if One should tell his neighbor, Sir you lie, And, this I auerr to your face,
Though I want where withal to prove my Saying true. In all these Controversies
Sectaries are so pertly uncivil, as to give the Lie to a whole Church, And what
supports the Boldness? Have they any other Church more Orthodox, Councils more
learned, Tradition more universal to prove we lie, than our Church, our
Tradition, And Councils are which say we speak truth? Nothing at all like them.
We here challenge them to speak to the cause and controversies are ended. What
then remain's to plead with? Plain Scripture? Not a word. Fathers plain? Not
one. O yes, Tertullian is drawn in to help at a dead lift, so is Theoderet, And
one or two more. Very true. But he is a glossed Tertullian, a glossed Theoderet
etc. Separate then these Glosses from the Fathers genuin Doctrine, give them the
Sectary to manage, you see him in open field completely armed ready to
encounter Church, Councils, Tradition, And all the other Principles of the
Catholic world. Are not Glosses think Glosses strangely powerful with
Sectaries.
ye strong and prodigiously powerful, which have not only force to plead
against a whole Church, But more over to implead her of palpable error? This
Church is supposed to have changed Her ancient Doctrine, And Sectaries will
reform it not by recurring to any other more Orthodox Society of Christians,
But by mere guesses and Glosses. That is. The Fallible Glosses and gueses of
men confessedly fallible, must reform a Church which hold's Her self
infallible, And proves it also.

9. Thus it is, Christian Reader. I speak plainly, And can defend my Assertion.
Besides mere begging the Question in all Disputes, besides Cauils, And weak
conjectures, The Sectary has no more left him to oppose our Catholic Tenets,
but mere vnprincipled Glosses. I neither word it nor wrong Protestants in
saying thus much. Peruse if you please their writings, chiefly Mr
Stillingfleets Account, you will find (when the Churches Infallibility, or
Transubstantiation etc. Happen to be handled, That Glosses laid on the
Authorities usually quoted for Catholic Doctrine, ever take up the most room.
And which is worse, yea pitiful in a Rational Defender of Protestancy: You
shall never find through this whole Book (wave Cauils conjectures and Glosses)
one sound Principle laid plainly forth, nor so much as hinted at, in behalf of
any Protestant Article. What think ye? Shall Yet Most weak and feeble.
Christians, who would fain have a Church to live in, see the old House of God
pulled down by vnhandy Glossers, before They have a better built up, And well
settled on good Foundations? Pulled down. What say I? Alas our Glossers have not
strengh to until it, much less force to demolish that long slanding Fortress.
Yet Glosses chiefly, And it is a sad thought for the Sectary, support his
vndefensible Schism made in the desperate quarrel against that Church which
gave his Ancestors Baptism. These only (there is no more) must plead in behalf
of his inhuman and barbarous Reformation; These finally must answer before an
Impartial Judge at that great day of Doom for all his merciless cruelty
practiced upon the deceased, and some yet living Catholics. Sad thoughts, I
say, they are to go to bed with, to rise with, to banquet with, which like
Ghosts will haunt him to his dying day, And lay Torment at his restles heart in
his greatest iollities, And more in the hour of death.

10. After all you see the Conclusion and an end put to Controversies. The
Conclusion against Sectaries.
If no Orthodox Church vphold's this Protestancy, or any article of it. (which
is evident). No Councils nor Tradition can support it. If no Councils nor
Tradition support it. It has no Principled Doctrine. If no Principled Doctrine,
No Moral certainty. If no Moral certainty, (for mere groundles Glosses cannot
give Any against all the Powerful Motives of our Church) there is no
Probability in it. If no Probability; The whole Reformation must be reduced to
fancy only. There we found it, And there leave it.

11. Now, if any except against our casting off Protestancy from the meanest
degree of Probability induced to Judge otherwise upon this ground, That many
learned men defend it. I have Answered above. Mere Probability is insufficient
to support Christian Truths. Here I both answer and Ask. 2. where were the many
learned Defenders of this new Faith, when one Luther stood up alone against the
whole Christian world, And first broached his Protestancy? If at that time
there was no Authority nor reason for the Nouelty, Process of time has gained
it neither. Look then into its Rise or First beginning, you will find it unsound
at the bottom, yea utterly improbable upon this certain Principle, That the
Singular Doctrine of one disgusted Rebel against a whole Church and Thousands
more pious and learned then Himself, can merit no Belief, but deserves (what
it has), to be Anathematized.

12. We must yet insist a little upon this Point, And lay forth the Vanity of
our Adversaries pretense to Probability, which done, you shall see
controversies are ended. Sectaries May say. Protestancy improbable.
If their own Authority makes not Protestancy Morally certain, it cannot but
raise it to a high degree of Probability. We deny this, And shall presently
Ask, why their Authority more aduanceth this Religion to Probability than the
mere Authority of Arians bring's Arianism to Probability? At present we do not
only oppose the voice and vote of the Roman Catholic Church against this Plea,
But the Authority also of Graecians, Abyssins and all other called Christians,
who with one unanimous Consent decry Protestancy as improbable. Compare
therefore votes with votes, Authority with Authority, There is no Parallel;
For, for one that defend's it, you have hundreds, yea Thousands that Contradict
the Nouelty. Thus much is indisputably Evident, if we precisely Consider
Authority as it were in Abstracto, or oppose the Votes of dissenting Parties
against it. But here is not all. We must go further, And distinguish well
between a bare Authority, and a rational grounded Authority. For this is an
undeniable Truth. Reasonable Principles ever precede, or are presupposed, when
Religion is pleaded for To the consequent Authority of those (whether many or
few) that Teach, or Profess it. Hence all say. If the first converted Jews to
Christianity, Had not had most weighty Inducements proposed to reason before
they deserted Judaism and believed in Christ The change had been most
imprudent; Nay, all had been obliged, as is proved in the 4. Chapter, To hold
on in that Profession still without Alteration. So necessary it is to have
rational grounds laid firm in the Foundation of Religion, before the Professors
allow it either Moral certainty, or so much as Probability. Thus much premised.

13. We draw Sectaries from all Self-Voting, or further pleading by their own
Authority, And force them in this Contest, if Sectaries drawn off their own
Self voting.
Protestancy be defensible, not to say, but to prove by Principles, distinct
from their own bare votes, These two Propositions. 1. That God who is Truth it
self, And once laid his Truths the foundation of the Roman Catholic Church,
permitted that faithful Oracle to become Traitorous, to teach Idolatry, to tell
the world loud Lies for a thousand years together. And that all this happened,
when there was no other Orthodox Church on earth to vnbeguile Those poor
deluded Christians. The second Proposition to be proved, is. That these
Millions of souls learned and unlearned who firmly believed this Church And
dyed happily in it, were All mad, All Idolaters, All besotted and seduced What
the Sectary is to Prou^.
by Fooleries: And (which is a Paradox above Expression) That a knot of late
unknown Nouellists pretending to Reformation, dare now attempt to teach men
more learned than Themselves; To make these supposed mad, wise, The Idolatrous,
Orthodox; the besotted, Reasonable; The Seduced, right in Faith again; And that
this was, and is yet done upon a mere proofles Supposition, ( that we are mad
and besotted) which stand's on no Principles, And for that reason is
contradicted by the vast number of most knowing Catholics, And the whole
Multitude of Christians Besides.

14. When these two Propositions are made probable upon good Principles, We
shall listen to our Sectaries Authority, But if they fumble herein, Only talk
and prove nothing, We reject their ungrounded Authority And say, The more
votes they multiply without Proofs, the less weight they have. You shall yet
see how weightles Their Authority is, might we here insist longer upon one
Matter of fact which ends all Controversies. In a word. All know the great
Controversy between Protestants and Catholics comes to this. Whether they or
we teach The difficulty proposed between Catholics and Protestants.
Apostolical Doctrine? Whether they or we lay forth the genuine sense of holy
Scripture? Neither Party saw or heard the Apostles Preach. Neither pretend's
now to Enthusiasms, or private Revelations concerning that Doctrine: The whole
cause therefore is to be tried, and decided by Witnesses of foregoing Ages,
such Testimonies and Tradition must clear this Matter of fact. A pretense to
Scripture only without precedent lawful Pastors, without Doctors, without
Witnesses teaching that sense and Doctrine which the one, or other Party stand's
for, is here both vseles and impertinent. If then The Protestant makes his
Doctrine Apostolical, His sense of Scripture, Orthodox; The Catholic replies.
Be pleased to give in your last Evidence, produce your Witnesses; your Pastors,
And Doctors Four Ages since, That taught as you teach, And sensed Scripture as
you sense it. My Church (add's the Catholic) evidently demonstrates a
continued succession of Her Pastors that taught as I believe, (as shall be
proved hereafter) And shows as clearly a Succesion of the same Doctrine and
Faith with these Pastors. Her Antiquity is undoubted, and her pleading
Possession in preserving the true Sense of Scripture and Apostolical Doctrine,
is as great as any King on earth can show for the Possession of the Crown he
wears. Now, says the Catholic, We examine your pedigree of Pastors and
Doctors, And after some few Ascents by a The first plead by Principles the
others not.
Retrogradation come at last to the year 1517. There we find, and most
evidently, a Luther, or Calvin To be the first men in the world that professed
Protestanism, that interpreted Scripture as you interpret, or owned your
Religion. With these late Runagates you must stop, No man on earth can advance
or bring your Genealogy further, Therefore to speak in the words of the Ancient
Optatus Meliuitan. Lib. 2. Contra Parmen: At that time, you were sons without
Progenitors, successors without a Pedigree New Teachers without comm^ssion,
Protestants indeed, but without Principles.

15. Hence I argue and it is a demonstration against Sectaries. If neither
Church, nor Councils, nor Pastors, nor Doctors, nor any Orthodox Christians in
forgoing Ages ever owned, or so much as heard of Protestancy before one
unfortunate Fatherles Luther broached it; If no Antiquity, so much as once
mentioned one Professor of that Religion; if no Tradition handed to Luther the
new Faith he taught (all which is without dispute manifest) Protestancy most
enidently is upon this very account both an Vnwitnessed and an Vnprincipled
Religion, And not only improbable, but in the highest degree improbable. But no
Authority can release an vnprincipled Nouelty from its own intrinsic,
miserable and ^ss^ntial state of improbability, Therefore our Sectaries votes
(of no weight at all) cannot make it probable. And thus Controversies are
ended, because an improbable Religion (And for this reason improbable, because
vnprincipled) is not defensible.

16. To add more to this Discourse I Ask, whether one Arius opposing the whole
Church represented in the Nicene Council, Protestancy as improbable as Arianism.
defended probable Doctrine or no? You will answer No. Very good. Yet he quoted
Scripture (and might one insist upon the exterior letter or sound of words)
more plain and express in the behalf of his Heresy, than all the Protestants on
earth can produce Fathers plain and Expresss for their Nouelty of Protestanism.
I would say. Neither Theoderet nor any other Father, speak's half so clearly to
the Doctrine of No Transubstantiation. No Sacrifice of the Mass etc. As these
words (to omit others). My Father is greater then I, (may the exterior letter
regulate here) seemingly express an inequality between the Father and the Son.
Now if the seeming clear sound of Scripture made not Arius his Doctrine probable
against the Church Then, much less can the more obscure Testimonies of some
Fathers, make the Doctrine of Protestants probable against the Church Now. And
if we speak of followers that Arius gained in his time, There is no comparison,
He had more than ever England had Protestants in it.

17. One may yet reply. The Nicene Fathers cited plain Scripture against Arius.
Very true, And so do Catholics against Protestants, For, Christ's Sacred words.
This is my body, are as significantly plain against Protestanism, as any Text
those Fathers then urged, or yet can be urged against Arianism. The Arians not
Convinced by Scripture only.
But this you see did not the deed, nor was then the last conviction, And why?
Here is the reason. Because as Protestants now wilfully Gloss this plain
Passage of Scripture and many others, So the Arians then wilfully Glossed all
those Scriptures alleged by the Nicene Fathers, And yet hold on in that strain
to our very days, as you may read in Crellius and Volk^lius Yet more. As the
Arian Party then only Glossed but without the help of any antecedent Church
Doctrine known to the world* or universal Tradition to settle their Glosses on;
So our Protestants now do the very same, There is no disparity betwixt them,
They Gloss, it is true, but give us Churchles Glosses. Finally, as those Fathers
at that time did not only reject the Arians Glosses, but established also their
own Definitions upon Scripture How Convicted
interpreted by the known delivered Doctrine of the then present, and the more
Ancient Church (for they represented both) And thus ended that Controversy, So
we Catholics proceed against Protestants, And bring all debates to the like
last period. The Church, or nothing, must end them. Without recourse had to the
known and owned Doctrine both of this present and precedent faithful Oracle,
They and we may interpret Scripture long enough, They may Cauil, And we may
hold on in our Answers to the end of an other Age, without hope of ending so
much as one Controversy. But of This enough is said already.

CHAP. XX.
A word to one or two Objections. It is further proved, That Controversies are
ended with Protestants, who have no Essence of Religion, but false opinions
only.

1. SEctaries may object first. We Suppose all this while But prove not, The
Orthodox world to have hitherto maintained the Doctrine now taught by the Roman
Catholic Church concerning Transubstantiation, Invocation of Saints etc.
Therefore our Discourse seems ungrounded. I answer. 1. The Reply is not to the
Purpose in this place, whilst we only press Sectaries to give in Proofs for
their Contrary Positions. This we say They Cannot do: Now if we be as far
of From Proofs, or Cannot ground our Tenets upon vndubitable Principles;
Controversies are ended without more Ado; Because The first Objection answered.
both of us, (if the Supposition hold's,) have no Articles of Religion to
Propugn, But weak opinions, which (whether true or false) import not Salvation:
Nay, the Truth of them, could it be known, is scarce worth any man's Knowledge.
I Answer. 2. Our Proofs (to say no more now) Stand firm upon Church Authority,
once at least owned Orthodox, on our Councils, and ancient Tradition never yet
repealed, nor excepted against, But by Heretics only. May it please our
Adversaries to come Closely to the Point and plead in behalf of their Tenets,
by the Authority of any like or better Church than ours is, We have done, and
must yield; But this they know is impossible, And therefore neither will nor
can Answer our Discourse. If they say our Church, (where its contrary to
Protestancy) has erred, Urge them to prove the Assertion by any Principle,
either equal to (or stronger than) our Church Authority is, And you will have
them driven again to their Glosses, or to some few gleanings of Fathers; In a
word to no Principles.

2. They may object. 2. We have took much pains to prove Nothing against
Protestancy, For we know, some late Professors namely Doctor Bramhal and Mr
Stillingfleet, stiffly maintain A second Objection Proposed.
these Negatiues of No Transubstantiation, No Sacrifice of the Mass, No
Invocation of Saints etc. To be only pious Opinions or inferior Truths,
Neither revealed by God, nor Essential to Protestant Religion, Therefore whilst
we urge them to ground such Negatiues upon plain Scripture, upon the Authority
of an Orthodox, Church, Councils, Tradition etc. They tell us we meddle not at
all with the Essentials of Protestancy, But only dispute against Opinions, And,
Contrary to justice, force them to prove mere opinions by Scripture, Church
etc. which is more then we can press upon them, or do our selves, For have not
we Catholics many Opinions in Schools, which none pretend to ground upon so
strong Principles as we settle our Articles of Faith on? Yes most assuredly:
Opinions then and Articles of Faith cannot but be very differently Principled.
And thus Point's at a distin^tion between Faith and Opinion.
the Protestant discourses in the present Matters, Here says He, is the only
difference, That Catholics lay Claim to more Articles of Faith, And the
Protestants to Fewer. Our more numerous Articles, over and above His
fundamentals, He calls opinions, Holds vnprincipled, And hopes to settle his
fewer articles, or the Essence of his Religion upon Excellent solid Grounds.

3. Hence it follows, that all Controversies hitherto agitated between us come
to no more, but to a slight skirmishing about different opinions only; For we
and they agree in the Essence of Religion. Unlucky opinions surely, Cries the
Sectary (and He would seem to sigh as deeply as we, But has not felt so much
Smart) which have caused endless Broiles, strange confusion, and a Shameful
Schism in the Christian world. Thus much I conceive some later men, who
expressly teach the Doctrine would have us learn, And because it is a new
invented way of defending this falling Protestancy, I hold my self obliged,
First to discover the whole fallacy of the discourse, Next to show how
Protestants themselves put an end to all Controversies. This done the Objection
is soon answered.

4. The fallacy lies here, That Protestancy is supposed to have an Essence when
really it has none, but is wholly made up of worse then false opinions. The
false Supposition stands gloriously in Mr Stillingfleets empty Title. A
rational Account of the The fallacy, discovered.
grounds of Protestant Religion. The man surely imagins Protestancy to be a
Religion (which implies an Essence,) yea and grounded too. I say the contrary,
it has no Essence, and consequently No grounds. To prove my Assertion, Do no
more but cast out of Protestancy all the Negatiues it has, which confessedly
are no Essentials. And next fix your thoughts on the little which remain's, And
is called Protestancy. You will see the Essence after these Negatiues are gone,
dwindle to nothing. Most surely this is not its Essence To believe these
Negatiues, pious opinions, or inferior Truths, For if God never revealed the
Negatiues* He never revealed to any, That the Belief of their supposed piety
constitutes the Essence of Protestancy. An other Essence Therefore must be
found out, if it have any, And may be it is this. Believe the Creeds or a
Doctrine common to all Christians (our Adversaries hint at both) and you have
the whole Essence of this Religion, Yea, and Faith enough to attain Salvation:
And thus they reduce their Faith to fewer Articles than we do. I might Say a
word in passing, And reduce all true Christian Faith to a shorter compendium.
viz. To one only Article of The Apostles Creed. I believe the holy Catholic
Church. That is, who ever own's the true Church of Christ, and firmly adheres
to all She teaches An other Sectarian pretense of believing the Creeds.
after a due Proposal made of her Articles, And dies in that Faith; such a man
jointly belieues both the Church and Creeds also. But if he run away with one
half only, or Talk of Creeds, as Sectaries do, without a Church, And exclude
from His Belief that Church which approues the Creeds, He separates that which
cannot be separated, And is a Self-chuser, In a word he neither belieues Church
nor Creeds, And consequently has no Christian Faith.

5. Hence I say. This very Assertion. I believe the Creeds i^ the sense of
Sectaries now explicated, is so far from being a Principled Truth, That it is
no more but an Error, or a proofles Protestant Opinion, As bad or worse as any
of the Negatiues are. If therefore they make it an Essential Article of
Protestancy, We press them according to their promise, to give a rational
Account of it before God and man. And here our Queries above come in again.
Have you, Gentlemen, any Divine Revelation, That this half Faith of believing
Creeds, after your bold receding from the Church is so sufficient for your
Salvation and mine, That more is not required? Did ever Orthodox Church
expressly teach this to be sufficient? Did ever ancient Council define so, or
universal Tradition deliver the Doctrine? Speak plainly plead by all, or any one
of these Principles, And I have done. But it is impossible. Perhaps you will say
All Antiquity and the Fathers likewise highly commend the Apostles Creed as a
short Abridgment of our Christan Faith. Answ: So do we as highly, But know
there are different Lections of it, whereof you may read in your own Doctor
Vshers Diatri^a. De Symbolis, London Print. 1647. Sent to his friend Ioannes
Vossius. We know again, (may Credit begiuen to S. Hierome. Epist* 61. Ad
Pammach.) That this Creed was not writ in Charta and atramento, but in tabulis
Cordis, And Therefore we must trust to Tradition for the best Lection. All
other Creeds even that ascribed to S. Athanasius (A Graecis interpolatum
dressed up a new by the Greeks, Says Dr Usher) The Church either made or has
approved. If then I must build my faith on these Creeds, I cannot divorce it
from the Church. For, Propter quod vnumquodque tale, est illud and magis tale.
If I believe my Creeds, much more must I believe the Church which either made
or Authorized them.

6. In a word here is all we demand, And If Sectaries can Answer they speak to
the purpose. Let them but name any The Belief^ of Creeds and the Church,
inseparable.
Orthodox Council, Nay, one ancient Father that says, Faith is then fully and
sufficiently Catholic, if one belieues the Creeds, Though at that very time He
pertinaciously reiect's the present Church we live in, Or will not hear that
Doctrine which She teaches above The express Doctrine delivered in the Creeds,
Let him, I say, do thus much And he speaks to the purpose, But it cannot be
done, Because both the Ancient and modern Church condemn's all who slight Her
Doctrine, though not expressly contained in the Creed. In this opposition
therefore, That which the Sectary would make the Essence of his Religion is
only his false opinion, and in real truth has neither Moral certainty, nor so
much as Probability, As is already proved. He may reply. All he pretend's, is,
That the Creeds completely contain Matter enough of Christian belief, (To Add
more is unnecessary), And Says withal, He slights not that Ancient Church,
which either composed or approved the Ancient Creeds, but blames the Later
Church which has turned mere Opinions into Articles of faith, And imposed them
on Christians to believe. Answ. These men it seems will hold on to be unlucky
in All They say. We are now inquiring after that Doctrine which essentially
Constitutes Protestancy, And here they obtrude upon us their Protestant
Opinions for Answer.

7. To assert Therefore First, that the Ancient Creeds explicitly contain
Matter enough of Christian Belief is a Protestant False Opinions supposed the
Essence of Protestancy.
opinion only, largely refuted by our learned Writers. See the other Treatise
Discourse. 3. C. 5. To assert that the Church in after ages added Vnnecessaries
above the explicit Doctrine contained in the Apostles Creed, Impugn's the most
Ancient Councils of the Christian world, And is no more but a Protestant
opinion. To assert. 3. That the Ancient Church was right in faith, And the
present Church not, or, That She has imposed mere. Opinions to be believed by
Christians in place of Articles of Faith, is a flat Calumny an improbable
opinion, which never yet was, nor can be grounded upon any rational Principle.
And can these opinions think ye which all Catholics reject, pass for the
grounded Essence of Protestancy? They must, or it has no Essence at all. And
mark well, As they proceed with us here, so they do in all other
Controversies. They tell us not only the Creeds, but Scriptures much more
contain all things necessary to Salvation, That Is only their Opinion. They tell
Particular Proof Thereof.
us, Their Belief now, and that of the Primitive Christians for the first
Three, or Four Centuries, is one and the same; It is their Opinion merely, And
demonstratiuely untrue. They tell us, They own a Church before Luther, but to
say where, or when it was distinct from the Roman Catholic, or as They Imagine
much larger than the Roman, is only an Opinion, and most improbable. In a word
They are every where so narrowly confined, That whether they build or destroy,
Impugn our Religion or offer to establish their own, They never get out of the
reach of Their own tottering improbable Opinions.

8. And because I find this strain runs through Mr Stillingfleets whole Book,
He cannot surely be justly offended, if for my better Satisfaction concerning
his Rational Account, I require his rational Answer to one Question which I
hold very reasonable. Thus I propose it. You, Sir, defend a Religion called
Protestancy, You allow it some essential Doctrine distinct from Popery, and all
condemned Heretics. Your Title supposes this Doctrine well grounded ( The
grounds of Protestant Religion) Answer I befeech you, give me first without
fumbling that Doctrine peculiar to Protestancy, which essentially makes it a
Religion. Give us the Specifical difference of it, if it have any? And A
question proposed to Sectaries.
Next, Ground this Doctrine (be it what you will) upon the vndubitable Authority
of some known Orthodox Church, Orthodox Councils, or universal Tradition, but
Fob us not off with your unproven Opinions, Tell us no more of believing Creeds
only, The Scripture only, the Four first general Councils only without more
(these Onelies we except against) Yet do you only thus much as I now require,
(It Is easily done, if your cause be good,) And I will recall what ever I have
written against you, And crave pardon for my rashness. But the Catholic
knows well because Heresy can have no grounded Doctrine, This task is
impossible. I am now to show the Protestant the impossibility of it also.

9. Imagine one who belieues the Creeds, as the Sectary pretend's to do, yet
so, That interiourly And from his very heart He abiures and slights all those
Negative Articles called the opinions of Protestants. (I speak not here of his
exterior demeanor nor Countenance his dissembling i'ft be so) My Question is
this. Whether such a man have internal, essential, sufficient faith to make him
a true believing Protestant? He hold's himself one upon this conuincing Reason,
That he firmly belieues what ever the Professors of that Religion maintain
Sectaries must make mere Opinions their Articles of Faith.
as both essential and sufficient to Salvation. Besides He knows well, No
obligation lies on him to believe by Faith, the Negative Articles of
Protestants, neither can he, because God has not revealed them. Such a man
therefore has completely essential Faith enough, and is a true believing
Protestant, or if he be not yet got so high, or have not the Protestant Faith
completely, necessary and sufficient to save him, He must help it out by
believing some one or other Protestant Opinion, And Consequently the Belief of
Opinions must either constitute him essentially a Protestant, Or He will never
be one, yet this is most untrue, for God obliges none to believe unrevealed
Opinions as Articles of Faith.

10. We must go yet further. Suppose this man belieues the Creeds, The Roman
Catholic Church and every particular Doctrine She teaches, just so as the best
Catholic Belieues, And whereas before He only slighted the opinions of
Protestants, now in place of them he firmly adheres to the Contrary Catholic
Positions. viz. To The Popes Supremacy. Transubstantiation.* An unbloody
Sacrifice. Praying to Saints worhiping of Images, And in a word to all that the
Church obliges me to believe. The difficulty farther urged.
This man in heart is certainly Catholic. I Ask whether he is yet a true
believing Protestant? In our Sectaries Principles, He is. For first he
belieues his Creeds or Doctrine Common to all Christians, And there is the
Essence of their saving Faith. O but all is spoiled by believing the Church,
And what ever Doctrine She teaches. Why so I beseech you? why should this spoil
all, if in Conscience the man Judges Her Articles to be revealed Truths? A
Catholic you say may be saved, Though he belieues thus much, Therefore there
is no reason to damn this man upon any Account of his want of Faith, For the
Faith of His Creeds saues him, And the belief of our Catholic Articles ruin's
not that Faith. Ergo. Again. You must say, His abiuring your Negative Opinions
does not Vnprotestant Him, if he belieues the Creeds, why then should the firm
adhering to our contrary Positive Catholic Articles (which you call opinions)
make him less Protestant? You may reply. If He hold's them only as opinions, He
is still Protestant, But we now suppose He belieues all as Articles of Faith.
Very good. This then follows ineuitably. Not to believe them as Articles of
Faith, besides Owning the Creeds, essentially makes him Protestant, Ergo, This
also follows To believe some one Negative, or more then the Creeds Formally
express (Add to them the common Doctrine of all Christians, The four General
Councils etc.) is essentially necessary to Constitute him Protestant. Now This
very More which is nothing but a Sectarian Opinion essentially enters in to
make him Protestant, or He shall never be one. Thus much I intended to prove,
and I hold it proved demonstratiuely.

11. You have what I would say, plainly laid forth in this unanswerable
Dilemma. He who judges all the Negative Articles of A dilemma.
Protestants false, And belieues the Contrary Positiues taught by our Catholic
Church As revealed Truths, is yet Protestant, or not. If not; the belief of
some thing else (Truth or untruth) is essentially requisite to make him
Protestant, But the belief of That (be it what you will) now superadded to
Constitute him a Believing Protestant, is no Truth revealed by God, But only a
Protestant Opinion, without which he wants the Essence of that Religion, Ergo
most evidently the Belief of Opinions essentially constitutes him a believing
Protestant, Consequently some Doctrine which God has not revealed makes him
Protestant, And the belief of his Creeds is not Faith enough to make him one.
These Inferences seem evident, if not, I petition Mr Stillingfleet to discover
where the fallacy lies.

12. Now on the other side, if such a man as belieues his Proving what is
intended against Sectaries.
Creeds, the Roman Catholic Church, And all the Articles She teaches just as I
believe them, be notwithstanding essentially Protestant still, He is both
Protestant and Catholic together. Catholic He is, whilst He Assents to all
without Reserve which the Roman Church teaches; And he is also Protestant, for
He belieues his Creeds, And what ever our new men require as essential to their
Religion. Wherefore unless The not-belieuing their Negatiues, or his submiss
yiedling to our Positive Contrary Doctrins, destroy that essential Faith of his
Creeds (which is impossible) He is in these Principles, both at once Catholic
and Protestant.

13. And thus you see How Our new men end Controversies, For now in their
Principles, There is no more quarrel about Religion, The whole contest being
purely brought to this, whether Party Opines more securely, just as the
Thomists and Scotists (worthy learned Catholics) dispute whether School
teaches the better Opinions, Though if the Supposition stand, it will be
difficult to find out disputable Opinions between us. what our Adversary i^
obliged to.


14. Be it how you will, Mr Stillingfleet must of necessity change his Tittle [
The grounds of Protestant Religion] For now Protestancy with him consists with
Popery, or rather is Popery, And Popery, If we speak of Religion, is consistent
with Protestancy: The Essence and grounds of the one and the other cannot but
be the same, if (which is ever to be noted) Protestancy as Protestancy has not
one true essential Article of Orthodox Faith peculiar to it self, For having
none, The Abettors of it must either be Catholics, or Profess no Religion.

15. And here by the way you may note the difference between us. As the
Catholic own's all which the Church defines to be de Fide And necessary to
Salvation, So contrariwise, the Protestant own's nothing within the compass of
His Articles to be de Fide, or in like manner necessary, For both He and I may
boldly renounce what ever he hold's as Protestant without danger of loseing our
Souls. And hence it is that Opinions only, and false ones too, essentially
constitute this whole Religion. I speak here of Articles proper to Protestancy,
For to believe the Creeds, the four General Councils, to Assert that the
Sacraments give grace to the worthy Receiver, that Faith and repentance are
necessary, or what else can be thought of, as Matter of Divine Faith, All, I
say, and every one Constitute the essence of Catholic Religion, and are known
Doctrins of the Roman Orthodox Church, in so much that the Protestant has no
proper, Special, or peculiar Tenet of Religion left him at all (which is true)
to propugn. And for this reason He is obliged hereafter, Iure humano, and
Diuino to write no more Controversies of Religion, wanting Matter to write of,
And no less obligation lies on him to leave off all further quarrelling in
behalf of his improbable Opinions. I would willingly see this plain discourse
answered.

16. Some perhaps not penetrating the force of it, may A weak reply, answered.
Reply. The old strife is now on foot again: For as we call the particular
Tenets of Protestants, Opinions, and improbable also, So they in like manner
say, All that the Catholic Church maintains above the Common Doctrine of
Christians or the Articles of the Creeds etc, are only Church-Opinions, as
improbable as Theirs. The Doctrine of Transubstantiation seems as improbable to
them, as No-Transubstantiation to us. Invocation of Saints more improbable,
than not to trouble Those blessed Spirits with our Prayers etc. Answ. The reply
settled upon no Foundation is more than simple, For either these men Cauil
because we call their Negative Articles, Opinions, or Term them improbable
Opinions. Sectaries themselves call them Opinions, that is vnexceptionably
plain, Though they know well that the Church never speak's so meanly of her
contrary Positive Doctrins. The only difficulty remaining is, whether they are
improbable or no? And this stands most clearly euidenced already upon an
undeniable Principle. viz. That when Luther first broached them, They were
opposite to the whole Orthodox world, And for that cause were then as
improbable and Heteroclite as one Rebels vote is against a whole Kingdom, or
as Arianism was against the Universal Church. Now since that time they have
gained no more Probability than Arianism, And so the old Improbability still
clings to them. And for this reason the Sectary is to find out a Catholic
Church which defended his Negatiues, or any one specifical Tenet of
Protestancy, as Ancient, or, reputed as Orthodox, as our Church then was, or is
now: Thus much done we will allow more to his Opinions than Probability. But to
do it is Impossible.

17. Thus the first part of the Objection above is solued. who are to prove the
Protestants. Negatiues.
To That is added of our pressing Sectaries to prove their Negatiues by plain
Scripture. I answer, we justly exact so much proof of Mr Rogers and his
Accomplices (the greater part of Protestants I think) who hold them Articles of
Faith: These are to produce their Scriptures, And only urge Doctor Bramhal and
Mr Stillingfleet that call them inferior truths or pious Opinions, to settle
these Negatiues or any Tenet of pure Protestancy upon so much as any thing like
a Probable Principle, And here we expect their last Propositio qu^escens for
Probability, But this cannot be given, whilst we know, The true Church of
Christ decries them as improbable, and Heretical errors.

18. It is very true (and that is next objected) Catholics have opinions in
schools differently Principled from Articles of Faith, but it is nothing to the
purpose, when the diffecence betwixt these and our Sectaries Tenants, is, that
Catholic opinions, if How Catholic Opinions differ Protestancy.
probable, are ever reduced to probable grounds, our Sectaries opinions
contrary to the voice and judgment of a whole Church, can have no such
foundation And for this cause we justly impugn them not as False Opinions only,
but as Heresies. Now to the last Plea of Sectaries making fewer Articles of
Faith than the Church does, The Answer is easy. It belongs not to them* God
knows, wholly unknown to the world one Age past, To give us now a right
measure of Faith, The attempt is no less vain, than prodigiously bold. But Say
on, How will they Abbreuiate? By what Rule? By what law? By their improbable
opinions. Here is all. Well therefore may they Lament these unlucky Opinions,
which have ruined many a poor Soul and given infinite Scandal to the Christian
world. Vae homini illi per quem Scandalum venit.

CHAP. XXI.
Protestants granting Salvation to Catholics by a clear inference drawn from
their Concession end Controversies of Religion. What force their concession
has. Why they granted so much. The Argument is clearly proposed. Mr
Stillingfleet return's no probable Answer. A full discovery of his fallacies.

1. SOme may think the particular Matter now hinted at too largely handled
being scarce worth half the labor here spent upon it, And They judge right,
Should I once so much as offer to prove, as Mr Stillingfleet fondly Imagin's,
the Roman Catholic Church a safe way to salvation because Protestants Say so.
Far be it from me to entertain such a Thought, For whether They side with us,
or not, We have absolute Absolute Certainty of Faith without dependence of
Sectaries.
Certainty of our Faith independently of Their suffrages, or Voting us in a
Secure way to Heaven. Wherefore Should Sectaries recoile, And say we are all
damned (as some have done) we regard it not, That would no more Lessen the
Certainty we now have of sound Faith, than Their Casual Granting us Salvation
in the way we are in, Heightens it.

2. It Is true, were it doubtful (or no more but Probable) whether Catholics
Could be saved in their Religion, The agreeing of Sectaries with us might
serve for something, But now, when the Certainty of our Doctrine Stand's, as we
here Suppose most secure upon an Infallible Principle (which is Church
Authority) The Proof taken from the Agreement of both Parties is an
Impertinency, And in real Truth, De subiecto non supponente, That is, Not to
be supposed, if (which is ever to be noted) we should go about to
strengthen our Catholic Doctrine, because Heretics Agree with us.

3. Howeuer, though the Agreement, Considered in it self, be^ no more but a
fallible Protestant Opinion, yet laid by the other indubitable Doctrine of the
Catholic Church It Is a Truth as asserted by them, And ties their tongues so
fast, that They shall Never hereafter speak a probable word against our
Catholic Faith. Again, the Concession presses Sectaries Ad hominem, who admit
Scripture upon the General Agreement of all Called Christians. If therefore
They argue well: Both you Catholics and we Protestants hold these books
Divine, Ergo, They are so. We Argue as strongly: Both Parties also grant
salvation to Catholics, An Argument against them upon their Concession.
ergo They are so secure, that it is impossible to plead against the Truth,
Though as I said now, The Sectaries Concession heightens not one whit our
Certainty, whereof you may see more n. 20. In the Interim please to know, The
only reason why I discuss this Controversy more at Large, is, first to discover
Mr Stillingfleets gross fallacies, Next to Show that Protestants, are forced at
last to Put an End to Controversies, Seeing the most Learned that ever wrote,
ingenuously acknowledge the Roman Catholic Faith, to be a safe, secure, and
abundantly sufficient Means to attain Salvation, which is to say, A true
believing Catholic Cannot be Damned upon the Account of Wanting Faith, if
other Christian* Duties be Complied with.

4. Now if you Ask what forced Sectaries to grant thus much to Catholics? I
answer it was no kindness God knows, But stark shame (to touch here on no
other Motive) which extorted the Concession from them, For would not both
Heaven and earth have Clamoured had They damned all their own Ancestors, all
the learned and ignorant of the Roman Catholic Church far and near extended,
for want of Divine Faith? Yet this follows, Because without Faith it is
impossible to please God. And thus they stand perplexed. Allow saving faith to
the Roman Catholic, Their Plea is ended; Deny it; They send millions and
millions of Souls to Hell. Thus much premised. I Argue.

5. That Faith which the Roman Catholic Church and Protestants The Ground of
our Doctrine.
also jointly own as sufficient to bring a man to Heaven, is entirely perfect,
And cannot be rationally opposed by either Party. But the Faith of a true
believing Catholic is such a Faith, Therefore it is entirely perfect, And
cannot be more rationally Opposed. Now further. If it stand's thus firm upon
Church Authority (That Is the certain Principle) And the Conc^ssion of
Adversaries As an ouer-measure (though weightles) it cannot be rationally
excepted against by either, both Parties owning it sufficient to Salvation.
Therefore All controversies concerning Faith are clearly ended in behalf of
Catholics, Unless mere Cauils may pass for rational Arguments.

6. It is truly Pitiful to see how vainly Mr Stillingfleet. Part. 3. C. 4.
Page. 611. strives to Euert the force of this short Discourse. Sometimes The
difficulty is not so much as touched by him. Sometimes He mistakes the
Question, And ever beggs it. Now He run's away with half a Principle, which
lead's in a lame Conclusion. Now false Suppositions pass for Proofs. Now
Protestant Opinions enter in, as sound Doctrine. Here he wrong's our Catholic
Authors, There He contradict's himself. In a word you have nothing through His
whole fourth Chapter But I know not what strange Confusion. Thus He Begins.

7. Protestants confess there is a Pissibility for some to escape (Damnation)
The Adversaries discourse.
in the Communion of the Roman Church, But it is as men may escape with their
lives in Shipwreck, But they (Protestants) undertake to make it evident, There
can be no danger, if they observe the Principles of Protestant Religion. Mark
first How strait hearted The man is, in granting as little as may be. viz. A
mere Possibility, And of some only to be saved in the Roman Faith, hoping
Thereby to remove his own Ancestors and Millions of Pious Christians as far
from Heaven as a Possibility conceived by Him, is from an Actual Being. I know
other Protestants speak more roundly And say absolutely, Salvation may be had
in the Roman Catholic Church, because it is a true Church in Fundamentals, And
that the differences betweem them And us are about lesser Matters, or mere
Opinions etc. See Mr. Thorndicke in his Book of Forbearance. page 19. Therefore
Mr. Stillingfleets, lean, bare, and remote Possibility of Salvation, is only
his own particular Opinion. Proved weak and vnconcluding.
Howeuer though he see's not the Consequence, We have enough to conclude
against him. I Will s'hew you how.

8. There is, Says he, A posibility of being Saved in the Romam Catholic
Faith, That is, Catholic Religion has in it a Possibility of bringing men to
Heaven, if there be nothing wanting on Their parts. Very Good. This Possibility
intrinsecal To the Religion is now as actually in Being, as the Religion it
Self, But the Religion is actually in being, Therefore this Possibility
inseparable from it, is also Actual, And lies not in the Series of things yet
producible, as Creatures do which God, if he please may Create to morrow. And
thus you see, Possibility stand's here not opposite to non-Existency, but to an
Actual impossibility, Therefore when I say, Catholic Religion now existing can
possibly save All, I say with the same breath, it cannot possibly damn Any.
Unless you will Grant it can save All and damn some, which is impossible.

9. Hence Mr. Stillingfleets pretty Put off, of Saving Some, and The Religion
which saues Some can save all.
not All, is most inconsequent Doctrine; For clear the Religion from all actual
essential Error, it can as well Save all, as some, And if it be tainted with
any essential Error, The whole Religion is naught, And can save none. But of
this more in the next Discourse. Chap. 5. 6. where I shall prove that Catholic
Religion is either intierly Good, totally Orthodox, or worth nothing, And
consequently if upon a supposed impossibility There were but one essential
error in it which I through invincible ignorance know not, yet Assent to, That
invincible ignorance would (It Is true) excuse me from Sin, But it cannot free
the Religion from being false and forged in it self?

10. What follows in the Objection of our narrow escaping damnation in
Catholic Religion, as men do with infinet danger in Shipwreck, is no more but
Mr. Stillingfleets own improbable Assertion, not worth refuting, And His reason
is far worse. Protestants, Our Adversaries improbable Assertion.
forsooth, undertake to make it evident, There can be no danger, if they
observe the Principles of Protestants. To make it evident. What a vast
ouerlashing is this. Sir, make your Assertion only Morally certain, Nay, but so
much as meanly probable, And May I have the honor to Answer, yo will soon
disclaim Evidence. In the mean while, I look upon it as a mere Vanity worth
nothing, And so is all the rest in your next page. 612. Where you bid us judge,
whether it be wisdom, in such a point as salvation is, to forsake a Church in
which the ground of Salvation is firm, to follow a Church in which it is but
possible one may be saved, but very probably he may do worse. All this is
worse than your own improbable Hic glorious bragging.
Opinion, You here Suppose without Proof, that the ground of Salvation is firm
in your Protestancy, And therefore shamfully beg the question in every word
you speak. Yet thus you go on.

11. His Lordship still asserts the Protestants way to be only the Safe way to
Salvation, and that in the Church of Rome, there is only a limited possibility
of it. Answ. Enough is said already of the Possibility. Here you beg the
question again, you run away with half a Principle, And only tell us, what his
Lordship Asserts. What security have I from his Assertion? There is yet more of
this stuff. Protestants confess, there is Salvation possible to be attained in
the Romam Church; but they say with all, that the errors of that Church are so
many and some so great, as weaken the foundation, that it is very hard to go
that way to Heaven, especially His begging the question.
to them that have had the truth manifested. Here is nothing but words. We only
hear what Protestants prooflesly Think and Say. What am I wiser for that?
These false Suppositions, This His false suppositions.
manifest begging the Question fall of Themselves without further refutation.

12. Were it worth the while, I might Ask whether these supposed errors so far
weaken the foundation of Catholic Religion, that Salvation cannot be had in
it? His Lordship Answers. I grant salvation to Romanists, But not as they are
Romanists, but as They are ^hristians And believe their Creed etc. Pitiful.
Speak, plainly. Will The Belief of Roman Catholic Religion damn them or no? If
it Damn's them, The Belief of their Creed's cannot save them. (Unless you both
damn, and save them at once) Contrariwise, if the Belief of the Creeds saues
them, Roman Religion cannot Damn them, for now upon the Supposition it
destroies not that saving Faith of the Creeds, But stands well with it here,
And therefore cannot damn any hereafter. What follows is yet worse, if worse
can be. You, Sr, Say. Page. 613. His Lordship dares not deny a possibility of
Salvation for the Roman Cathelick, but he is far from Asserting it of those,
who either know the corruptions of that Church, and yet continue in them, or of
such who wilfully neglect the means* whereby they may be convinced.

13. Here is first a false Supposition for a Proof. Of known Corruptions, And a
pure begging the question besides. Here is. 2. The half Principle of his
Lordships bare saying laid hold on without more, which inferr's no Conclusion,
But only thus much, That my Lord spoke (and perhaps not) what he thought, Or if
He did so we Catholics are not of so easy Faith, as to believe him. Here is
3. A pretty piece of Nonsense in those words. Nothing but Confusion in the
Replies of Sectaries.
But he is far from Asserting it of those who know the Corruptions of that
Church etc. As, if forsooth, one truly Catholic could know and own any
Corruptions in his Church And yet remain Catholic. These two things are
inconsistent, To remain Catholic, And to judge this Church corrupted in any
point of Doctrine. Such men My Lord may list among his Protestant Belieuers. In
a word His Proposition is de Subiecto non supponente, And so is also what
crowd's in next. Of Those who neglect the means afforded by Protestants
sufficiently Proposed etc. Here is again the false Supposition, not proved, we
never yet heard of any such means, nor shall here after, I am sure your
Rational Account afford's none.

14. You add presently a desperate word And it is, That his Lordship Speaks of
such Catholics whose mere ignorance excuses, when the Fundamentals are held
etc. Ergo you and your Lord damn all Sectaries send to Hall innumerable Learned
men.
the learned of our Church That intierly believed the Catholic Faith for a
Thousand years and upward. You Damn our B^des, our Bernards, our Dominicks, our
Brunoes, not to be listed amongst the Ignorant. You Damn more over all the
learned Catholics who have lived (since your Heresy began) in Italy, Germany,
Spain, France, and in other parts of the world. Bethink your self well, whether
this can pass for either Catholic or Charitable Doctrine? And never more rail
at us upon the account, That we Condem^ you, For, for one we comdemn, you damn
Thousands. Compar^ the ignorant, amongst you (late beginners) with the ignorant
o^ our Church Past and present; The learned amongst you with the learned of our
Church confessedly Popish for a Thousand year and upward, There is no parallel
in the number. If then yo^ damn many, why may not we condemn the late risen
fewer Multitudes among'st you, wilfully divorced from the Mother Church. Again
we damn not your Persons. No. One Supreme Judge Catholics damn none, but
Condemn Heresy.
only, is to Pronounce the final Sentence upon us all, But we condemn your
Heresy, And say as You ought to speak of the Arians, Pelagians, Macedonian's
etc. (and all such known Renegados) That you have no better Faith than these.
Look you to the Consequence.

15. Your next Demand is. When we grant a possibility of Salvation to those of
the Protestant Chvrch in case of invincible ignorance, How we dare deny it
where there is a preparation of mind, to find out and embrace the most certain
Way to Heaven? What Is this? Are you yet only in Preparatiues to find out, and
embrace? Is one whole Age gone, And Truth not yet found out among Sectaries are
yet preparing to believe.
you? The Catholic firmly belieues, A better Religion cannot be found than
that is He now embraces, And you are Still in a state of seeking, and preparing
for it. Sr, a mere Preparation to take Physic in a mortal infirmity cures
none, no more can a Preparation to believe, if one meet not with the right
Faith, save any. Good Physic actually applied, cures the body, And Faith
actually informing the soul saues us.

16. It is not now my intention to dispute that case of invincible Ignorance,
great Divines favor not the Opinion. See our learned Countriman Thomas
Southwell. Analyfis fidei Disp. 3. Cap. 9. 1. 150. And Michael de Elizalde de
forma verae Religion is inuenienda. Quest: 37. n. 596. The rest which follows
of men being saved by The Terms of Gospel (A language I understand not) And of
our Stalking to the interest of the Church of Rome, is vain Talk, (every Arian
will say as much) But no close Arguing.

17. Page. 614. You offer at a Salvation to our Argument already proposed. It
is most safe for Salvation to take that way which All parties agree in. To this
you never directly Answer, But wholly Our Adversary waves the main difficulty.
wave the difficulty. First you tell us again without Proof of the Errors and
corruptions in our Church, And say it is hard to conceive there should be that
Faith and Repentance, which you make necessary to Salvation with such a
multitude of errors. Sir, These fancied errors either destroy Divine Faith of
the Creeds and Fundamentals, Or do not. If destructive of Faith, You contradict
your Self, And falsify your own Proposition which says. Catholics may be
saved in their Religion, For without Divine faith no man can be saved. If these
Supposed errors destroy; not, Faith ( The ground of Salvation) is apt of it is
own nature to produce in a Soul Contrition, Repentance, pious Conversation, The
fear and love of God etc. Unless we wilfully hinder such holy effects of Grace.
And here you have an unanswerable Dilemma.

18. Suppose these miscalled errors destroy Faith, There is no Possibility of
Salvation at all; Suppose they destroy it not But consist with it, much less
can they vnroote Repentance, Piety, A dilemma.
the love of God, and the other virtues which bring men to Heaven. The reason
is evident. Essential Errors, were There any, stand directly opposite to
Christian Faith, which is true, therefore in the first place they must shake,
or rather destroy that ground of Salvation, before they reuerse Repentance and
other Christian Virtues. Now if you say we have indeed a kind of Faith, but so
defective that it beget's no Repentance no piety etc. You speak only your
fancy, destroy the very Essence of Faith, And Consequently the Catholic must
at last be damned for want of Faith, or, if you make the Errors so minute as
not to raze out Saving Faith, that stands in being still, so do other Christian
virtues likewise, and Salvation with them. The Argument is conuincing.

19. Page. 615. You are wholly besides the Question, And fall upon particular
cases impertinent to our present purpose. You first inueigh bitterly against
Deathbed Repentance, where Our Adversaries impertinencies.
you deliver intolerable Doctrine. 2. You unjustly Calumniate, As if Catholics
taught Repentance not necessary before death, whereas the world knows, both
Doctors in Schools, and Preachers in their pulpits most Zealously inculcate the
great danger of continuing in Sin, and delaying Repentance. Sr, these
difficulties worth examination, And thoroughly Canuased by others, are in this
place impertinencies, Therefore though you would lead me astray, yet I Will not
follow you, But press you to Answer directly to the point in hand. Give me a
man, For example, An humble S. Francis, who lived ever a Penitential life, and
delayed not Repentance until death (there have been innumerable in the Church
profoundly humble and penitential) the Question is, whether you dare damn such
upon the Account of wanting true Faith, true Repentance, the fear or love of
God etc? Damn such And you deny the possibility of Salvation to all Catholics,
Save them, And you grant that true Repentance, piety and other Christian
virtues are consistent with Catholic Faith. And thus I remove you from your
particular case of Deathbed repentance, For although all such were Damned
(which is hideously impious to Assert) Yet you see our Question has a large
extent in order to millions of other Belieuers, who lived piously all their
life long. Now if you Say that Doctrine which holds Salvation possible to one
who ever lived a lewed life, and only repent's at death is perniciously
impious, you only vent your Opinion, And here is an other impertinency.

20. Page. 617. You come to that which is the proper business, And it is to
examine the strength of our Inferences. Protestants grant we may be saved, And
the Church asserts it also. To An Instance brought in.
this you say his Lordship return's a triple Answer, Who first begins with the
confession of Protestants. This was the way of the Donatists of old, which
would hold as well for Them, as the Church of Rome. To prove the Assertion you
instance in one particular of Baptism. Both Catholics and Donatists granted
Baptism was true among the Donatists, but the Donatists denied it to be true
Baptism among the Catholic Christians, Therefore on this Principle the
Donatists side is the surer side, if the Principle be true. It is the safest
taking that way, which the d^ffering Parties agree on. Answ. 1. Here is no
Agreement concerning the main point of Salvation, For the Catholics and
Donatists jointly and unanimously never openly Confessed that Catholics could
be saved, as now we and Protestants by one consent say it. But let that pass.
2. The Catholics To no purpose.
and Donatists agreed that Baptism administered by Heretics was valid and good.
That Is true Doctrine. But both parties never agreed, that it was lawful for a
Catecumen to take Baptism from the Donatists, unless in Case of necessity. See
S Austin Lib. 1. de Bapt. c. 2. 3. O, but thus much follows. The Donatists
Baptism is more safe than that of Catholics upon this Principle, That both
Parties agreed so far, and it is safest to take that way wherein differing
Parties agree, consequently the Catholics Baptism is less safe, because the
Donatists denied it to be true.

21. Answ: This whole Discourse is a mere Paralogism; the Fallacy lies here,
That the Opinion of dissenting men is supposed A Paralogism answered.
to Add more security, more certainty to Church-Doctrin, than the Doctrine it
self deriues from that Oracle of Truth. I say Contrary. As such Opinions, when
true, Add no more weight or certainty to that Doctrine than it had antecedently
from the The Fundamental ground of our Answer.
Church, So if false; They make not the Doctrine less certain. Take one
instance, God reueals this Truth. The Divine word assumed Humane nature. One
preaches the Truth but Adds no degree of certainty to the Doctrine in it self,
which in the highest degree was most certain, before his Preaching. An other
falsely (as Arius did) opposes the verity, it is not Therefore less certain in
it self because He contradicts it. And thus we discourse of our Church Tenets,
indubitably most certain upon Church Authority, whether Heretics deny or
grant, (That Matters not) the Doctrine stand's firm still as before, And as we
see by daily experience neither rises higher in certainty, nor falls lower in
the judgment of Catholics, because Sectaries side with it, or bend against it.

22. Thus much proved The Paralogism is at an end. The Catholics held The
Donatists Baptism valid; so they would have done had these Heretics duly
Ministered it, and with all (which is possible) afterward denied it valid, So
independent Church Doctrine is of dissenting men's opinions. The Donatists again
slighted our Catholic Baptism, the Church regards it not, For as the Opinions
of the Goodness of their own Baptism heightened not the Churches certainty
concerning it, So their Contrary Opinion of its insufficiency made not the
Truth less certain to the Catholic. Apply what is here noted to our present
case, and you will see the like Conclusion. Protestants Say, we may be
Sectaries Siding with us neither Lessens nor increases our Certainty.
saved in Catholic Religion. The Opinion is true, But as asserted by them is
no more but an Opinion, which therefore Add's not one grain of more Certainty
to Catholic Doctrine, For had they denied us a possibility of Salvation, as now
by mere Chance they grant it, Catholics would have given as little ear to
That, as They now do to their many other false Opinions. So it is? Church
Doctrine as I now said, neither falls nor rises in certainty, upon the account
of our Sectaries Opinions.

23. You will Ask what then gain we by the Concession of Protestants when it
gives us no more Assurance in this particular, than we had before from the
Church? I have answered above. We gain thus much, That they cannot rationally
impugn any Catholic Doctrine without contradicting Them selves, For if
confessedly, This bring's men to Heaven, the Religion is sound, And implies no
essential Error, The concession then, as I said, serves well as an Argument ad
Hominem to stop the mouths of Sectaries, And shows withal, That they end
controversies For its What their Excession Serves for?
horridly unjust to dispute against a Faith which all grant saues souls. We
pretend no more, nor can pretend it, And here is the Reason.

23. No Catholic (nor indeed any other) does or can believe a Christian Verity
upon this ground or Motive, that Sectaries say its true, for their saying so,
is neither Gods Revelation nor the Churches Doctrine, But a mere Opinion as
taught by them, But an opinion (chiefly theirs) is to weak to ground any faith
upon, Therefore if I believe, as I do, Salvation most safe in the Roman
Catholic Church, I believe it upon a Motive totally distinct from the
Protestants Assertion. It is true, their Assertion or siding with us may induce
one to reflect on the great power Truth has in working upon men most
refractory, Though it Adds no new degree of certainty to Catholic Doctrine. I
have insisted longer upon this point because it utterly destroies what ever Mr.
Stillingfleet can say against us, unless he will quarrel upon this score, that
I here suppose my Church Doctrine most certain, which is not the Question now,
But may well be supposed in all good law of disputation, And shall, God
willing, be proved in the next Discourse.

24. Page. 619. you proceed to a second Answer of his Lordship, And Argue thus.
If that be the safest which both Parties agree in, the Principle makes much for
the Advantage of Protestants, And why? We Catholics are bound, Say you, to
believe with you in the Point of the Eucharist, For all sides agree The
Sectaries Argument taken from the Eucharist.
in the faith of the Church of England, That in the most blessed Sacrament the
worthy Receiver is by his Faith made Spiritually partaker of the true and Real
body and blood of Christ, truly and really etc. Answ. 1o. If we believed As you
do, The motive of our Faith would be, As is now said, quite different from the
Motive of your Opinion, And so it is de facto in the belief of every Catholic
Mystery. But I wave this, And say Your Principle is ill applied, For you and we
agree in just nothing concerning the Eucharist, but thus far only, That what we
see look's like bread. We say that very Christ who was born of the Virgin; and
suffered on the Cross is really and substantially present under the form's of
bread after true Consecration, You by a strange fancy lay hold of Christ's
Presence existing in Heaven, And think thereby to make your selves partaker of
his real body. We say Christ is rruly Worth nothing, and why?
and really in two, and more places at once, you make this utterly impossible.
We put the real Presence or local being of Christ in the very Object before our
eyes upon the Altar, you put it in your faith, or Fancy rather. Hence your
question afterward viz. Whether we do not allow any real and Spiritual presence
of Christ besides the Corporal (you mean the Real) manducation, is soon
answered, For we distinguish what you confound together, And say, if by these
Terms Spiritual Presence you would exclude the real obiectiue Presence of
Christ's sacred body, we dissent from you, And absolutely hold that Real
obiectiue Presence, which may be rightly called Spiritual because by it Christ
is placed Totus in toto, totally in the whole host and totally in every part of
it. Contrariwise, if you make it only a fancied Presence of Christ, or say, He
is not really under the Forms or Accidents of bread, we leave that lean
Sacramentarie Doctrine to you, utterly disanow it, and still dissent from you.

25. The whole cheat lies hudled up in those vnexplicated words. The worthy
Receiver is by his Faith made spiritually partaker of the true and real body,
etc. As if, forsooth, your two terms. The fallacy discovered.
Faith, and Spiritual, could make us agree in one Tenet, whereas we most vary
about this very Faith and the object of it, And also disclaim your fancied
Spiritual Presence. Hence we say, you have neither true Sacrament, nor true
Faith, nor receive worthily, nor really partake of Christ's true body, nor of
any benefit of his Passion. We say you feed not spiritually, but only taste
natural bread. This is our Doctrine concerning your miscalled Eucharist, we
allow you no more, and Therefore utterly dissent from you.

26. You add presently a great untruth, And I wonder you could speak it without
blushing. The greatest men of our Persuasion as Suarez and Bellarmin (say you)
assert the belief of Transubstantiation not to be simply necessary to
Salvation. Ignorance or, Malice or both had certainly a hand here, For they say
no such thing. I Ascribe much to the first, moved thereunto by your following
words. And that the Manner of it is secret and ineffable. Dear Sr, were Christ
really present without Transubstantiation as Luther held, The manner of his
existing with bread might yet be secret and ineffable, But would this infer a
denial of his ineffable Presence? All that Catholic Authors say, is, That the
modus exist^ndi or Our Adversaries Mistake.
Manner of his existing in the Sacrament, is secret and ineffable even with
Transubstantiation; do they Therefore hold the verity not simply necessary to
Salvation, or boggle at the Doctrine of Transubstantiation? You believe a
Trinity of Persons in one Divine Essence, it is hard for you to express the
Manner how God is one, and three distinct Persons, yet you believe the Mystery
And hold that belief necessary to Salvation. Divines eudeauour to explicate the
Manner of Christ's ineffable Presence in the Eucharist, but when all is done you
have no more from Then but Opinions, And so it falls out in the other Mystery
of the Trinity, where Schoolmen vary in their explicating Quomodo, How God can
be one in Essence And three distinct Persons, Yet they hold the belief of the
Mystery after a due Proposal absolutely necessary to Salvation, And thus they
discourse of Christ's ineffable Presence in the Eucharist. The Quomodo, or
Manner of his being there is difficult And cannot be clearly laid forth to weak
Reason; yet that perplexeth not our Faith whereby we submissively yield to
what God speaks without further curiosity.

27. Your other instances. Page. 620. are quite besides the business. Christ
you say, instituted the Sacrament in both kinds, The Primitive Christians
received in both. What then? Ergo Other instances refuted.
Christ commanded both to laics, is no Consequence, nor agreed on by
Catholics. 2. Both Churches, say you, Agree that the Eucharist is a Sacrifice
of duty, of Praise, of Commemoration etc. You know, we absolutely deny your
Supposition, and say you have no true Sacrifice, consequently neither praise
God, nor Commemorate Christ's Passion, but grievously offend him in your taking
a bare piece of bread, Here is no Agreement. And thus we speak of your Mass or
Liturgy, For there was never Mass in the without a true Sacrifice, you have no
Sacrifice, Ergo no Mass Church. The grossest error therefore is that you have
rased out the Sacrifice, most essential to a Liturgy.

28. Page, 621. You say. His Lordship Answers truly, that the Agreement of
differing parties is no Metaphysical Principle, The Contingent proposition.
but a bare contingent Proposition which may be true or false, as the matter
is, to which it is applied. Answ. A contingent Proposition; What Is this Sr? If
you mean that the Protestant party vented it by chance, I Will not quarrel with
you, But out it is in print, And applied to the Possibility of Salvation, which
you allow Catholics. Let this concession stand, it cannot but be true unless
you say, Both parties err in the Assertion, And then we are not only out of the
Question, but highly blame you upon this account, That all your pains in
discussing sc largely the matter hitherto, has been to no purpose, For one line
might have ended All, had you plainly Said. We Protestants foully erred when we
granted Salvation to Catholics in their own Religion. Be it how you will. I
say this Proposition. Salvation may be had in Catholic Religion, is So true,
that it cannot be false, because the greatest Authority on earth, the universal
Church of Christ own's it as an undoubted verity, and could this possibly be a
falsehood, neither we nor Protestants can believe any thing which the Church
teaches, as is amply proved in the second Discourse. etc. For to what purpose
should I believe the Trinity, the Incarnation, the Creed or any thing else, when
Is so true that is cannot be false.
that Church which proclaims these as Truths, may after all damn me? The very
uglines of such a thought carries horror with it, And stark shame decries it,
as Abominable. Your Lord and you say next. The consent of disagreeing parties
is neither Rule nor proof of truth, No man can resolve his Faith into it, but
Truth rather is, or should be the Rule to frame, if not to force Agreement.
Answ. All this is very right, Therefore we never make your consent either Rule
or proof of any Catholic Verity, much less do we resolve our Faith into your
Agreement; Church Doctrine Stands firm without you, it was true before you were
in being, And the evidence of it forced you to consent with us. Now a word to
your other two or three instances. And.

29. In real truth, Sr, I much wonder you saw not their Lameness, before you
thrust them into your Page 621. And that you would fain allow them Strength to
weaken this Truth. W^e Other Instances proved weight less.
and Protestants Agree thus far that Catholic Religion can save us, etc. I say
Contrary, The instances are so remote from your design, That they prove just
nothing. One is. The Orthodox Christians agreed with the Arians, that Christ
was of like nature with his Father, But added, He was of the same nature,
Ergo, Say you, it is safest to hold with the Arians. To hold what I beseech
you? You Answer, that Christ was of the like nature. Very good. That Likeness
either excluded the same nature or included it; Grant the first, you make the
Fathers Heretics, which is impossible, For they held the same nature common
and Consubstantial to the Father and Son. If their concession (which is true)
included the same nature, The Orthodox party and Arians agreed not in the same
hypothesis, consequently your instance is to no purpose at all. In a word this
ever and vnexceptionably holds good. The Doctrine which Heretics Jews and
Turks agree in with Catholics is most true (so you and we agree about
salvation now discussed) but it does not follow, that so much only, or that no
more is true. Your want of reflecting upon this Only or, no More makes That Is
truth wherein Catholics and Heretics agree.
all your instances impertinent And your inferences Ergo, It is safest holding
with the Arians most vnconcluding; For though the Doctrine be true when the
Arian side with the Church, yet it deriues no absolute safety from that consent
of Heretics.

30. Upon these grounds all the rest which follows falls to nothing. Some
dissenting parties (Say you) agree that there ought to be a Resurrection from
Sin, and that this Resurrection is meant in diverse passages of Scripture, But
they deny the Resurrection of the body after Death. Ergo it will be the Safest
to deny the article of the Resurrection. Again: Dissenting parties, as Jews,
Turcks, and Sectaries agree with Catholics, that there is but one God, Ergo by
virtue of this Principle, men will be bound to deny the Trinity. Lastly.
Dissenting parties Agree fully with us That Christ is man; but Heretics deny
His Godhead. Therefore it will be safest believing that Christ is mere man, And
not God. Answer. With much wearisomness do I read these more than pitiful
improbable inferences. Not one of them arises from Premises which lead in any
thing like your Conclusion. Reduce but Premises put which infer no Conclusion.
one to right Form (one serves for all) and you will see your folly. Thus it
is. That Doctrine in which Catholics and Heretics agree is safe and true
Doctrine; Catholics and Heretics agree in this Doctrine that Christ is man (but
not man only) ergo that is safe and true Doctrine. Here is the utmost your
Premises can infer, And I grant all. Christ is truly man. So I grant the
Doctrine of a Resurrection from sin, of one God only to be most sound and
Catholic, But here is your grand mistake and open fallacy with it. You seem to
persuade the Reader, that because Heretics agree so far with the Church,
Therefore it is safe to deny what ever other Doctrine She maintains. Sr, She
maintains the Truths now mentioned, yet not only Those But many more And herein
there is no Agreement, consequently no good conclusion for you upon any agreed
Principle. For thus much only follows from thence, That so far as we Agree, so
far true Doctrine is taught. Apply this to our present matter and all is plain.
You and we agree thus far, that Salvation may be had in the Roman Catholic
Religion. Most true. We dissent from you concerning the Charge of Superstitions
An ather fallacy discovered.
and gross Errors imposed on us, from this you can infer no Conclusion against
us upon the Principle of Agreement, now Supposed in the other Doctrine of
Salvation, which goes on roundly without all contradiction. I would say. We
agree about Salvation and that is a Truth; we differ in other points, here we
must dispute upon other Grounds, And lay that agreed on Principle aside, for
immediately it lead's in no conclusion in such matters.

31. Shall I now tell you where your whole Fallacy lies? It lurk's in that
pretty Term, Safest, For you thought to infuse into it this Sense. So much
Doctrine as we and Heretics agree in, is only the Safest, But no more, As if we
Catholics held, what ever other Tenet is out of the compass of that agreed-on
Doctrine implies both Vnsafety and Uncertainty. You grossly mistake. We hold
every other Point of Catholic Religion wherein you and we dissent wholly as
Safe and certain, as That is we both agree in; For I tell you once more, our
Safety and certainty depend not upon any Heretics consent. If then you would
rack That Principle ( we and Arians agree) to this unto ward sense, So much
Doctrine The Principle of Agreement abused
precisely is the safest we agree in, And no more, Or, That our maintaining
that agreed-on Doctrine to be safe, excludes other Catholic verities from being
So, We neither agree with the Arian nor any other Heterodox, But utterly
disclaim The Principle and consequently say, you can draw no Conclusion at all
from it against us. Sense the Principle and all is clear. Heretics and we
agree, That Christ is man, That sense contains certain Doctrine. O, but the
meaning may be; He is so purely man that he is not God. Give it this sense, we
agree not, but reject the Principle as Heretical, which therefore inferr's
nothing like a conclusion against us. All is contrary in the other agreed on
Principle Concerning the Salvation of Catholics, For that as I said now,
Though it serve not immediately to end other debates, touching Purgatory,
Pra^ing to Saints etc. yet it draws with it a long train of notable
consequences. For if we may be saved, we have true Faith in our Church, true
Hope, true Chatity, true Repentance, And what ever is necessary to attain
salvation.

More of Mr. Stillingfleets Mistakes briefly discovered.
32. I Will only briefly hint all the rest which follows from your Page 623. to
the end of the Chapter, To touch them is enough to take off the little strength
they have. You ask first. Why you ought to believe that which both Parties
agree in. I Answer because you must believe in some Church, which is either
your own or Two questions answered.
the Roman Catholic Or Both, Both grant the Catholic may be saved, what would
you have more. You Ask again, If the consenting parties may agree in a falsehood
what evidence have you but that the agreed on Principle, is one of those
Falsehoods? I have answered. 1. If the Principle, be supposed false you might
have roundly said so at the beginning, and spared all your superfluous labor
spent to no purpose in this fourth Chapter. I Answered, 2. The true Church,
even when Protestants consent to it cannot Agree in a falsehood, for the true
Church speaks truth, And He or They who side with it cannot swerue from truth
in that. You say. 3. It ought to be a safe Principle indeed, and no uncertain
Topical Argument, which men should venture their souls upon. Answ. If men must
be saved in the true Church (be it yet where you will) And in this we All
agree, none can in conscience call the Doctrine of it Topical or uncertain, as
shall be proved afterward. In the mean while Say I beseech you, Church Doctrine
Miscalled Topical.
what safer Principle have you to rely on in this weightly matter of Salvation,
which will not be more Topical Than that is which the true Church teaches, And
you approve. You know, or should know there was never any true Church since
Christianity began, which denied Salvation to the Romam Catholic. Nay all
Orthodox Christians ever granted it. You side with all these Orthodox
Christians and what greater Authority can there be on earth? Yet this Principle
must be called by you Topical and uncertain. Say then what is more certain? Will
you leave the voice and vote of all Orthodox Professors and run to Scripture?
Alas, The whole book Says no where so much as seemingly, That you Protestants
are in the Safe way of Salvation, And we Catholics not. What ever Argument
therefore is drawn from Scripture, will be a less satisfactory Principle (yea
none at all) And infinitely more Topical in order to save you, Than what the
church teaches, and you hold with it, is, to save us. Now if you let go this
Principle of plain Scripture, as you must (or I Will urge you lo produce that
plain Text which saues you, and Damn's Catholics) you have nothing left to
stand on but mere Misinterpretations and Glosses, which indeed merit not so
much as very name of Topics.

33. You say 4. Heathenism if our Principle hold, will be Answer to an
Objection taken from Heathenism
proved the safest way to Salvation, For some of you (Catholics) agree That
many of them may be saved without any explicit knowledge had of Christ, But
they deny you can be saved by it. Answ: Here the old fallacy is on foot again,
And a pretty Antilogy with it, For if the Heathens deny we can be saved by an
explicit knowledge of Christ, They must certainly have some explicit
knowledge of him; Or if they have no such explicit knowledge, How can they
deny Salvation to us by Christ? They cannot deny what they never heard off. But
let this pass. I Answer. 2. You are quite besides the Question and once more
out of our Principle, For you join together two opinions only. viz. what the
Heathens and some Catholics hold in order to the Salvation of such Aliens. And
We in the contest with you, make use of a Doctrine which all the Orthodox
Churches on earth have ever taught: This is more certain than any opinion can
be, and only (in order to the inference about the Salvation of Catholics) Add
your opinion to it. 3. After you have said all, you only conclude thus much,
that a Heathen may be saved without any explicit knowledge of Christ. The
Concession so far is good upon the Opinion of Catholic Doctors, but does it
follow from hence that so much only is true, or that no more Doctrine is Safe?
This you ought to infer or you prove nothing.

34. Page. 623. You only tell us what his Lordship says. viz. That the Roman
Church, and the Church of England are but two distinct members of the Catholic
Church, spread over the face of the Sectaries own Catholics a part of the
Catholic
earth. Observe good Reader, our Adversaries both here and else where often make
us a part, at least, of the Church Catholic. Upon that Concession I argue ad
Hominem, they are certainly to talk no more of any danger of damnation for want
of Faith, but grant freely we may be saved, or in real Truth They surpass
Mahomet in malice. For if Mahomet who held Moses and Christ two great Prophets
never dared to damn those millions of Mahomet more favorable then Sectaries.
souls that believed in them, And had lived from Moses until the wicked man set
forth his Alcoran, much less can these men who hold us Christians, and part of
the Catholic Church damn those innumerable professors of this great moral body
for want of Faith, who have been since the. 5. or 6. age until Luther appeared
in the world. You next put us to our proofs. If we can prove that the Roman
Church is properly the Catholic Church it Self, we are to Speak out etc. Sr,
though we are not to prove that we keep in the Kings high way where the world
has seen us so many Ages, But might most justly force you (late straglers) to
prove you have taken a better path; Yet what you desire is so amply euinced in
the other Treatise upon several Occasions chiefly Disc. 3. C. 1. 2. 3. That
none of you hitherto have dared to Answer. The proof briefly is reduced to this
plain Discourse. Three days before Luther shamefully deserted the Roman
Catholic Communion, there was a true visible Church on earth, but that only
was the Roman Catholic Church for all other Societies, name which you will,
were erroneous and heretical. The Roman, the only Catholic Church.
Ergo the Roman Church, or none, (for Protestants were not then in the world)
was the true Faithful Orthodox Church of Christ, And is so Still after our
Sectaries late Revolt from it.

35. You Cloy our ears again with his Lordships severe Sentence concerning the
Leaders of our Church, who refuse to hear, Her Instruction, And his Charity
extend's so far as to think them all lost souls, though many that succeed them
in these Errors, without obstinacy, may be saved. Answ: His Lordship neither
is, nor was, nor Shall ever be the Judge of the living and the Dead, Therefore
we little heed his heavy Doom, The man has his already. But say I beseech you?
Where was the Church before Luther whose Instruction the Catholic Leaders
refused to hear? was it your English Church? Alas, it was a thing, never heard
of in those Days. Was it the Church of Arians, Pelagians, and such like
comdemned Heretics, must our Leaders be damned for not hearing these? No
certainly. Say then for Gods sake A question Proposed Concerning. The Church
Catholic?
where was the Church, they should have have harken'd to and refused to hear?
Here, Sr, we urge you, may we use your own Phrase to speak out, to pronounce,
and prove. Again. How dare you with any Conscience suppose, that so many
learned, most pious and virtuous Prelates, Pastors, Doctors, Religious, went
against their own Consciences to lead Themselves and millions of Souls into
Perdition? whereof innumerable gave all they had to the poor, some built
Churches, Others founded Monasteries, others Universities, Others, who might
have lived like Princes in the world, shut themselves up in Cells to gain
Heaven at last, yet these, for sooth, must be Misleaders with you, And damn
themselves and whole Millions for nothing. The Devil in Hell has not Desperate
Doctrine.
malice enough to harbor such a thought, And I verily persuade my self that
neither the Bishop that is gone, nor you, Sr, when you wrote your Account, where
so far infatuated, as to Judge it probable. Your Papers speak not always your
own Consciences.

36. You Still run on with nothing. Many, Say you, hold A mere importinency
the Foundation it self Doctrinally, who hold it not sauingly. Most true. A
mere impor^inency
But the fault is not in the Doctrine, but in their want of complying. And
what is this to our present purpose? whilst we only Assert with you That
Catholic Religion can save us, If our lives be answerable to it.

37. You say again Page. 624. Our Leaders are lost because they most
dangerously withhold from others the plain and undoubted word of God, And
therefore deserve the same Anathema which. S. Paul Pronounces against an Angel,
in case he teach any other Doctrine. Answ. Do you speak in earnest Good Sr?
Favor me so far, That you and I may debate this one point, and end it by plain
Scripture, If you show me upon sound Principles indeed, That we teach any
Doctrine Contrary to the plain word of God I am gained to your side, And shall
acknowledge you Conqueror, But no fear of this. You Say moreover, if you Prove
us guilty of any gross dangerous and damnable Error, That, will be abundantly
sufficient to your purpose, that Our's cannot possibly be any safe way to
salvation. Conditional Propositions, here insignificant.
Answ. Very right indeed. But these Ifs end no Controversies: Set, once more
pen paper and prove us guilty of damnable Error, and you will damn so many, that
very few of your Protestants will be left in a state of Salvation. I Will make
the Assertion good hereafter. In the interim you Tell us, We palpably beg the
Question whilst we suppose the whole Church is on our side, and against you,
which is a notorious falsehood. Sr, words are but wind. I shall by the Grace of
God Evidence this Truth so notoriously in the next Discourse, that you, if
reason may have place, must confess, Catholics are the only Orthodox Church,
And Consequently grant, that Controversies are ended between us.

THE SECOND DISCOVRSE OF The Church and Rule of Faith
HEre we come to handle a main Matter in Controversies, And first Evidence the
true Church by Her Marks and Glorious Miracles. The Roman Catholic Church is
proved the only Orthodox Society of Christians, and Rule of Faith also. We
Euince Her absolute Infallibility, and show by Reason, That if She has taught
but one false Doctrine, and obliged Christians to believe it, there is now no
true Faith in the world.

CHAP. I.
Necessary Principles premised relating to the Controversy now in hand,
concerning the true Church And Rule of Faith.

1. THE first Principle. God whose eternal design is to bring man to true
Faith in this short pilgrimage, and after to endless Happiness, afford's means to
acquire both, And has as Principles presupposed.
well laid open the means whereby true Faith may be attained, As made our final
End known.

2. The second Principle. Those want the means leading to the last happy End,
who are Aliens from the true Church of Christ, or Separated from that Catholic
Society. The Assertion is so plainly delivered not only by most Ancient
Fathers, But by the more learned Sectaries also, That it is needless to produce
many Testimonies. S. Cyprian. Lib. de unitate Ecclesiae? Says. Quisquis ab
Ecclesia separatus est etc. Who ever is separated from the Church is joined to
an Adulteress, And divorced from all the Promises of the Church. He comes not
to the reward which Christ has promised who leaves the Church of Christ. He is
an Alien, Profane an Enemy, and cannot have God for his Father, who has not
the Church for his Mother. S. Austin. lib. 4. de Symb. C. 13. Speaks fully this
sense Citing those last words of Cyprian. And Lib. 4. de Baptis. C. 17. Says.
Out of the Church there is no Salvation. Yet more: Epist. 152. Whoeuer is or
shall be separated from The Fathers Testimonies preduced.
this Catholic Church, although he thinks himself to live most laudably, For
this one wickedness alone, that he is disioyned from the unity of Christ, shall
have no life, Sed ira Dei manet super eum, But the wrath of God remains upon
him. S. Fulgentius Lib. de fide ad Petrum. C. 39. Hold this most certain and no
way doubt of it, That an Heretic or Schismatic baptized in the name of the
Father of the Son and Holy Ghost, if he be not in Union with the Catholic
Church, Although he gives never so great Alms, And shed his blood for Christ,
yet he cannot be saved. I wave other excellent Authorities known to every one
versed in the Fathers, And need not to take more pains when Protestants
themselves own the Doctrine. The Ark was a type of the Church, says Perkins, in
Symb. Colum: with me. 785. extra quam omnes interibant, out of which Ark All
dyed, and all are damned who are out of the Church. Again In Caput. 9. ad
Sectaries Consent.
Galat. Those who are not members of the visible Church, are not members of the
Catholic Church. Humfred. Ad Ration. 3. Campiani. We condemn all who are not
aggregated to the visible. Church of God. Finally Calvin, the Master of
Sectaries. Lib. 4. Institu. C. 1. 4. makes it absolutely necessary to be in
union with Christ's visible Church.

3. The ground of this Truth is so solidly laid down in Scripture, that none
can contradict it, For here the Church is called the Kingdom, the Body, the
Inheritance of Christ, purchased at a dear The Ground of our Catholic Truth
rare, the effusion of his sacred blood, A City built upon a Mountain. The
House, the Temple of God, the Jerusalem, the Pillar and firmament of Faith,
etc. Whereby it appears, That whoeuer is out of this Kingdom, out of this
City, out of this house and Temple of God; whoeuer is not a member of this
Mystical body or shares not in this purchased Inheritance, or in a word out of
the true Church (be it where you will, I yet define nothing) is in a damnable
condition. A sad thought for all Sectaries, because it is certain, that Christ
has not composed his Church of such Members as rightly believe the revealed
Doctrine taught by the true Church, and of such as oppose it. Unity and Division
in Unity and Division in Faith have no place in the true Church.
points of Faith ase inconsistent in the same Orthodox Church, and destroy the
essential form of it, which is one Faith. Now if our Adversaries talk of a
unity in Fundamentals, they are not only evidently convinced of Error in the
other Treatise, But upon this very Account become Separaters from the Church,
and without Principles Assert that which neither Church nor Scripture teaches.
Who ever hold's not the Catholic faith entire shall Perish eternally, says S.
Athanasius in his Creed, but an entire Belief excludes all distinction between
fundamentals and others, as is manifest. I little value some Protestants
Glosses made upon this Text, for Glosses with me are weightles, when they stand
vnprincipled.

4. The 3. Principle. What the true Church of Christ teaches concerning the
sense of Scripture, That Is the sense intended by the Holy Ghost, and
Consequently most true. The reason is. Truth cannot be contrary to truth, The
Church and Scripture never Clash, But always speak one and the same verity.
This Sectaries must grant, who define the Church to be an Assembly of men
professing the pure Word of God, Therefore it cannot deceive or teach an Error
contrary to that pure word, Or if it does so, it cease, eo ipso, to be God's
Oracle, And the true Church of Christ.

5. If these men still go on trifling with their wonted distinction, of
Fundamentals, and not Fundamentals, And allow a Perfect unity of Doctrine
between the Church and Scripture in The Distinction between Fundamentals and
others, frivolous.
things absolutely necessary to Salvation, but not in others. This is to define,
and not to define, to build and destroy, to teach and cheat in one breath, For
a definition, which makes known the nature of a Thing, must stand in its open
sense without restraint, and exactly agree to the thing defined. Mark now.
Christ's true Church is the Thing defined; and the Definition charged with
endless restrictiue Terms, is drawn to Nonsense, fot it tells us, the Church
is an Assembly of men professing the pure Word of God, But how far? In a few
simple Truths, called fundamentals, in others it may err, and profess as much
falsehood as you please against the Verities of Scripture, So that the true
Church, not defined at all, is made by these, a fair and foul Spouse at once;
fair in a few unalterable necessary Truths, but foul, ugly, and deformed
(because erroneous) in a hundred other matters. Mark the Paradox, and call it a
flat Heresy, which separat's him who assert's it from the Catholic body. Thus
it is. Christ's Church is true, and falfe, pure and vnpure, right and wrong,
lovely and hateful together. The Inhabitants of this City of God, of this
Temple and safe dwelling place, are in it by believing a few simple Truths, And
at the same time out of it, by believing more Falsities. This is Mr
Stillingfleets strange Doctrine, who think's there is no Church now in the world
of one Denomination free from Error. To what desperate improbabilities does
Heresy drive men?

6. The 4. Principle. The received Doctrine of Christ's Church, chiefly in all
points of Controversy is ever as clear, and often more clear, by what She
teaches, than it is in any express words of Scripture. The Assertion is
vndubitable. For Church Doctrine clear in the Churches Definitions.
who see's not, but that the whole Catholic Doctrine, of the sacred Trinity, of
one God and three distinct Persons, of the Father improduced, the eternal Son
begotten, and of the Holy Ghost proceeding from both, is more plainly delivered
in Church Doctrine, than in any sentence, or sentences of Holy Writ. The like I
say of the high Godhead in Christ, which the Arians deny; Of Original sin,
rejected by the Pelagians, and other Articles of our Christian faith. And thus
much is evident against Secctaries, for do not they make their own Doctrine, of
their Caen^ Not always so inscripture, as Sectaries grant.
or Sacrament, when they call it a Sign, a Figure etc. more plain than any
words are for it, in Holy writ? And will they not also grant (It Is an Argument
ad hominem) that our Catholic Tenet of this sacred Mystery, laid forth in the
Council of Trent. Sess. 13. Can. 1. is more express and plain Popery than lies
couched in Christ's own words This is my body, Though the Popery is there clear
enough to every Reader? Yes most assuredly, For if our Doctrine stand as plain
in Christ's words, as in the Churches Definition drawn from thence, Sectaries
cannot (as they do) admit of the one and scornfully reject the other. Therefore
they must suppose Scripture more dark and obscure, than either their own, or
our Churches Doctrine is. And hence it follows that the very Arians were not so
much Heretics upon the account, that they opposed any most clear and express
sentence in Holy writ (for really it is hard to find one manifestly express
against them), as for contradicting plain Church Doctrine, or the true sense of
Scripture delivered by this Oracle of truth. Their Heresy then proceeded first
from some words in Scripture seemingly clear in their behalf, as, My Father is
greater than 1. 2. From no Text so manifest, but that still place was left them
to Why the Arians were accounted Heretics.
Gloss as they have done, and in their Judgments with some appearrance of
truth, yet Heretics they were and so deservedly accounted of, for
contradicting the Church's clear Doctrine. Be it how you will, thus much I am
sure of, They never mangled or misused any passage in holy Writ, when contrary
to their Heresy more shamfully, than our Protestants now mangle and abuse our
Saviors Proposition. This is my body.

7. By all you see this Principle well grounded. Whateuer Clarity Scripture
has chiefly in Matters of controversy (and clarity helps much in the Rule of
Faith) Gods true Church, which cannot but speak the Scriptures sense, in every
particular, delivers it most clearly, Wherefore S. Austin told Manicheus, Tom:
6. contra Epist: Fundam. C. 14. That if he was to believe the obscure
Mysteries of Christianity, He would assent to them upon the weighty Authority
of People and Nations celebrated and spread abroad, By the consent of all
learned, and unlearned, which consent implies the universal Agreement of the
Catholic Church, And to establish this Doctrine more firmly, He assures us.
Tract. 18. in Joan: That all Heresy which intangles souls and cast's them into
Hell, S. Austins Judgment concerning. Scripture.
proceed's from this one misery, that Good Scripture is not rightly understood
by them. Hence also He told us above, Lib. 1. contra Crescon. C. 32. That if
any doubt arise concerning the obscurity of Scripture we are to have recourse
to Christ's holy Church, and receive from Her satisfaction. To which purpose, S.
Cyprian speaks most piously. Lib. de Unit: Ecclesiae. illius lacte nutrimur
Spiritu eius animamur, adulterari non potest sponsa Christi. We are nourished
by the milk, we are animated by the Spirit of this faithful Spouse of Christ,
which cannot play the Harlot, or become an Adulteress.

8. The last Principle. The Rule of Faith is plain, or its own Self-euidence,
apt of its own nature to convince the most obstinate Adversary, whether Jew,
Gentil or Heretic, And for this reason must be immediately credible by it Self,
and for it self, otherwise it must suppose an other distinct Rule yet more
plain, more evident, more conuincing and more immediately credible, And that
Rule a third, a fourth, And so in infinitum, which is impossible. Again, the
Obiectiue Rule we Shall now speak of, Answer's to the thing regulated by it,
which is true, certain, and Divine Faith. This Rule then must not only be true,
and certain in it self, but also certainly applied to Belieuers, For a certain
What the Rule of Faith implies?
Rule in it self dubiously applied to an understanding, auail's only to leave
all in Suspense and lead's none to any further Acquiescency, but to a wavering
and uncertain Opinion, And this is neither suitable to firm Belief, nor to the
Rule it self, which ought to establish us in Gods revealed truths, without
doubt and hesitancy. Grant this Notion of a Rule to be exact (and none shall
justly except against it) All we have said above of the Scriptures
Insufficiency, to regulate Faith, or to decide controversies, is no less than a
Demonstration against Sectaries, Whereof see more in the other Treatise? Disc.
2. per totum. Scripture Certainly is not plain in all things necessary to be
believed, for were the true sense of it (which indeed is only Scripture) as
plain and indisputably clear for the Arians, or Protestants in every particular
controversy, as their Doctrine is plainly delivered by them; Or contrariwise;
were the sense of it as plain and indisputably clear for the Catholic Doctrine
in Matters of debate, as the very Doctrine is taught by the Church, All
Contention would soon cease, because either They, upon the Supposition, must
become Papists, or we turn Arians and Protestants, Or finally be forced to
deny plain Scripture. A most conuincing Argument.

9. The difficulty therefore is not (and Sectaries seldom touchit) whether
Scripture be true, were the sense known or out of Controversy, but what that
true sense is, which lies in obscurity, and cannot be known, without a certain
Interpreter. Here is the only Question debated between us and Sectaries. One
may The only difficulty concerning Scripture.
Reply. It is no good objection to say learned men differ about the sense of
Scripture, Ergo it is not sufficiently plain, because a great wit may wrest the
plainest words God ever spoke to a sinister sense. Contra. 1. But who knows,
when two learned Parties contest in this Matter, which of them is the sinister
Wrester? Contra 2. When a whole Society of men as the Arians were, and
Protestants are now, Tamper with a Text, which touches an essential point of
Faith, And dissent from others as learned as Themselves about the meaning, The
sense cannot be supposed more clear for the one than the other, without an
other Rule certain and Definitive. Pray you say. Is the sense of those words.
My Father is greater than I, indisputably clear for the Arian? Or the sense of
Christ's words. This is my Body without controversy clear for the Protestants
Doctrine concerning the Sacrament, when a whole learned Church opposes both?
Evidently No. Therefore Sectaries must acknowledge an Obscurity in Scripture.
our Nouellists must grant, that Scripture is not only obscure, in these two
places, But more; That a Judge is necessary to ascertain all of its true
meaning, as well in these, as in a hundred other Passages. Again, if Scripture
want this clarity, it cannot be its own Self-euidence, much less convince an
obdurate Adversary. Nay I say, though it were clear and the sense thereof
agreed on by all called Christians, yet both Jews and Gentiles scorn the
Divinity of the book, And say if it be of Divine inspiration, That must be
proved by a certain Rule extrinsecal to Scripture, Therefore it is not
immediately credible by it self, or for it self. Lastly were Scripture plain in
it self, yet (And this utterly ruin's Sectaries) The certain Doctrine of it, can
never be applied indubitably to any understanding, For our Nouellists say,
because all Teachers of Christian Doctrine are fallible, none can make an
infallible Application of it to any, or teaeh that Doctrine infallibly, which is
in it self infallible. See more hereof in the other Treatise. Disc: 1. C. 2.
and C. 4. N. S.

CHAP. II.
The Rule of Faith assigned: The Properties of a Rule. What is meant by the
Church? Ancient Fathers Assert that the Church is easily found out. Her marks,
more clear, than Her Essential Doctrine

1. THe true Church of Christ in this present State manifestly demonstrable by
signal Marks and Motives, is the only plain, certain, Self-euident Rule of
Faith, apt to convince the most obdurate: Vnbelieuer. It is immediately
credible, and the Doctrine of it certainly applied to a Seeker after truth.
These Assertions stand firm upon 3. Principles.

2. 1. Christ Jesus has provided Christians of a clear and easy Rule, otherwise
All are left in darkness, and know not what, or how to believe.

3. 2. Nothing assigned by Sectaries, Be it Scripture solely, or what else
Imaginable, Carries so much as a weak probability of being a Rule so plain,
easy, and satisfactory as the true Church is.

4. 3. All the properties of a Rule exactly agree to the Church of Christ and
to Her only. 1. The Rule of Faith is plain, Christ's Church is the Rule of Faith.
so is Church Doctrine and much more plain than Scripture; I mean, we easily
understand what the Church teaches though the Doctrine in it self be difficult.
2. A Rule is its own Self-euidence, so the Church is, taken with the Marks, and
Motives whereby She is demonstrated. 3. A Rule is apt to convince, the most
obstinate Adversaries; Christ's Church has evidently don so, witness the
innumerable Conuersions wrought by Her upon Jews, Gentiles, and most obdurate
Heretics. 4. A Rule must be certain, and certainly applied to Belieuers; what
Christ's true Church teaches is so, for She is Gods own Oracle, as shall be
proved hereafter, and teaches her Children infallibly. The Truth of these
particulars will be more fully laid forth in the sequel of this Discourse. In
the mean while, two things are to be cleared. The first, what we understand by
the Church of Christ. 2. How and by what means She may be known? Thus much
done, we shall easily find out those Christians, who are Members of this happy
Society, or essentially constitute that visible moral Body, called the Holy
Catholic Church. What is meant by the Church.


5. Concerning the first. We speak plainly, and understand by the Church a
visible Society of true Belieuers, united in one profession of Christian Faith
and the communication of Sacraments, under the Conduct and Government of
Christ's lawful Commissioned Pastors. I say no more yet, hoping no Sectary can
justly quarrel with the Notion of a Church, expressed in such general Terms,
And therefore wave at present that other worn-out controversy agitated by
Protestants. viz. Whether the Predestinate only make up the true Church, or
great Sinners also may be included, That is not at all to our purpose now, when
we only seek after a Society of Christians united in the true Faith of Jesus
Christ, who own a due submission to lawful Commissioned Pastors, whether those
who teach, or are taught, be Saints, or sinners, concerns them, it is true, but
not our present Question. Of such Belieuers there cannot be two or more
Churches, but one only; And to avoid all confusion, or the mingling of
different Questions together, we here move no doubt concerning the Head, The
meaning of the question proposed.
or chief Authority of this Church, but immediattly Ask, whether there is now,
and has ever been, since Christ's time, a visible diffused Society of
Christians, who have faithfully believed the Orthodox Doctrine of Christ, and
upon that Account well merit to be called the Professors of the true Catholic
Church? Of this Universal spread Society our Savior spoke most clearly, or of
none. Hell gates Can not preuail against it. The Spirit of Truth abides with it
to the end of the world etc. I think no Sectary will deny such a Church.

6. The only difficulty now is to find out this Orthodox and large diffused
Body of Christians, united in one true Faith, and the sincere Worship of God.
And nothing is more consonant to reason, more express in Holy Writ, or more
clearly asserted by the ancient Fathers than that the true Church lays forth
Her own evidence or clear Discernibility whereby She is distinguished from all
Heretical Sects, That is, She lies manifestly open to all eyes, and Cannot but
be most easily known. She is a Ci^^y built upon a mountain: The light of the
world: A Tabernacle placed i^ the sun. Ipsa est Ecclesia says S. Austin Epist:
166. In sole posita. The Church is placed in the sun, Hoc est in manifestatione
omnibus no^a vsque ad terminos terrae, That is, She is known by Her own
apparent and manifest Evidence all the whole world over. And because no one
Father touches this point with greater Energy than S. Austin, Hear yet more.
Tract: 1. m. 1. Joan: Possumus digito etc. S. Austins Judgment concerning The
Churches Evidence.
we can point at the Church and demonstrate it with a finger, and They are
blind who see it not. Lib. 2. contra Crescon: Cap. 36. Extat Ecclesia. The
Church is in Being apparently clear and conspicuous to all. Again, Lib: 2.
Contra Petil: C. 32. Neminem latet verae Ecclesia. The Church of Christ lies
hid to none. And Lib: Contra crescon: C. 63. The Church so clearly presents it
self to all sort of men even to Infidels, that it stopp's the mouths of Pagans
etc. See also this great Doctor, pondering those words of the. 30. Psalm. Qui
videbant me for as fugerunt etc. Obscurius, faith He, dixerunt Prophetae de
Christo, quam de Ecclesia etc. The Prophets have spoken more darkly of Christ,
than of the Church, And I think this was done, because they saw in spirit, that
men would make Parties against the Church, and not contend so much concerning
Christ ready to contend about the Church. Christ almost every where was
preached, by the Prophets in some hidden or covered Mystery, Ecclesia aperte,
but the Church was pointed at so clearly that all might see it, and those also
who were to be against it. I wave other Authorities, for it is tedious to prove
a Manifest Truth, or here to transcribe plainer Testimonies relating to this
subject. Thus much premised.

7. I say first. Though Church Doctrine be more clearly expressed by the Church
chiefly in all Matters of Controversy, than in Scripture; For example: you know
the Church delivers the An Assertion concerning Church Doctrine.
Consubstantiallity of the eternal Son, with greater clarity than Scripture
expresses that Truth, Yet no man can prove to reason this clearer Doctrine to
be immediately true, upon this sole ground, (Mark my precise words) that the
Church teaches it. My meaning is. The Church yet not manifested to be God's
Oracle by marks extrinsecal to its Doctrine, leaves Reason so in suspense that
it Cannot say. This is the Oracle which teaches Truth, or, that the Doctrine of
this not yet euidenced Society is Divine, and Orthodox. The Assertion is so
amply proved above that it is needles to press the Arguments further in this
place. All I say now, is, that we discourse in like manner of Scripture and
Church Doctrine precisely considered as Essential Doctrine, not yet made Credible
by The Doctrine of Scripture, or The Church, not Proved true by Saying its true.
signs and Motives. As therefore the Verities of Scripture, are not known to
be Divine Ex terminis, because I read them in that Holy book, But must have
them proved Divine upon a certain Principle distinct from Scripture, So the
Verities of the Church are not known Ex terminis to be certain, before I prove
the Church by Clear Motives to be the Oracle of Truth whereby God speaks to
Christians. what I Assert is evident in Christ our Lord and his Apostles, when
they first began to preach, For neither Jew, nor Gentil believed that Sacred
Doctrine upon their bare preaching, Nay, It scandalized the one, and seemed a
foolery to the other, But when they saw it confirmed by Evident Signs and
Wonders, by eminent Sanctity of life, by undeniable Miracles, and other Signal
marks which the Author of Religion laid open to Reason, Both Jews and Gentiles,
were gained, moved to believe by Such Inducements no less prudent than
forceably perswasiue.

8. The reason of all a Priori given above, euinces thus much: None can
indubitably and immediately own the Doctrine of either Church, or Scripture as
true and Orthodox but by one of these two means. Either the light of natural
Reason discouers that Truth, Or it must be known by Faith. Reason alone, too
weak to comprehend the Sublime Mysteries revealed in Holy writ or taught by the
Church, boggles at all, And, left to it self, reiects The reason of our
Assertion.
at least the harder Mysteries, as is manifest in both Jews, and Gentiles. Now
to know them by obscure Faith is wholly impossible, unless one have sufficient
Assurance before hand, grounded on other prudent extrinsecal Principles, That
both Scripture, and the Church teach Divine, and certain Doctrine. To know thus
much, the Rational man must discourse And in this present state of things,
first find out the Church, by her Marks, and Signs visible to all. If reason
complies not with this duty, the Faith we draw from thence is no Faith, but, a
precipitous foolish Credulity. For who can prudently assent to the high
Mysteries of Christianity, unless Reason first see it is prudent to do so?
This is what the Apostle deliuer's in few but most pithy words. Scio cui
credidi, and certus sum. That is, I first know why I am to believe by Reason,
and then steadfastly believe without further reasoning. But enough of this in
the Chapter cited above.

9. The. 2. Proposition. If the Doctrine of Christ's Church precisely considered
according to its Essence, be not ex exterminis manifestly true, or proves not
immediately that the Church is Orthodox upon Her own mere saying that She
teaches Truth; It is evident, She must be proved Gods Oracle by Motives,
extrinsecal to Her Doctrine. Now these Motives purely considered as Inducements
to believe, are not Articles of Faith, but sensible, reasonable, and of such
weight, that they powerfully incline every The Church* first proved Orthodox by
rational Motives.
well disposed understanding to this rational assent. As God anciently spoke by
Moses, by Christ, and his Apostles, So he now also speak's by his own true
Church, And lead's men under her safe Conduct to Salvation.

10. The ground of my Assertion, is no less evident, than the very Position it
self. First, Christ himself never proved his Doctrine true by merely saying it
was so, but confirmed it by signs and wonders which made it immediately
credible as is said already, So also did his Apostles, And so does the true
Church to this day. 2. Unless Christians have those prudent Inducements
preuiously applied to reason before they believe the Holy Catholic Church, The
wise providence of God must be supposed so neglectiue, as not to let men know
after a prudent and diligent search, which or where his true Church is, Though
Scripture Compares it to a glorious Sun, most visible to all And the Fathers
say, they are blind that see it not. 3. All those Millions of Christians who
believed the true Church, who lived and dyed happily in it, (innumerable shed
their blood for the verities of it) were not a People mad nor besotted upon
this Account, because As the Primitive Christians more induced to believe, so
are we.
They proceeded just as the Primitive Christians did, that always believed
upon Rational Motives. These Motives then first enlightened the reason of the
most ancient Christians, And reason afterward prevented by grace, submitted to
all the Church teaches. But much more of this hereafter, because of greatest
Consequence, though it seems Sectaries have little regard to the Evidence of
Christianity Drawn from rational Motives.

11. The. 3. Proposition. The Marks of Christ's Church manifest to all, are more
sensible and clear than the essential Doctrine is, marked by them; They are
peculiar to the true Church only, and distinguish Her from all Heretical
Communities; Finally taken all together, and not by Piecemeal, convince this
truth. That God speaks to Christians by this Church. Every part of the
Proposition proves it self. First a Mark is more clear and sensible than the
thing marked by it, For, who ever had seen our Blessed Savior walking here on
earth, and observed his holy life, whoeuer had heard his sacred words, and seen
his Miracles would have said, his Sanctity, words, and Miracles, were more
clear and evident to all, than his Doctrine was of being God and man. Therefore
the first Christians believed that great Mystery induced by evident works, and
wonders. 2. These Marks are peculiar and proper to the true Church only. You
have the reason hereof in the other Treatise. Disc. 1. C. 8. 1^3. The force of
prudent Motives.
Because it is not possible, if a true Church be now on earth that God can
permit a false Society to equalize it, much less to surpass it in the luster of
such Motives as forcibly persuade to discern between That, and all heretical
Communities, For were this done, Falsehood would be made as credible to reason,
as truth, And God would be guilty of Arguing less efficaciously in behalf of
his own Church, against Jews, Gentiles, and obstinate Heretics.

12. Observe well the Strength of this Argument. I say in a word. If an Arian
could truly Assert: I have as many forceable Motives, And marks of truth
belonging to my followers and Doctrine, As the now supposed true Church of
Christ can show for it self, could he say with truth I will evidence the like
Antiquity, the like Perpetuity, the like lawful Mission of my Pastors, the like
unity in Faith, the like conuersions of Heathens, wrought in and by my Church,
The like succession of Bishops preaching my Doctrine from Christ's time to this
day, The like sanctity, the like miracles, as any Church on earth can
demonstrate: They distinguish the true Church from false Communities.
Could an Arian, I say, (or Jew either) speak all this with truth, no Orthodox
Christian could argue the one or other of Falsehood in Doctrine: For grant thus
much, These very men might much better handle and interpret Scripture than
Protestants do, utterly destitute of all such Marks. The Jew, if the false
supposition stand would draw the old Testament to his sense, and so would the
Arian the new; And who could reprove them could they show you a Church bearing
these signs of divine Authority? Hence, Sectaries that only Gloss Scripture,
and never had any thing like an euidenced Church which taught the Doctrine they
now maintain, and so earnestly Gloss for, are most reproueable, And vainly
attempt to draw any prudent man to a belief of their Novelties.

13. By all you see how important it is to have a Christian Society clearly
marked, and distinguished from false Communities, with evident Signs, and
rational Motives before we recurr to Scripture. All faith depends on this
greater Evidence laid forth to reason, as Shall be demonstrated toward the end
of this Discourse.

14. I would have every one seriously to reflect on what is now said, and once
more to know, That Christ's Church like a glorious Sun euidenceth Her self by
the Luster of signal Marks, though her essential Doctrine believed by obscure
Faith, appears not Evident. Find me then out a Church ever in being since
Christ's time, united in one Faith, glorious in Miracles and conuersions of
Heathens, wherein Bishops and Pastors lawfully sent, have preached Christ's
Doctrine age after age; Give me a Church which was never censured or taxed of
Error by any Society of known Orthodox Christians, She, and She only, is
Christ's true Spouse, All other late risen Assemblies, are Conuenticles of
Satan; And these Marks do not only distinguish Her from all One only Church
Shows these Marks.
such Conuenticles, as is now noted, but Collectiuely taken convince this
Truth, That God speak's to Christians by this Oracle, whereof you have more in
the following Chapters.

15. In the Interim we must enter upon a further difficulty and next enquire,
which among so many Congregations as now are and have been in the world, is the
only manifested true Spouse of Christ? For all, as I said above, make not one
Church unless Christ has composed this mystical Body of such members as
rightly believe, and of others that injuriously oppose his sacred Doctrine. Now
because the chief controversy is between the Protestant and Catholic, The
first pretend's to a Church which teaches Christ's Doctrine; The Catholic
utterly denies the Pretense and pleads for his Own Oracle euidenced by prudent
Motives. This I say being the Contest, we are in the first place, to unchurch
the Protestant, and then prove by undeniable Arguments, where and with whom the
true Church of Christ is.

CHAP. III.
The Protestant has neither Church euidenced by Marks of Truth, nor true
Doctrine made credible to reason. His whole Faith is built upon Fancy.

1. THe Marks of the Church, as is now said, are so clear to reason, that they
make the Oracle manifest to all sort of people, to the learned and unlearned,
to Jews, to Infidels, and much more to Heretics who pretend to believe in
Christ. All of them are alike concerned, and obliged to make a search after the
true Church, and when it is found to believe it.

2. Now to find it out, I Ask, whether our English Protestants (with these we
chiefly dispute) like well of the marks Questions Proposed to Sectaries.
already hinted at, or will reject them? I propose my doubt with all candor.
Will they dare to say That their Church, as it delivers Protestants Doctrine,
or, as it is now reformed in England, was ever since Christ time In Being, and
visible to the world? Can they produce a Succession of Bishops, or Pastors,
that taught Protestancy Age after Age, without intermission? Can they show what
Conuersions these Protestant Pastors wrought upon Heathens to their faith, five
or six Centuries since? Can they produce, indubitable Miracles, done by such
Pastors? Most evidently No. Therefore our later Protestants reject these, and
the other like Motives, as slight and impertinent, to evidence their Church
(which yet say they, teaches Christ's Doctrine) and Wilily do so, because they
have none of them. Well. To leave them without excuse, to silence them for
ever; Here is an un answerable Dilemma. Either the marks now kinted at are
admitted or, rejected. Suppose them owned as clear cognisances of the true
Church, or of Her Orthodox Doctrine, we most justly urge Protestants to prove,
what I know will never be made probable. Viz. To show That they had a Church
three or four Ages since invested in the signs, and marks, now mentioned. On
the other side, if which is usual, such marks be slighted as unmeet to manifest
the true Church, it must be granted, They have no euidenced Church, and
Consequently no true Doctrine with it. Hence I Argue, Who ever belieues, in an
uneuidenced Church, destitue of all Signs and marks of truth, belieues in no
true Church; The Protestant belieues in such an vneuidenced Church, Therefore
he belieues in no Church: But he who belieues in no Church belieues a Doctrine
more than improbable, or absolutely false, And this is fancy or worse than
fancy.

3. What answer think ye do Sectaries return to this Argument? They return no
probable Answer.
A strange one indeed. They tell us the only Mark of the Church lies not in any
external Notes, but appears in the written word of God, and the Purity of
Scripture. So Alstedius. Lib. de notis Ecclesia C. 29. Whitaker Contro. 2. 9.
5. C, 17. and Mr Stillingfleet here and there, seems well pleased with the
fancy. Contra. 1. The Church had her Marks besore Scripture was written, what
ever sensible Signs Then distinguished that holy Society from all heretical
Conuenticles, makes it yet known to the world and Still as clearly point's it
out, For, the writing of Scripture nothing at all obscured, the exterior
luster of those Signs, or prudent Motives. Contra. 2. A Mark which makes an
obscure thing known is ever more clear and sensible, than that is which is
marked by it. The Church* Say Sectaries, The Church more clearly manifested
than Scripture.
is obscure and must be first known by Divine Scripture, But this very Divinity
of Scripture, is more obscure than the Church (For it is not its own
Self-euidence, nor known ex terminis to be Divine) Therefore unless this
Divinity be made manifest by an other light, it cannot give to all the first
notice of the Church, which appears More clearly to sense and reason, by its
own Signs, than Scripture does.

4. Hence it follows. 1. That, Scripture, which should first mark out the
Church, cannot do it; being more obfcure than the thing marked by it. It
follows. 2. That the Church thus marked, is its own Self-euidence, not Farther
demonstrable to Reason. Who ever therefore depriues the Church of her external
Motives, or takes from her the glory of Miracles, of Antiquity, Conuersions,
etc. Shall long grope in the dark, before He find's either Church, or
Scripture, You will say. Scripture known by the universal Tradition of
Christians, may well mark out and first discover the true Church, Tradition
being a thing most known, and Sensible to all. Contra. This very Tradition
either supposes a Church signalized with other Of what weight pleading
Tradition is
rational Motives, or excludes them; And imports no more but the bare Consent
of Christians, that accept of Scripture as Gods Divine word. Grant the first;
we have all that is wished. Plead only by the Second, or tell a Heathen (who may
be gained to believe the Church) That all Christians universally own Scripture
as Divine, and mention nothing of Miracles or other Motives manifest in the
Church, He will soon reply. The Chinese have also universal Tradition or a
general consent of a People largely diffused for their Bible; The Turks have it
for their Alcoran, yet such a Tradition alone is no Mark of God's word or the
true Church. Why then should it be a mark to Christians, if no more be said?

5. And the Heathen easily makes his Plea good by this conuincing Reason a
Priori. Before this universal Tradition was, before you so many Christians
agreed in the Belief of your Bible, the Doctrine Thereof was made credible upon
other Motives, These Motives are not now extinguished, or of lesser account
because you have agreed on the Scriptures Divinity; Nay they The Heathe^s
exceptions against Tradition only.
must be presupposed to have been before you agreed, For this Agreement is not
the cause of the Bibles credibility, but an effect of the same. That is.
Therefore so many. Christians have agreed by a universal Consent, that
Scripture is Gods word, because it was made credible to Reason Antecedently, to
an Agreement so universal, But the ground of this Agreement was no other but
the Authority of the Orthodox Church gloriously euidenced, by the Luster of her
Signs and Motives etc. This Principle alone, utterly ruins Mr: Stillingfleets
Resolution of Faith, as shall be made clear in an other place.

6. Again says the Heathen, you Protestants discourse not probably, you just
proceed as one does who lays Colors before a blind man and bid's him judge of
them. You say, that both I and Jews are blind, and cannot discover the light
which lies in the Scriptures Divinity. If this be so, how can you imagine that I
may find out the true Church by the light of Scripture (though admitted upon
Tradition) which I can no more look on than an owl on the Sun, at Noonday?
Neither will it help you at all, if you Say. Scripture interpreted both Mark's,
and manifest's the true Church, For I must first know that Scripture is Divine,
before I give credit to any Interpreter, And though I were ascertained of that
Divinity, yet I am still to seek whether your Interpretation, or the Arians be
better, and this I cannot know without a sure Rule extrinsick to Scripture, And
all fallible Interpretation. Yet the Heathen has not done, but pinches the
Protestant shrewdly. Admit, says he, that Scripture Mark's out the Church, and
gives us the first Evidence of it, when it tells us. The Church is a City
built upon a Mountain, and founded on a Rock, That all Nations shall flock to
it. That Christ will be with it to the end of the world; That it ever had, and
will have Pastors, Visible, He clearly conuinces Sectaries.
and audible, till we all meet in one Unity of Faith. That it is the Pillar,
and ground of Truth etc. Can you, my good Protestants, show me such a Church
belonging to you three or four Ages since when, you had not one single man in
the world professing your Protestant Religion? Where was then your Protestant
City visible on a Mountain? What Rock stood it on in those days, when it was
not in being? What Nations, what Jews what Gentiles did it then convert to your
Novelties? How was Christ then with it, and taught it all Truth, when there was
no such Church to learn his Doctrine? Give me a Catologue, of your Visible
Pastors at that time, or tell me how your Church was then a Pillar, an Oracle
of truth, whilst all it teaches now is fallible, and may be false?

7. Hence I argue. What Scripture says is true; Scripture here speaks of a
Church founded by Christ, of an Ancient, Visible An Argument drawn from what is
now said.
Society, of Her perpetual Pastors without interruption, of a Church converting
Nations etc. Therefore it speak's Truth, and points at a sure Oracle marked
with the notes we plead for, who ever then admit's Scripture, must jointly own
these Marks and Signatures of the true Church, But ye Sectaries admit
Scripture and have no such Marked Church, with Antiquity, continuance of
Pastors etc. Ergo you are not members of the true Church, which must
necessarily be found in some other Society of Christians.

8. Here by the way, we must prevent a triuial Objection; For some less knowing
Adversary may reply. We destroy our own Ground, and now prove the Marks of the
Church by Scripture, whereas we suppose the Scripture first proved to be of
Divine Inspiration, because the Church manifested by her Marks and Motives
says so.

9. I Answer we prove the Marks of the Church, and the Form of her essential
Doctrine also by Scripture, But how? Upon a Supposition, that the Book be first
proved Divine by Church Authority, Thus much done, it is an excellent
Principle, But not Primum indemonstrabile, its own Self-Euidence, Or first
indemonstrable Principle. This Truth is clear, For no man goes about to convert
a Jew by alleging Passages out of the new Testament, or to draw a Heathen to
Christianity by any thing written either in the old, or new Scripture. As
therefore that Scripture not the first in demonstrable Principle.
man would not be well in his wits, who hopes to convert a Protestant, by
merely alleging the Definitions of the Council of Trent which he slights, so he
would be as sensles, did he hope to convert a Heathen by Scripture only, as
much undervalued by him, as the present Definitions of the Church are by
Protestants. Hence you see how Scripture is a Principle against Sectaries, who
admit it, and reject an infallible Church. By Scripture we Argue and convince
them of error, might the words Thereof bear their proper sense without fancied
Glosses, Yet if we make a right Analysis it is not the first indemonstrable
Principle, but, Per Modum suppositionis only, that is, it must be either
supposed or proved Divine.

10. I say yet more. Though both the Jew, and Heathen, owned Scripture as it
truly is, a Book indicted by the Holy Ghost, Though it were so there yet remains
a difficulty not to be solued.
yet they have but made one step, as it were, toward Christianity, For when
such men look well about them, and find Scripture differently sensed by so many
iarring Heads as have it in their hands, by Arians, Socinians, Quakers,
Protestants, etc. (Catholics dissent from them all) where can, I beseech you,
these half Christians, whether Jews, or Heathens securely rest? With whom can
they rationally unite Themselves? whose sense must they believe and own as the
undoubted meaning of the Holy Ghost? To do any thing prudently in so weighty a
Matter is impossible, Unless they first come to the knowledge of Christ's true
Church, which as well Ascertain's them of the Scriptures sense in all
Controuerted points of Faith, as it does, of the Book's Divinity. Now further.
It is not possible to know the true sense of Scripture but by the Church; it is
not possible to know the Church, but by her Marks, (the essential Doctrine
Thereof no more mark's it self as true, than Scripture Doctrine denotes its own
Divinity) The Sectary therefore that rob's the Church of her Marks and the
external Glory of Miracles, Conuersions, Perpetuity etc. is guilty of three
heinous crimes at once.

11. First he makes the Conversion of a Jew to Christianity Sectaries make the
Conversion of Jews* impossible.
most impossible. I Will show you how. The Jew Admit's of the old Testament and
draws from every passage which speak's of Christ and the Church, a Sense quite
different from that which Christians own. The Protestant admit's both the Old
and New Scripture, And as we may Suppose, is at a hot dispute with a Jew
concerning Christian Religion. First says the Jew, Lay, Sir, your New
Testament aside, which is no Principle* with me, Because it neither evidences
it Self immediately to be Gods word, nor can you prove it Divine upon any sure
ground extrinsecal to the Book. Therefore we must Argue by a Principle common
to us both, The old Testament only. You read There, I read also, You know the
Original language, so do I, You compare Text with Text, I do the like, You
Gloss, and I Gloss against you, Yet after all is done, you draw one sense out
of this very Scripture, and would prove Christ to be the true Messiah, I draw
from thence an other quite Contrary, And say He is not. My demand is, whether
Christ, The Assertion, proved.
whom you Adore, has provided men of better means (Than your Glosses and mine
are) whereby we may certainly know what the sense of this Scripture is? If he
have done so, it can be nothing but a Church manifested by Supernatural Signs
and miracles, (for God now teaches none by Angels or Enthusiasms) if the
guidance of a Church be wanting we are all left in darkness, And know not what
Sense to make of Scripture; and this ill beseems the Goodness of a Savior, who,
as you say, came to enlighten the world and teach all truth, which is not done,
For he leaves Reason in Darkness and Teaches not where his true Church is. It
may well be the Protestant will except against his Adversaries Glosses, but He
is soon silenced, for Says the Jew, you, good man, when you treat with Papists
interpret Scripture as you please, and why may not I proceed so with you, And
use the like liberty?

12. The second crime committed by the Protestant, who depriues the Church of
Her external Signs, is, that he Eclipses that great light of the world (which
as Origin says shines to all) And make it as Obscure, as some Protestants make
their Church invisible before Luther. What I say is certain, For no man can
find the Church by reason, when all rational Motives are What Sectaries are
guilty of.
taken from it, And held impertinent to illustrate that great moral Body. Hence
you see the third sin of Sectaries relating to Scripture. This Book also loses
all credit with Christians, because it Euidenceth not its own Divinity, nor can
any Signalised Church tell us, it is Divine, or certainly declare the true
sense thereof, to either learned or unlearned.

13. My last argument against the Protestant is no Topic, nor bare
Probability, but a plain Demonstration. The Title says; This reformed man has
no Christian Doctrine made credible to The last conuincing Argument.
Reason, whilst he belieues as Protestant. To prove the Assertion, Three
Principles are here Supposed. First, that the Marks of the Protestant Church
or of its Doctrine lie (as these men will have it) in the Purity of Scripture
only. 2. That their Church Doctrine is either contained in the 39. Articles, or
implies so much as all called Christians Believe, and no more, Though plain
Heretics in many particular Tenets. 3. That this Protestant Community as it
Teaches, is either the whole Church of Christ excluding other Societies, or
only a Part of the universal Church. These Principles Supposed, you have my
Demonstration.

14. Scripture Marks the true Doctrine of Christ's Church, but it neither
mentions nor marks out the Doctrine contained in the 39 Articles, for our
newer men call these inferior Truths only, And hold them not Registered in
God's word. Neither does it Assert so much as darkly, that a Mixture of Truth,
and Falsehood, (such as all Heretics have owned and do own) is the Doctrine of
the true Catholic Church; Least of all, That a Doctrine common to Arians,
Protestants, and Catholics, is sufficient Scripture disowns. Protestancy.
to Salvation. Lastly, it says no where, that the Protestant Church containing
that reformed Doctrine, is by it Self the whole true Church of Christ excluding
all other Societies, nor so much as a Part of it, And this I prove.

15 If as reformed, it be a Part of the true Catholic Church, the Professors
of it have now, and had before Luther some Partners who joined with them in the
belief of their reformed Doctrine, But before Luther, they had not one sole man
in the world that believed as they believe, and so wanted fellowship, because,
neither they, nor their Partners were at all in Being: Now at this instant,
they have no Society of men, called a Church, (run over all the world) which
side's with them, or hold's either the. 39. Articles, or a Doctrine common to
all Christians, to be the true Doctrine of Christ, or of his universal Church.
All this I say is evident. And.

16. Hence you see, in what plight these men are, who pretend to a Church
marked and made evident by Scripture, and A clear inference against Sectaries.
when they have that sacred Book in their hands, it is impossible to find so
much as one Sentence or syllable in behalf of Protestancy. Those other
exterior Signs of Conuersions, Miracles, Antiquity etc. are of no Account
with them, And were they otherwise, most evidently they belong not to the
reformed Doctrine of the English Church. Here is a piece of sad news for
Sectaries, who have a Church neither Spoken of in Scripture, nor manifested to
Reason by one Supernatural wonder. So vneuidenced a Thing it is, And
Consequently upon a double Account, no Church at all.

17. The Sectary may reply. When he Asserts Scripture Marks the true Church or
Her Doctrine, the meaning is not that it speak's expressly the Tenets of
Protestants, but only Says, it is a sufficient Repository of all things
necessary to Salvation, and delivers so much plainly. What ever therefore is
not plainly taught in scripture cease to be necessary. Contra. 1. Protestants
A Reply Answered.
granting thus much, may seek long before they find Their particular Tenets,
because Scripture delivers none of them either expressly, or by any clear
Deduction. Contra. 2. The Jew and Heathen regard not the plainest Truths in
Holy Writ before the book be proved Divine, The most plain Verities avail
nothing with them, Yet God has afforded means to draw them to Christianity.
But it seems our Sectaries in all their talk of the Scriptures clarity, never
reflect on these Strangers from Christ, nor point at the means whereby their
Conversion may be wrought. Contra. 3. The Arian and the Orthodox as highly
differ about the sense of plain Scripture, as the Protestant and Catholic,
about the sense of Christ's own words. This is my body, And these differences,
either touch on fundamental Matters, or there are none such in the whole Bible.
Contra. 4. The Protestant only tells us what he says of all things necessary
contained in Scripture, and speak's his own Sentiment boldly, without either
proof or Principle.

18. Some object first. God can endite a Book in as plain An Objection solued.
words as any man can speak, and it is not supposed, that he affected obscurity
in his own Scripture, already written. Contra. 1. If Scripture be not obscure.
How is it That Christ told the Saduces they mistook the true meaning of it? How
is it, that these Protestant Pillars Luther and Calvin, so grossly contradict
one an other in their Commentaries made upon holy Scripture, And this in points
most material? How is it that innumerable others called Christians Profess to
reverence, to Read, to spend the greatest labor upon Scripture, and when all
is done draw out of it plain Contradictions in points, as is n^w said, most
Fundamental? Contra. 2. We question not what God can do, but say he has not
endited Scripture plain, de facto. S. Peter. Epist: 2. 3. 16. Speaking of S.
Paul's Epistles, is my warrant. In which, says he, Certain things are hard to
be understood, which the unlearned, and unstable deprave, as also the rest of
Scripture, to their own perdition. And the words relate not only to the
Mysterious Matters whereof the Apostle wrote, but to his Phrase and form of
writing also, Therefore the Greeck Copies have both in which things, and in
which Epistles, And all Expositors hitherto, even S. Austin, have acknowledged
an obscure way of speaking in S. Paul's Epistles, chiefly in that to the Romans.
Yet we are not to say that Truth expressed without harshness.
God affects Obscurity (the word is unmeet) but speak thus: His providence
purposely would have Scripture delivered in such a dark manner, that all might
have recourse to a living Oracle, (His true Church) which speaks more plainly,
and cannot swerue from any verity in Scripture, No offense is given to pious
ears, In a word you have a Verity expressed with out harshness. See S. Austin
lib. 2. de Doct. Christ: c. 6. And S. Ambrose Epist. 44. Again vote Scripture
most plain, what gain Sectaries by the Clarity, when they neither have plain,
nor obscure Text through the whole Bible for their Protestancy?

19. Hence we Answer to an other petty objection. Scripture (say some) relates
many Things not necessary to Salvation, Therefore it cannot be supposed to omit
things necessary. Contra: 1. Ergo it speak's some things of pure Protesstancy,
or nothing in that Religion, as reformed, is necessary to Salvation. I would
willingly have an express Text for this reformed Nouelty, and these few
difficulties solued. Contra. 2. Though the whole Bible were without dispute
most plain, or told us all things necessary, yet this neither moves Jew nor
Gentil, nor draws any to Christianity without further light, as is already
proved. We have shown above how Scripture contain's all things necessary in the
Reflex Part thereof. It is now our Task and intent to Mark out the true Church
of Christ (the only Rule of Faith) which decides all Controversies Concerning
Religion.

CHAP. IV.
The one and only true Church of Christ, was, is, and shall ever be the Holy,
Apostolical, and Catbolick Roman Church. Her Antiquity and Constant
Perseverance in the Ancient primitive Doctrine, without Alteration, proves The
Assertion.

1. IT is hard to illustrate a manifest Truth, because what ever reasons are
brought to light for it, surpass not much the Evidence of the thing you would
make clear. Who ever goes about to prove by Arguments that the Sun is the most
luminous Body in the Heavens will have much to do, because that is euidents to
our senses, and so is the true Church of Christ, says S. Austin, digito
demonstrari potest, She can be pointed at with your* finger. Origin adds Hom.
33. in Matthew. She is like a sun, casting her beams from one part of the world,
to the other. Howeuer, because we now treat with men, who either see not, or
pretend not to see, I will give them all the Evidence gathered from
demonstratiue Signs which a heart can wish for.

2. I say first, before we come to more conuincing Arguments. Antiquity is a
certain Note of Christ Church. The reason is. As God was before the Devil, and
Truth before falsehood, So the Orthodox Church, whether you take it from Adam,
or Antiquity denotes the true Church
from the first preaching of Christian Doctrine, was before all Sects and
Heresies. The Roman Catholic Church only which Christ founded, and is so much
extolled by the Apostle, has this Precedence. It was, when the Arians were not,
we know their first Rise, it was when the Pelagians were not, we know their
Beginning, it was when the Donatists were not, their Origin is as well known,
as that of Protestants, which first peeped out with one unfortunate Luther,
something above an age since. Might not then the Roman Catholic Church, more
ancient than all these Sectaries, have most justly questioned, each of them at
their first appearance, as the learned Tertullian. Lib: de Prescrip. did those
of His time? Qui estis vos? who are you new men? Vnde and quando venistis? From
whence came you? Vbi tam diu latuistis? Where have ye been hid so long? No body
yet saw you, or heard of you. I wave the Testimonies of other Fathers, (chiefly
of S. Austin and S. Hierome) though none presses this Argument drawn from
Antiquity with greater efficacy, than Optatus Meliuitan. Lib: 2. contra
Parme^an. They are known to every one. But this Mark must not go alone.

3. I say. 2. Antiquity, and a never interrupted Continuance The Church once
true never Changed her Doctrine.
of the same Visible Society Age after Age, and the same Doctrine vpheld without
change or Alteration, clearly evidences Christ's Church. This Scripture strongly
Asserts. Osee. 2. where the Church is said to be espoused to Christ in
Sempiternum for ever. Math: 16. Hell gates shall never preuail against it.
Math. 28. Christ will be with it to the end of the world. upon which Passage,
S. Hierome speaks most clearly. Qui vsque ad consummatione^ sae(...) etc. He
who promised to be with his own Disciples to the end ^f Authority and.
the world, both shows that these blessed men shall ever live (in their
successors) And that he will not depart from the true Belieuers. Videtur sicut
luna etc. They are words of S. Ambrose lib: 4. Hexam. The Church may be seen
like the moon eclipsed, but never perishe^, She may be clouded and over cast
with darkness, but cannot fail. The reason is. If Christ's Church could fail, not
only all memory Reason prove the Assertion
of his sacred Passion with the other Mysteries of our Faith, but the whole
Scripture also would for that time of her supposed Deficiency have been no
objects of Belief. None could then have said with truth; I believe the Holy
Catholic Church, or have had Access to it, because it was not then in Being.
Now further. As the Church cannot fail, so She cannot Alter from her self or
change Christ's Doctrine. For if She did so, She were no more Orthodox, Christ
could not own Her for his Spouse. Ponder* S. Austins Discourse on this subject*
in Psalm: 101. Exist^^t qui dicunt etc. There are some who say. This is not the
Church of all nations which once was. No. That Is gone, and thus they Speak,
says the Saint, because they are not of the true Church. O impudentem S.
Austins Judgment.
vocem, illa non est, quia tu in illa non es. O impudent speech, it is not the
same Church it was, because thou art not in it. Vide ne tu ideo non Sis. look
to thy self, least thou be not, for the Church will be, although thou were not
in the world. Then he decries this Doctrine of the Churches failure as most
abominable, detestable, and pernicious; And in Psalm. 60. positiuely Asserts
the permanency of it to the end of the world.

4. Hence I argue. But the Roman Catholic Church only, has ever continued in
being without interruption and never The probation urged.
changed, or Altered the Doctrine which She first learned of Christ; Protestancy
which began one only Age since, most evidently wants this continuance, and
every year put's on a new countenance. Therefore the Roman Catholic Church,
and not that of Protestants, is the Spouse of Christ. That the Roman Catholic
Church stood permanently in being ever since Christ, is as demonstrable, as
that Protestants were not before Luther. The Visible perpetual Succession of
our Popes, of our Bishops, of our Pastors and of our Catholic People in all
ages, is an irrefragable Proof. Neither do Sectaries much cauil at this
Personal Succession, or the exterior Permanency of our Church (for What
Sectaries object.
that is evident) But here is their Plea. This Church (say they) once Orthodox
changed from her self, forged new Articles of faith, Contrary to the primitive
Doctrine, Herein lies the great Charge. Now if I demonstrate, that the Roman
Catholic Church once confessedly Orthodox, has ever since been Visible in the
world, and never swerued from the pure Primitive Doctrine in after Ages, She is
certainly the Church of Christ still without Alteration. You will Ask how can
this be euinced?

5. Some may think it is best done by Paralleling our present known Church
Doctrine with that of the Primitive Times. Very good. But by what means shall we
come to a right Parallel? One may Say. Make A diligent Inspection into the
Records, and Writings of those worthy Fathers, who lived in the first Ages, And
all is done. I Answer. This Rule precisely considered help's nothing. For what
if those Fathers never meddled with most of the Controversies, now agitated
between us and Sectaries? And it is no wonder at all if they did not, For may
not a new Sort of Heretics rise up to morrow, whose Errors never entered into
the thoughts either of the Fathers, or of any man now living? Again, What if
most of those ancient Writings be lost, (many certainly are) we are at a Stand.
But finally, what if doubts arise concerning the sense of those few preserved
copies yet extant? can Sectaries Glosses or ours either determine what is right
Orthodox Doctrine by them? No. Therefore By what means one may come to the
primitive Doctrine?
as I said above, no man can come to a full, exact, and satisfactory knowledge,
of the Primitive Truths, but by the voice and Tradition of the present Church.
Reject this voice of the present Church, we are cast into darkness, we may
dispute long but end nothing. Now because it lies not in my way to Treat of
that excellent Rule of Tradition, learnedly handled by others, I Will give you
three Conuincing reasons, And prove my Assertion. viz. That the Roman universal
Church, once Orthodox* never changed the Primitive Doctrine. To show this, Two
certain Principles are to be reflected on.

6. First. God had always an Orthodox Church on earth founded by Christ, which
was, and is pure without mixture (at least) of notorious damnable Errors, and
which never taught An Argument proving the Roman Catholic Church still pure in
Doctrine.
Christians any shameful, false Doctrine; for had it done so in any Age, it had
then ceased Eo ipso to be Christ's pure Church. The 2. Principle. Protestants
confess, (and it is a certain truth) that the Roman Catholic Church continued
Orthodox without Notable error, for the first three or four Centuries.

7. Hence I argue. If this Church once pure, abandoned Christ's Doctrine in
after Ages, or forged new Articles of faith contrary to the Primitive verities,
that Change was Notorious, shameful, and damnable, as we shall see presently.
But it is not possible, that She ever made such a shameful, Notorious change,
And here is my Reason: Had She done so, Christ in that Age when this supposed
Alteration began, would have had no Orthodox Church on earth free from gross
and culpable Error, and Consequently his own pure Church would wholly have
been abolished.

8. You will Ask how I prove this? I Answer most evidently. Begin if you please
from the third Age, when the Roman Church was pure, And descend to Luthers
days, you will find all the known Societies of men called Christians, to have
been either Orthodox Belieuers, Or grossly erring in Faith, yea plain condemned
Heretics, And so reckoned of by Protestants. Such were the Arians, Nestorians,
Pelagians, Monothelits, Donatists etc. And all others nameable, excepting Roman
Catholics. But those gross erring men, evidently taught not Christ's pure One
reason urged.
Doctrine without notable Error, much less constituted either a Part, or the
whole Orthodox Church, which Christ established in truth, Therefore if the
Roman Catholic Church went to wrack also, if She erred notoriously with these
known erring Societies, the Orthodoxism and Purity of the whole Church ceased
to be in the world. And this is impossible.

9. Here in a word is all I would say. Christ had ever a Church Entierly pure
on earth, for he founded one pure, which should always continue in that
integrity laid in Her very foundation; But no error was laid in the
foundations of the Roman Catholic Church once Confessedly pure, therefore no
notorious Error stained it in after Ages; Or, if any such error fouled that
once fair Spouse of Christ, this Sequel is evident: There was at that time no
pure Church in Being, unless our Nouellists please (and perhaps they may do so
in time) to make Arians, Donatists, and such a rabble of men, more Orthodox
Christians than their own Progenitors were, and all the Roman Catholics are
now, the whole world over.

10. You see I insist upon notorious Errors, And do so on set Why we insist
upon Notorious errors.
purpose to prevent a Reply of some newer Sectaries, who say the Church of Rome
has indeed Her Errors, But not fundamental, or destructive of Salvation. And
will you know the reason of this trifling? Here it is. If they say She was not
Orthodox in fundamentals, there was no true Church in being for a thousand
years before Luther, and this no Christian dare Assert, And if they make her
Orthodox in every Article She taught, both Heresy and Schism falls shamefully
upon Protestants, Who dare not grant they abandonned a Church Entierly pure and
blamless, when they left it. Hence a middle way was wisely (or rather most
simply) thought of: Our Church, forsooth, must be what Protestants please,
partly true. viz. in a few Fundamentals, and partly false in other Matters of
less concern, which these men, elected by God, were to reform, and tell exactly
what was amiss, or how far it has erred, etc. And therefore name themselves
the Reformed Church. Well. Let this whimsy pass, largely refuted in the other
Treatise, and in passing take notice of a pitiful Church indeed which Christ
had by these men's own Confession ten whole ages before Luther. It was a mere
deformed Monster made up of Linzy wolzy stuff, of tawny Colors, of something,
and nothing, in a word of Truth and Falsehood. But here is not all.

11. I am to prove much more, if Protestants Principles stand firm. viz. That
neither we nor they, had any Orthodox Church, in fundamentals before Luther,
and Consequently no true Church was in being for ten whole Ages. Now most
evidently, Sectaries had nothing like a Church, for they were not in the world,
And it is as evident, if their Charge hold good against our Church, it had bin
much better never to have appeared than to see it turned into so many ugly
shapes, into such an unfashioned Monster as these new men make it. In a word
this ancient Catholic Society, if Sectaries say right (and Mark ever the
Supposition) erred notoriouslly in the very fundamentals of Faith, and Faith
totally ruined in Sectaries, Principles.
neither believed in Christ, nor Creed, and therefore there was no Orthodox
Church before Luther, nor yet is, to this day. If I evidence not this upon the
supposition now made, never Credit me here after. To do it, please to observe
that by a fundamental Error in Faith, I understand a Doctrine, which if falsely
taught, contrary to Christ's verities, is as damnable to those who teach it, as
the Arians errors are at this day damnable to Arians. Hence I Argue.

12. What ever Society of men forges new Articles of Faith contrary to the
Primitive Doctrine, or tell's the world a loud lie, that God revealed such
things as he never revealed, but utterly The Assertion manifestly proved.
disowns and yet execrat's, And more over obliges all Christians, after a
sufficient proposal, to believe such falsities upon Divine Revelation, and this
under pain of damnation, does open injury to Gods Infinite verity, Assert's
that which Eternal Truth never taught And therefore sins damnably, or err's in
the fundamentals of Faith. But Protestants, say, the Roman Catholic Church
long before Luther did so, ergo She sinned damnably and erred in the very
fundamentals of Faith. That She did so is evident upon their own charge, For
this Church taught ^^ unbloody Sacrifice neither Christ nor the Primitive
Church taught so: It defines Transubstantiation to be an Article of Faith,
Christ and his Primitive Church never did so. It maintain's Purgatory, Praying
to Saints etc. Christ never delivered such Doctrins, nor the Primitive Church
believed so. Now further. These are all loud Lies if Sectaries speak Truth, and
our Church obliges all Christians to believe them as truths revealed by an
infinite Verity under pain of damnation, which yet, as they suppose were not
revealed. Therefore She first openly iniures Gods Veracity, which can be no
light Offense, but mortal and damnable, And consequently err's in the very
fundamentals of Faith, Therefore upon that account is now no Orthodox Church,
nor was so before Wherein the Sin of all Heretics Consists.
Luther. And here briefly is the vltimate reason of all that is Said. The
enormous Sin of all Heretics past and present consists in this only, that they
pertinaciously charge, or fasten upon God a Doctrine He never taught, this
alone makes them Heretics, but the Church of Rome, say Sectaries, has don so,
ergo She was, and is yet Heretical.

13. If this Argument which I hold demonstratiue convince not, I will propose
an other and then briefly solue one or too Objections. The Arians who deny a
Trinity of Divine Persons, are guilty of a fundamental Error. All grant it.
Ergo the Roman Catholic Church was, and is as guilty, or rather more guilty if
Protestants do not Calumniate. I prove it. The Arians error related to a
sublime and speculatiue Mystery which transcend's all humane Capacity, But one
supposed Error of the Roman Church (as Sectaries tell the Story) is worse and
more gross, to wit, a plain, palpable and practical Idolatry. Why? She Adores a
piece of bread for God, wherefore if Idolatry was ever in the world, She
commit's that grievous Sin And errs damnably, An other Argument Urged.
But no Sin can be greater, no Error is more destructive of Christian faith,
than Idolatry; If then our Church be guilty of that crime, She is far enough
from being fundamentally Orthodox. Here is the Argument.

14* One may Answer, it is only the Sectaries Opinion (which is fallible and
may be false) that we are Idolaters. What then? You Nouellists hold the
opinion, you print it, you publish it, and persuade Thousands, and Thousands
poor beguiled souls, we are Idolaters, and they Judge so of us, And as long as
that Judgment stand's immovable, they cannot own us Orthodox Christians in
Fundamentals. But let us come more closely to the point, and speak of the thing
in it self.

15. Here is a Dilemma. We are Idolaters, or not; Grant the first; We err in
the fundamentals of Faith, and were no Orthodox Church either before or after
Luther. Contrariwise, if we be not Idolaters but only Adore the Savior of the
world, really and substantially present, under the Forms of bread and wine, Ye
Gentleman, do not only hideoufly calumniate a whole Ancient Church, And sin
damnably; But more over Err in a fundamental point of Faith, For, if the Second
part of the Dilemma subsist's. viz. That we Adore not a piece of bread, but
that very Christ substantially present (under the Species of bread) who dyed on
a Cross, The whole error, the whole Sin, you charge on us, falls heavily on
your Selves. You first tell the world a plain lie and say God never revealed
Christ's real Presence, in a consecrated Host as the Catholic Church belieues,
whereas upon the Supposition now made, He has revealed it; Therefore you
contradict God, you iniure an infinite Verity, which is a Error and sin, fall
heavily on Sectaries.
hideous fundamental error. Of such consequence it is to Tax* a whole Ancient
Church of false Doctrine, That to say so, is a flat Heresy, and the Calumny
without repentance is damnable.

16. 2. You oblige all you teach, and this under pain of Damnation, not to fall
down or Adore Christ, substantially present in the Sacrament, yet upon the
supposition (which is ever to be minded) he is really there and claims the
highest honor the supremest worship, as most due to his sacred Person. This
you scornfully deny, and both err and sin damnably. One may Answer you adore
Christ in Heaven, and that is enough. Contra. He merits Adoration whereuer he is
present, for if he should visibly appear to any of you all, you would (if
Christians) fall down and Adore him: Here he is in the Sacrament upon the
Supposition, and you disdainfully deny him homage and veneration. This in a
word is all I would say, and it is an unanswerable Dilemma also. AnVnswerable
Dilemma.


17. If you Accuse us justly, we are Idolaters, and were no Orthodox Church
before Luther, if your Accusation be, as it is, most unjust, you Sin damnably,
you unchurch a pure Church and err fundamentally. I prove it. Who ever should
Say this very hour: The pure Primitive Church of the first Age was guilty of
Idolatry, besides a damnable sin, err's fundamentally, For he makes a Church
tainted with falsehood, which God said was every way pure, And for that Reason
contradict's Gods Veracity. You Sectaries lay the same foul Aspersion on a
Church, which the Supposition now makes pure and Orthodox, Therefore you sin
damnably, err fundamentally, and unchurch your Selves by it.

18. I would willingly see this Dilemma Answered, and with all have every
Reader to take notice of a just Judgment of God fallen on Sectaries, whose
whole labor hitherto has been to charge error and Idolatry on us, and the
higher they went in such Accusations, the more they thought to destroy us;
never reflecting A just Judgment fall^n on Sectaries.
that in doing so, They have done their utmost to destroy all the Churches in
the world by Calumnies, and Consequently to ruin Them selves; For most
evidently if their was no true Church in the world before Luther, they are no
members of it at this day, but miserably Churchles. Grant the first, the second
is an inevitable Consequence.

CHAP. V.
A second Reason showing, That if the Roman Catholic Church erred but in one
Article of Faith, there is now no Fundamental Faith in the woild. Were Error
in this Church it is a remediless Evil and cannot be amended by any, least of
all by Protestants

1. SOme as was said above may object. The Roman Catholic Church before Luther
was right in a few fundamentals for She believed in God, in Christ, owned a
Trinity etc. So far, and a little further perchance She may be reputed
Orthodox, yet erred in other Matters which Sectaries desire to amend, and so to
settle Christian Doctrine again on it is old foundations. Observe how I must
labor to make that an Heretical Society upon our Sectaries Supposition, which
was and is the only true Church in the world; And therefore say. If our Church
has erred but in one only Matter of Christian belief, She is Traitorous,
disloyal to Christ, and can be believed in nothing. To prove The Church is
traitorous if false in one Article.
the Assertion, Suppose an Ambassador sent to a foreign state with this deep
Charge, that he utter nothing in his Princes name but so much only as he is
commissioned to speak. Suppose again, the man declares some few truths to the
state as his Lord commanded, But withal forges twenty other untruths on his
own head, and stiffly affirm's his order is to deliver all he says in his
Masters name. Would not such a man think ye be a Traitor upon a double
account? First because he exceed's the bounds of his Commission and delivers
that he had no order for, But chiefly because he speaks vast falsities, wholly
Contrary to his judgment who sent him.

2. The Application in easy. The first Teachers of the Gospel were legates sent
from God to a great State; the whole world, For in omnem terram ex^uit sonus
eorum. They taught every where and well for some short time our Christian
Verities, as the Prince who sent them Commanded, But their Successors, the
Pastors and Doctors of the Roman Catholic Church in after Ages, had, Say
Sectaries, the ill luck to miscarry, to turn Traitors, for, besides a few
fundamental Truths vpheld no man knows how, They did not only exceed their
commission in delivering Doctrine to all Nations which Christ their Master never
allowed of, but more over; forged of their own heads twenty untruths.
Purgatory, Praying to Saints, Transubslantiation etc. And spoke all in their
Princes name, Said also they had Commission from Christ to teach so. This fact,
if the Charge be true, is Treasonable, they injured Christ And consequently not
Orthodox.
and his Verities and betrayed their trust; But a Church so perfidious cannot
be Orthodox. Therefore if Sectaries do not Calumniate, Christ had no Orthodox
Church in the world before Luther which I intended to prove, and Consequently
Protestants are yet no true Church at all.

3. I say moreover. If the Roman Catholic Church has taught false Doctrine but
in one only Matter of Christian belief, She can be believed in nothing, yea I
may rationally suspect her false in all She teaches. Just so it is. If the book
of Scripture deliuer's one Doctrine false which Christians now believe, I cannot
credit it in any thing. The reason is: One and the same Motive of my belief
duly and equally applied, ever moves to an equal Assent, or to None at all.
For example. I believe Christ dyed for us, because Gods word says so, Here is
the Motive of my Assent: I believe also that he ascended into Heaven, because
the same word of God speaks it, here is the same Motive. Imagine now by a
supposed impossibility, that this latter Article A Church false in one Article
merits no belief.
is Gods word, but false; I cannot believe our Saviors Death upon the Motive
of God's word, For if this word be false and once deceive, it may as easily be
false and deceive me twice, And there is no possible means to quit me of my
error, Because whoeuer endeauours to do that, is of less Authority than God's
word, which is now supposed to deceive me. If therefore the First Verity can
reueal an untruth, none can believe either man or Angel speaking of the high
Mysteries of our Faith, and Consequently All must still remain in Error.

4. Apply this Discourse to the Roman Catholic Church which pretend's at least
(I say no more yet) to be Gods Oracle, and to speak in His name. She speaking
in his name assures me, that Infants are to be Baptized, I believe Her upon her
word: She also tells me, there is a Purgatory, but we must now suppose with
Sectaries, it is a great untruth, if so; I cannot possibly believe Her in the
other Doctrine of Infant Baptism. For if she deceiues me once She may well do it
again, and which is to be noted, There is no means left under Heaven to
vnbeguile me or to draw me out of my supposed Error; for who ever attempts to
do that, is of less Authority than my Church, which is supposed to teach, to
err in Her teaching, and stiffly to maintain the Error. Scripture cannot help
here, unless it be clear upon an indubitable Principle, that the sense of it,
and Doctrine of my Church can differ in points of Faith, which must be proved,
and not Supposed. If Fathers be alleged Seemingly contrary to this known
Doctrine, my duty is to explicate them, and rather to draw the Fathers to what
the Church teaches than to renounce Her Authority, and adhere to the dubious
and yet unknown Sense of any Father.

5. Now here is a short consideration For Sectaries. I said, whoeuer supposes
the Roman Catholic Church to have erred, A Reflection for Sectaries.
must jointly own it so remediless an Evil, that all the men on earth cannot
help or remove the supposed error from this Church. The reason is. All the
Proofs and Principles (setting plain Scripture aside whereof there is no
danger) which may be thought pertinent to impeach Her of error, will fall
infinitely short and prove less ponderous, less substantial to persuade that She
has erred, than her sole Vote, and own Authority (whilst she anathematizes the
falsehood) is to persuade the contrary. Viz. That She never erred. Hence
Sectaries, confessedly fallible men, who Sectaries Attempt desperate and why?
may easily spoil all they go about to mend, adventure desperately to reform
the Church, when the very Principles they should reform by (were there any such
in being) are incomparably of less weight, strength and force than the
Authority of this Church is, which says She cannot err. Howeuer She must be
reformed (and here is the wonder) before they know whether She has erred, or
have the least assurance of their own half accomplished reformation. Who then
see's not, every attempt made against our Church this way to be, as really it
is, a folly, an vnaduiced Enterprise no less impossible, than in the highest
manner improbable? Mark what a task lies on them.

6. First they are to prove She has erred, which was never yet done 2. To give
in Principles whereby they will reform. 3. To What they are to prove
Show themselves well settled in a perfect Reformation. 4. To euince that all
those innumerable learned men of our Church from the Fourth to the present Age
have been stupidly blind, bereaved of judgment and besotted with Error. 5.
Whereas other Christians both more aged and most learned espied none of these
Errors, They are to prove that God made choice of such vncommissioned men to
perform a work so long neglected by the Orthodox world. But of these
particulars enough is said in the other Treatise.

7. Hence two things follow. First, that Sectaries only lose time, when by
alleging a few dark Testimonies of the Fathers they offer to overthrow any
Doctrine of our Church. Alas, what this Oracle positiuely defin's is a stronger
Principle than twenty dubious Authorities of Fathers (if any such were) in
appearance contrary. It follows. 2. That the Roman Catholic Church must of
necessity be either owned Orthodox in all She teaches, or cannot be believed in
any thing.

8. Wherefore I say a great word. If this Church has deceived the world in
teaching a Purgatory, for example; neither we nor Sectaries can certainly
believe, that Christ was here on earth or Redeemed us. For Ask, why believe we
this great Mystery? If you Answer Scripture reueal's it, you are Questioned
again. How One Error in the Church Destroys all Faith.
know you that Scripture is Gods word which Ex terminis evidences not it self?
You must Answer Universal Tradition and all the Churches in the world have
owned the Book for Gods word. Very good. But The Church hitherto supposed most
Orthodox, among so many Heretical Societies, and Her Tradition likewise have
actually deceived all; For She is now Imagined to have taught the false
Doctrins of Purgatory, Transubstantiation etc. Therefore you cannot believe
Her, or any Tradition, for erring in one point of Faith, She is not belieuable
in any (This principle stand's firm) Much less can you trust to the Doctrine or
Tradition of known Heretical Churches, whether Arians, Pelagians or others, For
all these have erred and most grossly, Therefore you have no certainty of the
verities contained in Scripture, nor can you believe this one Prime Article.
Christ dyed for us, by Divine Faith.

9. Let therefore the Sectary labor all that is possible to contract the
fundamentals of Faith into the shortest room Imaginable, let him mince them
almost to nothing, let this one Article. Jesus is the Christ be Faith enough
for all: I say if the Roman Catholic Church speaking in the name of God, as
She pretends to speak, has taught but one false Article, and obliged
Christians to believe it under pain of damnation, (Purgatory for example) none
can now upon any Motive known to the world firmly believe That Jesus is the
Christ. So pernicious, is one known error of the Church, that it ruins's all
belief of other Articles, nor can such a Church be more trusted in any thing
She speaks, than Scripture relied on, were it false in that Article. Jesus is
the Christ.

10. The reason a Priori is. All Faith is at last reduced, or finally resolved
into Gods Divine Revelation, whether he speaks by this or that Instrument, by
this or that Oracle, imports nothing. The Vltimate reason of the Assertion.
The difference of the Oracle he speaks by, diuersifies not faith, which
always tend's to one Center, and rests on one sure Ground, Gods Veracity. If
he speaks by a Prophet that is his Oracle, If by an Apostle he is made an
Oracle, If by the exterior words of Scripture, they are Oracles, if by the
Church, She is his Oracle. Now further. Suppose any of these assumed Oracles
speaking in the name of God declare a false Doctrine to Christians, the Falsity
Vltimatly redound's to God, who own's them as Oracles, yet by them teaches the
world Falsities. It falls out here; As if a Prince should send a Legate to a
State who speak's in his name, and cheat the whole State by his Embassy: would
not all deservedly upon the Supposition, more impute the Cheat to the Prince
than to the Legate that speaks in his name? The parity is exact and proves, if
either Scripture, Prophet, Apostle, or Church speaking in the name of God
delivers false Doctrine, God himself deceiues us, and therefore Rich. de S.
Vict. Said well in this sense also. Si error est quem credimus etc. If we
believe an error, It Is you, Great God who have deceived us, But if God can
once deceive, either immediately By Himself, or mediatly by his Oracle, The
whole Systeme of Christian Faith, is desstroyed. What I say would be true,
Although He should make a solemn protestation of Speaking Truth, For even then
he cannot oblige me to believe, because he may deceive in that very
Protestation, and deliver a falsity, if the supposition hold.

11. Here then is the final Conclusion. As subiectiue Faith in a Belieuer is
Indivisible, That is, it is either wholly good or wolly naught None can have a
piece of Faith without the whole virtue, (an Could the Church propose one false
Article She can be believed in nothing.
Arian cannot believe Christ to be a Redeemer, if He denies the Trinity) So if
one Matter of Faith proposed by the Church be really Contrary to what She
defines, None can believe any thing She teaches, For, the mere Possibility of
deceiving Christians in one Article, impossibilitates the Belief of all She
proposes. And this proves the Church absolutely infallible not in some points
only, but in all and every Doctrine, whereof you have more in the, 15 16 and 17
Chapters following.

12. Some may reply. I suppose all this while the Church made so steadfastly
God's Oracle as not to err in any Doctrine She proposes, which is Petitio
Principy or a begging of the Question. Contra. And Ye Gentlemen whilst you
impeach Her of Error Suppose Her Instrumentum diuulsum, an Oracle tom, as it
were, from Gods Sspecial Assistance, just as if I should Suppose the words of
Scripture separated from the Spirit of truth. You suppose Her a fair spouse,
yet make Her a harlot, when and as Often as you please. You acknowledge some
Church or other (find that out where you can) to teach Truth, yet you like
petulant Scholars will forsooth be so wise, as to tell her where she misseth
in Her Lesson and correct Her for it; And you have done it to the purpose, For
you have destroyed Her Monasteries, robbed Her Altars, profaned Her Temples,
abused Her Children, banished some, and hanged up other. Are not these fine God
deceiues if the Church c^n Err.
Doings? Contra. 2. I suppose nothing but what is manifest, that Christ ever
had a Church on earth (once more find it where you can) and that God speaks to
Christians by this Oracle, which he will be with to the end of the world, And
against which Hell gates shall never preuail. Now I say, if this Church which
God (not I) makes his own Oracle, and promises to teach Truth by it, can
deceive but in one Matter of Faith, God himself deceiues us, And this Church
cease Eo ip^o to be Catholic, yea, and God to be the Eternal Truth. For it
Matters nothing, if he can deceive, whether he do it by Scripture, or the
Church. Solue this Argument if you can.

13. You may say. 2. The whole ground of this Discourse a Fallacy and comes
only to thus much. If a man once tell a lie he must be thought a liar in all he
speaks. So it is. The Church speaks an untruth in some things, Ergo it does so,
or may do so in all, seems no good consequence. Contra. If an Ambassador once
be found in an Untruth when he speaks in his Princes name, I think few Monarchs
or States will no more believe him in like occasions, Than give credit to one
convicted The disparity betwe^n a private man erring, and the Church.
of periuery when He swear's, unless what he swear's be proved true
independently of his Oath. But let this pass. The disparity between a private
man and the Church is most notorious. The First considered as one single and
private, has no Commission to speak in Gods name, or to teach the whole
Christian world what is, or what is not Christ's Doctrine; The Orthodox Church
is empowered to do this, or to teach nothing, if then She err's but once, the
Error makes Her infamous, redound's to the Damage of all Christians seduced
by Her, yea and to God himself, as is now declared. Hence I say the Church
cannot teach truth by halfes, as Sectaries would have Her, or now Hit right,
now miss. She cannot be Orthodox in a few main Matters called Fundamental, and
erroneous in others. No. She is either Gods Vicegerent in all She deliuer's as
points of Faith, or in nothing. She must when she pretend's to speak in Gods
name truly do so, or She cannot speak, nor pretend to speak, but must be
silent. This Verity is further laid forth in the Chapters now cited, where we
treat of the Churches Infallibility.

14. In the mean while, if any Should Object The Church vainly pretend's to be
so far an Oracle of Truth, as not to impose on us false Doctrine And then
demand, from whence She had this Whether our whole Discourse tend's.
Privilege of Infallibility? I Answer. Whoeuer trifles with such objections in
this place, (to be solued hereafter) little vnderstand's the force of our
Arguments. Mark I beseech you. It is now a supposed Principle (Sectaries will
have it so) that the Roman Catholic Church has forged new Articles, and
imposed the belief of them on Christians which God never Revealed. Grant thus
much, She iniures God, sin's damnably, And therefore is no Orthodox Church, But
if She neither now be Orthodox, nor was so ten Ages before Luther, There was
not then, nor is yet any true Christian Church in the world, And consequently
Protestants ^aue no Church. The more erring Therefore they make the Roman
Catholic Church, the more are they Churc^lesse. This is what I Press and
express at present, and would willingly have my Argument solued.

15. There is yet an other Objection scarce worth the paper, you shall have it,
such an one as it is. Protestants talk much of A weightless Objection.
Papists Blindness, And to free the Roman Church from damnable sin or formal
Fundamental Errors, may perhaps say She has indeed erred before Luther, and
still is Idolatrous, But may be excused upon the Account of invincible
Ignorance. Answ. What Is this? Do we hear talk of invincible ignorance in a
whole learned Church? Pray, where shall we find knowledge if ignorance have
place here? Such ignorance may perhaps be in some particular men, But to Tax a
whole Church with it, is not only to make so many Councils, so many profound
Doctors as have taught the world worse than Idiots for a thousand years, but it
is to iniure Christ, to tell Him he has indeed established a Church, yet marked
it so obscurely, removed it so far out of the Sight of Christians, that the
most learned of all could not discover the Truths it taught for ten long Ages,
though all Antiquity Assures us that Christ's Church is one of the most
manifest things in the world. Again, Suppose our Church were blind and
inculpably ignorant, who for Gods, sake must open Her eyes now, and vnbeguile
Her? Touching upon the Ignorance of Catholics Solued.
Must a few late scattered Sectaries Do the wonder, that are to look to their
own vincible ignorance, And therefore (if learned) Sin upon that account
damnably. 3. If our Church may be excused upon the score of ignorance, excuse
also the Arians less learned, the Pelagians, the Donatists etc. And say there
were never any formal sinful Heretics in the world, yea Jews, and Turks may
thus be acquitted of formal Sin, and Error likewise. But above all free, I
beseech you, our Sectaries from further painstaking, as also from the least
hope of amending Matters, were there any thing amiss, for you may well rest
assured, if ignorance has cast this learned Church into such an Abyss of
Error, it is not to be expected that the far weaker knowledge of Protestants,
can draw Her out of it. I wonder men of Modesty dare offer to impute ignorance
to the Roman Catholic Church, And presume to teach more learned then
Themselves.

CHAP. VI.
Other Evidences of the Roman Churches Perseverance in the Primitive Faith
without change or Alteration. Whether wickedness of life necessarily induces
Error into the Church? The Donatists and Protestants Argue, And Err alike.

1. I Argue. 2. God had ever a true Church preserved free from Error for so
many Thousand years as passed between A second Argument
Adam and Christ. It stood all that vast time invincible against Heresy, and
was never stained with false Doctrine. The Truth is indubitably owned by Christ
our Lord, who came not to change so much as one iota of Doctrine taught by the
Prophets, but only to perfect it by revealing other Verities, not explicitly
known before. Now Mark a strange Paradox avouched by Sectaries. They say
boldly, That our Christian Catholic Roman Church which certainly God Himself
established, And enriched with his own Verities, only continued Orthodox for
Three or Four Ages, and then (O dismal time) left off to be what it was; lost
Christ's revealed Truths, became the whore of Babylon, Apostated from it Self,
and cheated the world into false Doctrine. What says the prudent Reader? Is it
Possible that the Ancient Church of Drawn from a most improbable Assertion of
Sectaries.
the Patriarchs and Prophets stood without change or blemish for 4. or 5.
Thousand years, and Christ's own Spouse became smutched and ugly within the
compass of three or 4. Ages? Is it Probable that the lesser light of the
Synagogue lasted so long, And the Glorious sun of Christ's own Church, appeared
dark and Eclipsed soon after The world had Cast an Eye upon Her? And this, to
increase the wonder happened then (Sectaries must say) when evidently There was
no other true Church on earth, unless you will take in Arians, Pelagians etc
and such open Heretics to make up a Catholic Society, most unfit (all know)
to teach Christ's Orthodox Doctrine. I wish Protestants would well ponder the
force of this one reason, And return an Answer.

2. My last Argument is a Demonstration against Sectaries, who say. There was
always an Orthodox visible Church since Christ's time: For this Article of our
Creed was ever professedly true in all Ages. I believe the Holy Catholic
Church. They say again, There was a time when our Roman Catholic Church once
Orthodox, began to innouate, to bring in new Doctrins of an unbloody Sacrifice,
of Transubstantiation, of praying for the Dead, of Purgatory etc. Now be
pleased to observe the Demonstration. When An Argument against Sectaries.
the Roman Church began these new supposed Doctrins and actually erred, There
was at that very time an other Orthodox Church in the world, or was not; If
not; Christ had then no Orthodox Church on earth, and Consequently that Article
of our Creed was false. I believe the Holy Catholic Church, For no man can
truly believe in a Church which really is not. If contrariwise they own a pure
Orthodox Church to have been on earth when the Roman began to err, That
(because Orthodox and pure) was certainly a Society of Christians distinct from
the then supposed fallen and false Church of Rome.

3. Hence I argue. Eirher that Orthodox distinct Church, sensible of Gods cause
and the Honor of Christian Faith, vigorouly opposed, censured and condemned
those imagined errors of the Roman Church now fallen, or Carelessly let all
alone, and omitted that Duty. If it omitted that duty, it was no true Church,
For if true, Her Charge was and is, (She has a command from Christ to do it)
to crush, and suppress false Doctrins, when they first rise up, or begin to
infect the body of Christianity. This duty that Church neglected, and for that
cause was not Orthodox. Moreover, the Roman is also Supposed actually drawn
from Truth, Clear and Conuincing.
Condemned Heretics made up no Church. We had then in those days a strange
world indeed, when Christ the Supreme Head looked down from Heaven, and saw his
Mystical body the Church pitifully Corrupted, when he cast an eye upon poor
Christians, and found them all Churchless.

4. If Sectaries own such an Orthodox Society, which opposed and censured the
Roman Errors, that must be a Truth as Notoriously known to the world as it is
now supposed, that the Church of Rome had Errors Notoriously known. And Here I
desire the Judicious Reader to reflect on what I Shall propose, And wish our
Adversaries to Answer. Can they Imagine the Errors of the Roman Church openly
discovered so many Centuries since, and judge that no Orthodox Christians then
living (who beheld Truth run to ruin) made Opposition against them? The
Errors, say Protestants, were palpable (for our new men espy them now) yet no
Orthodox Christans are heard of to this day, who then stood up for Gods cause,
and defended the Ancient truths of Christ against this supposed erring Church,
This yet lies in darkness The Fault must be noised as both criminal and
public, And yet there is no news at all of such as lent a helping hand to
redress it.

5. Again, Can it be imagined that the Roman Catholic Church which Age after
Age condemned innumerable Heretics, And gives in an exact Catologue in order
as They rose up, (These Sectaries Paradoxes and.
particulars are exactly known) And yet that no Author, Friend or Enemy Can be
found, who gives so much as the least hint of any sound Christians that
condemned the now decryed Errors of this one Church? Finally (and here is the
wonder) must we suppose our Church to have grossly erred a thousand years since,
when yet all good Christians were silent and reprehended it not, And that now
after ten whole Ages are past, And Millions of Souls damned for want of Faith,
A company of iarring Protestants Can probably begin to talk of them, to
Reprove, to Argue, Vast improbabilities
and offer to settle Christianity right upon its old Fundations? No thought of
man can fall upon more desperate improbabilities, yet they pass as current
among Sctaries. But of this point more hereafter in the 13 Chapter.

6. Now here is the Conclusion, and the true Trial of this cause. It is
possible that our new men, who pretend knowledge in Antiquity, name an Orthodox
Church which openly Protested What Sectaries are obliged to do, but Cannot.
against these supposed Errors before Protestants were in Being. It is
possible to tell us when this Church strongly Acted against the Roman Errors.
It is Possible to say what became of that Orthodox Church at last, whether
after it had done that great work and Censured the Roman Doctrine, It quickly
disappeared, Or still remain's in the world. It is I say, Possible, that
Sectaries Evidence these particulars of most high Concern, or impossible, If
the first can be done, we Catholics ought to Reform. But I must vnbeguile the
Reader, and absolutely Assert. All the Protestants who now are, or shall be
hereafter, Shall as soon destroy all Christian Faith as name any Orthodox
Society, any thing like a true Church which censured these supposed Roman
Errors, Therefore (And it is an evident Demonstration) Our Catholic Church
once true, continued so in all Ages, Or there was none in the world Orthodox,
The Articles She maintained then, and yet defend's are no Errors, but
Primitive Verities. And thus the whole Plea of our new men Concerning Errors
entering the Church de facto, ends as it deserves in a flat Calumny. What do
they think to bring Errors to light now, whereof the most learned Churches in
the world never took notice before? Will they speak of false Doctrins when all
Orthodox Societies said nothing of them? Dare they accuse and condemn a Church
which Millions of Souls so highly reverenced that the best of Christians lived
and dyed happily in it? Nothing can be more exotical. Wherefore I say, when our
Nouellists can work this Persuasion into men's minds, That Crows once white,
turned black in time (though no body must say when) Then, and not Their Attempt
impossible.
before, they may perhaps hope to make us mad, and induce All to believe, that
our Church Anciently pure became tainted in time with gross Errors, though
when or in what Age this deformity appeared they know not, nor Can ever know,
because the Change is de subiecto non supponente, not supposable.

7. One may reply. Though the Sectary cannot point at an Orthodox Church which
condemned these now Supposed Roman Errors, yet he has plenty of witnesses to
ground his Assertion upon, For in past Ages, many, though reputed Heretics,
vehemently decryed the Doctrins of our Church as Novelties Sweruing from the
primitive Truths. Answ: Very true indeed. For thus Arius of old decryed
Consubsta^t^ality and the Supreme Godhead in Christ, Pelagius, Original sin,
The Monathelits two wills in our Savior, Humane and Divine, Luther an unbloody
Sacrifice, And the Devil after all, if you will believe him, will oppose every
Truth which Christ taught. But what is all this to the purpose? which yet to my
great wonder I find urged by some? Is the Authority of these condemned and
confessedly known Heretics, precisely considered, to be paralleled with a
Church The Votes of Adversaries without Proofs, weightless.
which was never condemned by Orthodox Christians? Must the condemned Party be
heard when it Accuses, And the Innocent or never censured Church be Supposed
guilty, after the whole world held her blamless and has judged well of Her
condemnations pas't upon Heretics? Compare I say, the Authority of the Church
time out of mind proved Innocent, with the Authority of Heretics known most
guilty, There can be no Parallel, may we precisely respect Authority. Wherefore
if the Opposition of Heretics has any force, Their charge against the Church
must stand upon Strong proofs and sound Principles distinct from Their own
voting Her Delinquent. These Principles we seek for in all our Disputes with
Protestants, yet hitherto never heard of Any, and believe it, We hold their
own Authority of no greater weight than that of Arians, or, of any other
condemned Heretics.

8. Others, quite driven off all ground of rational Arguing will needs fasten
Errors upon our Church, because, forsooth, in such an Age the 9.th For example
after Christ, or There about, some Popes were less good and People much
debauched. An other simple Plea.
Then, most likely, was the Nick of time, Say these, to bring in
Transubstantiation, the Popes Supremacy and what other Error you will. Answ. A
most pitiful Plea, not worth the paper it blot's. I shall not so much refute
it, for it merit's not the labor, As Show how it destroys the Belief of all
Christian Religion.

9. Pray you consider Christianity in the greatest Latitude Imaginable. Call
Arians, Donatists, Protestants And Catholics also Christians. Grant, which is
true, that there have been very wicked men amongst these different Professors.
I say if this Argument have weight. Some few Popes, and many People were not
good for one Age chiefly, Ergo debauchery in manners more then probably brought
in false Doctrins under the Notion of Christian Truths, A Jew or Gentil may
Argue as well, and infer that Viciousness of life has destroyed all Truth
among Christians, if ever They had any. For why should lewdness have less force
to Subvert all Truth taught by the Church of Rome than some only? It has, say
Sectaries, brought in much Error, Therefore, says the Jew, it may as well
have corrupted all Christ Doctrine.

10. To reinforce this Argument, I told you above, if the Church of Rome, had
but once proposed one Article to be believed by Divine Faith, which is false,
She is not to be rejected and proved unreasonable
credited in any thing. If you Reply, it is evident That though false in many
Tenets, She yet taught some Articles true, As that Christ is our Redeemer. The
Jew Answers, and so do I too, She Taught and teaches so still; but that This is
Truth, if debauchery of life be ineuitably connexed with false Doctrine, shall
never be made Probable, For this Church is either entierly sound in Doctrine, or
Entirely deluded. One may Say. Scripture is evidently plain for some Primary
Articles of Christian belief. Answ. The Jew scorn's the Reply, and maintain's
this Truth, as I also do. If it be once proved that the Church of Rome imposed
on the Christian world Falsehood in place of Truth, Transubstantiation, The
Sacrifice on the Altar etc. She may as easily have corrupted the whole Bible
and made that Book false in a hundred important Passages, whereof enough is
said in the other Treatise. No true Church Therefore, no Probability of true
Scripture.

11. Let us now proceed to others called Christians the most known
Arch-hereticks, you will have the same Conclusion. Arius for example, a
stubborn proud Fellow had many Associates like Himself, yea and certainly
taught some Doctrins false, Therefore, Says the Jew, All He delivered was
false also. The Devil learned Luther to broach His new Gospel, and the man's
enormous Viciousness is known to the world by as credible Authors as Platina or
Nico: de Clemangijs, who make Popes and People so impious, Therefore all that
Luther taught cannot but be upon the Argument proposed, most justly excepted
against An other Simple Argument, rejected.
as pernicious Doctrine; For gross Errors like a Torrent follow Deprauation in
manners. Caluins Pride, Deceit, and Cousenage, to say nothing of that hidious
Sin for which he was branded, are upon Record, And all know what Rebellion,
what tragical Doings ensued upon the wicked man's Apostasy. Who then can harbor
so much as a good thought of any Doctrine He taught even that Christ dyed for
us? Hence, says the Jew, if Wickedness of life and Errors in Doctrine be such
inseparable Companions And all Sects or Religions nameable have had Professors
wicked, Farewell Christianity, yea and Christ Himself also. For, if the Impiety
of some, lead's Erroneous Doctrins into a whole Moral Body, that one crying Sin
of Judas might more easily have corrupted the First Apostolical College small
in Number, Than the incomparable less defects of Popes deprave the great Moral
Body of the Church. O, but Christ secured the other Apostles from Error. Answ.
So he does his Church, And the Jew will as soon believe the one as the other,
who Argues thus.

12. Christianity was never without Sin, Ergo never without Error, if the
Argum^nt have force. When Therefore these new men Say Wickedness of life
Compared with the loss of Faith.
Gods Providence seems equally concerned to preserve the Church from things
equally Pernicious ( But viciousnes of life is as pernicious to Christianity,
and as destruct^ue to the End of it as Errors in Doctrine) They know not what
they Say. The Argument is every way defective?

13. First its utterly False, that Wickedness is so pernicious as Errors
against Christian Doctrine, For Errors destroies Faith the ground of Salvation,
and immedeatly opposes Gods Infinite Veracity, Wickedness in Manners destroies
Grace and other Supernatural virtues, yet leaves the Foundation unshaken.
Again. By what law do these men Suppose that God preserved not his Church Holy
in those days? Does it follow because some were wicked that She lost all
Sanctity? Will they Say if the English Church had ever Sanctity in it, All
vanished into Smoke in the late dissentions and deplorable Tumults? There were
never such Doings at Rome in the worst of days as England then Showed to the
world. O but there were then many Holy and Godly men that suffered. Be it so at
present, I love not to recriminate. For one of yours Holy, we had Thousands in
that Particular Abuse can not unhallow the Church
Age you except against the whole world over, in England Germany, Spain,
France, Denmark etc. most humble, pious, virtuous and profoundly learned.* What
do you think, that a few Abuses in Italy not half so bad as you make them, can
Unhallow an ample Church? Yet here lies the Strength of your weak Argument. The
iniquity of some, chiefly of Popes and Prelates ruins not sanctity only, But
moreover induces Error into the whole Moral Body of Christ. You just proceed,
as if One should atattempt to prove that a goodly Building, which yet visibly
stands fair to the Eye, and firm on Sure foundations, is all shattered and
pulled down, because you can lead a man to the Byplaces of it and show him in
it some Nastiness. The Instance is most Pertinent. You find filth Here and
there in the fair House of God, and though there be more of it before your own
doors, yet your Church must be supposed Holy and Orthodox, And ours
contrariwise false and impious.

14. But I wonder nothing at this lame way of Arguing. Lewdness of life in some
(not in all sorts of men as is vainly Supposed) Vnsanctifies the Church, and
bring's in Error etc. For just so Heretics of old Argued against Catholics.
Read S. Austin. Sectaries argue like Heretics of old.
Tom. 7.ad liter Petiliani lib. 2. Through his several Chapters chiefly. Chap.
39. Petilianus objected as these men do, And I will Answer as S. Austin did.
There is no bitterness in honey, nor dross with pure gold, Says Petilianus. We
Donatists are the purified gold, you Catholics full of bitterness and dross.
etc. S. Austin Answer's. This is to Vapor like a mad man, And to prove
nothing. Attendis zizama. Thou attends't to the Cockle only, and not to the
wheat (As who should say though some be, yet all are not wicked) Thou
considers't the Seed of the Enemy sown in the world, and regards't not the
seed of Abraham, in whom all Nations shall be blessed. Quasi vero vos iam s^is
massa purgata. Thou talks't as if ye, forsooth, were only the purged Mass of
men, the sweet honey, the pure gold, the refined oil, and none but you. It is
not so. There is much naughtines among you, And the saint shows wherein it was.

15. In like manner one might easily lay forth the lewdnes, the Hypocrisy of no
few Sectaries were it not that S. Austin teaches us to use better Arguments,
and therefore C. 32. Says. How S. Austin argues against the Donatists.
Paciscamur ergo etc. Let us agree on this. That thou neither Object to me our
wicked men, nor I thine, to Thee. This bargain once made, thou will have
nothing to Say against that seed of Abraham, now diffused over all Nations. But
Petilianus, I shall press thee with an insoluable Argument, and Ask, Why ye
Donatists have impiously Separated your Selves from the seed of Abraham, or
that Catholic Church wherein all Nations are blessed? And thus we urge
Protestants.

16. Again. Chap. 51. Petilianus objected. Ye Catholics lay Claim to S. Peter's
Chair the Sea of Rome, I call that, says he, in the words of the Prophet,
Cathedram Pestilentiae. The Sea of pestilence. And do not Protestants speak
thus irreuerently of the Roman Chair and Church also? Both Argue alike. S
Austin Answers. Haec non vides? Dos't not thou see that all thou alleges't here
is a mere lying Calumny? For though thou may reproach some, yet all are not
guilty of the Crimes imputed to them. I will avouch more, Adds the Saint. Si
omnes per totum orbem tales essent quales vanissime Criminaris etc. If all the
Bishops the whole world over were as bad as thou fanciest, what wrong has the
Chair of S. Peter, or the Church either, done thee? If thou persuade thy Self,
that those who deliver the law, do not exactly comply with it, know, that our
Lord Jesus speaking of the Pharisees, lon^ since silenced thee. Dicunt and non
faiunt. They say but do not. If then thou woulds't diffame either Church or
See, because men in works are not answerable to their words, thou knowes't not
what to say but only to reproach without Reason. Thus and much more Blessed S.
Austin, and He overthrows our Adversaries whole Plea by it. Though I verily
hold them no such strangers to common reason, but that they saw well the
Argument The Sectary Cannot but see his Argument void of force.
already proposed enormously impertinent, to prove either the Sea of Rome or
that Church impious or erroneous in Doctrine.

17. The true Reason of foysting in such simple stuff, is an itching to Cauil,
because they can not closely dispute against Catholic Doctrine upon rational
Principles, having none to urge against us. What remains but to scratch (it is
a late strain got in among them) and to rub upon old soars, the personal
defects of others abroad, whilst God knows, they have more festered wounds to
look on and lance in their own Brethren at home? Thus I say, they must nip and
taunt or write no more Controversies, Though it is done to their own Confusion,
For suppose all were true which is said of lewd and wicked men in the Church
(as in real Truth the half is not) yet the impiety of these men Why sectaries
bring to light such simple Stuff.
never came to that height as to make upon such Cauils, the pure Spouse of
Christ a Harlot; on Frontlesly to impeach Her of Error, or quite to desert Her
as our Nouellists have done most shamefully. No: Though wicked, they know well,
that Cockle grows up in the same field with good Corn, and that the Sin of
some may stand with the Sanctity of many in the Mystical body of Christ. The
Harvest, as the Gospel, and S. Austin teach, is to Winnow all, and to Make the
Separation. But enough and more then enough of this slight and forceless
Objection.

18. I have yet one word to say of errors wrongfully Charged on us. Were this
Supposition true that the Roman Catholic Church had Apostated so shamefully in
any Age, as Sectaries Imagine, Had She been made of a beautiful Spouse a harlot,
Had She fallen from the primitive Truths into false Doctrine, And consequen^ly
Cheated Christians into Falsities for a thousand years together; Christ Jesus
our Lord had been obliged by virtue of A Reflection for Sectaries.
his promise already made in Scripture to have appeared Again, To have sent an
Angel from Heaven, Or to have used some other extraordinary means to establish
his Church a new, to raise up the walls of his now Supposed ruined Jerusalem,
which he built so slightly, that it all fell down in the short Compass of three
or four Ages. I say All, For, if the Church be false in one Article, I can
trust it in nothing. The Promises in Scripture of Hell gates not prevailing
against the Church, of Christ's being with Her to the end of the world, are
manifest; Yet now upon the Supposition, Hell and Heresy have destroyed the
whole Building, and He Blessed Lord, looked on, saw his own work defaced, yet
after all his Engagements of preserving it in Being, repaired nothing. These
are harsh Heretical Paradoxes unfit for Christians to hear, yet the Sectary
(will he nill he) must own them to his Confusion.

19. To establish more this great Truth, That the Doctrine of our Church is at
this day the same with the Primitive; I might well Argue from the Confession of
our Adversaries, Luther Chiefly and Calvin, who grant so much in many
particulars, As that of Merit, of Free will, Limbus Patrum etc. But withal say
Antiquity erred no less than we do now, And therefore Calvin professes he
follows none of the Fathers but S. Austin, Though when He pleases, he is too
bold with the Saint and scornfully reiect's his Authority also. See Bellar: de
notis ecclesiae lib: 4. What Sectaries Novelties are.
Cap. 9. I might also show that our Sectaries Novelties, for the greatest part,
are nothing else but a List of old long since dispersed and condemned Heresies
now brought to light again, and knit together in one bundle to poison the world
withal. They have renewed the Heresy o^ the Donatists, who taught that the
Church of God had perished throughout the world except in some few obscure
Corners. They renew the Heresy of the Arians teaching it unlawful to offer
Sacrifice for the dead. They renew the Heresy of the Eunomians, saying that by
Faith only man may obtain life Everlasting. You have with These men the Heresy
of the Iconomachians in breaking down the Images of Christ our Lord and His
Saints, revived again. Of the Berengarians denying the true Body and blood of
our Lord Jesus Christ really present in the Eucharist, as likewise of the
Vigilantians that slighted the Invocation of Saints, denying Honor due to the
Relics of holy Martyrs. But I need not to insist upon these and many more
revived Heresies, they are things Vulgarly known to all, largely laid forth in
the writings of our Catholic Authors. Se Bellar: now Cited.

CHAP. VII.
Manifest and most undeniable Miracles peculiar to the Romani Catholic Church
only, prone Her Orthodox, withal show that She still retain's the Primitive
Doctrine.

1. BY this word Miracle, or Miracles, I understand a supernatural work done by
Almighty God above the power and force of Nature. For there is no doubt, but
that God, who What is meant by Miracles.
created Nature, has within his boundles Omnipotency Supereminent effects of
Grace, which far surpass the little Might of all Creatures made by him. These
are finite; The Author of them infinite, And can do more.

2. 2. This Principle is certain. God has wrought innumerable Miracles, not
only to Testify He can do more then Nature, Why Miracles are wrought.
but with this express Design also, that by the Manifestation of such wonders,
All may come to the knowledge of those Oracles whereby He speaks, and Reueals
most sublime Mysteries far above the reach of our weak Reason. Now whether
these Oracles be Prophets, Church, or Apostles, seems one and the same thing,
If they be equally Manifested by miraculous Effects, and speak in his name who
Assumes them to teach the world.

3. I say manif^sted Oracles by Signs, And say it for this End, That all may
reflect upon the depth of Divine wisdom, which may on the one side Seem too
rigorous in obliging us to believe most Difficult Mysteries, neither seen by
Eye nor heard by ear, They facilitate Faith.
Were it not, That on the other side, the burden is lessened and our Faith much
facilitated by the Evidence of most prudent and conuincing Motives, For it is a
great Truth. Non sine testimoni^ reliquit Semetipsum benefaciens de Caelo. His
Goodness so favorably condescend's to our weakness, that though he remoues not
Vneuidence and Obscurity from the Mysteries believed, Yet he makes them all so
evidently Credible to prudent Reason ( Benefaciens de Caelo) by the Luster of
Signs and Wonders, That the man who belieues not after a Sight had of such
glorious Marks, stand's guilty before Gods Tribunal of damnable Sin.

4. The third Principle. Miracles eminently great in number and quality (for
example the raising of the dead to life) Chiefly, when wrought by Persons of
Singular virtue to Confirm our Christian Faith, are from God, and evident
Signs leading to the knowledge of true Religion. None can doubt of the
Assertion, seeing Christ our Mord. Matt. 11. When Questioned whether He was the
true Messiah, proved the Affirmative by his Signal Miracles. The blind see, the
lame walk, Lepers are Cleansed, And lead to the knowledge of true Religion.
the deaf hear, the dead rise again etc. Which is to say in other Terms. These
wonders speak in my behalf, and plainly Testify that I am the Messiah; For
only to say, I am a Prophet sent from God without proving the Truth to Reason
by Signs and wonders Conuinces nothing, Induces none to Believe. Therefore
John. 10. Christ remitted the unbelieving Jews not to the Evidence of his
Doctrine, (for really no Doctrine of Mysteries above Reason, though most true, is
or can be its own Self-euidence) But to his manifest Miracles. The Works which
I do in the Our Savior pleaded by His Miracles.
name of my Father, These give Testimony of me. Again. If you w^st not believe
me believe my works. Blessed S. Paul might have Long preached the Sublime
Doctrine of Christ, and without Fruit, unless. Miracles had confirmed it, which
he call's the Signs of his They were Signs of Paul's apostleship.
Apostleship. 2. Cor. 12. And How long think ye would Nabuchodonozer have
remained in his Idolatry unless He had beheld that prodigious Wonder wrought by
God upon the three Israelites in the fiery Fournace. Daniel 3. But when he saw
them walk in the flames nothing hurt, He cried out. Blessed be the God of
Sydrack Misack and Abdenago, who has sent his Angel etc. Miracles therefore
are powerful Inducements to Belief, which Truth might be yet more largely
demonstrated by the Wonders of Moses, of Elias of the Prophets and Apostles,
But these I wave and briefly take notice of our Saviors sacred words John 15.
If I had not come and spoken to them, they should not have finned, but now they
have no excuse of their sin etc. And to show, that Speaking only was no
sufficient Conviction, The Text add's. If I had not done among them works which
no other man has don, they should not have sinned but now they have seen, and
hate me, and my Father etc.

5. Three things follow from hence. First That eminent Miracles of their own
Nature are Marks of Christ's Doctrine and true Religion. 2. That Our Savior
most justly condemned Why the Jews were taxed of Incredulity?
the Jews of infidelity, not so much for rejecting his word or Preaching, as
for not believing after they had seen it confirmed by Wonder's from Heaven, For
it is Said plainly. Had they not seen they had not sinned. A Doctrine Therefore
attested by Miraculous signs, and wonders renders the Vnbelieuer guilty of
Infidelity: Consider it alone, deuested of such Marks, what have we? High
Mysteries preached, But without Proofs antecedently laid forth to Reason;
Truths taught, but yet unknown whether so or otherwise. In a word we have the
Decrees of a great Monarch obliging all to submission, but without his Seal, or
Signature.

6. And Hence it is that our blessed Lord empowered those first great Masters of
the Gospel Matt. 10. not only to teach his Sacred Verities, but to teach
Perswasiuely, by the virtue of Miracles. Go and preach, saying the Kingdom of
God is at hand Cure the sick, raise up the dead, cleanse the Lepers, Cast out
Devils etc. And they did so. Mark 16. 20. They Went abroad, preached every
where, God Cooperating with them, and confirming their Doctrine by Signs which
followed, Or to speak in the words of S. Paul. Heb. 2. God withal Testifying
by Signs and wonders and diverse Miracles etc. A third sequel. If the Jews
had not sinned by rejecting Christ Why sectaries are blameable?
and his Doctrine (which then was new) in case he had not wrought greater
Miracles amongst them than ever Any did before him, How highly imprudent think
ye. How notoriously culpable are our Sectaries who believe the new opinions of
one wretched Luther or Calvin, without so much as one Miracle wrought, to make
them probable?

7. A fourth Principle. True Real Miracles are Still necessary in the Church
and fortold to be so, by Truth it self. Joan 12. Amen, Amen, I say unto you, he
that belieues in me, the works which I do he shall do, and greater works than
these shall he do. I say purposely, True real Miracles, mindful of S.
Chrisostoms profound Discourse upon these very words in his Book against the
Gentiles. There have been, says the Saint certain Masters (you may call them
Impostors) who had their Disciples and talked much of Wonders whilst they
lived; but none of them ever came to the impudency S. Chrisosloms excellent
Reflection.
as truly to Prophesy of Miracles to be done by them after death. No: A Iugler
may do something strange, whilst he is on the Stage, But take him off the
Theater, Throw him out of this life, The cheat appears, He is worth nothing.

8. All is contrary in our Savior, who here foretold of greater Wonders to be
wrought in after Ages by his true Belieuers, Than He had done in this Mortal
life. And if we Speak of great Conuersions (which all most justly account
Miraculous) the Truth is Evident, For our Blessed Lord converted but few, in
Comparison of those who followed in the Church after his Death. (A parallel of
other Miracles we shall see presently). Yet more. The Apostles wrought the
greatest Miracles after Christ's Ascension.
And it is worth Reflection, whilst Christ's Disciples conuersed with Him, the
Gospel record's little of their Miracles, But after his leaving this world
Signs followed them, They cast out Devils, raised the dead, spoke with new
tongues, converted Nations, laid hand on the Sick, etc. And the like
Supernatural effects have been visible in the Church through all Ages after the
Apostles. So true are the words of Christ. Greater Things shall be done. And
the meaning is not, that every true Belieuer should work Miracles, (For so
Christ's promise would not be truly fulfilled, because All do them not) But
that some choice elected of his Church, as it happened in the Primitive times,
Members of this Mystical Body, should have the Privilege.

9. One Reason of my Assertion is. If Miracles, Gods own Seals and Characters,
were Necessary at the first preaching of the Gospel to induce all to believe
Christ's Doctrine, or to distinguish his Truths from the Errors of Jews and
Pagans, The like Necessity is for their Continuance in after Ages, not only in
respect of Infidels, but erring Christians also. For, no sooner had Christ
founded his Church, But the Devil raised up his Chapel by it, Pestiferous
Heretics from Simon Magus, have Why Miracles are now Necessary?
been in every Age his Chaplins. All of them Pretended to Truth, with an Ecce
hic est Christus, Lo we preach Christ. In this Confusion of Sects, it was
absolutely needful, to Mark out that happy Christian Society which taught saving
Faith and Showed where God was adored in Spirit and Truth. Now no Mark can be
more Palpable or more attractiue, than the Glory of indubitable Miracles,
Christ's own Cognisances, and the Clearest Evidences of Apostolical Doctrine.

10. 2. Miracles are necessary in the Church to stir up Christian Faith, and
Devotion with it, which would soon grow cold, Two other Reasons alleged.
were it not that Divine Providence frequently quickens both, by these
exterior Signs and wonders. Wherefore, as His Goodness works inwardly and
plyes our hearts with Grace, so outwardly also (to Testify that nothing is
wanting) He moves us to Believe by no less visible Inducements than Those were,
which first made the world Christian.

11. 3. The Continuation of Miracles Clearly appeared in the first five
Centuries after Christ, And as Authority makes them indubitable, So reason also
proves them necessary upon this very Account, that the Conversion of Infidels
strangers to Christ, was not wrought on a sudden, or all at once, But
successively Age after Age, If then Miracles were necessary to convince our
Christian Verities when Christ and his Apostles first preached to unbelieving
Jews and Gentiles, no man can probably judge them Useless in after Ages, when
the like Barbarous, the like Ignorant and vnciuilized Nations who never heard
of Christ or Scripture became Christians, Induced, to so happy a change, not
because they heard truths Taught, But because they saw all confirmed by Evident
Signs and Wonders.

12. Reflect I beseech you a little. Were not the Natives of those vast and
remote Regions we call the Indies (whether Orient or Occident) a People as
ignorant of our Christian verities and as much auerted from Christ's Doctrine,
when S. Francis Xauerius, and other laborious Missioners first preached There,
as any Nations One Reason further illustrated
were to whom the Apostles preached Christ? Yes most certainly. In both cases
the disdain and ignorance may well be paralled. Imagine now that S. Xauerius had
only opened his Bible; And told the ruder People of the high Mysteries of
Christian Faith, would this think ye, though never so speciously laid forth,
have gained credit? No. But when their eyes beheld Miracles, and glorious
Miracles accompaning His laborious Preaching; The By an Instance of Missioners
sent to preach
deaf, dumb, blind, and sick instantly cured. When they saw the Sanctity, the
Austerity and Innocence of His virtuous Life. When they heard him endued with
the Gists of tongues. When they knew that after a noble contempt of the world,
The blessed man sought nothing but God, And fearing neither death nor dangers
Courageously traveled from one end of the world to the other etc. Then it was
they began to look about them, to open their eyes more, to Renounce Idolatry
and submit to Gods truths, most manifestly euidenced by glorious Miracles. Then
it was that the Saint (Gods grace concurring) converted Thousands and
Thousands, All which is upon certain Record, and witnessed by those who have
written the wonders. Howeuer grant that S. Xauerius wrought but one or two
Miracles (when many more cannot without impudency be denied him) our Assertion
subsists, that Miracles are necessary, for the reclaiming of Infidels, And if
he did none at all, This as S Austin anciently observed upon a like occasion,
is the greatest Wonder of all, That he converted innumerable Heathens to our
Christian Faith, without Miracles.

CHAP. VIII.
Miracles evident in the Roman Catholic Church, No less induce All now to
believe Her Doctrine, Than Apostolical Miracles Anciently Persuaded to believe
that Primitive Doctrine. The Denial of Miracles Impossibili^at's The Conversion
of Jews and Infidels.

1. I I say first. Clear and Unquestionable Miracles, of the like Quality with
those which Christ and his Apostles wrought, have been ever since, most
gloriously manifest in the Roman Catholic Church, And in no other Society of
Christians, I hope none for Proof of my Assertion can expect that I write
Volumes, or bring to light again in this short Treatise so much as the hundred
Part of those prodigious wonders which are upon Record in the lives of Saints,
in the death of Martyrs, and Ecclesiastical History. Baronius large Tomes give
you innumerable in every Century, And Bellar: Lib 4. de not is Eccle: C. 14.
Hint's at a few from the first Age to the 15. I must wave this longer work, and
briefly Argue thus.

2. Christ Spoke Truth in the Text now cited. John 14. 12. Prophesying of
future glorious Miracles to be wrought by those who believed Indubitable
Miracles euince Christ's Prophesy fulfilled.
in him. But the indubitable Miracles wrought in the Roman Catholic Church
only, through every age prove that Prophesy exactly fulfilled, or effectually
Evidence the Verity of it; Therefore none can doubt of Miracles done in the
Roman Catholic Church, if Christ's Prediction be true, and this Proposition be
also proved. viz. That, This Church only, has effectually manifested the truth
of that Prophesy, or shown such Wonders as have proportion with Christ's own
glorious works, and the Apostles.

3. Now to clear the Truth, Here is my Principle. When I read a Prophesy in
Scripture, I submit to it by Faith, but when I See it actually Accomplished or
made manifest by real visible Effects And both Sense and undoubted History
discover so much evidently, Reason, grounded on Sense and History, Can not but
prudently assent to the Verity. What I would say is clear in all the Ancient
Prophesies of Christ, and his Church. Take this one instance. The Prophets,
Daniel chiefly and Esaias, Foretold of the large Extent of Christ's glorious
Kingdom here on earth, of The Principle whereon, our Asser^ion is grounded.
whole Nations flocking to his Church, of Her teaching those Truths which were
believed from the Beginning; But when all saw with their eyes innumerable
Heathens gained to our Christian Faith, and heard of other Conuersions conveyed
to them upon certain Relation (for few or none of us saw the latter Conuersions
wrought in China, Iapan, and the like remote places) when I say Authority never
Questioned gives us certainty hereof, Then all bless God, And conclude. That
what the Prophets fortold of great Conuersions, has been visibly fulfilled;
And that Christ's Church is daily more and more enlarged, Answerable to those
Predictions.

4. Hence I discourse further, and Assert, that the glorious Miracles which
stand upon indubitable Record, and have been done in the Roman Church only,
most notoriously Evidence without Dispute the actual Accomplisment of our
Saviors own words. The works which I do, he shall do also and greater than
these shall he do. If you Ask how I prove the Assertion? I appeal to Sense and
certain History. Sense first saw these Miracles done, and certain History which
Supplies the want of Sense, conueyes them to us, though innumerable are living
at this Hour, who have been eye Witnesses of Miracles. Now here we might enter
upon a long work and Recount what the Fathers and Historians both ancient and
latter, have of this Subject. Read if you please these few.

5. Irenaeus Bishop and Martyr who lived about the year 180. lib: 2. Cap. 57.
And says. The number of these Divine works which God has manifested in his
Church the whole Fathers, produced witnesses of Miracles.
world over, are numberles. A little before, He mentions these particulars.
Some cast out Devils, other Prophesy, others lay their hands on the sick and
cure them; yea and raise up the dead, who lined with us for many years.
Tertullian of the second Age Lib. ad Scapul: And Eusebius. lib. 5. give you a
large Catologue of most glorious Miracles. The like does S. Bafil. Lib. de
Spir: S. Speaking of that worthy Bishop of Neocaesarea. S. Gregory, deservedly
called Tha^maturgus, for the wonders he wrought. S. Athanasius and S. Hierom
relate the Miracles of S. Hilarion, S. Martin. And the sames Hierome. Lib.
aduersus Vigelantium c. 4. Says that the Signs and wonders manifested in the
Temples of Martyrs prove mightily beneficial, both to Belieuers and the
Incredulous. Responde (they S. Hieromes words.
are his words) Quomodo in Vilissimo pulucre etc. Answer, Vigilantius, how it
is that we see such Signs and virtue present in a little invaluable dust, and
dead men's ashes? S. Ambrose, an Eyewitness of Miracles wrought by the Relics
of S. Geruasius and S. Ambrose an lie witness.
Protafius Ep^st. 85. for proof of them, Appeal's to sense and the Judgment of
others. You have known, says He, Nay you have seen, many dispossesed of
Devils, many when they touched the garments of Saints, freed from their
Infirmities etc. S. Austin Lib. 22. de Ciuit: C. 8. and 9. Is large in relating
the Miracles wrought by the glorious S. Austins Evidence.
Martyr S. Stephen; And Lib. Contra. Epist. Fundam. C. 4 5. Says, That the
true Church of Christ is proved and demonstrated by Miracles. Our Venerable Bede a great Scholar, a worthy virtuous man, And highly esteemed the whole
Christian world over, certainly deserves credit, when. Lib. 4. Histor. He
recount's the Miracles of the glorious S. Cuthbert Bishop of Lindesfern and of
others within our England. Are any such seen now a days wrought by Protestant
Bishops? No God knows, Their new Faith is a great stranger to all old Miracles.

6. Fall if you please lower and read S. Bernard in the life of S. Malachy a
worthy Bishop of Ireland, what wonders have we there? The ancient Miracles of
the Church, Says S. Bernard, were apparently, manifest in S. Malachy. He had
the gift of Prophesy, S. Bernard in the Life of S. Malachy.
Cured the Sick, changed the minds of men to the better, and raised up the
dead. Now if you will hear of S. Bernards own Miracles, Read Godfridus who
lived with him. Lib. 4. C. 4. and wrote His life, you have innumerable. It Is
hard, says Bellarmin, to Recount all, And as numberles are the known Miracles
of those two admirable, Saints Blessed S. Dominick and the Seraphical S.
Francis, Founders of two most glorious Religious Orders. S. Francis, To omit
his other certain wonders, was Himself a Miracle of Austerity and Penance. The
like was S. Dominick, who as we read in his life raised three dead men to life.
And for three you have more revived by an other of His holy Order, I mean that
admirable Saint Vincentius Ferrerius. So the pious and learned S. Antoninus
Archbishop of Florence Recounts in his Histpry. 3. Part lib. 23. And who dares
say that so great a Doctor And most modest Prelate, was so Frontless as to
write that we read, not long after the death of S. Vincentius, without
Assurance and Certainty. The whole world would have decryed the Folly, Had it
been a Fourb, an Imposture; or a fabulous Story.

7. By what is now said of These and other infinite Operations of grace which I
am forced to omit, you may infer first. That the Miracles wrought in the Roman
Catholic Church are not inferior to those done by the Apostles, And
consequently if our Our Saviors Prophesy falfilled in the Churches Miracles.
Saviors Prophesy was seen manifestly fulfilled in those first Apostolical
Wonders, it has been also as effectually accomplished in these latter of the
Church. I say, in the Roman Catholic Church, For all those now named, whom God
privileged with the Grace of working Miracles, were of the same union in Faith
with this Church, and no other. It follows. 2. That Humane Faith, when no just
Exception comes against it, But the foolhardy Spirit of unbelieving Heathens
and Heretics, gives Mortal Assurance of Miracles. The Miracles of our Savior
evidence this Truth. He raised Lazarus from death. John 11. A Touch of his
garment cured the infirm woman. Matt. 9. He restored sight to a blind man.
John. 9. Observe I beseech you. All Iewry beheld not these Wonders, But some
only, Yet they were wrought for the good of All, and without doubt proved
conuincing Arguments of Christ's great power to innumerable, who actually saw
them not, But only heard of them, and Assented to what they heard, upon
Miracles made Credible upon humane Authority.
humane Authority prudently credible. Therefore our Savior Supposed That
humane Faith (and this before the writing of Scripture) was a Sufficient Means
to convey to others a Moral certainty of his Miracles. I say yet more. If God
ever efficaciously intended to worck a true Miracle since the Creation of the
world by any of his creatures, Humane Faith was, and yet is the First and most
Connatural way of Conueying it to the knowledge of others. Who therefore
excepts against this usual course of Providence destroies a Principle of
Nature, and can believe nothing of Supernatural Effects, but what he either
sees with his own eyes, or find's registered in Holy Writ.

8. Ask now. How many Austins, How many Chrysostoms, how many Cyrills, how many
Bedes and Bernards, have upon their Credit, and Reputation assured us of
Miracles wrought in the Roman Church only, like to those in the Primitive Age?
They are numberless. Did Christ our Lord restore life to the dead, sight to the
blind, health to the sick? The Professors of our Catholic Church, by his
virtue, have done the very same, and the Miracles are more numerous. But now,
and here is the chief demand. Were our Saviors glorious Works made Credible to
Authority alleged.
thousands no Eyewitnesses upon Humane faith and Authority, before Scripture
registered them? So it is. Behold we have our Austins, our Iustins, our Basils,
our Bernards vnexceptionably plain for the Churches Miracles, and none can
without Impudency, and the violation of all humane Credit, probably Cauil at
what these have written. None can without making very Saints Impostors and
guilty of that enormous sin of grossly deceiving Posterity, pare away so much as
any substantial parcel of what is Recorded. Therefore unless all humane Faith
perish, its desperate rashness to deny most glorious Miracles to have been in
the Roman Catholic Church, which was my Assertion.

9. And to confirm it more. I Ask why do Sectaries to disgrace our Miracles,
introduce, I know not what Stories of the Heathens wonders? Are these credible
or no? If not; reject them boldly as Impertinences; If Credible, it seems
humane Faith is of some weight with Sectaries when they read of the Heathens
fopperies, though of no Account for true Miracles wrought by the Church of
Christ. Again, this Faith is much worth with these men, when to lay a foul
Aspersion on a Pope Sectaries in Consequences.
or Prelate, they fill their Books with a hundred petty Stories, whether true
or false imports little. Herein their easy Belief swallows all, But if a
Father or Choice Historian mention a Miracle, its a Fourb, a dream, a fiction,
and what not.

10. One word more and I end. A mere pretended Humane Authority, which really
is not, And therefore nothing worth, is shamefully made use of to patronize
that crying Sin of Sectaries Schism. Our Church, Say they, Changed Her ancient
Faith, the Charge at most relies on History or Humane Faith, God never told
them so. For example. The Lateran Council first brought in the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, some Pope or other first invented Purgatory etc. Suppose
all this were as true, as it is hideously false, History or nothing must make it
good, and yet in our present case it is no warrant for known Miracles. Thus
Faith rises and falls in value as our New men's fancy pleases. Believe it, had
blessed S. Ambrose (cited above), in lieu of that Miraculous Cure wrought on a
blind man at Millan, when Himself was present (and innumerable of that City
saw the wonder) related a stroy prejudicial to either Pope or Clergy, How often
think you would that have been told and reiterated in the Writings os
Sectaries? But now when He speaks of a supernatural Work of grace, done at the
Relics of the holy Martyrs Geruasius Humane Faith now Valuable now not with
Sectaries.
and Protasius, not a word is said. No, all passes in Silence, as if Christ's
own Marks and the Churches glory (undoubted Miracles) deserved no Memory, but
Contrariwise Scorn and contempt.

11. I said in the Assertion, that the grace of true Miracles, (meaning such as
exactly Answer to our Saviors glorious works) is proper and peculiar to the
Roman Church only. The proof hereof is easy. First, Sectaries pretend not to
work Miracles, For they say, that power ceased long since, though I might here
mind them of Caluins great wonder, and really it was a strange one, For whereas
God's Saints restored life to the dead, this great Sinner, having persuaded one
Bruleus of Ostun to fain himself dead, deprived the poor wretch of his life Or,
rather God Caluins Miracle.
to lay open the fraud and Hypocrisy of both the one and other, turned the
Fiction into a Verity, for really Bruleus who Counterfeited himself dead, to
get Calvin the renown of working Miracles, was after all the Ministers long
prayer, found dead indeed. The story is known and writ not only by Hierome
Bolsec in Vita Calvini. C. 13. But by others also. And here I wish Sectaries to
give some credit to humane Authority.

12. Now as Protestants disclaim Miracles, so do the Jews also, for they never
had any after our Saviors Coming. It Is Sectaries Jews and Turks disclaim
Miracles.
true, that Pond upon Probatica. Joan. 5. Or as many will have it, the Pond it
self, so called because the Sheep ordained to Sacrifice were washed there,
continued Miraculous, whilst Christ our Lord preached, But soon after ceased,
And so do all other wonders amongst that abandoned People. The Turks who say.
God gave Mahomet the sword and Christ the Power of working Miracles, pretend to
no such supernatural effects at all. No more in Justice can Heathens or the
Donatists lay Claim to any, whose wonders were but trifles, compared with the
Glorious works of Christ and His Church. None of them all converted whole
Nations to Christian Religion, none of them raised up the dead. None of them
after death wrought any Miracles. See Tertullian writing of the Heathens. In
Apolog: C. 22. 23. And S. Austin against the Donatists. Homil. 13. in Joan. De
Vtilit. Credent. C. 16. As also Lib. 10. de Ciuit. C. 16.

13. I say. 2. If the Miracles of Christ and the Apostles rationally proved
against Jews and Gentiles, the Credibility of Apostolical The ancient and
modern Miracles compared together.
Doctrine, The very like Signs and supernatural effects most evident in the
Roman Catholic Church, as rationally prove against Sectaries the Credibility
of our now professed Catholic Doctrine. I would say. Church Miracles constantly
wrought in all Ages since Christianity began, are no less efficacious to draw
Sectaries to the Belief of our Church Doctrine, than those the Apostles wrought
were to induce Jews and Gentiles to the belief of Apostolical Doctrine. Here is
one Proof. The same Signs and Marks of Truth when equal in Majesty, Worth,
Quality, and Number ever discover to Reason the same Truth, For, God can no
more deceive by such works of Grace than by his own Divine word. Interrogemus
ipsa Miracula says S. Austin. Tract: 24. in Joan: Quid nobis loquantur de
Christo. Let us ask of Miracles what they say of Christ? Habent enim si
intelliga^tur, linguam suam. They want no tongue to speak with, their Language
is plain for Christ. Just so Say I and prove it, Church Miracles Speak as
planly for the Church. Wherefore if the Roman Catholic Church most clearly
gives in evidence of Her Miracles equal in worth, quality, and number with
those wrought by Christ and his Apostles, it follows, that as those first
Apostolical wonders were sufficient to convince Jews and Gentiles of the Truth
of Christianity, So these latter also wrought in the Church are of like force,
and no less efficacious to convince Sectaries of what ever Doctrine She teaches.
Now ponder What the Apostles did, the Church does.
well what the Apostles did. They cured the sick, dispossed Devils, raised the
Dead, converted Nations, etc. But these very Miracles have been done in the
Roman Catholic Church, yea and greater too, Ergo we have the like Evidence of
Truth in both the primitive Age and this, Consequently with it the same Truth.
The Evidence has been partly laid forth already, and shall be further proved
presently. The Sequel is undeniable.

14. I say. 3. No otherwise, nor upon any better ground can the Sectary Oppose
the Miracles of our Church, than Jews and Gentiles have opposed and yet do
oppose those of Christ and his Apostles. Observe well. Will the Sectary Say our
Miracles are wrought by the Devils power? So the Jews Calumniated Christ own
Glorious works. Will he Say, they are only fained by poor deluded or bold-lying
Catholics? So the Jews speak of Christ's own Miracles to this day. Will he
Say that some Miracles avouched true, have been afterward evidently The like
opposition made against Christ's Miracles and the Churches.
Counterfeit, and why may not those the Church glories in, be rancked with
such? Contra. And why may not Christ's own wonders be also listed with them? The
Argument, if of any force equally concludes against both; For if the Forgery of
some prove all forged, Christ's own Miracles no more escape the Censure; than
if one should say, (it is S. Austins instance) all women are naught, because
some have been so. Let then the Sectary show upon good Principles That Church
Miracles have been forged, and he speak's to the purpose. In the interim, he
may well think, his bold incredulous Humor makes none forged.

15. One may reply. There is a vast disparity between our Saviors Miracles
registered in Scripture, and those we plead for, only attested upon humane
Faith. I Answer in order to Christians there is a Disparity in the Testimony,
But that falls from the purpose now. First because Christ's Miracles were known
and admitted upon humane Authority, before Scripture was written. 2. And
chiefly, because both Jews and Gentiles as much slight our Scripture testifying
those wonders, as the Miracles themselves, And make little account of either.

16. But when they read these things in Scripture, and moreover both Jews and
Heretics convinced.
hear what Miracles God has Constantly wrought in every age (yea almost every
year) in his Church, and yet continues that favor to our present days; When
they hear and read of the Miracles which that one sacred house of Loreto
Evidences, the public Monuments and Testimonies whereof are undeniably
Authentic, and able to convince the most obdurate Gentile. When they read or
hear of the continual Miracles done at the Relics of S. James at Compostella
in Spain the infinite number of Pelgrims resorting thither from all parts of
Christendom (besides Records) bear witness of those great Benefits. When they
read or hear of that perpetual Miracle seen in France, exhibited to all men's
eyes in the Sacred Vial of S. Mary Magdalen, wherein the precious Blood
gathered by that penitent Saint at our Saviors Passion is yet perserued, and
Visibly boyl's up on the very day he suffered after the reading of the Passion.
A whole Nation testifies this, thousands and thousands have seen it, and
Spondanus. ad An: 1147. Says, he beheld the viole in the Church of S. Maximin.

17. When again, they hear or read of the undoubted Miraculous Cures wrought
upon the blind, the lame, and all sort of diseased Persons by the Intercession
of our Blessed Lady at Montaigu, By what particular Miracles, they are
Convinced.
(English usually call the place Sichem) The evidence whereof is so undeniable
without dispute, that Iustus Lipsius in su^ Aspricolli to the Reader, most
justly says. They are not men (but rather beasts) or purposely shut their
eyes, that See not those Miracles as clear as the Sun; For, Says He, many of
them have been manifest to our eyes and senses. And Erycius Puteanus speak's as
fully the sense of his Predecessor. See his Praeface ad Aspricol. H^c ista etc.
These very Miracles which the Mother of God began to work at Montaigu this very
Age we live in, are so manifest, so many and most stupendous, that if any
doubt of them, Poterit and de vniuersa Numinis potentia dubitare, He may as
well doubt of all the power God has, They are plain truths, rigorously and
most severely examined, testified by Eyewitnesses, and now upon Two certain
Mirac^es related.
Record etc. I am forced to omit innumerable latter Miracles, (The work would
be Immense to recount but half) yet one most certain, and no less famous then
certain, you have here set down. Another truly wonderful, follows in the next
Chapter. Sense, Experience Reason and all humane Faith go to wrack, if either
be boggl'd at. Those judgments are perverse, Those hearts harder then stones,
that dare deny them Credit.

The Admirable cure wrought by Blessed. S. Xauerius in the Famous City of
Naples upon a worthy Religious Person called F. Marcellus Mastrilli, a Noble
man by birth, and by Profession of the Society of Jesus. The Proof hinted at
above, reassumed.
18. In the year 1634. The Vice* Roy of Naples Count Monterey, pleased to keep
a Magnificent Solemnity at his own Palace in Honor of the ever Blessed Mother
of God. Amongst orher Altars richly adorned to set forth the Festiual day, The
care of one Altar was committed to F. Mastrilli, who standing on the lower
steps of a ladder, and casually looking up at one that took of Tapistrie nailed
to a higher part of the wall, met Marcellus wounded.
with a sad Accident. Behold a Hammer of two pound weight fell directly* upon
the Temples of his head, struck him down, left him senseless, and grievously
wounded. In this Peril, First taken up by the hands of others, He was
presently carried in a Couch to his own College. Doctors of Physic and
Surgeons without delay called for, searched the wound and found it Mortal.
Forth with, a burning fever following upon the hurt, so increased the danger
in that noxius air (a great enemy to wounds) and unseasonable winter time,
That all left hopeless, despaired of Marcellus His wound judged Desperate and
why.
Recovery. Besides his mouth by the Contusion of Nerves was so closed up, that
the poor Patient could take no sustenance. To help That, The Doctors
(necessitated to use violence) forced it open, and thrust an Instrument down
toward his stomach, hoping thereby to clear the passage and fit it to receive
some nourishment. But with little good success, For the Cruel Remedy became an
unspeakable torment to the afflicted Patient. Soon after followed strong
Conuulsion fits (plain Symtoms of death) and besides a Dead Palsy, which
wholly took away the use of his left arm.

19. Whoeuer desires to see more of this desperate danger, And how near
Marcellus was at deaths door, may please to read Daniel Bartoli in his second
Part of Asia. lib. 5. at this Tittle L'Imperio dc* Toxongum. Page with me 441.
and. 442. And also Michael de Elizalde. Eorma verae Religionis. Qust: 27. N.
478. P. 329. who lived at Naples, and wrote this Miracle not long after it
happened. In this condition Marcellus continued many days, despaired of by the
very best and most expert Physicians. Wherefore the Conclusion was to implore
the mercy of God Death expected.
in his behalf, to commend him as the manner is, to the prayers of the
Community, and finally to administer Extrem unction, For his obstructed Mouth
and breast full of Clottered blood, hindered the taking the Holy Eucharist, or
last Viaticum. The Doctors The Doctors gave Marcellus over.
prudently aduiced to prepare him for death, For they found him now past all
hope of Recovery, Nay, all of them with one Consent absolutely Concluded,
Marcellus could not live till the next morning.

20. Now here begins the Miracle. The 3.d of January four hours within night,
The Fathers that watched with dying Mastrilli, The Miracle begins.
observed He did not only move and turn Himself to the wall, but heard him
speak also; which seemed to them a wonder, For before He lay speechles not
able to utter a word, much less to move his weak body. But what follows
clear's all, The motion came from a stronger hand, And thus it was.

21. S. Xauerius appeared in a pilgrims weed very Glorious With S. Xaue^ius
Apparition.
to Marcellus, And with a Smiling Countenance demanded, whether He would rather
dye at present, Or according to his former desire be sent Missioner* into the
Indies? In passing please to know, the virtuous man ever languished after that
Mission, Though hindered from it by Superiors, because of his tender and weak
Constitution.

22. Marcellus Answered I am ready to do whateuer God pleases; Yet according
to my former purpose, may that be grateful to the Divine will, and granted by
Superiors, I am in heart prepared to dye a Martyr for Christ amongst those
Indians. Xauerius hereupon pronounced the form of a vow which the sick man (as
the words were spoken by the Saint) repeated after Him. By this vow He obliged
himself to renounce Country, Friends, and whateuer is in the world to be sent
to the Indian Mission. You have the Form of the vow in Bartoli now cited. Page
444. In the Marcellus his vow. Relics Applied to the wound.
next place a Relic of the Holy Cross and some others also which Marcellus
had about his neck, were applied by the help of S. Xauerius to the wound in his
head. Still the Fathers present heard Marcellus speak for a long time together,
some thought them words of a distracted brain, others judged Otherwise. After
these and many other Circumstances related by the Authors already quoted,
Xauerius Spoke to this Sense. Marcellus be of S. Xauerius Comfortable words.
good Courage, you are now perfectly cured. Your desire is granted, you shall
go to the Indies and there dye a Martyr. This said the Saint disappeared.

23. Without delay at all, Marcellus loock'd on as a dying man revived;
instantly sat up in his bed, called for his clothes, The Miracle moct Evident.
Yea, says Elizalde, Exilit e l^cto leap't out of his bed, And with a strong
Cheerful voice said. I am well, I am perfectly Cured, And so it was indeed. For
the Mortal wound cause of His Malady quite Closed up, appeared no more, And
which is a wonder, the hair of his head cut of by the Surgeons to facilitate
the cure, was restored as formerly. So Elizalde testifies. n. 480. Restituti
Capilli ad Vulneris Curationem ^rasi. His Paleness and weakness, went away,
Color, strength and agility returned in that very Instant. What need I say
More? Marcellus a Moment before at Deaths door, becomes sound, healthful, and
perfectly well.

24. Those who attended Him called together the Fathers of the house many in
number, to be Eyewitnesses of the wonder. All came with joyful hearts, and
First prostrate on the ground with much devotion gave immortal thanks to God
for the cure, then Embraced Marcellus who took a little sustenance, which he
had wanted for a long time. That done, the Superior commanded him forthwith to
write down exactly every particular he had heard or seen that night, and to
subscribe all with His own hand. He did so. The next morning, when whole
Multitudes came to pray for Marcellus soul (the Humble man was indeed Made
known to the Community and noyse'd abroad.
much beloved and honored all Naples over) They found him perfectly recouerd,
saying Mass at. S. Xauerius Altar. Presently the Miracle manifest to all Eyes
was soon diuulged through the whole City and held so indubitable, that some
thought it needless to give His Eminence the Lord Archbishop Information of
it. Howeuer that was done and most exactly. The Doctors, the Surgeons, the
Fathers, and other Eyewitnesses also Examined upon Oath.
of the wonder were assembled before His Eminence, and All upon Oath solemnenly
taken, avouched boldly without doubt without hesitancy the naked Verity, and
undeniable Truth of the Miracle. Now if any would be further informed of the
great Severity usually held in the Sacred Congregation of Rites at Rome, when
Miracles are brought to the Test before that high Tribunal, Though the whole
world knows the rigor, you may by the occasion given of this one wonder, read
Elizalde. N. 485. This Short Relation permit's me not to insist upon So many
large particulars. In lieu thereof, be pleased to hear what F. Elizalde (one
learned and a great Divine) speak's of his own knowledge. n. 481. Much to the
sense, as follows.

25. I was says He in Spain when this great Miracle was wrought by S.
Xauerius, And although I am of an Humor incredulous enough A learned man's
Testimony Concerning this Miracle, whilst he lived at Naples.
not easily drawn to believe such wonders, yet upon the several Testimonies
which came in great number from every part of the world, I found my self even
then convinced of the Truth. Now I have lived at Naples well nigh three years,
and Conuersed with many, who were in the College at the time of this wonderful
cure, And with one particularly (a man upright and just) that was in the
Chamber when Xauerius appeared to Marcellus. I have attentively considered what
every one said, and after a diligent inquiry made, perceive (as it ever falls
out in a point of Truth) no difference amongst them, but Contrariwise, find
all, vnius labij* Speak the same, agreeing in one Relation. But let us omit our
own witnesses. Italy, Spain and the other parts of the Christian world never
questioned the Miracle, but held it certain, and most prudently did so, For
scarce any thing can be more Authentic remaining within the Limits of humane
Faith. Upon this certainty it was, that His Catholic Majesty familiarly
treated with Marcellus a long time together, desiring his prayers, and
bountiffully offered all Assistance in order to his further voyage, so likewise
did the Dukes and Princes of that Court. Nay, all sort of People came flocking
to the pious Passenger, as if He had been one sent from Heaven, or raised from
the dead. Happy were they that could speak with him, touch his garments, or
receive any little small trifle from His hands. Thus all reverenced the Holy
man. So great Renown the Miracle had gained every where. Much to this sense
Elizalde writes. Let us now go on.

26. Soon after the Miraculous cure, Marcellus began his long journey toward
the Indies, and in the year 1638. arrived at Nangasaque in Iapan, where taken
prisoner, He first endured that Marcellus his Martyrdom. strange, and
Miraculous.
usual and cruel Torment of water (known to every one) but came out sound, not
hurt at all. The standers by astonished at the Spectacle, presently commanded
the Executioner to strick of his head. The Barbarous man attempted to do it,
but on a sudden made strengthles, wholly benumbed, was not able to move his
hand. Where upon Marcellus said, delay no longer, but in Gods name do thy
duty. The fatal blow at those very words was given, And The Virtuous Marcellus
became a Martyr and dyed for Christ, according to the Prophesy of S. Xaverius.

27. Now here I Ask what just exceptions can Sectaries make against this
Miracle, attested upon Oath, rigedly examined, and universally believed? Will
they say Marcellus was indeed wounded No just exceptions against the Miracle.
(for that many Seculars saw), yet the wound was but slight, not mortal and
perhaps no more but a rasing of the skin? Say so. The Doctors and Surgeons had
been worse then beasts, to torture the poor Patient as they did by forcing down
into His Stomach the Instrument already mentioned. Besides burning Cauils
answered.
feauers, Conuulsion Fits, Palsies (of themselves mortal) usually ensue not
upon slighter hurts. Will they say The Aparition of the Saint to Marcellus was
either an Illusion, a dream at most, or a distemper of a dying man's fancy? That
indeed might have some color, had we not Evidence against it. For what can
be Answered to the strange effect, the Miraculous cure, I mean, which so
suddenly followed in one short Moment of time? This ( clear Self-euidence)
speak's truth, and proves that God had a hand in the cure. None can Cauil at
it, none can contradict it. Perhaps some will say. All was a fourb, a cheat,
and Fiction, The Fathers, Doctors, and Surgeons by compact fained one Mortally
sick that was not, to gain Jesuits the renown and Glory of a Miracle.

28. What Is this? who are here accused and condemned? Give ear a little Gentle
Reader. A flat Calumny will have us to believe That All those venerable
Fathers, those expert Doctors, Those experienced Surgeons, with others also who
beheld the Miracle, All I say, Though they called God to witness by Solemn
Oath taken upon the sacred Gospel, That the cure was real and Miraculous were
notwithstanding worse The just falsely accused.
then very Villains, forsworn, base, abject, and perjured Persons. And this we
must Assent to, upon no other proof, but because Malice likes well to
Calumniate ever itching to decry God's own Glorious wonders. Besides, we must
believe those high Tribunals where the Miracle was most rigidly examined, and
after examination unanimously approved, to have been so notoriously unjust, so
impiously partial, and wickedly misled, as to oblige Posterity to own upon
humane Faith, a Lie, an Imposture, In a word, that to be Gods Glorious work (a
true Miracle) which really was not. Is it not impudency think ye Tribunals
Condemned.
to harbor such desperate Thoughts? The Devil himself (though Father of lies)
would be ashamed to calumniate so boldly, without some Color or appearance of
proof; Yet here we have not any.

29. Now I Will prove the Sectaries Assertion to be a flat Calumny, and withal
further euince the truth of the Miracle. S. Xauerius, as we have heard,
ascertained Marcellus of his cure, and likewise Prophesyed, that He should go
to the Indies and there dye a Martyr for Christ. I know Malice may Cavil here,
And deny all. But Mark what follows. Upon the Assurance of this Prediction
Marcellus Himself, the Reverend Fathers also and others relied, when they so
Confidently gave out, That he should lose his life at Iapan, and dye a Martyr.
Reflect I The Calumny rejected. The Miracle proved true.
beseech you. Had it not been in the highest measure imprudent, nay more than a
foolish Presumption of those Fathers to have filled all men's ears with that
Prophetical Speech, upon mere future uncertainties? The performance whereof,
(all know well) was liable to a thousand Disasters and Casualities, in that
immense voyage from Europe to the furthest parts of the world. Speak
impartially. How easily Might Marcellus (none of the strongest Constitutions)
have dyed in the way? What if Pirates had seized on the Ship, and cast him over
board? What if the Vessel had perished by Tempest with the virtuous Man, and
other Passengers? How much scorned would the Fathers have been, who certainly
were never so strangely besotted as to expose themselves and the reputation of
their Order to a public contempt upon mere Contingencies and weak Conjectures.
Hence I infer, They had by virtue of S. Xauerius Prophesy a high Moral
Assurance of the event, The Prophesy spoken some years before Marcellus his
Martyrdom, was true, And the real Effect of his death proved it true, neither
Devil nor Mortal man could certainly foretell Things so remote, and yet God
wrought the Miracle.
to come. God therefore was the Author of that Prediction, And Consequently His
Divine power by the means of the Saint, wrought the Miracle.

30. Its high time now to reassume what I began with, and said above. When
Jews and Gentiles read our scriptures which with them may well deserve as much
credit as Humane faith gives to Caesar's Commentaries or any other History; When
they find in that Sacred book how strangely Christianity was first established,
and introduced by the virtue of our Saviors glorious Wonders. When they fall
lower and see (though still upon Humane Faith) an evident Continuance of the
very like Miracles wrought in the Roman Catholic Church through every Age. The
Conviction is by good law so strong, the The Proofs hinted at above, urged
Proofs for undeniable Miracles so manifest to the dullest Gentile, that He may
as well deny (as Lipsius Says) the Sun to shine as doubt of those most
glorious visible wonders unquestionable, in this one Society of Christians. And
this hold's true, Although no more but Humane faith resting on most Certain
Authority inform's us of these Miracles, For such a Faith, as great Divines
Observe, often comes to so clear a degree of The weight of humane Faith.
Certitude, that you may well call it an vndubitable kind of Euiden^. How
certainly do we hold (it is S. Austins Instance. lib. 6. Confess. C. 3.) that
we are born of such and such Parents? How certainly do we believe and upon
humane Authority, Says Snares, Tom. 1. de Incarn: Disp. 31. Sect. 2. That
Titus and Vespasianus destroyed Jerusalem? And can any Cordial man Question,
if He lay prejudice aside, but that true and most glorious Miracles have been
as certainly wrought in the Church, as that those two Emperors destroyed
Jerusalem, or that such are our Parents? I appeal to every ones Conscience for
Answer.

31. By all now said we see first, that what ever can be proposed against our
Churches Miracles, has like force against Christ's own glorious works. And I
challenge Protestants to hint but at one Argument which does not equally strike
at Sectaries justly reprehensible, And why.
both. We see. 2. How Hideous a Sin Sectaries commit, who Scornfully slight all
those known and most evident Miracles wrought among Christians, since the
Apostles times: By this their unworthy Procedure, they rob Christ's Spouse of
Her greatest Glory, falsify His own sacred words, Prophesying of greater
wonders than he did, And finally make the Conversion of Jews and Heathens to
Christianity impossible. For, give me a naked Church without Signs, without
Marks, without Motives inducing to truth (and the most conuincing Sign of
all, is the Glory of Miracles) Nothing remain's proposable to a poor Infidel
that is meet to convince his Reason, But the bare letter of Scripture, or the
essential Doctrine of the Church, which solely considered more affrights weak
Reason, (naturally auerse from high Mysteries) than brings it to any Submission
or Acquiescency. I say therefore the sin of Sectaries is grievous, Whilst
Miracles are slighted, by doing so, they slight the Church, yea Christ himself,
and hasten apace to Atheism.

CHAP. IX.
A word to a few Objections, as also to Mr stillingfleets unworthy Exceptions
against that evident Miracle wrought at Zaragosa in Spain.

1. THe objections are as few as fallacious, and cannot be otherwise, when, as
it is said, All of them prove as much (that is just nothing) against our Saviors
own Miracles as against those of the Roman Catholic Church. To see this truth
manifested and difficulties vanish into nothing, be pleased to afford a little
Attention.

2. The Sectary may Object first. None of us all know One objection.
what strange effects nature can produce in certain circumstances, nor what
Power the Devil has to work Miracles, when therefore Scripture forwarn's us.
2 Thessalonians. 2. Of Antichrists great Prodigies, as also of False-Christs and
false-Prophets appearing with Signs and wonders. Matt. 24. We may justly
suspect, if nature alone cannot do such works, that the Devil had a hand in
most of our Church Miracles. Contra. 1. And You see Found weak and frivolous.
first, the Argument Equally oppugn's Christ's own Miracles, licenceth both
Jews and Gentiles to slight him as a false-Prophet, and his glorious wonders
also. Contra. 2. Not one of these False-Prophets once raised* the dead to life,
nor after their own death did any thing like a Miracle, as the departed Saints
of Gods Church have done most frequently by a touch of their Relics only,
which Truth of ( mighty weight) deserves Reflection, and refutes what ever
Donatist, or Coniurer can say in behalf of counterfeit Miracles. Contra. 3. And
observe well the Objection. None knows what nature or the Devil can do etc.
What then I beseech you? May one infer from our not knowing the Devils power
that this evil Spirit has actually wrought all the Miracles recorded in
Scripture, and Ecclesiastical History? To Assert this we must not only know how
far his power reaches, but more have Assurance also Of his actually doing such
Wonders. And thus much (manifestly improbable) neither is nor can be
ascertained upon the weakest Principle within the compass of nature or grace.
We usually say, the Devil appears with a Cloven foot, That is, you may easily
discern his Villainy, And we know he never cast's out evil Spirits like Himself
from possessed Persons, which yet has been done and frequently in God's Church
Miracles above the power of Devils.
Church. He can, it is true, if we believe History take up the Divided Parts of
a dead man and act with them for a while, But there is no such Motion, no such
Operations in the dead assumed Corpse, as have been seen in many Miraculously
restored to life. Be it how you will, We are sure God can do, yea and has
done great Miracles, when therefore all imaginable Circumstances forceably
induce us to believe that they are his own glorious works, it is I hope more
wisdom to Ascribe them to an Omnipotent Power, than to Father them upon Devils.

3. Some who plainly see, its a degree of madness to doubt of so much humane
faith as Testifies of Miracles wrought in the Roman Catholic Church grant many
have been done, But then Object. 2. God did them to manifest that Christ is the
true Messiah, or to work a Belief in us of so much Doctrine only as is Common to
all Christians, but not to confirm our Popish Errors, of Praying to Saints,
Purgatory etc. Contra. This Argument also impugn's our Saviors great Miracles,
which were not wrought (one may say) to confirm all the Doctrine he taught, but
a Part or parcel of it only. Contra. 2. If Miracles Mark out a Doctrine common
to all, or confirm so much truth And no more; It seems strange, that Arians,
Pelagians and Protestants work not Miracles as frequently as the Church does,
For these men own a Doctrine common to all Christians, yet show none of these
wonders. Contra. 3. There is not one Miracles truly alleged for every Doctrine
the Church teaches.
Doctrine taught by our Church, (and held erroneous by Sectaries) which is not
Sealed, Signed, and Attested by evident Miracles. We have innumerable for
Christ's Real and substantial Presence in the Eucharist; As many for the
Invocation of Saints, as also for the Honor due to holy Relics. Innumerable
prove that third place of Purgatory etc. All these (may good Authors deserve
Credit) are upon undoubted Record. And what just Exception have Sectaries
against so great Authority? I Will tell you. Their own incredulous Humor. Here
is all. Whereas, could they speak to the cause, they should give us weight for
weight, and Oppose what we Allege (in behalf of Miracles) upon grounded
Principles. That is, they Should euince positiuely that our Authors are mere
Cheats, and fain Stories, when we read of Miracles wrought in confirmation of
praying to Saints, the Real Presence. And this in all law of Disputation they
are obliged to do upon solid Proofs indeed, distinct from their own
Incredulity, or a mere Saying, Such Records are false. But do what ye will
Sectaries can never be driven to dispute upon Principles.

4. A third Objection. S. Austin. Lib. de Unit: Ecclesiae. Says. We therefore
say not, we believe because so many wonders are done all the world over in holy
places, for what ever we find in this kind. Ideo sunt approbanda quia in
Ecclesia Catholica fiunt, are to be approved S. Austin alleged against Miracles
Speak's nothing for Sectaries.
because they are wrought in the Catholic Church. Hitherto, the objection is
of no force, For the Saint only Says, No new Miracles ought to gain certain
credit, But such only as are wrought in the Church, or such as confirm Her
Doctrine, or finally have the Churches Approbation. Now because he disputes
against the Donatists, and supposes the Church known upon other grounds
expressed in Scripture, Her Unity Chiefly and universal extent over the world,
before these latter Miracles were heard of. Let us, Says S. Austin, wave this
Plea of Miracles (you Donatists allege yours, and I mine) and Argue by
Scripture only, and see what Church Scripture commend's antecedently known,
before these latter Miracles came to our knowledge. Which is to say, though the
after Particular Miracles added to others formerly done, may much strengthen
our Faith, yet absolutely How the Saint pleaded against the Donatists.
Speaking, Faith depend's not of them, Because the Church we believe in is
sufficiently manifested by Her Unity, Perp^tuity, and Vniuersallity expressed
in Scripture. Haec sunt causae nostrae documenta, hac firmamenta. Here in sies
all we have to Say, Whilst we contest with you Donatists that own Scripture
with us, yet Cauil at our Miracles. Who ever read's this one Chapter exactly
And draws any other sense from the whole Context than what is now briefly
hinted at, will much oblige me may he please to discover it.

5. One yet may Object. S. Austin Says more, and it seems much against us.
Non ideo ipsa manifestatur Catholica quia haec in ea fiunt. The Catholic
Church is not upon that Account manifested to you Donatists, because these
Miracles are wrought in it. I Answer. 1. The words understood as Sectaries
interpret Euert as wholly the Miracles of our Savior, who said. If you will
not believe me, believe my Works. 2. The Sectaries sense impugn's also the
express Doctrine of S. Austin. de Vtilit. Credendi. C. ^7. Where He Asserts that
Heretics are condemned by the Majesty of Miracles. Besides, Their sense is
nothing to the purpose, because in this very Passage He speak's of latter
Miracles known to S. Ambrose at Millan, And Says, He will no more insist on
These, than permit the Donatists to talk of their False-visions; For the Church
is sufficiently manifested without them upon a Surer Principle (the Holy
Scripture) which the Donatists admitted, and therefore Why He^ waued the proof
of Miracles with the Donatists.
whilst They pretended to Miracles as well as S. Austin did, He prudently
waued that Discourse, and Argued by Scripture only, leaving Miracles to their
own worth and weight. I Say to their own weight, which is gathered from this
great Doctors Discourse.

6. Our Lord Jesus, says he, arose from the dead, and manifested Himself to
his Disciples and offered his sacred body to be touched by their hands, yet,
least that might be thought a fallacy, he judged it meet to confirm his
Resurrection more Principally by the Testimony of the law, the Prophets and
Psalms, showing All things were now accomplished ^n him. Whence I infer, as
the touching his Sacred body was Proof enough, though not the chiefest of his
Resurrection, when Scripture was at hand to make that most manifest; So
Miracles also The true Reason, given.
wrought in the Church manifest that Oracle but not Principally to the
Donatists, who ought to have believed more firmly the Churches Doctrine upon
that one potent Proof of the Apostle. 1. Tim: 3. 15. The Pillar and ground of
Truth, than for all the latter wonders done in the Church. Yet these have a
mighty force and are strong Inducements, so far as Motives can reach, but not
the chief and Principal cause of any man's Belief, or Assent. Read then S.
Austin's words thus. The Church is not made manifest by her latter Miracles to
a Donatist who Cauils at such wonders, but Principally by Scripture which he
admit's, and will like Protestants be tried by, You have the Saints full Sense
and a great Truth with it, whereof there can be no doubt at all, when. Lib.
Contra Epist: Fundament^. C. 4. 5. He Demonstrat's the Church by Her Miracles.

7. To end this point between S. Austin and the Donatist, as also between
Catholics and Protestants, I say all Controversies are fully tried and happily
ended by Scripture only. But how? Not because any can pretend to find every
Tenet of Faith clearly set down in so many express Terms of holy Writ, For the
Protestant How Scripture decides all Controversies.
pretend's not to so much in behalf of his Doctrine, But thus the Orthodox
discourses with S. Austin. Scripture evidently points at the Church of JESUS
Christ known by Her Marks and manifest Signs, by Her Antiquity, Her large
Spread over the whole world, by the Succession of Her Pastors and Doctors*
Miracles, and the like Signal Motives. Thus much once clearly laid forth in the
written Word, that Holy Book remit's him to the Church Clearly marked,
commend's Her, faith S. Austin, and command's him to hear and learn what ever
She teaches.

8. Whence it is, that our profound Doctor Disputing the Case, whether the
Baptized by Heretics were to be rebaptized, labored not to decide the
Question by any express words in holy Scripture (wholly silent in this
particular) But contrariwise teaches, that the Church which is diffused all
over (and no Party of Donatists shut up in a corner of Afrique) was to give
Sentence herein, For She is that great Oracle, which Scripture commend's. Read
Lib. 2. de Bapt. C. 4. And de Unit: Eccles. C. 22. Thus briefly you see the
true difference between the Protestant and Catholic, The first has not a word
of Scripture for his Tenets, much less any Orthodox euidenced Church. The
Catholic relies on a Church spread the whole world over, known by The
Catholics strong hold.
Miracles, Conuersions etc. And Scripture command's him firmly to believe what
ever She Proposes as Faith. Qui vos audit me audit. Whoeuer hears the Church
hears Christ, And in this Sense Scripture manifesting Gods own Oracle, which
cannot but propose truth, end's all Controversies.

9. A 4.th Objection. Julian the Apostata as S. Gregory Nazian. Orat. 1. in
Julian: And Theoder: Lib: 3. Histo. C. 3. attest, drove away Devils with the
Sign of the Cross, Therefore wicked men can do Miracles. And why may not
Almighty God A fourth Objection solued.
for Reasons best known to his infinite wisdom do strange wonders, and permit
an Arian to Say, All are wrought to Confirm his false Doctrine. Contra. Both
Parts of the Objection equally impugn the Primitive Miracles of Christ and the
Apostles. To the first I answer. An Heretic may work a Miracle to prove
Catholic Doctrine, but never to make his own False Opinion probable. The Reason
is. God who is Truth and Goodness it self, can no more deceive by his own
Works, than by his own Words. Sicut humana consuetudo says S. Austin.
Epist: 49. verbis Diuina potentia, etiam factis loquitur. As man speak's by
words, so God speak's by his works. But the Works or Wonders now Spoken of
because supernatural proceed from God, And as is God can no more deceive by his
own Works then by by Words.
supposed deceive, Therefore it ill beseem's an Infinite Truth and Goodness to do
them. Upon this Ground I say likewise, Divine Providence will never permit his
own glorious Works ( Seals and Signs of Truth) to be abused by wicked men. But
of this particular I intend to speak more largely hereafter.

10. We now Come to Mr. Stillingfleets Cauils you have some of them. Part. 1.
C. 5. p. 134. And 135. Where he does not Mr Stillingfleets Cauils answered.
so much, impugn Miracles as would have them done by such Persons as he likes
well of; Popes for example, that pretend to infallibility. And if (which is
easy) we produce many wrought by Holy Popes, His next Querie perhaps may be.
Why all all of them are not Miraculous men alike? In a word I like not to
search into the depth of Gods secret Counsel, And therefore briefly discourse
of persons favored with such Graces, as S. Austin does of different Places.
Tom. 2. Epist. 137 to his Clergy and people at Hippo, where he proposes this
Question. Quare in alijs locus haec miracula fiant and non in alijs: Why are
Miracles done in some places and not in others? We have known some wrought at
Millan: ^n Africa though full of Saints Bodies, not so? He return's this wise
Answer grounded on the Apostles wotds. 1. Cor. 12. Non omnes Sancti etc. All
saints have not the Gift of curing diseases, all discern not spirits, ita nec
in omnibus memorijs Sanctorum. etc. So God And first why God works Miracles by
some, and not by others.
who divides his Graces according to his own best will, does not these wonders
at the Memory of every Saint. And who dare enter into his secret Counsel, or
ask why he does so? Why raised he three dead men by S. Dominick, and not one we
know of by S. Austin? Dividit propria unicuique prout vult, He is Lord and
distributes his own favors as he pleases. And thus we Answer Mr.
Stillingfleet who next Says some thing of Miracles done in Corners. What can
the man mean? Are all the wonders wrought at Loreto Compostella, Sichem and
other places seen to innumerable, and All upon certain record to be callid
Corner Miracles? Be pleased to hear worse yet.

11. Page 135. Think not says Mr. Stillingfleet We are of such easy faith,
that the pretended growing out of a leg in Spain, or any of your famous
Miracles wrought by your Priests in Italy will persuade us Mr Stillingfleets
unjust exceptions against the Miracle wrought at Zaragosa.
to believe your Church infallible. Again, after his Talk of Devils doing no
feats when Opposers are by, He utters this scornful language. It is an eas^
thing for a Stump to grow a leg in its passage from Spain hither, For fama
crescit eundo. And in despite of Truth, cast's out too much bitter venom to
obscure a Glorious work of God, wrought by the Intercession of our Blessed Lady
upon a young man at Caesar Augusta or Zaragosa in Spain (where you have her
miraculous Statua Set on a Marble Pillar And for that reason is called, Neustra
Sennora del Pilari) It is one of the most evident and clearest Miracles which
I believe has been done in the memory of any man now living. I have the whole
Printed Relation by me both Latin and Dutch, written by Peter Neurat Doctor of
Physic, and dedicated to his Excellence Don Francisco Marquis of Caretto and
Grana. Ambassador Extraordinary from the Emperor to His Catholic Majesty. The
Substance whereof is thus.

12. Ego ab Caesaraugusta Venio etc. I come from Zaragosa and bring tidings of
a Miracle not heard of in any age. A young man had his leg cut of and buried,
which was Miraculously restored again, by the Intercession of the most Sacred
virgin. My Lord, I here present you with a Gift it is not mine, but our Blessed
Ladies, to whom immortal thanks are due for the favor. Given at Madrid Ibid.
Mart. Anno 1642. I have besides the License of the Vicar General, Don Gabriel
de Aldama appointing the whole Narration to be Printed, which begins. Nos el
Licenciado Consultor del Sanct^ officio etc. Subscribed.

Lic. D. Gahriel de Aldama.
And underwritten* Por su mandado
Martin de Lual Notari^,
13. Yet more. I have the Attestation of Hieronimus Brizids, Testimonies of
that Stupendous Miracle.
who had order from the Vicar General to pervse and censure the whole Relation
presented to the said Vicar, D^ Gabriel de Aldama. Legi (says he) libellum de
stupendo Mirac^l^ ^stro saeculo inaudito Diuae Virginis de Pilari, quod verum
esse scio etc. I have read the little book concerning that stupendous and
strange Miracle in this our Age of our Blessed Lady of Pilari, which I know to
^e true, I knew the youth at Caesaraugusta, or Zaragosa, when he had but one
leg, and there begged Alms at the Church door, I saw him afterward at Madrid,
whither he came at the command of his Catholic Majesty, and saw him going on
both legs. I saw the Mark, which the Blessed Virgin had left, where the leg
was cut of, And not only I, but all the Fathers of the Imperial College beheld
this (I might add upon certain Relation innumerable other Eyewitnesses and of
noble Men too, then in the court of Spain) I knevv the young man's Parents, I
knevv the Surgeon that cut of the leg. Given at Madrid. 12. Mart. 1642.
Underwritten.

Hieronimus Brizids. 14. We may add hereunto the Approbation of F. Joseph
Crespo, The license of His Catholic Majesty.
Prior of S. Martins Monastery in Madrid, who knew, as he says, this Miracle
to be most true, and witnessed it under his own hand. 4. Martij. 1642. Lastly.
Facultas Regia, or his Catholic Majesty's License, is thus annexed. Signata a
D. Augustino de Arteaga and Cannizares, Scriba Camerae Regiae. You shall see
presently how rigidly the Miracle was examined, and afterward approved by the
Lord Archbishop of Zaragosa. The particulars whereof are briefly as follow.

15. This young man called Michael Ioannes Pellicer about nineteen Who this
young man was?
years of age, was born at Calanda a Village in Aragon, Son to Michael Pellicer
a Husbandman, and Mary Blasco, Inhabitants of that Village. Whilst he served
his Uncle James Blasco, His right leg broken.
being in a Cart laden with wheat, by chance fell down, and one of the wheels
ran over his right leg, and broke it. His Uncle and Friends being poor Conveyed
him first to the Hospital He was Carried to the great Hospital at Saragosa.
at Valentia, where remedies were applied, but without success. Thence brought
to the great Hospital at Zaragosa, He was Committed to the care of John de
Estanga a most expert Surgeon and public Professor of Physic, who finding the
His leg cut offingn^.
legw holly rotten cut if of four fingers below the knee, and buried it. When
the wound was some what healed; the lame man went on Crutches to our Ladies
Church, and there both begged Alms, and earnestly implored the Blessed Virgins
favorable Assistance. He was well known to all there for the space of two whole
years. In the year of our Lord 1640. He went back to his Parents at Calenda,
and going up and down as well as he could begged sustenance for Himself, and
poor Parents.

16. On the 19. day of March. Anno 1640. well wearied with gathering up Hay
sitting with his Father, Mother, and two others, he laid aside his crutch and
went to bed. About a 11. of the Clock that night, his Mother entering the
chamber where he was, found one in the bed with two feet, and suspecting him to
be some soldier (for then a whole troop lodged in the Village) presently ran
to her Husband who came in, knew his son well, wakened him out of sleep.

17. On a sudden the yet not too well awaked youth, brake Was Miraculously
restored.
forth into these words. I dreamed I was in our Ladies Chapel of Pilari, and
annointell my leg with the oil of the Lamp burning there. The poor Father
ouerioyed replied Render, my Child, immortal thanks to God, our Blessed Lady
has restored thee thy leg. Hitherto, the youth before his Father spoke
reflected not on the Miracle. All this noysed abroad, drew in many
Eyewitnesses that night, and the next day more, who accompanied the young man
to the Church, where, to the end all might behold the The Miracle diuulged.
Miracle, His foot, which yet stood much wrested to one side, came before a
Multitude of people to its own natural Posture, and those who saw him the day
before wanting one leg, observed him now walking strongly on two, sound and
whole.

18. Thus much noted by a public Scribe and spread abroad, soon after called
the youth to Caesaraugusta, Where he had his Judges assembled, witnesses
examined, Lawyers pleading and the Was rigidly examined.
whole cause most rigidly discussed. All which performed, The most Illustrious
Lord Archbishop of Zaragosa, D. Petro Apaolaza, publicly gave Sentence the
27. day of April. Anno 1642. The sentence finally given
that the restoring of that leg was a Work above the force of nature, and
therefore might without doubt be deservedly esteemed, A prodigious Miracle.
Those who attested the same, after due examination, and subscribed their names
were as follow.

19. Don Antonio Xauirre Prior of S. Christina. D. Ioannes Perat official of
the Metropolitan Church at Zaragoca. Don Subscribed by many.
Virto de Vera Archdeacon there. Don Joan Plano a Frago also Official. D.
Philip Bardaxi Interpreter of the sacred Canons. D. Didacus Chueca Canon of
Caesar augusta. D. Martinus Irribarne Canon and Reader there. F. Bartholomeus
Foyas Prouincial of S. Francis order. F. Antonius Ortin Prouincial of the
Minims of S. Francis de Paula. D. Dominicus Cebrian, the first Reader of
Divinity at Zaragosa. The sentence Published.
given, was published and declared by great Doctors of the Canon and Civil law,
D. Aegidius Fuster; and Michael Cypres a public Notory also. It was signed by
D. Antonius Albert Zaporta the Apostolical Notary, and chief scribe of the
Ecclesiastical And now extant in the Spanish Annals.
Court at Caesar Augusta. D. Thomas Tamayo de Vargas the Kings Historiographer
of Spain and the Indies has published it in his Annals extant in the Spanish
language, Printed at Alcala.

20. The Relation end's thus. Videant haeretici an hoc tam facile etc. Let
Heretics look well to it, whether they can as easily The end of the Relation
slight this, and other strange Miracles done in our time among the Indians, as
they scorn the restoring of S. John Damascens hand at the Intercession of our
Blessed Lady. This we now speak of, is Testified by Eyewitnesses. Both
Spaniards and French were Spectators. The whole cause lasted long under a
most s^uere Examination, and finally to make the Glorious works of God known,
Sentence was Iuridically pronounced by a worthy Archbishop as is now said.
Quod si rei tam notae contradicere ausint. And if Sectaries yet dare contradict
so manifest a Verity. Quis illos etc. who is there that will not look on them.
As impudent, and list them among incredulous Jews?

21. Yet our Mr Stillingfleet, forsooth, Shifts all off with a Ieer. It is an
easy thing for a Stump to grow a leg, in its passage from Spain hither. What
will not this man write to his petty purpose if it come in his way? What will he
not pare away Mr Stillingfleets cheat, and open fraud.
and add to a Story remote from the knowledge of the vulgar (His book is full
of such fraud) Will he not think ye, say any thing before the illiterate and
ignorant, in the high Mysteries of Faith, whilst he blushes not to cheat and
deceive his Reader in a matter of Fact Notorioussly known to the world? If he
thinks I have forged this Relation, He shall have the very indiuidual Copy I
made use of sent him, the Bulk is not big. If he doubt's of the Authority of
these witnesses already produced, and say yet all is a Fourb, I Will say as
easily, I am fooled in believing there is such a man in the world as Mr
Stillingfleet whom I never saw, And next will force him to exchange Principles
with me a little. You Sir say its a fourb, a pretended, no real Cure* What Is
required of Him?
I say Contrary, The Cure was real and a great Miracle. Prove now you Your
Assertion upon as good Humane Authority as I have proved mine And we come to
Principles, fit to decide in the present Matter. Fail to do this, your
Assertion has not so much as one leg to stand on, besides fancy, or something
worse.

CHAP. X.
Other Marks and Signs, peculiar to the Roman Catholic Church prove her
Orthodox, And make Her Doctrine evidently credible. These laid forth to Sense
and Reason, distinguish the true Church from all Erring Societies Inferences
drawn from the Doctrine Here delivered.

1. VEry little may suffice, concerning the first part of the Title, our
Catholic Authors having done the work to my hands whilst they treat most
largely and learnedly, of the Amplitude, and Vniuersallity, of the Roman
Catholic Church, of the continued and Succession of Her Bishops, Pastors, and
people, of Her Unity in one and the same Faith, of Her Sanctity, of the
efficacy of Her Doctrine in converting whole Nations to Christ, which S. Austin
justly hold's miraculous. The Largeness of this great moral Body (rightly
called by Sectaries a growing Religion which no persecution of Tyrants could
hitherto suppres) For time, extends it self without dispute to all passed Ages
since Christ, And The Largeness of the Catholics Church.
if we speak of place, the growth successively, was so great, That, In omnem
terram exivit sonus eorum, it has been preached with immense fruit to all
Nations, Answerable to that of the Royal Prophet. Psalm. 2. where the eternal
Father speaking to Christ our Lord, as man, gives him an ample Kingdom, spread
all over for his Possession. Ask of me and I will give the Gentiles for thy
Inheritance, and thy possession, the last ends of the earth,

2. Hence we first distinguish the Church of Christ from the lewish Synagouge,
limitated to one time, (till the coming of our true Messiah) And to one place
also, For the Sacrifice essential to that Religion, could not be offered but in
the Temple of Jerusalem only. We distinguish both Church, and Doctrine likewise
from Mahumatism, Nestorianism, Eutychianism, and other Heresies in
Distinguishes Her from all false Sects.
the East, which never got any considerable footing in these Western parts of
Europe Finally we distinguish it from Lutheranism, Calvtanism, and
Protestanism, a confused Mixture of both: and other late Doctrins. These and
their dissenting Heads stay in our Northin Climats, without fruit or Progress
made into Asia, Africa, Greece, or the like remote Countries, wherefore some
doubt not to auerr, and most truly, That the Holy Orders of S. Dominick, of S.
Francis, and of the Society of Jesus are further spread, more diffused through
the world at this day ^ than all the Sects or Subdiuisions of Protestants ever
yet were, or I think will be. But the Kingdom of Christ's Church, as
Tertullian Cited above. Chap. 1. n. 6. well observes, Vbique regnat, reigns
every where, and is The Amptitude of Christ's Keingdome*
every where believed, Nor can these latter Sectaries now in an aged world,
hope to Propagate further; For if S. Austin. De Unit. Eccle. C. 14. Thought it
enormously improbable, that Donatism then so early, could diffuse it self the
whole world over, much less can our confined Protestants very late Teachers
after so many Centuries, when Heresy every where lies a gasping, Hope to draw
foreign Nations to a Belief of their Novelties.

3. The reason a Priori is. A greater extent, a further increase seems
inconsistent with the very Nature of those who profess this Religion, For once
living in the Vine, and drawing Nutriment from thence, they wilfully cut them
selves off, and separated from the Church, Therefore as S. Austin says they
lie where they are, Withering, and dying, without Luster, or any Enlargement.
Again; as they began this new learning without Gommission to teach, So they can
send none hereafter Authoritatiuely, to spread it further. Hence I Argue, That
Church only is Christ's true Spouse which ever Protestancy increases not. And
why.
was from the first Rise of Christianity, and successively got Possesin the
four Parts of the world, But thus the Roman Catholic Church was, and is Still
diffused (here is Christ's promised Inheritance) Therefore She is the only true
Church. Contrariwise, the narrow, confined, and iarring multitudes of Sectaries
scattered up and down in a few corners in Europe, All late Beginners, and
shameful Desertors of this Ancient Society, never had so ample an inheritance,
and Consequently Their pretense of being the true Church of Christ is more than
improbable.

4. We may yet subioyn to the Amplitude of our Religion the ever visible and
never interrupted Succession of Bishops, and Pastors, in the Roman Catholic
Church from Christ's time. A Mark no less evident to sense, than openly
destructive of Heresy. This succession long since Prophesied by Daniel. Cap. 2.
Christ Kingdom shall never be dissipated, and foretold by the Apostle Ephesians. 4.
11, He gave some Apostles etc. Sett's forth the Glory of it. We need not in
this place, to weary the Reader with the known Authority of S. Austin
positiuely Asserting. Contra Epist. fundam. The succession of Lawful Pastors,
urged.
C. 4. That the Succession of Pastors from* S. Peter's time held him in the
Catholic Church and the Argument is more fully urged again. Lib. de utilit.
Credendi C. 17. We need not tell any with S. Cyprian. Epist. 76. That, that
man is not in the Church, nor can be thought a Bishop who succeeds to none, but
has his Authority and Origin from himself. These and other forceable
Testimonies we wave, and urge Sectaries, as the ancient Tertullian did the
Heretics of his time; Lib. de praesc. Evolvant ordinem Episcoporum suorum etc.
Let them unfold the Catalogue of their Bishopr from this day to Luther, and
from Luther upward, and here we call not for Hussits, Waldensis or such like
men, but for a continued descent of Bishops, and Pastors, Lawfully ordained,
and commissioned by Authority to preach Protestancy; We Protestants have none.
call indeed but hear of none, before the days of that unfortunate Luther.
Therefore as I said above, they are sons without Fathers, they would be thought
spiritual Children, but are so unbegotten that no body own's them.

5. Reflect a little, Gentle Reader, and cease not to wonder at the greatest
Paradox, I think, that ever entered into the thought of man. Holy Scripture
Ascertains us, that Providence has appointed Bishops to govern his Church,
Pastors and Doctors to teach till the Consummation of Saints, for the edifying
A Paradox maintened by Sectaries.
of Christ's Mystical body. The Roman Catholic Church gives in Her Catalogue of
Bishops, and Pastors, ever since Christ. The first Apostolical Pastors received
their learning from an Infallible Master, God and man, These conveyed it to
their Successors, They to others, till this very age, And to prove that They
both kept and faithfully conveyed the same Doctrine without Change or
Alteration, you have not only Church Authority, the greatest on earth, but more
Gods own seal set to this Doctrine, Christ's own signs and Marks, Miracles,
undeniable Miracles, Conuersions of nations etc. Now start up a knot of late
unknown strangers called Protestants, without Bishops, without Pastors, for 1^.
Ages, These pretend to have received new letters, new learning from Jesus
Christ, That is an other sense of Scripture, than was formerly delivered, This
Letter is read, This learning is published to the world. We Ask what lawful
Pastors taught it four Centuries since? What ancient Church owned it? They
Answer none. We demand again, To have at least a Demands proposed to Sectaries.
sight of God's Seal set to this Letter, some visible Marks of Christ, Miracles
for example, to make the doctrine accepted. They have not any. Ergo say we The
letter is forged, the Doctrine is false, uneuidenced, improbable.

6. All that is pleadable against this Discourse is, That our Doctrine once
confessedly Orthodox, was changed by the Church in after Ages. Answ. We are
both willing and ready to discuss, and that most rigidly this particular with
Protestants, but before hand give them one Caveat. Viz. That no Topics, but
sound Principles enter here, or bethe last Probation. If then we produce and
most evidently, a list of our Bishops and Pastors ever No Answer given.
since Christ, as Witnesses of our Faith. They are to do as much, and produce
as many for Protestancy. If we, as we do, ever force Sectaries to name some
known Orthodox Society of Christians, that condemned our Doctrine in any Age,
they are obliged to vnbeguile us, and show us where, or when, or by whom, we
were condemned. If finally we vnexceptionably evidence most glorious Miracles
to have illustrated our Church, even after Her fancied Falling from the
Primitive truth, after she became What sectaries are forced to grant.
the whore of Babylon, our new men must either deny her such Miracles (if so,
we urge them to ground the denial on Principles equal to our contrary
Probations) or will certainly be forced to confess, That God wrought Miracles
in a Church, which had brought in shameful Errors and quite forsaken the
Primitive Doctrine. Observe well the force of our Argument. Its improbable to
say, That God favored this Church with the Glory of Miracles, Had She
falsified His revealed truths. And it is as wholly improbable to deny Her the
Glory of Supernatural wonders. Sectaries worn-out Objections are not worth
taking notice of. Some oppose the Greeks, though now not of the Church,
pretending to a Succession. We answer if the Pretext be true, Their cause upon
that Account is better than Protestants, But withal say, though Succession be
ever necessary to demonstrate the Church, yet it follows not, where we have
it, There is the Church, For Other Errors may undo all, And de facto Unchurch
the Greeks, guilty and condemned in three General Councils. See Bellarmine de
Notis Ecclesia. Lib. 4. Cap. 8. 6. secundo.

7. Enough is said above, and in the other Treatise also. Disc. 1. C. 10. n. 4.
12. of the Union and Sanctity of our Church. Unity a Mark of the Church.
Union in Faith the greatest Blessing hearts can desire, asserted by S. Hierome
Epist. 57. ad Damasum (Those are profane who ^ate not the lamb in the Roman
Catholic Church) And innumerable other Fathers, knit's together this whole
Moral Body amongst so many different Nations, different judgments, different
manners, different Education, different times, different places, from one end
of the world to the other. All believe as the Pope himself belieues, or is no
Member of this Church, And here is our Glory. Whereas, if on the other side, we
cast a sorrowful Utterly destroyed by Sectaries.
thought upon all the Heretics who from the beginning rent themselves from the
Roman Church, we shall find Divisions, and subdiuisions (Foreruners of Ruin)
endlesly following, which at last destroyed them. From one Luther, as Bellarmin
now cited observes. Cap. 10. a hundred Heresies sprouted up, And since his time
there are more added to that number in our Mr. Thorndicke true Observation
once most Catholic England. He that can take measure says Mr. Thorndicke, in
his late little Book of Forbearance. P. 33. how much of common Christianity is
lost by these Divisions in thirty years time since our troubles began, even
among them that call them selves Godly and Saints, will easily believe that it
(he means Christianity) has not long to live in that Is^and, unless Division
be put to death.

8. A just judgment of God upon them, pointed at by the Prophet Isay. Cap. 19.
2. I will make the Egyptians to run against Egyptians, and a man shall fight
against his Brother: every man against his friend, City against City and
Kingdom against Kingdom. Such confusion such an Abomination of desolation we
Englands Division remediless without returning to the Roman Catholic Church.
see now standing in that once holy Nation ( He that reads let him understand)
which might justly draw tears of blood from Compassionate Eyes, Were it not
that as S. Hilary notes, Bellum haereticorum pax est Ecclesiae. The Dissensions
of Heretics brings peace to the Church: This some what asswages our Grief, and
stint's our tears. But the Evil is desperate and incurable, do what Sectaries
can, without returning to the Church of Rome which causelessly they have
forsaken. And thus much Mr. Thorndicke seems to Assert, though I know not very
well what he mean's by the Rom^^ Catholic Church. He Adds more. P. 127. We
(They in England) are in the State of Schism in spite of our teeth, Though we
are ^^ clear our selves of the crime of schism upon the Terms settled. S^. no
Terms excogitable shall clear you from that crime, or ever bring you to
Settlement, But a perfect Reunion with the ancient and present church of Rome,
Whereof enough is said both in this, And the other Treatise.

9. To speak in this place of the Churches Sanctity, whether we consider the
Purity of Doctrine, or the Eminent Holiness of innumerable professing her Faith,
would require volumes. I say in a word, neither Heathen nor Sectary, though
cauils are raised Sanctity Eminent in the Roman Catholic Church.
against the Orthodoxism of our Doctrine, could yet justly tax it of too much
liberty given to Christians. We, contrary to the inclination of nature, fast
when Sectaries feast; we humbly confess our Sins to a Priest, they shake of
that obligation. Our Church forbid's Marriage to the clergy allowed to
Ministers. We in spiritual Affairs submit to one Supreme Head of the Church,
They acknowledge no submission to any in points of Belief, but to their own
Fancy. We are united together in one Ancient Catholic Faith and execrate all
Divisions, They are endlesly divided in their Novelties. We set a high value
upon the pious laudable works of just men, They esteem all as sordid and
sinful. We say God inforceth no man to Sin, they as Calvin confesses, make him
both Author and cause of it. I might yet instance in a hundred other
particulars, But it is needles. The whole world see's that Catholics,
strengthened by the Grace of God, contrary to their interest, and natural
Propensions, even for conscience sake, Profess and practice more Austerity,
Pray more diligently, fast Not so with Sectaries.
oftener, observe the laws of the Church more exactly, And finally do greater
works of Charity than Sectaries either think necessary, or hold Themselves
obliged to by virtue of their Religion. I say by virtue of their Religion which
binds to nothing but only to Believe (though no man knows what) and
consequently gives so much liberty in other matters that it makes the
Professors thereof Libertins. Most unjustly therefore do our new men call
Protestancy the reformed Religion, (unless by an Antiphrasis or contrary way of
speaking) when God knows, it reforms nothing, but contrariwise allows more
then enough relaxation to Corrupted nature. Whence I infer A thing so Indulgent
as Protestancy miscalled, a Reformed Religion.
Protestancy is cannot be from God, who will have us to curb Sensuallity, and
upon that account the Professors of it seem very unfit to reform the Doctrine
of the Church, were any thing amiss, whilst they leave manners so notoriously
Unreformed, releasing all from the burden of such Duties, as Christians have
practiced from the Beginning.

10. Be pleased to reflect a little. We have, thanks be to God, in the Roman
Catholic Church many Holy Religious Orders, as Benedictans, Dominicans,
Franciscans etc. All had their The truth declared by two Instances
several Founders most eminent in Sanctity and never meddled with mending Church
Doctrine, knowing well that was sound and orthodox, But contrariwise endeauored
to better the world by their Prayers, Preaching, incessant labors, and
virtuous Example. Suppose now any of these had called their Order a reformed
Religion and brought Christians by that Reformation to greater Liberty to more
Sensuality, than was practiced before Their Prayers and Preaching; Would not
all most deservedly have accounted their Labors misspent and worth nothing?
Suppose again that any one would begin to Institute a Religious Family, with
these or the like Injunctions. All of them may Marry, provided they keep
Coniugal Chastity, All may fast but when the humor takes them, All may profess
Poverty, but experience nothing of the hardship. All may obey but in greater
matters only, not in others, freely left to their choice. Would not such a
Founder vainly pretend to Reformation, that lays no more Christian Duties on
any? Would not every man look on him as One that peruerts Religion, and laugh
at his folly? This is the case in our Protestants mending matters. Therefore I
say once more the Reformation is not from God, but a humane and very sensual
Invention. Enough is noted already both here and in the other Treatise of the
Efficacy of our Catholic Doctrine Conversion of Nations a great Miracle.
Demonstrable to our Eyes and Senses, in the Conuersions of Nations to Christ.
Maximum Miraculum Says S* Thomas 1. Con. Gent. C. 6. It is the greatest of
Miracles, and a manifest Testimony that God Assisteth this Church to do such
wonders. We pass now to consider some Truths, grounded on the Doctrine already
delivered.

11. One is (and it gives comfort to every Soul) that our Lord JESUS Christ
though Absent from us, lives yet as it were Visibly, shows himself Manifestly,
Acts still Miraculously in the Mystical Body of our Catholic Church, and the
several Members Thereof. His Power appears in Her Miracles, Christ our Lord
works yet in and with the Church.
His Wisdom in the learned, the certainty of His Doctrine in the Churches
Infallibility), The Antiquity of his Truths in Her long continuance. His Mercy
appears in the Charitable, His Obedience in the Perfect Religious, His Poverty
in thousands who have left all for his love, His Submission in the humble, his
wearisom labors in the painful Missioners, His Retirement in Her the Ermits,
His Patience in the mortified, His Purity in Virgins, the Efficacy of his
Divine word (last mentioned) in the Efficacy of the Churches preaching, His
Holy life appears in Her Sanctity, and finally his Sacred death in innumerable
glorious Martyrs. Frame then a right Idea of our Blessed Lord, we behold The
Church expresses our Saviors perfections.
his admirable Perfections Shining in the Church, And contemplating the Church,
we see to our unspeakable Solace Christ Jesus, as it were, yet living working
in it and by it.

12. A second truth. As Things in Nature are not first known by that we call
Their interior Essence, but by outward Marks, Qualities, and Effects, whereby
we easily distinguish one from an other, a Lion for example from an Elephant,
(but do not so easily, says Aristotle, distinguish their different essences,
known to few). Just so we Discourse at present and say the true Church is first
euidenced by her Marks, Signs, and Motives, Miracles Antiquity Conuersions
etc. which being objects of sense lie open to every eye and Collectiuely taken
make, as I said above, this beautiful Spouse as discernable from Heretical
Societies, as one Creature is from another by its outward Form and known
Proprieties. I do not Assert that The Church first known by Her Marks.
the Motives lead to a Scientifical knowledge of the Churches Essential
Doctrine; no: For this we believe by Faith, And know not Scientifically; Yet
they plainly Mark out the great Oracle, whereby God speaks to the world, And
therefore wonder not, that Sectaries strive so earnestly to Obscure the
evidence, Their design is to take from us the clearest Principle which must end
Controversies, Why Sectaries endoauour to obs(...) ^he Churches Luster.
For cast onc^ off a Church manifested by Antiquity, Miracles, Conuersions etc.
Nothing remains to regulate Faith, but the dark and yet vnsensed Letter of
Scripture, which is most grossly abused by the one or other dissenting Party who
force upon it quite contrary Senses. And by what means can any one come to the
knowledge of Him or these that abuse it, if Church Authority be excluded or
decide not in this most weighty matter? We need not says Mr Thorndicke (in
his Book of Forbearance. P. 2.) The Heresies of the Primitive times to tell us,
what Irreligious pretenses, may be set forth in Scripture Phrase. Our own
Fanatiks would furnish sport enough with the Fool^ri^s they pretend as from
Gods Spirit because they can d^liuer their Nonsense in the Phrase of Scripture:
Again. This two edged sword of holy Scripture, may prove an edged tool to cut
their s^ins with, who take upon them, and have not skill to handle it. Much
better were it say I, were the Abuse or ill handling of the Book only found
among a few Fanatics, But the evil is spread further, you Gentlemen are all
alike, whether Fanatics or Protestants, that handle, gloss, and interpret
Scripture by Private reason, conttary to the Judgment of an uniuersal
euidenced Church.

13. A third Truth. The Church thus manifested by Her Marks which are Objects
of Sense, and induce reason to judge that She only is Gods Oracle; Catholics
never call into doubt Her Essential owned Doctrine, nor seek for further
Evidence thereof, because there is none in this present State, But humbly
submit to all she Teaches. This Evidence then once attained, which arises from
the Churches Marks, And has drawn Millions to belie^e her Doctrine, We next
turn to our Bible, and learn there, that the Language of these Motives (for
etiam fact^ What these Motives Speak.
loquitur Deus, says S. Austin above, God speaks by his works) and the
Language of his own written word is one, and the same. That is what these
Inducements point at, God expressly delivers in holy Scripture. Observe an exact
parallel.

14. The Antiquity of our Church, and here is one sensible Mark we plead by,
gives Assurance that the first Founder was our Lord Jesus Christ; No Sectary
call's this truth into Question, and the Gospel confirms it, Luc. 24. 48.
Beginning from Jerusalem etc. Her Constant Perseverance, visible in all Ages,
God reueals in Scripture,
proves Her indeficiency And this is manifest in Scripture. A City placed on a
Mountain Hell gates shall not preuail against Her. Om(...)m etiam infidelium
oculis exhibetur says S. Austin. Lib. Con. Crescon: C. 63. The Church is so
well seen by all, that the very Pagans cannot contradict Her. She shows you a
continued Succession of her Popes, Bishops, and Pastors from the beginning, and
Scripture also Ephesians. 4. 11. And he gave some Apostles etc. long since foretold
it. She gives in a clear Evidence of Her Miracles through every age, Our
Blessed Savior prophesied it should be so. John. 14. 12. Maiora horum facient.
They shall work greater wonders. None can deny most Miraculous Conuersions of
Kingdoms, and Nations to Her Faith, and the Prophesies of Christ's Church
fulfilled.
Prophets every where Proclaim the truth. Many Nations shall flock to Her.
Zachar. 2. 11. She Shows how Her Doctrine was propagated through the whole
world, And therefore is called the Visible Catholic, or Universal Church,
Scripture also Confirm's it. Do^ete omnes gentes. Teach all Nations.
Dominabitur a mari vsque ad mare. She shall reign from sea, to sea. Finally to
say much, in few words, which might be further amplifyed. Is it true (which the
Church demonstrates) that Heretics, as Arians, Nestorians, Pelagians,
Eutichyans, Lutherans, and Caluinists, once Professed Catholics, shamefully
abandoned Her Union, and for that Cause justly deserved the reproachful name of
Heretics, and Separatists? Scripture Foretell's us of the Breach and Apostasy.
John. 1. 2. 19. Ex nobis prodierunt. They left us, went out from us. for had
they been of us they would have remained. And thus both Church and Heresy are
visibly pointed at by clear Marks, and Gods written word also. Videndum (it is
the Expression of Optat. Mileuit. Lib. 1. a little after the middle) Quis in
radice ^um toto orb ^a^serit, quis for as exierit? We are to see who They were
that continued in the root, with the whole world, and who parted from it. We
are to see who erected another Chair distinct from that which was before. Call
these and boldly, Heretics, straglers from the Church, and the Verities of
Christ's Gospel. And here by the way, we urge our Nouellists, to point at a
visible Sectaries Urged to Answer.
Orthodox Society, which the Supposed erring Church of Rome abandoned, as
clearly as we lay forth to them the time, the place, the circumstances, not
only of their own impious Revolt, But of all other more ancient Heretics from
this Catholic Society. Could the Sectary do thus much, He might speak more
confidently.

15. To end the matter now in hand You see by what is said already, If Christ's
words have weight. Math. 18. 16. In ore duorum vel trium Stet omne verbum; That
Truth stand's firm upon the Testimony of two or three vnexceptionable
Witnessess, We here introduce two Testimonies in behalf of our Church which
none can except against. Gods own voice speaking to reason by Miracles and the
Motives now mentioned, is the One, And his own sacred revealed word, which most
significantly teaches what these Motives speak, is the Other. Hence I say
Sectaries cannot dispute against this Church, without proofs drawn from Motives
as strong, and Scriptures as clear as are now alleged in our behalf. We press
them again and again to give in their Evidence, and seriously demand whether
Protestancy was confessedly founded by Christ, Or, but once owned Orthodox by
any sound Christians, Sectaries Grauelled at Every Question.
As all acknowledge the foundation of the Roman Catholic and the Orthodoxism
of it, to have been established by Christ our Lord. We further enquire after a
visible Succession of their Pastors, after their visible Miracles, their
visible Conuersions, made in foregoing Ages. Nothing is answered, nothing is or
can be pleaded, nothing in a word is returned probable. Therefore Protestancy
is an vneuidenced Religion, no Motives countenance the Nouelty, no Scripture
speaks for it, and Consequently cannot but be in the highest degree improbable.

16. A fourth Truth. A Church which wears as it were Gods own Livery and
bears the Signatures of Divine Authority in Her Miracles, Prodigious
Conuersions etc. so far Eclipses the false luster of Heathens, Jews, and
Heretics, that reason concludes. In this one manifested Oracle it is, that
Eternal Wisdom delivers his Divine Truths, Or, there is no such thing as a
revealed Truth, taught in the world. This judgment most rational, once well
settled in an understanding without further debate, ends all controversies of
Religion. So forceable and perswasiue is the language of God's own glorious
works.

17. Imagine I beseech you that God should now lay the Heavens open, and
evidently declare to the whole world in most significant and clear words, That
the Roman Catholic Church is Gods works speak no less plainly to reason, then
His words.
his own faithful Oracle, and exactly teaches those truths he revealed. All,
whether Heathens, Jews or Heretics, would submit, and, if reasonable yield
Assent to so great an Evidence manifested by words. And what shall his own
glorious works of Miracles, the known language of Heaven, ever spoken since
Christianity began prove less perswasiue than words, but once only delivered?
Interrogemus Miracula says S. Austin cited above, Quid nobis loquantur etc.
Ask of Miracles what they speak of Christ, demand also what they say of his
Church. Habent enim (...)guam suam. They are neither dumb nor silent Orators.
Works therefore speak, and can Answer both for Christ and his Church. S. Paul.
Romans 1. 20. draws evidence of Gods in^isible Perfections, of his Power and
Divinity, from the Creation of the visible effects in Nature, And shall not
Christians think ye find evidence enough in the works of grace, (I mean in
Miracles and other most Signal Marks) manifest in the Catholic Church, which
make it highly Credible That he speak's his eternal verities by this one
Oracle? The Evidence in both cases well penetrated seems much a like, call it
moral, physical or what you please, whereof more presently.

18. From this Discourse it follows, That a Church demonstrating Gods own Seal
and manifest Caracters of Truth, so exactly All walk in Darkness without an
Euidenced Church.
teaches Truth, that none can rationally contradict Her Doctrine, though often
difficult to weak Reason. The ground of my Assertion is. Renounce once such an
Oracle, we are cast into confusion, and have no other Master to teach
Christians, but the obscure Mysteries of Faith, (far enough, God knows, from
any Self-euidence,) and the yet not sensed words of holy Scripture, because the
Church which only can, and must interpret, is upon the Supposition rejected. In
this two fold Darkness of obscure Mysteries, and vnsensed Words, weak Reason
toyls as our Sectaries have done a whole Age, But with what success think ye?
S. Peter's night labor return's the true Answer, Tota nocte laborantes nihil
cepimus, All night long we have took much pains, yet got nothing. Such is the
Fate and Folly of our modern Sectaries, that will walk in the dark without the
Guidance of a Church, And Her infallible Tradition. Here also we have The true
Cause of our Sectaries endless Divisions.
the true cause of their endless Dissentions, and multiplicity of Religions,
which almost every year are coined new. All Pulpits says Mr Thorndicke. P. 5.
so ring of this multiplicity, That now no Religion stand's to be the Religion
of that Kingdom.

19. A fifth Truth. The Sectary that Professes himself a Christian, and
seriously ponder's the Marks, the Signs of Divine Authority openly seen in the
Roman Catholic Church, stand's so convicted of wilful Error, that practically
he is either to renounce Christianity, or obliged to believe this euidenced
Church, I prove him First convinced of wilful Error upon these grounds. The
Sectary confesses, or he is no Christian, That this Argument is efficacious
against the Jews. Christ our Lord did greater wonders, showed more manifest
Miracles, than all other Prophets wrought in the time of Judaism, and from
hence He inferrs, or (shall never prove it) that Christ is the true Messiah.
Therefore this Argument is equally pressing against Protestants. What ever
Argument Proves Christ to be the true Mos^ias proves also the Catholic Church
true.
The Roman Catholic Church only has evidently done greater Wonders, chiefly in
the Conversion of Nations; She has shown more manifest undoubted Miracles than
all Protestant Professors in the world, Ergo She is the only true Church,
because She bears the Marks, does the works, and wonders of that great Lord
that laid Her foundations firm. Whereas Contrariwise this naked Protestancy,
has no resemblance of a Church, But lies in Obscurity, vneuidenced, only known
by its own Monstru^ fiery upon this Account, That two hideous Rebels begot it
in Pride, and brought it forth in Division to no other purpose, but to fright
all that look on it. Again the Sectary, if he be Christian, must hold this
Argument Valid against the Jews. All the Prophesies in Scripture speaking of
the true Messiah, exactly agree to, and were amply fulfilled, in the Person of
Christ our Savior, and in no other. But the like Argument hold's as strongly
in our case. For all the Ancient Prophesies of the true Christian Church
whereof we read in the old Testament, As of Her Continuance, Visibility, and
Nations flocking to Her only agree, and are exactly fulfilled in the Roman
Catholic Church, And not so much as one appears in this naked Nouelty of
Protestancy, Ergo the Roman Catholic Church and not that Fatherles Progeny of
Protestants, is the only true Catholic Oracle of Jesus Christ.

20. Lastly this Argument is strong against the Jews and Proves them deserted
by Almighty God. Since Christ came to Redeem us, This abandoned people lie
under contempt, and are A visible Mark of Gods wrath. Set upon Jews and
Sectaries.
best known upon the Account of their open injustice, Wherefore God to set a
visible Mark of his wrath upon them, has not only scattered them up and down
some few corners of the world, but also permitted them to Divide and Subdiuide
into several Sects, and Factions. But the same Argument is as forceable against
Protestants, For first, the whole Christian world abroad slights the men as
Innouators, and their Doctrine also as Novelties. Arians, Semiarians, Graecians,
Abyssins detest Protestancy, and as highly contemn the Authors of it, as the
far extended Church of Rome condemn's both the one, and other.

21. 2. No Injustice ever done by Jew, except that one wicked fact of
crucifying Christ our Lord, is comparable to the open The open injustice of
Protestants.
clamorous wrong of Protestants, who without law or right yea contrary to all
conscience, violently usurp the Ecclesiastical goods in England, and worse
than Robbers on the high way appropriate all to Them selves, which neither God
nor man intended for them. These Reueneues were given by Catholics for the
Orthodox Pastors and Teachers of our Ancient Religion, that lawfully and
quietly possessed them for a thousand years, And now behold a Robbery done but
one age since, turn's the true Owners out a doors, And serves, forsooth, to
intail Church Livings upon Luthers Progeny, open Rebels against the Church. The
world never heard of greater Iniustlce.

22. Now lastly if we speak of different Sects, and endless Divisions in points
of Doctrine, Most undoubtedly the Dissentions are greater, the Sects more
numerous amongst Protestants professing Christianity, than among the very Jews
that profess. Judaism. A just judgment of God, A clear Mark of his
Indignation, set upon both. The Sin of the one for deserting Christ, Divisions
more amongst sectaries then Jews.
has scattered that People up and down the world, And the Sin of Sectaries,
for their deserting an Ancient Church, has more scattered and divided them
into endless erroneous, and most iarring opinions. Upon these grounds therefore,
That Protestants believe not an Oracle signed with the Marks of our Lord Jesus
Christ; That they reject a Church clearly Prophesied of in holy Writ, That
they lie hid in vneuidenced Conuenticles, And broach Doctrins slighted the
whole world over; That their open injustice and robbery cries to heaven for
revenge, Practically I say, They renounce Christ, Church and all Christianity
with it. Thus much of the Churches Evidence against Sectaries, we now proceed
to a further consideration.

CHAP. XI.
Christ and his Church made manifest to a Heathen. No Prophet comparable to
Christ, no Church comparable to the Roman Catholic. Our glorious Christ Jesus
Exhibits a glorious Church. He is proved the Only true Messiah, And the Roman
Catholic Church His only true Sponse. How the Heathen Discourses, if rational,
And Prudent.

CHrist and his Church are so easily laid forth to a Heathen, That grant once
the Existence of a Power Omnipotent and Infinitely wise in the Government of this
world, the main work is done, Reason if it contradict's not Evidence, soon
finds out the A Deity supposed what the Heathen would Learn is easily learned.
One and Other. Now if as S. Cyprian Discourses, it be a most heinous Offense.
Eum nescire velle quem ignorare non poterant, not to know God, whom all cannot
But know, In like manner say I, it must needs imply a Supine negligence in our
present State, when Christianity is diffused all Nations over, not to come to
the true knowledge of Christ and his Church, whilst neither can be concealed.
The Heathen then that Own's a God, and desires to serve him, is supposed to
demand of Christians, How or in what way, due Honor may be rendered to that
infinite Being. For Answer please to bear in mind these Principles, rightly
called three strong Evidences.

2. First. True Religion whereby we yield Honor and due Submission to God,
ever bears the Ensigns of it is Author, And Three principles.
shows by certain Marks, it proceeds from God. No Jew nor Gentile, no Heretic
can deny the Principle, delivered in these general Terms, though Disputes may
arises concerning some particular Motives. 2. A greater Evidence of Credibility
in Religion, is a certain Matk of its Truth, For whoeuer, whether Heathen, Jew,
or Christian, own's that matter of Fact of Moses prevailing against the
Egyptian Magicians, Or, of S. Peter's Miracle, set against that of Simon Magus,
See's well by the force of greater Evidence, That the Prophet and Apostle
maintained Truth against these Sorcerers. A third Principle. If there be not a
Of the Greater rational Evidence for Gods Truth.
greater excess of rational Evidence, or a stronger Conviction in behalf of
true Religion, than fdr Sects vnorthodox or false, God is frustrated of his
End, And can oblige none to embrace true Religion; For this Obligation
necessarily cease if a Spurious Faith could match the Orthodox Religion Or
Outuie it in those glorious Wonders which God evidences, And has manifestly
appropriated to His own revealed Truths only. See more Hereof in the other
Treatise. Disc. 1. C. 8. Thus much premised.

3. We here Represent in the first place, our Glorious Lord Jesus Christ, the
great Master and Author of Catholic Religion, and Ask what credit the Heathen
gives to that holy book we call Scripture, or to one Part thereof, which
recount's the prodigious wonders wrought by our Savior. Will he own them? upon
Humane faith (for we urge him not yet to believe infallibly) as Authentic, or
as well deserving Credit as Caesar's Commentaries, or any other received
History? If he grants; we Infer. These Miracles, far above the Power of nature,
were Gods own works, and manifestly testified that none since the world began,
whether Heathen, Jew, or Heretic, ever paralleld Christ our Lord in the like
Wonders. Now, if he wholly flights the Authority of that Book, we proceed
further upon Evidence The Heathen convinced by the manifest Signs of Gods
power.
e^nough and lay before him those manifest Effects, which in a short time
followed* our Saviors Preaching, most apparent in the first Propagation of the
Gospel, and continual increase of it. Herein, the Marks, the Ensigns of a
Divine Power clear to sense, speak openly, without contradiction. viz. That no
ancient Prophet, no Heathen, no Jew, no Heretic ever opposed sensuallity so
strongly as Christ our Lotd did, yet he gained Millions to submit to his law.
No Prophet, no Heathen, no Heretic, preached more difficult Mysteries, Yet as
the World sees, He has drawn whole Kingdoms and Nations to believe his
Doctrine. And if you go on, or Ask by what Instrum^nts this admirable work was
happily accomplished? The Answer is ready. Twelve poor Fishermen, friendles,
unlearned, despicable in the eyes of worldlings, were the chief Oracles. These
made the incredulous, Belieue^s, Strangers to Christ, his own Domestics, Lofty
Spirits, Submiss to his law. No Heathen can doubt of such known Effects, signal
Evidences, of Gods power, cooperating with Christ, and the sirst Euangelical
Preachers. But because this Argument is most fully handled, in the 4. and 5.
Chapters of the first Discourse, I petition the Reader to return thither, And
once more to peruse that Discourse, which I hold unanswerable, and most
conuincing for our present intent!

4. To add yet more in behalf of our Glorious Redeemer, and the verity of
Catholic Religion (for prove the one, you prove the other) I Propose a second
Question to the Heathen, and Ask, Whether our Blessed Lord, who called himself
the long expected Messiah, and the true Son of God, Spoke Truth, or
contrariwise, most impudently Assumed to himself that so An unanswerable
Dilemma.
high Prerogative? Grant the first. He was indeed the true Son of God, and the
wonders he wrought, were Gods own works, Therefore Christian Faith stands firm,
upon Eternal Truth manifested by most glorious Signs. Say. 2. That Impostor
like, He falsely made himself the Son of God, when he was no more but a Cheat.
It follows first. That either God positiuely intended to draw the world into
gross Error by his Perfidious Preaching (which is horrid to think) or we must
grant, that his Gracious Providence long before this day, should by one evident
Sign or other, by some Notorious Mark of dishonor, have made manifest Reflect
Gentle Reader upon these Consequences.
the Legardemaine, the Imposture of this supposed Deceiuer. It follows. 2.
That the Jews who crucified our Blessed Lord justly deserved upon that Account
Renown and Honor, yea, the highest Recompense, For it was a laudable fact to
comdemn a Counterfeit, s^ openly wicked as dared to call Himself the Son of
God, when H^e was not. Perkin Warbecks disguise, was but a Peccadilio compared
to this shameful cousenage. The sin of Mahomet who never made Himself God but
a Prophet only, came not near the Malice of this one supposed abominable loud
Untruth. It follows. 3. That our supposed Impostor (I have a horror to
pronounce the word) deservedly merited, And yet merit's for His inexcusable
Hypocrisy, eternal Reproach, contempt and ignominy, in the just judgment of
God, men, and Angels. Hence I Argue.

5. God is just, and has Providence over the world, But our just and wise God
never since Christianity began, Se^ Mark or Sign of Ignominy, upon our Blessed
Savior, as he has done upon other Impostors. Our just and wise God ever since
that wicked People nailed him to a Cross, has been so far from honoring them
or rewarding Their impious Fact That, most visible, and severe Punishments have
proved the only Recompense and best Reward. The Temple ruined, their Dispersion
followed Christ honored the Jews contemned.
up and down the world, where they live contemptible, chiefly infamous for
Hypocrisy, and Avarice. (Se also this Argument more enlarged above Chap. 2. n.
4.) Our most just God, has not only taken of all Marks of Ignominy, but
evidently to our Senses declared by real Effects His innocent Lamb our lovely
Savior worthy of Honor Benediction, and Glory. So true it is, We read.
Apocal. 5. 13. Dignus est Agnus, qui occisus est etc. The just Tribute of
Praise and Glory is visibly paid him (so Providence has ordained) not only by
Kings, Princes, Learned and unlearned, by all Nations far and near, But by the
very Turks also.

6. And is it possible (reflect I beseech you) that God who is no Exceptor of
Persons, could have punished so dreadfully, these abandoned Jews, had they
done well, in crucifying our Lord Jesus? Is it possible, that his just, and
wise Providence, could ever have crowned a Counterfeit with so much Honor
God's just Judgment.
and renown, as our Savior has gained, or permitted A che^ not only to be
Reverenced as the true Son of God so long (though he was not) but moreover to
draw so many Millions and Millions of Souls into error as believed in him, for
sixteen Ages and more. The Paradox is so desperate so highly improbable, That
one would as soon deny both God and Providence, As once seriously harbor it in
his thoughts. Observe my Reason.

7. The Light of nature dictates, abstracting from Authority Romans 2. 9. That as
on the one side, Shame, Ignominy, and Confusion pursue horrid Workers of
iniquity, So on the other, Prove ou^ Savior Innocent.
Glory, Honor and renown inseparably follow the manifestly declared just, and
innocent. But Shame, Confusion, and Ignominy, Gods Just Signs of indignation,
yet visibly follow that wicked race of People, the Authors of our dear Saviors
death, contrariwise, Glory and renown, ever since he dyed, have been his due
reward, and own inheritance. Therefore if God speak's, And the Jews Criminal.
as He does, by these Signal Effects of Justice, The Jews so long severely
punished, stand like guilty Criminals in that high Tribunal of Heaven, There
sentenced answerable to their Desert as Workers of iniquity; And our Holy Lord
Jesus, so long honored the whole world over, receives the contrary Sentence,
And is by visible effects there proclaimed just and Innocent. A Domino factum
est istud etc. It was not chance but a Signal work of Providence, that the
Stone these Builders rejected, became so glorious as to support the noblest
Fabrik God ever made.

8. Apply what is is now said to the Roman Catholic A true Application of this
whole Doctrine.
Church, We shall se an exact Parallel of proofs, delivered in the same Terms.*
Christ our Lord called Himself Eternal Truth in all he taught. Our Church
stil's Herself, Gods own Oracle, in all She teaches, Now whilst so high a
Prerogative is claimed, She either speaks Truth or lies most impudently. Grant
the first. Viz. That this Church speaks Truth, she is to be believed in all she
teaches, Say secondly, she falsely makes Herself Gods own Oracle, when she is
not, Divine Providence which cannot dissemble, nor Design to ruin Souls by the
false Doctrine of an infatuated Oracle, would long before this day, have either
destroyed Her, or marked Her out as a Cheat by some evident Sign of Justice, as
he has marked other false Oracles ( Jews, To the Roman Catholic Church.
Turks, Infidels, and Heretics) with Contempt, ignominy, and Disgrace. The sin
is so hideous, that it well deserved a greater Punishment, and would have been
inflicted upon this Church also if the Supposition stand: Unless as is now
said, we Assert (which is abominable) that Gods express Will was, that She
should poison whole Nations for so many Ages with corrupted Doctrine. But All is
contrary. To our unspeakable comfort the Roman Catholic Church fail's not, She
keep's her Posture still. She flourishes every where, even amongst thousands
and thousands She flourishes.
that dare not (interest will have it so) Profess Her Doctrine, And without any
least Note of infamy proceeding from God, ( what Devils or Malice invent or vent
against Her, we heed not) Teaches not only, the most pious and learned in this
nearer world, But the wisest also of the whole Universe. Thus we discoursed of
Christ our Lord, and the Argument hold's as strongly in behalf of our Church.

9. Again. Has God whose Counsels are just, Crowned our Savior with Glory and
Renown? Has he also who knows well where to inflict Punishment, manifested his
Wrath upon an ungracious People that condemned Him? Ponder I beseech you first,
How visibly Providence has made his own Spouse the Roman Catholic Church,
Renowned, And wonder not, the Made renowned*
Son of God paid dear for the Renown, and gave his life for it. Vt exhiberet
ipse sibi gloriosam Ecclesiam. Ephesians. 5. 27. That he might exhibit and present
to Himself and the whole world a most glorious Church. All this, I say, visibly
Appears, to o^ eyes and senses.

10. Ponder. 2. Where and upon whom, God has Set Marks of ignominy, and
inflicted most rigorous Punishments. Wh^^ upon Jews only, that opposed and
condemned Christ? Are Jews and Heretics.
these only Marked and Chastised? No. Those rebellious Spirits also, Those
first Renegados, I mean the chief Arch-hereticks that opposed and condemned his
Church, Vile, and abject in life, dying, felt Gods heavy hand of Justice.
Manichaeus was stead a live. Montanus hanged Himself. Arius voided out his
bowels and filthy soul together, in a Privy. God struck Julian the Apostate
dead, and the ground opening swallowed up his carcass. Nestorius wicked
worm-eaten tongue brought the wretch to a miserable end, And John Calvin
consumed with vermin, Seuerly Punished.
dispairing dyed like an other Herod or Antiochus. I need not Here relate any
thing of Luthers sudden death after his merry supper. Read Bellarmin. Lib. 4.
de notis Ecclesiae C. 17. where you have these, and other more fearful Examples
of Gods Severity.

11. Finally must we say, that our Lord Jesus is proved no Impostor upon these
reasons, That no false Prophet since the Creation purchased the like universal
Fame, None ever had so universal an Applause, or the like Tribute of praise
paid Him? It it true* That ever since Christianity began, the powerful hand of
Providence has not only rescued our Holy Jesus from all Reproach (justly
merited) but moreover by signal Effects of indignation, made his Enemies
contemptible? The renown of the Roman Catholic Church.
Nothing can be more manifest. You may then boldly Conclude in like manner. The
Roman Catholic Church is as demonstratiuely proved no Cheat but an Oracle of
truth, upon the same grounds. Her universal visible Extent, the continued
Succession of Her Pastors, the Conuersions, and Miracles wrought by Her inuit
all with a loud Venite Adoremus, incite all, not only to behold and Praise this
magnificent Building, but also to Adore the Founder of it; For, if it be true
as was said above, that the visible works in nature point at God the only
Author of them. Caeli enarrant glor^am ejus, The Heavens declare his Glory. It
is also clear, that these visible Effects of grace, Miracles, Conuersions
obuious to every Eye, set forth the glory of the Roman Catholic Church. Now
how deservedly she has gained this Renown, let the world judge.

12. Wisdom, says, Solomon, built Herself a house. Proverb. 9. where Pillars
stand firm, a Table is plentifully furnished, Victims are immolated etc. The
whole Passage. S. Cyprian. Lib. 2. Epist. 3. Applies to the great Sacrifice of
the Altar offered up under the Forms of bread, and wine. I wave the Application
and urge only an How gained
evident truth, And It Is, that Our Church built upon Christ the Cornerstone,
upon those strong Pillars the Apostles, has stood firm sixteen Ages, and here
is Her Glory. For if Glory (witness S. Ambrose) be nothing else, but Clara cum
laud notitia. A clear knowledge with Fame and Renown, The long Continuance and
ample extent of this Church, could we say no more, has justly purchased Her a
large Renown the whole world over. Now mark where the contempt lies, which is a
base Esteem of a thing unworthy value. All know the Arians built, Heretics
despicable.
the Pelagians built, the Donatists and other Heretics built* but their
vnsteedy disordered Houses soon fell down, and came to nothing. What says
Reason when Ruins are compared with this long standing Edifice?

13. Next cast a serious thought, upon the Inhabitants of this house of God.
You will find all united in one Faith adoring one Jesus Christ, loving one
Mother his spouse, looking on one last End, Their hope and Happiness And if
through frailty differences do arise abating charity, our Advantage is far
above all other Societies in the world: We have a supreme Pastor (God be ever
blessed) that can command, and like a Other advantages in the Church.
Father exhort to peace, in Abrams language. Ne sint qu^so j^rgi^ etc. Iarrs
must not be in the house of God, Fratres enim s(...), For we are all Children
of one loving Mother. Here is the Churches Glory. Whereas on the Contrary side,
nothing but Discord, and that remediless, the known evil of Lucifers pride, And
in the highest points of Faith, inseparably hant's the rambling Fancy of such,
as have wilfully divorced themselves from this one united Society. And Here is
matter enough of Contempt, and Compassion also.

14. In the last place consider well the vast multitudes who are, and have been
Domestics in this house of God. In the very Entrance we meet those Candidati
aternitatis (as Tertullian speaks) Nouices of Eternity, the newly admitted by
the Sacrament of Baptism, and no Society of Christians can show the like
number. Here we have Cherubins admirable in Knowledge, The Inhabitants of the
house of God, numbertles.
Doctors I mean, profoundly learned, Seraphins inflamed with Divine love, that
rest in the height of Contemplation. Here we find Penitent Souls bewailing
their sins, innumerable Martyrs shedding their blood for Christ, numberless
laborious Missioners traveling far and near to propagate His sacred Gospel.
Here finally we have (for it is long to recount all) Abraham's glorious multiplied
Stars. Genesis 15. 5. Kings and Queens, whole kingdoms and Nations professing the
Faith of this one Church. The Gentiles walk by Her light, and Princes in the
brightness of Her rising. Lift up thy eyes and see, says holy Isaias, All these
assembled together: And if you Ask what the duty was, and yet is of so many
conuened Multitudes? The Royal Prophet, that long since forsaw in Spirit a
continual Oblation offered up, Answers? Psalm. 9. 1. In templo ejus omnes dicent
gloriam. All in this Temple and sacred House shall incessantly render praise,
and glory to God, the Author of So noble a Structure, Therefore Psalm. 86. 2. He
rightly Concludes. Gloriosa dicta sunt de te O Civitas Dei. Glorious things are
spoken of thee, O City of God: Thou begans't In Jerusalem, wa'st afterward
extended to all Nations, becams't permanent, and because permanent, Glorious.
Thus that whole Psalm, speaking mystically of Christ's Holy Church. These are
Truth's not only proved, as you se by Scripture, but also evident (and this I
urge) to our eyes, and senses. Now next consider those scattered, dissipated,
and iarring Multitudes of Heathens, Jews and Heretics, And let reason, if a
spark of it live in any, judge, whether this be not evident without Dispute.
Viz. That as no Prophet ever came near to Christ our Lord in glory and A
Parall^l of Christ and His Church.
renown, So no Society of men since the world stood, was, or is, comparable to
our glorious Roman Catholic Church, All other besides this happy united moral
Body appear as they are abject, and contemptible.

15. And thus we Evidence Christ our Lord and his Church to a prudent Heathen,
not first by making the intrinsic Reasonableness of the essential Doctrine the
main Proof of its verity, as Mr. Stilling: simply Argues, above. Disc. 1. C. 9.
(For it is truly ridiculous to draw the Pagan to believe a Doctrine, as
reasonable and Divine, whilst yet he knows not, upon any rational Inducement,
whether it be from God, or no) But this way takes effectually. When you lead
him on by a clear light extrinsecal to the Doctrine, when you set before his
Eyes, such Marks, Signs and wonders as cannot but proceed from God, Miracles
Conuersions etc. When you Show him How strangely the Doctrine of Christ and his
Church, though sublime and difficult, was miraculously Spread the whole world
over, when you Demonstrate how manifestly Divine providence has Age after Age
Honored Christ and his Church, and severely Chastised the professed Enemies of
both. When finally you make it manifest that there is no Union, no Form, no
fashion of Religion in any Society now on earth, but in How the Heathen is
Convinced.
the Roman Catholic Church only. Then the Heathen, if reasonable and desirous
to learn Truth, must confess that God speaks Truth by this one Catholic Oracle
only, Or there is no such thing as a revealed Verity taught in the world.

16. Out of what is said already I infer first. If that Maxim of Philosophy he
undoubted, Frustra sit per plura etc. It is needles to multiply many proofs in
behalf of a Verity, when one most clearly conuinceth it. This Argument alone,
drawn from the glorious Marks of our Catholic Church, which cannot but proceed
from God, proves Her his own faithful Oracle, With these Signs we have the
thing signified. These in a General way settle in every reasonable
understanding this fundamental Truth. God speak's to the world by his euidenced
Church. I say in a General way. For as the visible works in nature, prove this
General Truth. Ipse fecit nos etc. A mighty power made us, we made The efficacy
of Church Motives.
not our Selves, though as yet none comes thereby to an explicit knowledge of
many Perfections in God; So the Marks and Motives manifest in the Church,
convince this General Truth also. That the same Power which made Nature gives
being to these, the same Power which preserues nature, preserues these glorious
Signs for our instruction, And Consequently it follows, That as the visible
world is proved Gods own work, so this visible glorious marked Church is proved
his own Oracle, Though yet neither the Heathen nor any knows every particular
Doctrine, which God teaches by the Church. In like manner great Divines assert,
that Christ's own Disciples owned first our blessed Lord as the true Messiah,
and a great Prophet. Joan. 1. 41. Inuenimus Messiam, We have found the Messiah,
before they learned the other high Mysteries of his being the natural Son of
God, the second Person of the Blessed Trinity, the Redeemer of Israel etc. see
Suares. 3. Part. Tom. 2. Dispu. 31. Sest. 4.

17. A second Inference. The General Truth now spoken of well established. God
teaches the world by a Church Signed with Supernatural wonders, All further
disputes cease concerning the particular Doctrins She teaches, though sublime
and above the reach of our weak Capacities. For none, whether Heathen, Jew, or
Heretic, can boggle at a Doctrine which God reueal's, How reason discourses
upon these Evident Motives.
But God, says prudent Reason, reueal's such and such Truths, The Incarnation
of the Divine word, the Trinity, Original sin etc. by a Church which most
pressing Motives euince to be His own Oracle, Therefore it is my duty to Submit
and believe every Doctrine She proposes.

18. The Ground hereof seems clear. For as there can be no endless Progress or
going on in Infinitum in the intrinsecal formal Object of Faith, because Faith
at last rest's upon one sure Principle, An infinite Verity* So we can have no
endless Process in the extrinsick Lights, and Motives, whereby we are induced to
fix a firm Belief upon that one sure Principle. Therefore in what ever Society
of men Reason finds these Motives, it rest's, without further Enquiry after
stronger, which cannot be found, But most evidently reason finds them in one
only Oracle the Roman Catholic Church (as is now proved) and prudently rests
there as upon lights which immediately manifest the Church, Scripture not so
immediately Credible as the Church.
and make Her Doctrine evidently credible. Scripture, it is true, is the object
of Faith, but not so immediately credible as the Church, for independently of
Scripture, I can believe the Church as the first Christians did before the Book
was written, but men generally in this present State cannot believe Scripture
without the Churches Testimony, As is already, and shall hereafter be proved
more at large.

19. A third Inference. Who ever pretend's to a Doctrine revealed in Scripture
and hold's it of Faith, has either a Church which teaches it euidenced by the
Marks of our Lord Jesus Christ, or He publishes a falsehood. Which is to say in
other Terms. If the euidenced Church of Christ positiuely own's not, or reiects
such a Doctrine, that Doctrine, Eo ipso, is spurious, forged, and not de Fide.
Hence it is, that when our Blessed Lord, Commissoned the Disciples to Preach
his sacred Verities. Math. 28. 19. Go and teach all Nations. He sent them
abroad with the Characters, Marks, and Ensigns, of his own Preaching. Mark 16.
2. Our Lord working with all, and confirming the word with Signs that followed.
And here by the way, I can never sufficiently admire the open folly of
Sectaries, that wholly Churchless, A lawful Mission required to teach our
Christian truths.
will yet needs persuade us into new opinions upon their own bare word, That
they teach truth. It is impossible. Nay I say more, Although (which is false)
they should speak Truth, they ought not (Churchless as they are) to be listened
unto. For suppose one should present himself as an Ambassador from a Prince to
a foreign State, but without Credentials, or Authentic letters justifying his
Embassage, no State can or will admit him, though he speaks truth. He must not
only do so, but show his Authentic Commission that he speaks truth, delivered
by the Princes own order, or he is sent back vnreceiued in the quality of an
Ambassador. In like manner I say. No more can any one essentially
vncommissioned pretend to teach Christ's Doctrine, whilst he is not sent to teach
by Christ's own euidenced Oracle, than this vncommissioned An Instance
Legate to speak in his Princes name. Many a man knows the law well, and is
fit enough to pronounce a just Sentence, yet sitt's not on the Bench nor gives
it, because he is not Authorized to do so. And thus we discourse of all
Heretics, no members of the euidenced Church, though, as I said, they deliver
truth by chance, they yet deserve not the hearing, wanting power and Authority
to teach it.

20. S. Cyprian Epist. 2. Speak's very pertinently to our present purpose. Quod
vero ad Nauatiani personam pertinent etc. For as much as concerns Nouatians
Person, I would, dear Brother, have you know in the first place, we are not to
be curious concerning what he says, when he teaches out of the Church. S.
Cyprian Confirm's the Doctrine.
Quisquis ille est, and qualiscunque est, Christianus non est, qui in Christi
Ecclesia non est. Whoeuer, or of what condition soever he be, is no Christian,
that is not in the Church of Christ. And hence S. Austin in his frequent
Disputes with the Donatists, presses this point most efficaciously, Lib. de
unit. Eccles. Cap. 2. Quaesti^ inter nos versatur, vbi sit Ecclesia vtrum apud
nos aut illos? Here lies the main Business, where the Church is, whether with
us or them? Again, Epist. 163. Quaritur vtrum vestra an nostra sit Ecclesia
Dei. We demand whether yours or ours be the Church of God, which must be known,
says Optat. Mileuit. Lib. 2. By Her Marks, and Characters. And therefore we
said above, though S. Austin made use of Scripture against the Donatists, it
was not done to decide every particular Controversy by the bare and obscure
words of that holy Book. No. The profound How Scripture manifests the Church.
Doctor aimed not at such impossibilities, his whole drift being to teach the
Donatists a great Verity, which we all subscribe to. viz. That Scripture once
admitted as Gods word, without Dispute clearly demonstrat's the Church by Her
visible sensible Marks, Antiquity, Miracles, Conuersions, Digito demonstrari
potest, We can point at Her with our finger Says S. Austin. The Church
therefore thus manifested we have enough, and rely on Her as a faithful Oracle
in every Doctrine She professes. Se Cardinal de Richelieu. Traitte pour
conuert^r ceux etc. Lib. 2. C. 7.. Cest encore. Where he exactly renders S.
Anstins meaning conformable to what we delivered. Disc. 1. C. 14. n. 10.

21. The last Inference. If all are bound to embrace true Religion, All have
also with the obligation means to know where it is taught, But the means to
know this lies not in the essential Verity thereof, for that is no
Self-euidence, or manifestly true ex Terminis. The means to know it is not
found, in the high Mysteries of Faith, for these (far above the reach of humane
understanding) remain yet in darkness without More light. Scripture alone makes
not its own Divinity known, and though it did so, And the Heathen owned it as
most Divine, yet when he evidently discouer's that dissenting Christians Sense
the book quite contrary ways, he has not the means to learn what true Religion
is, or where it is taught. Thus then He must Discourse, or believe nothing.

22. God that is Truth, reueal's the Verities of true Religion. If so; some
united Society of men teaches what ever God reueal's, for Angels are not our
Doctors. I find, Says the Rational man, great Signs of truth amongst the
Christians, and after The Heathens prudent Dis^ourse.
many a serious thought Cast upon a Matter of highest Concern, I sind also that
all those Signs, as Antiquity, Vniuersallity, a visible Succession of Pastors,
evident Miracles, which cannot but proceed from God, belong to one only
Christian Society, the Roman Catholic Church* I se moreover a strange benign
Providence held forth in preserving Her from innumerable attempts of
Adversaries. No Jew, no Heathen, no Heretic can show the like Signal Marks and
Proofs, of Gods love, as this one Catholic Oracle demonstrat's. Therefore all
other Societies are false Sects misled by erring Prophets, according to Christ's
own Prediction. Math. 24. For there shall rise false Christ's, though they
clamor never so loud. Ecce hic est and Conclus^on.
Christus. Lo we preach Christ, and his truths. Thus Reason test's satisfied,
yet because the Heathen see's whole Armies banding against the Church, and
rationally hold's their Arguments like theer cause very weak, He is desirous to
have the Fallacy of some chief Adversaries laid forth to his reason. For your
Satisfaction be pleased to read the following chapter.

CHAP. XII.
The Adversaries of the Roman Catholic Church plead unreasonably. A Discovery
of their fallacies. The cause of all Error concerning Religion. The only means
to remedy Error.

1. THe enemies of the Roman Catholic Church are chiefly reduced to these four
Classes, to Atheists, Heathens, Jews, and Heretics. A word briefly of their
fallacies in order. Some Atheists there have been (and perhaps Lucian was one),
that to cast off all thought of Religion more expressly denied Divine
Providence, than they did the Existency of a God. And a chief The Atheist^ Plea.
Argument to omit others of less weight, is much to this sense. A Numen
Infinitely wise and powerful, shows his careful Providence in governing the
world, But an evident Principle opposes this careful Providence, and no
contrary Principle of equal strength Seems to establish it, Therefore reason
well denies Providence. Now here is the evident Principle. The Oppression of
just men, manifest to our eyes, the prevailing of the wicked against the just,
of Turks against Christians, to say nothing of other much visible Confusion and
Discorder; prove a neglect of Providence, and no contrary Principle half so
strong or evident conninces it; none counterpoises the weight of this clear
proof now hinted at, ergo Reason, reasonably denies Providence. Thus the
Atheist. The Pagan Argues, That Religion is false which holds Mysteries
ridiculous, and impossible, but Christians How the Heathens and Jews Argue.
teach that God is one Essence and three Persons. Both seem impossible. The
Jews vapor against a crucified Savior, and lay its unworthy God to become
man, and to dye ignominiously upon a Cross. Lastly our modern Sectaries that
own Christ, come limping after the rest, and except much against the Roman
Catholic Church. She, Say they, has changed the ancient Articles of the
Primitive Faith and introduced Novelties in lieu of them, She maintains errors
contrary to sense in Her* Doctrine of Transubstantiation; And much more seems
amiss.

2. I say first. All these and the like Arguments are mere unsound Paralogisms,
and prove just nothing against Providence, against Christ, or the Romam
Catholic Church. Before I discover the fallacies be pleased to note. 1. That
God whose existence we have proved. Disc, 1. C. 2. is a Being incomprehensible,
and far transcend's the reach of our narrow Capacities. The very Gentile
Philosophers owned the truth agreeing in this Principle, That humane reason is
as weak to know what God and divine Mysteries are, as an owl is to behold the
Sun at noonday. Note 2. Reason in man, often too bold enters into Divine
Mysteries, though conscious it walks in a Labyrinth not so much as Principles
pr^mised to solue these Objections.
half-sighted in the search it makes, and this less than Half-insight into
Divine truths, is the cause of Atheism, of all Heresy and the most gross
errors now reigning in the world. The Apostle. 2. Tim. 3. 7. Point's at the
misled. Semper discentes. They are always learning, but never come to the
knowledge of truth. Note 3. Reason in the inuestigation of Religion and Divine
verities, may tend two different ways, Directly, and Reflexly. Direct reason,
as is now said, falls upon some great Mystery in faith, finds it harsh, yea
most difficult to be understood, and What follows? The faint man with his
feeble reason either reiect's the Mystery, or remain's so perplexed in the
search that he can resolve nothing. His procedure is just like a man unskillful
in Music, that hearing one Note alone which seems harsh, slights all without
more Ado, whereas he should listen to the whole Harmony before he judges. In
like manner we often proceed with God by a Half-pondering Divine Mysteries.
Contrariwife, reflex Reason labors not to Conquer difficulties by it self, or
any half consideration but prudently waves that way, and has recourse to a
surer Principle, whereof more presently. Thus much premised.

3. A second Proposition. The fallacy, of Atheists in their Arguments against
Providence, chiefly arises from this; That the direct Judgment of weak reason
runs headlong into Mysteries The fallacy of Atheists Discover. ed
considered only by halfs or in themselves, without attending to the Solution,
most easily attained by a Judgment which is reflex and Prudent. For example.
The Atheist denies Providence because just men suffer, and the impious Preuail
against the just, and hence inferr's negligence in God: Here is one harsh
untuneable Note to his ear, but reflect's not First, That, that which he calls
Nature is as negligent, and much worse left alone without God. He reflect's
not. 2. That if God were supposed to R^le the world, there would yet be fools
enough to sind fault, and think some thing amiss in the Government. He reflects
not. 3. That if God be an intellectual Being infinitely wise, his thoughts are
as far above our thoughts as the Heavens above earth, And therefore adventures
desperately to reject Providence which his shallow head neither does, nor can
Understand. Finally He never reflect's, that to deny all divine Foresight
cast's Reason into more Mazes, than to grant it; For deny it, we must say, That
this admirable and well ordered work of nature Gouern's it self. The Sun, Moon,
and Stars, move themselves. We must say, That the vast and swift circulation
What they are forced to grant against Reason.
of these Celestial Bodies depend on no Superior cause; unless we feign many
unknown invisible Gods, or Genii, Eternal of themselves, And say These run
about with the Heavens, and regulate that admirable Motion. But to Assert this
without Proof offer's more violence to our intellectual Faculties than to own
one powerful Being, essentially wise, and therefore Vigilant over all He
Gouern's. In a word you see here, this great Fabric of Nature (some rightly
compare it to a Clock or Watch) and find in it nothing like confusion, but
contrariwise a lovely Order, a Harmony most gracious beseeming God, Yets say
the foolish of the world, we ate to divorce it from his sacred Providence: That
is, the Clock can move, the wheels can turn about without a Superior hand
that winds all up and orders all. And why I beseech you? Mark the reason of
such as have no Reason. Free Causes, men I mean endued with Liberty, abuse
liberty oppress the just, raise tumults, breed confusion, and Scramble who can
get the greatest heap of dust together; Ergo says the half eyed Atheist, (
respiciens ad pauca) there is no care had of us, which is to say. Men comply
not with their Duty but abuse their own Free will, Therefore God is blameable
because he either makes them not mere Animals, Brutish, or forces not Virtue
upon them against their wills. Its an Error.

4. Thus much then concern's God. To indue rational Creatures The abuse of
liberty redound's not to God.
with Liberty to command the right use of it; but not to be responsable or held
neglectiue, if They abuse it. No, this touches them (for It Is their own work)
that do Evil. Let then the Evil remain where it is (Providence can forgive,
but not forget) And seriously consider the lovely Harmony, the recreatiue Order
visible in the works of Nature (here is Gods own admirable Economy) do only
thus much, and reason so evidently discouer's a depth of Wisdom in these works,
that it cannot but exclaim with the wise man, Sap. 14. 3. Tua o Pater
prouidentia gubernat. Your Providence, o Father, gouerns all. This done cast
your thoughts again as much as you will upon the Monsters in nature, which man
freely beget's, and freely bring's forth. What follows I beseech you but rhus
much only? That God, after so many menacings so much Terror laid before us if
we transgress, leaves liberty to its own free choice, and will severely punish
the Offenders; But that Spurious Progeny of evil Works he own's not. Therefore
no Argument can have force against Providence Liberty is lest to act without
^^mpulsion.
upon this account, That liberty is permitted to act as liberty requires,
without Compulsion. Were God forgetful or negligent; would he not, or could he
not punish sin now, or hereafter, Atheists might vapor more boldly; But hereof
there is no danger, for nature it self leaves this deep impression in all (let
who will Govern it) that one supreme Regent hates Iniquity, and that as he
often does visibly in this life, So he will more rigidly take Revenge in the
future. Mihi vindicta: and Ego retribuam. Romans 12. 19. And this consideration
alone of both present (most clear) and future Punishments, so blunt's and
dead's the Atheists Plea, that their best Arguments fall to nothing, and are
indeed resolved into pure Nonsense. This consideration alone, that God will
reward the unjust sufferings of the Virtuous, is comfort enough for them, and
every rational prudent Creature.

5. We are next to dispatch the main business with these Adversaries, who
desire to have as strong Proofs in behalf of Providence, as they allege against
it. I will therefore for the better Satisfaction of all, produce three most
conuincing Arguments. One is; The Deity we all Adore is not inexorable, but, as
clear and manifest Experience teaches, and most known History in One clear
proof of Providence.
all Ages relates, hear's often the Prayers of just men in time of Tribulation
releasing them from sudden danger, when no humane Power can help in the
Exigency, Innumerable after earnest Prayer and hands lifted up to Heaven, have
found speedy Assistance, some in the peril of Shipwrak escaped, others thrown
to hungry lions have been lest untouched, others cast into the fire not so much
as scorched, volumes might be writ of such particulars. Therefore there is a
Supreme Numen, that has care of us, the Sun, Moon, and Stars hear not, nor can
lend aid in such pressing Necessities, And to recurr to no man knows what
invisible Spirits, is, as we now said, less intelligible and far more
difficult, than to own one powerful Being of Himself that both can and does
relieve at his good Pleasure.

6. 2. The knowledge of future things Sublime, and above the reach of all
Creatures, Argues a Power Omniscient, and Omnipotent. The reason is. The
Prenotion of what is to come, not yet limited to any Being in it self, nor as
yet determinately existing, necessarily arises from an Infinite Knowledge and
efficacy of light, which extends it Self to what ever can be The knowledge of
future things proves a Power Omniscient.
known; for that power which comprehend's things future, much more comprehend's
all past and present, and therefore has an infinite Extent, which we call
Omniscience. Now I subsume. But an Intellectual power is in being, that by
virtue of his own light knows future Truths whereof none can doubt, because he
has actually communicated part of his knowledge to others, For example, to the
Ancient Prophets, who most exactly fortold things to come relating to Christ
our Lord, and the Glory of his Church; Such Secrets highly Divine, they had not
as men nor were they known by any Principle within the bounds of Nature,
therefore God Omniscient imparted all; And he did so not in vain, but for this
great End, That mortals may see how an infinite Goodness condescend's to inform
us of Truths whereby he manifestly tender's our Happiness, And this alone
demonstrat's Providence. That the Prophets foretold truths to come is evident
by the books of Scripture, writ whole ages before they happened, and the Event
visible to our eyes, proves the verities of the Predictions. What have your
Astronomers who more often miss then hit in their Predictions comparable to
these Prophesies in Scripture? Nothing at all, if (which deserves reflection)
we consider the Eminency, the Depth, and high importance of the Mysteries
revealed.

7. My last proof taken from one Manifest Absurdity, is no less than
demonstratiue. Suppose Providence be denied, it follows, That those Millions
of men who since the worlds Creation adored God, whereof innumerable were wise,
upright, and holy, have all been besotted and stupidly beguiled in Adoring that
which is not. Nay more, This also is consequent, A third and most conuincing
Proof.
That a few abject, ignorant, and despicable Atheists, are only endowed with
the light of a Truth, which once established, makes Virtue odious, Honesty, and
Goodness highly contemptible. I prove the consequence. If Providence be a
chimera, All our acts of Reverence, of Fear, Obedience, Religion and Gratitude
tendered to God, essentially blessed with that fore-seing Power are dissonant
to reason, and in themselves abominably sinful. Contrariwise, All acts of
Contumely, of Blasphemy, and Contempt of Providence, are consonant to reason,
and most laudable. The more therefore, we blaspheme, contemn Divine Providence,
the more laudably we operate, and as highly merit praise, as one does that
contemn's an Idol set besore him to worship. For Providence, Say Atheists, is
an Idol, Ergo to adore it is madness, to contemn it, most Praise worthy. These
and Harsh sequels granted by Ath^eists.
other like Sequels are so harsh, so Abominable, and contrary to the light of
nature, that I think the boldest Atheist now living, dare not in a serious
mood own them as Truths. And thus much briefly of reasonable Arguments in
behalf of Providence, to oppose that slight Plea of Atheistical Spirits already
Proposed, and dissolved.

8. The third Proposition. As Atheists plead fallaciously against Providence,
so Heathens Jews, and Heretics follow closely the like Strain in every
Argument proposed against the Mysteries of Faith taught by Christ and his
Church. Atheists and Heretics argue a like.
I would say. As the Atheist run's headlong with his weak Judgment upon
Difficulties, so these now named, err as he erreth. They make Direct Reason to
see more than it can see, to Comprehend Mysteries incomprehensible, and quite
cast asside that Prudent reflex Reason, which allayes all, and gives most
Satisfaction. For example, The Heathen Comprehend's not that great Mystery of
the Trinity, and there stand's puzzled. Good cause, say I, for if a Cockle
shell contain's not the whole Occan; why should thy shallow head comprehend the
Trinity? Were this possible, either thou must be God, or God leave of to be
what he is. The Jew vnderstand's not how God became man, and dyed ignominiously
upon a Cross. Observe a strange Stupidity says Divinely S. Chrisostom. Lib.
Quod Christus sit Deus, toward the end. These Adversaries of Christ read of
contempt and Disgrace, and credit all. They read in the same Scripture of our
Saviors Admirable Miracles and believe nothing. Here is want of Reflex Reason.
The Heretic boggles at the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and wonders that a
Church made up of fallible men can be held infallible. And from whence comes
The Assertion proved.
this boggling? What cause is there of wonder? He Answer's. Transubstantiation
seems contrary to Sense and Reason. Very good. I Ask again, to what Reason is
it opposite? Grant gratis the Utmost, it only seems contrary to that not
wel-sighted Reason which more often beguils than learns us Truth, or which
loses it self in the Search of deep Mysteries, where it can find no Exil. But
Answer I beseech you? Is the Doctrine opposite to that Other wise Prudent
judgment, whereby all know or should know, That reason is never more
reasonable, than when When Reason is reasonable?
it leaves off reasoning in high matters above reason? No certainly For deny
once this one clear Christian Principle, or say that is only belieuable and no
more, which weak reason Approues; We destroy the very Essence of Faith and can
believe nothing. The Doctrine of Gods Free-acts, of a Trinity, of the
Incarnation, of Transubstantiation, and the other like Mysteries is quite
renounced, if so much only gain's belief, as weak reason (puzzled in the
Mysteries) see's Reason for.

9. I say therefore. This Direct purblind reason cast's us upon Difficulties,
Reflex reason solues them. The first makes us mere What effects weak reason
produces.
Scepticks yea (and followed) Atheists too, The second good Christians: The
First remains in darkness, the second finds light. The first would turn all
faith into Science, the second says, No, Si non credideritis non intelligetis.
Unless you believe you shall not understand. The first, though no more but a
handmaid, would rule, bear sway, and command, the second curb's that petulancy,
and bids Her Obey. Now the only difficulty is to show what is meant by Prudent-
reflex Reason, and of what consequence it is in matters of Faith.

10. Briefly this reason stands not long upon the Mysteries How the reflex and
prudent reason proceed's.
revealed but, leaves off that lost labor and relies wholly, on the Authority
of one Master, that reueals them. Hence Clem. Romans in Recogn. D. Petri gives
this wise counsel. Ante Omnia, etc. Before all things examine well by rational
Motives, whether he be a Prophet that speaks; This done, ponder no more but
believe boldly all he Says. And wonder nothing at the principle, for it is far
more easy to find out the Prophet by his marks, and signs, than to understand
the sublime Doctrine he teaches. S. Irenaeus! Lib. 9. C. 9. 1. speaks
conformably. Non enim nos aliter discere poteramus quae sunt Dei, nisi Magister
noster verbum existens homo factus fuisset. We could not otherwise learn those
Secrets God has revealed, unless our great Master, the Divine word, had been
made man. Which is to say, the Reason we call reflex and prudent, most easily
finds out the Master that teaches truth, and having once found him it relies on
his word, whilst direct Reason stays entangled in difficult Mysteries, and
learns nothing. Hence also it is, that S. Thomas and others most profoundly.
Observe a notable difference, in our proceeding when we harken to God, and to
man. When we treat with man, we rigidly What man speak's is to be examined,
what God says, not.
examine the things he speak's, and if found absurd, or impossible, reject them;
We observe the coherence of his Discourse, and judge whether it be consonant,
or dissonant to reason. But to proceed thus with God, who can neither deceive,
nor be deceived, is Impudence; Enquire then no more but thus much only, what
God says, and rest Satisfied, his own sole word, is warrant enough.

11. We come now to apply this Doctrine more home. The Primitive Christians,
after a prudent search, found out by evident signs, and wonders, the great
Master of the world Christ our Lord, and were commanded to hear him Matthew. 17.
5. Ipsum audite. And because he proved Himself by manifest fignes, to be a
Doctor and Prophet sent from. God, They believed the Doctrine he taught, upon
his own word, though very sublime and above weak reason. Now here is a Point of
consequence worth our serious ponderation.

12. Can any one imagine, that our great Doctor of truth An application of the
Doctrine.
left us all comfortles, or so destitute in his Absence, without Pastors
without Prophets, withous living Oracles that yet speak in his name, and
deliver with all certainty those Verities he taught, and will have ever taught?
Reflect I beseeck you. This great Master says No. John. 20. 16. As my Father
sent me, so I send you. Matthew. 20. 19. Go and teach all Nations. Luke. 10. 16.
He that hear's you hears me. And to these Pastors he promises his presence and
continual assistance to the end of Ages. Matt. 28. 20. I will be with you ever
to the end of the world. And the There is yet a teaching Oracle.
very excellency, the very nature, of Divine Learning requires this Assistance,
and must, if Divine, depend on an Oracle which cannot but speak in Gods name
Truth, and Truth only. For how is it possible to conceive the vast moral Body
of Christians, of so different tempers diffused the whole world over, knit
firmly together in one saving Faith; if no certain Oracle lays forth that
learning, which God has revealed, and will have all to believe.

13. The Sectary may Answer, Scripture is his Oracle, he needs no more. Contra.
1. Christianity had a living Oracle before Scripture was written, did then that
Oracle cease to be because Gods truths were committed to paper or parchment?
Contra 2. And mark I beseech you, how unwarily weak reason (already rejected)
works mischief to it self, and others. Reason The Plea of Sectaries rejected.
reads Scripture, and when that is done, it sett's endless iarrs incomposable
debates not only between man and man, but, which is worse, between God and man;
Therefore Scripture thus handled can be no Oracle that unites all in one Faith.
Theses Iarrs between man and man are manifest, for the Arians, Pelagians,
Protestants, and Catholics read the book, and you see what fighting there is
about the Sense, which only indeed (and not the bare letter) is Scripture. Now
that some of these many Contend also with God, is undeniable. For God approues
not all these different senses because contradictory, Therefore some draw a
false meaning from Scripture, and these Some (let the fault light yet where you
will) oppose the true Sense of the Holy Ghost, yea act stiffly to their Eternal
shame, against that noble perfection in God, his vndeceiued Verity and this I
call contention or quarrelling with God (Truth it self) which as you see, our
Sectaries will have go on without redress, because they allow of no Doctor no
Teacher, no Oracle, that can end the Strife, or reduce the erring Party to due
submission.

14. I say therefore, And here is my last Proposition. The The true teaching
Oracle name'd.
Roman Catholic Church, which prudent reason easrly find's out, and no other
Society of Christians, is Gods own Oracle, What she teaches, we learn; what she
reiect's, we reject, Her Definitive word is our warrant, without further
dubious search made into the Mysteries proposed. The proof of my Assertion,
depend's on this brief discourse.

15. God obliges all poor and rich, learned, and unlearned, to embrace true
Religion, And consequently afford's means to find it out, being a matter of so
much weight as concerns Salvation, But the Necessary means to find true
Religion, is to come to the knowledye of that Oracle which Proposes and teaches
truth with all certainty, For no man teaches Himself but learns, if wise, of a
better Master; Scripture you see Ends not our Controversies. The Mysteries of
Faith are not our Doctors, because these in themselves obscure, are believed
after Reason has found out Gods living Oracle, Therefore all Christians must
own a Teacher, an Oracle of truth established by Almighty God, commissioned to
enlighten and to instruct the world. How shall they hear says S. Paul Romans 10.
15. without a Preacher. Observe well a teaching Oracle is to Propose
Euangelical Doctrine. But how shall they preach unless they they be The Church
Commissioned to teach, instruct's all.
sent? Here you see the Mission and commission of Euangelical Doctors plainly
pointed at. Now further. As none can but own such an Oracle, so all must
likewise acknowledge it so Visible by Marks and Signs, so obuious to sense and
prudent reason, that the most simple may discern it from Heretical Communities;
For this Oracle teaches the poorest sort of men, therefore Providence has made
the evidence thereof plain, and suitable to the meanest capacities.

16. Here we See again the difference, between the essential Doctrine of the
Church, and the Churches outward luster manifest in Her Signs. The first is
not got by long Pausing upon the Mysteries of Faith, nor by rigidly examining
the things revealed, as we discuss Doctrins probable or improbable in Schools.
No. The Christian says not, I will either Know how God can be one Essence and
three distinct Persons, How the Incarnation is possible, or I will believe
neither; For go this way to work, he does like one that takes wholesome Pills
and chewes them, but finding much bitterness, soon spits them out. Thus then he
should proceed guided by a Reflex prudent discourse. My only search is to find
out that Oracle whereby God speaks to Heathens, Jews, Christians and
Heretics; There is such an one manifested, or none can Believe any thing. This
once found, How prudent reason discourses.
I examine no more, nor intricate my self in the Mysteries proposed, but will
humbly Submit to all that is taught. This wisdom I learn from the Primitive
Christians, who most easily knew that Christ our Lord was the true Messiah, and
one sent from God by the Wonders he wrought, though they little yet understood
the depth of those Mysteries he delivered, and obliged all to believe. Thus
much Premised.

17. I Prove that the Roman Catholic Church is God's only Oracle. And first
Her exterior Marks and signs give in as clear evidence of Her being the only
Divine Oracle, as the wonders which the Apostles wrought euidenced them to be
Divine Oracles. With this luster we have a Church most visible, and
discernable, from all vnorthodox Communities. None can Parallel Her in known
Miracles, in Antiquity, Perpetuity, Conuersions etc. 2. This Church has taught
the world ever since The Churches clear Evidence.
Christianity began, and no Orthodox Society but She only is nameable, which
delivered the Sincere Doctrine of Christ; For hint at any, they are manifestly
proved condemned Heretics. 3. She was never censured in any Age of error by
so much as one confessed sound Christian, Nay I say more (and have proved it
above) She is so infallible, that if she erred but in one Article, She then
ceased to be Gods Oracle. 4. This Church shows the Mission of Her Pastors, and
deriues Her Commission to teach the world, from God, and our Lord Jesus Christ.

18. The first Mission concerning the teaching of the new Testament Originally
came from Almighty God, that sent his only Son our Savior to preach. John. 14.
24. The word you have heard is not mine but his that sent me, the Fathers. Luke
4. 14. He sent me to Euangelize to the poor. Now Christ our Lord, sent the
other Apostles. Mark 16. 15. Going into the whole world preach the Gospel to
all creatures. These first Masters, had their Successors lawfully commissioned,
they sent others age after age, in so much that the Mission of Orthodox Pastors
legally authorized to administer Sacraments, and to preach Gods word, never yet
failed in the Roman Catholic Church since Christ's being upon earth, nor shall
fail hereafter to the worlds end.

19. These Truths well weighed, And after many serious thoughts found as they
are undeniable, Prudent reason account's all that can be objected against our
euidenced Church, worse than folly. And here is the ground a Priori of the
folly. These Adversaries Sectaries mistake the right way of arguing.
that Oppose us, quite mistake the right way of Arguing, (were there any) For,
whereas they should first find out Gods great Oracle which teaches truth, and
object that against us, They wholly wave this matter of highest Importance,
And, so far as weak Reason can work, draw Arguments from the dark Mysteries of
Faith. One finds difficulty in the Trinity and reiect's it, Another in the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation and hold's it impossible. That is, weak reason,
as much set's up its own light against God, as if one should offer to
extinguish the Sun beams by the dim light of a candle.

20. Observe I beseech you a strange Procedure. We evidence a Church; we prove
Her Gods Oracle by the Characters, Signs and Marks manifestly laid open to all
men's eyes, we say this manifested Oracle which has drawn Millions of souls to
the Catholic belief cannot beguile us. Our Adversaries one the other side Say
(notwithstanding this reasonable Evidence) God speaks not by Her, Because the
Mysteries are hard and above Reason; whereas indeed the quite Contrary should
be inferred, They plead most simply.
viz. Because they are mysterious God speaks by so euidenced an Oracle. And
here is the Reason of my Inference.

21. Had the abstruse Mysteries taught by the Church been a humane Invention
only, and not from God, the supposed Inuentor of them (who ever he was) had
been worse then mad to Propose so many, to our shallow Reason. He should rather
have followed the strain of all other Heretics, and with the Arians denied a
Trinity, with Protestants cast of Transubstantiation, The reason of their weak
pleading.
But this you see is not done, The Church speak's truth plainly, because She
knows there is an other light, a stronger Evidence which lessens, facilitates,
and conquer's these seeming Difficulties. If therefore there be evidence enough
of Credibility for this one Proposition. God speaks to all by this known
Oracle, Reason pleads no more, but yields to one that cannot err.

22. It may perhaps appear Strange, if One consider with what plain Simplicity
the Holy Evangelists wrote the Gospel of Jesus Christ, where they seem to
furnish the Jews with Arguments against our Savior. They declared how He was
contemned, reproached, Scourged, haled from Tribunal to Tribunal, and finally
Crucified. Here the Adversaries of Christ Exclaim, and Ask what is more
Difficult? Could God possibly (Say they) The Candor of the Evangelists writing
our Saviors life.
permit his only son to be thus abused, when it is writ, Maledictus qui pendit
in ligno. Cursed is the man that hang's on a Cross? The Evangelists feared not
the Objection, but, related the Story as it was. Nor did they to gain their
great Master applause Cover or dissemble his Sufferings as Policy might have
done, had humane Wisdom only made the Book. No. They proceeded heartily; And
why all this Sincerity think ye? The Answer is easy. They knew well, that the
Victory which our Savior gained after all these sufferings, The Renown he
purchased upon the Cross, the Miracles he then and formerly had wrought, were
so forceable Evidences of his being the true Messiah, that no contrary
Humiliation, even to death it self, could obscure that greater light and
rational evidence of Truth. Therefore whole Multitudes beholding the wonders at
his sacred Passion after the Centurion had cried out, This man indeed was just
returned, knocking there breasts. Luke. 23. 48. And in his life time, said. Quid
facimus? What do we do? This Christ works so many wonders, That if we dismiss
him, All will believe in him.

Arguments drawn from what is said. Reflections made upon the premised Doctrine.
Christ, and His Church prevail against Incredulity.
23. Hence I Argue. If the evident Light of our Saviors glorious Miracles was
sufficient to vanquish Incredulity, and to work a Belief in all of his truly
being the Son of God, notwithstanding the difficulty of the Mystery; It
follows clearly that the undeniable Evidence of the Roman Catholic Church
already laid forth, is as fully sufficient to vanquish the Incredulity of
Heathens, Jews and Heretics, And to work this Persuasion in all
(notwithstanding the high Mysteries proposed) that She is Gods Oracle. For here
is my Principle, and most undoubted. That as the Verity of Christian Religion
is to be learned from that known Oracle which bear's Christ's Ensigns, without
disputing the Sublimity of the Doctrine, so the falsity of a Doctrine is proved,
(Not by the difficulty thereof), but, is clearly gathered, from the Nullity of
an vneuidenced Church, which teaches it. An vneuidenced Church therefore is no
warrant of true Doctrine.

24. And here you have briefly the fundamental Reason, why no Heretic, can
probably oppose the received Doctrine of our Catholic Oracle, or defend his own
contrary to it, whilst he is Churchless, I mean so long as he gives in no
Evidence The true reason why no Heretic can oppose the Church.
of an other Church distinct from the Roman Catholic, as Ancient, as universal
as She is, as glorious in Miracles as She is, as famous for Conuersions as She
is, as Uncensured as She is, as commissioned to preach, and teach the world, as
She is, I say whils't no such qualified Church can be euidenced, which
contradicted our present Catholic Doctrine, and maintained that of Sectaries,
so long the Protestant cannot defend his own opinions, nor rationally oppose
our Catholic Tenants. For here, as S. Austin anciently observed disputing with
the Donatists, lies the main Business and it decides all Difficulties. Vtrum
vestra, an nostra sit Ecclesia Dei. Whether yours, or ours, be the Church of
God. Let then this one point, worthy Debate, be rigidly examined; And it is
easily done may the ever acknowledged Marks, and Signs, of the true Church
have weight with Prudent reason, We are all without more Dispute reunited in
one Ancient Faith.

24. And who can (if his cause be good) decline this modest Offer? When it is
known, that these public Signs have fixed, Sectaries Ever decline the Sentence
of an Euidenced Church
and established this public Judgment in all through the Christian world.
That a Church so undeniably Ancient, so Miraculous, and drawing Souls to Her,
cannot but be Gods Sacred Oracle? But Sectaries in all their Polemicks wave
this worthy Question concerning an euidenced Church, and unworthily to the
great Wearisomnes of every Reader, stand pitifully trifling with a few long
since defeated and worn-out Controversies. I say trifling, For is it not more
then slight and frivolous, now to flurt at the worshipping of Images, now to
pelt the Pope, now to quote a half sensed Sentence against Purgatory, now to
misrelate And trifle time away.
a Story, now if a wickedness lie in a Corner to rifle that, Now to talk, as if
men were mad, of the Roman Churches Idolatry. Here to iibe at our Ceremonies,
there to attaint the Spotles Reputation of Christ's Spouse? Say for Gods sake to
what purpose is this? when the Knowledge of that Vnum necessarium which cannot
but be known. viz. Here is Gods euidenced Oracle so clearly ends all Debates,
so justly determin's what is true, and what is false, in these and the like
particulars, that none can, unless led on with a Spirit of Contradiction
withstand the just Sentence of this One euidenced Oracle.

25. If the Sectary reply, notwithstanding the Churches Evidence, many things
She teaches appear doubtful to him. I have Answered. Disc. 1. C. 18. Proofs
only doubtful, yea though Probable also, (which is not) want pith to gainsay an
Evidence What the most ancient Christians owned,
owned by the public Wisdom of the Christian world: But the greatest Part of
the Christian world Always owned these Truths. First. That God has, and ever
had, a Church Visible on earth. 2. That his Church may be known by Her Marks,
Signs and Motives, and that the most meet Signs to Distinguish Her by, are
answerable to those, manifested in Christ our Lord. 3. That the Roman Catholic
Church only, Evidently shows these Signs, and by Virtue of them demonstrat's
Her self to be Gods own Oracle. Here you have my Principles already laid forth,
And a Petition with them to Protestants, to infringe or weaken but One of them,
upon Scripture Proof, upon the irrefragable Testimony of Fathers, or by Virtue
of any Principle which may appear probable to the universal Sense, or rational
Consent of such as have been owned Orthodox since Christ lived on earth. But to
do this is utterly impossible.

26. Descend now if you please to particular Controversies, you shall ever find
that nothing but the twilight of weak Reason, mere Doubtfulness I mean,
support's Protestant Religion. It is doubtful say these Adversaries, whether
Purgatory be, or Doubts and Cauils are the only Support of Protestancy.
no. It is doubtful whether Praying to Saints be Orthodox Doctrine. The Popes
Supremacy over the whole Church is Doubtful, and Questionable. Very Good, let
these Propositions pass yet as doubtful. Perhaps Purgatory is not, Perhaps it
is. Perhaps invocation of Saints is Orthodox Doctrine, Perhaps no, For neither
the one, nor other considered in Themselves is a Truth Evident Ex terminis, or
so much as Morally certain. Now here is the just Trial. The Protestant
positiuely denies Purgatory. I positiuely Assert it. Both Propositions are
hitherto supposed doubtful, Therefore He who maintains truth is obliged to
raise his Proposition from that low State of a poor Perhaps or doubting, to a
higher Degree of certainty. The Catholic speaks plainly and Argues thus. Gods
euidenced Oracle which bears the Marks, the Ensigns of Christ Jesus, and
taught the world from the Beginning, obliges all as well to believe a
Purgatory, as a Trinity of Persons. I cannot therefore, Says he, without a
Forfeiture of all Reason and striving against the Public wisdom of the
Christian world, Own this a faithful Oracle in the Proposal of the one Mystery,
and hold it Perfidious or Traitorous in the other. Here is the Catholics
Evidence. Now Mark well. The proofs of the Protestants Proposition, ( There is
no Purgatory) are ever as remote The Assertion declared and proved.
from Certainty, as miserably dubious, as his very Assertion is. I say no Proof
goes above the Strength of one poor deficient and weak Perhaps. If he allege
Fathers Contrary to Purgatory, or any other Catholic Tenet, His own reason yet
in a cloud tell's him. Perhaps, He hitt's on the true Sense, Perhaps not. If he
plead by Scripture he never get's above the degree of doubting, If he take
recourse to History or any other Principle what ever, He shall find himself at
the end of his labor, where he was at the Beginning as doubtful in his Proofs
as in his Assertion. And why? He has no euidenced Church to rely on. But more
of this hereafter. See also. Disc. 1. C. 11.

CHAP. XIII.
Other Inferences drawn from the precedent Doctrine. Atheists and Heretic,
Argue alike. The Motives of Credibility lead to a total Belief of what ever the
true Church Proposes* A word of Mr Thorndicks Mistakes concerning the Church*

1. THe first Inference. All that is pleadable in Behalf of Protestancy or any
particular Tenet thereof, is not only doubtful but highly improbable, upon
These two Principles. First, that a Church euidenced by the very same Marks and
Motives which Christ our Lord Showed to the world, reiect's the Two Principles.
Nouelty, (And no Authority on earth can Contest with an Oracle so clearly
Manifest.) The other Principle. No Society of Christians signalized with the
like Motives as the Roman Catholic Church Demonstrat's, ever maintained so
much as one Tenet of the Protestants Doctrine. Here the ingenuous Reader is
desired to reflect a little how we proceed.

2. I prove my Catholic Doctrine by the Public Authority of an euidenced
Church, (That Is my Principle) And our Adversaries to Oppose me come armed with
two or three maimed The Sectaries opposition against the Church is null And why?
dark Sentences, of the Holy Fathers and think this enough to cast Popery out
of the world. No such Matter my good Countrymen, There is yet much more to do,
before you speak probably. You explode Transubstantiation, Purgatory,
Invocation of Saints. We Ask whether you ever had a Church as Euidenced, as
Ancient, as universal, as Commissioned to teach as ours, which publicly
maintained your Tenets and censured The Roman Catholic Doctrine? Show us such a
Church upon solid Principles the work is done, you give weight For weight,
Evidence for Evidence, and may Speak boldly, Nay I say more, you may well
triumph, For upon the Supposition, we are vanquished; But Fail to do this (and
fail you must) you are silenced, yea, impossibilitated to write more
Controversies. Se more of this Subject above. Disc. 1. C. 19.

3. A second inference. The Atheist and Protestant plead alike. That is. As the
one Argues against God, just so the other does against Christ's Church. All
know the more ancient Atheists offered not positiuely to Demonstrate the
Nonexistence of God, for there is no Principle to ground that Senseless
Assertion upon, But chiefly excepted against the Proofs The Atheists way of
arguing parall'd with that of Sectaries.
drawn from the visible works in Nature and thought these so weak to Euince a
Deity, that there might well be none. Thus our Sectaries proceed. For stark
shame they dare not deny a Church of Christ, Yet their whole labor is so to
obscure Her Evidence, that no man can possibly find out the Oracle by Signs,
Miracles, Conuersions, and Antiquity. Therefore as the Atheist in effect denies
God, or at least stand's doubtful of his Being, So the Sectary, to parallel
him, because He denies the Churches glorious Evidence, cannot but remain
doubtful, whether there be any such Oracle or no. Again as the Atheist bewrayes
his folly in giving the Lie to the universal Judgment of mankind, when he
Says the works of Nature prove not a Deity, So the Sectary run's the same
Carreer, betrays his folly, and gives the Lie to the whole Christian world,
when he says, the Manifest works of Grace, visible in the Catholic Church
convince Her not to be God's Oracle.

4. A third inference. The sole Evidence of the Roman Catholic Church visible
by Her Marks, so clearly conuinces and carries on the whole Catholic Cause
without exception, A Church clearly euidenced cannot be excepted against.
So utterly vanquishes the Protestants Plea of Errors entering into this great
moral Body, that it is highly improbable, yea a flat Calumny to impeach Her of
any. Here is my reason. Mere doubts, or crasy Topics can not reuerse Evidence,
But the Churches Antiquity, Her vast extent, Her Progress, Her Miracles, Her
Conuersions and the other like Signs, are ^x sensatis, sensibly and undeniably
evident; Therefore all impleading Her of Error is more than improbable, unless
She has erred in showing such Marks as have made the world Christian. Now
further. If this Evidence stand's firm, Her Doctrine is made evidently Credible
by it, that is, so worthy of Acceptance by divine Faith, That Reason, after so
much Light seen, is obliged under pain of damnation to yield Assent to the
Doctrine. For, as none can prudently believe, before this Evidence be attained.
( Qui cito credit levis est cord, Eccles. 19. 44. One too quick in believing
is not wise) So none after it is had, can without damnable sin Disbelieue.

5. Hence I Argue. The Doctrine of the Primitive Church was made evidently
credible to reason (That is) worthy of all Acceptance in the three or four
first Centuries, or was not; The Primitive evidence of Credibility.
If not; none could then believe, with divine Faith; For the Evidence of
credibility necessarily preceed's Faith, And as Faith in it self is strong,
most certain, and victorious over Incredulity ( John 1. 5. 4. This is the
victory which ouercom's the world, our Faith), So this preuious Evidence,
answerably brings Reason to so firm a State of believing certainly, that
nothing Proposable can Eclipse that clear and manifest light.

6. Contrariwise, if those Primitive Christians had the Evidence we speak of,
and were thereby obliged to believe, We Catholics Is yet manifest in the Roman
Catholic Church.
are Most secure, for the very same Evidence still continues to this Age in the
Roman Catholic Church. Miracles go on, Conuersions of Nations go on, the
Succession of Pastors goes on, The fulfilling of Prophesies goes on, Sanctity
of life in Thousands and Thousands, is manifest to our eyes and senses. Every
day the Church grows older, and which is enough to convince the most obdurate
Heretic, the lovely union, the unanimous Consent, of so many Nations though
*different in tongues, in manners in Education, (conspiring, and openly
Professing one and the same faith,) has not only gained our Church a public
Reputation the whole world over, but moreover proves this great Truth, That
she, and none but she, is Gods Sacred Oracle.

7. If then (and here lies the force of my Inference) it had been a flat
calumny and more than vastly improbable, to have taxed the Apostolical
Primitive Church of Ertour after so great The force of the Inference.
Evidence laid forth to Reason in Her Marks and Signs, it is no less sinful in
the Protestant now, no less ungodly at this day, to accuse the present Church
of corrupted Dectrin, whilst She frees her self from the Calumny, by giving in
the very same Evidence of Credibility. For here is my irrefragable Principle.
The like full evidence of motives lead's reason to draw Thence a most firm and
certain Faith. Destroy this Evidence in any, that proves Himself to be Gods
Oracle, you must deny it to Christ our Lord when he preached, To the Primitive
Church also, and finally to the Modern Catholic Church. Do so, All Faith
perishes; Grant it to both the Ancient Church and this now in being, All
pleading against our Catholic Doctrine is mere Vanity.

8. The Sectary may reply. Though the Evidence we insist on has some weight.
Yet it follows not, that all the Doctrine An Objection Proposed.
our Church teaches is made evidently Credible, For he can justly except
against the Doctrine, relying upon other solid Grounds, and most approved
Principles. Scripture, for example, the Authority of holy Fathers, the Records
of Antiquity, the Form of the Primitive Church, are his Principle, and by these
he hopes to prove our Churches Doctrine False, which done the Evidence we build
upon, signifies nothing.

9. I am very willing to solue this Objection, the Answer I hope, will show
upon what vnsteedy foundations Protestancy stand's. To proceed with all
clarity. This is Questionable, whether we, or Protestants, teach the Doctrine of
Jesus Christ. And because it is here impossible to descend to all particular
controversies, we will fall upon one only much debated (one serves for all).
Viz whether Transubstantiation, or no Transubstantiation, be Orthodox Doctrine.
The truth yet lies in darkness, there is no Self-Euidence either in the
Affirmative or Negative, It Is yet no more but doubtful, or a mere Perhaps,
whether the Protestants or we Speak Truth; Gods revelation which only can give
certainty is Where the difficulty lies?
yet obscure to us both, and as little euidenceth it Self, as the Verity we
enquire after. By what means then can we raise our selves above this state of
Doubting to so great a degree of certainty, as to Say without fear.
Transubstantiation is Orthodox Doctrine. And the contrary, is not so.

10. The Catholic (to wave in this place other proofs) recur's to his Church,
And says this Public euidenced Oracle, as well raises him to a State of
certainty for his Tenet, as the euidenced Primitive Church raised the first
believing Christians from their doubts to Security. For the like full evidence
always lead's to How the Catholic Peoceed's.
a like certainty of Belief. The Protestant, having rejected our present
euidenced Church, hopes well, and will needs find flawes and falsity too in Her
Doctrine, not by confronting Her Evidence, or denoting an other Church, As
ample, as ancient, as miraculous, as She is, which held his Doctrine, for this,
though it should be pleaded, (if we come to a clear Decision,) is vnpleadable,
because the Protestant has no such Oracle. What Is done therefore? I Will tell
you, and you may justly wonder. He shaks of this clear Principle of an
euidenced Church and pretend's, (though there is no such matter) to launch into
the vast Ocean of Scripture, Councils, volumes of Fathers, ancient Records *and
thinks The Sectary takes a Contrary way.
to carry on his cause this way. Here He pick's up one dark Sentence of a
Father, and triumph's with that, There on another. Here upon the least hint
given he Snarles at one piece of Popery, there at another. Here he guesses, and
there he misses. In a word the man is busily idle, does much, and just nothing,
run's on, but is out of his way, utterly lost, without the guidance of God's
euidenced Oracle which only can draw him out of the Labyrinth. And if you Ask,
why he is out? I Answer his Error lies here, that both in this and all other
Controversies, he makes his false Suppositions to pass for proofs against
evidence.

11. You shall see what I here Assert Made Good. To prove no Transubstantiation
the Seandary read's Scripture, Fathers, Antiquity, or what else you will. Be it
so. He read's but not alone, For the learned Catholic bear's him company and
read's also. Mark now. The One after his reading glosses, so does the other.
The One compares Passage with Passage, so does the other. The One discourses,
So does the other. But when all is done (and here lies the mischief) the
Protestant imposes one sense upon the perused Testimonies, and the Catholic
another Which leaves him in State of doubting.
quite contrary. This daily Experience teaches. viz. That we differ not so much
about the words we read as about the sense of Scripture and Fathers. Therefore
this also is Evident, That the Protestant aduances not his Doctrine (if yet he
get so high) above the degree of guessing only, whilst he pleads by his glossed
Scripture, and Fathers, For as long as the Catholic, wholly as learned and
conscientious as He is, and an ample Church besides, opposes his far-fetched
Sense out of the Fathers, He cannot without Impudency, and making a false
Supposition to pass for his Proof, cry it up as certain: Now further. As the
sense he draws from Scripture and the Fathers is no more, but at most
doubtful, (I say improbable) so his Assertion concerning no Transubstantiation,
or what ever else he holds contrary to the Roman Catholic faith, is wholly as
much wavering, or purely doubtful: But that which is only doubtful and no more
is too weak, What ever is doubtful grounds not Faith.
either to ground any Christian Tenet upon, or to Contrast with the Roman
Catholic Church, whose Doctrine is indisputably made evidently credible.
Therefore unless a weak Uncertainty can reuerse Evident Credibility, the
Sectaries Plea against the Church, is not only improbable, but highly
improbable.

12. To conclude this Point. Here is an unanswerable Dilemma. It is possible to
Denote, and point at another Church (which without dispute taught Protestant
Doctrine and opposed ours) as Ancient, as large, and every way as Euidenced to
sense and reason, as the Roman Catholic Church is, Or it is not possible. If
possible, controversies are strangely ended, for prove A Dilemma.
me once such a Church, I say plainly. There is no such thing as true Faith in
the world worthy defense. Why? Because if the Supposition hold's two different
Churches euidenced a like, equally as ancient, as efficacious in Doctrine and
glorious in Miracles, clash with one another, Say and Unsay, approve, and
condemn. The one condemn's Protestancy, The other Popery, One will have
Transubstantiation believed, The other not, which is as wholly destructive of
Christian Faith, as if Scripture it self should plainly Speak Contradictions.

13. On the other side, If the Sectary can neither name, nor point at a Chutch
(every way as euidenced as the Roman Catholic) No euidenced Protestant Church,
no pleading for Protestancy.
which expressly propugned Protestancy and opposed Popery, He shall never utter
probable word against any one Article of our Catholic Faith; For throw an
euidenced Protestant Church out of the world, All that is allegable in behalf
of its Doctrine, or against us, will either End in a slight discharge, of a few
scattered vnweighed Sentences of holy Fathers (no sooner read than Answered)
or, as we daily Experience, in gross Mistakes, and bold Calumnies laid on our
Doctrine. And can these think ye extinguish the visible Luster of our Chureh,
can these lessen the evident Credibility of Her Doctrine, or bring so known and
owned an Oracle into open disgrace, or public Disreputation? It is impossible.
The most vigorous Abbettors of Protestancy may not only blush to Assert it, but
will be bafled did we once live to see the happy day, when our just cause might
be proposed, and heard in a Public Dispute, before Learned and impartial
Judges.

A Word of Mr Thorndiks Mistakes discovered in His Book of Forbearance.
14. Though I Honor Mr Thorndick, and hold him much more wise, Learned, and
moderate, then some late voluminous Writers have been, yet because Truth will
out, I must not dissemble but Speak truth, And therefore Say in a word. His
whole attempt against the Roman Catholic Church is weak, And the feebleness
of it Cannot but appear to every Reader that penetrat's the force of the
Principles already established. My wish indeed was to have. Understood his
meaning better in some particular passages, For here and there, he seems to me
a little obscure, yea, to build with one hand and to Pull down with the other,
How ever by what is clear we have enough, and may well refute his Errors.

15. Page 19. In the Book now cited He takes leave to blame all those who
declare in behalf of the Protestant Church, that it depart's, or Separat's from
the Church of Rome. For, Says he, seeing it has bin granted in, and by this
Church, ever since the Reformation that there is, and always was salvation to
be had in the Church of Rome as a true Church, though corrupted; I am very
confident, that no Church can Separate from the Church of Rome, but they must
make Themselves thereby Schismatics before God. I grant. 1. Such are
Schismatics as leave this Church, I grant 2. Salvation was, and will ever be
had in this Church, Yet say. 3. It is Calumny, yea a plain Contradiction, to
grant Salvation attainable in this Church, and to impeach Her of Error or
corrupted Do and rin. The Calumny Church Motives either prove that Oracle pure
in all She teaches, or in Nothing.
is unquestionable because the Marks, the signs and exterior Evidence of our
Church already insisted on, either prove her Gods Oracle as sound and faithful
in all She teaches as the Primitive Church was, or convince nothing. What then
can these Adversaries aim at? Will they grant Her no less illustrious in Marks
and Motives which induce to faith than the Apostical Church was, and yet make
Her a Monster, a harlot, and prefidiously false in proposing Faith? Have so
many learned Doctors Age after Age taught Her Doctrine, so many Martyts shed
their blood In defense of it, so many Saints wrought glorious Miracles to
confirm it, and after all can it upon no proof but upon a vain and most unjust
Supposition be called false and vnorthodox? Nothing can be more extrauagant.
You must therefore either deny the Evidence we plead by, (which is undeniable)
or own this Church entirely sound in every Doctrine proposed, as Faith. Whence
it is that when Jews, Gentiles, and Heretics, convert themselves to Catholic
Religion, drawn thereunto by the light of evident Motives, they frankly believe
no Part, but all Church Doctrine without Exception. And the Reason of believing
thus Wholly and not The Reason of believing entirely, and not by halfes
by halfs, is given above. C. 5. 6. where we Demonstrate, that if the Roman
Catholic Church has erred in the proposal but of one Point of Faith, and
obliged Christians to believe that under pain of Damnation, She is not only
traitorous to Christ, and therefore can be believed in nothing, But moreover at
this present day there is no true Faith professed in the Christian world.
Contrariwise, if She be true and vnerrable in all teaches, She is to be
believed in every Article without reserve.

16. Now to the double Contradiction in the words alleged. It is granted Says.
Mr. Thorndicke that there is, and always was Salvation to be had in the Church
of Rome as a true Church, though corrupted. I Answer this is implicatory. For
if true, She is not corrupted in Doctrine; or if corrupted in Doctrine She is not
true; Unless one makes by mere fancy a Chimera of the Catholic Church, and
says a true Church may be corrupted which is impossible, for truth excludes
corruption: Therefore no Orthodox Christian ever owned a Church partly true,
partly false. You Sr, say. 2. Salvation may be had in this Church. Very good.
Ergo Her Faith is sound able to produce The Contradiction euinced against this
Author.
in every soul Repentance, the love and fear of God, and what ever else is
necessary to acquire Heaven, Or if it want this Essential Perfection and bring
not men to a security of Salvation, it is no Faith at all, and consequently
Catholics must be damned for want of divine Faith, having no true Church to
believe in. See more. Disc. 1. C. 21. n. 7. Finally, whereas you Assert. No
Church can Separate from the Church of Rome, but they must make themselves
thereby Schismatieks before God, The Inference Sr, is true, but most clear
against your Self, And proves that both you and the Protestant Party are
Schismatics before God and man too. For this matter of Fact, Viz. That you
Separated from, Protestants proved Schismatics.
and rebelled against the Roman Catholic Church is as evident, as That
England, once Catholic, communicated with Rome in Points of Faith, in the use
of Rites, Liturgies, Sacraments, And afterward divorced it self from that
Communion. Reply, or tell us you had cause to do so, and so far only receded
from this Church, as She receded from Her Ancient purity, You make again a
false Supposition your Proof, your self Judge in a cause you have nothing to
do with, And the lovely Spouse of Christ loyal and perfidious, Chaste and a
harlot with one breath.

17. Yet one word more. You say the Church of Rome is a true Church wherein
Salvation is had, though corrupted. One clear Inference against Mr Thorndick.
Hence I Argue; Either you in England are now at this instant separated from
this Church, as it is True, or not; If separated from it, as true, the
Reformation belongs to you only, you are to cancel your own Errors, according
to the form of Doctrine in our Church, for She, if true, is so far pure that she
cannot be reformed. And thus much you seem to grant P. 33. It is out of love to
the Reformation, that I insist upon such a Principle as may serve to re-vnite
us with the Church of Rome; being well assured, that we can never be well
reunited, with our Selves otherwise. That not only the Reformation, but the
common Christianity must needs be^lost in the Divisions, which which will never
have an end otherwise. What is this to say, but to wish the English Church
reformed by the Roman Catholic? Therefore something (if these quoted words
bear sense) is amiss, not in the Roman, but in the English Church, which needs
Reformation. Now on the other side, if you say the Roman Catholic was and is a
true Church, Another Inference as clear.
and that the English also is altogether as true as she, or has not separated
from the Roman in matter of true Doctrine; it follows ineuitably, if the
Supposition hold's, that neither of them needs Reformation in matter of Truth
(for here we speak not of Rites and Ceremonies which are alterable.) To what
purpose then is it to talk of reforming either Church, in point of Truth, when
both are Supposed so true, that neither can be reformed, nor differ, if true in
faith, from one another?

18. Perhaps you may (yea and must) reply, if your Discourse have sense. Though
they are true in Doctrins called fundamental, yet both have their lesser
corruptions, and these need Reformation. This is all that can be Asserted, For
if both are false in fundamentals neither of them at this day is the Orthodox
Church of Christ, and consequently both the Romanists and English wanting
fundamentals, are People essentially Churchless. Now upon the Supposition of
lesser corruptions only not fundamental, you have a dreadful Inference against
Protestants, And as true, as dreadful. Viz. That their first Separation from
the Roman Catholic Church was damnably Sinful, though She were here falsely
supposed to have erred in smaller matters; This, I A third Inference.
Say follows, not only because the Ancient Fathers expressly teach, No
Reformation can be of such Importance, as to counteruaile the danger of
Divisions, And that all things should be rather tolerated than to consent to
Schism in the Church; But upon this other account also, that the Revolt of
Protestants from our Ancient Church has laid such a visible disgrace upon a
noble Kingdom, That none but the powerful hand of God, with the wisdom of our
Gracious Souereign and the States concurrence, Touching upon the doleful
Divisions in England.
can take it of. The Nation, we see with our eyes, is strangely divided,
hideously discomposed, Religion is of the hinges, and men generally are so
transported into Extrauagancies; that none can say what the Religion is which
England Professes at this day, There are so many Sects, so many Divisions, so
many Tub-Preachers, so many woemen-Gospellers, so many Quakers, so many
Fanatics, so many Leuiathan-Monsters, that you may read and see without
turning to the Bible, a Babylonian Confusion, amongst them. Would Popery, Sr.
think ye, (you are as I understand moderate, and learned) had that continued,
laid England under such a public Disgrace as this Rabble of men, and Fanatics
have done? Let the world judge.

19. Now if you Ask, from whence came this fearful Disorder, which to my sorrow
makes our Country ridiculous to foreign Nations? I answer. The first Rent, the
first Rupture, the first Schism of Protestants from the Catholic Church,
occasioned all. Here is the Source, and Sole Origin of these unfortunate, The
Origin of all these lamentable Divisions.
Reuolutions. Wherefore this Argument proposed by a Fanatic against
Protestants is unanswerably conuincing, Ad hominem. (I say ad hominem; not that
I approve Fanaticism). As ye Protestants without recourse to any other judge
but your Selves upon your own Authority quitted the Roman Catholic Church, and
thought your Fact reasonable; So we Fanatics, without recourse to any but our
own tender Consciences, (knowing you began a Reformation not yet complete)
leave Protestancy, And hold our fact as reasonable as yours: And thus others by
your first Example The Fanatics Argument against Protestants.
may reform Religion to the worlds end. Yet all of us (may these men Say) make
but one true Church, For if Mr. Thorndicke Page. 9. Answer's pertinently to
that demand. Where his Church was before Luther. There it was, says he, where
it is. The same Church reformed, which was depraved before. If this Answer I say
be good, Pray you why should Fanatics, Nay why ought the Arians, and worst of
Heretics be excluded from being of one and the same Catholic Church? For the
Church seems to Sectaries an ample field, and embraces all called Christians
though differently reformed. The only difficulty then is, to find out him, or
se Those, who among so many dissenting Reformers (the whole world over) have
happily made the best choice, in All seclanes will reform, and none can do it.
mending Religion. The Protestant you see reform's the Catholic, the Puritan,
the Protestant, and the Quaquer will reform all at once, until some new Sectary
peep out, that bring's in a better Fashion. And is it possible, shall all these
unreformed People reform one another? This difficulty cannot be solued in
Protestant principles.

20. I say in a word. It is impossible to reform any erring Society of
Christians, but by the Rule Doctrine and Authority, of The Church which reform's
other erring Socoeties must not need any reformation.
some one Church, which must be owned so pure, that She cannot be reformed in
what She teaches. The reason is clear. For a fallible and deformed Church, can
no more help to reform another like wise fallible or unreformed, than the blind
lead the blind. Hence methinks Mr. Thorndick, who hold's Protestancy as
fallible, and as much out of order as Popery, Speak's little to the purpose
Page. 11. where he says. There is no Power in this Church and Kingdom (he
mean's England) to reform it self in matter of Religion, but only by that Form,
and to that Form which may appear to have been held by the whole Primitive
Church before the Corruption came in, which we pretend to reform. I cannot but
smile at this word Appear. Pray you Sr, Say to whom must it Appear? What? To
you or me, or to any private fallible man? You talk as if, forsooth, the
Primitive Doctrine were so apparently Manifest to People, that every one by
opening Books and reading Autiquity, may with a wet singer clearly discover the
true and Orthodox Form of Religion, Whereas the contrary is evident, For have
not we and Protestants (to omit others) now for a whole Age perused Councils,
and Fathers, and after all, do we not see with our eyes, that what seems
Orthodox Doctrine to one Party, seems not so to the other? It appears
manifestly to me, that the Primitive Fathers, so openly maintained an unbloody
Sacrifice upon the Altar, that the wit of man cannot without violence, wrest
them to a contrary sense; does the Truth appear so to Protestants? It appeared
to S. Cyprian Epist. 55. ad Cornel. Dissentions arises after the perusal of the
primitive writings
and to me also, That Heresy and Schism, take their Origin from this, That the
fraternity of Christians answerably to Gods command, Obey not one Priest (and
one Judge) who is Christ's Vicegerent in the Militant Church on earth. Will
Sectaries read and understand this as I do? It seemed clear to S. Hierome
cited above, That one out of the Roman Catholic Church, whereof Pope Damasus
was then Head really belonged not to Christ, but to Antichrist, and Therefore
ought to be esteemed an Alien from the house of God, a Person unclean, and
profane. Will the Protestant after his reading these words own the Doctrine
pure and Orthodox? No he dares not.

21. What then is the Result, though we read these and a hundred other Passages
in the ancient Records so Plain for Popery? Experience tell's us, nothing else
ensues but an endless contest about their Sense, and crossing one an other with
contrary glosses. This is all that can appear to Mr Thorndick. Wherefore Unless
The plainest Authorities Convince not Sectaries
Recourse be had to better Principles then to mere Appearances, Disputes may
go on till Dooms day, without Satisfaction, or fruit to any. Be it how you
will. My hearty wish is, that Mr Thorndick, who hitherto Stays in
Generallities, would please fully to set down that whole Platform of Religion,
which he conceiues exact, and suitable to the Primitive Church. Were this done
(which will never be) I am confident, His Extract or what is required of Mr
Thorndick
Draught would appear so imperfect, and misshapen a Business in the judgment of
Catholics and Protestants also, That as the one Party cannot, but look on it
with disdain, so the other would reject it as unworthy Acceptance.

22. Besides, would it not seem a new wonder to Strangers abroad, Yea and as
ridiculous as wonderful, were rhey told, that after so much labor spent about
reforming Religion in England, we have yet at present a thoughtful Gentleman
there, that is very busy in Setting forth the last and best Edition of
Protestancy Reformed, which perhaps may prove worse than any other gone before.
Naught it must needs be, for this Reason, That the means he would reform by,
has no Proportion with the designed End. For by A New^ Reformer of Religion in
these old days of the world.
the light of a few dead Manuscripts, written 14. or. 15. Ages Since, He
offer's now to amend all the Churches in the world, though the very sense of
these Writings which must be the Rule of his Reformation, is neither well known
to Himself, nor yet agreed on, by those dissenting Churches he would reform.
What think ye? Were this sense yet to be learned, (the want whereof causes
endless Errors among Sectaries,) would not common Prudence rather take it from
a living Oracle, which has taught the world time out of mind, than from a late
Nouellist that Professes himself fallible, and Therefore may most easily
Misinterpret would appear ridiculous to all.
the best Records? This living Oracle at least promises infallibility (Which
Shall be proved presently) And therefore is a Surer Principle to rely on, Then
The Fathers Sentences long Since Written, whilst Sectaries make Their sense and
true meaning a Matter of Contest.

23. Yet one word more and I end. Mr Thorndick will Reform the present Roman
Church Corrupted, by the Primitive supposed pure for the first 4. or. 5. Ages.
I must needs demand first, whether that Primitive Church, the Rule of his
Reformation Questions proposed to our Adversary.
was infallible, and pure in those pretended fundamentals only, necessary to
Salvation, though not in other Doctrins of lesser Moment? Or. 2. Whether She
(because fallible) as much needed Reformation in smaller Matters not called
fundamental, as this present Church is supposed to need? Or. 3. Whether She was
so entirely pure in every doctrine, little, and great, that She could not be
brought to more Purity, or be better Reformed? Grant the first. viz. That the
Primitive Church was vnerrable and pure in fundamentals only, not in others,
The present Roman Church is as good as She was, For our Adversary own's Her a
true Church wherein Salvation may be had, and thus far She needs no reforming.
Grant. 2. that both these Churches, because fallible, might err, and perhaps
have erred in lesser Matters, not named fundamental, The Primitive can be no
Rule of Reformation to the present Church, because that Primitive is alike
err(...), alike reformable, And for ought men know, as much out of the way of
truth in Non-fundamentals as the present Church is; Therefore I said above, if
the blind cannot lead the blind, a Church wanting Reformation cannot reform
another sick of the same malady.

24. If finally it be Said, the Primitive Church was so infallible, so pure
every way, both in great and little Matters, that She could not be more
reformed in the first 5. Centuries for example: We have a Church once entirely
pure, And then urge our Herein Satisfaction is most required.
Adversary not barely to say it, But to prove upon indubitable Principles,
Scriptures, Fathers, or the General Consent of Christians, that She continued
not wholly as pure in the sixth, seventh, or eight Age, and so downward to our
days as She was before. To show a Deficiency in this Church once confessedly
true, in after Ages, will be more than an Herculian labor, when it is
demonstratiuely euidenced above, That nothing but a Church equally as Ancient,
as Universal, and glorious in Miracles as the Roman is, can probably impeach
Her of the least Corruption. Mr Thorndicks Mistake is, that he makes (as
Sectaries usually do) a false Supposition his Proof; He supposes A supposition
made a Proof.
our Church corrupted in Doctrine, and then will amend it according to his fancy
by the Primitive, whereas he knows, or ought to know, that we Catholics deny
His Supposition, and say both are vnerrable, and withal Assert, that no
Authority on earth can better inform us of the Primitive Doctrine than the
present Roman Church, which has successively handed it to us Age after Age.
Howeuer to take away all ambiguity and further Dispute in this Matter, you have
next, three following Chapters which I hope will give Satisfaction to the
rational Reader. More shall be added hereafter.

CHAP. XIV.
Whether there be a Church of one Denomination infallible, not only in Matters
miscalled Fundamental, but in all and every Doctrine She Proposes, and Obliges
Christians to believe, as Faith?

1. AS the Answer to the Question aym's at a clear and easy way of ending
Controversies Concerning Religion, So the following Discourse tend's to settle
one great truth in the minds of every one. viz. That both the Ancient, and
present Roman Catholic Church is not only infallible, But that the what we
intend to prove.
Adversaries of Her infallibility destroy the very Essence of Christian
Religion, And deservedly merit upon that Account, The name of Schismatics and
Heretics also.

2. To make good what is now Asserted, a few Postulata or Principles must be
premised. One is. That Church which Promises, and proves Herself infallible in
Doctrine does not only Upon these following Principles.
facilitate, but gives also absolute Security to Faith, For such a Church
Participat's most, and comes nearest to that first Divine Apostolical Spirit,
which confessedly was infallible.

3. A. ^. Principle. Whereas nothing has, or ought to have, a stronger
Influence over the minds of men than Religion, So nothing can discountenance it
more, than a steadfast Persuasion of its Fallibility, and Consequently, of it is
easily being False. This Persuasion Cut's of all Christian Assurance, and
drives men to so cold an Indifference of embracing this or that Religion, That
it much import's not which to take to, any or none.

4. A. 3. Principle. The means or influence whereby Christ preserues his Church
infallible, needs not to be explicated by any Supernatural quality, personally
inhering in the Teaching Representative, or intrinsecally eleuating the
conuened Prelates to a State of Infallibility; for it is enough, that the safe
Conduct of Almighty God, who is always vigilant, and Assists by his exterior
Protection, so secures the Church from error, that She neither What the
Churches Infallibility requires.
can be misled, when She teaches, nor mislead others. Yet I deny not but that
an interior Motion of Grace may be, yea and often is in the hearts of such as
are Assembled together in God's name, and Assisted to define infallibly. Divine
Faith, It Is true actually elicited, even after the permanent Habit infused,
requires a Supernatural Motion of Grace, But hereof we speak not at present.

5. A. 4. Principle. When it is enquired Whether the Church Distusiue be
infallible, the Querie is not, whether the Motives inducing to distinguish that
Oracle from others, Demonstratiuely and with all Metaphysical certitude,
evidence likewise Gods Revelation relating to the Mysteries Believed; For this
might lead us to enquire whether Faith be evident in Attestante, That is, so
Vnexceptionably manifest, that all may clearly Infer from the Revelation
clearly known, That the Mysteries believed, are evidently true. We now meddle
not with that Difficulty, though great Divines patronize the Affirmative, But
only Ask, Whether the Doctrine of Christ's Church be so infallibly Certain, that
it cannot be False or deceive any. Catholics The Question Stated.
own a triple infallibility necessary to Faith. The first proper to God's
Revelation, no Protestant denies that. The second belongs to the Church, either
Diffusiue, or Representative in General Councils, whereby we learn, and that
infallibly, those Truths which God reueals. The third infallible Assurance
necessary to Faith, all Orthodox Christians have, that believe the A threefold
Infallibility.
Mysteries revealed upon the Divine Testimony, Proposed by Christ's Church.

6. A. 5. Principle. If, (what is most undoubted) Divine Faith essentially
relies upon Gods infallible Verity speaking by one or more men sent to Teach,
(who prove their Mission and Demonstrate the Credibility of the Doctrine
delivered) it necessarily follows, That, that first infallible Verity beget's
in every true Belieuer, no less perfect Faith Than what is most certain and
infallible. Wherefore as it is the indispensable Duty of every believing
Christian to acquiese in, and rest upon God's infallible Man's Duty grounded on
Christ's Promise.
Veracity; So it is an indispensable Promise, That we have Christ present with
a Church which teaches all Truth, And therefore cannot but Propose the Object
of Faith infallibly. The firm Promise irreuokably issued from Power and Goodness
it self, Matt. 28. 20. I am with you always to the end of the world. John.
14. 16. I will Ask the Father, and he will give you an other Comforter, the
Spirit of truth to remain with you for ever. Hell gates cannot preuail against
the Church. Thus much premised.

7. The Difficulty now agitated is. Whether the Roman Catholic Church and Her
approved General Councils be so secured from Error, That She cannot swerue
from that first Support of Truth, (I mean God's infinite Veracity) But must when
She teaches, Teach that exactly which God has revealed, and will have after a
sufficient Proposal, Universally believed. Sectaries say, She may, Yea actually
has swerued from God's Revelation, and in great Matters too, though not perhaps
in the What Protestants assert.
Primary Fundamentals, (as they are Called) or in Fundamentals Simply necessary
to Salvation, And they were forced to this wicked Doctrine upon three naughty
Motives.

8. First to give Scope, or rather to inuit Libertins to hold or deny so much
of Christian Religion as pleases their fancy; And do we not see the liberty
effectually laid hold on in England amongst Phanaticks, and such giddy People?
All this giddines And why?
came first from the reformed, or rather the deformed Nouelty of Protestancy.
They do it. 2. to make Controversies Endless, For deny the Churches
Infallibility, Cauils go on; Grant Her infallible Disputes are ended. 3. This
is done, to quit themselves of an Infamy justly laid upon them, of being both
Schismatics and Heretics at once, which shall never be clawed of, do what
they can. For these unsound reasons, or pestilent The Catholic Assertion.
Motives rather, The Church forsooth must needs be fallible. Catholics on the
other side, maintain the contrary, And say there is a Church so Infallible,
that She cannot err in any thing She teaches, as Faith. And thus much God
willing shall be euinced in the following Discourse. But to do it exactly, I am
briefly to lay open to all that have eyes, The Abject, the Desperate and
Desolate condition of a fallible Church. You have here my first Proposition.

9. A fallible Church is essentially Constituted, in a State of public A
fallible Church is in a State of rebellion.
Rebellion and Hostility with it Self, Wages war against Infidels without hope
of conuincing, or conquering any: And therefore cannot be Christ's Orthodox
Church. To declare further what I would say know first, That Sectaries own a
Catholic Church much larger than the Roman Catholic, And make Themselves Part
of it. Conceive now (which though very hard is yet possible), that the
Representative of this great Moral Body meet's in a General Council, and
discusses the Question now in hand. Viz. Whether there be a Church of one
Denomination Preserved infallible by Divine Assistance? Part of the
Representative, and these are Protestants, Oppose the total Infallibility of
every Church. Part (Catholics I mean) Say one Church is infallible, and that
is the Roman. The Difficulty proposed can be decided, or not. If not; This
great Representative meet's to no purpose, but only to make more No means to
unite it.
Strife in the world. If it can be decided, God has provided means whereby the
truth of so weighty a Matter may be known, But there is no such means left,
unless some one Church or other (or all together) be owned infallible,
Therefore an endless Hostility goes on, in this supposed Representative.

10. That all means fail may Sectaries Votes have place, is indisputably
Evident. You shall see it clearly. The Catholic Party Appeals to Scripture,
alleges these and other like Passages. Without some One Church be Infallible
He who hear's you hears me, and from thence infer's, Who ever hear's the
Church hear's Christ, an Infallible Teacher. The Church is the Pillar and
ground of Faith, and hence concludes, She is infallible. The Spirit of Truth
shall remain with the Church for ever. Pastors, and Doctors, are appointed by
Providence to preserve the faithful from wavering in Faith, and all erroneous
Circumuention. Hell gates cannot preuail against the Chutch etc. What can be
more The Scripture.
Significant, if plain words have sense for the Infallibility of some One
Church? Yet all these and many other Testimonies so shrink to nothing, (may
Sectaries Glosses stand in force) That no man can say what God speak's in these
Scriptures or know the Truth now debated. Viz. Whether any Church be infallible
or not, This means failing of its End which ought to compose our Strife,
Hostility is as vigorous, as when the Dispute began, for yet we know nothing
certainly.

11. Pass from Scripture to Fathers, We have there most pregnant Expressions.
The Church cannot be adulterated. Cypria^ And Fathers Speak significantly the
Churches Infallibility*
de Unit Eccle: What She once received from Christ, She ever hold^. Idem.
Epist. ad Corn. She is a pure Virgin in Faith, and cannot be deceived or
seduced, nor overcome with any Violence, being vpheld by Her Virginal
integrity. Fulgent. Epist. ad Probum. Cap. 5. Her Fa^^ is invincible, even to
the Powers of Hell. Eusebius Caesar. Praepar. E(...)g. ^ib. 1. C. 3. If any fear
to be deceived by the obscurity of a Question, let him Consult that Church
concerning it, which the Scripture Demonstrat's without any ambiguity. S.
Austin. lib. Contra Crescon. C. 33. What think ye? Is not the Churches Immunity
from Error clearly established? No say Sectaries, For though we cannot
confront these Passages of Scripture and Fathers, with others as significant
for our Plea of Fallibility; Yet we do, and must deny Their plain Sense; We do,
and must say, The Roman Church has been adulterated, otherwise we are
Schismatic'ks. We must Sectaries deny all, or must own themselves Schismatiks.
say, that though once pure She lost what she had received; And therefore is
now no Virgin, but a Harlot. We must Say, Her Faith is Vincible, That it is
not safe to consult Her in dubious Matters, for She can return no better
Answer, than what is fallible and may be false. Thus Sectaries.

12. Hence it follows first; That our great supposed Representative, made up
of Protestants, Catholics, and all other called Christians stand's without
redress in an open Rebellion, in a public Hostility with it Self, And
consequently taken in its whole Latitude is not Christ's Church, Because the
Church of Christ is essentially founded in Unity, This supposed Representative,
torn as you see in pieces with intestine Divisions is not one, And therefore
most desolate, For, Omne regnum diuisum in se desolabitur. And here by the way,
I take leave to tell Sectaries, It Is but Folly to talk as They do, of a
Catholic Church wider than the Roman, Or of a lawful Representative possibly
to be conuened in Unity, out of the Body of all named Christians, For as such a
Church (considered Two Mistakes of Sestaries.
in the largest Extent) which stands divided in Faith is not Orthodox; So such
an assembled Council, made up of so many iarring Belieuers (considered under
that notion of Hostility and Rebellion.) can be no legitimate Council. The
reason is. Christ never owned a Church professing more Faiths than one, nor
lawful Councils consisting of other Members than Orthodox Christians. You will
then say Heretics, are not to What Heretics have to do in Councils.
^e admitted into Councils lawfully called. I Answer they are admitted, but
how? Freely to dispute, not to Teach; to propose difficulties, but not to
Regulate Faith, to acquiese in the Churches Definitions, but not to define,
remaining Heretics.

13. You see. 2. That a Church fallible in Her Definitions concerning Faith,
vainly attempt's to reclaim Infidels and Heretics from their Errors.
Wherefore the Nicene Fathers Condemnation of Arius might have been justly
excepted against and pleaded reuersable upon this ground, That what they
defined (because fallible) might be as far from Truth, as the very Errors they
Censured, and defined against. Nay I say more: If that Council was then
fallible, it lies yet at the mercy, not only of Arians, but of all Christians
at this day, to admit, or reject, the Nicene Censure, or rather, if Prudence
have place, to suspend Strange sequels if the Church be fallible
their Judgments and say, no man knows what to believe. Into such darkness,
upon such Hazard, and indifferency, Christians are cast, if God's Church or
that Council could err. One instance may give you some light.

14. Imagine a Heathen at that time, when Arianism seemed prosperous, and
carried much vogue in the East, well inclined to embrace Christian Religion,
VVithall Suppose the man firmly settled in this Judgment, That Catholic
Religion (much resembling Arianism) was so fallible, that both the one and
other might be false. Say I beseech you How indifferent would this Judgment
have made the Heathen, to either Religion? Nay would it not, had interest
swayed never so little, have drawn him more to Arianism? Yes most assuredly.
For thus he might have discoursed, and prudently. What, they call Catholic
Religion How the Heath^n discourses.
and Arianism are much alike, both fallible both may be false. My Interest now
when Arianism flourishes, carries me thither. It Is true, I meet there with
fallible Doctrine which may be false (God knows how things are) but the
mischief is I can find no better amongst Catholics, nor in any other Society
of Christians. Now if all I can learn be no better but fallible, and perhaps
false Doctrine too, I may as well learn that from the Arians as from Catholics,
or rather ought to suspect all Christian Religion of Error, because none of
that Profession And Concludes against a fallible Religion.
can assure me infallibly, what God has Said. But such Doctors says the
Heathen who may as easily teach me to iniure an Infinite Verity, and ascribe
that to God he never revealed, as lead me to acquiesce in his revealed truths,
(were any such truths in being) deserve no Credit, Therefore I neither can, nor
will believe any thing.

15. Before we make a further Step to one or two Propositions which decide this
Controversy, a few difficulties are to be cleared against the precedent
Discourse. One is. Hostility ceases in the ample Council now mentioned, would
all, which is easy, Agree in one Truth, That Christ's Church is infallible in
Fundamentals only, or fundamentals simply necessary to Salvation. Answ: This is
to say If that were done (which never was, nor can be done) a Reunion follows.
Alas, it is not yet agreed on by all nor ever will be (unless some quit their
Errors) One objection answered.
which and where, Christ's true Church is. It is not yet nor can be agreed on,
How many or few these fundamentals are, For though Catholics and Protestants
Unite in a belief of the Trinity, and call that a Fundamental Article, The
Arians stand out, and Hostility ceases not but increases by the Sectaries Means.
oppose both. The means then here thought of, is so far from establishing Union
that it increases Division, And so it will ever fall out whilst a Church of one
Denomination, is not acknowledged infallible in every Doctrine She teaches, and
obliges Christians to believe under pain of Damnation. Se more hereof above.
Chap. 5. n. 5.

16. A. 2. Objection. Dissentions in Councils (witness those at Basil and
Florence) or the Access of Heretics cannot lessen their Power, or Anull their
Definitions, Therefore our Plea taken from the Hostility in a most ample
Council Euinces nothing. Answ. I grant the Antecedent and say, Though
Heretics and dissenting Christians meet together, yea, Though some too busily
advance opinions dissonant to truth and Orthodox Doctrine, Yet God's gracious
and watchful Providence, which draws good out of Evil, And often conuert's War
into Peace, will with all Assurance effect that such a Council either break up
and Define nothing, Or, if a Definition issues forth that only shall be defined
which is certain, and infallible. Thus much is granted. Yet I deny the
Consequence and Say, The Argument drawn from Hostility Conuinces. Here is my
reason. That Imagined R^presentatiue consist's, as we now suppose, of Arians,
Protestants, Catholics, Socinians and all other called Christians, For these,
as some think, Collectiuely taken, make up the diffused Church of Christ more
ample than the Roman, Or, if so many The Argument taken From Hostility
Conuinces.
Constitute it not, Let Sectaries please to tell us what Christians are to be
excluded, or precisely how many are the Members of this diffused Catholic
Body? In the mean while vouchsafe to Consider the force of my Argument,
grounded upon an implacable Hostility.

17. This whole diffused Moral Body evidently maintain's Contradictions. For
example, Christ is the highest God, Christ is not the highest God. Our Lords
Sacred Body is substantially present in the Eucharist: That Body is not
substantially present. As therefore this large Society of Christians, now
supposed but one great Church holds contradictions, So it must be granted, that
the Representative of it also hold's the same Contradictions, Or, cease ^o
ips^ to Represent the whole Diffused Moral Body.

18. Hence one of these three Sequels ineuitably follows. The first. If this
Representative still continues to Represent (which is ever to be noted) and
proceed's to a Definition, answerable to the Sentiment of the large Moral Body
in Division, it necessarily Defines the contradictions of those Churches to The
Reasons and Proofs of my Assertion.
be Orthodox Doctrine, and were this done There is More then Hostility enough,
For thus impossible Contradictions, are both Definable and Belieuable. Or, it
follows 2. that our imagined Representative break's up, and leaves all points
in Controversy as Wholly undecided as they were before; And this which implies
an endless Hostility, would, I think, be the Result of that Council, And upon
that Account appear a ridiculons Representative. Or. 3. This follows. That
some one Part or other in the Representative must lay down Arms, and
acknowledge one Church of One Denomination absolutely infallible, in whose
Sentence all are to rest. Without this Acquiescency in one Orthodox and
Infallible Church, Errors in Faith go on as S. Austin Speak's what we Assert.
we see hitherto in a remediless condition. This truth S. Austin. Lib. de
symb. ad Catec^um. C. 6. Saw well, where He speak's profoundly to my present
purpose. Ipsa est Ecclesia sancta, Ecclesia vna etc. She, and she only is the
holy the one Church, the Catholic Church, which fights against all Heresies,
She may fight, but cannot be foiled. And Might I here Digress a little, I could
Demonstrate That never Heresy yet of any Fame in the world appeared since
Christ's time, but it was Crushed censured, and condemned by one only Oracle the
Roman Catholic Church, to whose Sentence the very best of Christians dutifully
Submitted, relying on our Saviors secure Promise. Hell gates cannot preuail
against that Oracle.

19. A. 3. Objection. Scripture alone though all Churches were fallible, is
sufficient to teach infallible Faith necessary to Salvation. Answ. Of all
Objections proposable, this is least worth. For had Scripture that sufficiency,
it may, I hope, be yet Enquired, Whether the Church also, which cannot clash
with Scripture, has the like Prerogative of infallibility. Scripture was
infallible when the Apostles preached, and yet their Preaching was as
infallible as The words they wrote. But here is not my greatest Exception. I
say Scripture and all the Verities in it go to wrack if the Church be
fabllible, For grant this, we have no infallible Certainty of the Scriptures
Canon, of it is substantial Purity or Immunity from corruption, of it is true
Scripture with out the Churches infallible Testimony, loses force.
Sense in a hundred controuerted passages. We cannot believe that Christ is
God, or That his Ascent into Heaven was real, and not a vain Vision. We Cannot
believe what Sacraments are, nor know the number of them without the Church.
Therefore unless this Principle stand unshaken. It is immediately more certain
that the Church, manifested by Her Marks is Gods own Oracle, Than That
Scripture, setting Church Authority aside is Gods word, we can believe nothing.
For who see's not but that very Book would soon have been out of credit, had
not God by special Assistance preserved as well it is Doctrine pure in Men's
hearts, as He preserved the words in Velume or parchment, And this by the means
of a watchful living Oracle his infallible Church.

20. Again, and this Reason conuinceth. Were Scripture judged sufficient to
teach Saluifical Faith completely, independently of the Church, Or were the
Church (when that Judgment is) held not only errable but actually erroneous,
How can any having The Assertion is proved.
these two judgments ( Scripture Infallibly ^eaches Faith completely). The
Church because erroneous fail's in this Duty) Account himself a Heathen or
Publican (as our Lord Says) though he absolutely refuse to hear the Church?
His refusal Certainly is prudent and defensible upon this ground, That
Scripture does all, learns him enough, Therefore none can oblige him to hear
the Church, which may mislead and Propound false Doctrins, For no man in his
wits will listen to a Fallible Oracle, whilst he has another at hand, that
teaches all Truths infallibly.

21. If you reply. Such an one is at least obliged to hear the Church in
Fundamentals, but not in others. The Intelligent Person Asks, whether
Protestants who lay that obligation A Reply answered.
upon him of believing fundamentals only, own that Assertion s^ infallible,
that to believe the Distinction is an Article of their Faith? If they say it is
a fundamental Article and that he is obliged to believe so, Protestants do not
only maintain one infallible fundamental Point peculiar to themselves, disowned
by the Roman Catholic Church (for She certainly reiect's the Distinction) The
Sectary C^nuicted of Error.
but moreover now become infallible Oracles, in a Matter of greatest
Importance, which cannot pass, because they are Professedly fallible in all
they teach, Therefore may truth have place, the Dictinction given between
fundamentals, is both Vnfundamental and fallible Doctrine, And so without More
we are freed from all Obligation of believing the Church, for that Distinction
failing to be a fundamental truth, The Church is absolutely fallible in
fundamental Doctrine. Well then may we not hear Her at all, without any Note of
being looked on as Heathens, and Publicans.

22. Some perhaps, great Patrons of Christian Liberty, and freedom of mind in
matters of Faith, may object. 4. The Church cannot exercise Her Authority over
men's Judgments, or oblige any to an internal Assent, Her power being limited
and to thus much only, as to order and regulate the Exterior A Reflection made
upon Christian Libertins.
for this end, that Unity and peace May be preserved without public
Dissension. Answ. These men certainly never say their Creed. I believe the holy
Catholic Church, that is in mind interiourly, I give Assent to all the
Catholic Church teaches, Now if this Doctrine stand, They may well not yield
Assent at all to any Doctrine the Church teaches, but like Hypocrites may
outwardly be fair Catholics, and inwardly foul Heretics, And this is, to
Profess one thing, and believe another. Christ is ashamed of them. Luke. 9. 26.
and so is the Apostle also Romans 1. 16. Who blushed not to preach as he
believed, And to believe as he preached. But enough hereof is said in the other
Treatise.

CHAP. XV.
Divine Faith in this present State of things, necessarily requir's a Church
infallible. The Reason hereof. The Church neither Defin's, nor can Define by
Humane Authority only. Her Definitions, more than morally certain, are
Infallible. Sectaries Recourse to Moral certainty in Matters of Faith, a most
frigid Plea. Their Fallacy is discovered. Objections Answered

1. ONe Principle established above. N. 6. Proves the first part of my
Assertion. Divine Faith which is a firm Assent to what ever God speak's So
vltimatly rest's upon his Infallible Veracity, One Principle premised.
That if a true Belieuer yield Assent to him as He speaks, and because He
speaks, All the power in Heaven cannot Separate Infallibility from that Belief.
Herein consist's the Perfection of all Divine Faith, That without sweruing, it
tend's upon a Verity Infallible, and without Hesitancy hold's that infallibly
true, which the infallible Verity Reueal's. A lesser Perfection than this is
not Faith, And a greater the Apostles had not, if we precisely respect The
perfection of Faith.
the Motive of their Assent, Hence all must Distinguish a twofold
Infallibility, One intrinsic, and infinite, proper to Gods Verity, The Other
answerable to a creatures Capacity, (finit, it is true), yet Infallible, and
such the Apostles Faith was.

2. Thus much Supposed, not easily gainsaid by Sectaries, the infallibility of
one Church which we say is the Roman Catholic, Stand's firm. And here is the
Reason. As Faith relies upon an infallible Verity that reueal's Truth, So it
also rest's upon an infallible Oracle, which (without danger of Error) Applies
and Proposes that very Truth yet obscure, to Belieuers, For it little auail's
to have a Verity infallibly Revealed, if a fallible Oracle which may both Miss
and Mislead, be our best One ground of the Churches Insallibility.
and only Guide, or Proponent. The Church therefore which Says Indubitably, I
Propose what God Reueals, must be infallible, answerable to the Infallibility
of Divine Revelation. Ruin the One or Other Infallibility, Faith can be no more
but an uncertain Assent, And consequently no Faith at all.

3. To Reinforce this Reason. Please only to cast a serious The reason
reinforced.
Thought upon such as have been justly reputed Heretics, and upon their
Procedure. The* Arians after the reading Scripture denied the high Godhead in
Christ, His Eternal Consubstantiality also to the Father, And erred. The
Pelagians rejecting Original Sin, swerued likewise from the Verities of
Christian Religion; so did the Monothelits that impiously bereaved Christ of
his two Sacred Wills, Divine and Humane. The true Church, All know condemned,
and yet condemns these Tenets as Heretical. Right say modern Sectaries, And it
was well done. Very Good. If well done, hereupon ensues another troubleson
Question, and it is. Whether that true Church, whilst She condemned these
Errors and defined the contrary Truths, proceeded Doubtfully, Probably, upon
Moral Certainty only, or Spoke as Gods Oracle ought If the Church defines
doubtful.
to speak, Infallibly? If She Defined doubtfully, it is yet also doubtful
whether Christ be the high God, and Consubstantial to his Father, Unless
Scripture (now supposed God's word) in express Terms clear the doubt, and raise
the Doctrine to absolute Certainty, which most evidently is not done.

4. The whole Contest then is, Whether the Church or Arians Interpret
Scripture better, For the Object of my Assent when I believe the eternal Word,
Consubstantial, being not Express Scripture, but an Interpretation only, it
follows, if the Interpretation which the Church gives be supposed doubtful,
She wrong's the Arians, and all other Christians, whilst She obliges them to
believe the Mystery otherwise than only, Sub dubio or doubfully, which is not
to believe at all. Again If the Churches She wrongs both Arians and All
Christians
Definition get a Step higher, to a degree of Probability and no more; The
Arians Opinion for ought we know yet, may be as tenable as the Contrary Doctrine
now supposed Orthodox, And Consequently the real Consubstantiality of the Son
to his Father, is no more any Object of Faith, but merely a disputable Matter
like this or that Opinion in Schools, earnestly tossed to and fro, But never
ended. Doubts therefore, And mere probabilities rejected, too weightles for
Church Definitions,

5. We are next to look a little into one only Refuge left The Sectaries Plea
of Moral Certainty examined.
Sectaries, called Moral Certainty. It Is a dark cloud, they are lately got
into, our Endeavor shall be to dissipate it. They may say. When the Church
condemned Arianism (the like is of any other Heresy) and defined the Eternal
Word Consubstantial. The Definition (much above Probability) though not
absolutely Infallible, was yet so morally Certain that no man can, but most
unreasonably, doubt of its Verity. In passing, I may without Offense take
notice of Sectaries Inconsequences, and Ask, if Moral Certainty be at least had
from Church Definitions, when She interpret's Scripture, though the Doctrine be
not formally expressed There, Why are not Her Definitions every whit as Morally
certain against Luther and Calvin, though what She Defin's be not in express
Terms Gods word? I would also as willingly learn, why Protestant Doctrine is not
esteemed over all the world so Morally certain as thief Ancient Catholic
Definitions are? But let these Queries, not easily Answered pass, We come to
the main difficulty, and demand.

6. Whether this Positive Doctrine. Christ is the Highest God, and
Consubstantial to his Father be a Fundamental Article of Christian Faith
finally resoluable into the Divine Revelation, And admitted A question Proposed
to Sectaries.
as most Fundamental by Protestants? I verily persuade my self they will Say it
is: If not; This follows ineuitably, that there is no fundamental Article in
our Christian faith. Upon the supposed Concession I Argue. But If the Church be
fallible, this Positive Doctrine. Christ is Consubstantial. is no Article of
Faith because it cannot be resolved into an infinite Verity infallibly
Revealing Truth, Therefore it is only a Moral humane Persuasion at most, which
may be false.

7. The Proof of the Minor, will best appear if we Ask why Sectaries believe
that positive Doctrine? They cannot Answer, Scripture expressly Teaches it; For
most evidently that is not so. Will they say the Mystery may by good Discourse
be deduced The true Answer proves Faith Certain.
from Scripture? I Could wish to see a clear Deduction, yet fear it. Howeuer
Suppose that done, new Doubts arise concerning the certainty of the Deduction,
which can be no more but morally certain, most insufficient to ground Divine
Faith. The true Answer therefore must be, or none. The Nicene Council, The both
pas't, and Present Church faithfully interpreting Scripture, Definitiuely
delivered the Doctrine, and upon this ground we believe the Mystery.

8. Now here we come to the main Business, and Ask again, whether God speaking
by this Church as his own Oracle, Proposes that Doctrine and obliges all to
believe it, Or, Contrariwise, whether the Church divorced as it were from
Divine Assistance teaches upon Her own humane fallible Authority, And The
Churches Infallibility further euinced
obliges all to believe the Mystery? Grant the first, The Definitions of the
Church are infallible, because an Eternal Verity speaks infallibly by Her. Say
secondly, That the Church wholly Vnassisted, teaches and Defines upon Her own
fallible humane Authority, the Doctrine we learn from Her of the Incarnation, of
the highest Godhead in Christ, of his being Consubstantial, of the Blessed
Trinity, of Original Sin, beget's no Faith, Because if the Supposition hold's,
that Assent relies not at all upon an Infallible Verity speaking by the Church
Assisted, but upon a weak and fallible Human Authority which cannot support any
certain Belief, For it is most preposterous to Say, that men merely fallible,
as all are left to Themselves, can Assure us, what that Doctrine is, which God
Reueal's Infallibly. Now we Come to this Moral Certainty.

9. And one Perhaps will say, Such men, though fallible, may at least give
Moral Assurance of the truth of the Doctrine, and that is enough. Contra. 1.
Moral assurance which ever implies some weak Degree of fear of the contrary may
in rigor be false: But the Church, which obliges all to believe Her Doctrine
under pain of Damnation speak's without fear, and Says boldly. God reueal's as
I teach, Therefore her Doctrine if false, is the Devils Doctrine. But none can
say, That the Nicene Definition against Arius was the Doctrine of Devils, But
Contrariwise a Truth revealed by God, and Belieuable Fide Diuina, Ergo it was
infallible, and more than Morally certain. Contra. 2. God The Churches
Definitions More then Morally Certain.
Speaking by the Church gives greater Certainty than Moral, And if he do not
speak at all by Her, the Definition now removed from Infallible Assistance
Vphold's not Faith, as we shall se presently, nor can it be prudently judged
morally certain.

10. Though much be said in the other Treatise. Disc. 1. C. 4. 6. against this
Pretense to Moral certainty (Sectaries casually light on it because, forsooth,
they brook not the word. Infallibility) yet here we must wholly weaken that
Plea. I say Therefore, could the Church (as She cannot) Define or teach without
Gods special Assistance, Christians would either not attain to so great
certainty of Her Doctrine, as is Moral; Or if no greater could be had, That
certainty would not be Divine Faith. Every one knows Moral certainty to be a
kind of knowledge, whereby men judge such things are, or are not, without great
Hesitancy or any reasonable cause of Doubting, It is usually grounded upon some
vulgar Persuasion, or common half owned Evidence, which the most of men trust
to prudently, When no surer can be had. Thus we say. All People in Common
Conversation speak not always contrary to their thoughts. Some mean well in
their Priceeding. The Nature of Moral certainly briefly hinted at.
Rome and Constantinople are now Cities in being. These and the like
Assertions may in rigor be false, Yet our Iudicatiue faculty without Violence
readily yeild's to all, induced thereunto by a Persuasion vulgarly received
whereby we say, That as such things are Commonly reported, So they also are
usually believed, and Commonly true. In a word the greatest part of Moral
certainty may be rightly styled a kind of half Supposed Evidence, current in
the world, which may Deceive, yet easily deceiues not.

11. Now be pleased to reflect. The sublime Mysteries of A reflection
Faith, remote from all vulgar Apprehensions and half owned Evidences, are
neither visible like Constantinople, seen by innumerable Eye-wittnesses, Nor
assured upon any either Fallible or deceiuable Authority, nor finally believed
upon a mere humane prudential Discourse only. No. They lie in a higher Region
above our natural knowledge in the Abyss of Gods inscrutable Wisdom, and the
more remote they are from Sense Or any Half-euidences, the more they stand in
need of an infallible Proponent, No Power deceiuable can ground Faith.
Whereby All rest Ascertained of their being Eternal Truths. Hence I Argue.
None but God above who Reueal's, and an infallible Church which Proposes the
Mysteries can give Assurance of their being Divine Truths, or say absolut'ly
They ought to be believed answerably to their Dignity, as Divine. Now further.
But if God reueal's them as his own Truths for this End, that all believe them
infallibly, the Church cannot but Speak in the name of God, and independently
of this Vulgar The insufficiency of Moral Certainty.
humane knowledge, Propose them also infallibly as Divine, Or if She could turn
us off with no more but a Moral Persuasion of their seeming Gods truths, yet
may not be so, The Strength of Faith vanishes into a dissatisfactory Topic,
into a mere Perhaps thus. It may be we Believe Truth, it may be not. In a word
we believe not as the Apostles did, infallibly.

12. Hence none, I think, shall ever comprehend how this Whimsy of Moral
Certainty got into our Protestants thoughts, For had Christians agreed in that
Certainty, or had they said: Because the Mysteries of faith are proposed so
weakly, We can believe with no Stronger assurance but Moral, They must have
received and learned that Doctrine (not from their own fancy) but from some
Superior Power, some known Oracle that taught so, which either revealed, or
proposed the Mysteries as only Morally certain, and no more. But to point at
any such Oracle is impossible, And here is the reason. All know, that God Faith
only Morally certain rejected by all that taught Christianity
an infallible Verity, cannot Reueal any Truth only Morally Certain. Christ our
Lord taught his own Verities infallibly, so also did the Apostles who were
Strangers to this low and half lame Assurance. No ancient Christians nameable
professed a less certainty (of Faith) than infallible in the Church which
taught them. The Roman Catholic Church you see for conuincing Reasons, lays
claim to divine Assistance when She Teaches; and disclaims this petty kind of
Certainty, which may be false: From whence then came the Persuasion of that
certainty into men's Heads when neither God, nor Christ, nor Apostles nor
Ancient Christians, nor any Orthodox Church ever favored it?

13. The true Answer is, Inimcus homo hoc fecit. An old Enemy to decry the
Infallibility of Gods own Oracle conveyed the fancy into a few Sectaries,
Though when they have it, it becomes The Author of Moral certainly.
wholly vseles to end Controversies. Observe my reason. If these men Dispute
with a Jew, will they say that Christian Religion, taken in what latitude you
please, is not absolutely infallible, but only a little More morally certain
than Judaism? Or if they Argue against us can they be so shameless, as to allow
Moral certainty to Protestancy and deny it to Catholic Religion? They must do
so, and here is the reason. Moral certainty is never appliable to two Parts of
a Contradiction, The One must It is vseles to Sectaries in all Disputes.
of necessity be made morally Improbable, (so if all judge in this Instant that
Constantinople is a City in being, the Contrary i^ Morally improbable) if
therefore Sectaries hold Protestancy Morally certain and the Roman Catholic
Doctrine not, This becomes in their Opinion Morally improbable. Dare they say so
much with any Countenance? If they do, our Dispute begins a fresh, we come to
the Trial of their Assertion, and will show when it pleases them to hear, that
their high challenge to Moral certainty, is far from being probable. At least
this is Evident, That whilst we most rationally except against it, its only an
unproven Supposition and ends no Controversies.

14. To discover yet more the Vnweightines of this weak An Instance
certitude in Matters of Faith. Imagine if you please First. (it is in this
present State an impossible Supposition yet gives light to what I would say)
that the Church had not Proposed at all the abst^use Mystery of the Sacred
Trinity, As it is already significantly Defined. Suppose again that twenty
learned men, (but fallible) after a perusal of Scripture had endeauored to
bring Themselves and others to believe it. viz. The Father of himself Proving
Moral Certainty insufficient.
Eternal and unbegotten, the Son Coequal and Eternal, begotten, The holy ^h^st
Eternal also and proceeding from Father and Son. All three Consubstantial, one
in Essence, in Power, in Wisdom, in Omnipotency, only distinguished by their
Relative Oppositions. I say notwithstanding; This their Assent would only have
been a weak Opinion not morally certain, and though hundreds more had Sided
with these Twenty upon the like Ground, none could have believed the Trinity
with Divine Faith. The reason is, Because whilst men merely fallible (and as
fallible) Propose an incomprehensible Mystery far above the reach of humane
understanding, The Proposal (relying upon a deceiuable, Or an vnassisted Power)
cannot bring Faith to it is own Object, Gods infallible veracity. The Resolution
of this supposed Faith clear's all. For Ask why They believe the Trinity? It is
Answered they verily think and persuade Themselves that the Mystery lies
couched in Holy Writ. But Ask again, whether that Thought or Persuasion be not
fallible, they Answer, affirmitiuely. Ergo, Say I, their Faith which cannot go
beyond the strength of that weak Proposition, is also fallible and consequently
not Divine.

15. Here you see first, the absolute Necessity of an infallible Proponent in
Points of Faith, which Sectaries have not, And therefore can believe nothing
Divinely; And truly Catholics would be in as bad a Condition (yea really no
Catholics) An Infallible proponent, necessary
could the Church only guess at these high Mysteries, could She propose them
upon a humane errable Authority only, Or in a word, Define Fallibly. You see.
2. Upon what ground the ^aith of a Catholic is infallible, For being demanded
why He belieues this, or any other Mystery, his Answer is, God reueal's them.
Questioned again who gives him so much Assurance? A satisfactory Reply is at
hand. He belieues so, because an Assisted Church, which cannot Err, Proposes
all Her Mysteries infallibly. Take away Divine Assistance, She is errable and
may deceive every one She teaches.

16. One may here demand whether the Protestants Belief of the Trinity, or of
any other high Mystery grows up to so much Certainty with them, as is Moral?
Answ. 1. It import's little whether it do or no, So long as their Faith is
merely fallible. I Answer 2. If we Speak rigorously, Their Belief is not
Sectaries have no faith morally certain.
morally certain. Here is my reason. Their own Divining in so abstruse a Matter
cannot raise the Assent so high, And if they would borrow, as it were,
Certainty from the Catholic Church, and Apply that to Themselves, They know
well this Oracle Ownes no other Certainty in the Belief of revealed Truths, but
what is infallible, and cannot be False.

17. By what is said already we easily Solue a common Objection. Moral
certainty seems often equivalent, yea wholly as Satisfactory An Objection.
to reason, as that is we call Physical, For one that never saw Constantinople
can no more Question the Being of such a City, than doubt of the sun's shining
at Noon day. Answ. All is most true, but nothing to the purpose, For, that
certainty Therefore equalizes physical, because (Originally grounded upon a
sensible visible Evidence) it is taken from innumerable Witnesses Moral
Certainty. grounded on Sensible Evidence gives not Faith any Assurance.
who have seen the place, This makes the common Report indubitable, and
conueyes unto us a certainty as firm, as if we saw Constantinople with our
Eyes. But the Mysteries of Faith lie, as is now noted in a higher Region, and
are neither proposed nor conveyed to us by the help of any visible or sensible
Evidence; And were they in some low degree morally certain upon humane Reports,
that would neither match, nor be so strong as natural Evidence is. Wherefore
God interposes his own Assistance and raises the Proposition of these Mysteries
and our Belief of them, to a yet higher Degree of certitude far above either
Moral or Physical, For whether we consider them as Truths revealed by an
infinite Verity, or proposed by the Church Divinely Assis^ed, They stand firm
upon infallible Principles. And thus we have their Truth indubitably conveyed,
And the Conueyance you se, admits of nothing but Infallibility. I say the
Truth, For without doubt there is a strong visible and sensible Evidence in the
Marks and Motives which Denote Christ's Church, and make Her Doctrine in the
highest manner indubitably Credible, But hereof you shall hear more partly in
the Objections, But most amply in the third Discourse.

18. To end this point concerning Moral Certainty. I Ask Moral Certainty in
Faith a most frigid Plea. And why?
(and for Answer appeal to the Judgment of every rational man) what cold
comfort would it have been to the Primitive Christians, had the Nicene Fathers
after a resolute Definition issued forth, whereby the Consubstantiallity of the
Divine Word was Asserred, and a Peremptory Anathema Pronounced against all that
believed it not, Declared themselves and Sense in this frigid manner? It is so
indeed Defined. But we only mean thus much, That the Doctrine is morally certain
and may be false. Would not Arius think ye have slighted the Definition? And
might he not have Argued to the purpose Thus? If no man can hold himself happy
for being actually in Error, He cannot Certainly think himself out of the
danger of an unhappy State, if he be exposed to the danger of Error, But the
Moral certainty you defend thrust's you upon the danger of being in Error,
Therefore your Condition is none of the surest, Nay it is as bad as mine, For
the worst that can befall my Doctrine, which I pretend Scripture for, is, That
it may one day prove false, and so may yours too (Good Fathers) if in the least
degree fallible.

19. Hence You se first, That the Definitions of Christ's euidenced Church must
either be owned infallible, And then mere Moral certainty has no place, Or
Heretics may endlesly cauil at Her Doctrine and boldly say, nothing is taught
nothing can be believed infallibly. If you Reply. Many cauil and except To
except against the Churches Infallibility destroys Faith.
against the Churches Infallibility. I answer. This is to say, Exception is
made against a Truth which either must stand unshaken, or Faith (made no more
but a tottering Opinion) is destroyed. And Mark in what a Distress poor
Christians are, who Ask. Domine quo ibimus? Lord whither shall we go to learn
Eternal truth? Protestants will needs draw us from a Church* hitherto held
infallible, And to afford a better provision of Truth, remit us to Themselves,
who confessedly are fallible in all they Teach. A Paradox beyond Expression.
The Church is supposed fallible, The Sectaries Paradox.
and Protestants are really fallible. Where then is our Security? From whom
shall we learn Truth? From no body. But more of this hereafter.

20. You se. 2. There is not one received Christian Principle so much as
seemingly favorable to Moral certainty only which may be falls, or which forces
That upon the Churches Inf^rences.
Definitions. Whereas, on the contrary, Scripture Councils, and Fathers
Positiuely Averr Church Doctrine to be infallible. You se. 3. To pretend to true
Faith or to true Religion divorced from Infallibility, Destroys Both, For
although every Truth be not infallible, yet Truth and Infallibility inseparably
meet in Faith. Wherefore this Inference inuiolably hold's good. My Catholic
Faith is true Ergo it is infallible. For Faith relies upon, And is vltimatly
Resolved into God's infallible Veracity, which (with the Concurrenee of other
Principles requisite) Transfuses into it a Supereminent infallibility above all
natural Certitude. What ever makes Faith true makes it Infallible.
That Therefore which makes Faith true, makes it also Infallible. Now further
to our present Purpose. God as we here Suppose revealed the Consubstantiallity
of his Son Infallibly, But the Mystery lies dark in Scripture, The Church
empowered to Propose exactly eternal revealed Truths, Answerable to* Her Trust
and the weightines of the matter, speak's not like one faint hearted, Forsooth,
Morally speaking Christ is the highest God. The word is Consubstantial, But
Asserts it without all Peraduentures, And strik's Arianism dead with one only
Definition. And thus Faith stand's firm upon a double infallibility, the One
infinite and Essential to God's Verity; The Other, the infallible Proposition
of an Assisted Church, For as She Proposes the obscure Mysteries of Faith, so
we believe. Whereof more presently.

Other Objections proposed by Sectaries, Solued. More of Moral certainty.
21. One, though enough broken already, must appear again in our New men's
Terms, or nothing is done. Thus they Discourse. If Christian Doctrine be in so
high a Degree Morally Certain, As it is Certain that Caesar, Pompey and Cicero
were men once in Being, None can reasonably doubt of the Doctrine, And why may
not Such an Assurance Content us, without our pretended Infallibility? I read
this in Mr Stillingfleet more then once, And had I not seen it with my own
Eyes, I Should never Sectaries Mistaks concerning Moral certainty.
have thought, That One Professing Knowledge in Divinity could have erred so
enormously. To lay open the foul Mistake.

22. All know the Certainty we have of Caesar's once being in the world was
first grounded upon a Visible clear Evidence, for Innumerable saw the man,
heard him Speak, whilst He lived on earth. The Verity ever since conveyed down
from Age to Age Continues still to our days, And here is all the Moral
Certainty men can have of Caesar, of Pompey, or of any other, so remote from
us. Please now to observe. As Caesar and Cicero were seen by many
Eyewitnesses, So Christ our Lord was both heard and seen by Innumerable when
he Preached, and suffered on the Cross. The Evidence to those Spectators was
Sensible and Physical, To Jews and Gentiles now, its Moral, who upon a
Universal report Say without boggling, There was once a man in the world called
Christ, as they say, There was once One, Called Caesar. But (and here we Come
to discover Mr Stillingfleets Error) Do These Jews and Gentiles therefore To
say Christ was upon Moral certainly
believe in Christ, or Assent to his Sacred Doctrine by Faith, because they
Judge upon Moral Certainty, He was once on earth? Is this Truth, I say, As it
is grounded upon a Common Report, or Morally Certain the Object of Faith? It is
more then ridiculous. is not to believe in Christ.
For grant That, All the Jews in Europe at this Day may be well thought to
Believe in Christ, because they have Moral Certainty of his once Being in the
world.

23. To Believe in Christ Therefore, is not to Say, such a man once had his
Being, he Preached, and suffered (for this lay open to Sense) But implies Much
more. viz. To Assert indubitably upon Divine Revelation. That the Man called
Christ Jesus was truly the Highest God, The only Messiah, The Redeemer of
Mankind, Consubstantial to his Eternal Father and finally to Assent to Every
Doctrine he taught. These and the What is to believe in Christ.
like Truths (neither visible nor sensible, like Caesar) are Objects of Divine
Faith, far enough removed from Physical and Moral Certainty, And we firmly
Assent to All, not because they are seen with our Eyes, or Scientifically
known, Or finally Conveyed unto us upon the weak Support of Moral certainty,
But because God an Infinite Verity has revealed them. Here is our Ground. Now
This Revelation being not evidently known by virtue of any Principle in Nature,
must be Believed (together with the Obscure Mysteries, Attested) by an Act of
Divine Faith.

24. And Hence it follows, That as no Object ( as seen or Faith is more then
morally Certain
Evidently known) Can terminate Supernatural Faith; So no Moral Certainty can
be essential to it, Or uphold it. The vltimate Reason hereof is most
Conuincing, and Briefly thus. What ever God reueal's (as it is revealed) is
Certain and Infallible Doctrine. Wherefore, He or those that take from this
infallible revealed Doctrine, its own intrinsecal Certainty, And make it no More
but Morally Certain wrong God the first Verity, and iniure all Christians, who
are to learn it as Infallible, But Sectaries do So, That is, they vnnaturely
turn A Conuincing ^eason hereof.
Gods infallible Doctrine out of its own intrinsecal Certainty, and Say its only
Morally Certain to us, Therefore they wrong that first Verity and abuse all
Christians. This Principle alone Proves the Churches Infallibility, And utterly
ruin's the Protestants Pretense to Moral Certainty, whereof you Shall have More
hereafter.

25. Now to deal fairly with Mr Stillingfleet, let us at present falsely
Suppose Moral Certainty a sufficient ground of Faith, Were Church Doctrine only
Morally certain, Sectaries yet gain Nothing.
what Good for Gods sake get Protestants by that? Can They tell us where the
Church is, whose Doctrine must be reputed only morally certain? The Arians call
themselves a Church, so do the Graecians, the Protestants likewise, and finally
so do Catholics. Are all these different iarring* Doctrins Morally certain?
Evidently No. For the Professors of them maintain Contradictions, utterly
Destructive both of Moral and all other Certainty. Some One Society therefore
teaches it, For more than One (if divided in faith) cannot, This One must be
Signalized and pointed out, which no Protestant can do, For if he name his own
Church he has the whole world against him, and will be forced to prove his
Assertion upon indubitable Principles: And if he point at the Roman Catholic
Church, he ruin's his own cause, For two opposite Churches cannot teach Doctrine
morally Certain. Now if he can point at no Church of One Denomination teaching
Doctrine Morally certain, This certainty is only an insignificant word in the
air, appliable to no Christian Society.

26. A second objection. The Motives of Credibility though commonly held only
Inducements morally certain, so Denote the true Church, that all may find it
out, Therefore though Church Doctrine were only morally Certain, and not
Infallible, it may sufficiently lead to believe that Doctrine which God has
Revealed. Answ. Here is neither Parity nor any Inference consequential, Faith
relies not upon Motives inducing to Belief.
And the want of distinguishing between the Credibility* of Revealed Doctrine
and its Truth, breed's the Confusion. The Motives then only make the Doctrine
evidently Credible, and remit us to the Church which teaches Truth, She
proposes the Doctrine, and upon Her Proposition Faith relies, which therefore
must be infallible, not upon the Motives too weak to Support Faith. In a word
here is all I would say. God Reueal's truth infallibly, the Motives in a
General way manifest the Church where truth is taught, the Church thus
Signalized Proposes Truth infallibly, And upon Her infallible Proposition (not
for the Motives*) Christians believe Infallibly.

27. A third Objection. If the Churches Proposition be infallible, or if God
speaks by the Church As he anciently did by the Prophets and Apostles, And She
likewise Speak's in his name. Whateuer this Oracle Proposes may be called the
Voice of God, and Consequently the Formal Object of Faith. I Answer no hurt at
all were it so, For perhaps in this present State of things, few Articles of
Faith are, or can be believed independently of the Churches Proposition. At
least it is very easy to say. I Believe the Sacred Trinity because God
anciently Revealed it to whether the Churches Proposition may be Called the
Object of Faith?
the Apostles, and also because the Church now Testifies that the Mystery was
anciently Revealed. Howeuer we here wave this Doctrine and Say. The Churches
Proposition, though absolutely infallible, is not properly speaking the Formal
Object of Faith, Though much may be de Nomine. First, because it is merely
Accidental, not Essential to Faith, to be proposed by the Church, by this, or
that Oracle, For Christ our Lord at his first Preaching was not the Church, yet
he Proposed Articles to be Believed, and most Infallibly. 2. Divines by the
word Formal Object, usually understand the Ancient infallible Revelation made
to the Prophets and Apostles, And not the Churches Proposition, which though it
be an Intrinsic, Essential, and Necessary Condition completing, and Applying
the Ancient Revelation to Belieuers, yet Principally it Terminates not Faith.
Now to be an essential Condition, nothing at all impairs the Churches
Infallibility. Thus much is said to solue the Objection, though the Matter,
it is true, is capable of higher Speculation, but Sectaries like not Speculatiue
Learning.

28. A fourth Objection. The Churches Infallibility seems chiefly Asserted
upon this Ground, that She is to be Heard, and Obeyed, which proves nothing.
For Judges, Governors, and Parents The Disparity between Governors Commanding
and the Church defining.
are to be heard and obeyed, though all are fallible. Answ. A most silly
Objection. The very Matter, wherein These and the Church are to be Obeyed
Shows the disparity, For No Civil Magistrate pretend's to regulate Faith, or
to Define what God Reueal's. This the Church, and She only is empowered to do,
To crush Heresies as they rise up, and to establish without Erring the contrary
Truths, which cannot be effected (the matter being so Sublime) without the
infallible Assistance of the Holy Ghost. Now we are to Proceed to the main
Business in hand.

CHAP. XVI.
Principles premised to the following Doctrine. The Roman Catholic Church is a
Church of One Denomination. She, and no other Society of Christians, is
Infallible. Other Grounds of Her Infallibility laid forth. The Infallibility of
Councils maintained against Mr Stillingfleets Supposed Truth and Reason. There
are no Principles whereby Approved Councils can be proved Fallible. Sectaries
Convinced by their own Doctrine.

1. WE here first Premise three certain Principles* One; that the Doctrine of
all Churches severally Denominated One Principle, importing the Disunion in
Faiih.
from their Authors, as Arianism from the Arians, Protestancy, from
Protestants, Christian Verities from Christ our Lord, ^s not in the whole (or
totally considered under One Notion of Christian Doctrine) either True or
Infallible, For in this whole diffu^ed Body, We evidently find Contradictions.
The Arians con^adict Protestants, These Set against Arians, And the Catholic
Church Opposes both. Therefore All of them maintain neither One, nor true, nor
infallible Catholic Doctrine, And consequently infallibility ceases in the
Whole, when the several Parts stand in an implacable Opposition with One
another.

2. A. 2. Principle. If all Churches which Contradict One another are not
infallible, One only, and of one Denomination Another Principle.
must be infallible, or none at all can be so. For example. Catholics, and
Protestants, teach Contrary Doctrine (the like is of all other dissenting
Societies) both Parties cannot be infallible, Therefore the One is so, or
Neither. Now further. Protestant^ disclaim the Prerogative of teaching
infallibly; whence it follows First, That the Roman Catholic Church enioyes
that Privilege, or there is no such thing on earth as an infallible Church.
Secondly this is Consequent, It is the same to Say. The Roman Catholic Church
is infallible, as to Say, that God yet Preserues an infallible Church in Being.
This I Assert, not only because Protestants quit all Pretense to infallibility,
but upon this ground chiefly, That no other Society nameable can Parallel this
One Oracle in Her Marks and Signs, Illustrious Miracles, admirable Conuersions,
Sanctity, the blood shedding of Martyrs. By these The present Church proved by
her Signs as Infallible as the Primitive.
Signs the Infallibility of this present Church is no less rationally proved,
than the Infallibility of the Primitive Church in the Apostles time. Here I
Petition our Adversaries to give a probable Disparity.

3. A. 3. Principle. One may teach true Christian Doctrine, and yet not Propose
it as infallible. So all do that hold the Definitions of the Church only
morally Certain. One again may teach infallible Christian Doctrine, and yet not
teach it infallibly, Different ways of Teaching infallible Doctrine.
And thus Sectaries teach the General Truths of Christianity, of one God, and
of one Christ. The Doctrine, obiectiuely attested by Divine Revelation is in it
self infallible, But these Nouellists for want of Divine Assistance, teach it
not infallibly, And therefore Confess themselves so fallible that they may
swe^^e from Truth. Finally, One may teach, true and infallible Christian
Doctrine with this Addition, That he Teaches it Infallibly. And these three
Perfections now named, were most Eminent in the Preaching of Christ and His
Apostles. They Taught true Doctrine, They taught infallible Doctrine, and
moreover taught it infallibly, In so much that their very formal Teaching was
not liable to Error. Thus much Premised, here is my Assertion.

4. The Roman Catholic Church is Gods infallible living The Roman Catholic
Church is Gods Infallible Oracle.
Oracle, and teaches not only Christ's true and infallible Doctrine, But moreover
Delivers it so infallibly that She cannot err. The Proof of the Assertion
wholly depend's upon a Discourse in the other Treatise. Disc. 1. C. 2. and in
the Appendix. P. 2. 3. 4. Whence I Argue. If once you annul this one Principle,
that a Church which pretend's to teach Christ's Sacred Doctrine, teaches it so
fallibly that She may Deceive, it does not only follow that one Eminent
Perfection in our Saviors Preaching (who taught infallibly) is utterly lost,
and now removed from us, But this is also consequent, That no man can have
assurance of so much as of one Christian Verity at this day Proposed or taught
the whole world over. The Reason is. Whateuer Church teaches Christian Doctrine
fallibly, can say no more but thus much timidly, That ( as taught) it may by
virtue of the Proposition be false, but a Doctrine so far removed from
infallible Certainty for want of a due Application of its Infallibility, comes
not near to the Doctrine The Assertion proved.
of Christ and his Apostles, which was Applied, Taught, and. Proposed
Infallibly. Therefore such a Doctrine if valued by the merit of its Delivery,
Can be esteemed no more but a weak uncertain humane persuasion, not at all
resoluable into God's infallible Verity. For though God own's a Doctrine
obiectiuely True, and Infallible (because he Reueals it) yet he utterly disowns
such a Proposal as discountenances that VVorth, and makes it look like a
changling, or dislike it Self, (That is) neither True, nor Infallible, but
contrariwise Possibly false and fallible. And it neither is, nor can be more to
Christians than fallible, if proposed Fallibly.

5. The Case is thus, As if one had a Gem of mighty Value, and skilful
Iewellers were appointed to Prise it, yet none after all Art and Industry used
can know the true worth Thereof. An Instance
The Jewel may indeed be precious, and perhaps not. More the most skilful
cannot Say. Put this case, the Owner would be little enriched by such an
unknown treasure whilst the worth is not known. And no More Say I, are
Christians now enriched with Christ's Precious Verities, whilst none can esteem
of Their vltimate Value nor Say infallibly, They are Gods own infallible
Truths? Moral certainty has here no place, For the Reasons alleged above. Hence
it follows, That as God Reueal's his verities of an Immense Valuation ( True
and infallible) So Providence has ordained that they be Proposed answerably to
their due Estimate, truly, and infallibly, without which Their unfitness to
ground Faith is more than palpable, as will appear by the Resolving any one act
now held de Fide. Please to observe. We and Sectaries believe the Divine word
Consubstantial to his The Assertion further declared.
Father, the Church Proposes that infallible Truth, but as it is now Supposed,
Fallibly, the Assent which follows upon that Proposition and should be Divine,
reaches not so high, because it Answers not to the Strength of the infallible
obiectiue Verity in it Self (yet not asserted by any, as infallible) But to the
weakness of the formal Proposition, which is supposed so fallible that it may be
false. All then that a Belieuer can Say by virtue of that weak Light is thus
much only, and no more. Perhaps the Divine word is Consubstantial, perhaps not,
For none does or can auen the Truth otherwise, but as a thing doubtful or
indifferent to truth and falsehood.

6. The Reason a Priori of all now said is. We neither know, nor believe by
external Obiectiue Truths considered in Themselves, but by our own Subiectiue
internal Acts, as therefore an Obiectiue Truth appears in our own internal
Acts, of so much worth it is to us, And neither more nor less. Now further. My
internal Faith necessarily depend's on two external Objects when I believe any
Mystery: The first is Gods Revelation, The other the Churches Proposition:
Neither the one or other is my true Faith, for that is inherent in me, if I
believe. We believe not by Objects but by our int^riour Acts.
When therefore the Church after Her Proposition obliges me to Settle my
internal Faith upon the Divine Revelation, I rationally demand in what manner,
Or how I shall fix it? Knowing well, if God speaks he speak's infallibly, But
my Scruple is whether the Church can infallibly Assure me so much? If She
Answer's truly She does so, I am secure upon this Principle, that an Oracle
teaches which cannot Deceive. But if it be replied, She is only empowered to
Propose revealed Truths fallibly, and I by my internal Assent close, as it
were, with That, or lay hold of the revealed object just so as it is proposed
fallibly, most evidently my Assent and Belief, is no more but Fallible.

7. In this Matter then as in all others, we are exactly to attend to the
Proposal of Objects, for as they are laid forth to us, so much weight they
have. For example. A real Good in it Self is by mistake Proposed to me as an
Evil, I adhere to that Object as it is proposed, and must Adhere to Evil,
because it appears so to me. In like manner, an infallible Truth, is Proposed
not as it is in it Self, infallible, But discolored, and defaced, by a
viciated Proposition which is fallible; Therefore by force of that weak
Declaration it appears no other to me but As things are proposed so they are
to all that believe.
weak and fallible: And none on earth can vnbeguile me, or Propose it with
greater certainty, Because all are now Supposed fallible in their Teaching.

8. One Instance may yet clear my meaning. The Protestant reads Christ's Sacred
words. Matt. 26. This is my Body. And Proposes what he conceiues to be
belieuable by Faith, But An Instance
does it fallibly. Imagine that the Roman Catholic Church also could Say no
more for Her Doctrine, or the Sense of those Words, But as the Protestant does
so fallibly that all might be False, it is clear That none, whether Catholic
or Protestant, can have Certainty of the Doctrine, which Christ our Lord
delivered in that one short Sentence. Why? Both declare their fallible
Sentiments only and Fallibly concerning the Sacrament, So far their teaching
reaches and not farther. Therefore the Faith which should be had of the Mystery
dwindles into nothing but into a fallible Opinion, by virtue of that imperfect
Teaching.

9. Hence we learn, that a Doctrine though infallible in Gods word without more
Help, makes no man (though he be a Prodigy of wit) an Infallible Teacher. The
reason is. Infallibility Scripture alone makes no man infallible. And why?
Proceed's not from Scripture easily misinterpreted, but immediately from Gods
special Assistance, And this Assistance which fixes an Assumed Oracle upon
Truth vnerrably, no malice can wrest to falsehood. Now that the Book of
Scripture as daily Experience teaches, is horridly perverted to a Sinister
sense, needs no proof, For all know, what ruin Heretics have (to the uttermost
of their Power) endeavored to make of the chief Articles of our Christian
Faith, though they aknowledged Scripture to be God's Divine Word. There is
scarce One which remain's Vnperuerted. Some Deny the Necessity of Divine Grace,
Others, that great Mystery of the Incarnation, Others an Equality in the Divine
Persons, Others our Saviors two Wills, Divine, and Humane. Thus the Pelagians,
the Antitrinitarians the Apollinarians and Monothelits taught and deceived The
world. And when Scripture is Alleged in behalf of every Orthodox Truth, All you
have from them is a return of overthwart Glosses. Grace, must signify what the
Pelagians please, The Word made Flesh, How abused.
what the Antitrinitarians fancy, and so of the rest. Whence it is Evident that
Scripture Alone without more light, clears not sufficiently its own Truths, For
here you Se the most Primary Atticles disowned and Consequently Scripture
abused by Private Spirits, which therefore makes none infallibly certain of
God's revealed Doctrine.

10. We Catholics require a further Help, One faithful Oracle to teach, which
in this contest about the Sense of Gods What Catholics require besides the
bare -- Letter of Scripture.
Word end's all Strife, and Says both plainly and infallibly. Thus and thus an
Infinite Verity speaks in Scripture: Yet Sectaries are offended with us,
because we can assert without hesitancy. We believe infallibly what Truth it
Self Reueal's infallibly: Nay more, They are angry with God for having done
them the greatest favor Imaginable. For to put a Period to these endless A
signal Mercy of God makes sectaries offended.
debates raised among Christians, To teach all Infallibly by his own unerring
Oracle what may and ought to be believed Infallibly, is a signal Mercy for
which due Thanks can never be rendered. Disowne the Mercy, we live and shall
live, in a Spirit of Contention to the worlds end.

11. Now if you Ask why the Church, after She has proposed the Sense and verity
of Scripture, more easily beget's infallible Faith in Her Children, Than the
bare letter of Gods word can do without Her? I Answer. The facility (Divine
assistance Supposed) arises from the Clarity of Her teaching known to all
Universally, whether Orthodox or others. Whence it is, that few of our
Adversaries scarce move any doubt concerning the Sense of the Churches
universal received Doctrine (for that is plain) but chiefly Question the Truth of
it. Whereas all is contrary in our contest with the forenamed Heretics, For
there is no Dispute whether Scripture be true, What is chiefly debated with
Sectaries.
The debate only being what it Says, or what the Sense of Gods sacred word is?
Here we fight in darkness before the Church Speak's and Declares Her Sense, And
if She be divinely Assisted to teach truth, as is already and shall be more
amply proved in the sequel Discourse, that doubt also ceases, and vanishes
into nothing.

12. In the mean while, Some may Object. 1. The greatest part of Christian
Doctrine is now agreed on, and Supposed by Catholics and Protestanss both true
and infallible, what necessity then have we of any other Oracle besides
Scripture, to teach infallibly? Answ. The Agreement is Null, and the
Supposition destroies it self, if all that taught Christian Doctrine since the
Apostles time teach it fallibly, For How could any An Objection Answered.
agree in this, That such and such a Doctrine is both true and infallible, when
He, or They (yea all) that teach may, because fallible, err in their very
teaching, and call that infallible Doctrine, without Assurance given of its
Infallibility? Do Therefore all own the Verities in Scripture infallible (not
infallible ex Terminis) We must jointly own with that, an Oracle which Proposes
these Verities infallibly, or can believe nothing. And by this you Se the
Supposition destroies it Self, For The Sectaries Supposition destroys it
self.
to Suppose a Doctrine infallible, when none can Propose it answerably to its
Merit, as infallible, or infallibly, is as implicatory, as to Suppose without
Proof, the Stars in Heaven equal in number, and from thence to Infer they are
to be judged equal. The Parity holds exactly.

13. Object. 2. Whoeuer, though fallible, Delivers by chance Infallible
Christian Doctrine, Teaches the very sense that Christ taught. Answ: Very true.
But he gives no Assurance Aunother Error of Sectaries.
That he does so, For a fallible Delivery of a Truth, as yet only Supposed not
Proved infallible, raises it no higher but to such a State of Uncertainty, that
one may justly doubt whether it be Christ's infallible Doctrine or no.

14. Object. 3. The fallible teaching of an infallible Verity may well convey
unto a Hearer that which God has Revealed. For why may not an infallible
Verity, as Revealed, though fallibly Proposed have influence upon Faith, and
work in Belieuers a most firm Assent? Answ. It is utterly vmpossible; For a
fallible teaching of an infallible Verity not yet Proposed as infallible by
any, neither Supposes the Truth Certain upon other principles (and this is ever
to be noted) nor makes it infallible. It Supposes no Truth taught infalliby,
for Protestants Say None now can teach so, All Doctors being fallible: And most
evidently Sectaries clearly convinced.
it makes not that Verity infallible, For the Verity (as revealed) was
antecedently Infallible before this fallible teaching meddled with it, Which
therefore can not make it Infallible. By what is said, you se our Sectaries
Supposition of some Christian Doctrine acknowledged infallible is pure
Sophistry, for none can Assure them so much, if All that teach it be fallible.
The very Apostolical Doctrine respectively to us now living loses i'ts
Infallibility, if this Supposition stands, That all Teachers are fallible. Now
we Proceed to a Second Argument and Discourse thus.

15. If the whole Church (the like is of any General approved The Churches
Infallibility further proved.
Council) can err, She may not only traitorously betray Her Trust, But moreover
do so much Mischief to Christians by uniting all in Error, That they must
remain in it, without redress or remedy, For if the Church may mistake, whilst
She Teaches, No man on earth can be rationally Supposed wiser than She is, nor
go about to Vnbeguile the deceived by Her. The Evil here hinted at is so
Notoriously horrid, the Perplerity it causes so Great, that either Church
Doctrine unavoidably becomes despicable, (whilst every one may justly Quarrel
with it) Or this Principle must stand unshaken, that the Church cannot teach a
Falsehood.

16. Some Sectaries seeing the Force of this unanswerable Argument, hold the
Church Diffusiue infallible in fundamentals, Yet neither name nor can name
those Christians who constitute an infallible Church larger than the Roman,
whereof enough Sectaries Oppose The Infallibility of Councils, without reason.
is said both in this, and the other Treatise. In the next place their whole
Strife is to Oppose the Infallibility of the Churches Representatiues in her
General Councils, But methinks inconsequently, For what ever Reason proves
Immunity from Error in that diffused Moral Body, Conuinces as forcibly the
like Privilege in its Representatiues, Which are not Conuened to deceive, But
to teach God's revealed Verities

17. Mr. Stillingfleet. Part. 3. C. 1. 2. P. 506. After a larger Prologue to
very little Substance, Tell's us. It is not any high challenge of
Infall^bility, in any Person, or council, which must put an end to
Controversies; For nothing but Truth and Reason, can ever do it, and the more
men pretend to unreasonable ways of deciding them, instead of ending One, they
beget many. I say contrary. If the Church and Her Councils be infallible,
Controversies are ended without more Ado, For all know upon that Supposition,
What to believe and what to reject. And if they be not Owned infallible, there
is no such thing or things in being as Truth, and Reason, which can put an end
to Controversies. To explicate the Assertion is to prove it.

18. Do then no more but cast away all thought of an Infallible The
Infallibility of Councils asserted.
Church, as also of Her infallible Councils. It is clear, that every Doctrine
Taught since the Apostles time has been delivered Fallibly, It Is clear likewise,
All that teach it at this day (highly dissenting among them selves) Teach
fallibly, Imagine now that two adverse Parties, Ten learned Protestants on the
one Side, And as many learned Catholics on the Other, meet together and
seriously Discuss this Point, whether Protestancy or Catholic Doctrine (as
opposed to Protestancy) be the true Religion? (the like is if any particular
Controversy fall under Debate.) I say the Attempt to decide any one
controuerted matter is Vain and Impossible, if both Church and Councils be
Supposed fallible, And consequently Mr. Stillingfleets Truth and Reason are no
more but mere insignificant Words. The Reason is. Whilst fallible men pIead for
Religion upon Principles as fallible as they are that Argue, the Result of that
Dispute necessarily carried on by Arguments and reasoning purely fallible, can
end in nothing but in dissatisfactory Topics, if yet it come so far. But this
is so, and observe well. The Protestant plead's The weakness of two parties
pleading fallibly.
for his Tenants, or oppugn's our Doctrine and does it fallibly: The Catholic
Answers, and fallibly too; The Protestant Replies, but has no infallible
Principle to ground his Reply upon, no more has the Catholic, if the
Supposition hold's, any other Answer but what is Ungrounded, and Fallible. Say I
beseech you, do not both Parties, busied in this Contest upon uncertainties,
run on in Darkness? Have we yet the least hope of Satisfaction? Or so much as
the Truth we all seek for yet discovered in this weak skirmish, Whilst Fallible
men, and Fallible Arguments, and Fallible Principles are the only Support of
the whole Discourse? Most evidently no. All are left where they were before in
a deep Perplexity.

19. I Said just now, If we we exclude an Infallible Church, and her approved
Councils, Truth and Reason vanish to nothing, and that no Principle remain's
whereby these Contests of Religion can be ended. To prove the Assertion
further. I first urge the Protestant to name the last certain Principle, or
that vltimate Sectaries are urged to name the last Judge in these Debates,
Judge in whose Sentence he dare Acquiese, and Say positiuely upon this
Principle we must both rely, This shall Define whether you my Adversary, or I
yours, defend Truth. The man will not for stark shame name Himself nor any
private Person on earth for Judge: He cannot recurr to an Inferior Council and
Oppose that, against One Generally received the Whole world over: He will not
adhere to a Schismatical and Heretical Church, and plead by Her in defense of
his Doctrine, against an Oracle never yet taxed or tainted of Error, Or if he
does so, he gain's nothing, For all those are as fallible as the two Parties
now in contest. Where then is the Sectaries Sure Principle, or last Judge to
stand to in these Debates? Or whither will he go to find out his yet
Vndiscoured Truth and Reason? Will his refuge be to Scripture? It help's
nothing in this Case, not only because Scripture omit's to speak either
explicitly of the half of such And cannot pitch on any.
Controversies as are now agitated, But upon this Account Chiefly, That if the
Church and Councils be fallible, the Book it self becomes a most fallible
Principle to all, For neither Catholics nor Protestants, nor Arians, nor any,
can Say with Assurance, ^uch and Such is the undoubted ^ense of Gods word in
Controuerted Matters, if the Churches Judgment be set light by, and looked on
as fallible. Yet I Will Say thus much. Were the Church fallible, Sectaries may
well blush, first to decry Her Sense of Scripture, and then to set up the far
inferior and fallible interpretation of every single Person against the Church?

20. Some may Reply. The grand Principle of Protestants, The grand Principle of
Protestants, rejected,
is, that Scripture in things necessary to Salvation, appears plain to all who
use ordinary Diligence to understand it, wherein certainly their Truth and
Reason may be found. Contra. And I Press not in this place the Uncertainty of
the Principle, which is as disputable as any other Protestant Tenet, But Say
more, it is wholly improbable, Yea and destroies Protestancy. It is And why?
improbable, Because it cannot be Supposed that any private man or men, have
used full Diligence to understand the Scriptures Sense, And that a Church of a
thousand years standing has neglected a Duty so necessary. But these private
men whether Arians, Protestants, or Socinians, and the Church draw
contradictory Senses from Scripture, And all these iarring Sectaries with their
different Senses defend not truth, Therefore some of them (let the fault yet
light where you will) have not used Diligence, nor righly understood God's
word. The Question now is (and some Oracle must decide it) where, or in whom,
this Misunderstanding lies? Most willingly would I have this one Difficulty
folued and it is worth the Labor, whilft every one See's it is no more certain,
that the Protestant hitt's on the Scriptures true Sense, than it is certain
that the whole Church after a thousand years Diligence, mistakes it. Can this
think ye be ever cleared in behalf Why Should Sectaries his right on the
Scriptures Sense.
of Protestants by any Proof, so much as meanly Probable? It is Impossible.
Wherefore I Conclude, Their Grand Principle is rotten at the very root, fail's
all that Rely on it. I will say it once more. If the Protestant has no greater
Certainty of his Sense of Scripture than it is certain, That he hitts right,
and the Church Err's in her Sense, His Belief after all industry And the Church
be deluded?
used stands vnprincipled, rests on his own fancy, and is not rectifiable,
while he judges so. Say the very utmost it is no more but a mere hazard,
whether he belieues, or no, and this destroies Protestancy. Thus much of
Scripture.

21. The next thing pleadable in behalf of Mr Stillingfleets Truth and Reason,
may perhaps be the Authority of Holy Fathers. It is weightles if the Church be
fallible, or has Erred. And first Protestants say all Fathers are liable to
Error. I add more and Assert, if that Church whereof They were Members taught
or can teach false Doctrine, it is a mere vanity to seek for certain Truth, or
any satisfactory Reason in the Fathers Writings. What can Streams (the Fathers
were no other) be Supposed pure, and The Sectaries pretense to Fathers
improbable
the Head fountain (Gods own Oracle*) Poisoned and infected? Did they hit right
upon our Christian Verities, when their only Guide (Christ's sacred Spouse)
misled Posterity? Could they Dedicate all their Labors to make an Oracle
renowned, that afterward whispered Errors into all men's ears? These are
Paradoxes. I Say then, it is a stronger and far more reasonable Principle to
Assert, That the Church never erred nor can err, Than first to Suppose Her
erroneous, And next to find truth in the Fathers, who were no more but
Scholars, and sucked the milk of purest Doctrine from the Breasts of this their
Mother, The Catholic Church; If She therefore poisoned them with falls
learning, both She and They yet poison us; And consequently neither the Church,
nor Fathers deserve credit, nor can be prudently Believed.

22. And here by the way I cannot but reflect upon a strange Procedure, usual
with Sectaries in All their Polemicks. First The procedure of Sectaries,
unreasonable.
they Suppose the Church and Councils errable, yea actually misled in Asserting
Purgatory, Transubstantiation etc. And to Rectify what is thought Amiss, Some
few Gleaning of Fathers (how little to the purpose is seen above) are produced,
and these, Forsooth, must stand as it were in battle Array, fight against a
whole Church, and overthrow Her Errors. Is this, think ye Reasonable? Can it
be imagined that God preserved his Revealed truths in the Hearts thoughts, and
words, of a few Fathers, and suffered his Universal Church, with so many
learned Councils (conuened after the Four First) to fall presently into so
shameful a Dotage, as Sectaries charge upon Her? Were the Fathers Then
illuminated, and was the Church afterward darkened and besotted? There is none
so blind, But must needs se Himself out of Countenance by aduenturing to
Defend a Tenet so highly Contrary to all Reason. Wherefore I must earnestly
petition the Reader once more to reflect upon the greatest Folly which,
Methinks, ever entered the Thoughts of men. Thus it is. The primitive To say the
Fathers taught truth, and that che Church deserted Truth
Fathers, (not many in number) Who wrote in the First three or four Centuries
in different Times and Places, (perused by few and understood by Fewer) are
Supposed to Deliver exactly the Catholic Verities, (What They said was True)
And an Ample Universal Church together with Her Learned Councils known to All;
spread the whole world over for a Thousand years and upward, must be Supposed
so Abominably sinful, Is worse then a Paradox.
so Fearfully misled, as to Desert the Ancient Faith of Those Fathers, to
Pervert God's Truths, And Finally to Bring into the Vast Moral Body of
Christians a Universal Mischief, a Deluge of Error, of Idolatry, And no man
knows what. If this be not pure Phrensy, there was never any.

23. The last Principle to ground Truth and Reason upon, or to bring
Controversies to an end, is Universal Tradition, but this also Fail's to uphold
Truth, if the Church be fallible: For who will, or can with certainty trust the
Tradition of a Church (or so much as take the Book of Scripture from Her) were
she branded with this foul Note of having Publicly taught, and wilfully
imposed a hundred Doctrins upon Christians contrary to Gods revealed Revealed
Truths. But more of this above. C. 5. 6.

24. After all you se first, Truth and Reason brought to Ruin, Faith and
Religion vnhinged, if the Church and Councils, be Fallible. You se. 2. These
Inferences Settled upon undeniable Principles. The Church is infallible, Ergo
Controversies are without Perplexity ended. Contrariwise. The Church is
Fallible: Ergo Contentions Clear Inferences against Sectaries.
go on without Redress, endlesly. Scripture as you have heard because
differently Sensed decides nothing, No more do the Fathers (Say Sectaries)
confessedly fallible. Church, and Councils are rejected as errable when and as
often as Sectaries please, Those that Dispute of Religion (Yet more Fallible)
are not to be Judges in their own Cause, and without a Judge Their best
Arguments will be thought by all Prudent men, no more but Vnconcluding Topics,
And really they neither are, nor can be better for want of Principles, and some
Oracle Infallible.

25. Whoeuer desires to have the Principle I Rely on further established by
clear Inferences drawn from our Adversaries, needs only to read M.
Stillingfleet from page. 534. to the end of that 2. Chapter. My Principle is.
There is no possibility of ending strife touching Religion if the Church and
Councils be fallible, yet Mr. Stillingfleet and his Lord, Say they must have
some end, or They Will tear the Church a sunder. My Task then is to show that
these men's Doctrine Tears all in pieces, and makes Controuersis Endless.

26. The Determination of a Council erring (say our Adversaries) is to stand in
force and to have external Obedience at least yielded to The Sectaries Doctrine
breed's Confusion.
it, till evidence of Scripture, or a Demonstation to the Contrary, make the
Error appear, and until thereupon, another Council of equal Authority, reuerse
the Error. Here is their Position, which breed's nothing but Confusion among
Christians, and licenseth every unquiet Spirit, interiourly at least, to
Censure Church Doctrine as abominable if He judges it Erroneous, or Contrary to
Christ's Verities. I say Interiourly? And It Is hard to Silence and oblige men
to external Obedience, if this full Persuasion remain's And necessarily brings
in Division.
steadfast in their minds. Gods truths are Ouerthrown, by an Erring Church, or a
misled Council. There is no law humane or Divine which can bind to Hypocrisy;
But to judge one thing Evidently falls, and to Profess it as true is pain
Hypocrisy, To avoid therefore this Sin all are in points of faith not to Speak
Contrary to Truth, or hostility will of Necessity follow Between the Profession
of private men and their interior Judgments, which cannot but foment
Rebellion in the Church whilst People generally live in such a Persuasion that
God's Truths are wronged.

27. But here is not my greatest Exception. Please to mark those other words.
Till Evidence of Scripture, or a Demonstration makes the Error appear: Or,
another Council reuerses the Error of the Former, And say I beseech you, to
whom must this Evidence of Scripture appear? To whom must the Councils Error
be Demonstrable? What to Private men, and these It can not be said to whom the
supposed* Errors of.
Fallible? If so; the Contest will be whether these Private Erring men or the
Supposed Erring Council, has the greater Evidence of Scripture, Or on which
Side the Demonstration against the Error lies? I say if the Church and
Councils be fallible, There neither is, nor can be, any thing like Evidence or
a Demonstration in either of the Contenders, Therefore an Councils must appear.
endless Dispute upon mere Uncertainties must ensue, unless Mr. Stillingfleet
lays the Error upon whom he pleases, and makes Himself Vmpire in the cause.
You will say he supposes the Councils Errors evidently known. Pitiful. To whom
I bescech you must they be known? Its impossible to return an Answer. Again if
Suppositions may once pass for Proofs, I Will go the Contrary way, and either
Suppose all Councils infallible (or maintain this Truth: Errors cannot be
evidently known) And why should not my Supposition, be as good as his? What
then remain's but that we bring these Suppositions to the Test, and Examine
which is better? And here the Dispute begins again in behalf of what is
Supposed, which can never be ended without an infallible Judge.

28. It may be replied. These Adversaries prove not Councils fallible upon any
bare Supposition, but only Say thus much: If they were Fallible, the Peace of
the Church may yet be Preserved. Contra 1. Peace is infinitely better vpheld
were Councils (as they truly are) owned Infallible, For so every one would
Acquiese in their Decrees, as the Christian world has done hitherto. Contra 2.
The Churches Peace is torn in pieces, Sedition Sedition reign's if Councils be
fallible.
necessarily reign's, Debates are endless, if Councils be fallible. To prove
this.

29. Call once more to mind the Assertion. Viz. The Determination of an erring
Council is to stand in force, until there upon, an other Council of equal
Authority Reuerse the Error. Observe I beseech you. Both these Councils are
Supposed fallible, and of equal Authority. The Second therefore cannot reuerse
the One Proof of the Assertion
Error of the First, being as weak, as fallible, and of no more Authority than
That first was. Or if thus by Turns one may Annull the Decrees of the other, A
third may be conuened which recall's the Decrees of both* and a Fourth which
Cashieres all the precedent Definitions, And so in Infinitum without Stop or
Stint. Hence arise endless Quarrels, not only between Council, and Council (For
every one will Stand for its own Right) But also among Christians, Who seeing
the Discord are thrown into a remediles Perplexity, and can never know what to
Believe, or whom to Obey. You will see clearly what I would expres by one or
two Instances. The Nicene Council Defined Further declared by an Instance.
the Consubstantiality of the Son to his Eternal Father. So much is undoubted.
Imagine now, that an other like Assembly as fallible as the Nicene (for that
with Sectaries was fallible) and of equal Authority, had Defined the quite
Contrary Doctrine, And let this be also supposed (for in Protestant Principles
i^ is Supposable) that this Second corrected the Error of the First. What
tumults think* ye, what an endless Rebellion would have ensued there upon in
Christendom, had the One Council thus clashed with the other? No man in
Prudence, could have Believed or Obeyed either, because both are Supposed
fallible, and of equal Authority.

30. There is yet one Instance more Suitable to a Sectarian Humor. Imagine
only, another Council Conuened, as Learned, Another Instance Showing.
as General, and as fallible as Protestants Suppose the Council of Trent to
have been, And that this reuerses all the Doctrine contained in the Tridentine,
Offenfiue to our Nouellists. Would not this destroy the Unity of the present
Church? Would Ths horrid Inconvenience of Iarring Councils.
not some Side with the first, some with the second, or rather would not All
(upon the Supposition) scorn and contemn the Authority of both Church and
Councils? The like Inconvenience follows, were the Catholic Church as large
as some Sectaries make it, or embraced all called Christians, If in that case
Two Councils representing the whole Moral Body should meet, and the later Tear
in pieces the Decrees of the former, Would not Dissentions Grow as high, and as
odious upon these Voting and Vnuoting Councils, as they are now in England
whilst Prelatiks Preach One kind of Doctrine, and Fanatics another quite
contrary? And is it Possible, Do all Eyes se the Horror of this contrary
Preaching in One Island, and are they shut upon a greater more Terrible, were
it true, That two of the highest Tribunals in the Church could stand in open
Hostility, and the One band against the other? Thus much of Dissentions and
Tumults, necessary Appendants to iarring Representatiues.

31. But all is not yet Satisfied. Our Adversaries Say, There can be no cause
of Tumults in the Church, if an Error be evidently Discovered, For every One
ought to thank God (not to grumble) when they se themselves freed from so great
Sectaries ^^ destroy their own Principles.
a Mischief: On the other side, if the Error be not Evident, All are to submit
to the Councils until a Public Declaration makes the contrary truth manifest,
And thus the Peace of Christendom seems well secured. Answ. And we will first
begin with these last words. If the Error be not Evident or intolerable, all
are obliged to submit to the Council until some public declaration etc. Hence
I Argue. But there neither is, nor ever was any Evidence of Error produced
against one of our Catholic Councils (the Lateran, Florentine, or Tridentine
for example) there neither is, nor ever was, any Legal Declaration more against
these, than against the First most ancient and purest Councils in Gods Church,
Therefore Sectaries by their own Principle are obliged to Submit to the
Lateran, Florentine, and Tridentine, as well as to others. That there has not
been any Public Legal Declaration made against them is manifest, And here is
my proof.

32. The clamours and Calumnies of Arians Cast upon the The Assertion proved
Nicene Council were no Legal Declaration against That, but most Vncanonical,
Ergo the clamours and calumnies of Protestants cast upon the now named
Representatiues are fully as Illegal and Vncanonical, yea and more forceles (if
more can be) to Declare Clamours, no Proofs.
them Inualid, And besides clamours, we never yet had, nor shall have hereafter
any Thing from Sectaries. The true Reason is. Go groundedly to work, There is
not one Imaginable Principle whereby the Nicene can be proved a more lawful
Council then the great Council of Lateran was, so much decryed by Nouellists:
And if it were Possible (as it is not) to Overthrow the One by any solid proof,
the Other Eo ipso loses all Credit and Authority.

33. Hence These and the like calumnies vented by Sectaries The Arians and
Protestants Clamor and Calumniate alike.
i^ Corners. The Lateran and Tridentine were unlawful Councils, (...)ed by the
Pope, they had not freedom. Their Votes ought to be (...)ted Surreptitious. The
Conuened were not men of unquestionable Integrity. Some few by fair Pretenses
brought over the greater number wanting Judgment, to side with their Designs
etc. Such corner-Calumnies I say, and I read them in our Adversaries (As easily
^^attered out by Arians against the Nicene Fathers) can never pass for legal
Declarations against Catholic Councils, whilst every Proposition want's proof,
and every word its due Weight: That i^, what ever can be said to this Sense
stand's Vnprincipled. Therefore unless all must be just so as Sectaries will
have it; Unless falls Suppositions become conuincing Arguments, and a pure
begging the Question prove it, Or be able to decide our Differences, We have
Right to cry as loud They. Audiatur and altera Pars. A Judge is to decide all*
and not Clamours.
Let Catholics be heard also. And when they are heard and return their Answers
before a lawful Judge to every particular, these Calumnies will vanish, or
rather appear like Themselves, Forged and far-fetch't Improbabilities. Exclude
a Judge and a just Sentence, Sectaries are where they would be in the old
Labyrinth of Quarrelling without Principles, or giving any hope of ending One
Question in Controversy.

34. Now to implead our Councils of Errors? and to pretend Sectaries never
legally assembled.
Evidence for it, is more than a desperate Attempt, unless as I say the
Corner-votes of a few iarring dispersed Sectaries (never legally Assembled)
have Power to create a new kind of Evidence unknown to the world. Please to
reflect a little. It must, Forsooth, be Evident That the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, or Praying to Saints are Errors, whilst a whole united
learned Church Opposes these vain Pretenses and Defend's the Articles as
Catholic Create a new Kind of Evidence.
Verities. It was never yet heard, that Sectaries Scattered here an there had
Authority to impose such foul disgraceful Names of Evident Errors, or Errors
morally Certain upon Doctrins so universally received, when as I say The most
learned Body of Christians that ever was, Vnuotes all they blow into the ears
of others, as mere Impertinences. Evidence, Good Reader, and Moral certainty
lose force and never yet stood in the Sight or presence of so strong an
Opposition. I will yet say more. Though we abstract from Church Authority, we
Catholics are able to maintain our Doctrine against Sectaries upon Tradition,
the Authority of Fathers, ancient Records etc. But still we require A last
Judge to give Sentence, whether they or we abuse the Principles we plead by
(For certainly the one or other Party does so) But this, Nouellists ever
Decline and Sectaries decline both Judge and final Sentence.
will have us to Dispute without either Judge or indubitable Principles, and so
make, as is now said, all Controversies endless, which indeed is the only Thing
they aim at, and I have undertaken to prove against them.

35. Mr Stillingfleet. P. 539. speak's so fully to my purpose that more cannot
be desired from an Adversary. He Demands, how it can be known when Errors in
Councils or the Church are manifest or intolerable, and when not? And Answers
thus. We appeal to Scripture interpreted by the Concurrent Sense of the
primitive Church, the common reason of mankind, the consent of wise and learned
men, Supposing Scripture to be the Rule of Faith. And a little after. Our
Adversaries Doctrine.
If you Ask further. Who shall be Judge what a necessary Reason or
Demonstration is? His Lordship tell's you plainly enough from Hooker. It is
such as being Proposed to any man and understood, the mind cannot choose but
inwardly assent to it. Here you have the Gentleman's last Principles: And every
one when applied to our present Matter is as much Controuerted between
Catholics and Protestants, as the very Question now in Dispute. Observe well.

36. The Question is whether the Lateran, Florentine, and Tridentiue Councils
have erred in their Definitions (the like may be moved of all others)
Protestants say, they have erred; Catholics Lead's still ^n to dispute, but to
make no end of Controversies.
Deny it. Both Parties Appeal to Scripture interpreted by the Sense of the
Primitive Church So far as that Oracle learns us. And if any Passage be found
there seemingly favorable to Sectaries, Catholics after the Contest of one
whole Age have been more ready to clear all Doubts, To take of any thing like
Imagined Errors, Than Protestants were ever yet able to lay such foul
Aspertions upon either Church, or Councils. What then is to be done? Must we
eternally Dispute concerning that Sense and end nothing?* Must we Commence new
Quarrels Sectaries who began the quarrel.
about Matters so often debated? Must the old Actum agere come over and over
again? Sectaries like that Sport well, but no Progress is made this way. As yet
we only skirmish in the dark. Wherefore recourse at last is to be had to a
lawful Iulge to some known Oracle or other, in whose final Sentence all are to
acquiese, If any lawful Judge, or owned Oracle (Primitive or latter) Condemn
our Councils of Error, and we license Sectaries Like well ^^ hear themselves
talk without Principles.
to name either (Provided they make not Themselves Judges, nor their long since
defeated Arguments Evidences) We are indeed the guilty Persons, and They the
wise Reformers, But if All of us Decline this last Judicature, and do nothing
but hear our Selves talk upon Principles grossly misinterpreted, by the one or
other Party, Dissentions will go on remedilesly to the great Scandal of Jews
and Gentiles, and controversies of Religion cannot but prove endless.

CHAP. XVII.
More of this subject. A further Search made into Errors called intolerable.
Whether the Roman Catholic Church must be supposed by Sectaries to have
already Committed intolerable Errors, Or only, whether She may for the future
Err Intolerably? The Doctrine of Protestants proved False, And Most inconsequent.

1. MR Stillingfleet to find out Evident and intolerable Errors in Councils
Appeal's (as you Se) in the next place to the Common Reason of mankind, and to
the Consent of wise and learned men. None could have more ruined his own cause,
For this Dilemma is unanswerable. The forementioned Councils have either erred
intolerably in Defining the Doctrins A Dilemma
of Transubstantiation, and of Purgatory, Or have not erred intolerably. If
not; Protestants, as is now said, are obliged by their own Law to yield at
least external Obedience to them, which is not done, For herein they have made
a Public Reformation, and call such Doctrins Errors. On the other side, if
these Errors be intolerable you se by their own words, We must have the Common
Reason of mankind, the Consent also of wise and learned men both ready to
Oppose and Condemn them: But this is enormously improbable upon a clear Ground.
Do no more but Divide the Moral Body of Christians now at Debate into two
Classes, Catholics and Protestants, For one that Or a clear Conviction of
Protestants.
makes these Councils Illegal or their Doctrins intolerable, you have hundreds,
yea I think thousands, who avouch the Contrary, and clear Both from that
unworthy Imputation. Therefore unless Protestants engross the Gift of common
Reason and Wisdom to themselves, and allow no little parcel of it either to the
Greek or Latin Church, They are to recall what is Said: And if they will have
Reason so fast intailed upon a few Sectaries, That no body else can share in it,
There is no further Dispute: All we say is. God help Them.

2. But what say we to Mr Hooker who tells us necessary Reason or a
Demonstration is that, which being proposed to any man and understood, The mind
cannot choose but inwardly Assent to it. I answer, the Principle, though good,
is most impertinently Applied to the controversy now in hand, For have not we
(As is already noted) Thousands and Thousands in the Roman Church most learned
and pious, who hear the Doctrins of the fore named Councils proposed, and in
Judgment so inwardly Assent to all without scruple, that they would dye for
the verities there A Principle ill applied.
defined? The Truth is manifest. Therefore Mr Hookers necessary Reason, or
Demonstration has no place in these far more numerous than all the Protestants
are in England, and consequently every man Stand's not evidently convicted of
our Councils Errors. Now if you say so many Thousands are fooled, Know Sr,
That no few of these fools, are wise enough to dispute with you, and to Show
you Speak at random without Principles.

3. Thus much is said of our Catholic Councils hitherto conuened in the
Chureh, now if we return to the old Supposition, and First imagine all Councils
fallible, and Secondly think, that the latter, of equal Authority amends the
First, or a Third the Errors of the Second, and so in Infinitum, I Say it is
Impossible, either clearly to Discover the pretended Errors, or to redress
them, and this I Assert upon these grounds.

4. One already hinted at, is, that none can by an inward Assent (and Mr Hooker
requires that) own any such Evidence An Assertion proved.
whilst the Council which makes them Errors, is as weak and fallible as the
other was that Defined the contrary, and Published all under the Notion of
Christian Truths. No more can I, were I yet to Learn rest Satisfied, in what
either of these two iarring Councils Define (for the One is as bad as the
Other) than I am able to trust to two Ministers Talk, if I heard them Preach
quite contrary Doctrine at Paul's Church, That is, no man can believe either,
upon their fallible Authority. This Principle therefore Stands firm. An errable
Council A fallible Council, most un meet to teach the high Mysteries of Faith.
i^ as unfit to Teach, or Vnteach another likewise Erring, in the high and yet
unknown Mysteries of Faith, as One Wholly ignorant, of an uncouth Path, is to
direct a Stranger into it, For as Both these are to learn the way from a third
Guide more skilful, So both these Councils must take their Instructions from
some third certain Oracle, Or remain, as they are, Ignorant. But Sectaries
remit none to any living certain Oracle, Therefore they cannot but still Sit in
Darkness (It Is Gods just Judgment upon them) and blind as They are, lead the
blind they know not whither.

5. Again (and here is my second Reason) Before the Discovery of these
intolerable Errors we ought to have a List of them, and know How many or few
they are, And who can Ascertain us of this? Are we to divine at their
Intolerableness by our own private Judgments? Or is some wiser body to
instruct us, when there is no Council at hand to do it? Must all Christians
dispersed up and down the world write letters to one another, Or inform
themselves whether the Errors be intolerable? These Supposed Errors in
Councils.
And if so; whether it be yet high time to cry out against them? Or, is it
enough to Ask our next Neighbors what they think of the Business, and rest
there? Perhaps some will hold them inconsiderable, Others of a violent temper
heinous not longer to be born with. And can such Iumbling and Confusion which
tears the Unity of the Church in pieces Preserve Her in peace think ye? Must
we first Suppose a learned Cannot be discovered by larring Multitudes.
Council to have erred, and next rely on unlearned iarring Multitudes to
Proclaim, Censure, and Reuerse the Error? If this way be not more than
Vncanonical in matters of Religion, there was never any.

6. You will Say, the next Council is to mend all the failings of the former.
Answ. Were this, as it is not Possible, what is to be done in the mean time,
whilst there is no Council in Being? Must the Church which Belieues the
Definitions of What if a Council be not in Being.
the former erring Councils and all Christians with it, Err on so long till
this other Council Appears? Or is every private man to resolve for himself
what is best to do in such Exigences? Reflect I beseech you. How far easier were
it, to quiet all, might Councils once be owned infallible. Yet here is my least
When difficulties arise
Exception. I say therefore to prove what I said above. If Church and Councils
can err notoriously, There is no means left on earth, either to discover the
Errors, or to amend them.

7. The Assertion will be proved by sifting this one Point to the Bottom. And
Much light will be had if we leave Generalities, One Point Examined.
wherein Sectaries always lurk, and descend to particulars, Or lay forth the
nature of some imaginable Errors. Call then These if any be, horrid and
intolerable.

8. To teach there is no God, no Christ, no Redeemer, no Salvation. I Ask
whether the Councils in Gods Church can err thus grossly, The Nature of horrid
Errors.
or are so secured by Divine Assistance, as not to Define such vast
Absurdities? If it be Answered, They are so far at least preserved infallible,
I clearly Infer, No man can exclude a total infallibility from Councils. If it
be Answered, Possibly they may err in this Damnable manner. I infer Again.
Ergo, Possibly, Councils, Church, and all Christians may utterly desert Christ,
become Atheists, Turks, Jews, Devils, or what else you will, that naught is.
Can this also be granted.

9. One may reply, it is indeed possible, yet will never be. C^ntra. Who
hinders the Mischief, I beseech you, if the Supposition may stand? The Roman
Catholic Church, Say Sectaries, is already Idolatrous, and long since was
Antichristian, when some English Protestants made the Pope Antichrist. The
Church accused of intolerable Errors.
Why then may not Atheism, Judaism, and Turcism infect likewise the Whole Moral
Body of Christians, and Destroy both Church and Councils? Grant this Possible,
there can be no more talk of after-Councils correcting the former, erroneous,
For the Church is now Destroyed, Christ our Lord must please to appear again,
or send some great Prophet to establish a new Church more firm than the other
was now ruined, or we are lest desolate, utterly Churchles.

10. I am verily persuaded our Adversaries will think twice on it, before they
once grant these horrid Consequences, and therefore must needs make the
Supposed Evident intolerable errors not altogether so abominable, but less, or
of a lower rank, yet evident and intolerable. Remember that. And what may these
A question proposed to Sectaries.
be think ye? I would fain know whether any such foul Doctrins have been ever
taught de facto, or, because Councils are Supposed fallible, whether they yet
remain in a State of possibility, and only may be Taught? If it be Said they
are not actual but only possible, Or may be intolerable hereafter, And
Sectaries upon that Account abandon the Roman Catholic Church: Their Sin is
now actual and more horrid than such Concerning these Supposed Errors Actual
or Possible.
Errors are, Because They desert a Church upon supposed faults which only may
be, yet never were hitherto. Now if for a mere Possibility of falsities, (never
yet actually Discovered nor known) The Roman Church is to be quitted,
Protestants ought to forsake Their own Religion, For they are all liable to
Error, Yea, And may well hang up the most Innocent man in the world upon this
score, That he may be a thief, Though as yet he never Stole any thing.

11. The Errors therefore, if we Discourse rationally, hitherto pretended
against us are not in a mere State of Possibility, None Condemned for Errors
which Possibly may be.
But Actual, Evident, and intolerable. We inquire after them, And still proceed
upon this wretched Supposition, that both Church and Council are fallible, or
have erred. When Envy has done its Utmost, you only can get a List of these or
the like Supposed Falsehoods. Praying to Saints. The Real Presence. Worshipping
of Images. Transubstantiation or some thing of this nature, which Catholics
maintain. Now truly, it is more than extrauagant (and I know not with what
Conscience Sectaries do it) to Decry these as Evident and intolerable Errors,
whilst a whole learned Church defends them as Truths.

12. What Says Mr Hooker? Is the mind so forced that after a full Proposal, it
cannot choose but inwardly Assent to All as evident Errors? Toys. Trifles.
Millions, as we now Sectaries in consequencies.
said, own them as Apostolical Verities. 2. If Evident and intolerable, they
strike at such Verities as Sectaries call the fundamentals of Faith, And
consequently the Roman Church which maintains them, has been Vnorthodox in
fundamentals for a thousand years and more. Will this be granted? Grant or
deny, here is an unanswerable Dilemma; They are fundamental Errors (in our
Sectaries sense) destructive of Divine Faith, or not. If not; but only smaller
matters, Protestants Oblige themselves to forbear, and to expect the Churches
Good pleasure until, some other Council meet's, and Reuerses what is Amiss.
Their Clamours therefore against the Churches Doctrine now, are vnauthorised and
most illegal by their own Principles. Nor have they Power, as is confessed, to
Reform themselves in lesser matters, but only in things of a higher Concern,
Evident, and intolerable.

13. Now if they be of this nature and consequently fundamental A clear
Inference against Sectaries.
Absurdities against Faith, It follows, that there was no Church right in
fundamentals the whole world over for ten Ages before Luther: Not the Roman; if
the Supposition hold's, Nor any other Society of Christians for all those (name
whom you will) were more deeply plunged into fundamental Errors. 3. And It Is
the chiefest thing I aim at. If Church and Councils be owned fallible, can
err, or have erred, Our Adversaries Supposition of Errors Evident, and
intolerable, is purely chimerical, And therefore I said just now, None can know
them as such, and consequently no Power on earth can amend them. I prove the
Assertion.

14. First they cannot be known as evident or manifest, Intolerable Errors
cannot be proved against the Church.
without Principles, as clear as the Errors are Supposed to be, which
therefore must be so indisputable That the mind inwardly Assent's to them, as
Mr Hooker Says. A weaker light, as Probability, or a miscalled Moral
Certainty, beget's Evidence in none. Now here we Urge our Adversaries to bring
to Light but one, or more clear Principles, whereby it may manifestly appear,
that Transubstantiation or any other Catholic Doctrine, is so manifest a
Falsehood, That the mind conquered, By any thing like a Principle.
and convicted with the Evidence, cannot choose but decry it as intolerable.
Whither will these men run for Principles? To Scripture, it is evidently abused
by the one or other Party, but who is in fault? You will say That Is yet
disputable, therefore f^r of from Evidence. Church and Councils, supposed
errable, and erroneous, cannot tell you nor give in evidence against him or
them, that abuse Scripture. Whither next? To the Fathers? All are fallible, and
their Sense ^n controuerted matters is made so intricate when you hear Them
glossed by the Protestant, and vnglossed by the Catholic, that you would Swear
they speak Contradictions, And can any thing like evidence or certainty, grow
from these contrary Glosses, which as Experience teaches, breed endless Quarrels?

15, Other Principles we have not any, except Mr Stillingfleets Common Reason
of Mankind (the worst of all) for do we not Scripture, Church Fathers and all
Principle fail Sectaries.
se, that Heretics every where make Themselves and their own Sects most
reasonable? Where we have nothing like common Reason, but so many different and
divided Sentiments of iarring men dispersed up and down the world. If therefore
Scripture, Fathers, and this Common Reason fail to be Principles, our Sectaries
Supposition of manifest or Evident falsities in the Church, goes beyond all
Moderation, and implies an Ouerlashing more than intolerable.

16. Their ungrounded Mistake lies here, That Principles are Supposed at hand,
or ready at a call to Decide in this case of a Councils Supposed Error,
Whereas if both Church and Councils can, or do Err, There are no such things in
being as Principles. Topics Uncertain Topics, no Principles.
at most, or an endless iarring upon mere Vncettainties lead none to an Evident
Discovery of Errors, Therefore I said right, they cannot be known as Evident
for want of Principles, and if not known as such, no Power on earth can amend
them. Yet good Principles reach thus far at least, as to Demonstrate that
Protestants grossly Mistake in their Clamours against our Churches errors De
facto, And here you have my Principles already hinted at.

17. Either these supposed Errors are those unchristian Tenants mentioned N.
8. And certainly Councils never transgressed so enormously as to Define such
devilish Doctrins. Or. A Strong Argument against Sectaries.
2. They are only Possible false Doctrins which may be Defined if Councils can
err, but yet are not taught. If So; All must Say, that as it is horrid to
condemn a man for a crime he may commit, though he never did it, So it is the
highest Injustice to condemn a whole Church for Falshood's She may teach (if
fallible) though She never taught them. Nothing then remains but to plead
against our Church Doctrine de facto, as evidently and intolerably Erroneous,
and herein we will not spare Sectaries one whit, but Urge them, as we do, to
speak home in the cause. Their Accusation is evident, we Press them Again and
again to justify it by Proofs and Principles as evident. What must these
errors be decryed as Evident and intolerable, and can none but Sectaries get
so much as a glimpse of the Evidence? Away with such fooleries. No man can hear
them with Patience.

18. By what is said already you se, that The Doctrine of Protestants Shows it
Self as it is, not only false but most Inconsequent. Sectaries Doctrine, in
consequent.
Mark, I beseech you the Inconsequence. These Nouellists Define the Church to
be an Assembly of men who Belie^^ and Profess the pure Word of God, But such
men (find them where you can) as believe and profess the pure Word, which is i^
it Self Infallible, are certainly infallible if they Believe it as God's
infallible Word, Therefore they must acknowledge an infallible Moral Body of
Christians that Constitutes an infallible Church.

19. In Lieu of Doing this, They Tear all in Pieces, and First Decry the Roman
Catholic Church as Errable, Yea actually erring; Next, and this Marr's their
own Cause, they withal Profess themselves fallible: Whereas, had any thing
like consequent Doctrine entered their Thoughts, They should at least have made
^rotestants infallible, being as They Say, new commissioned By their own
Principles, they should hold some Society of men Infallible.
Doctors sent from God, to amend the Churches Errors. And believe it their own
Infallibility, had they casually laid claim to it, would as soon have been
persuaded (That Is never) as now without Probability or any thing like a
Principle, They endeavor to prove the Roman Catholic Church Fallible. But let
this pass. Thus much I Assert. To tell us on the One side, There is an Assembly
of men who Believe the infallible Word of God, And on the Other, To make all
that Teach and Believe it, Fallible, liable to False Doctrine, is not only to
proceed The contrary Doctrine ruins Faith.
inconsequently, but moreover to Expose Christian Religion, to the Scorn of
Jews and Gentiles, yea quite to ruin Divine Faith, And finally to make us all
Scepticks, certain of nothing.

20. If it be replied. The, Councils, and Sectarles with them, are at least
preserved infallible in things Called the Fundamentals of Faith plainly
revealed in Scripture, I urge them first to give in their Proofs for this half
or partial Infallibility, which will be more than ridiculous, if once they
Appear in paper. Again, if we are all infallible and secure in a few
Fundamentals plainly registered in Scripture, to what Purpose do Sectaries keep
a coil about smaller Matters, called Vnfundamentals, Which are neither
intolerable or Considerable, because Small, Much less can they be Evident
Errors, so long as a whole Their pretended Evidence of Errors is evidently a
Fourb.
Church defends them as Truths, For this Evidence cannot but fail Sectaries
(or come to nothing) whilst the Church and They stand in Contest about it. Be
it how you will. Here without a Judge, we are got into the old Labyrinth again
of an endless Dispute, which can never Produce any thing like Evidence in behalf
of Sectaries.

CHAP. XVIII.
Two Adversaries mainly Opposite to True Religion. The last and most urgent
Proof of the Churches Infallibility taken from the Necessity, the Notion and
Nature of true Religion. Mr Stillingfleets Objections found weak and weightles.
Most of them already Proposed and Dissolved by others. A short Reflection made
upon some few.

^. THere is a Knot of half-witted People who Say, though Religion Seems
indeed necessary to Preserve humane Society in peace, And to Ouer-awe unruly
Spirits, yet the Two Paradoxes maintain^e by these half mad men.
best (were any Good) is no more but a mere Fiction, a forged ^ale, in fine an
Error. These men make nature Monstrous, and must Consequently maintain two
vast Paradoxes. The one; That humane Societies every were (That is) All
Kingdoms, and Commonwealths stand in need of Fiction and Error to make them
happy. The Proposition is evident: For if peace, Tranquillity, Fiction and
foolery can make no man happy.
and the subduing of unquiet Spirits, be a true necessary Happiness to all, And
these cannot subsist without a fained Religion, It is manifest that Fiction,
Foolery, and Error make the^ happy, which is as much as to Say, a Constant
Sickness keep's the body in health, weakness gives it strength, Pain and (...)
^ase and refreshment. Certainly no less is error disso^^^t to a rational
Nature, than Sickness repugnant to health, (...) to fire, or heat to water.

2. The second Paradox wholly as bad and clear, keeps Parallel with this other.
It is now supposed that Religion which is nothing else but Fiction, necessarily
conduces to the Peace of Kingdoms and Commonwealths, whereupon their Happiness
^est's more secure, And is better preserved than if this fiction (...) not.
Hence it follows evidently. To know and Profess Truth, to quit our Selves of
Error and fiction, robb's us of Happiness and makes humane nature miserable.
The Inference is undeniable, For if we be happy upon this score that we live in
a D^tage, we are miserable in case we get free of it or become Wise, which is
against the light of Reason, For if God has endued Nature is not miserable by
being freed from dotage.
all with a desire of true Wisdom and the knowledge of truth, (whereof none can
doubt) Man cannot be miserable if he Possesses that Good which the Author of
nature would have him to enjoy. Hence it in also Inserred, that the universal
Persuasion of true Religion is no Dotage, no Deception but a Truth, and that
most notorious.

3. Now if you Object, some live without Religion, and ^^ few embrace a false
one; you plead by cases merely Accidental, As if one should Say, Nature has
made man Sociable and given him a tongue to Converse with others, But some
Cases merely Accidental made use of to no purpose
are dumb, others abuse their faculty of speaking, Therefore man is no sociable
creature. This is our case. Those who live without all Religion, (if any such
be) are the dumb and blind: Those that Profess a falss Religion, like lying
tongues abuse Gods Gifts, the Abuse is Theirs not God's, who would have all to
be v^ius labij of one Tongue and one heart in a matter of so high Concern. And
thus much of these first Adversaries Opposite to true Religion.

4. In the next place, I may well name our modern Sectaries no less than
Arch-aduersaries of Religion, who make the Church and all that teach Church
Doctrine fallible. My reason is. A Fained and Fallible Religion, are near
Cous(...) Sectaries paralleled with the other Adversaries.
Germans. The one is a Fiction, The other at least may be so, And for ought any
man can know, is no better. For there is no Principle whereby it may appear so
much as probably, that all the Christians who lived since the Apostles time or
yet are alive, have not been deluded with fictions concerning^ Gods truths, but
rather are plunged into a deep Deluge of gross Errors, if the Church and
Councils can Teach or believe false Doctrine, And here be pleased to reflect a
little, Ho^ near these two Adversaries come to one another.

5. The first mentioned account it Happiness to remain in Error, and Sectaries
like well not only the Possibility but more, a prefent manifest danger of
erring in this matter of highest The Parallel la^id forth, and proved.
Consequence. Actual error pleases the one, and a great hazard of it contents
the other. Humane nature, say the first, would be miserable were men so wise as
to learn this Truth, that Religion is a Foppery, though it be so, And we are
all undone (Say Sectaries) could we acquire so much Wisdom in this present
state, as to be infallibly Ascertained that Religion is no Foppery, which
perhaps may be one. Wherefore to weaken all certitude They tell us, That none
can learn infallibly those truths which God has revealed, because all Churches,
all Councile, all Pastors and Doctors, whose Duty is to give Assurance of trut^
are so fallible, And that the very best may err and oblige men ^^ believe
Error. Here is all the comfort we have from Sectaries. Thus much premised.

6. We come to the fundamental Ground which proves our Catholic Religion, and
the Church that teaches it to be infallible. I Said in the first Disc. C. 1. n.
9. speaking against Atheists. If we receive the first lights of nature called
general The fundamental ground of the Churches Infallibility.
(...) from any Power inferior to God, They are all fallible, and may deceive
us. This granted, which I think no Christian can deny, It is most consequent to
Assert, That if we receive the Supernatural lights or truths of Grace revealed
in Scripture (vastly above all humane Comprehension,) from a less Power than
God, the wisest of men may live in error, and cannot but be deceived. And thus
both Nature and Grace necessarily depend on God.

7. This great Truth i^ the Apostles Doctrine. Jacob. C. 1. 17. Omne Donum
perfectum de sursum est. Every perfect Gift Deduced from the Apostles Doctrine.
comes from above, descending from that Father of lights. God therefore,
rightly styled the Father of light, or, as Divines Speak, Prima veritas the
first unerring Verity, Pleased to make known some few of his Divine truths in
that Book of Holy Scripture. Few I call them, compared with innumerable others,
not at all revealed, which yet his infinite Wisdom comprehend's, Howeuer these
few (often darkly expressed in that mysterious Book, or in Terms less
perspicuous) Dazzle the eyes of weak sighted Mortals, and wonder nothing, The
Apostle gives the Reason ^. Tim. 6. 16. because all proceed from him, Qui lucem
inhabitat inaccessibilem, That dwell's in an inaccessible light, none can
attain unto. Yet truths they are, the first unerring Verity Treasures
Communicated.
Asserts it, and therefore ought to be esteemed treasures. If treasures;
Providence will have them conveyed unto us by secure hands, And if eternal
truths concerning Salvation, God cannot but will, and his Will is a law, That
all be Proposed and Taught as Divine and infallible Verities, depending upon
none, How to be Valued*
if we vltimately bring them to their last Center) but upon the first Truth
only, who neither will, nor can deceive any.

8. Now here is the Difficulty. Seeing it has pleased Almighty God for reasons
best known to Himself, to leave most of the high Mysteries registered in
Scripture in no little Obscurity, The main Difficulgy Proposed.
Some express his own Perfections of being one essence, and three distinct
Persons, Others relate to the admirable works of Grace effected by his Infinite
Power (Of this nature are the Incarnation, and the whole Series of man's
Redemption.) The Difficulty I say is to find out a trusty Interpreter, some
faithful Oracle, which can when doubts occurr concerning the darker Mysteries
clear all, lay open the Book, and absolutely Assert. An infinite verity speaks
thus, This sense and no other is what the Holy Ghost intended. And this is
necessary, because Almighty God teaches no more immediately by himself, nor will
have Enthusianisms to be our Doctors.

9. Moreover the necessity of such a sure Oracle (if Divine The necessity of an
Infallible Oracle.
truth must be learned) is proved upon this ground chiefly. That these
mysteries, as is now said, have both their Difficulty and Darkness. Natural
reason left to it self boggles at them, Jews, Gentiles, and Heretics reject
the highest. It is, Say they, mighty* hard to believe a Trinity, the Divine
word made flesh, God and man to dye upon a Cross etc. What can Reason yield so
far, or submit to these as eternal Verities, when their last and only Proof is
taken from a Book which we se evidently sensed different ways, and so
interpreted, that One in rigor may own the Quineced because the Mysteries are
difficult.
Scriptures Divinity as the Arians do, and yet so far favor Reason, as not to
force upon it the Belief of such sublime secrets, which offer violence to our
intellectual Faculties. Thus the Arians discourse.

10. Now here I justly appeal to the common Judgment of Mankind, and Ask
whether our God of truth, who on the one side perfectly comprehend's the depth
of his own revealed Mysteries, and on the other, penetrat's no less our shallow
capacities (puzzled as we se in the search of the most Obuious things in nature)
could make choice of men merely fallible, and divorced from Divine Assistance
to interpret Scripture, whilst all of them none excepted, because errable, may
grossly mistake and change the purest Verities which were ever yet revealed,
into Errors. What think ye, could God who from Eternity foresaw, and yet sees
his written Truths depraved, abused, yea Heresies drawn from his most sacred
words, Could this Al-seing wisdom I say, put his own Sacred book into such
Sacrilegious han^s, or like well that a few scattered and divided Sectaries
should be the only best Interpreters of it?

11. I say yet more. All the men in the world, considered merely as nature has
framed them, fallible, would commit the Presumption in this matter easily
Committed.
Sin of Presumption, and wrong both God and his verities, did they venture so
far as to interpret Scripture by no other Rule or law but by their own weak
Reason, and there upon resolutely define, that God is one pure Essence, and
three real distinct Persons: Original Sin is such an evil as the Orthodox
Church teaches: Children are to be Baptized etc. To deduce thus much from the
bare letter of Scripture, and to define every particular resolutely, is above
the force of all natural knowledge. Those then who Interpret the Truths of the
first Alseing Verity that inhabits light not seen by our natural eyes, must be
specially Privileged, and either receive Divine Assistance necessary.
illumination from the Father of Light, or thankfully take infallible
Assistance from the Holy Ghost the Spirit of Truth, which is both promised and
readily given to the Catholic Church.

12. Hence I deduce the Churches infallibility, and Argue thus. Either there is
such a Society of men preserved by Providence infallible in all they Define and
interpret, or not. If you Affirm, The Roman Catholic Church alone has the
Privilege, for all others disclaim Infallibility. If you Deny. The A further
Proof.
highest Mysteries of Christian Religion are things only sought for, but not
found, talked of, but never learned. In a word Religion is a mere Skepticism,
the best that learn it seem just like those Scholars the Apostle mentions.
2. Tim 3. 6. Semper discentes etc. Always learning, but never thoroughly
instructed. If I evidence not what is here said so manifestly, That no Sectary
shall rationally contradict it, censure me at your pleasure.

13. A few Questions will clear all, And first I must Demand. From whence has
that we call Religion its truth? All Answer from God the first unerring Verity.
Very right. But we Ask again, Where is the Master teaching Oracle which plainly
deliuer's these revealed truths, or clearly Proposes the Mysteries now named?
Sectaries usually tell us, Their Oracle is holy Scripture. Hereupon follows a
third Querie more difficult than all the rest. Viz. Who Ascertains you Arians,
you Donatists, you Pelagians, you Protestants you Quakers (All fallible) that
you The Sectaries pretense to their reading Scripture, examined.
rightly understand what you read, and grossly deprave not Gods Word, for
without controversy innumerable called Christians do deprave it? Protestants (a
perfect Representative of all the other) shall Answer for all. O say they, We
read Scripture attentively, we pray for light, we peruse the Originals, we
compare Passage with passage, and after much pains taken we both believe the
highest Mysteries, and moreover persuade our Selves, that the new Model of
Protestancy is conformable, or (at least) not Dissonant to Gods word. Here you
have their last and very best Principle, For they will not hear of an
Infallible Church.

14. Reflect Gentle Reader a little. Do Protestants only read, pray., peruse,
and compare? No Certainly. The Arians long since have done So, yet boldly
oppose Protestants, and deny the highest Mysteries of our Christian Faith. If
then the Arians Praying, perusing, and comparing prove no conviction to
Protestants, Arians also read, and Oppose Protestants.
Why should the Protestants praying or perusing Convince the Arians of Error?
Again. Have not Catholics (think ye) of a longer continuance and far more
numerous than Sectaries, prayed and perused Scripture? None can doubt it. And
yet they hold the whole Model of pure Protestancy a Nouelty, and openly declare
it Heretical. Therefore unless Sectaries have So do Catholics.
a singular talent in praying and perusing above all other Christians, Unless
they can produce better Proofs for the Mysteries of Faith against the Arians,
and stronger Arguments against Catholics in behalf of Protestancy, than the
bare letter of Scripture, Sectaries Pretense to reading Scripture.
And their own weak conferring Texts together, or praying upon them, They do
not only make Protestancy ridiculous, but moreover, every new whimsy
defensible; For was there ever yet Fanatique in the world that could not Say
thus much? He certainly both professes and teaches truth, because he has a
Bible, read's that, peruses it and prays earnestly. And will not any Adversary
retort the Argument upon him and defend whateuer foolery he fancies contrary.

15. Believe it, if this way of Arguing have force the meanest Quaquer in
England, will make his cause good against the makes Protestancy ridiculous.
stoutest Protestant, and the Protestant if he say. I read, I Ponder I pray,
proves his Religion every whit as strongly against the Quaquer. That is,
neither proves any thing. Nay more, the worst of Heretics, may upon this
ground maintain his Errors against the Orthodox Church (be that yet where you
will) and could the Church only say, She reads Scripture, ponders it and
prays, Her case would be the same with the worst of Heretics, But besides
reading and praying There are other Proofs, whereby One Church only is euinced
God's Faithful Oracle

16. From what is now said I Argue first. A Principle, which makes false
Religion true, yea all Religions though most erroneous as credible as true
Religion, is more than intolerable. The Sectaries Principle makes false
Religions true.
But this Principle of Protestants, we read Scripture, we ponder and pray,
makes false Religions true, and all Sects though most erroneous as credible as
true Religion is, Ergo it is more than intolerable. The Minor as is now said
proves it self, For every Heretic pretend's to read and ponder Scripture, but
if you move a further Question concerning the Sense of what he reads, he
returns you his own fancy as the best light he has, and makes that his Judge.
This and no other is the Protestants Principle, and the chief, if not the only
support, of all Heresy in the world.

17. I Argue. 2. And hold it a Demonstration. To make Religion a Skepticism
eternally debatable, without hope of attaining truth at last, is wholly as
ridiculous, as if two men should go to law merely to wrangle, hopeles of ever
having their cause determined. But this Protestant Principle. We read, Pray
and ponder makes Religion a mere Skepticism without hope of ever knowing it, or
having truth finally decided ( Semper discentes they Another Conuincing
Argument.
are always learning but never well taught). Ergo it is more than ridiculous.

18. To prove the Minor let us first suppose, that either we Catholics, or
Protestants teach and profess true Religion (both certainly do not, for we hold
Contradictions). Suppose. 2. This falsity, which our Adversaries will have
supposed. Viz. That the Roman Catholic Church after all Her reading, and
perusing Scripture is as fallible in all She teaches, as Protestants
confessedly are in what they deliver after their reading. Both teach as they
do contrary Doctrine, Yea and fallible Doctrine, yet both tell you, they teach
true Doctrine. Say I beseech you, what man in his wits To teach Contrary Doctrine
and true Doctrine.
can believe Either upon their bare Assertions, chiefly if we Suppose them of
equal Authority? when he find's the Result of their reading, and perusing
Scripture, to end in nothing but in open Contradictions, and sees plainly that
the opposite Doctrine of the One Church, so much abates the Credit of the other
teaching contrary, that in real truth both become Contemptible. And hence I
Said, that which we call Christian Religion would justly deserve Scorn, if no
Church teach it infallibly. But is impossible.
here is not all. To discover more the gross error of Sectaries in this
particular,

19. We are yet to Demand upon whom this iarring Doctrine of the two dissenting
Churches now supposed Fallible is to be laid? Or whence it proceeds? Can it
come from Gods special A Doctrine taught fallibly.
Assistance think ye? It is impossible. Because God teaches no contradictions.
Nay, if we consider it as contradictory, no Spirit of truth can teach it.
Therefore we must part the Doctrins, and Ascribe to each Church its own
particular Opinion, And then (were that possible) Examine which is true.

20. But here lies the Misery. I say boldly. There neither is nor can be any
appearance of certain revealed truth in either Proceed's not from God.
Church, not only because all Principles fail whereby to discern a certain
Christian truth from Error, but most upon this ground, That we must now remove
the fallible taught Doctrins of both these Churches, from Gods Infallible
Verity and his Special assistance also, and make them lean upon man's weak and
shallow understanding. We have no other Principle to rest on, if once
infallible Assistance be excluded. But it is manifest, man's shallow But relies
upon man's weak Understanding.
capacity communicat's no Certainty to Any, concerning the high Mysteries of
Faith, removed from their Center (The first infallible Verity). Therefore all
we can learn from such Teachers, is no more but doubtful Doctrine at most, or,
if it reach to an Opinion meanly probable, there is all, Yet you have often No
ground less then infallible Supports true Religion.
heard, (and it is a Truth) that no Principle less then one which is
infallible, Can uphold our Christian Doctrine. Wherefore an utter ruin of true
Religion ineuitably follows upon this Ground. As Duine Doctrine infallibly
taught begets infallible Faith, So if taught doubtfully, it begets only a
doubtful Assent, which is no Faith at all. Now were these Doctrins respectively
to each Church probable (as I think neither would be if the Supposition of
their fallibillty stand's) we are only brought to the old Skepticism again, and
may dispute of Religion as we do of Probabilities in Schools, and so if men
please, They may as often change Religion as they change Opinions, or apparel.

21. Some perhaps will reply. Protestants can certainly Say more for themselves
then only to tell you They read Scripture, and compare the Passages of it
together by the light of their own weak reasons, Could so much indeed make them
accomplished Sectaries can pretend to no other Principle.
Doctors able to lay forth Gods eternal truths, it would seem strange, mighty
bare, and dissatisfactory to Reason. Answ. Here is all you have from them, For
they neither do, nor can pretend to more. Wherefore I challenge them again and
again to Say plainly what other Principle can be relied on, not wholly as
doubtful, and as much controuerted as their very Religion is, when they either
teach, or interpret Scripture, contrary to But to their own Comparing Scripture.
the Roman Catholic Church. Observe their Procedure. If a contest arises
betwixt them and condemned Heretics, The Arians for example* All ends in a
mere throwing Texts at one another, And the sense must be just so as each Party
conceiues. And do they not follow the same strain in every Controversy with
Catholics? One Instance will give you sufficient light, and may well serve for
all.

22. They (Protestants I mean) read those words of our Savior. This is my
Body. So do Catholics also. They compare Text with Text, and Sense all as they
please. Catholics as wise and learned compare also, yet hold contrary Doctrine,
and discover no little fraud in these new men's Deductions, and Criticisms. Say
now plainly. Who is He that acts the Sectaries seek to quarrel but to End
nothing.
Sceptick's part? Who is He that would endlesly quarrel about the Sense of Gods
word? Is it the Catholic? No certainly. He is willing to have the cause
vltimately decided, He Petitions to have these endless strifes remitted to the
censure of one Supreme Judge, to a Church which manifests it self by evident
glorious Miracles (never yet censured, by any Christians but known Heretics)
and which finally has taught the world ever since Christ left it. Dare
Sectaries do thus much? Dare they appeal to any Orthodox Church, by whose just
Sentence these debates may have an End? No. They recoyle, and without listening
to any Judge but Them selves, would still continue these Debates. Therefore they
are the Sceptists. And to prove this, give me leave to propose one Question to
the Protestant (He is the man we now treat A Conuincing Proof of our Assertion.
with). Has he any Church so free from Censure, of so long Continuance, so
glorious in Miracles as the Roman Catholic is. Has He any Council as generally
received the whole world over, as either the Lateran or Florentine which ever
interpreted Christ's words or Sensed them as he does? Most evidently no.
Therefore I said well, His reading and glosses, and all he can Allege for
himself, are nothing but His own weak thoughts, as far removed from the
foundation of truth, ( Gods infallible Verity) as earth is from Heaven and more.

23. But its needles to Prosecute this Point further, when one only reason,
which none can contradict gives Evidence enough against Protestants. I Propose
it thus. What ever Doctrine they teach peculiar to Protestancy, or maintain
against the Roman Catholic Church, either proceed's from Gods infallible
Assistance, or wholly borrowes strength from their own Sectaries teach Doctrine
divorced from Divine Assistance.
fallible Conceptions, after their reading and comparing Scripture. Grant the
first; They teach infallible Doctrine, by virtue of Gods infallible Assistance,
and consequently are the men who constitute an Infallible Church. Say secondly,
that all they teach deriues force from their own weak reason (guided only by
the external words of Scripture, understood as they conceive,) They teach as
the Arians, and all Heretics have taught before them, a learning which is not
from God. Their And therefore not from God.
Doctrine in a word, Divorced from all Divine Aid and Assistance, stand's
tottering upon their own errable Sentiments, and therefore neither is (which I
intended to prove) Christ's Doctrine, nor at all resoluable into that first
Principle of truth, God's unerring Verity.

24. Shall we to give some clearer Light to the Controversy hitherto handled
compendiously recapitulate a few of these many reflections made already in the
foregoing Chapters? And then more establish the Churches infallibility upon
undoubted Principles. To do so, may perhaps benefit the Reader.

25. Say therefore. Is it true that Christian Religion vltimately A brief
recapitulation of what has been Said.
depend's upon God, the first unerring Verity? No man doubts it. Is it true,
that innumerable called Christians grossly misconceiue those revealed Truths,
after their reading and perusing Scripture? It is no less certain. Is it true,
That the bare reading, and pondering Scripture Sectaries like Arians.
no more ascertain's Protestants of the Verities there registered, than the
Arians or any other Heretics? The truth is undoubted, For from whom should
they have greater certainty. Is it true, That Funaticism. Scripture wrested.
Doubtful faith.
eu^ry Fanatique recurr's to Scripture, as Sectaries do? Experience proves it.
Is it true, That this sole recourse to Scripture wr^sted to a sinister Sense,
vpohld's the most false Sects in the world? Is it true, That Christian Doctrine,
doubtfully taught, beget's only a doubtful faith? Is it true, That the only
support of Protestants in points of Religion Comparing Texts, fallible*
Skepticism.
amount's to no more but to their own doubtful and bare pondering Scripture, or
to their various and fallible comparing Texts together? Is it true, That these
men like Scepticks would stand everlastingly quarrelling about the sense of
Gods word, and cannot be iuduced to hear any Judge No Judge.
speak in this cause of Religion but themselves? Is it true, That we urge them
to make choice of what Judge they please, provided they appeal not to their own
Sentiments and Glosses, as much controuerted as Protestancy is? Is it true,
That they can name no Orthodox Church which No Orthodox Church. Nor Councils
Want of Infallible Assistance* Fallible Professors, of fallible Doctrine Divine
Revelation wronged. Doctrine never owned.
taught as they teach, glossed Scripture as they gloss; No Council generally
received (Comparable either to the Lateran or Florentine) which favors their
Interpretations forced upon Christ's words? Is it true, That the Doctrine they
propound confessedly proceed's not from Gods infallible Assistance? Is it true,
That they assume to themselves the name of Christians, and yet are ashamed to
be called infallible Professors of the whole syst^me of Christian Religion? Is
it true, That they have done their utmost to take from God's infallible
Revelation its own intrinsic nature of Infallibility, by making it no more but
morally certain in order to our Christian Faith? Is it true, That, that half
Infallibility some lay claim to, in a few yet unknown fundamentals, appears
even to Protestants, not any Doctrine owned by the Christian world, nor can it
appear otherwise, whilst a whole universal Church decryes it as improbable? Is
it true, That These Nouellists raise not their Doctrine Endless Disputes.
any higher, but only to an endless Contest, whilst no Judge but themselves must
speak in the cause?

26. Are all these things (I say) more amply enlarged and clearly proved
already so undoubted that no Sectary shall ever rationally contradict them? If
the Judicious Reader find I speak truth, as he will, may Prejudice be laid
aside, I may boldly Conclude. Who ever see's not the deplorable Condition of
misled Sectaries, who ever see's not also an absolute necessity of an
infallible Church to set them in the right way of truth Again is wilfully
blind, supinely negligent, Yea utterly Careless of Salvation.

CHAP. XIX.
Certain Principles, where upon the Churches Infallibility stand's firm. The
End of Divine Revelation is to teach all Infallibly. Every Doctrine revealed by
the fiast Verity is no less infall^ble then true. Its one thing to teach Truth,
another to teach Divine and Infallible Truth. Sectaries Strangly ungrateful. A
word of Mr Stillingfleets weak Objections.

1. NOw we come to the last certain Principles whereupon the Churches
infallibilit^ stand's most firmly. Here is one. The Doctrine which God reueal's,
as it proceed's from that first unerring Verity, is not only true but
infallible. The Second Principle. Scripture which makes none infallible is
often abused by Heretics. Principles premised.
The third Principle. Some Christians are yet in Being That both teach and
learn this true Divine, and infallible revealed Doctrine. The Proof is easy: For
unless some Teach and learn it, All Teach and learn another Doctrine distinct
from that which God revealed, The Principle Proved.
and this neither is, nor can be Divine, but merely humane at most, and Perhaps
a foolery. That therefore, which the Prophet Asserts. John* 6. 43. All shall be
Docibiles Dei, docible or taught of God, is not so, For now if the Supposirion
hold's, the whole Church (take it in what Extent you please) is delude^ as the
Apostle Says Ephesians. 4. 14 With the wind of Doctrine, in the wickedness of men,
in Craftines to the circumuention of error. And this brings ruin to Christian
Religion.

2. The. 4. Principle. This Divine Doctrine is not only A Church must be
acknowledged absolutely infallible.
true and infallible in it self, but moreover so infallibly Proposed by one
unerring Oracle, That all who will receive it, are most indubitably certain of
those very truths which God has revealed, and therefore cannot err. Make good
this one Proposition, We have an infallible Church established, not only in a
few nicknam'd unknown fundamentals, but in every Doctrine She teaches. Now the
Proof is taken from the End of Divine revelation which seems most Conuincing,
For say I beseech you, Why did God impart truth and infallible truth to the
world? The end was not to improve his own knowledge, being ever Omniscient. It
was not that the Angels and blessed in Heaven should believe, for Faith*
cease in that happy State, All there se intuitiuely what they once believed.
The end therefore The Proof is taken from the End of Divine Revelation.
why God revealed true and Infallible Doctrine was, That we, yet Pilgrims on
earth walking by Faith should yield Assent to it, and believe all as both true
and infallible. But this is impossible, if the Church which immediately Proposes
the Doctrine can clash with Scripture or with Gods Revelation, and pervert his
Verities. Therefore She must be acknowledged both true and infallible in every
Doctrine She teaches.

3. If any reply. It seems sufficient that the Church teaches Truth, though
She neither proposes nor teaches it so infallibly, but that some times She may
swerue from it, He destroys again Christian Religion. Be pleased to observe my
reason. If the Divine revelation is to be ass^nted ^o infallibly.
infallibility of revealed Doctrine be lost as it were in the way between God
and us, If the Revelation appear not as it is in it self infallible, when we
assent to it by Faith, That is, if it be not infallibly conveyed and applied to
all by an unerring Proponent, as it subsists in its first cause, infinitely
infallible, Faith perishes, we are cast upon pure Uncertainties, and may justly
doubt, whether such a Doctrine, separated from that other Perfection of
infallibility, be really true or no? To se this clearly laid forth, Please to
make one reflection with me.

4. May not either Jew or Gentil, well inclined to Christian Religion
rationally propose this Question to the Protestants or to any? Has God revealed
any Doctrine which is only true, God's revealed Doctrine is no less infallible,
then true.
and not infallible? You will Answer, No, because the same infinite verity
which support's truth, is powerful enough to uphold also its infallibility. Say
on I beseech you. Can you who pretend to teach truth (the worst of Heretics
have done so) Ascertain me also, that you teach and propose Gods infallible
Truths, infall^bl^? Prove your Selves such Doctors, and none will ever Question
further the Truth of what you teach, For if you once make this clear, that you
teach the infallible Doctrine which God has revealed, the truth inseparably
connexed with infallibility, is no more disputable but manifestly Credible. But
if you turn me off, with a fair Story of teaching truth, and Ascertain me not
of your teaching it infallibly, every rational man will most justly doubt of
your teaching Truth. And here is the reason a Priort.

5. Every Doctrine which is taught as a Verity, founded upon God (the first
Ver^ty) is no less Infallible than true, Therefore who ever Ascertains me of
the one, must jointly ascertain me of the other: Or if he will divorce truth
from that perfection of Infallibility, There is no parting Infallibility from
truth.
he gives me no more but at most the half of that Doctrine which God reueal's.
Nay I learn not so much from him, seeing God own's no true Doctrine (men can
teach natural truths) which is not as eminently infallible, as true. Now
further. If I be fob'd off with no man knows what halfes of Divine Doctrine,
That is, if the Proponent parts truth from its infallibility, and no Authority
in Heaven or earth licenses any to Separate what God has joined together, I
only learn the faint Sentiments, when We believe God's revealed Doctrine.
or weak Opinions of fallible Teachers founded upon fancy, which God disclaim's
And (which is ever to be noted) man by nature fallible can do no more, but only
propose them as mere humane or doubtful Uncertainties. But a humane doubtful
Proposition, though true, beget's, as is said above, no certain faith in any,
Therefore who ever will not utterly ruin the very life and Essence of Christian
Religion, must absolutely assent both to the truth and Infallib^lity of
Religion, and consequently acknowledge an Infallible Oracle which teaches and
One Church only Infallible.
proposes Infallible Verities, Infallibly. But this is only the Roman Catholic
Church, as is said above, for no other Society of men lays claim to teach Gods
infallible truths, infallibly.

6. To solue all Objections against this Discourse, it will much avail to be
well grounded in this sure Principle. Viz. A certain Principle.
It is one thing to teach truth, and another to teach Divine and infallible
truth. Man by natural reason can teach truth, yet is insufficient to teach
Divine, revealed, and infallible Truth, this must come from a higher Power,
either from Divine Assistance, or Supernatural Whereupon our Answers to
Sectaries
Illumination. If therefore the Protestant Should demand, Why we cannot believe
his Doctrine even when he only Proposes those general Verities which all
Christians admit (He never offers to Obtrude upon you his inferior Tenants
peculiar to Protestants). Answer. They are truths indeed, and infallible
truths, but not proved so, because he Vnassisted teaches them. If he Ask again
upon what foundation do we Catholics lay the truth and infallibility of that
Doctrine we believe and teach? Answer. are grounded.
Upon this firm Ground, that Scripture interpreted by an Assisted* Oracle (the
Chruch) which cannot beguile any, Proposes all we learn, as true and infallible
Doctrine.

7. If he reply. 3. Protestants abstract from the Churches Interpretation and
hold Scripture plain enough in all fundamental Doctrine necessary to Salvation.
Answer. He err's not knowing the depth of Scripture; which is so dark, and
unintelligible in the abstruse Mysteries of faith, that unless certain
Tradition and the Sense of the universal Church cast light upon it, or impart
greater clarity to the bare letter, The wisest of men Scripture is obscure.
will be puzzled in what they read, or at most guess doubtfully at its meaning,
And therefore may easily swerue from truth. To se what I say, proved.

8. Imagain only, that twenty learned Philosophers or more, who never heard of
Church Tradition, or of her Generael re(...) Doctrine, had our Bible dropped down
from Heaven with Assurance that it contain's Gods infallible truths, provided
all they read be rightly understood, but not otherwise. Suppose. The most
learned Philosophers ignorant of Tradition and Church Doctrine.
2. They peruse that one Sentence in S. John's Gospel. I^ the beginning was the
Word, and that W^rd was with God. The same was in the beginning ^ir^ God etc.
Suppose. 3. They also confer the Sentence with all other Passages in Holy Writ
relating to this Mystery. Could these Philosophers think ye by the force of
their natural discourse only acquire exactly the infallible truth of the
Incarnation, just so as the Church now teaches and belieues? No. Every Particle
would put Cannot Understand it.
them upon a further Scrutiny. What is signified Says one, by this. In
principio. In the beginning? What is that Word says another, which was with
God, or how was it with God? Was it One real thing Essential to him, or merely
a breath a Word terminated upon creatures, without which nothing was made? All
know though the Arians had a Church to teach, yet with that sure Rule of faith
they mangled and misvsed this very passage of the Gospel, Therefore
difficulties much more would molest these Philosophers, having no Oracle to
interpret, And as many would arise concerning other Scriptures, relating to the
sacred Trinity, Original Sin, and the like Mysteries.

9. Now here is my reflection, and I think every Intelligent An application
made to Sectaries.
person will speak as I do. Just so much as these Philosophers have to gloss
with and descant upon, So much Sectaries may challenge, but no more, if we
sever Scripture from the Churches Interpretation. Both have a Body without
life, words without sense, difficulties proposable concerning their reading,
but none to Answer them.

10. The only difference between them is; That the Philosophers, yet ignorant
of Church and Tradition have no School to go to. Sectaries have both, yet run
as it were from School with half a Lesson, with one part (and it is The
difference between them and the Philophers.
much the obscurer part) of Divine Learning only, the bare Texts I mean, of
holy Scripture, shutting out the Churches infallible Sense. And what have you
in lieu of this light, which has hitherto illuminated Millions of Christians?
The weak and errable Sentiments of a few disunited Sectaries. And is this all
we can rely on? Do we believe the Trinity, the Incarnation and other high
Mysteries (so obscurely expressed in Gods word, that innumerable have mistaken
the true Sense) because a Luther, a Calvin, or their followers expound Whether
Luthers followers or an Ancient Church is to teach?
it? Or is our Belief grounded upon that Churches Interpretation which has ever
taught the world? The One or Other must have influence upon Faith, if we will
believe. But most manifestly the first (men only of yesterday, and fallible)
are not our Doctors, Therefore the Church is the only Oracle which Ascertains
us of the Scriptures Sense, of its Truth, and infallible Doctrine also.

11. Two things necessarily follow from this Discourse. The one. That
Protestants Show themselves strangely ungrateful, because Sectaries manifestly
ungrateful, And why?
they slight an Oracle, which has taught them all they know concerning the
Primary Articles of Christian Faith, for in real truth the Churches Authority
in Her expounding Scripture vpholds that true Assent they yield to the Mystery
of the Sacred Trinity. So much is granted, Or not. Grant it. I Ask. Why disdain
they to hear this Church in other matters? If you deny. Their Submission to
this and the like Mysteries wholly relies upon their own fallible
dissatisfactory thoughts and glosses. Here Some perhaps will retire to the
Primitive Churches interpretation, and ground their Assent upon Her Doctrine.
Nothing is got this way, For the most Primitive Recourse to the Primitive
Church, frivolous.
exposition of Scripture was no more infallible, than what the latter Church or
Councils have Defined. But enough is said above, of this Chasing all
Controversies up to the Primitive Ages.

12. The second Inference is. If God has not made Religion a matter of eternal
Debate, If all are obliged to believe by divine Faith the very truths, yea the
same infallible truths which God has revealed, and no other of a lower or
slighter Rank; If he has revealed them for this end, that all may be
Ascertained A second Inference.
of their intrinsecal Worth, (That is,) of being both Divine and infallible; If
the whole Christian world remain's not at this day in Error, or is not cast
upon uncertainties what to believe; If both the truth and infallibility of all
revealed Doctrine stand's and subsist's firmly joined together in God, the first
Verity (impossible to be separated there). And if Finally as It Is there true
and infallible, all are obliged to learn it: Nothing can be more manifest then
that divine Providence has established and empowered Some Oracle to teach and
propose that very revealed Doctrine under its own Nature and N^tion, as it is
both true and infallible.

13. Thus much Supposed and proved, All further Questions The Oracle teaching
truth cannot be questioned
concerning the Oracle ceases, For it neither is, nor can be another but the
Roman Catholic Church which has charge to interpret Scripture faithfully, to
rescue Gods truths from the lewd misusage of Heretics. Clear therefore once
that Sacred Book from abuse, Learn what this one certain Oracle teaches, our
Faith is sound, Catholic, and Apostolical. But if Scripture by reason of its
Obscurity deceiues any, or the Church could deuiate from the sincere
interpretation of Gods truths there registered, The Very life of true Religion
is lost, Faith vanishes into error.

14. Who ever seriously Consider's what is already said in this and the
precedent chapter will find Mr Stillingfleets scattered Mr Stillingfleets
Objections weightles.
Objections against the Infallibility of Church and Councils utterly void of
strength. Some worthy person of our Nation (who he is I know not) in his Guide
of Controversies. Disc. 3. has so broken and vanquished the little force they
have, that I may well supersede all further labor herein. There is not one
Objection proposed, but It Is either first, evidently retorted upon Mr
Stillingfleet, Or 2. Implies a pure begging of the Question. Or 3. Impugn's all
Councils. Or 4. Appears so slight at the very first view, that it deserves no
Answer. What can be more slight then to tell us as he does. P. 508. That we He
Speak's not truth.
are absolutely auerse from free Councils, because we condemn all other Bishops
but those of our Church without suffering them to plead for themselves in any
Indifferent Council. It is hard to say what the Gentleman mean's by free and
indifferent Councils, for he fetters all with so many Conditions, that never
any was yet found in the Church so qualified, as he would have it. Read him
through his 1. and 2. Chapter, as also P. 557. You will se what I assert,
Manifest. It is true, we condemn A Calumny for a Proof.
all heteredox Bishops (and does not Mr Stillingsleet recriminate, and condemn
ours?) But to say we suffer none to plead for Themselves in a free Council is a
flat Calumny, unless that only be free which some bodies fancy makes free, and
no other. A word now to one or two Objections.

15. If you (says Mr Stillingsleet) require an Assent to the Decrees of
Councils as infallible, There must be an antecedent Assent to this Proposition.
That whatsoever Councils decree, is infallible. I first retort the Argument. If
you require an Assent to your Definitions in the Dort-Meeting, Or hold That the
conuened there delivered true Doctrine. There must be an The first Argument
retorted.
antecedent Assent to this Proposition, That what soever those Dort-men taught
is true Doctrine before you own it as true. Ascertain us of thus much, And you
solue your own difficulty. If this Instance please not, make use of another.
Your Ministers in England pretend to teach true Doctrine, though not infallibly.
Say only upon what antecedent Proposition the Truth of their Doctrine is
assented to by all, before it be believed as true, and we shall without labor
Answer in behalf of our infallible Doctrine.

16. In a word thus Catholics plead. This general Proposition is to be
assented to, as both true and infallible. Viz. All And clearly solued.
are obliged to Hear and Believe the Pastors of God's Church when Lawsully
Commissioned to teach in God's name, and as the Orthodox Church teaches. Here
is the Thesis or the universal received Proposition. But these Pastors and
Doctors when assembled in Council are still Pastors of the Church and lawfully
commissioned to teach in God's name, both true and infallible Doctrine,
Therefore they are to be heard and believed in all and every Definition,
proceeding from that Assembly, lawfully conuened. Here you have the Hypoth^sis
as indubitably certain, as the Thesis.

17. A second Objection you meet with in his Page 509. Another Objection
retorted, and Solued.
What infallible Testimony have you (he means Catholics) for this, that
Councils are Infallible? It is not enough for you to say, That the Testimonies
of Scripture you produce are an Infallible Testimony for it: For that were to
make the Scripture the sole Judge of this great Controversy, which you deny to
be the sole Judge of any. I first retort the Argument and Ask. What Testimony
have you Sectaries (I do not say Infallible) But so much as seemingly probable
taken from Scripture, whereby Councils (the greatest Representatiues in God's
Church) are made fallible? Not one can be alleged.

18. Now my Answer briefly is. Scripture once admitted for God's word (which
our Adversaries will not reflect on) manifestly The Catholic Principles for
Infallibility.
conuinceth the Churches infallibility. To those express and significant
Passages of holy Writ known to every one ( The Church is the pillar and ground
of Truth) you have them already, We add the judgment of Fathers cited above
(The guide of Controversies. C. 3. P. 147. Produces more). Besides, Gods Church
which we hold an Infallible Oracle, interpret's Scripture to this sense, and
here are our abundantly full Principles for Her Infallibility. Come you Sr,
now closely to the point, confront us if you can with as many Passages of
Scripture, as many Testimonies of Fathers, Or (and this we always urge) with
the Authority of any Orthodox Church which favors your contrary Tenet of
Fallibility., The Strife is ended. But hereof there is no fear at all. And thus
you se how Scripture is the Judge Sectaries have none for their Tenet.
when once admitted as Divine, and faithfully interpreted, not otherwise.

19. A. 3. Objection. Page. 509. The Decree or Definition of a Council receives
Infallibility from the Council before the A third weak objection retorted
Pope confirm's it, or not. If not; The whole infallibility resides in the
Pope, and this some Say is not de Fide universally. If it arise from the Council
before the Pope confirm's it (for that act of confirmation follows the
Definition) the Council is infallible antecedently to the Popes Confirmation. I
first retort the Argument. An Act of Parliament, or a law made for all, receives
its force from the Conuened Members before his Majesty Confirm's it, or not. If
not; The whole Power of making such a Law resides in His Majesty, which some
will say is not so. If it arise ftom the Parliament, before His Majesty
Confirm's it (and that Confirmation follows the Act) The Parliament is empowered
to make such Laws, before His Royal. Assent Confirm's them. Here is the very
same Form of arguing (though in a different matter) and you se the weakness of
it.

20. The true Answer to the Objection is as follows. Every Doctrine definable
may be considered two ways, first as it Proceed's from God the most supreme
Verity, and under that Notion, it is both true and infallible in it self before
the pope and Council Define it, (And note, they can Define no other Doctrine And
solued.
on earth, but what God ratifies in Heaven). 2. It may be considered as the
Doctrine of the Representative Church infallibly Assisted to teach Divine
truths; And under that Notion it is called Church Doctrine, proceeding from the
Head and Members of one mystical Body: The Head therefore Separated or solely
taken, Defines not in Councils, The Members divided from the Head define not,
But one and the same Definition proceed's jointly from both Head and members
united together. The Instance already hinted at gives light enough. If any
reply, The Definition when the Council proposed it, was both true and
infallible Doctrine. I distinguish the Proposition. It might be then Certain
Every Doctrine true in it self, is not therefore Church Doctrine.
and infallible Doctrine in it self (that is true) but as yet it is neither known
or owned as such or called Church Doctrine: It was then the whole Councils or
Churches true and infallible Doctrine, I deny it. This is founded upon both Pope
and Council infallibly assisted, as is now supposed, and already proved.

21. I find no more in Mr Stillingfleet worth any notice That which follows in
his Page 510. overthrows all councils Other Objections waued as impertinent.
or proves nothing. What certainty have you, Says he, that this or that
Council proceeded lawfully? That the Bishops were lawful Bishops? That the Pope
who confirm's them was a lawful Pope? That some By-ends or Interest swayed not
many? That all conditions were exactly performed etc. I Answer first, and Ask.
What certainty have you of any illegal Bishops, of unlawful Popes, of Interest
Swaying all. Here because you accuse, we put you to the Proof. I Answer. 2.
That Certainty which you or any has of no By ends in the four first general
Councils, of their lawful Bishops, of no interest swayng etc. The same we have
of all the approved Councils in Gods Church. To insist further upon such saint
Objections, is only to lose time or; (might one retaliate in Mr Stillingfleets
own language) merely to kill flies, to run after them, and make sport with
them. And thus much of the Churches Infallibility, (I mean the Roman
Apostolical Catholic Church) to whose Censure and infallible Judgment I do
most willingly submit my Self, and every particular in this Treatise.

THE THIRD DISCOVRSSE OF. The Resolution of Faith:
THe subject here hinted at, is as all Shollers know very Speculatiue. Terms,
according to my little Skill in the English Tongue, often Fail to express what
is necessary. Wonder not therefore, if now and then you meet with that which
may seem Obscure to a Vulgar Reader. My Endeavor Shall be to give the
Discourse so much Light, as that Every one may perceive the Adversary I treat
with, clearly refuted.

THE FIRST CHAPTER
Some chief Contents in this Discourse briefly declared. Mr Stillingfleets
weak attempts against the Churches infallibility and the Resolution of Faith.
The Catholic way of resolving Faith, the very same with that of the Primitive
Christians. Of the mistakes which run through Mr Stillingfleets whole Discourse.

1. IN the following Chapters, we first remove such difficulties as may seem to
obstruct the Clearest Resolution, What this third Disceurse Contain's.
And all along discover Mr Stillingfleets Errorus. viz. Chiefly those, most
apparent. in his 5. Chapter. 2. We examine what Influence the Motives of
Credibility have over Faith? 3. Necessary Principles are premised much auailing
to Conceive the true Analysis. 4. We Show wherein the Main Difficulty lies in
this Resolution (Omitted by Mr Stillingfleet) and solue it. 5. The whole
Progress of Faith is Explained in order to its last Resolution. 6. The true
Analysis is given in two Propositions. Here we also treat of the Evidence of
Credibility, and solue the Sectaries Objections. 7. This question is proposed.
Whether the Churches Testimony may be Called the Formal Object of Faith? 8. We
Ask what is meant by this word Reason, And enquire how far true Reason Conduces
to end Controversies? 9. Protestancy is proved a most unreasonable Religion.

2. Mr Stillingfleet. Part 1. C. 5. P. 109. offer's at much, it is to discover
strange ill Consequences, yea grand Absurdities, Our Adversaries bold adventure.
if Faith be resolved by the Churches Infallibility; and seems some what
ouer-heated in carrying on the cause against his Adversary. Let any man (says
he) judge whether this be not the most compendious way to overthrow the belief
of Christianity. There is hardly any thing more really destructive to
Christianity, or that has a greater tendency to Atheism, than the Modern
pretense to Infallibility. The unreasonableness of it is so great, that I know
not whether I may abstain from calling it ridiculous. And much more to this
Sense.

3. It seems by what I read in Mr Stillingfleet T. C. (whose Book I had not
then seen) said that Catholics in this present What his Adversary asserted.
State, resolve their Faith after the very same manner, as the Israelits
anciently, and the Primitive Christians resolved Theirs. If he said that, he
Spoke a Truth, not only defensible; but so Sound and Irrefragable, that Mr
Stillingfleet (to use his own pretty Phrase) like one under an Ephialtes Shall
tumble, groan, toss this way and that, and yet not rid himself of the vexation.

4. The Doctrine I find plainly delivered, and the Instances of the ancient
Israelits and the Primitive Christians, so well made use of for the Catholic
Resolution by our learned Countryman, Thomas Ba^on Southwell. Analysis Fidei.
Disp. 4. and 5. That here I must needs insert some Part of it, because it much
auailes to Conceive the easiest way of resolving Faith, And well penetrated so
utterly defeates what Mr Stillingfleet has, that Is Sound Doctrine.
much more is not requisite to make void his forceles Objections.

5. F. Southwel therefore, Analysis Fidei now cited, c(...) n. 18. Speak's much
to this sense. Had one asked a (...) Belieuer in Moses his time after the
(...)uch was written, Why believe you that God is just, wi^e, faithful in his
Promises? Or (if you will have one particular) why Adam sinned How the
Israelits questioned about faith.
in Paradise? He would have answered Scripture Says s^. But if again demanded,
How know you that Scripture is God's Divine word? Would he think ye have
Answered, I se that by the very light and Sparkling of the Letter? It is
impossible as shall be proved afterward. Thus therefore He would have replied.
Moses our great Prophet Affirm's it, or rather God speaking by the mouth of
Moses lays that Verity open to us, And upon that ground I believe it. So we
read. Deute^. 1. 3. Moses spoke to the Children of Israel all which God had
commanded him to say to them. Now if thirdly Questioned. How Would ^aue
answered?
Prove you that Moses was a true Prophet, or God's Oracle, He could not have
satisfied by alleging Scripture, without a Vicious Circle, but would have
Said: This truth is immediately, and most evidently Credible by it Self, for
the Wisdom, Sanctity, and Power of working Miracles, manifest to all eyes,
prove to Reason, that Moses is a great Prophet.

5. In like manner Catholics proceed in their Resolution of Faith. Demanded
why we believe the Mystery of the Incarnation, it is Answered Scripture
Assert's it. Ask again, why we believe the Divinity of that Book called
Scripture? It is replied. The Church ascertain's of That. But how do we know
that the Church herein deliuer's Truth? It is Answered, if we Speak of
knowledge preuious to Faith, Those admirable Signs of Divinity mentioned
above, and manifest in this one Oracle. Viz. The Sanctity of life the Contempt
of the world, Catholics in this present State, return the very same Answer.
the c(...)ed Austerity of Penance, the height of Contemplation apparent in
thousands and thousands, And above all the glorious Miracles most illustrious
in this one Society of Christians prove it an Oracle so evidently credible,
That we cannot, if prudent and manifest Reason guides us, but as firmly believe
what ever this Oracle teaches, as the Israelits believed Moses and the
Prophets. One only Differen^^ aduantagious for us.
Here is only the difference (And the Advantage is ours) that in Lieu of Moses
we have an ample Church: Inumerable multitudes in place of one Servant of God,
The incomparable greater light, I mean, the Pillar and Ground of truth, the
Catholic Church diffused the whole world over.

6. Answerable to this Doctrine the primitive Christians resolved their Faith,
after the Canon of Scripture was written. Ask therefore why these first
converted People, whether Jews or Gentiles, believed Christ to be the true
Messiah, the Son of God, and Savior of the world? They might have Answered. We
read this and much more in Holy Scripture. But how know you, that these
Scriptures are not suppositious or fained, as some Gospels have been? We
believe this, Say They, The Primitive Christians way of resolving Faith.
upon the undoubted Testimony of those blessed men the Apostles, who both
taught us, and wrote that holy Book. Yet more. How know you that those Apostles
were not Cheats (for there have been false Prophets and Apostles) but men
Authorized by Almighty God to teach and write his holy Verities? Had they
replied, We prove this by Scripture it self, the Circle would have been
inevitable. For to Say Scripture is Gods word, because the Apostles Assert it,
and to Say the Apostles were infallible Oracles of Truth, because Scripture
affirm's that, is to Prove Idem per Idem, And implies a most vicious
Circulation.

7. Their Answer then must have been, for there is no other. The manifest
Miracles wrought by the Apostles, Their eminent Sanctity and Holiness of life
(our Lord working with, and confirming their Doctrine by manifest Signs) proved
them Gods Oracles, True and faithful commissioned Teachers. And thus Is Our way
also.
we discourse of the Church Whose undeniable Miracles, Sanctity, and
Conuersions wrought by Her, convince reason of this great Truth, that She only
is Gods Oracle. All this is said supposing the Canon of Scripture already
complete, For if we go higher, and consider a Church (whether it be that of
the ancient Patriarchs, of the Israelits, or finally of the Christians before
Scripture was written) Faith must be resolved into Divine Revelation by the
means of some living Oracle (Whether One or more it imports not) who manifested
themselves God's commissioned Teachers by Signs and Miracles. Whereof more
afterward.

8. This much premised (And it is Very easily understood) you shall Se Mr
Stillingfleets verbose Objections brought to Three Mistakes chiefly pointed at
nothing, but to mere Cauils and Mistakes. Three Mistakes chiefly, run through
his whole 5. Chapter. First he strangely confound's the Judgment of
credibility necessarily prerequired to true Belief, with the very Act of Faith
it Self, whereas the Resolution of these two, have indeed a due Subordination
to one The first breeds Confusion.
^^other, yet depend upon quite different Principles. The Judgment of
Credibility whereby the will moves and command's the intellectual Faculty to
elicite Faith, relies not upon that Object which finally Terminates Faith it
self, But upon extrinsecal Motives wihch persuade, and Powerfully induce to
believe, ^uper omnia.

9. Here is the Reason. The high Mysteries of Faith, the Trinity, for example;
Original Sin, and the like Transcend our natural Capacities, or to speak with
some great Divines are naturally Incredible, Therefore Providence has by the
force and efficacy of extrinsecal motives, raised them from that degree of
natural Incredibility, and made all most credible to humane Reason. And this no
Sectary can deny, For before that Doctrine be believed which he embraces, and
before he reiect's the contrary not believed by him, He will tell you, He has
Motives and reasons as well for the one as the other. Here is all we require at
present.

10. Mr Stillingfleets second error is, that he distinguishes not between the
nature of Science and Faith. Science is worth In the second Science and Faith
are not.
nothing unless it prove, and Faith purely considered as Faith, (mark well my
words) is worthles, if it prove, For as innumerable Fathers affirm, Fides non
quaerit quomodo. Faith reason's not, nor Ask's how these Mysteries can be, but
simply belieues. Science makes use of Principles, Per se nota, known by
themselves And then discourses, Assuming nothing but what is proved, wherefore
no virtue, no validity, can be in the progress, or Sufficiently distinguished.
end of a rational Discourse, which was not precontained in the first assumed
Principles. Faith, it is true, has its Preambulatory Motives, as we have seen
already, yet Scientifically draws no Conclusion from them (and herein Mr
Stillingfleet all along beguiles himself, and the reader). The Motives inducing
to believe this Truth. God has revealed a Mysterious Trinity are morally
certain, yet there is a more firm Adhesion to the infallibility of that Divine
Testimony for which we believe, than the extrinsecal Motives inducing to belief
either do or can draw from us* And in this sense Faith contrary to Science,
goes far beyond the certainty of all extrinsecal Inducements, as shall be
presently declared.

11. Our Adversaries third Mistake lies here, That he distinguishes not,
between the humane and Divine Authority of the The third also wants a
Distinction.
Church. S. Austin Lib. con. Epist Fundam. C. 4. Speaking of the first, Says.
The profound wisdom of so many Doctors, the consent of Nations, the Antiquity,
the continued Succession of Pastors etc. held him within the Pale of the Church
Catholic, yet this Authority precisely considered as humane, and therefore
fallible, is not sufficient to ground Divine Faith. I say as humane, for though
I believe that the Church has ever been Visible, with a continued Succession of
Commissioned Pastors to teach Orthodox Doctrine, yet my Act of Faith no more
relies upon such motives, considered merely as Motives, inducing to believe,
Than the Primitive Christians Faith relied upon the visible Miracles, which
Christ or his Apostles wrought.

12. As therefore that first Act of Faith, whereby they believed our Savior to
be the true Messiah, was built upon his infallible Divine Authority, manifested
by Miracles, Sanctity of life etc. So that first Act of Faith whereby every one
belieues the Church to be God's own Sacred Oracle, is built upon Her infallible
Divine Authority manifested by Miracles, and other signal Marks of truth,
whereof Scripture plainly Speak's. Hell gates shall not preuail against the
Church. She is the Pillar and ground of truth, And so much is said above. C.
16. 17. that I know well Sectaries What caused our Adversaries Error
cannot Answer. The not reflecting upon this twofold Authority which Mr
Stillingfleet knows Catholics do distinguish, makes his Circle charged on us
so irregular a Figure, that it look's rather like a Rhomboides than a round
Circle, as shall appear presently, with a further Discovery of his other
mistakes. One thing I cannot but admire, and it is, That though his 5.th Chapter
be tediously long, yet the main and most real difficulty concerning the
Resolving of Faith is scarcely so much ^^ hinted at. After a few Pages I will
propose the Difficulty, and endeavor to solue it.

CHAP. II.
Mr Stillingfleets 5.th Chapter. Part. 1. examined, is found VVeightles. The
weakness of his Arguments discovered. His First and chiefest Argument retorted
and solued.

1. I Must and will wave all this Centlemans Parergons, all frivolous
excursions with his uncivil language, and if I touch in a word upon his pretty
conceipted Ieers scattered here and there, it shall only be Pertransennam, as
if I little minded them.

2. Thus he begins. Page 112. The Infallible Testimony of your Church is the
only Foundation for Divine Faith, and this Infallibility Our Adversaries first
Argument.
can only be known by the Motives of Credibility (He means in this present
State) Therefore this way of resolving Faith is unreasonable, because it
requires an infallible Assent upon probable grounds beyond all Proportion or
degree of Evidence, which is as much as requiring infallibility in the
Conclusion, where the Premises are only probable. Answ. Our Adversary Spoil's a
good Difficulty by proposing it lamely, He would fain say some thing like that
which Catholic The difficulty not fully proposed.
Divines learnedly propose whilst they handle the Resolution of Faith, But so
fumbles and does it by halfes, that He ^eaches not home to the main Business.

3. I Say therefore first. The Argument proposed if of any force, destroies all
Faith even the most Primitive. To prove the Assertion I Ask, whether the first
Christians believed infallibly the Infallible Testimony of the Apostles
Preaching, with a Divine Infallible Assent? Most certainly they Did. Yet the
Infallibility of that Testimony was not known (if we speak strictly of
Knowledge) but by Motives of Credibility which were no Object of their Faith
(unless you make faith to be Science) The Argument retorted.
but Inducements only to believe. Ergo this very Primitive Faith was
unreasonable, because it was an infallible Assent built upon probable grounds,
beyond all Proportion or degree of that Evidence, whereby those pious men were
moved to believe. Hence You Se, though the Motives which illustrate the Church
were in themselves fallible, and not Metaphysically conexed with the Divine
Testimony, yet Faith grounded on that Testimony cannot but be certain and
infallible, and consequently must Transcend, or go beyond all the degrees of
Certitude appearing in the prerequired Motives. Mr Stillingfleet reply's. This
is to require Infallibility in the Conclusion, where the Premises are only
probable. Answ. He err's not knowing the nature of Faith, which Discourses not
like to Science. For example. Make this Sillogism. Whateuer God reueal's is
True, but God reueal's the Incarnation of the Divine Word, Ergo that is true.
The difficulty only is in the Minor: But God reueal's, which cannot be proved
by another believed Article of Faith, wholly as obscure to us as the
Incarnation is. I say proved by Reason, because the same difficulty will be as
much moved again Concerning the Proof of that second believed Article, as
concerning the first of the Incarnation, and so in Infinitum. And Showed
Proofles.
Therefore all rational Proofs auailing to beget Faith in any, must of
necessity be extrinsecal to belief, and lie as it were in another Region more
clear (yet less certain) than the revealed Mystery is, we assent to by Faith.

4. Now to our Purpose. We hold this an Article of Faith. The Church is God's
infallible Oracle, And therefore Say, antecedently Rational Proofs for the
Churches infallibility.
to Faith it cannot be proved by Arguments as obscure, or of the same
Infallible certainty with Faith, For then Faith would be superfluous, or rather
we should believe by a firm and infallible Assent, before we do believe upon
the Motive of Gods infallible Revelation, which is impossible. Hence it is that
when we go about Have not the certainty of Faith.
(...) the Infallibility of the Church independently of Scripture, Yea, and
also independently of all belieu^d Church Doctrine, We must necessarily Euince
this rationall^, by reflex Arguments and Motives extrinsecal to what we
Believe, which are not of the same certainty with Supernatural Faith it self.
Now these Arguments what these Motives Prove.
founded upon the Motives of Credibility can go no further (stretch them to
the utmost) But only to prove this great verity. That what ever we believe,
either of Scripture, or of the Church is most evidently Credible above all
things proposable to the contrary, And this great light the learned at least
have, before they yield an infallible Assent upon Divine Revelation to the very
Doctrine of the Church, or Scripture either.

5. I Say. 2. Mr Stillingfleet and all Sectaries, whilst They Believe with an
Infallible Assent the most fundamental Articles in Sectaries go beyond that
Evidence whereby they are induced to believe.
Scripture, go beyond all Proportion of that Evidence whereby they are induced
to Believe, And consequently must Solve their own ^eak Argument, yet strong Ad
hominem against them. If I Euince not this Truth blame me boldly, And observe
my Proof.

6. The Sectary belieues that Verity which. S. John expresses in this short
Sentence. The word was made Flesh: That is, he belieues the Incarnation of the
Son of God with an Assent so infallible, that it cannot only be false, but that
he would not disbelieue it upon any reason Proposable, Though an Angel should
preach Contrary, But neither this Act of Faith, nor its Formal Object (the
Divine Revelation) are ex terminis evidently true, Quoad ^s, yet must be proved
^uidently Credible to reason, or Faith becomes unreasonable, and rash, For, Qui
cito credit leuis est cord. Now further. None can prove this, by another Act
or Article of Faith (no more its own Self-euidence than the believed
Incarnation The Assertion, Proved.
is) All therefore which can be done, is to make it evidently Credible by
Motives extrinsecal to Belief, by universal Tradition, and the Consent of
innumerable learned men, who have both conveyed unto us the Words as Divine
Scripture, and the genuine Sense of them also. But this very humane Tradition,
this exterior Consent of all, or what other Motives can be Imagined preuious
to Faith, (because fallible,) may deceive: Yet by the help of such fallible
Motives Mr Stillingfleets Our Adversary Clearly Convinced.
Faith, if it rest's upon the Divine Revelation is raised higher, and stand's
firmer upon that Ground, than the Evidence of his Motives can induce to.
Therefore he makes the conclusion surer than the Premises, And goes beyond all
Proportion and degree of fallible Evidence, preambulatory to his certain
Belief. What I Assert is manifest. For by Faith he The Conviction Manifest.
Says the Incarnation is so infallibly true, that it cannot be false, Yet all
the Motives which induce him to believe Say, Possibly it may be false, or
exclude not a Possibility of falsehood. And if this be not to Transcend all
Proportion of his acquired Evidence, nothing is to go beyond it.

7. The Argument will be yet more clear if proposed after this manner. Mr
Stillingfleet infallibly belieues the truth of that Scripture now Quoted. I Ask
by what means can he know That this very believed Truth is a Divine. Verity, or
Scripture? The Answer may be, That Is known upon Tradition, or the public
Authority of all, not only Christians but others also, who have conveyed the
Book to us. Very Another most Conuincing Proof.
good. But this Public Authority, this Conueyance, or what ever Tradition you
will, is either of equal infallible certainty with the Believed Truth of
Scripture, Or less and much weaker; If less and weaker, Mr Stillingfleets Faith
goes beyond all propotion and degrees of his preuious acquired Evidence, Not to
be answered.
And it be of equal infallible Certaintly (That is) If he belieues as
infallibly the Conueyance of those Words, For, or Upon Gods Divine Testimony,
as he belieues the Doctrine there contained to be a Divine Truth, He makes one
Article of Faith the Proof of another, and evidently incurrs the Circle
objected to Catholics, as shall appear afterward, When we examine his 170.
Page, and refute his Error concerning the Moral Certainty of Faith.

8. Now to the Objection. It is not possible, That the Assent in matters of
Faith rise higher, or stand firmer than the Assent to the Testimony is, upon
which those things are believed. Answer. Very true. But know Sr, we Assent to
matters of Faith upon Gods Divine Testimony, and not for the Motives which only
induce to believe. So the Primitive Christians believed upon Christ's A Mistake
in the Objection.
infallible Testimony, and built not their Faith upon the exterior Motives
Evident to Sense, which merely considered as Motives only made his Testimony
highly credible to Reason. Viz. One Instance which none can boggle at.
That it was Divine and infallible. For example. Some saw, Others heard of our
saviors great Miracles, of his admirable Sanctity, And then discoursed. The
Man that does these wonders cannot but be one sent from God. It is true, he
preaches both new and difficult Doctrine to our ears, But if he be sent from
God, we are obliged to Believe him upon his word, And upon that Word Their
Faith relied.

9. Apply this Instance to the Church, you have all I would Say. The Church is
euidenced by Miracles, Sanctity of life in Millions, by Conuersions and the
like signal Motives. Here are the Inducements which prove Her Gods Oracle, and
Clears all.
the Doctrine highly credible, above what ever all other Societies called
Christians have Taught, Yet our Faith is not built upon these Motives
considered as Inducements, but upon Her infallible Testimony. The Instance now
given Concerning the most Primitive Belieuers is so clear, That our Adversaries
shall never weaken the force of it, or show the least Disparity.

10. And thus you se all Mr Stillingfleets talk. P. 113 Comes to nothing. I
desire Says he to know, whether an infallible Assent to the Infallibility of
your Church can be grounded on those Motives of Credibility? Answ. And I desire
to know whether an A Question answered, and retorted.
Infallible Assent to the Apostles Preaching, was grounded on those Motives
which the Primitive Christians saw or heard of before they believed? what you
say, I Will say. Briefly. Many learned Divines hold the Motives of Credibility
Metaphysically connexed with Gods divine Testimony speaking by the Church, and
if that opinion be true, the Motives ground an Infallible Showed also
impertinent.
Assent but that is Evidence, and no Faith, And therefore most impertinent to
your following Inference. If, say you, we affirm the Motives ground an
Infallible Assent, there can be no imaginable necessity, to make the Testimony
of our Church infallible, in order to Divine faith. For, we Catholics, you
hope will not deny, but that there are at least equal Motives of Credibility to
prove the Divine Authority of the Scriptures, as the infallibility of our
Church, And if so, why may not an Infallible assent, be given to the Scriptures
upon those Motives of Credibility, as well as to our Churches infallibility?
Answ. A strange kind of Argument.

11. First, Sir, you know, or should know, Catholics hold with S. Austin, That
no certainty can be had of Scripture without Church Authority (How then do you
say, You hope we will not deny etc). No Motives as is proved above and in the
other Treatise also, immediately make Scripture Credible, independently of the
Churches Tradition. No Miracles were ever heard of No Motives make Scripture
evidently credible.
which proved the book of Ruth admitted by you, more Canonical Scripture, than
that of Judith which you reject. Did any Martyr ever yet dye in defense of
Salomons Canticle (that is Scripture say you) and refuse to dye for the Book of
Wsdom, cast out of your Canon? Or was ever any soul sooner converted by reading
the One, than the other? These Miracles Sr, these Martyrdoms, these Conuersions
immediately illustrate the Church, and prove not a Part only but Her whole
Doctrine to be Independently of Church Authority.
most Evidently Credible, and worthy of belief, whilst you se your Signs of
Divinity and no man knows what imagined motives in behalf of Scripture, as
little Evidence the Books you admit, as those you reject, That is, neither
indeed have any Self-Euidence in them, abstracting from Church Authority. Your
Evidence therefore is a strong fancy and nothing else.

12. But admit one had Evident Motives for the whole Canon or bare letter of
Scripture, you have not any so much as probable for the Sense (chiefly in
Controuerted matters) which properly is God's Revelation, without the Churches
infallible Interpretation. Speak, Sr, your Conscience plainly, What can it
avail you or me, to know that the Book we read is God's No Motives for the
Scriptures Sense.
word (Seeing innumerable false Religions by perverse Misinterpretations are
drawn from thence) if that other Principle. Deus ^^ dixit; God, or Truth it
self speaks This and this particular Sense, lies in darkness concealed from us.
This Principle then. God speak's this Sense, being the very vltimate Resoluent
and last foundation of Christian Faith, must, when that Sense is Obscure,
borrow light from no dark mistaken fallible or doubtful Orade: But the bare
letter of Scripture is dark, and grossly mistaken by Heretics, man's private
Judgment is fallible, our comparing the Scriptures Passages together, is
merely Coniectural, and dubious. Therefore if the certitude of Faith must rely
upon Without the Churches Infallible interpretation.
what God has spoken (I mean the infallible Sense of his sacred word) The
Oracle which interpret's, can be no other but an Infallible Church. And here I
both Petition and urge Sectaries to assign any other Surer Ground where upon
Faith can be built, seeing all confess we are obliged to believe that Infallible
sense, chiefly in matters they call Fundamental. This Argument alone could we
say no more, forces every rational man to own a Church absolutely infallible
in Her exposition of Scripture.

13. From whence also it follows first, that Mr Stillingfleet much mistakes
Himself, when he Says. Both sides I hope agree, Our Adversary mistaken.
that there are sufficient Motives of Credibility, as to the belief of
Scriptures. I answer. There is not one firm Motive for the true revealed Sense
(and this only is Scripture) if we exclude Tradition, and the infallible
Interpretation of Gods Church. Bring to light but one, and I am satisfied.

14. It follows. 2. That, that half Tradition owned by Sectaries in order to
the conueyance and delivery of the Books of Scripture, leaves them wholly
Scriptureles, and as Faithles The half Tradition for the barc letter.
as if they had no Bible, For it neither grounds faith immediately, because it
is not God's Revelation, but the fallible Consent of men; Nor can it induce as
a Motive to believe any one particular Article of Christian Religion, without
further certitude had from the same Churches infallible Tradition and
interpretation, Not sufficient.
concerning that most weighty Point of the Scriptures meaning. Reject therefore
this infallible Interpreter, All of us just like Arians, Macedonians,
Donatists, desperately rely upon the worst Guides Imaginable, our own fallacious
and vngouernable fancies, and will needs learn of such giddy Teachers, the pure
interpretation of God's Word. These we make our Oracles in lieu of Christ's
Church, and in doing so, may easily ascribe to God a Doctrine he disdain's to
own, and become Heretics by it. The very hazard men run in this wilful
Course, is an open Injury to the Supremest Verity, unavoidable in out Sectaries
Principles.

15. And here by the way, you se the Vanity of that pernicious Doctrine
published by them, wherewith the world is Sectaries pernicious Doctrine.
cheated. Viz. The Sense of Scripture is plain enough, even to the unlearned,
in things necessary to Salvation, in other matters not necessary, a right Faith
an unerring Guide, an infallible Interpreter, See^ vseles and superfluous, As
if forsooth, the Arians, Pelagians, Nestorians, had not grossly erred in Points
most necessary, though Concerning the Clearness of Scripture.
they read the same plain Scripture, which we all read. Did the^ that supposed
Clearness nothing secure them from Heresy in Necessaries? Why should it, I
beseech you, rescue Sectaries (wholly as fallible) from gross errors in other
matters, when the words of Scripture are more express against them, than
against the worst of Arians. But hereof enough is said above.

16. It follows. 3. That no Christian has stability in Faith but the Roman
Catholic, for the most which others, no members of this Church, can know (if
yet they know so much) is, That the Books of Scripture are Gods word, but with
this half piece of imperfect Learning, they neither know nor can believe one
particular Article of Christian Faith, because that other The Roman Catholic
only has Stability in Faith.
Principle, the last Resoluent of all Belief, God speaks infallibly this very
Sense, has no influence over their Assent, and therefore is rejected by them as
impertinent to ground Faith upon. One instance will give you more light.

17. The Arian and Protestant agree thus far, That those words. John. 1. 5. 9.
Three give Testimony in heaven etc. are Divine Both Arians and Protestestants
want a Stability.
Scripture, yet so vary about the meaning, and the difference is in a matter
most fundamental, that the One Assent's to the sacred Trinity for these words,
which yet the Other impiously denies. Say now, upon what infallible Principle
does the Protestants faith stand more firm, than that of the Arian? Will Mr
Stillingfleet say the Scripture is Clear? The Arian takes him off that Plea,
and endeauours to obscure the passage, by adding to it no small number of his
Arian Glosses. Next And why?
he Argues thus ad hominem, and thinks no wrong at all done. Can ye Sectaries
believe that your glosses laid upon those Scriptures which Catholics produce
against you, are strong enough to divert, and pervert the Sense or
Interpretation of their Universal Church, and shall my glosses opposite to your
Doctrine, have no force to divert or weaken the late, private, invented Sense of
a few Lutherans? What law is there for this? I call it late and private as it
comes from you, for you How the Arian argues against Sectaries.
disdain to ground it upon any Church Authority absolutely infallible, in all
She teaches. Therefore it is your own Private Sense, and not the Churches. O
but the Church of Rome in this particular interpret's Scripture faithfully,
though She err's in other matters. Pitiful. That is, She hitt's right when
You Will give leave, and misses when you think otherwise.

18. One may Say again. The whole Orthodox world ever proved the Mysterious
Trinity from that alleged Passage of Scripture. Contra, Replies the Arian, I,
and my Adherents who deny the Mystery, hold our Selves as precious a Part of
the His Argument Conuinces.
Orthodox world as you Protestants do, And hope we expound Scripture by the
help of our private Reasoning and comparing Texts together, as well as you. Why
not I beseech you? Or give a Disparity. But say on, And the contest is ended.
Have you any Oracle, which more infallibly Ascertain's you of that Sense of
Scripture to be as you gloss, then we have who give it a quite contrary
Interpretation, For hitherto we are both alike, and expound all by our private
Judgments. Grant such an Oracle (Distinct from Scripture) whereby you have
Assurance of God's meaning darkly expressed in those words, you become plane
Papists; Own not Any Infallible, you cast your Selves upon as great
Uncertainties as we Arians are thrown, who expound Scripture by our own natural
Discourse. No infallible Church therefore, no Stability No Orthodox world,
without an Infallible Church.
in faith, no Stability in faith, that specious word of an Orthodox World
Signifies nothing, For this I Defend, and have Proved it, if all Churches be
fallible in their Definitions, there neither is, nor ever was since Christ's
time any such thing in being, as an Orthodox World.

19. It follows. 4. That as it has ever been the proper Mark or Character of
all faithful Belieuers to yield Submission The distinct Marks of true
Belieuers, and All Heretics.
to the Churches Doctrine, though weak reason conceiues it difficult, so
Contrariwise, stubbornly to resist Church Authority has ever been inseparably
the Mark and Badge of all Heretics, whether ancient or modern. With this
virulent Spirit they began to Oppose God's Oracle, and held on for a time, But
as S. Austin observes at last ended in shame Conterentur, says the Saint, the
battered Rock of the Catholic hitherto stand's firm, maugre that Violence, And
their Scattered forces routed and broken, as experience tells us, are brought
to nothing.

CHAP. III.
More of this subject. Objections Answered. A word to Mr Stillingfleets
forceless Instances. Motives of credibility ever Precede Faith. Whether the
rational Evidence of the Truth of Christ's Doctrine, can be a Motive to believe
it.

1. WHat follows in Mr Stillingfleets. 3. or. 4 next Pages, seems so slight
that the very most is refuted by the grounds already established, Yet to Comply
with the man's humor, we must follow him further. How Says He can you make the
Assent to your Churches Testimony to be Infallible, when The sirst Argument
retorted.
that infallibility is attempted to be proved only by the motives of
Credibility? I Answer. Just as you make the Assent of the Primitive Christians
given to the Apostles preaching infallible, So I make the Assent to the
Churches Testimony infallible. The Motives are alike in both Cases, if not
greater for the Church.

2. He Objects. 2. If Divine Faith, cannot be built upon the Motives proving
the Doctrine of Christ, what sense is there that it should be built upon those
Motives, which prove our Churches infallibility Here is the old Mistake again.
I Answer therefore. Divine Faith is not built upon the Motives inducing to
believe, but upon the Infallible Testimony of Christ, and his Church. The
Motives ground the Judgment of Credibility, The Infallible Testimony Support's
The second is a gross Mistake.
Divine Faith. Now if by this word, Built, you mean no more but rationally, To
induce, I say none in this present State can be induced to believe Christ's
Doctrine revealed in Scripture, in case he reiect's the Authority of that
euidenced Church which both Ascertains him of the Canon, and the Sense also.
Hence, That other Objection falls to nothing. How can there be an infallible
Assent to the truth of this Proposition: Scriptures are The third retorted, and
answered.
the word of God, when that Infallibility at the highest is but evidently
Credible? I Answer and retort the Argument. How could the Primitive Christians
Assent to the Apostles preaching as infallible, when that infallibility at the
highest, was but Evidently Credible, before they believed?

3. The whole Confusion lies, as is said, in not Distinguishing between Faith,
and the Judgment of Credibility. Infallibility therefore, whether we Assent to
Christ, to his Apostles, or to the Church (all taught one and the same Doctrine)
is the Object of Divine Faith, but none ever assented to any Doctrine these
Oracles taught, infallibly, without sufficient Evidence preuiously had A
Discovery of the whole Fallacy.
of its Credibility. And thus I believe by Faith Scripture to be God's word,
because the Church Says so, But if you Ask, why I hold all the Church Teaches
to be Evidently Credible, I Euince not this truth by the Infallibility I
belleue, But recurr to those Motives whereby She is proved an Oracle as
evidently Credible, as ever any Apostle was, And consequently I believe Her
Infallibility with the same Divine Faith, as I believe the Words of Scripture.

4. Page 114. He Obiect's. 3. We Catholics make by this way of resolving Faith
every man's reason the only Judge in the Choice of his Religion. Why do we
more so, I beseech you, than the Primitive Christians, who certainly had the
very like rational Motives with ours, and no other, before they believed? But
of this Subject we shall treat largely toward the End of this Discourse.

5. Page. 115. He Says. If the Infallibility of the Church of Rome, be a sure
foundation of Faith, what will become of the Faith, of all those who received
Divine Revelations, without the Infallibility of any Objections grounded on
Instance.
Church at all? And he brings in these Instances. First, of the Apostles
believing the Divine Authority of the old Testament when Christ suffered, which
certainly was not Grounded on the infallible Testimony of the Jewish Church,
for at that time it consented to the Death of the ^essias. 2. Of all that
believed the woman of Samaria (no infallible Oracle) when She declared the
Discourse between Christ our Lord and her self. 3. Of such as believed our
Saviors Doctrine and Miracles related by men honest and faithful. These, Says
^e, had no infallible Testimony, but only a rational Evidence to build Faith
non, and consequently an Infallible Testimony of the Conueyers of Divine
Revelation is Unnecessary to Divine Faith, which seems undoubted, For very few
in the first Ages of the Christian Church received the Doctrine of the Gospel,
from the mouths of persons infallible.

6. By the way I much wonder, Why Mr Stillingfleet omitted to touch here upon
an other Instance far more difficult, which both he and all other must solue
concerning rude and illiterate Persons (chiefly if of no great maturity) who
are induced to believe by the Testimony, or Instruction of their Parents, or of
Another Instance more difficult.
some other simple Teachers. These certainly may have Faith, without acquiring
that full Evidence of Credibility whereunto the learned reach, yea, and without
any Discovery of the Scriptures rational Evidence, never perhaps heard of, much
less understood by them.

7. Now I Answer to the Objection. None makes the Roman Catholic Church in all
Circumstances the only sure foundation of Divine Faith, For the first man that
believed in The Church in all Cireumstances was not the only Foundation of
Faith.
Christ our Lord before the Complete Establishment of His Church, had Perfect
Faith resting on that great Master of Truth, without dependence on the
Christian Church, For Christ alone was not the Church, But the supreme Head of
it. Faith therefore in General requires no more, but only to rely upon God the
first Veri^y speaking by this or that Oracle, by one or more men lawfully sent
to teach, who prove their Mission and make the Doctrine proposed by them
Evidently Credible. In like manner, the Apostles preached no Doctrine in the
name of the new Christian Church, whilst our Savior lived here on earth, But
Testified that he was the true Messiah by virtue of those Signs and Miracles,
which had been already wrought above the force of nature. Thus much Supposed.

8. It is hard I think for any to Say, where the force lies in The Mistake of
the first Instance.
that Instance of the Apostles believing the Divine Authority of the old
Testament, which innumerable Jews then dispersed all Jury over, and the other
parts of the world (not at all conscious of Christ's Passion) most firmly
believed. Why therefore might not the Apostles believe the Divinity of the old
Scripture upon the Authority of that Church, whereof there were at that time
many and very many Professors in other places distant from Jerusalem? Hence I
say the Belief of that Article never failed, But was always preserved entire
in both Churches of the Jews and Christians, for we all yet believe the
Authority of the old Testament, And Consequently its hard to Conceive what this
Objection aims at.

9. Again, admit a total Subversion of the Jewish Church, Had not the Apostles
our Blessed Lord present who could well Ascertain them that he came not to
Cancel any Divine Supposed true its forceles.
Authority of Scripture (for this was impossible unless God be contrary to God)
but to fulfill, to perfect, and change the old Law into a better State. O but
the High Priest and the Elders also erred in consenting to Christ's death. Very
true, and the Reason is because their Privilege of not erring, lasted only to
Christ's coming and not longer, But hence it follows not, that then there was
no Jewish Church which believed the Divine Verities of the old Scripture. I
verily think, Mr Stillingfleet mistook one Objection for another. Perhaps he
would have said, that the Apostles lost faith of our Saviors Resurrection, at
the time of his Passion, But this Difficulty is solued over The Apostles failed
not in Faith.
and over. First it is Answered, that Article was not sufficiently Proposed to
them, Therefore we read. Luke. 18. 34. They understood none of these things.
This Word was hid from them. Again. Had they failed in Faith ar that time, They
were then as Bellarmin observes. Lib: 3. de Ecclesia. C. 17. neither the whole
Church (but only material Parts of it) nor could that improbable Supposed
Error, have prejudiced one whit the Faith of others, who firmly believed in
Christ.

10. That other Instance of the Samaritan woman is soon cleared, if we
distinguish between the Motive, or the natural Proposition The other Instance
cleared* by one (...)tion.
of Faith which comes by hearing, and the infallible Oracle whereupon it
relies, And It Is strange Mr Stillingfleet saw not the Distinction. The Faith
therefore of those other Samaritans that believed in Christ upon the wonans
word, Vltimately relied upon our Saviors own Authority who had conuersed with
her, And hence the Gospel Says. Now we Believe not for thy Saying, for we our
Selves have heard, and know, that this man, in very deed, is the Savior of the
world. It Is true, had this woman, whom the Fathers Suppose perfectly converted
to Christ, been made an Infallible Oracle in all she delivered The Samaritan
woman proposed what She had heard,
as the Apostles were in their Teaching, or the Church now is. Her Testimony
might well have supported Faith, but because thus much only can be euinced by
Scripture, that She ^ealously Proposed what She had heard of our Savior, Her
testimony alone might serve well as a natural Proposition to raise Belief in
others, though insufficient to ground in them that Supernatural Assent, And her
words had upon this Account greater weight, because She confirmed them with a
Sign above the force of Nature. This man has told me all I have done. I know
some Authors are of opinion, that this Samaritan called Photina first reduced
to the Faith of Christ her Sisters and Children, which done, She went into
Africa, and there Propagated the Christian Doctrine with great Success, till
at last both She and her Different Opinions Concerning her.
Children were crowned with a glorious Martyrdom. The only difficulty is,
whether She be the fame with that S. Photina whereof a memory is kept in the
Roman Martyriloge the. 20. day of March, some Greek Authors stand for the
Affirmative, Be it so or other wise, it imports little to our present Purpose.
Who desires more of this Subject may read the erudite Godefridus Henshenius.
Tom. 3. de Santis Martij die. 20. immediately after the life of S. Ioachim.

11. Conformable to this Doctrine we Answer to these other forceles Instances,
and might say with some good Divines, That Other Instances Showed forceles.
all Immediate Propounders or Conueyers of Divine Revelation in such particular
Cases, need not to be Infallible, For Faith (as These Divines Teach) requires
no more; But first that the Object be truly revealed, and Proposed to one upon
prudent Motives, Suitable to the firm Assent He must elicite. 2. That In
Doctrine Commonly received.
by the light of such Motives He be induced to fix Belief upon the Divine
Revelation, although that full Evidence of Credibility which the Church
Manifests and the more learned attain to, be not yet acquired by him. These
Conditions presupposed, Divine Grace is ever ready to make that man's Faith most
firm and supernatural, And consequently an Obligation lies on him to believe.
But from this Doctrine which is Common, no such thing follows as Mr Stillingf.
would infer. Viz. That the Churches infallibility Seems unnecessary to uphold
infallible Faith, for may not young Beginners growing more mature (chiefly if
solicited to abandon Their first Faith) justly demand to have more full
Satisfaction in all their doubts, and so much Assurance concerning that they
once assented to, as not to be removed from it upon any false Motives or
fallacious Arguments, though never so Specious? Such cases (Say these) fall out
every day.

12. But in this present State, none can clear these doubts, none can Assure
any that his Faith is certainly true, none can bring the most learned to a
perfect acquiescency in Belief, but an Infallible Church, Therefore upon this
very Account The Churches Infallibility absolutely necessary.
Her infallibility is proved not only convenient, but absolutely Necessary. And
hence it is, That Gods sacred Providence never failed since Christianity began,
to have in readiness Some one or other infallible known Oracle, whereupon faith
might rest most Securely. The Apostles had for their Master the best living
Oracle, Christ our Lord. The Primitive Christians learned of the Apostles.
After them the Church perfectly founded did succeed, as the only Oracle
whereunto every one may take recourse for further Satisfaction when
difficulties arise, Though in some particular Cases, as is now Said, Her
Motives and glorious Miracles, be not at the first laid forth most fully to
every simple Belieuer. Ceteram turbam, says S. Austin, contra Epist: Fund. C.
4. non intelligendi viuacitas, sed credendi simplicitas sal^am facit. That is.
Candid Simplicity, makes these more How young Beginners are drawn.
safe, than curiously to search into the vltimate grounds of Believing. The
Reason is, because fewer Motives (if yet prudent and Conuincing) may well serve
to induce Beginners, seldom molested with Difficulties against Faith, than will
convince Others more learned, who often struggle to Captiuate their
Understanding, when the high Mysteries of Christianity are Proposed.

13. Moreover, many great Doctors maintain, that in the Two Solutions more.
particular cases now mentioned, God by his special Illumination Supplies the
want of the exterior Proposition when that is deficient, or less conuincing.
See Suarez. Disp. 4. de Fide sect. 5. and this way also, we easily solue Mr
Stillingfleets difficulties. Lastly it is noted in the other Treatise. Disc. 1.
C. 2. n. 5. 6. And both received Doctrine.
That whoeuer is lawfully sent to teach the Christian doctrine, and delivers
those Truths in the name of God and his Church, if considered, as a member
conjoined with Christ's infallible Oracle, He may be Said to teach infallibly.
The Reasons you have there given more largely.

14. I am now to retort Mr Stillingfleets Instances upon himself and show, That
though he walk's never so far abroad to view the several Plantations of Faith
amongst either Brittans or Barbarians, he must solue his own difficulties. Thus
I discourse. We now Suppose, All these Barbarians Converted to Christ These
instances retorted.
to have had true Faith, and Consequently prudent Motives to believe, before
they firmly assented to the Divine Reuelatlon. We make Enquiry after these, and
Ask: By what Inducements were such as yet knew not our Savior, drawn to
believe in him? Mr Stillingfleet return's the strangest Answer I ever heard,
What our Adversary asserts.
For he seems to make his Motives inducing to Faith nothing but the rational
Evidence of the truth of the Doctrine delivered, and Therefore grievously
complains. P. 118. That we destroy the Obligation to Faith, which arises from
the rational Evidence of Christian Religion. If this be not pure Fancy there
was never any, and my Reason is. That Supposed rational Evidence, is either the
very same with the intrinsecal Verity of the Doctrine deleuered, or a rational
intellectual Light distinct from the Doctrine. If it be the very same, These
truths simply Proposed. Christ His rational Evidence of Christian Religion
is God and man, Adaem infected his posterity with Original Sin. God is one
Essence and three Persons, are without more their own Self-euidences, and
consequently all the Miracles which Christ and his Apostles wrought to settle
these, and the like Verities Reicted,
firm in the Primitive Belieuers, were to as little Purpose, as if one should
raise the dead to persuade us that the Sun shines, or (if we speak of Moral
certainty) that there have been such men in the world as Pompey and Julius
Casar, which is enormously untrue.

15. Contrariwise if he Says, This rational Evidence necessarily implies a
preuious intellectual Discourse grounded on prudent Motives, distinct from the
Verity of Christ's Doctrine, He first cashier's his own fancied Evidence. And 2.
must Andretorted.
Answer to the Instances proposed, And. 3. Assent to this true universal
Proposition. Viz. That never any believed, or can believe (if we abstract from
private Revelations) without Motives distinct from Christ's Doctrine, (fit to
induce Faith) And an Infallible Testimony to ground Faith upon. Thus the
Samaritan woman, and those who heard her Relation, being first induced by
precedent signs to judge that Christ was a Prophet. I perceive thou art a
Prophet Says the Text (and perhaps his Goodness added more interior light to
strengthen those Signs) firmly believed upon his infallible word. Jesus said
to her I am ^e Prudent Motives and an Infallible Oracle. Necessary to all Faith.
(the Messiah) that speaks with thee. Neither can any Instance be given where
true Faith is, But you have with that very Faith, Prudent Motives Proposed to
reason, as Inducements, And besides an Infallible Oracle to ground it upon. O,
but every immediate Propounder of the Divine Testimony is not infallible. Be it
so at present, What matters that? If he leads me to one which gives me a
clearer Evidence of Credibility, and proves Himself by Motives above the force
of nature, God's Oracle.

16. Some thing of this nature we have in the first Conversion of Christ's
Disciples John. 1. 44. Philip, Says the A Proof taken from the Conuersions of
Christ's Disciples.
Text, meeting with Nathanael told him. We have found Jesus the son of Joseph
of Nazareth, whom Moses in the Law and the Proph^s (...) of: Nathanael wondered.
What can there be any good from Nazareth? Philip answered. Veni and vide. Come
and se. Drawing near He understood that our Savior knew his Interior, where
in there was no Guile, and beheld him under the figtree before he was called:
Thus enlightened by Signs above the natural knowledge of man, forthwith that
true Profession of his Faith followed. Rabbi, thou art the Son of God, thou art
the King of Israel. In like manner it may easily fall out, if one not very
learned treat with another wholly illiterate (yet The Application.
morally honest) that has heard little of Christ or his Church, He who would
instruct, Says no more, But, Veni and vide. Come I will bring you to an Oracle
right able to teach you, we call it the Catholic Church, She can show you who
laid Her foundations firm, She will convince your understanding by the efficacy
of such Motives, ( Miracles, Conuersions, and Sanctity of life) which far
surpass the power of natural causes. Now after you have seen and heard what I
Say to be most true, Believe not upon my word (for I only point at the Oracle)
but upon the Churches own Testimony, She is without Guile, and cannot deceive
you.

17. And here by the way you se how differently the Sectary How differently the
Catholic Doctors, and Sectaries proceed.
and Catholic proceed, in the Conuersions of an Vnbelieuer, whether Heathen or
other. The first only open's a Bible, and without further Motives but what are
found there, bidd's him read the Book. This yet unconverted man Says the sense
is dark, He vnderstand's it not. The Catholic on the other side, Proposes a
Church euidenced by the very same Marks and Signs, whereby our Savior and his
Apostles were In the Conversion of Unbelievers.
manifested to be Oracles sent from God. This Church both proves that the Bible
is of Divine Inspiration, And mereouer declares its Sense in all controuerted
Passages. Finally after Her Motives laid fo^th, She remit's every one to
Christ's own words, He that hears you hears me, and our Savior remit's us to
his Eternal Father, for he Assures all. John. 7. 16. That the Doctrine delivered
by him was not his, but his Fathers that sent him. And here is the last ground
of all Divine Faith, which stand's fast upon three strong Principles never yet
at variance with one another. The Church, Christ our Lord, and God the first
Verity. Consider I beseech you which of the two Teachers proceed's more
rationally.

18. You se moreover those Instances of the Brittans and The Instances of
Barbanians proved forceles.
Barbarians brought to nothing, For suppose first, which some Authors assert,
that S. Peter Prince of the Apostles Preached in Brittany or England, Or that
S. Paul, Simon Cananaus surnamed the Zealous, Aristobulus a Roman, and S.
Joseph of Arimathia performed that Apostolical function there, (whether so or
no I dispute not). Suppose again, And herein all agree, that England received
the Christian faith very early, For it is as certain that King Lucius and his
Subjects, were converted by S. Damianus and his Associates, sent to preach by
that holy Pope and Martyr Elutherius about one hundred and eighty years after
Christ; As The reason here of.
it is indubitable, that the English Saxons were afterward Converted by S.
Augustine and his followers sent by S. Gregory the great in the six Century, to
do that most worthy and laudable Duty. Upon these Suppositions you see, that
the first Preachers were Apostolical men, and privileged by our Savior to
work Miracles, Mark. 16. 20. Those others in the two following Conuersions
received their Commission from Popes, held a strict Union with the Roman
Catholic Church, and finally made their Doctrine evidently Credible by great
Sanctity, and other Signal wonders, as known History recounts.

19. Some may reply. All these Conuersions would have been easily wrought, had
those Preachers only made our Saviors Miracles known, and done none
Themselves. I Answer first, Done they were and prejudiced nothing, but rather
highly advanced the Glory of our Saviors wonders, Yea and as experience A
Reply Answered.
teaches, yet notably facilitate the Conversion of Infidels every where, when
God is pleased to work them by his Servants. Therefore the Apostles were
empowered not only to Testify that the Messiah did Miracles, but moreover to do
the like themselves, And for this reason, Almighty God has ever hitherto
preserved, and will hereafter preserve that singular Grace of working Miracles
in the Church. I Answer 2. None can have infallible Assurance either of our
Saviors Miracles, or of any other Verity recorded in Scripture, independently
of some actual living, actual infallible, and most clear euidenced Oracle by
Signs above the Prudent Motives induce to Faith and An Infallible Oracle
support it.
force of Nature, which in this present State is the Church, And therefore I
said a great Truth, That Divine Faith had in all Ages that necessary Expedient
of rational Motives to induce it, an Infallible Oracle to teach it, and finally
to rely on.

20. Hence we easily Answer Mr Stillingfleets Question. P. 118. What, Says he,
cannot men have unquestionable Assurance that there was such a Person as Christ
in the world who dyed for us, if the present Church be not infallible. Answ.
You might, Sr, have proposed a wiser Question. Know I beseech you That in the
forenamed Proposition. There was such a Man as Christ who lived in the world,
and An unlearned Objection answered.
dyed for us, Two things may be Considered. First, That the man called Christ
dyed on a Cross, And this Verity, as we said above, Once visible, both Jews
and Gentiles yet Assent to upon Moral Certainty, but therefore do not believe in
Christ. The Reason is Manifest (and it utterly destroys your Doctrine) because
that Common report, or Moral Certainty is not God's infallible Revelation,
which only can support Faith.

21. The second thing to be considered is. That the man called Christ dying for
us, was the only Messiah, truly God, the Redeemer of Mankind. Here you have the
hidden Verities of Christian Religion, the Certain Objects of Faith Conveyed
unto us, by no Moral Assurance but solely upon God's Infallible Revelation,
whereof more presently.

22. Page. 119. He tell's us first. We cannot say, what or where that Church is
which we suppose infallible. Nor. 2. What is that Church is the proper Subject
of infallibility, Nor. 3. What kind of Infallibility this is. Nor. 4. How we
can know when the Church Defin's infallibly. Here is very slight Matter to work
on. To the first we Answer. The Church, which we do not barely Suppose, The
true Church denoted.
but have already proved Infallible, is that diffused Society of Christians
(united in one Faith under one Head) which is most discernable from all
Societies, by the same evident Marks of truth, that Christ and his Apostles
manifested to the world. To the. 2. We have both Answered and retorted the
Argument in the other Treatise, where it is Said. The Church may The subject of
Infallibility.
be considered, First as it is Docens, or Teaching, And thus Her Representative
moral Body, the Pope, I mean and Council assembled together, for the Reasons
alleged. Chap. 17. is the proper Subject of Infallibility: Again if we consider
the Church as it is Discens, learning, or taught, All those diffused multitudes
of Christians that are united in one belief, and own due Submission to their
lawful Pastors, because they believe as the Church Representative teaches, may
be rightly styled upon the Account From whence Infallibility Proce^d's?
of their infallible Faith, the proper Subject of Infallibility. And must not
our Adversaries who hold a Society of men infallible in Fundamentals solue this
Difficulty, and Declare in what Subject that half Infallibility is lodged? To
the. 3. we have Answered. Chap. 16. This infallibility which proceed's from the
Special Assistance of the Holy Ghost, is of such a Nature, That, that Blessed
Spirit will never permit the Church instructing, to Define a falsehood, nor the
instructed, Universally to fail in faith. To the. 4. I Answer. Then we know the
Church Defin's infallibly, when She obliges all under Anathema, to believe her
Doctrine, and when the Doctrine is so sufficiently proposed to her Subjects, that
it cannot be morally doubted of. But enough of these Strengthles difficulties,
examined and solued a hundred times over. May better be expected hereafter? We
shall se that in the following Chapter.

CHAP. IV.
More of Mr Stillingfleets Errors. Of that odd kind of Faith he seems to
maintain, grounded on Moral Certainty. What Influence the Motives of
Credibility have upon Faith? Other Parcels of his Doctrine Examined, and
refuted. Objections Solued.

1. AFter Mr Stillingfleet had said, All may have unquestionable Assurance of
our Saviors once being in the Mr Stillingfleets Doctrine.
world, though the present Church were fallible, He tells us again, that the
Assurance of the matters of fact which are the foundations of Faith, is
necessary, in order to the obligation to believe, And then add's. I mean such
an assurance as matters of fact are capable of, for no higher can be required
than the nature of the things will bear. He goes on in his Ignorance. Cannot we
have unquestionable Assurance, that there were such persons as C^sar and,
Pompey without some infallible Testimony? If we may in such things, Why not in
other Matters of fact, which infinitely more concern us, though the Church stamp
not her Infallibility upon them? The man you see would say, That these
verities. Christ dyed for us, is our only Redeemer, truly God and man, being
Matters of fact, and foundations of Faith, are conveyed to us upon no higher
certainty than Moral only, For the nature of them, just like that Assurance we
have of a Caesar, and Pompey, bear's no greater. Hence he also tell's us. P.
206. that Moral certainty, may be as great as Mathematical Explained by himself
and Physical, Supposing as little reason to doubt in moral things, as to their
Nature, as in Mathematical and Physical, as to theirs. And afterward. There can
be no greater than this Moral Certainty, of the main foundations of all
Religion. Reflect Christian Reader. But The Doctrine is dangerous
the Verities now mentioned. Christ is our Redeemer. The only Messiah, truly
God and Man, are the main foundations of Christian Religion, And Conveyed to us
by moral certainty, Therefore Mr Stillingfleet lays the whole weight of
Christian Religion, hitherto held infallibly true, upon a certainty which may
be false. By this confused and undigested Discourse, I hope all will perceive,
what it is to write Controversies, with half an Insight into Difficulties.

2. I prove it first both indigested and erroneous by this undeniable
Principle. No Authority in Heaven or earth delivered And Proved Most erroneous.
these Verities ( Christ is the true Messiah. Christ is God and Man) upon Moral
Certainty only, Ergo, None can believe them with so weak an Assent, as is only
Moral. The Consequence is clear, For if no Authority conveyed or delivered the
Verities as Morally A two fold Probation.
certain only, And I Assent to them with a Believe only Morally Certain, my
Assent is given to some Authority which has no Being either in Heaven or
earth. Or, Argue thus, and you Convince. If all Authority Imaginable, whereupon
Faith can depend, Conveyed or delivered these Verities both as Infallible
Truths, and infallibly, And I Assent to the Doctrine with a Belief not
infallible, but only morally Certain, I leave by my fallible moral Assent, the
true Infallible teaching and Conueying Oracles of Christian Doctrine, and
believe upon a mere fancied Authority, which was never empowered to Convey God's
Verities to any.

3. Now that all Authority (whereupon Faith can depend) delivered the
forementioned Verities Infallibly, is Manifest. All Teachers of Christian
Doctrine conveyed it Infallibly.
God's Revelation, was and is infallible. Christ our Lord and the Apostles
taught these Doctrins Infallibly. The Orthodox Church, Disclaim's this petty
way of conueying and teaching Christian Doctrine fallibly. Therefore No
Authority can be conceived, which delivered such Verities (owned even by
Sectaries essential Doctrins) upon Moral Certainly only, or Conveyed them
fallibly to Any.

4. Hence you se first. This Dilemma cannot be Answered. Either we believe,
That our Savior is the true Messiah (the like is of all other Mysteries)
because God revealed it, And because A Dilemma
Christ himself, His Apostles, and the Universal Church ever since taught the
Doctrine; Or Contrariwise, we believe it upon some other Authority Inferior to,
and distinct from the Infallible Testimony of these Oracles. Grant the first,
our Faith stand's firm upon a Testimony both Divine and Infallible, and
therefore Cannot but be Infallible. Say. 2. We believe upon another Authority
distinct from the Testimony of the Oracles now named, that misplaced Assent,
because not resoluable into the first Verity, is no Faith at all.

5. You se. 2. Whoeuer attempt's to turn these high revealed A 2. Inference.
Verities out of their onw nature of being Infallible, Or rashly presumes, to
convey that Doctrine to us upon Moral certainty only, which God by Divine
Revelation, Christ our Lord, The Apostles also delivered and Conveyed, as most
infallible certain Doctrine, Becomes thereby a public Corrupter of Divine
Truths upon this account, that He transfigures what the first Verity has spoken
Infallibly, into weak Topics and uncertain Moralities. The Offense is
Criminal, and the wrong done to God not pardonable, without a serious
Repentance.

6. You se. 3. That No Authority Imaginable vphold's this pretended Moral
Certainty of Sectaries in Matters of Faith. And here I desire Mr Stillingfleet
to Answer. Will he believe that Christ our Lord is the true Messiah, God and
man, because No Authority conceiuable vphelo^'s
All Orthodox Christians assent to the Verity? I Answer first. All these
believe the truth with infallible Faith, and why dare not he do so also? 2. If
he Assent's because they Universally consent to the Mystery, He build's his
Faith not upon God's Infallible Revelation, but upon the Assent of Others which
He says Should only be moral, and fallible. 3. Will This pretended moral
Certainty.
he believe the Verity because Heteredox Christians Judge it true? That Is
neither God's Revelation, nor Christ's Doctrine, And Consequently his Faith has
no foundation. 4. Will he believe for the Motives of Credibility preuious to
Faith? These considered as Motives, are nor God's Revelation, Nor so much as
Apostolical Doctrine. Besides as we Shall se presently, Protestants have no
Motives at all to rely on. Finally will He tell us, He belieues that Christ was
in the world and dyed on a Cross, with the same Moral assent as He yields to
the being of Caesar and Pompey? I have Answered, that is nothing to the Purpose,
For Gentiles assent to such Matters of Fact (once Visible and Sensible) by Moral
where the main difficulty lies?
Certainty, And yet are Infidels. That therefore which urges at present,
Concern's the hidden and obscure Mysteries of Faith, In these Moral Certainty
has no place at all. The reason is manifest For if as revealed they stand firm
upon God's infallible Testimony, No Power under Heaven can alter their own
intrinsic Infallibility, Or Convey them unto us upon weak Moral Certainty, yet
Mr Stillingfleet boldly Assert's. There can be no greater Certainty then Moral,
of the Main foundations of all Religion. Judge good Reader, whether this be not
a gross Mistake, And whether I wronged the man, when I told you his Discourse
is undigested, and highly erroneous.

7. Yet we have not said all. Wherefore because Mr Stillingfleet seems highly
to value This late invented Nouelty of Moral Certainty, we will examine the
Doctrine most rigidly, till at las't the Moral certainty more rigidly examined,
whole fallacy be discovered. To do this, my first demand is, to what Object
will He apply his Moral Certainty in this Matter of Fact? Christ is the Messiah
truly God and man. These four things and no more, can only be thought of. 1.
The Matter believed. 2. The Divine Testimony, which reueal's that Truth. 3. The
Faith of those who believe upon Revelation, And. 4. The Motives whereby we are
induced to believe the Truth revealed, Four things to be Considered.
because God speak's it. Now all know first, that in Material Objects purely
considered in themselves, there neither is, nor can be moral Certainty, For
every thing is, or is not, independently of our Judgments, where only Moral
certainty is founded, therefore God, and all those who se things intuitiuely,
are exempted from this imperfect degree of Knowledge. 2. There can be no moral
certainty in the Divine Revelation, which proceed's from an infinite Verity,
for this without Question is most Supereminently Infallible. 3. If that
infallible Testimony, or Revelation be infallibly The efficacy of Divine
Revelation.
applied to Belieuers, and has influence upon their Faith, it cannot but
transfuse into it infallible Certainty, if God Speak's infallibly, for this end
that we believe him infallibly, And if Faith rest not upon that Perfection of
his infallible Testimony, it is no Faith at all. Thus we Argued in the other
Treatise. Disc. 1. C. 5. n. 7.

8. It remain's, that we now Say a word of the Motives which what Influence The
Motives have upon Faith?
induce to Faith, and examine what Influence they have over it, when we either
believe the Doctrine in Scripture, or the Churches Definitions. Mr
Stillingfleet. P. 203. Having first told us, that the Revelation which was
communicated to one, was obligatory to all concerned in it, though they could
have nothing but moral certainty for it, Concludes thus. By this it appears,
that when we now Speak of the resolution of Faith, though the utmost reason of
our Assent be that Infallibility, which is supposed in the Divine Testimony,
yet the nearest and most proper Resolution of it, is into the Grounds inducing
us to believe, That such Our Adversaries Doctrine.
a testimony is truly Divine, and the resolution of this cannot be into any
Divine Testimony, without a process in Infinitum. He would Say, That a true act
of Faith relies upon two foundations, one remote, the supposed Divine
Testimony, The other most proper and nearest, To wit, the Grounds which induce
to believe, that fuch a Testimony is in being, or truly Divine. And his reason
(if he has any) must be, because these grounds, immediately Apply, or Convey
unto us the supposed Divine Testimony. Now this Conueyance, or Application of
the Testimony, being made by grounds only Morally certain, It follows, that
the Faith we elicit Answer's not to the strength of the Testimonies
Infallibility (considered in it self) But to the weakness of the Conueyance, and
consequently can be no more, but only a Moral certain Faith, not at all
Infallible. And thus you remoues Faith from its own Object.
se, To lay Faith as low as may be, to remove it from its own Center, and
fasten it upon no man knows what moral ground's; Finally to introduce a new,
weak, and uncouth way of believing, is the best service Mr Stillingfleet can do
for God and Christians. But, Ad rem.

9. I Say first. Protestants have no grounds distinct from the Divine
Testimony, whereby to discover any one particular Truth, which God has
revealed. I prove the Assertion. These supposed Grounds, are either reduced to
the rational Evidence of Christian Religion, already refuted (as laid forth by
Mr Stillingfleet) Or to the Doctrine contained in Scripture, And this Says He.
Page The Doctrine refuted.
170. We believe by Faith upon a Divine Testimony, which therefore is not the
antecedent Reason or ground, Why we believe it, For no verity Assented to by
Faith, can (as assented to) be the preuious Reason of our Assent, or a rational
ground iuducing to believe. Therefore we said, our Saviors Miracles believed
by Faith, when Rational Inducements to Faith are ever presupposed to Belief.
we read Scripture, are not the Inducements to believe them, because an
Inducement to Faith, is ever presupposed, and not inuolued in the Act of
believing. But it is needles to Say more of this, For no man in his wits, if
Questioned by either Jew or Gentil, why he belieues the Sacred Trinity, can for
the last Answer tell him, He belieues so because ^e belieues it, or because he
read's that Mystery in a book called Scripture. Now besides these proofles
Inducements, there are no other imaginable, whereby the Divine Testimony can be
Discovered, conveyed, or applied to Belieuers, but only those known Catholic
Motives (as Miracles, Sanctity, Conuersions Church Motives Slighted.
of Nations etc) which illustrate the Universal Roman Church, And these Mr
Stillingfleet scornfully call's, mute things, a grand Salad too often served
up, found very dry and insipid. Therefore he has no rational Inducement morally
Certain for any one Article of Christian Religion, much less for the Tenets of
Protestants.

10. I Say. 2. If the Grounds or Motives inducing to believe (let these be what
this Adversary pleases) have Infallible connection with the Divine Testimony, or
convince upon Metaphysical Certitude that God speak's the Truths we believe,
The Assent given to the Motives is not moral, but highly infallible.
Contrariwise, if all Motives preuious Faith cannot be built on Fallible Motives.
to belief be supposed so fallible, that they may deceive, Faith neither is,
nor can be built upon them, Therefore Mr Stillingfleet Err's in Saying. The
nearest and most proper Resolution of Faith is into the Grounds, inducing to
believe, that such a Testimony is Divine.

11. To prove the Assertion, I demand, Whether God obliges all to believe his
revealed verities, upon his unerring Testimony, as the only Formal Object, or
to believe for Motives extrinsecal to that Testimony, which though morally
certain, may possibly Deceive? Grant the first, Faith stand's fast The
Assertion proved.
upon its own foundation, the Divine Testimony. Say. 2. It is jointly built on
Motives, as the nearest and most proper Object which in rigor may deceive, it
hangs, as it were, Upon two Heterogeneal Principles, The One most firm and
Infallible, The Other weak and fallible; Viz. Motives which being fallible,
cannot but contribute as much Weakness to Belief, as the infallible Testimony
gives it Certainty, And so these two Principles, by their different Influence,
Do and Undo, build and destroy, wind on and wind off: The one imparts
infallible Certainty, the other staikes it away, and makes Faith no more, but a
fluctuating, moral, and fallible Assent.

12. To advance this Proof yet further, I Ask Again (if all Divine Revelation
were by a supposed Impossibility not infallible, but only morally certain,)
whether then Christians could believe the revealed Mysteries, with a Faith as
certain, as they now elicite upon Revelation? Answer, Tea. That Perfection of
infallibility, essential to Gods Revelation, would then be vseles and
impertinent to Support Faith. Answer, The Proof further explained, conuinceth.
No, or Say Faith, if the Hypothesis stand's, would not be Divine and certain.
I infer. Ergo, it is neither Divine nor certain De facto. My reason is. So far,
and not further, Gods infallible Testimony or the Divine Revelation has
influence upon Faith, as fallible motives Apply it to Belieuers, or give it
leave (might one speak so) to Support that Assent, But these fallible Motives,
which immediately apply the Revelation to Belieuers, permit it not to raise that
Act to any greater certitude, than only moral which may be false, Therefore the
Revelation de facto communicates no more Certainty to Belief, than if it were
only morally, and not infallibly certain, For here is our Adversaries
Principle. According to the Proofs and grounds, whereby we discover the Divine
Testimony to be in Being, We believe, But all these Proofs and grounds Say only
Morally and Fallibly, that the Testimony is now in Being, Therefore faith also
can be no more but only Moral, Fallible, and liable to Error.

13. Hence it follows first, That neither the very Apostles, Ill Consequences
deduced out of
nor any other Belieuers ever fince that time, had any surer faith than only
moral, which may be false. It follows. 2. That the Truth of all Christian
Religion, inuolues in it a Possibility of salshood, For being applied or
proposed to us, upon Sectaries Doctrine.
grounds only fallible and moral, we are to judge of it, according to the
Exigency and Merit of such weak grounds, And therefore can esteem it no better
than fallible. It follows. 3. (And this I would have noted) That Faith in
these men's Principles, tend's not absolutely into the Divine Revelation, but
only with doubt and fear, or merely conditionally. For every man may rationally
Say. Lord if you have revealed this truth. Christ is the true Messiah. I
believe it as undoubtedly true, but the certainty I have thereof, is only
Settled upon Motives which They make Faith a Conditional Assent.
may deceive me, Therefore my faith can be no more but Hypothetical or
conditional, to this Sense. If you have revealed it, I believe, if not I reject
it. Hence you se, it were much better (could not the difficulty be otherwise
solued) to Say the Motives preuious to Faith convince with Metaphysical
certainty, that God speak's by his Scripture and Church, Than to make the
Revelation so strengthles that it can (because weakened by fallible Motives)
contribute no other certainty to Belief, but what is Moral, and may be false.

14. And thus much Mr Stillingfleet, could he proced consequently This
Adversary Proceed's not Consequently.
(as he does not) should Assert. For, if (as he says) considering the Nature
of things, moral Certainty be as great, or beget's as firm an Assent as any
Mathematical, or physical certainty, what is it that fright's the man from
allowing Infallible certainty to Faith? Or what gain's he to Substitute in Lieu
of that, another certainty which he call's Moral? For if these two certainties
be equally as strong, it is Senless to establish the One, and reject the Other,
but the truth is, in matters of belief, moral certitude has no place, as is
largely proved above.

15. Against this Discourse one may first Object. God can An Objection proposed.
oblige all either to believe what is revealed, as infallible true to us, So
that there can be no possible Deception in our Belief. Or. 2. He may oblige us
to believe His revealed Verities merely according to the efficacy of such
Proofs, as intimate to us that God Speak's; And why may not Mr Stillingf. build
his Faith upon such Grounds or motives as the nearest foundation, though the
vltimate Principle of believing be the Divine Revelation? I have partly
Answered. Either those Motives convince withal Of no force if the Motives be
infallible.
Metaphysical certitude, that the Revelation does actually Exist, and than the
Difficulty cease, for the Assent yielded to them, is infallible; Or
contrariwise, They are as Mr Stillingfleet supposes, fallible, And may stand
with all their Luster, though the Revelation really were not in Being. Speak
So; It is most clear, such Motives cannot support Faith, For all which right
reason can draw from them (if not absolutely infallible) is thus much only,
That our Christian Verities according to Prudence, If fallible, they uphold not
Faith.
are evidently credible. But by virtue of that Judgment we reach not as yet to
the infallibility of the Divine Testimony, Therefore if God obliges all de
facto to ground Faith upon his infallible Testimony which cannot deceive, He
jointly Obliges us not to The reason hereof.
ground it upon fallible Motives, which may deceive, and stand as Mr
Stillingfleet will have it, although God had never revealed any Christian
Verity. Again. If we are obliged to free Christian Religion from all
Possibility of falsehood, That is, if God will have us to believe it as
absolutely infallible, We cannot without wrong done to his infinite Verity Say,
he obliges us, to settle faith upon Motives only morally certain, or absolutely
fallible, for thus He would oblige us to believe that as his own Truth; which
possibly may not be Truth, but contrariwise, a lie, a falsehood, an Error.

16. 2. Object: Now De facto, in this present State there is no Difficulty, For
all judge though the Motives be fallible, yet A second Objection Solued.
God has revealed our Christian verities. Answ. All do not judge so, But admit
some do, They judge so by their infallible Assent of Faith, terminated upon the
Verities as revealed, But antecedently to to belief, none can judge they are
infallible revealed truths, whilst Motives only fallible ground that Judgment.

17. A 3. Objection. Suppose Eternal truth had never revealed A third proposed
by no Sectary* more difficult.
the sacred Trinity (the like is of any other Mystery) Suppose also that the
whole System of Motives had then stood in the same vigor and force as now they
appear to us: Would not God and prudence have obliged us in that case to
believe as firmly the Trinity, as we now believe it? I answer. If the
Supposition implies no Contradiction, as I verily think it does; (at least many
hold so) Prudence would then have laid upon us an Obligation of firmly
believing; But what follows from hence? Thus much only, That poor Mortals not
seeing the depth of things would have been invincibly deceived; But Deception is
remote from God, for his wisdom penetrat's all Truth, and his Goodness could not
upon the Supposition have obliged any Solued. The ground of the Solution.
to believe a falsehood, or that to be, which really is not, Therefore he could
not in the Case now supposed, have afforded Divine Assistance to make Faith
supernatural, because the Object by error apprehended belieuable, really was
not. Thus much is true, and God might have obliged us to judge, That the
Motives would then have made the Mysteries evidently credible (though they were
not) yea, and perhaps further to believe Conditionally, As is said above.

18. A. 4.th Objection. This Proposition is true. We believe for the Motives,
Or, we prove that God Speak's because the Motives apply and convey the Divine
Testimony to us. I distinguish the Proposition. We believe for the Motives as
Inducements, to settle Faith upon another Object. Viz. God's Testimony, I grant
A fourth Obiestion solued
it. We believe for the Motives, That is, We ground our faith upon them, as
either the nearest or more remote Object, Why we believe, I Deny it. Thus the
will loves good, because the understanding apprehend's or conueyes good to it,
yet loves not the by a clear Instance.
knowledge which conueyes it. Fire laid near to fuel burn's, the approximation
burn's not, but is only Conditio applicans, a necessary condition applying heat
which burn's. So we say the Motives avail to make it most credible that God
speak's, But no more ground Faith, than approximation burn's, or the knowledge,
when we prosecute Good, is the Object of love.

19. And here by the way you se Mr Stillingfleets constant Mr Stilling:
Constant Error, discouereds
Error, who makes the Motives inducing to Faith the foundation of it; That is,
in other Terms: He Confound's the Judgment whereby we Assert, the revealed
Mysteries are evidently Credible, with the Assent of Faith it self, And will
needs have the formal Object whereupon Faith is built, not only to be the
Divine Revelation but the Motives also, though they can do no more but (...)ace
the Will guided by reason, to settle belief upon the infallibility of the
first Reuealer.

CHAP. V.
More quarrels Answered. Mr Stillingfleets endeavor to catch Catholics in a
Circle, demonstrated both vain and improbable. His Objections are forceless. A
word to an vnleaaned Cauil.

1. FRom the Page last cited, to P. 123. I find nothing in Mr Stillingfleet
worth any larger Answer than is given already. Here He tells us, That many
things in Christian Religion are to be believed before we can Imagine any such
thing, as an infallible Testimony of our Church. It is hard to guess at his
meaning, for he names not one Article, thus Assented to. Perhaps he would His
meaning obscure.
Say, That the Verities revealed in some books of Scripture, called
Protocanonical known by their own proper Signatures or Motives, as the Harmony,
Sanctity, and Majesty of the Style, may be believed without the Testimony of an
Infallible Church. If so; I Answer first. All this Harmony or Majesty,
considered only as Objects of Sense, or as preuioussly known by their Natural
Evidence (thus far and not further they bear the name of Motives) avail not to
believe any Verity in Scripture, if the infallibility of the Church be
rejected, And therefore we said above, this Sanctity and Harmony The Church
rejected, no Majesty in Scripture can gain Belief.
are assented to by Faith only, after the Church immediately Euidenced by Her
Motives, Ascertain's us that such Books are Divine. I Answer. 2. Grant such
Motives may in some weak manner, and particular Circumstances conduce to
believe the Scriptures Divinity, yet in this present State, when we have a
Church most clearly manifested, which both Ascertain's us of Scripture and the
Sense also, it would be no less than an indiscreet rashness to cast off her
Authority, (being the most facile and plainest Rule) and in Lieu of Her, to
rely on another foreign, unfit way of Believing by Motives, not half fo clear,
and far less conuincing.

2. Thus some Divines Teach, though a Heathen after a due Consideration of the
works in Nature, may come to believe that God will reward Good, and punish
Evil, yet none do Assert, That when our Christian Articles are clearly proposed
to An Instance
him, by the Pastors and Teachers of the Church, For example, That Christ dyed
for us. The dead shall rise again. God will reward the just etc. That then if
he reject Church Authority, he can believe the forenamed Articles with Divine
Faith. This I Deny, And the reason is, because that way of believing, when a It
is imprudent to reject we easiest was of Believing.
more ordinary and facile is proposed, Seems temerarious and imprudent, And so
it would be, should any now when the Church gives us full Assurance of the
Scriptures Divinity lay aside Her Authority, and Say. I will alsolutely believe
this or that Truth to be God's word, because I Discover apparent Signs. of
Divinity, in what I read.

3. In the next place, Mr Stillingfleet Quarrel's with a word. The Roman
Catholic Church, which, in his opinion, is just as much as to Say. The German
universal Emperor, That is particular and universal together, for Roman
restrain's or marks out one Church, universal, includes all. Answ. It is a mere
Quibble exploded by A mere quibble exploded by Fathers.
the Fathers, particularly S. Hierome. Apolog. 1. aduersus Ruffin. not far from
the beginning, who call's the Roman Faith the Catholic Faith. What, Says he,
is Ruffinus his Faith? It is that there with the Roman Church preuail's, or
another founded in Origens Writings? Si Romanam responderit, Ergo Catholici
sumus. If he Answer's it is the Roman Faith, This Inference is good, we both
profess the universal Faith. Therefore Roman and Universal are here synomimal
or words of one Signification, which the Apostle clearly Insinuates. Romans 1. 8.
Your Faith is renowned the whole world over. Again. Epist. 16. ad Principiam
Virg: circa medium. He shows that the most ancient Saints addressed themselves
to to the Roman Church, Quasi ad tutissimum communionis su^ S. Hierom's
express. Testimonies.
portum, as to a place of refuge, or of mutual Communion, which was General,
Public, and belonged to all. Yet more. When, Epist: 57. ad Damasum, This great
Doctor positiuely teaches, That he was joined in Communion, with no other
Society of men then such as adhered to Damasus, S. Peter's Successor, ( where
upon the Church was built) And that those who eat the lamb out of this House,
were profane. Did he think ye speak of any one particular Roman Diocese, and
not of the universal Catholic Church? It is contrary to his Discourse, and
reason also.

4. Se more of this subject in the Epistle of S. Athanasius to two Popes,
Julius and Marcus, Read also S. Cyprians Epistle. 52. n. 1. Other Fathers Speak
with S. Hierome.
And S. Ambrose, De obitu fratris, about the middle, and know withal, The word
Roman added to Catholic is not to limit the universal Jurisdiction of that
See, But to distinguish Orthodox Belieuers from Heretics, who were professed
Enemies of the Roman Faith. If therefore we may rightly comprise under this
word Roman all other Christian Societies, past or present united in Why the
Roman Church was called Universal.
belief with this one Mother Church, There is neither Bull nor Solaecism in
speech, to call the Roman (ever One and the same in Faith) the universal Church
of Christ.

5. Page. 127. To catch Carholicks in a Circle Mr Stillingfleet Ask's, why we
believe Scriptures to be the Word of God. If we Affirm upon this Ground; That
the Church which is infallible Mr Stilling: endeavor more then weak,
delivers them so to us, He demand's again (and bidd's us Answer if we can)
whether it is possible to believe the Churches infallibility any other way, than
because infallible Scriptures Say, She is infallible, which implies a plain
Circle. Answ. It is very possible, For seeing Scripture demonstrat's not ex
terminis its own Divinity, nor can be made evidently credible by any light
internal to catch Catholics in a Circle.
to the Book, some other infallible Oracle distinct from it, must necessarily
ascertain us, that the Book is Divine, And the Doctrine there preserved, is yet
pure as the Apostles wrote it. But this Oracle can be no other but the Church
which proves Her self by Signs and Miracles to speak in Gods name,
independently of Scripture, therefore the first act of Faith, whereby we
believe in a General way the Churches infallibility, relies not (as this
Gentleman weakly supposes) on Scripture, But upon the Church it Self, as the
most known manifested Oracle. And thus the Circle is easily avoided.

6. You will se more clearly what I aim at, by one Instance taken from the
Primitive Christians. Ask what induced them to believe the Apostles
Infallibility when they Preached? All No Circle in the Primitive Christians
Faith.
Answer; They believed so, because those blessed men immediately proved
themselves commissioned Oracles sent from God, and made their Doctrine evidently
Credible by sensible Signs and Wonders which surpassed the force of Nature.
Very true. I^ like manner we believe the Churches infallibility, having
preuious Motives as Strong to believe that Truth upon her Authority, as ever
Christians had to believe that S. Paul was infallible, when he preached. If
then there was no Vicious Therefore none in our Resolution.
Circle in those first Christians Faith, there can be none in Ours, vhilst all
of us have infallible Oracles, manifested by Supernatural Signs to rely on: And
Those first now mentioned had them before Scripture was written. You will say
this Discourse seems to prove, we cannot believe the Churches Infallibility
upon the Scriptures Testimony. It has been Answered over and over, supposing
Scripture be one admitted as God's sacred Word, ^e prove the Churches
infallibility so strongly by it against all Adversaries, who own the Book as
Divine, that none of them shall ever return a probable answer to our alleged
Testimonies.

7. But what Says Mr Stillingfleet. Is there no difference between the way of
proving a thing to an Adversary, and resolving ones own Faith? Answer yes. But
we both resolve and pro^^. We Resolve the first Act of Faith concerning
Scripture How we both resolve and prove the Churches Infallibility.
into the Churches infallible Authority, and believe that Book* to be of Divine
Inspiration, because this Otacle says so. Then we Argue upon a Principle
proved by us, and supposed, (though not proved) by Sectaries. The Principle is.
Scripture is God's word. We read the book which all Christians Say is Divine,
And prove also from it the Churches infallibility against our Adversaries Ex
probatis and concessis, That the book is Divine. Here is no danger of a Circle,
nor any fault in this way of Arguing.

8. Yet Mr Stillingfleet makes his Exceptions, and will needs have the Circle
go on against us. You prove, Says he, the Churches infallibility from such
Passages. Super hanc Petram. Pasce oues etc. But how come you to know
infallibly, A reply retor^ed.
that the Sense of those places is as you believe, For your Adversaries deny
any such thing as infallibility proved out of them? I may Answer first, by
proposing the like Question. How do these Adversaries know that their contrary
sense is exactly the true Meaning of the Holy Ghost? Will they tell us they
think so (here is all we have from them) what am I better for that? When the
Donatists, Pelagians, and all Heretics can think as boldly as any Protestant,
And by their deluded thoughts vnsense, as we se by experience, the most choice
and sacred Passages in holy writ. To whom then shall we recurr in case the
Sense be doubtful? I Answer to the Church. O, says Mr Stillingfleet Here we
are got into a Circle again, and though his own words (see them in the page
cited, fine) give no force to his Probation, yet I Will help them on to all the
Strength his meaning is capable of. He should therefore Another Reply, Answered.
Argue thus. We believe the Churches infallibility because the true sense of
Scripture says, she is infallible. Again, We believe this very Sense of
Scripture to be infallibly true, because the infallible Church says so. I have
Answered. The first Act of Faith wherewith we believe the Churches
infallibility, is not at all founded upon the true Sense of Scripture, as yet
not known ( in illo signo) to be so much as Divine, but upon the Churches own
infallible Testimony made by it self, and for it self, immediately credible.

9. Now if we Speak of another Distinct, consequent, and more explicit act of
Faith, when we believe the Churches infallibility upon this ground, That She
declares the Scriptures ge^^in Sense which proves Her an infallible Oracle,
There is no difficulty at all, Because this very Exposition or Interpretation
of Scripture brought to its last Principle, is vltimatly resolved into (and
therefore again believed upon) the same infallible Authority The sense of
Scripture resolved, and believed.
of the Church, or rather upon Scripture and the Churches Interpretation
together, For thus jointly taken, They ground Faith, and not like two disparate
Principles, As if we first believed the Scriptures sense independently of the
Churches Interpretation, And then Upon Scripture and Church Authority jointly.
again believed the Churches Interpretation to be infallible, because the Sense
of Scripture known aliunde, or without Depending on Church Authority, Says she
is infallible. This cannot be, if Scripture and the Churches Interpretation
Indiuisibly concur to this lotter act of Faith, whereof we now speak.

10. Here then is a Dilemma that clear's all, and free's us from the least
Shadow of a Circle. We either know (or believe) the Scriptures Sense
independently of the Churches infallible The Assertion Clear^d.
Interpretation, or receive it upon her infallible Authority. Grant the first,
There is no danger of a Circle, for in case that Truth were know upon a sure
Principle distinct from the Church, it would be another new and as strong a
Probation of her Infallibility, as if an Angel sent from Heaven should
interpret Scripture to the Catholic Sense, And then we might Assent to the
Churches Infallibility upon two disparate Principles (which prove not one
another). The one Ordinary, the Churches own Interpretation, The other
independent and extraordinary, Should an Angel or Prophet sent from God,
interpret. Say. 2. We believe the Sense of Scripture upon the This way* no two
Propositions to make a Circle of.
Churches own infallible Authority, There are no two imaginable Propositions to
make a Circle of, whilst that Sense internal to the letter, can not be
infallibly propounded otherwise, then by the Church.

11. Page* 128. I find an unlearned Objection much to this Sense. We Catholics
destroy all Possibility of avoiding a Circle, if we prove by the Motives of
credibilty no new Revelations Distinct from the old; And this we Pretend not
to, For A weak Objection in effect solued.
we only seek to euince by these Motives a Divine Assistance with the Church in
every thing She Defines, but this Assistance cannot be proved from any other
ground, but only from the Promises made in Scripture, Therefore we are still in
a Circle, For we believe the Scriptures infallible, because of the Churches
Testimony, and we believe the Church infallible, because of the Promises in
Repeated Again.
Scripture concerning the Assistance of the Holy Ghost with the Church, so as
to secure Her from all Error. Here in Effect is the same Objection repeated
again, Therefore I Answer. We believe not in the first place the Churches
infallible Assistance moved thereunto by the Promises in Scripture, For this
first General Act of Faith wholly relies upon the Churches own infallible
Testimony without depending on Scripture; because Her Testimony One Instance
clear's all.
is made most Credible to reason by conuincing Motives, before we believe, that
She is insallibly Assisted. All must Say what I now Assert, For before
Scripture was written, The Primitive Christians believed infallible Assistance
granted the Apostles in every Doctrine they taught, being induced to believe so
by the Signs and Miracles which those blessed men Euidenced. In like manner we
in this present State, answerable to the Procedure of these Christians, having
the same Motives manifest in the Church, may well be induced to believe, That
She both now is, and ever was no less Assisted by the Holy Ghost to speak
Truth, then the Apostles were, for as much as concern's the Substance and
Verity of her Doctrine.

CHAP. VI.
Mr Stillingfleet solues not His Adversaries Argument* A word of his tedious
Shuffling. The Motives of Credibility both distinguish the Church from all
other Heterodox Communities, and prove Her Infallible. The Agreement with the
Primary Doctrine, no Mark of the Church. More Mistakes and Errors discovered.
Of Mr Stillingfleets double Faith who Belieues, but not upon Divine the
Testimony, That the Books of Scripture contain Gods word in them: Yet Belieues
the Doctrine in those books, to be Divine.

1. IN the next place, Mr Stillingfleet labors to solue his Adversaries main
Argument, the Substance whereof The substance of the Argument.
is. As Christ and his Apostles proved themselves Oracles sent from God by
their works, Signs, and Miracles; Again as the Primitive Christians induced by
such Signs believed Christ and the Apostles upon their own Testimony to be
infallible Teachers: So we having ever had the very like Works, Signs, and
Miracles manifest in the Church, are prudently induced to believe Her as an
Infallible Oracle, upon her own Infallible Testimony.

2. To solue this plain and pressing Argument, one of these What Is required to
solue the Difficulty.
two things must be done: Either a Disparity is to be given between Those first
Signs and Miracles of the Apostles, and the latter of the Church, or it must
be shown wherein the Inference made, is Defective or vnconcluding. Viz. That the
Church euidenced by Her Signs, is not proved God's infallible Oracle, as the
Apostles were proved by their Signs, to be infallible Teachers. I heartily
wish, any would read Mr Stillingfleet through all his long Pages of this
Subject, And afterward Gratify me so far as to Say, where or in what Paragraph
the direct Answer lies to either of these Difficulties, I would Own it as a
Singular favor, in the Interim Nothing is, or can be Answered.
give me leave to Speak truth. He Shuffles all along, Waves the main Matter,
and Answers nothing.

3. Thus he trifles. The Church of Rome is infinitely obliged to us, could we
make all good we Say. Our Attempt is Heroical and generous. What, must men be
as much obliged now to believe your Church infallible, as that Moses and Christ
were so? He wonders nothing at the Severity in our Censures of all out of our
Church, if to deny our Churches infallibility be an Offense of so high a
nature. Then he Asks. P. 129. Mere Trifles returned.
Whether the same Motives of credibility belong to our Church, by which Christ
and his Apostles showed their Testimony to be infallible? We have Answered Yea,
and proved the Assertion largely. Disc. 1. C. 7. 8. 9. And here press him to
refute our Probations; Or if he hold's them not refutable, to give a Disparity
betwixt the Apostolical, and our Churches Motives.

4. But he run's on headlong, and to slight the Devotion and Charity manifest
in the Church, talk's of our Superstitious Ceremonies, and burning of
Heretics. To what purpose are these More Parergons in Lieu of a Solid Answer.
Parergons when a Categorical Answer to the main Business is expected?? Is it
only to give a vulgar Reader Entertainment, or to withdraw all who peruse his
Book from minding where, and how he would Shift off the Difficulty? He shall
not do it, for we will follow him closely, and therefore take notice of one
great folly. P. 130. Where he pleases to Say. How much we have befooled our
selves, in attempting to prove the infallibility of our Church, in the same
manner as Christ and the Apostles proved their Infallibility. And Mark his
Proof expressed in this proofles Proposition. Insisting, Says he, on that of
Miracles as the greatest Evidence of their infallibility (he means the
Apostles) our Church cannot with any face pretend to it. Is not this Heroical
and generous only to Say we are befooled and Faceles, When we have convinced in
the Chapters To say we are befooled is no Proof.
already cited, that the Church has wrought Miracles every way equal with
those, which the Apostles wrought? What Doings are these? May men vapor thus
with their bare Assertions, whilst we Prove, and sti^l expect to have the
Arguments solued, either by Reason or Authority?

5. Page. 130. As if one still sought to divert a Reader with a deep piece of
Learning, He tells us Man's understanding because More Shifting yet.
finite cannot be in it self infallible, without receiving a participated
Infallibility from an infinite Power above it, And a tedious Discourse follows
hereupon known to every one, but what is all this Said, over and over, to our
Difficulty? Have we yet any Disparity given between the Apostles Miracles and
those which the Church Evidences, Or is our Inference already made, any way
infringed hitherto? Not a word is yet returned to either, and therefore the
Argument stand's in its vigor without reply.

6. Page. 131. He says first. The Apostles delivered not their Doctrine from
Themselves but immediately from God, and consequently their Testimony must be
owned infallible. Answ. Neither can the Church The Apostles Divinely inspired,
the Church infallibly Assisted.
without Divine Assistance deliver her Doctrine as from Herself, but from God.
As therefore the Apostles were immediately Inspired to teach as they did, so the
Church is immediately Assisted by the same Holy Ghost to define as she does, and
upon this account her Testimony must be owned infallible, For what ever reason
or Authority ascertains the one, ascertains also the other. And here we may
come to Principles if our Adversaries please The Proofs are equal
Let them euince (and it is a Truth) that the Apostles were so ^^inently
privileged, I will lay down my Proofs by Theirs, and Show by as great
Authority, that the Church has her Privilege also of Divine Assistance.

7. He Adds. It being most unreasonable to think that God would favor such
persons (the Apostles) with so extraordinary a power, who A paradox
should falsify their Message, and deceive the world. Gentle Reader consider a
little. The Apostles taught the world for a few years only. The Roman Catholic
has stood invincible, and taught Millions of Christians for sixteen Ages, If
then it be unreasonable, The Apostles taught for a Short time, and Erred not.
yea impious to think, that God could permit those first Blessed men to falsify
their message, and deceive with error for that short time; Is it not I beseech
you as highly unreasonable and impious to Judge, that an Infinite Goodness could
permit the very Church he founded, made glorious by Her Miracles and other
Signal Motives (all which Prove her favored with a Power extraordinary) to
falsify her Message, to betray Her Trust, and lead Millions of souls into
damnable error, during the vast circuit of a The Church longer, and grossly
erred.
thousand years? Consider I Say, And blush at his boldness, who dare impeach
this purest Spouse of falsehood.

8. Page. 132. He goes on. These Motives of credibility were wont to be
esteemed only the notes of Distinction of the true Church Church Motives both
distinguish and prove.
from all others, and not rational Proofs of her infallibility. Answ. They both
distinguish and prove. The Apostles were distinguished from all false Teachers,
and proved also Oracles sent from God by their Signs and Miracles, The like we
say of the Church, whose Marks and Miracles are not inferior to those the
Apostles manifested, and far more Numerous. Show us a disparity if you can, or
be silent hereafter.

9. Page. 132. I find nothing but first leave given Bellarmine, to multiply his
fifteen Notes of the Church to fifteen hundred. A sting at Bellarmine to no
purpose.
How comes this to the Purpose? Or what need is there of multiplying, when One
of those Fifteen, (and I Will tell you which it is) the Churches glorious
Miracles, has so silenced Sectaries, that none of them all has hitherto
attempted to return any better answer than this. Bellarmine thou lies't? He
Says. 2. The only certain Note of the true Church is its agreement with the
Primary foundation of it, in the Doctrine which was infallible, and attested by
miracles undoubtedly Divine. This is a strange Note or Mark, which cannot be
distinguished from the thing Marked, as the Motives of Credibility, manifestly
sensible, are distinguished from the Doctrine believed.

10. Answer therefore, Good Sr, is this Agreement with the Primitive Doctrine
its owns Self Evidence, as a Mark should be* Or, do all dissenting Parties
accord thus far, That anciently such That Is made a clear Mark
^as the Primitive Doctrine, but now is changed from it self into another new
Learning? Most evidently no. For the whole contest between the Church and Her
Adversaries (may these be ^eard) is, whether of us Profess the Primitive
Doctrine laid in the first foundation of Christianity? This point then being yet
disputable (for so Sectaries will have it) it is mere folly to make it a Mark
whereby to distinguish truth from falsehood, And there is which Sectaries must
Say, is yet disputable and obscure.
no clearing it from Improbability unless you say. Sectaries more ^i^e then the
rest of the world can exactly tell us, who those Christians are that now agree
with the Primitive Doctrine, and who dissent from it, But others as wise as
they, want faith to believe such bare Assertions without Proofs and Principles.
In a word there is no knowing what the Primitive Doctrine was, nor can any now
have infallible certainty of the Apostles* Miracles, without a Church actually
in Being, and Infallible.

11. He says. 3. If our Doctrine be repugnant to what was Originally (...)ered
by the Founder of the Christian Church, our Society is not the Conditional
Propositions, here Proofless
Christian Church. Answ. No more. Sr, is Yours, if it be repugnant. But To what
purpose are these Iss, and conditional Propositions? when Proofs are expected
from Accusers. Prove you if you can, but do it upon sound Principles, that our
Doctrine is repugnant to that which was Originally delivered, you are
Conque^our, and we no more Catholics, but, Sr, a hundred more of your Volumes
will never Euince this.

12. He demands. 4. whether we cannot conceive a Church should A fallible
Church cannot be Consonant to Christ's Doctrine.
be Consonant to the Doctrine of Christ, without being infallible? Answ. No
truly. It Is impossible and here is the Reason, because in a less space then
one Age, there would be as many Religions in such a Church, as there are Towns
or villages in it, And perhaps more. And is not this manifest in England, where
almost every year we have a new Religion coined? Therefore to Imagine a Society
of men united rogether in the belief of Christ's infallible Doctrine, without an
infallible Oracle to teach, is a mere Chimera* O, but every Man in this
fallible Society is bound to take care of his soul, and to believe the
infallible Doctrine of Christ. I Answer. If to take care of his Soul
necessarily* implies the Belief of Christ's infallible Doctrine, it is
impossible to take that care, because he can have no infallible Assurance of
Christ's Doctrine, without a Church which teaches it infallibly. Hereof enough is
said above.

13. Page. 134. He desires to have such Miracles wrought as may convince
Infidels, as to the point of the Churches infallibility. Answ. He has all he
can desire. The Blind se. A Parallel of Miracles.
The Dumb speak, the Deaf hear, The Dead rise up to life again were our
Saviors own Miracles, and convinced Infidels, but these are our Churches
likewise, as is largely proved. Disc. 2. C. 8. What would the man have more?

14. Page. 135. To his no little disgrace, without any Proof at all, he
scornfully slights that evident and most known Miracle An Evident Miracle
slighted.
wrought at Zaragosa in Spain. But enough of this above. Disc. 2. C. 9. Here I
can add, having it from a right Honorable Person yet living, who heard His
Majesty Charles the first Say, in the presence of many others. The cure of that
young Man at Zaragosa was certain. Some hereupon Proposing a further Question,
whether it could be thought a Miracle? His Majesty Answered be it as you will,
the thing was done, The leg cut off and buried, was certainly restored again.

15. In the same Page he Questions whether the Motives we produce belong only
to our Church? But grant, Says he, they do belong, its hard to find the
connection between them and Infallibility. We have Answered to the first. No
Society of men can show the like Motives, and therefore urge Mr Stillingfleet
to produce his Evidence, That is, To prove they The Conne^ion between Miracles
and Infallibility euinced.
belong to any other Society, But to the Roman Catholic Church only. The other
point concerning the Connection, Nicodemus a Prince of the Jews. John. 3. V. 2.
long since cleared. Rabbi we know thou art come a Master or Teacher from God,
for no man can do these Signs which thou dos't, unless God be with him. Was
then our Savior proved by the works and the Miracles he did, a Master sent
from God to teach? And did these Signs convince reason, that God was with him
when he taught? None can deny it. Therefore none can doubt', but that He was
also proved infallible by Virtue of His wonders, And consequently the connection
between them and infallibility hold's good. But The true Inference.
the Church (and here is our Inference) Evidences the very like Signs above
the force of nature, therefore reason concludes that She also is proved
Infallible. Wherefore, Mr Stillingfleet is either obliged to find a flaw in the
consequence, or to give a Disparity between our Church-Motiues, and those other
Primitive, which he never goes about to do.

16. I meet with nothing in His. 136. Page, but loud untruths Another Parergon
to divert the Reader.
concerning our Doctrine of Penance, as if we indulged sin here, and yet gave
men hope of Heaven hereafter. It is a Calumny (every one knows we teach no
such Doctrine) and ^n this place a mere Parergon besides. I therefore slight it,
and take notice of another straying out of the way. P. 137. where he Speak's
thus. The Principles of any Conclusion, must be ^f more credit then the
Conclusion it self. Therefore if the Articles ^f Faith, The Trinity and
Resurrection be the Conclusions, And the Principles by which they are proved be
only Ecclesiastical Tradition, it ^ust needs follow, That the Tradition of the
Church is more infallible then the Articles of faith, if the Faith we have of
those Articles, should be finally resolved into the veracity of the Churches
Testimony.

17. This Difficulty not well digested, either Proves nothing, or makes every
Resolution of faith void, For suppose I believe Every Resolution made null by
this Objection.
the Trinity because God has revealed the Mystery plainly in Holy Scripture. I
Ask whether God's Testimony, supposed the Principle of believing, be more
infallible then the Trinity, which is believed upon it, here called the
Conclusion? Say, The Divine Testimony is more Infallible, I Will Affirm the very
same of the Churches Proposition, For what the Church speak's, God speak's.
Answer No. And give this reason, Because we believe the Testimony and the
Mystery attested, by one Indivisible certain Act of Faith, which tend's
infallibly upon both these Objects at once, without making Conclusions, The
difficulty ceases. And hereby you se How the Churches Testimony is the Clearer
Principle.
first. How the Churches Testimony is a Principle to the thing* believed, For
every one knows, that a Formal Object compared with its Material^ which lies
in darkness, is the greater Light, and has the pre-eminence to be immediately
known For it Self, and not for another: Whereas, the material Object would
still remain in a State of obscurity, and never be yielded to, but by the
Energy of its formal Motive. In this sense therefore, the vltima ratio
assentiendi, or formal Object may be well called the more certain Principle,
Though as I now said, the* Assent be indiuisibly terminated upon both Objects
infallibly.

18. You se. 2. Where the mistake of our Adversary lies. He Supposes faith
generated by Discourse. First that we believe The Mistake discouerd.
the Trinity (for example) upon one Principle. Viz. The Churches Tradition or
Testimony, and then descend lower to believe the same Mystery upon God's
Revelation distinct from the Churches Testimony, As if, forsooth, the Churches
Testimony were an ^xtrinsecal condition preparing all to believe upon the
Divine Revelation (This must be intended or nothing is said to the Purpose) now
we utterly deny the Supposition, and Say when we believe the Trinity, or any
other particular Mystery upon the Churches Testimony, or rather upon this
revealed truth: God speaks so by the Church, We then elicite not two distinct
Acts one depending on the other, but with one One Indivisible tendency in Faith,
indivisible tendency of Faith believe at once, the Formal and Material Object
together, That is, we believe God speaks the truth by the Church, which is to
say: we Assent to it because he speak's it, by his own infallible Oracle.

19. This one syllog^sm clear's all. What the Church* Says is true. The Church
Says God has revealed the Trinity. Ergo that is true. We resolve the Mayor, or
first Proposition thus. What the Church says i^ true. That is. What God
speaking by the Church says, is true. But God speaking by the Church Says the
Mystery of the Trinity is, Ergo, That Is true. Where you see, we only Discourse
(could Faith be so generated which some Divines Assert) from the Formal object,
or from Gods Revelation, to the Material believed. Now Mr Stillingfleet makes
this Sense of the Mayor Proposition, (and here lies his Error) that the Church
Says of Her self, not including Gods Revelation, is The Error more Clearly
pointed at.
an act of Faith and true, But the Church of her own sole Authority says, God
revealed the Trinity. Ergo I must first believe the Mystery by one act of Faith
upon the Churches Testimony, as a Preparatiue to believe it better, upon Gods
pure Revelation, which is another distinct Formal Object from the Churches
Testimony. This Discourse is implicatory. First because the Churches Testimony,
if separated from the Divine Revelation, can ground no act of Faith. 2. If
which is true, it only cooperates with, or consummates the ancient Revelation
in order to the Belief of any Mystery, it can help nothing to bring in a
Conclusion, wholly as obscure as it self is. That word, Conueyance, beguiled Mr
Stillingfleet, for he thought, if the Churches Testimony conueyes unto us the
ancient Revelation, What beguiled thy Adversary.
it must be excluded from being infallible, and much more from being a joint
Motive with it. Herein lies his Error.

20. It is difficult enough, To Say what He would be at in his two next pages.
Some times he will have no want of Evidence in faith, as to the Reason inducing
to believe, And if he means, That what we Assent to by faith must be evidently
Credible before we believe, its a Truth, but if he will have the very act of
Faith elicited to be evident, the Apostle. Heb. 11. 1. Faith implies Obscurity.
contradict's him. For Faith is an Argument of things not appearing. Sometimes
again he says, the Assent is not requried to what is obscure and Vneuident,
And then to mollify the Proposition, add's. But what is evident to us And
theresore credible. In a word, Obscure Doctrine.
if he intend's thus much only, That the eu^dence of credibility precedes the
in^^dent act of Faith, all is well. But by one Instance we may guess where he
err's. The manner of the Hypostatical union, Says he, is to us ineuident,
whereunto God requires not our Assent, but to the truth of the thing it self.
Answer, good Sr, Is the truth of the Hypostatical union in it self, or of the
Trinity evident to us? Where lies that Evidence? The truth of the Trinity
evident to no Belieuer.
Or upon what Principle is it grounded? Heretics are found that for the very
difficulty of these ineuident Mysteries deny both, And the best Orthodox
Christians ingenuously Profess, they so far Surpass all natural capacities,
That there is no assenting to either but only by an humble submissiue Faith,
which essentially implies Obscurity. If therefore what you say bo true. We may
lawfully suspend our Assent, where God gives not evidence of the thing Assented
to, you may Consequently suspend your Assent, and neither believe the Trinity,
nor the Incarnation.

21. Page. 140. He demands why we believe the Resurrection of the dead? We
Answer because God reueal's it. An Objection Proposed.
But Questioned again why we believe, that God has revealed it? We Answer
because the infallible Church says God did speak it, whereby it is plain that
though our first Reply be from God's Authority, yet the last Resolution of our
faith is made into the infallibility of the Churches Testimony: For though God
had revealed it, yet if this Revelation were not attested by the Church'es
infallible Testimony, we should not have sufficient ground to believe it,
Therefore the Churches infallibility must be more credible, then the
Resurrection of the dead.

22. To give a Satisfactory Answer, please to hear what I demand also. Mr
Stillingfleet belieues that our Savior is Answered by Scripture it self.
the true Messiah, because Christ spoke the Truth with his own sacred mouth.
John. 4. 26. And if he belieues Scripture, He Assents again to that truth upon
S. John's Testimony, And so firmly belieues it, that if the Evangelist (or some
other of like authority) had not wrote it, he could not have believed S. John's
Testimony, or that our Savior Spoke those words. Here is our solution. God
long since said the dead shall rise, but this Ancient Revelation being remote
from us, (if solely considered) cannot move us to believe the truth, unless an
Infallible Oracle Ascertain us that God once spoke it, just as S. John assures
all that Christ said. I am the Messiah. Ask now ^hy Mr Stillingfleet belieues,
that our Savior uttered those ^ords? He will Answer, God speaking by S. John
an Infallible An Application of the Instance clear in Scripture.
Oracle, Affirms it. So I say God speaking by the Church, an Infallible Oracle,
affirm's the Resurrection of the dead. O, but independently of Church Authority
we know the resurrection is revealed in Scripture, Contrariwise we know nothing
of our Saviors words, but from S. John's Testimony. Answ. we know indeed the
Resurrection is asserted in a Book called Scripture, But that the Assertion is
Divine, or uttered by Eternal Truth, we have no more Infallible certainty
without the Churches Testimony, Then if any vulgar Samaritan, without Divine
Assistance, had said. Christ spoke those words. I am the Messiah.

23. By what is now briefly touched you se first, That as our Saviors own
words and S. John's reflex Testimony upon them, concur Indiuisibly to the Faith
of these Adversaries; So the revealed Verity of the Resurrection in Scripture,
And the The ancient Revelation and the Churches reflex Testimony
Churches reflex Testimony which infallibly Ascertains us that it is revealed,
may well indiuisibly concur as one complete Motive to our faith, whereof more
hereafter. I say indiuisibly; And therefore this Faith vltimatly resolved,
relies not first upon Scripture only, as our Adversary conceiues, without any
relation to the Church, and then rest's upon the Churches Concur indiuisibly
to* Faith.
Testimony, as upon a distinct Formal Object, but by one simple Tendency it
pitches on both together.

24. You se. 2. Its hard to Say what Mr Stillingfleet would have, when he tells
us. This Principle. The Church is infallible, must be more credible then the
Resurrection of the Dead. If We clearly distinguis^ what our Adversary
Confound's.
he mean's, the Churches Testimony is to us in this present State, the more
known and nearest Motive, whereupon the Faith of that Article is grounded, we
easily Assent. But if he think's we must first Assent to Scripture, which
asserts the Resurrection and own that as Divine, or the only Motive of Faith
without all Church Authority attesting it to be Divine, He err's not knowing
our Doctrine: For we Say, no Scripture can be infallible An improper Speech.
assented to as Divine independently of the Churches Testimony. Again those
words. More Credible, are improper, if applied to the Formal Object of Faith,
For the Formal Object terminates Belief, the Credibility whereof goes before,
and is grounded on the preuious Motives inducing to believe.

Whether we Square Circles in our Resolution of Faith* The other mentioned
Points in the Title of the Chapter, discussed. Upon what ground those Articles
called the fundamentals of Faith are believed, in the Opinion of Sectaries.
25. In many following Pages we have little but that the Churches Infallible
Testimony must be called the Formal Object of Faith, whereof something is said
above, And you shall have more hereafter.

26. P. 149. He thinks we Argue like men squaring Circles, when on the one side
we make Scripture obscure, yet on the other, give it light enough to prove the
Churches infallibility, And then he talk's of an Apocalyptical key hanging at
the Churches Scripture Proved Divine Conuinces the Churches Infallibility.
girdle, able to unlock all the Secrets in it. To the first I have Answered.
Thus much Supposed, that Scripture is proved Divine, we have so great light
from the several Passages thereof, to convince the Churches Infallibility, that
no glosses of Sectaries shall ever obscure them. To the Ieer of the Clauis
Apocalyptica I Answer. Some one or other must unlock those high secrets, when
it is evident innumerable Heretics by a wrong key wrest Gods word to most
pernicious Senses. The Question is whether you, Sr, or the Church must rurn the
key?

27. Page. 152. After thanks given for our Coleworts so often served ^y, Those
mute Persons, the good Motives of credibility; He is Brisque Ie^rs and empty
words
and in earnest resolute, to solue our Argument, Asking before hand: Whether it
be not en^ugh to be in a Circle our selves, but must ^eed's bring the Apostles
into it also? Reflect I beseech you. We said above, that the Apostles induced
by the Signal works and Miracles of our Savior, Assented to his sacred Doctrine
as most infallible. In like manner, The Primitive Christians induced by the
works and Miracles of the Apostles believed them to be infallible The force of
our Argument
Oracles. Therefore we also in this present State, having Motives and Miracles
of the same weight and Evidence in the Roman Catholic Church, Believe with a
firm Assent of Faith that She is God's Oracle, and her Doctrine most infallible.
The short Answer to all this (says Mr Stillingfleet) is, That the ground why
the Christians did Assent to the Apostles Doctrine as true, was because God
Wholly waued.
gave sufficient Evidence, that their Testimony was infallible in such things,
where such infallibility was requisite. Pray, Consider well, whether this be
not a gliding, or rather a plain running away from the Difficulty? We have
urged all this while the Parity between the Churches Motives, and those of the
Apostles, We have proved and yet plead, That the Evidence is a like in both.
The Churches most manifest Signs are. The blind se. The lame walk. The dead
rise, Devils are dispossesed etc. And these termed by you unsavory Coleworts,
and mute good Things, were the Apostles Signs also. Are not you therefore
obliged in all law of Disputation, What all law of Disputing require^.
either to prove, and upon sound Principles indeed, That we falsely appropriate
such Motives and Miracles to the Church, Or, if you cannot disparage so
illustrious an Evidence, to show a fault in this Inference? The Church is known
as well by her Signs, to be an infallible Oracle.

28. Now mark how we are put off with half an Answer. God ^y you, gave
sufficient Evidence, that the Apostles Testimony was infallible. None doubt's
it. But Say on, what want do you find of the very like Evidence in the Church?
Her Miracles are as manifest, Her Conuersions as Numerous (and more) Her fame
as renowned, Her name as Catholic, finally might we use your scornful
language, Her Motives (no mute Persons) speak Nothing like an Answer given.
aloud, and Her Colewarts are every whit as good, as those were the Apostles
served up. To this you Answer not a word, but first tell us with your
Adversary, that the Apostles confirmed their Doctrine with Signs that followed,
by which Signs all their Hears were bound to aknowledge them for infallible
Oracles; And it is very true. But we prove the like Signs accompanied and
followed the Church in all Ages, therefore her Hearers are also bound to
acknowledge Her an infallible Oracle also. In this place you should have spoken
to the Cause and Showed, Why, or upon what Account, those first Signs were so
powerful to Prove the Apostles infallible, And these latter of the Church less
pregnant to prove Her infallible. This, and it is the main Point, you wisely
wave For it is unanswerable, and most frigidly tell us The main point pressed
again.
P. 153. You must be excused as to what follows. viz. That those same Motives
moved the Primitive Christians and us in our respective Times, to believe the
Church. And why not dear Sr? Give us the Disparity, and we have done, but you
cannot. If therefore it which cannot be Answered.
be a bold Attempt to deny the Evidence of the Church we plead for, which. S.
Austin. Epist. 166. compares with the Sun manifest to all, vsque ad terminos ad
terrae, To the last bounds of the earth, it is impossible to weaken the force
of our Inference, when we Say. The Church is proved by her Motives an
infallible Oracle. You next Term this Expression, The formal Object of faith,
a Coccysm, whereby it appears how little you are versed in School-Diuinity.

29. It seems in the Page now cited, your Adversary vrges this Argument, Ad
hominem. If a Church be acknowledged An Argument urged, ad hominem.
infallible in Fundamentals, The last reason why you believe it infallible,
must rest upon this Principle, That the present Church does Infallibly witness
so much by her Tradition. To this you return a most dissatisfactory Answer, in
these words. When you Ask ^s (Protestants) why we believe such an Article to
be fundamental, As f^r an Instance. Christ will give Eternal life to them that
believe him, The Sectaries Answer.
^e Answer not because the Church which is infallible in fundamentals Delieuers
it to be so, For that were to Answer Idem per Idem; But we ^peal to that Common
Reason which is in Mankind, whether, if the Doctrine of Christ be true, This can
be any other than a fundamental Article of it, it being that without which the
whole Design of Christian Religion comes to nothing.

30. Good Reader ioyn here two things together. Mr Stillingfleet believes (and
Mark the word) such an Article to be Fundamental, not upon Scripture or Church
Authority, for neither makes the Distinction between fundamentals and not
fundamentals; highly dissatisfactory, and why?
And again, before he has proved by any infallible Authority that such a
Distinction in his Sense ought to be made, He brings in the common Reason of
mankind to Judge in a matter, which Catholics Say is de Subiecto non
supponente, not capable of Judicature, Because there are no Things in being as
he call's fundamentals, distinguisable from others, of a lower Rank. Moreover
(And take notice of this) He belieues such an Article to be a truth because God
reueal's it, and belieues it to be a Fundamental Faith stand's not upon two
disserent Motive Divine and humane.
Truth upon this Motive, that Common reason hold's it so. Does not therefore
this one act of Faith, rely upon two heterogeneal Formal Object? As Faith; it
is built upon God's Vera^ity, as Fundamental Faith, it stand's tottering upon
man's fallible reason.

31. What follows is as bad or worse. It is sufficient, Say you, That the
Church does deliver from the Consent of universal Tradition, the infallible
Rule of Faith (which to be sure, contain's all things Fundamental in it) though
She never meddles with the deciding what Points are fundamental, and what not.
Pray you, Sr, Answer. Who shall dare to meddle with those fundamentals, were
they Supposable in Worse Doctrine yet.
your sense, if the Church does not? What must your private Judgment or mine,
decide here? Quo iure? by what law or Authority? whilst Scripture says
nothing, and you will not permit the Church to meddle in the Business, were
there any such thing to be meddled with, Therefore you leave all to men's
private Opinions, to make what they please fundamental, and exclude from
Fundamentals every thing which likes them not. And here is your fumbling way of
Believing no man knows what, whilst Their broken kind of Faith.
the Church tells you, that every thing She Proposes, as an Article of faith,
is Fundamental. This impregnable Principle we establish in Lieu of your loose
Faith, and broken way of Arguing also. Lastly you are out in the main
Supposition, that Scripture only is the Rule of faith, But hereof* enough is
said in the first Discourse.

32. The next Thing I meet with worth any Notice, is. P. 158. Whereunto we also
ioyn his. 170. Page. It seems D. Lawd before Mr Stillingfleet wrote his
Account, was urged to give a The main Point concerning Scripture, and its
sense, examined.
satisfactory Reply to the Question. Why, or upon what ground Protestants
believe the Books of Scripture to be the Word of God? Scripture alone Says
not which Books are Canonical, much less declares their Sense in matters
controuerted. Sectaries reject the Churches Infallible Authority And say, She
is not to tell us which Books are Scripture, or, what their sense is, though
admitted as God's word. Is it not very reasonable think ye to A reasonable
Demand.
demand upon what Ground these men stand, when either they believe Scripture to
be the word of God, or give an Assent to the particular doctrins contained in
the book? For clearing these difficulties, you shall have Mr Stillingfleets own
word's P. 170.

33. This Question, Says he, how we know Scripture to be Scripture, may import
two things. First, how we know that all those books contain God's word in
them? Or secondly how we know, the The substance of Mr Stillingfleets Answer,
Doctrine Contained in these Books to be Divine? If you then ask me, whether it
be necessary that I believe with such a Faith, as is built upon Divine
Testimony, that these Books called Scripture, contain the Principles of the
Jewish and Christian Religion in them, which we call God's word, I do and shall
deny it (viz. That This belief is built on any Divine Testimony) and my reason
is, because I have sufficient ground for such an Assent without any Divine
Testimony. But if you ask me ^^ what ground, I believe the Doctrine to be Divine
which is contained in those books; I then Answer affirmatively, on a Divine
Testimony, because God has given abundant Evidence, that this Doctrine was of
Divine Revelation.

34. Here are two Assertions. The first is, That the Books of Scripture contain
God's word in them, And this cannot believed upon any Divine Testimony. Thus
much granted, It follows ineuitably. Though one should pertinaciously reject
the whole Drewes an ill Consequence after it.
Canon of the old and new Testament, or absolutely affirm, These Bookt, and all
the particular Sentences contained in them, are not God's written word, He
could not yet for such a perverse Denial, be accounted an Heretic. I Prove
it. None can incurr the guilt of Heresy, but he who denies a Truth which God
has revealed, or which stand's firm upon a Divine Testimony. But he that denies
the Books of Scripture to contain Heresy not incurred, though one denied the
Books of Scripture to be Divine.
God's Word in them, renounceth no Truth revealed by Almighty God, For, Says
our Adversary, this is no revealed Truth, nor stand's firm upon any Divine
Testimony, Therefore he is no Heretic. Now further, if he may without the sin
of Heresy deny these Books to be Divine, Seeing God never said so, It is
impossible to believe the Doctrine therein contained to be Divine, upon any
Divine Testimony, yet Mr Stillingfleet thinks he may.

35. My Reason is. No man vnderstand's by the Books of Scripture which contain
the Principles or Doctrine of the Jewish and Christian Religion, to be merely
the Paper or Cover of the Books, but he must understand, if he rightly
conceiues What is to be understood by the Books of Scripture?
what Scripture is, the very Principles and Doctrine contained in those
writings. For example. Here is one Principle in the old Testament. Genesis 17. 4.
God made a Conuenant with Abraham and his seed for ever. Another in the New.
Joan. 1. 14. The Word is made Flesh. Answer I beseech you? Can any man truly
affirm, that these two Principles (the like is of innumerable others contained
in Scripture) stand not firm upon God's infallible Testimony, when It Is
manifest, the whole Christian world is obliged to believe them, with a Faith
grounded upon the same infallible Testimony, that revealed them? Principles of
Religion denied.
It was Therefore no little Oversight in Mr Stillingfleet to Speak here of the
Principles of the Jewish and Christian Religion, contained in a Book called
Scripture, And positiuely to Assert, these cannot be believed upon a Divine
Testimony. This certainly is not Defensible.

36. Some may yet Reply. Two things are here to be considered. First the bare
letter or outward words of Scripture, and these we believe not upon Divine
Revelation, but have them from universal Tradition, or the consent of Nations.
An Answerto such as here diflinguish
The second, is the Sense or Divine Doctrine which these outward Signs or
exterior words Convey to us. Now this Sense or the interior Doctrine of
Scripture, as contradistinct from the bare outward letter, we purely believe
upon the Divine Testimony, casting the Assent given to the Words upon Between
the bare words* and the sense.
other foreign Principles. I believe Mr Stillingfleet elsewhere Says some such
thing as this, or must say it. Contra. 1. The mere outward words though pure,
are no Books of Scripture, And as separated from the Sense and interior
Doctrine, are neither Principles of the Jewish or Christian Religion, nor in
rigor God's word, For God never spoke nor inspired others to write words, but
he jointly conveyed with them his own Sense, and Doctrine also. And Methinks its
very hard to believe this Doctrine. This is my beloved Son as God's sacred
words, and not to believe those very words to come from God, upon the same
Divine Motive which Support's the Doctrine. Moses, says our Savior. John. 5.
47. Has written of Words are Divine.
me. And if you will not believe his Writings, how will you believe my Words?
These outward Signs therefore, the very words of truth, called by the Apostle.
1 Thessalonians. 2. 13. Verbum auditus Dei. words of hearing, or heard, are in very
deed the Words of God; and consequently may well, where none can rationally
doubt of their Purity, be assented to upon the same Divine Testimony, with the
Doctrine contained in them.

37. The Reason is. God would have been the same Verity he now is, although he
had revealed nothing, that therefore which moves or determin's Belieuers to
assent to the truths revealed is not only his increated Authority, but the
sincere external Revelation with it also. These Two jointly The First Veritas
Speaking is the Object of Faith.
concur as one Motive, whence it is that the First Verity, as Speaking, or
Revealing, may be rightly called the Formal Object of Faith. I know Divines
vary about this Question. Whether the external Proposition be a partial Motive
with Gods internal Verity, or only a necessary condition whereby that Verity, (
the vltimate ground of faith) is applied to Belieuers, herein much may be de
Nomine: But none of them all Say, The exterior Revelation is assented to upon
one Principle which is not Divine, and that the Doctrine conveyed by it, is
believed upon another most Divine and infallible. This is a nouelty. What
Sectaries should grand.
Neither do I see, how Sectaries can find that Luster, that Majesty and
Divinity, so often talked of in the purest words of holy Writ, if they be not
owned as God's true words upon his Divine Testimony.

38. Let us now briefly examine Mr Stillingfleet's Proposition, without
depending on what he teaches or must teach, concerning the belief of words
separated from the Doctrine. We believe, Says he, the Doctrine contained in the
Books of The Doctrine in it self examined.
Scripture upon a Divine Testimony, because God has given abundant Evidence,
that this Doctrine was (or is) of Divine Revelation. Here are three things
Distinguishable. The Doctrine Believed, The Incarnation for example. The
Testimony revealing the matter bebelieued, and finally the Evidence whereby
that Testimony is brought to light. Now all our difficulty is concerning the
Evidence of this Divine Testimony whereupon we believe any Mystery, and we Ask
from whence Mr Stillingfleet takes his Evidence (He has you se abundance of it)
wherewith to prove that God ever Said. The Divine word was made flesh?

39. The Question seems reasonable, because this Testimony which all ought to
believe, and consequently does Exist, is not it is own Self evidence, nor can
it be euidenced by another Testimony of Scripture (wholly as obscure to us)
that God spoke The Divine Testimony, not its own Self evidence.
that Truth, For so we should go in insinitum and Prove one dark Testimony by
another equally as dark. Infallible Tradition not written, and the infallible
Authority of the Church our Adversaries reject, And may Say, Both (though
admitted) are Objects of faith, and consequently under that Notion appear as
little Evident to us, as the Scriptures Testimony is, we desire to prove.
Therefore whateuer is rightly called Evidence in this matter, whereby all would
discover an obscure Testimony (not yet proved God's word) must of necessity be
extrinsecal to the Testimony it self, and if extrinsick, no other Evidence can
Therefore the Evidence of its Credibility must be taken from extrinfick Motives.
Possibly be had, but that which arises from the known Motives of Credibility,
For by these the Church is proved an Oracle no less Infallible, then those
first Masters of Christianity were. Wherefore Mr Stillingfleet is constrained
whether he will or no, if he gives in any thing like Evidence, to make use of
these good mute things the Motives of Credibility, which he scornfully call's
Coleworts too often served up, or shall never prove that God once said. The
Divine word is made flesh. Which is to Say, He must first evidence a Church,
before he Proves those words Divine.

40. It may be replied; His Evidence for the whole Book of Scripture and every
particular sentence in it, is taken from the fallible Tradition of all called
Christians, and others also no Christians. I Say fallible, For he owns none
Divine or Infallible. Tallible Tradition no sufficient Evidence.
Contra. 1. The Scripture was acknowledged Divine, before men agreed so
universally that it was Divine, Tradition therefore, which is rather an Effect
of our Christian Belief concerning Scripture, then a proof of it, presupposes
some other more clear foregoing Evidence, whereby the Book was anciently owned
as Divine. This we enquire after, and very reasonably; because the Chinese
have a universal Tradition for their Bible, and the Turks for their Alcoran one
also general, yet such a humane, fallible and weak Tradition proves not those
Books to be Divine. Contra. 2. And here is an An Argument ad hominem.
Argument ad Hominem. If Mr Stillingfleet belieues the Testimonies of Scripture
Infallible, upon fallible Tradition which may be false, he makes his Conclusion
concerning the belief of every Passage in Holy Writ, far more sure then the
Premises are which lead in the Conclusion, And this Doctrine he reiect's above
as improbable. Contra. 3. He has neither universal Sectaries have no universal
fallible tradition for their Seripture.
Tradition for the Protestants Canon of Scripture (disowned by more then half
of the Christian world) much less for its true Sense, wherein dissenting
Christians so much vary, that none of them all can Say upon humane or fallible
Tradition, what the true meaning of the Holy Ghost is, and consequently this
very Tradition, as also Mr Stillingfleets double Resolution of Faith into the
Books of Scripture, and into the Doctrine, or Sense, come just to nothing.

41. Page. 158. He Argues the whole Church consist's of men subject to error,
That is, All the Parts are liable to mistake, Ergo the whole Church cannot
possibly be infallible, A faslacious Objection Solued.
in and of it self. Answ. Lay open these covered Terms, In and Of it self,
The Argument loses force. I Say therefore, Men merely considered as nature has
made them fallible in order to believe Supernaturally, have In and Of
themselves no immunity from error, yet taken under another Notion, as they
constitute a Church, they are infallible. That is. There was, is, and will ever
be a Church Teaching, and a Church Taught, Infallible, So that all shall never
err in Faith. You may easily reioyn. This or that man, these or those
Multitudes may wilfully abandon Christ's Doctrine. Too true God knows: And if
so, They are no more members of the Church, but Heretics or Infidels. Again.
If you run Some may err All the Church, cannot.
over the rest of Christians remaining Orthodox (whether Pastors or People) and
Say these may also fall from Faith; I Answer Some may, All cannot, because God
has promised ever to preserve a Church in Being, I mean faithful Teachers and
faithful Belieuers, to the end of the world. And must not Sectaries acknowledge
thus much, who hold a Church infallible in Fundamentals, which upon that
account cannot wholly err?

42. Mr Stillingfleet Answer's, Though the Authority of the whole Church be not
Divine, yet she cannot err in Fundamentals, because she is tied to the use of
means. Say, Good Sir, who ties Her to this infa(...)ble use of Mean's, if the
whole Moral Body and every Member of it be fallible? Grant that God by his
special Assistance ties Her fast, She is for that reason infallible, and must
Use the means: Take from Her divine Assistance, and Say She is only guided by
the erring Conceptions of fallible men, She may easily swerue from the Means,
and revolt from Christ. And thus the fallacy is cleared. You, The fallacy
discouerid,
Sr, Suppose the Infallibility must be taken from the right use of means,
whercas the contrary is true. Viz. Therefore S^e rightly uses the means,
because She is antecedently preserved infallible by Divine Assistance. You
suppose again, that all the Parts of this They rightly use the Means, because
antecedently made Infallible.
Assisted Church are fallible, And we Say no, For as long as they continue
members of it; So long as the Pastors lawfully commissioned teach in Christ's
name, and the faithful believe their infallible Doctrine (There will be ever
such a Church on earth) So long they are all infallible. If any fall from
Faith, whether few or many, These, eo ipso, cease to be Members of this
Mystical Body, yet the Church fail's not, for the failing of some, infer's not
a possible Failure in all. The want of this Distinction caused your error.

43. And thus having removed such weak difficulties out of the way (thought
great ones in that 5th chapter) which to an Difficulties removed, we proceed to
the Resolution.
an unwary Reader may seem to Obstruct the Catholic Resolution of Faith, We
will in the following Discourse, first Premise some Principles much auailing to
conceive the easiest Resolution, and next declare where the chiefest difficulty
lies which Mr Stillingf. has not done, and finally endeavor to solue it,
without the least danger of any vicious Circle. Afterward we shall prove that
Protestants have no Faith at all to resolve.

CHAP. VII.
Necessary Principles premised to the Resolution of Faith. God can Speak in a
Language proper to Himself. His external language is twofold. When God speaks
not immediately, He must be heard by his Oracle. What the exact Resolution of
Faith implies?

1. THe first Principle. God who is an Infinite verity and speak's not to
stones, can by a Divine Language proper to himself, so make his interior mind
and sincere God's proper language
meaning known to rational creatures, that all upon hearing His voice may
without hesitation indubitably, Say. Thus God Judges, this be Speak's, which
granted. All are obliged both readily and firmly to yield assent to so great a
Majesty for his own Authority. Known to all.
The reason hereof is clear. If God can speak to Mortals, and for this end that
he be understood, there arises an obligation in every one to believe him
without fear or doubt, Or in case it be impossible after all humane industry
used, to learn what he speak's, none can absolutely believe him.

2. A. 2. Principle. Then (and not otherwise) this external Language is
certainly known to come from God, when it is spoken in his name, and so fairly
appears by its own Signatures, Luster, and Wonders, to proceed from him, That
all must confess an infinite Goodness cannot permit, either Devil or false
Prophet to use the like way of Speaking, I mean by Signs peculiar How this
Divine Language is known to proceed from God?
to God, and withal to utter a falsehood in his name: For were this possible, we
infringe the greatest Evidence which Christianity has, and must Say, though
Christ our Lord and his Apostles Significantly spoke to all in God's name by
their wonders, and Miracles, Yet neither Jews nor Gentiles could be obliged
(after a clear discovery of them) to believe that they were sent from God, To
teach the world.

3. Now because this external Language is twofold, First. Private and
Immediate. 2. Public and Mediate, both for our better Satisfaction are to be
declared. Concerning the first. Imagine By one Example, G^ds immediate way of
speaking,
that one like another Mofes were in a Desert, and saw a Bush burn, yet not
consumed, Drawing near he hear's one Speak out of the flame, and Asking who it
is? it is Answered. I am God that speak's, and command thee to believe and
deliver to all what I Say, And to Evidence that I am God, I fore-tel thee now
things, which shall happen in thy days. Besides thou shall see these is
declared.
wonderful Signs to confirm this Truth, that I Speak. Put thy hand into thy
bosom, it shall become leperous, and presently The language known to proceed
from God* And why?
pure again, Cast thy rod upon the, ground I Will make it a Serpent, and without
delay turn it into what it was before. And if these Signs move thee not, look
into the next Thicket, there is one lies dead, barbarously slain by his
Enemies, this man I will raise up to life, and thy own eyes shall see the
Miracle. For these wonders therefore, thou must believe, I am God who speak's,
and know it belongs to my Providence not to permit such a signalized Language
to pass from me, unless it were mine. Thus we have Gods private and immediate
way of speaking.

4. Hereupon this retired man leaves his Solitude, goes abroad, and publishes
to all what he has heard and seen, but yet gain's no credit. He then tells his
incredulous Auditors, God has sent him as a Messenger to speak in his name, and
proves his Commission The way of Speaking by another.
by working strange Wonders. He cures the sick, dispossesses Devils, raises the
Dead, which done, the most obdurate hearts Assent to what he teaches, and
believe he is no Impostor, but a Messenger indeed sent from God, For none, as
that Prince amongst the Jews argued above John. 3. 1. can say he comes from
God, and work such wonders, unless God be with him. And this is God's public
way of speaking by another.

5. A. 3. Principle. Whoeuer grant's that God can speak what we are obliged to,
if God ^peak's not immediately.
to man by an Oracle distinct from himself, must also (if so great a Majesty
pleases not to impart his truths immediately) hold it Obligatory, to hear the
Mediate Language of that Oracle, whereby God speak's.

6. Imagine now, you had an earnest Seeker after Truth, a mere Stranger to
Christ, yet thoughtful of a long Eternity, that look's about him, and is
resolved to find out what God has spoken by the best Oracles. He read's
Aristotle, Plato, and the like ancient Philosophers, And ponders all most
diligently. What How a Zealous Inquirer after ^tuth, proceed's?
follows? Some few Sparks of light he finds there, but so mixed with darkness
and error, that the ill Luster of it, leaves him quite dissatisfied. Perhaps
he may hope to learn more from Mahomet's Alcoran. Worse Success here. For no
sooner has he the Book in his hands, but the impudent lies, the horrid
Impostures, the filth and contradictions discovered there, so disquiet He
meet's first with profane learning.
his troubled soul, that be curses the Book, And rightly Conclud's so foul a
language, could never come from God. Inquiring moreover who this Mahomet was?
He learn's, he was a Counterfeit, an Ignorant, an vnpure and most cruel man,
only prays^ble in this, that he owned One God, Though he never adored him in
Spirit and truth.

7. Thus much done, our Zealous Seeker, hears of a Book Falls next on the Holy
Scripture.
called the Holy Scripture, highly reverenced by Christians. He reads and
reioyces, for now he meets with a language beseeming God, grave, Sim^le,
familiar, yet withal serious. The Doctrine and Preceps of the book appear also
most sacred, But one doubts occurr'
doubt occurr's Concerning the strange Miracles and wonders in the old and new
Testament. So does another in no few Passages, which there Seem so obscure,
that He vnderstand's them not. Howe^er, by what is discovered, most happy Man
were He, could any Ascertain him of the truth of all now perused, And
indubitably prove it to be God's own infallible word.

8. In this restles condition, He proposes the Doubts to one He seek's
Satisfaction.
or more of Caluins followers, and Ask's how they prove the Scriptures
Divinity? They tell him the Question is as impertinent, as if he should demand,
how light my be known to be light, and not darkness, white to be white, and not
black. Much dissatisfied with the Answer, wholly as bad as that other Proof is,
taken from the private Spirit; The inquisitiue Person having And repaires to
Catholics.
heard of a known Christian Society called Catholics, addresses himself to
some of the learned among them who pretend to Speak in the name of Christ and
the Church, And assure him that God is the Author of Scripture. This yet
reaches not home, and though it were further answered, the Church positiuely
teaches so, yet he may justly demand. How we prove the truth of the Churches
Testimony?

9. Here whilst Sectaries are silent, We proceed as the solitary Man did, and
evidence God's own Language spoken by one only Oracle. That is, We lay forth
the Motives mentioned above, which illustrate the Church and most prudently
convince, that God speak's by this Oracle. The Motives are her undeniable
Miracles, the eminent Holiness of life in thousands, the Sanctity He listens to
God's own language Spoken by the Church:
and Unity of her Doctrine, witnessed by the consent of so many different
Nations, who all agree, and will agree in one and the same Faith, to the end of
Ages. We Add hereunto the Constancy and fortitude of Martyrs, those admirable
Conuersions the Church has wrought, Her amplitude extended the whole world
over, and yet to give more light, We Ask whether ever since the first Creation
of things, such multitudes of Professors so well united in one Faith, so wise,
so learned, so pious and virtuous, can be found in any other Religion not
Catholic? Who more exactly complied with the Law they lived under, or yielded
a readier Obedience to it, then those do and have done, that make Profession
of the Roman Catholic Faith. The Ingenuous man says No, and the truth is
manifest. The Heathens so notoriously transgressed the Law of nature, that few
and very No Motives sound in any other Religion but the Catholic.
few observed it. During Moses Law the Church was but little, yet the Peoples
sins were great, And if we compare the Learning, Wisdom, and Piety of the
Jews, with the eminent Knowledge, Virtue, and Piety of those who profess the
Catholic faith, there is no Parallel. Mention modern Sectaries, divorced from
Christ and his Church, what are they? Men of yesterday; truly Lawless, in a
word a very small disioynted company. Their Critical learning appears in their
Writings, and the virtue they have, is best known by their works. Nothing
hitherto of God's Language. I mean, no rational Motives illustrate this
Religion.

10. Thus you se First. How a Seeker after truth may by prudent Industry learn,
that the Doctrine contained in Scripture, is Gods own Sacred and Divine word.
But. 2. To be Assured hereof, an Infallible Oracle, euidenced by Supernatural
Signs The last assurance given.
is to attest the Verity, for so Providence has ordered, That God's own most
sublime and Divine langua^e, m^st be conveyed to us by another more plain and
easy. The Motives which illustrate the Church are this plain exterior
Language; Induced by them, we hear the Church speak, And upon her Testimony
believe that other sacred Language of God, delivered in Holy* Writ.

11. A. 4. Principle. The Resolution of Faith is then exactly made, when all
the Causes or conditions whereupon it depend's, what the Resolution of Faith
implies? and when exactly made?
are plainly laid forth, until we fall upon the very last Cause or Motive of
our assent, given to the Divine Revelation. Briefly. The final Cause of
believing is, that in this our short Exile we live virtuously, as Faith
requires, and after enjoy eternal Happiness. The material Cause or Subject of
Faith is Man's understanding. The intrinsic Formal cause is no other but Faith
it self, which as truly makes a soul b^lieuing, as vision received in the
^etina of the Eye, denominat's it seeing. Thus far there is no great dispute,
nor much can be questioned concerning the resolution of the very Formal Act of
Faith (as distinguished from the Obiectiue) which is made by a reflex
Contemplation upon it, as it tend's in to all those causes and Conditions,
whereon that act depend's. The only difficulty therefore remaining, concern's
the Formal extrinsecal Motive, which all Say is Gods Divine Revelation.

12. Now one Question may be. From whence have we Catholics greater assurance,
of our Doctrine, or why Say we That, that stand's firm upon the Divine
Testimony, and reject the Arians and Protestants Doctrine as a Nouelty, or not
built upon the same foundation, whilst all of us pretend to Scripture? The
Arians say Christ is not the highest God. We assert the contrary. Protestants
teach the Church is fallible. We the contrary. In rhis Opposition of
Judgments, who An easy difficulty
can certainly Define what God has spoken? To this (and it is the least of
difficulties) we Answer. God who cannot deceive has given so many Divine and
manifest Signs, in behalf of the revealed Doctrine which the Church teaches,
that none can Question the Truth, unless he will either Solued upon this
Principle, That God cannot cheat the world.
say: An infinite Wisdom cannot declare his own Interior mind by clear
exterior Signs; Or which is worse; That he has established an Oracle, and set
it forth with strange Supernatural wonders, only to make a fair Appearance,
though the final End be to cheat all that believe it.

13. Now here is the only Question. Whether these Arians, or Protestants, have
any better euidenced Oracle by more, (or equal) Signs and miracles, which
teaches their Tenets, then the Roman Catholic Church is, that Teaches ours.
Could such an Oracle be euidenced, They might talk of the Assurance of their
particular Doctrins, but till this be shown, which will never be, silence must
prove the best Answer.

CHAP. VIII.
The main Difficulty in the Resolution of Faith, Proposed. What Connection the
Motive, have with the Divine Revelation? Of their weight and efficacy. God's
own Language not imitable by his Enemies. Faith transcend's the certainty of
all Motives. The main Disficulty solued. Of our great Security in Believing
God, Though we have not Evidence of the Divine Testimony.

1. THe real Difficulty in this matter which Mr Stillingfleet hitt's not on, is
so common to all Christians, The Difficulty common to all.
that Sectaries are as much, yea more obliged to solue it, then the Catholics.
Thus I propose it. The last Resolution of faith, is made into this Obiectiue
Truth. God has re^ealed the Incarnation (the like is of any other Divine
Mystery) None knows Evidently the Mystery of the Trininity in it Self.
but the Revelation appears, and must appear Obscure to him that belieues, For
It Is neither its own Selfe-Euidence, nor can be evidently applied by any other
Medium, especially if the Motives of credibility, have not infallible connection
with the Divine Testimony. Thus much supposed, which none The ground of the
difficulty.
can deny, it follows, that the intellectual Faculty, when the Revelation is
obscurely proposed, stand's as it were houering, and cannot, for as much as yet
appears, be more inclined to assent infallibl^ then to dissent.

2. If you Say ^^e Will after a full Sight of the Revelations credibility, can
d^^ermine the understanding to assent su^er Omnia, or Infallibly, it is
Answered, This seems impossible. First, because the Motives whereby the Object
is made credible, can settle in us no other judgment, but This. God's
Testimony and the thing attested by it, are most prudently thought to exist, or
appear so highly credible, that it is the greatest folly, not to believe, But
this Judgment, you se, neither reaches to the Verity of the Revelation in it
self, nor to the matter revealed, therefore Faith cannot as yet, be elicited.

3. Again. The will cannot move the understanding to assent The will Seems to
help nothing in this particular.
to an object, Sub ratione very infallibilis, under the Notion of an infallible
Truth, unless manifest reason first conuinces the intellectual Power, that it
Exists, and is infallible. But all the reasons preceding Faith, bring with them
no such Conviction, for all are here supposed fallible, Therefore if the
understanding yeild's an infallible Assent to that, which is not rationally
convinced to be infallible, it proceed's temerariously, and does more then it
can do, for it goes beyond the limits of Prudence; saying. This is infallibly
so, though it has no reason to judge it infallible. The force of what is now
said, will best appear in this Syllogism. A Truth (though really a truth)
Proposed The whole difficulty proposed in one Syllogism
or represented, as obscure, cannot move the understanding to an infallible
Assent, but the Divine Revelation is proposed and represented as an obscure
truth, Ergo, it cannot move the understanding to an infallible Assent.

4. To Solue this pressing Argument many learned Divines ascribe, and Methinks
most reasonably, so great an Evidence to the Motives of credibility, so strong
a connection between The Judgment of learned Divines.
them and the Divine Revelation, that it is impossible to separate what God has
conjoined. Viz. The Truth of his Revelation, from the evident appearance, or
rather the real Exhibition of so many glorious Miracles, so much blood shedding
for Christ, so great Sanctity, Such innumerable conuersions wrought upon
Millions etc. These and the like Signal wonders, taken atlogether, God cannot
permit to be done in his name, and with all their Circumstances to confirm a
Faith which tend's to no other end, but Holiness of life and everlasting
happiness, unless the Divine Testimony were really in Being, as these Signs
convince. Where in the force of Church* Motives lies.


5. To illustrate more this necessary Truth, be pleased to consider a little,
wherein the weight of our Church Motives lies, and first behold them as they are
Positiues Signs, Miracles, Sanctity, Conuersions so positine, that neither Jew
nor Gentil can deny one of them. 2. Carry well in mind this negative Truth
also. The want of Arguments to the Contrary. I would Say; Nothing like a
rational Proof can be alleged against them, but what equally discredit's the
admirable Wonders of Christ, and hie Apostles. Add hereunto. 3. That no Society
of men, be they Heathens, Jews, or Heretics have hitherto shown or shall
hereafter show Signs Comparable to these in confirmation of any doctrine
apposite to that, which the Catholic Church teaches. God's exterior voice,
net ^mitable by the Devil, or any false Prophet.


6. From what is here hinted at, and the Principles already laid, I Discourse
farther. God can speak to creatures in a Language worthy himself, and so
proper to his own great Majesty, that no false Prophet can forge, counterfeit,
or perfectly imitate it. The Assertion seems manifest, For if his own Language
be forgeable, or imitable by Enemies, It is impossible to judge by any Sign,
whether he, or the Devil speaks. Nay, it follows clearly, that God Cannot
speak at all in a Language worthy himself, or powerful enough to gain Belief,
For if His voice be not distinguishable from that of an Enemy, How Shall men
yield a surer Assent to God when He speaks, than to an Impostor that speak's
like him?

7. Thus much supposed, these two things follow ineuitably, Church Motives
certainty Speak Something.
and in right Order. First. Something is certainly signified by these Marks,
and signal Motives manifest in the Church, and consequently they are either
God's Voice, or the Devils: Take which you will. If God's own Voice (for etiam
factis loquitur Deus, Says S. Austin) it is so clear and discernable by it
self from another cogging Gypsy Language, that all may know it proceed's from
God: Or if this cannot be known it auails him not what follows, if the
Language of the Motives be an illusion
to speak, when the language he vtters, cannot possibly be discerned to be his.
Contrariwise, if you say The whole Aggregation of Motives are a mere illusory
language of God's professed Enemies, you undo all, you destroy the Evidence of
Christianity, you annul our Saviors most glorious Miracles, and render the
Apostles admirable wonders, not only insignificant, but contemtible to Jews
and Gentiles. Let therefore the man appear in public who dare boldly Assert.
All the illustrious Motives and marks God either Speaks by them, or
Christianity Perishes.
of the Catholic Church (which as I said certainly signify something) are the
Language of Devils, or false Prophets, when it is evident they induce to
believe a Doctrine most Pious and sacred. If you Affirm, Christianity goes to
wrack. Say no, or acknowledge such supernatural Signs to proceed from God, we
have enough, the very Luster of ithem so discountenances and abashes Heresy
that it appears, as ^t truly is, in the highest measure improbable.

8. Hence we see (It Is the second inference, and the chiefest thing I aim at)
an inseparable Connection between these supernatural Signs, and the thing
signified, I mean between the Motives and the Divine Revelation: For if it be
certain, that such Signs The Connection asserted follows: from hence.
proceed from God (which is indubitable, unless either Devil or false Prophet
fourge them) None can doubt, but that God's interior Revelation actually
exist's, as the Motives Morally Evident, do Convince.

9. You will Say, If the Motives have an Infallible Connection with Gods
internal Revelation, that very Revelation, and Consequently the Mystery
Revealed, must also appear evident Faith not Evident, though the Motives have
an Essential Connection.
in Themselves, to all Belieuers, And so faith would be Evident. I deny the
Consequence, because the Assent given to that Connection, which implies the
highest Moral certitude conceiuable under the degree of most strict Evidence,
is Science and not Faith, For it says no more but thus much. The Divine
Revelation, not seen in it Self, but only by the light of external Signs, is,
by virtue of these Signs, made evidently Credible, Now this evidence, Faith,
as Faith leaves, Or lays aside, And firmly adheres to the Divine Revelation
only for it Self, as Contradistinct both from the Moral Evidence of the
Motives, and their apparent Connection with the Revelation.

10. The reason is taken from the Notion of Faith, which essentially tend's
obscurely upon its own Object, as the most ancient Fathers assert, whose words,
because known to Every one, I wave at present, and will only mind you of what
some Protestants teach. Faith, Says one, and the Twilight seem to agree in
this Properly, The nature and tandency of Faith.
that a mixture of darkness is requisite to both; with too refulgent light, the
one vanishes into knowledge, as the other into day. Thus much granted, it is
clear, that no Evidence of the Testimony assented to, can move to Faith, not
only because we should in the case of Evidence be necessitated to believe, But
upon this account also, that the certitude of Faith, taken from the Supremest
Verity, is of a higher Strain, and far surpasses all the certitude we find in
Nature, or in the Motives inducing to believe: For were it possible, as it is
not, that these Motives, and all the preuious Proofs leading to Belief, could
deceive, it is yet more impossible, that God's infinite The excellence of it
surpasses all created Certitude.
Veracity deceiues any. Now by Faith, we lay hold upon this most Supreme, or,
All-comprehending Infallibility proper to God alone, not communicable to any
creature. And in this sense, Faith far transcend's the Certitude of the
forementioned Connection, which is known to be Infallible by Natural Discourse
only.

11. It is true, The more evident these Motives appear the better they induce
to believe, yet for that reason have less to do with the very act of Faith,
which as I said, rest's upon, and lays claim to no lower a Verity then the
most Pure and Supreme only, And if it rest's not here, it is no Faith. I say,
Supreme and Pure, and for this reason also, we exclude Faith relies upon the
most pure and supreme Verity.
the connection between the Motives and Divine Revelation, from the Formal
object of Faith, because the Connection implies a Complexum, or Mixture of two
things known Scientifically, and therefore is unmeet to ground Faith. One may
reply. The exterior words of Scripture taken with the Divine Testimony are
Objects of Faith, therefore these Motives assented to upon the same Testimony
can, also terminate Faith, For we all believe The same thing known and believed
that the Church is Holy and Universal. Answ. Very true, because the same thing
can be S^itum and Creditum, both known and believed upon different Motives*
known by the force of reason, which see's the Connection between the One and the
Other, and believed also upon pure Revelation. Thus we know the Existence of
God by the works manifest in nature, and withal believe it upon his own sole
word, or the Divine Testimony.

12. Upon these Principles we Answer to another Objection. To believe, Say
some, is to trust God whom we believe, which How we trust God by Faith.
is impossible, if his outward words, or exterior Signs be necessarily
connexed with his interior speaking. For how can we trust, when an absolute
Assurance, is had of his Testimony? Answ: This is done very easily, when the
Assurance given is extrinsecal to the Testimony, and far inferior to the
Supereminent Infallibility of God that speaks. Now this Motive only, and no
lesser certitude ground's supernatural Faith. In a word we trust, because we
transcend all created Certitude and rely upon the most Supreme Verity, by an
Obscure Assent of Faith.

13. Others, Object. 3. We suppose all this while, the Motives inducing to
believe more perswasiue and efficacious, then Church Motives proved efficatious.
can be euinced by reason: For why may not God separate the exterior
appearance of a Miracle from the reallity of it, And So permit the Diue I to
delude us all? I Answer. 1. This Criticism first reuerses the most glorious
Miracles which Christ ever wrought. I Answer. 2. Though the appearance and
reallity of a Miracle be separable, yet the evident Signs of Sanctity manifest
in innumerable, The Evident Appearance of whole Nations converted to the
Catholic Faith, are inseparably conjoined with the reallity of interior
Sanctity, and real interior conuersions. All Collectiuely taken, most
Conuincing.
Now in the weighing these Motives, One is not to be thought of singly, but
pondered with the rest; Altogether indubitably euince, that God speak's by
them: Or if you Still Deny, Say I beseech you, whose language they are? I
Answer 3. The obsolute Power of God cannot permit (If He positiuely intend's
not to lead all into error) That a false Miracle be wrought and God cannot
cheat any by a false Miracle.
done in his name, to confirm a Doctrine suitable to his Goodness, and the
increase of Holiness. In this Case therefore, The Miracle must b^ real without
guile and deceit, For were this cousenage possible, God could have ^o language
proper to Himself, Contrary to what is already proved. Thus much premised.

14. We are to solue the Difficulty another way, perhaps The Difficulty solued
another way
more plain and easy, And therefore distinguish with Divines, a Twofold
c^rtitude in every act of Faith. The one (called the Certitude of
Infallibility) arises from the supernatural Principles which concur to the
very act of Belief, And these not liable to error, can never operate but when
the Divine Revelation really is. This certitude may be had, though we no more
experience or know it by any reflex Consideration, than One who is directly A
twofold Infallibility explained.
moved by the Holy Ghost to write a Truth, need's to know that he is divinely
assisted; And it implies not only the mere Truth of the Act, but moreover an
infallible Determination to truth; The other called, Certitudo adhaesionis: or
a firm Adhesion belong's to the Belieuer, and is not grounded on Evidence, as
it falls out in Science, but upon most prudent Motives proposed to Reason
(which clearly discovered) the Will by her pious Affection commands, and
determins the intellectual Faculty to Assent indubitably, The he art or will
furthers our Assent.
For, cord creditur ad lustitiam. Romans 10. The Heart or Will can thus further
and incline the mind to yield, when it is evident credible, that God speak's,
and eternal Salvation depend's upon an assent, which is given without fear or
hesitation.

15. S. Bonauenture eminent for Sanctity and Learning. 3. Distinct. 23. art. 1.
Quest. 4. speak's most pertinently and profoundly to my present purpose. Est
certitudo speculationis, and est certitudo adhaesionis etc. There is, Says he,
a speculatiue certitude S. Bonauenture.
and a certitude of adhesion, or of cleaning fast to what we believe. The first
has respect to the intell^ctual power, the other to the pious Affection of the
will. If we speak of this firm adhesion, it is Both clearly distinguishes and.
far greater in faith, then in Science, because faith makes him that belieues
more certainly to adhere to the truth revealed, then Science does, to any thing
known. Hence we se, that men truly faithful, cannot by Arguments Torments, or
inticements be inclined to deny in words a bel^eued Verity, which r^^e in his
wits will do for a thing he knows, unless it be upon this account that faith
dictates, he is not to Lie. Stultus etiam esset Geometra etc. A Geometrician
would be Explain's this twofold Infallibility.
very unwise, who for any certain Conclusion would undergo death (as thousands
have done for their faith). Whence it is that one truly Faithful, though highly
learned in natural knowledge, would rather lose it all, then deny one only
Article of Faith, so strong is his adhesion to truth believed. What this great
Doctor Asserts, need's no Faith no Speculatiue operation.
further Probation, For if it be certain (as all confess) that Faith is no
speculatiue knowledge grounded purely upon Evidence, (discouerable in the
Divine Revelation) it must of necessity be a practical Assent in order to the
effects now mentioned, of suffering, and dying for Divine Revealed Truths, when
occasion is offered: Now that such an Assent may be elicited upon Prudent
Heretics without Motives, assent to fooleries.
Motives has no difficulty, whilst we se condemned Heretics by mere
pertinacy, so Stiffly fastened to their Errors without Motives* that it is very
difficult to make a Divorce between Heresy, and their Phanfies.

16. One may object first. The understanding cannot practically Assent to a
thing as indubitably true by any Command of the Will, when this Power is
utterly unable to change the nature of Motives, or to make them appear
otherwise then they are, That is, highly Probable, yet uncertain. I Answer (to
omit What force the will has.
that Heretics without Motives, pertinaciously assent to mere fooleries) The
Will can with another Help (whereof more presently) Supply the inefficacy of
those intellectual Lights, which prudently euince this truth. It is evidently
credible that God speak's by the Signs laid before me. God's peculiar
Language, his Seal and Signature appear more clearly in these Evidences, t^an
in any Princes commission sent me, when I see his own Seal and Hand writing. O,
but yet we have not Evidence of his Testimony. No thanks to thee poor Creature,
to Assent, had thou Evidence. Know therefore His Majesty is too far above us
all, to humor As reasonable Creatures, we are Obliged to submit
such a Curiosity. As reasonable creatures we are obliged to submit our
judgment to his, though it be not evident he Speak's, for this Duty the
highest Power imaginable requires of us (who infinitely surpasses all created
Excellence) That, upon a most credible Appearance of his speaking, when nothing
makes the contrary probable, we yield an Assent answerable to his supreme
Excellence, that is firm, certain, and Infallible. Who then dare stand
trifling in so weighty an Affair as concern's Salvation? Or, who dare tell our
glorious God? Lord, I find my self obliged to believe, And Se great Soueraign
the Signs and seals, Witnesses of your Speaking, Yet because all possibly may
be counterfeited, I will, like one little Loath to yield, deal both warily and
Sparingly with you; You shall have no other faith Upon a Credible appearance of
God's Speaking.
from me, but what is faint and meagar; In fine, a poor miserable and moral
certain Assent. Is this think ye to proceed Nobly with God? No. If we believe,
our faith ought to suite his great Worth and Dignity, or really we believe not
at all.

17. From what is Said, Two things follow. 1. That our Security is greater
whilst we believe God, induced by most prudent Motives, though we se not the
Evidence of his Testimony, Than to believe the most evident Assertion of any
man living, esteemed one of the very best Reputation. The reason is. If God
speak's, I am certain he deceiues not, And therefore Two Certainties compared
together.
cannot mistrust his Veracity, But If man speak's, whom I know liable to error
and deceit, The main ground of Certainty fail's, For though I hear his voice
and have evidence of his words, yet neither give me absolute Assurance of Truth.

18. The Question therefore is? Whether I may not more prudently believe God
who cannot deceive, though I want evidence of his Testimony, than to believe
man, that by error or The difference, declared.
mistake may deceive, when I have only Evidence of his outward words, which are
separable from Truth? In the one case words, are evident* And I have with them
some degree of moral certainty concerning Truth, In the other; I have
infallible certainty of truth (If God speak's) and the highest moral Assurance
imaginable of his speaking, before I believe.

19. It follows. 2. That Evidence in the formal Object assented to, is
inconsistent with Faith, which implies a prudent, and withal a most infallible
practical Assent in order to an Faith quite different from Science
appretiatiue Esteem of the will, and those effects, mentioned by S.
Bonauenture. Therefore it is of a quite different nature from Science, whose
tendency is Speculatiue, and sees clearly the Object assented to. But I know
some will yet require further Satisfaction in this hard matter. I shall
endeavor to comply with their wish, in the next Chapter.

CHAP. IX.
The whole Progress of Faith explained in order to its last Resolution. Of that
which the Fathers Call the light of Faith. Its wholly different from Sectaries
Private Spirit. From whence Faith has Infallible Certainty. Objections Solued.

1. FAith says the Apostle. Romans 10. 17. Comes by Hearing, Again. V. 14. How
shall they hear without a Preacher? Faith comes by hearing.
But how shall they preach unless they be sent? All then must hear the Divine
Verities and believe what they hear taught, by men lawfully sent to preach. Now
because God has been pleased to speak by different Oracles, anciently by his
Prophets, by Christ our Lord, his Apostles, and finally by the Church (all
together make up but one School as it were of Divine learning) His One great
Truth to be heard.
whole endeavor ever was in all ages to have this truth Taught by these
Oracles. viz. God is the Author of the Doctrins which all are obliged to
believe, and to make thus much highly Credible, He never sent as I said above,
Prophet, Apostle, or Christ himself to ^each, but jointly Authorized them to
show the Royal Signs and Seals of his own Soueraignity, Miracles I mean, and
other Supernatural wonders, whereby they were proved commissioned Oracles, to
speak in the name of God.

2. To our present purpose therefore. None can believe, What necessarily
proced's Faith. A natural proposition of the Mystery. with a Motive above the
power of Nature.
r^less he hear. Which is to Say: That Via ordinaria before the Hearer elicites
Supernatural faith, a natural Proposition of the Mystery revealed, necessarily
precedes that Assent. Yet more. He that Teaches is not barely to Say. Unless
you yield assent, you will be damned, But he must also propound some Motive of
prudent credibility with the Mystery, which Motive, so far surpasses all the
Power in nature, that it manifestly appears to be God's work, or his own
inimitable language, as is already noted.

3. Besides it is not sufficient that the Preacher tell's us, God is the Author
of his Doctrine, clearly confirmed by Miracles, but he is to make the Assertion
morally certain either by working a Miracle Himself, as Christ and the
Apostles did, or in want of that, to bring in strong Arguments and witnesses,
whereby Moral evidence by witnesses.
it may appear, such supernatural Wonders have been done, to confirm that God
is the Author of his Doctrine. Now this Moral evidence by witnesses, is
equivalent to the seeing of Miracles done before our eyes, which falls out in
all evidence called Moral, For I am now no less assured by most credible
witnesses that Cardinal Altieri was clected Pope of Rome, then if I had been
present at his Election. After this natural Proposition made of any Divine
Mystery, some apprehensions of its Verity (or credibility rather) easily follow
in the Hearer, which also are natural.

4. Thus much done by the Preacher, One desirous to learn truth discourses, and
perceiues so great a Concern as Salvation The prudent Judgment of Credibility.
depend's upon his believing the Mystery proposed, that at last, he is brought
to this prudent Judgment of credibility. God cannot deceive the world by such
exterior Signs, as are here proposed by this Preacher, therefore I ought in
prudence to yield my Assent, and believe. Now here enters another Principle;
wholly necessary to make Faith certain, which may well be called the last
hearing of Gods Voice, or his powerful Inuitation to believe with full
certitude, and it consists in an interior illustration of Grace imparted God's
powerful inuitation to believe.
to a soul, whereby the Object of Faith with its credibility, is represented
another way, more clearly then before, yet so, that no Mystery is seen
evidently.

5. Hereupon, the Will prevented with divine Grace begin's to work by her
Pious affection, after that preuious judgment The will preueated by grace
Command's,
had of the Mysteries Credibility, and the interior Divine illustration, which
is the last speaking of God to a Belieuer. The Will therefore affectioned to
the Happiness propounded, moves the understanding to elicite most certain
Faith, Super omnia. The The int^llectual Faculty Obeyes and belieues.
Understanding Obeyes, and forthwith belieues by an infallible Assent the truth
of the Mystery, though not seen evidently.

6. Hence you se, This infallible Assent proceed's from a Twofold Voice of God.
First from the Motives preuious to Faith, whereby its evidently credible that
God speak's, though the The Twofold voice of God
Motives were fallible; But the last Voice of his Divine illumination, which
represent's the Revelation more indubitably than mere Motives can do, takes
all doubt away, And we come to an absolute certitude in Faith, upon this
interior sacred language of God, called by the Fathers, Alta Doctrina, a high
learning. Caelestis Doctrina, The Language of heaven, which opened Lydia's The
last ^ voice called high learning
heart. Act. 16. 14. And made her to attend to such things as S. Paul
delivered. And might I here speak a word in passing, I can avouch in all
Christian Sincerity, rhat treating with many reconciled to our Catholic Faith,
I have heard some Ssy (and it was a singular comfort to me) that such Miracles,
so strange Conuersions, as the Catholic Church has made, Her long Continuance,
Maugre all attempts against Her; The eminent Sanctity Gives certainty to Faith
of innumerable who profess her faith, appear to be Gods own glorious works;
But besides these outward lights, which convince much, God (Said these) seems
to Speak to our very hearts; and tell's us. Truth only is taught by this
Oracle, and upon so clear conviction, we find our Selves obliged to believe.
But as S. Austin profoundly observes. Lib. 1. de Praedest. Sanct. Cap. 8. Valde
remota est a sensibus carnis haee Schola, in qua Deus auditur and docet. The
School where God is heard and teaches, is very remote from flesh and blood.

7. Answerable to what is here noted of God's interior voice by Illumination,
the illuminated S. Austin. lib. 11. Confess. Cap. 3. S. Austin confirm's our
Assertion.
speak's most significantly, Where he desires to Hear and understand, How God
in the beginning made Heaven and earth. Scripsit hoc Moses, Scripsit and
aebijt etc. Moses wrote this, but he his gone from us. Now he is not before me,
for if he were. I would hold him fast etc. And for your sake entreat him, to
lay open these things. I would give good ear to his words. If he spoke in
Hebrew, I could not understand him, but if Latin, I should know what he Said.
But how should I know that he Speaks Truth? And if I knew so much, Truth
inwardly teaches.
should I know it from him? The Saint Answers. Intus vtique mihi, intus in
Domicilio Cogitationis etc. Inwardly, where my most secret thoughts dwell,
Truth verily spoken not in Hebrew, Greek, Latin, or Certainty arises from that
interior learning.
any other babarous Language, without mouth or tongue, without a rustling noise
of words, would tell use. Moses speak's Truth. Et ego statim certus, And I
presently made certain (Mark whereupon his last certitude is grounded) would
confidently Say to that blessed man. You speak truth. Thus S. Austin, who in
the 8. Chap. now cited, call's this light a secret Grace, given by God to take
away the hardness of hearts in Matters of belief. And his Doctrine Scripture
Speak's fully this Sense.
is consonant to these, and like Expressions of Holy Scripture. 2. Cor. 4. 6.
He has shined in our hearts, to the illumination of the knowledge of the Glory
of God. Esa. 54. All shall be taught of God. Matthew. 16. Flesh and blood has
not revealed it to thee, but my Father which is in Heaven. John. 1. 2. 27. His
unction teaches all things. John. 6. 44. No man can come to me, unless the
Father that sent me, draw him. John. 10. My sheep hear my Voice. etc.

8. From these and many other Passages, The most ancient Fathers, (especially
S. Austin and our Venerable Bede) teach that none can Hear, and Assent to the
exterior Proposition The Holy Fathers Inferences.
of the Divine Mysteries, unless at the same time the light of Grace work's
interiourly, and proposes all after another way more efficaciously. Read S.
Austin toward the end of this 8.th Chap. at those words. Cum ergo Euangelium
praedicatur etc. Where he tell's you, when the Gospel is preached, some believe
and others do not. Those, says he who believe, when the Preachers outward
words sound in their ears, Intus a patre audiunt and discunt, interiourly hear
Gods own Voice and learn, what he teaches: Others, who believe not, Hear words
Chiefly S. Austin^.
spoken by the Preacher, but hear not that interior Divine Language, and
therefore learn nothing.

9. Gant then first, That the Motives inducing to Faith were supposed fallible,
because perhaps we have no reflex Evidence of their infallible Connection with
the Revelation. Grant also, that the exterior Proposition of Divine Mysteries,
retain's Obscurity (which is true) yet this Secret, this perswasiue
illustration of Grace, (being as I said the last hearing of God's Voice) The
illustration of grace supplies the Inefficacy of Motives,
can on the one Side, supply the inefficacy of the Motives, And on the Other,
so accomplish the Mysteries exterior Proposition, that it brings faith to its
full certitude. Do then the Motives Shine less clearly, or leave Some
Capacities, as it were, in a wavering condition? The illustration gives more
light, and And add's more Clarity
drives doubt away. Is the Divine Testimony, merely considered according to its
outward proposal, obscure? The Illustration add's new clarity to it, and makes
Faith most certain, yet still without Evidence. Et ego statim certus; And by
virtue of this light, I say confidently with S. Austin, what I believe, is
infallible true.

10. To Illustrate yet more this necessary Point (I speak to Catholics
(Sectaries will not hear me). Read the Angelical Doctor. S. Thomas. 2. 2.
quest. 2. a. 3. Where as his manner is, He obiect's. It is dangerous to give an
assent to things when we know not, whether that which is Proposed be true or
false, as it seems to fall out in matters of Faith. Ad. 2. he Answers. As man
by his natural light Assent's to natural Principles, so the virtuous The
Angelical Doctors Doctrine,
man by the Habit of Faith rightly judges of what belongs to that Virtue, And
therefore, per lumen Fidei diuinitus infusum, By the light of Faith divinely
infused, he assents to the Mysteries. S. Vincentius Ferrerius also in his
Sermon, upon the sunday within the Octaue of the Epiphany, pondering our
Saviors Answers to the Doctors Questions in the Temple, speak's to our S.
Vincen^ius words, conformable.
purpose and very significantly. Christ's words, Says he, veniebant ad Cor
Doctorum cum lumine, came to the hearts of those Doctors with light, and they
Said. O verum dicit. The Child speak's Truth. Again. Christus loquebatur Diuina
virtute, Christ spoke with a Divine virtue, and all the Doctors understanding
him, assented. Pro certo verum dicit. Most certainly he speaks truth. Thus. S.
Vincentius.

11. The Principle whereon this Doctrine relies, All must admit. Viz. That an
act of Faith is wrought in a Soul hy Faith a work of the Holy Ghost.
the operation of God's Spirit, and therefore the Holy Ghost must not be
excluded from that work, which none can do but He. Now what we Assert in this
particular, is, that the infallible certainty of faith comes from this
interior Illumination, as it more lively set's forth the formal Object
assented to, or help's to a clearer Proposal of the Divine Mysteries.

12. And thus in a word we have the whole Progress of faith in this present
State, explained. First, a natural Proposition of the Mysteries precedes: This
beget's a natural apprehension of their Credibility. After some consideration,
there may arise an imperfect Judgment of Credibility: But, should the W^ll
offer as yet, to incline the mind to Assent only upon what appears hitherto,
it could not move to a Faith which is an Assent Super Omnia, or most certain.
Therefore The whole Procedure of Faith briefly laid forth.
the illustration or powerful Inuitation of Grace (by which, as I said, the
Object appears another way and more clearly) is infused, whereof the soul is
Recipient. The will now after other Preparatiues, thus strengthn'd a new,
command's boldly the understanding to Assent upon the safest Principles
imaginable. Viz. Upon God's infallible Revelation accompanied with his own
Divine light, which makes Faith to grow higher in certainty, than all the
Reason or knowledge in this life, can arise to. For as S. Thomas observes,
Humane knowledge deriues its Certitude from Man's natural Reason, which may Err,
but Faith has its infallibility, Ex lumine Diuinae scientiae from the light of
The efficacy of Divine Light.
Gods divine wisdom, which cannot deceive, and therefore is most certain.

13. Some may Oppose. In this Discourse of the Divine illustration, we seem to
favor Heretics, who talk much of their light. It is a strange Objection,
Says F. Granado. Controu. 1. de Fide. Tract. 1. D. 5. Whilst all acknowledge
this Light All Catholics Acknowledge this Light.
to be, Gratia per Christum, a Supernatural grace purchased by our Savior,
which raises us above the force of natural Principles, and moves to believe
most firmly, And the Motive is, the Divine Revelation it Self, invested or
appearing, in God's own Divine Illustration. To what is pleaded in behalf of
Heretics, I Answer. Heretics talk every whit as much of their Faith,
Heretics Claim to Faith and light, makes neither Divine.
as of their Light. Do we therefore agree with them in faith, because they Say,
theirs is as divine, as ours? No certainly. For the like sound of words,
implies neither the same reallity of things, nor any agreement at all. Why then
should we favor the light they pretend to, which like their faith, is a mere
illusion, and no more symbolizes with the Illustration of Catholics, then
their faith does with true Faith?

14. I ground my Assertion on these three Principles. S. Paul Says first. No
man can believe unless he Hear's, nor hear without a Preacher, Therefore in
this present state of things, an exterior Humane Proposition of the Divine
Revelation necessarily precedes the true light of Faith, and that light is The
Pretended light of Heretics Proved an illusion.
not given to believe, via ordinaria, unless one authorized to Preach in God's
name, Proposes the Revelation suitable to the natural way of hearing other
Verities, by our senses, Imagination, and humane understanding, Otherwise, that
would be possible which the Apostle makes impossible. Viz. To hear and believe
without a Preacher. Now further none can be a fit Minister to propound the
Revelation, but he that makes his Proposition good by a Miracle, or some
supernatural wonder, otherwise a mere Impostor, may as well gain credit by
Saying he speak's God's truths, as the very best of the Apostles. But no
Protestant, is able to do thus much, none of them all can say with truth. God
has revealed my particular Doctrine, First because none of them can propound
their Doctrine, as warranted by Supernatural Signs.
add Seal that very exterior Proposition with a Miracle, As every Preacher in
the Catholic Church can do, Therefore the illustration he pleads for is mere
Phansy, and nothing else.

15. Again, and here is my second Principle grounded also upon the Apostles
words. How shall they Preach unless they be sent. Which is to say. He only is
fit to Propose Gods Divine Revelation, who proves himself commissioned to
Preach, by Supernatural Signs and indubitable Miracles, For thus Christ our
Lord sent by his eternal Father, thus the Apostles sent by Christ, and the
Church ever since (all showing Wonders above the force of Nature) proved their
Mission; withal euinced, That God only empowered them to teach as they did. Now
here is the main point we urge. Could the Protestant, 2. They have no
Commission to teach.
who certainly never yet wrought one indubitable Miracle to countenance his
Doctrine, give in Evidence by some one or other Miraculous work, That an Oracle
sent him to reach, He might speak more boldly, But this being impossible, The
light he pretend's to, is just like his doctrine, An Signis fatuus, vain and
void of all reallity.

16. 3. Our latter Protestants seem to attribute no other certainty to the very
act of Faith, then what is moral, and necessarily consequent to a humane
fallible Ratiocination, TO is much like to the Assent we elicit, when we say
Caesar or Pompey 3. Their Faith being only moral and fallible, Cannot Proceed
from the Holy Ghost.
have been in the world. If this Doctrine be defensible, its impossible to
declare, how either Faith it self, or the illustration preuious, can proceed
from the Holy Ghost: For did the Spirit of God work with a Soul, when it
belieues, The certainty of Faith, would without all doubt, go beyond that
assurance which is only humane, moral, and fallible. Now we Say quite
contrary, That Faith is an absolute Infallible supernatural Assent, whereby all
ought to adhere to Mysteries most profound, or above all humane Reason, And
consequently, we derive its certitude The Catholics faith most certain.
from God's Infallible Revelation, invested in his own Divine light, and
readily return him a double Obedience of our whole interior, of the Will, and
Understanding together, and believe most undoubtedly.

17. One may Object. 2. As none can discern true Gold A harder Difficulty.
from another metal very like it, unless there appears in the Objects some
real Difference, so it is impossible to discern a true Revelation, from one
merely apparent, or false, by any Divine light, unless there be an Obiectiue
diversity or discernibility discouerable between them, which cannot be assigned.

18. This Objection (proposed by no Sectarie) is to the Purpose. To solue it, I
must remind you of that Solitary Man Commissioned Proposed by no Sectary.
to preach, after his Vision had in a desert place, who goes abroad, tell's
what he had heard and seen in his own natural Language, But gains not belief.
He uses another Idiotism, Speak's in Gods name, and as one sent from God ought
to speak, That is, he evidences his Mission by supernatural Signs, work's
Miracles, or proves them wrought in confirmation of his Doctrine: All now adore
him as a Prophet, All believe. This Language some Divines rightly call an
extrinsecal Form of speech, which is Supernatural Quoad modum, because it
contain's wonders done above the force of nature, and proceeds from the Faith
of him that teaches, as also from the Belief of the whole Church besides.
Please to observe. As man's natural speech, is apt to beget in a Hearer a
natural knowledge of his internal Conception The language of God* whether
exterior, or interior
that speak's, and the thing spoken of, So this Supernatural Language is apt to
beget in one well disposed, a Supernatural apprehension of his internal
conception that speak's, and the Mystery likewise spoken of. Now because this
exterior Language is God's proper Form of Speaking and most peculiar to
himself, it carries with it Ex natura rei, its own signature, its own
Discernibility, in so much that its distinguishable from all other Carries with
it, its own discernibility.
ways of speaking which are false, or come not from the first Verity. And this
peculiar mark of God's speaking, (very discouerable) the preuious light of
Faith perceiues, as most different from all other counterfeited Languages. And
thus you have the Obiectiue Diversity sought for, fully pointed at.

19. Hence you see first, That none can propose A false Mystery, for example,
the Incarnation of the Holy Ghost, invested in all and every due Supernatural
circumstance, requisite to believe Two Inferences deduced from this Doctrine.
a revealed Truth. Something appertaining to God's exterior Language, and the
natural preuious Proposition, whereof we have now spoken (though both Miracles
and Mission be falsely pretended) will ever be wanting. You se. 2. That when two
Mysteries are propounded together, the one false, the other true, both in the
same natural manner, neither of them contain's a sufficient proposal Inductiue
to supernatural Faith, nor can God according to ordinary Providence, give his
Grace to believe in such Circumstances, whilst the Preacher abuses his
function, and teaches things he was not sent to teach.

CHAP. X
The easiest way of resolving Faith, Laid forth in two Propositions. The
evidence of Credibility further declared. Sectaries have no Evidence of
Credibility. It is as evidently Credible that God now speak's by the Church, as
that He did anciently Speak by the Prophets.

1. THe first Proposition. Faith which comes by exterior Hearing is resolved
into the first Verity, speaking In to what faith is resolved?
by one or more lawfully sent to preach, who prove their Mission, and make
their Doctrine evidently credible, by Signs both prudent and supernatural. You
have in this Assertion first, Faith's Formal Object (God's increated verity)
Specified. You have. 2. the Appendants requisite to beget Faith briefly hinted
at, whereof more presently.

2. If therefore any Ask why we believe this or that Divine Mystery; The
Incarnation for example? Some Answer the One and the same Answer returned by
All.
belief is grounded upon unwritten, or Apostolical Tradition, Others upon the
words of Scripture, others finally recurr to the Churches infallible Testimony.
All of them speak but one and the same thing, comprised in these few words. God
Says it, who cannot err, speaking by One or more, lawfully sent to Preach.

3. Inquire again. But from whence have we Assurance that God has said the
Divine word was made flesh, for the Doctrine to us, is neither Evidently true,
nor Evidently false? I Answer God Himself gives infallible Assurance hereof,
And who can do that better then He? Here Faith precisely considered, as an Upon
what Verity Faith finally relies?
intellectual Assent, finally rest's; In so much that if you multiply demand's
to the world's end, no other Answer can be returned but this only, Eternal
Truth has said it, or reueal's that he All further Answers impertinent, the
Reason hereof.
Speak's this Verity. All further Questions proposed and replies given, though
different in sound are really Synonimal. The reason is, because the last Motive
of Faith can have none before it Self, for to run on in Infinitum with Motives
and stop no where, is to make no Resolution at all.

4. I know a Heathen Philosopher may abuse the Sense of the An Objection
Proposed in the name of a Heathen.
Apostles words. 1. Cor. 1. 18. And say we now preach foolery indeed, Gentibus
Stultitia. For what can be more deuoid of reason, then to believe most
infallibly, whilst the mind yet in darkness does so, having by the very act of
Faith no evidence why it beli^ues Infallibly. I Propose this Objection in the
name of a Heathen, for no Christian, whether Sectary or other, can use it,
because Christian Doctrine teaches, that none can be saved without Faith, which
as I now said, is neither Evidently true, nor Evidently false, ex Terminis,
Therefore all that believe are ineuitably cast upon a necessity of choosing a
Doctrine whereby Salvation may be attained, though it be not like the first
Principles in nature, its own Self Evidence.

5. Now to satisfy the Heathen and quiet a mind too inquisitiue after Evidence,
both have what they ask, Evidence enough; It is neither meet for God to give,
nor man to have evidence of the Mysteries.
not of the Truth of the Mysteries in themselves, For as on the one side, it is
not meet that Gods great Majesty should impart such an evidence (who I hope may
keep the like distance from his Creatures, as Great Monarchs do when they
intimate their Command's by only showing the Seal and signs of Soueraignity to
subjects) So on the other side, it is not fit that man have evidence of the
Mysteries, because it is incompatible with a perfect Subjection, with that
merit and Obsequiousness which The reason hereof.
God requires of his rational Creatures, who are to walk to heaven by an humble
and dutiful Faith, or shall never come thither.

6. And here by the way we may justly admire the Sauciness of some half
Atheistical Spirits, who find themselves puzzled in the search of the most
obuious things in nature (none of them can say how, or by what, one poor flies
wing is knit together) yet will forsooth, have God to give Evidence of his own
deep Secrets (the greatest Mysteries of grace) or Cannot believe. Experience
teaches, how prompt and ready every good Subject is to obey his Prince, at the
least beck, sign, or insinuation of his will, Though the Intimation carries
not with it strick evidence, yet in this matter of man's Submission to God, when
both his glory and our eternal Welfare are Concerned, innumerable stand
houering and doubtful, Questioning whether God requires firm The peruerness of
Atheistical Spiricts.
Faith from them, And why? Because an Evidence suitable to their fancy seems
wanting.

7. Humor once such a Curiosity or give them a greater light of Evidence, the
next thing required will be, that God interiourly teach all by Himself,
without Church, Pastors, Doctors, or any. And if this serves not the turn, He
must either please to open the Heavens at a call, and (once a year at least)
visibly instruct them, or there is no drawing such Spirits, Evidence of
Credibility enough.
out of a state of Incredulity. I Say contrary, the Evidence of Credibility
apparent in those manifest Signs and marks which illustrate true Christianity
(a great mercy of God he gives so much of it) is abundantly sufficient to
induce the most obdurate heart in the world to believe with such an Assent as
suites God's great Majesty, that is, with a Faith most firm and Infallible.
Observe an undeniable Evidence.

8. It is evident That ever since the first Plantation of Christianity, The
Appear^nce and Credibility of true Christianity.
there has been a Continued Succession of Pastors and Doctors, who taught the
Belief of one God and one Savior Jesus Christ, with other Articles of the
Catholic Faith. It is Evident, that innumerable Professors of this one belief,
have been eminent in Learning, wisdom, Sanctity of life, and Contempt of the
world. It is Evident, that the Predictions of Prophets uttered whole Ages
before our Savior preached, agree only to one Christian Society known the
whole world over. The Universal extent of this great Moral Body is evident.
Unity in Doctrine, Evident. Admirable Conuersions wrought by this Church, are
evident. Undeniable and most glorious Miracles, Evident. The Courage, the
Constancy, the profound Humility of Martyrs, and finally their bloodsheding,
the last Testimony of loyalty (Authors worthy of credit number them to eleven
Millions) are Evident. Here in few words, you have The Evidence, indisputable.
before you no Romance, no Furb, no fraud, but most clear and indisputable
Evidence. Now ponder first but seriously; And Ask whether God, after the sight
of so many illustrions Marks. Manifested to all, could permit, those Millions
and Millions The impossibility of deception in this Evidence
who loved truth, and heartily sought to serve no other, but the great God of
truth To be deluded, with mere Phansies and fooleries? Were this possible,
might we not all, charge plain Cousenage upon an Infinite Goodness, and most
justly complain: Si error est quem Credidimus etc. If we believe an error, it
is you great Soueraign, that has deceived us.

9. In the next place cast your thoughts and seriously also, upon all Sectaries
pas't and present since Christianity began. You will find (and here likewise we
plead by Evidence) no Succession of Pastors lawfully sent to preach, no
Conuersions of Nations wrought by any. No eminent Sanctity, no Universal
Sectaries utterly destitute of all Evidence of Credibility.
extent of their Religion, no Unity in Doctrine, and which utterly ruin's their
Cause, nothing like a Miracle among them. How then dare these Nouellists
destitute of all outward appearances of Truth, or any thing like Evidence, go
about to make their Religion credible by mere toys and trifles? These I call
trifles. Here to snarle at a Pope, there at abuses in the Church. Now to fill
Volumes with Criticisms, now to patch together a few broken Sentences of the
ancient Fathers; That is in a word, to be everlastingly quarrelling, and never
to Propose Sectaries new way of Arguing.
so much as a probable Way how quarrel's may be ended. Can such trifles I Say
(and here in brief you have the utmost Sectaries can do) extinguish the light,
the Luster, and Evident Credibility of God's own manifested Oracle? Let common
reason Judge in this case. Now we go on in the Analysis.

10. Having Said abready, We believe because God has This evidence explained,
the Analysis, goes on Clearly.
revealed the Incarnation, (the like is of any other Mystery) and being
impossibilitated (if we stand within the formal Term's of Faith) to allege any
further intellectual Motive of believing than this; The last of all. God has
revealed, what I Assent to. It necessarilly follows, that every other Question
relating to the Formal ob^ect of Faith ceases here. But if it be demanded, how
the Understanding dares rest most firmly on an Object not evidently seen, we
pass from that Power (without breaking off the Analysis) to the Will and Say,
she can by her pious Affection command the intellectual Faculty to Captiuate it
self, in Obsequium fide^, and believe most undoubtedly.

11. Now if another Question ensue's. How the Will can bring the Intellect to
so much Obsequiousness? The Answer The Power of the will Over the
Understanding. Manifest impiety not to believe.
is at hand. It does so, because God has showed by all those most prudent and
manifest Signs already laid forth to Reason, that He is the Author of the
Doctrine we believe: In so much, that it is not only the highest imprudence
imaginable to disbelieue, but Wickedness to do so, in a matter of such
Consequence. I say Wickedness, for after a full sight had of the rational
Motives inducing to Faith (seeing none can arrive to Evidence of the Mysteries)
One of these three ways must be What reason forces upon Every one.
followed. To believe nothing. To believe mere Fooleries: Or finally to believe
a Doctrine which God has distinguished by Evident Marks and Signatures, from
Heresy and falsehood. To believe nothing either is, or tend's to Atheism, and
that is Wickedness. To believe Fooleries, no wise man will hear of. Therefore
all are bound to believe, and if so; Faith must be Evidently prudent and
rational, I mean so manifested by supernatural Wonders, that reason is proved
unreasonable in case it denies Assent. Now I Subsume. But these Supernatural
Signs, One only Society of Christians Evidences, and it is no other but the
Roman Catholic Church, Therefore she only proposes Faith One only Society
Proposes Faith which is rational.
which is rational, and consequently obliges all to believe her Doctrine.

12. Hence you see that every one in the Choice of Religion, is to ponder in
the first place, those weightly Arguments which make an Election prudent: And
then it is prudent (not otherwise) when Signs from Heaven Gods own Marks,
heighten What makes an Election Prudent?
the Religions Credibility so far above all other false and forged Sects, That
these at the first full Sight, appear (as they are) horrid, ghastly, and
contemptible.

13. If you will Discover more clearly, what I would have reflected on in this
Particular. Be pleased to compare Heathenism, Judaism, Turcism, and finally
Aeresy with one glorious Roman Catholic Church. Speak plainly; Can you find in
these any thing like the Miracles, the Conuersions, the large Extent, the Unity
and Sanctity of this one most Euidenced Oracle? I need not prove the Negative (
You cannot) for its Demonstrable to sense. Heathenism and Heresy, are now
things of Scorn the whole world over, Judaism, it is true once had its No
Society Comparable to the Roman Catholic Church, in this rational Evidence.
Signs and Miracles, wherein it far surpassed Heresy (which never had, nor
will have any like it). Howeuer, Christ's Illustrious Kingdom, his Church
Militant, vastly surmount's that Ancient and now decayed Luster of Judaism. And
thus much briefly of the Evidence of Credibility, which once had, Faith most
firm easily follows, and without it, none can believe.

14. A second Proposition. Faith in this present State is resolved into the
Authority of God; the first Verity speaking by the Church. This way of
resolving Faith is both plain and easy, The Plainest resolution of Faith.
and very suitable to the common Apprehension of every one, learned and
unlearned, who if Questioned, why they believe any Divine Mystery, readily
Answer. Sic docet Sancta matter Ecclesia. So our Holy Mother the Catholic
Church teaches. And they Answer well, For the First Instrumental Principle
where into Faith is resolved, must be so clear and Conspicuous a Rule, that all
may easily learn the Doctrine delivered by it.

15. The Assertion is plainly laid forth. Deuteronomy. 30. V. 11. The Assertion Proved
by Scripture.
The Commandment I command this day is not above thee, nor far off, nor
situated in Heaven that thou mays't Say: Who of us is able to ascend into
Heaven to bring it to us? That is. To know where true Faith is taught, we need
not to weary our selves with much Speculation, or expect that God in Heaven,
lay open the sense of Scripture by Enthusianisms or any Private Revelation. Nor
placed beyond the S^a that thou may pretend: which of us can pass over the
sea and bring it to us. And hereby That endless Labor, that everlasting
Inquisition Sectaries endless Labor.
made after Truth, proper to Sectaries, seems rejected. Originals must be
examined, Passages of Scripture compared, History sought into, Libraries turned
over, Languages learned, Yea, and the very particular Mysteries of Divine
Faith, must be weighed by humane Reason (and thus they descend into the Abyss
of God's secrets) before they come to Satisfaction in Religion. All is
toylsome, all dissatisfactory, all endless. A more short and easy way is at
hand, For says the Scripture. Iuxta est serm^ valde, in ore tuo. The word is
very near thee, in thy Mouth and in thy Heart to do it. And the Apostle. Romans
10. 8. Applies this very Passage to the Word of our Christian Faith. Hence I
argue.

16. But the Church is that first Instrumental Principle, The Church, is the
first Instrumental Principle.
and most easy Rule which teaches our Christian Verities, Scripture teaches
them not so plainly, Therefore Faith may well be resolved into the first
Verity speaking by the Church and whoeuer resolves it without all dependence of
this living Oracle, put's the Conclusion before the Premises, as we shall see
afterward.

17. I prove the first part of my Assertion. 1. It is as evidently credible
that God speak's to all by the Church, as that he anciently spoke by the
Prophets and Apostles, For we have the same supernatural Signs manifested in
all these Oracles a The Churches Evident Credibility* parallel with that of the
Apostles.
like, as is largely shown above, and Consequently have with them the same
Grounds of an Evident Credibility, But Evident Credibility; induced the
Faithful to believe those manifested Prophets and Apostles, Ergo, the Churches
Evident Credibility, every way Parallel, induces all in this present State to
believe this Oracle. 2. God is equally infallible, Yea one and the A second
reason
same Verity, whether He speak's by one single Person or many, and must be
heard with all profound Submission, Provided, that the Oracle He speak's by,
be made immediately Credible A third, and
by the luster of Supernatural wonders, as most evidently the Church is. 3. The
Church, Answerable to the Prophets and Apostles, is a Living Oracle, and upon
that Account able to Solue all doubts which may occurr in controuerted Matters,
but the Clarity of a living euidenced Oracle, ready to decide all such
difficulties, makes the Rule of Faith easy, and much auail's to a clear
Resolution. 4. Our Analysis into God's Veracity Speaking fourth reason
by the Church, Stand's firm upon that first Principal and infallible Motive,
the Divine T^stimony it Self, I call it Principal because the Church is only
Instrumental as we now said, whereby God speak's: And this Resolution is made
without any danger of a Process in Infinitum, or the least Shadow of a vicious
Circle, as Shall presently appear by giving the last Analysis.

18. In the Interim, know thus much. To prove the second The other part of the
Assertion it manifest.
part of our Assertion. viz. That Scripture is not a Rule so perspicuous and
clear in delivering the very Chief Articles of Faith, as the Church is in
controuerted Matters, were to prove a plain Evidence, For what can be more
manifes't, then that we, and all Heretics pas't and present, are at endless
debates concerning the true Sense and meaning of those very words we read in
Scripture? Yet the Ruel of Faith (Sectaries confess it) ought to be clear open
and manifest to all. I wave all further discourse upon this Subject, and here
adioyn our last Analysis.

19. One demand's, why I believe that great Mystery of the Incarnation? I may
well Answer first. God's own sacred The last Resolution given.
Word, which we call Scripture Asserts it. The next Question will be, Why I
believe this to be Scripture? I answer. The same God speaking by his own
Oracle, the Church, affirm's it. A third Question follows. Why do I believe
that God speak's thus by the Church? I Answer the Ground of my Faith in All
Demands answered.
this particular, is God's own speaking and the very same with that he spoke
by the Apostles. As therefore his Own word, uttered by those first great
Masters, vpheld the Primitive Faith, without any further ground, or Process in
Infinitum, So his own Speaking Our resolution the same with that of the
Primitive Christians.
by this Oracle of the Church, vphold's mine. And I can go no further; For the
last formal Object of Faith, has none latter, That One word of Truth is enough
to believe upon. Again, as those first pious Christians, had any moved a doubt
concerning their Inducements to Faith, would have answered. The blind see. The
lame walk, strange Miracles are wrought by ehese blessed men, And therefore we
both must in Prudence, and will believe that God speak's by them; So I likewise
bring to light the same Signal Motives Evident in the Church, and The Motives
alike.
Say, I both must, if prudence guides me, and Will believe that God speak's by
this Oracle, known as well by Her Miracles and supernatural Signatures, as ever
any Apostle was known.

20. And thus you see first, as I noted above, How we pass from the Formal
Object of Faith ( God's own Testimony proposed by the Church) to the Prudent
Inducements of believing, whereupon the Judgment of Credibility (not Faith it
felfe) is vltimatly Why we believe? And how we prove by rational Motives
grounded. Now these Inducements being laid forth to reason, The Will command's
an absolute Assent, which rest's upon God's word, spoken by this Oracle. You
see. 2. All danger of a vicious Circle avoided in this way of resolving Faith.
For when I believe that God speak*s by the Church, I resolve not the Belief of
that Truth, into another antecedent Revelation taken from Scripture, yet wholly
obscure, and no way so immediately Credible as the Church is, (for if I did so,
a Process in Infinitum would necessarily follow) But I believe that word of
Truth for it self immediately, and rest there, As the ancient Christians The
word of truth believed for it Self
relied upon the very words spoken by the Apostles, without recurring to any
former, or surer Revelation. If therefore those happy Belieuers made no vicious
Circle in their Faith (having no t^o Propositions proving one another to make a
Circle of) We in our belief are altogether as free, from that faulty Circular
way, in our Resolution. It is true, All of us, if The primitive Motives, and
ours, the same.
Questioned about the Evidence of Credibility, most bring to light Motives
inducing to Faith, They theirs; We ours; both are a like significant, both
Supernatural, as is already explained.

21. You may gather. 3. out of what is here and formerly noted, how easy it is
after a full Sight had of those signal The illustrious Signs apparent in the
Church.
Motives (and they more set forth the Churches Glory, than any Train of
attendants can illustrate the greatest Monarch) That the first connatural
Language which God speak's by the Church, is this general Truth. There only his
Special Providence are God's own Voice.
Directs and gou^rn's, where the illustrious Signs of his own Soueraignity
manifest, That he teaches by a Voice peculiar to Himself. But these Signs
most evidently, are seen in one only Society of Christians, the Roman Catholic
Church, Therefore he teaches by this One only Oracle, And the necessary Lesson
he will have all to learn is; That he has called all to one Communion what we
learn by them.
of Faith in one Church, Euidenced by Supernatural wonders. This fundamental
Verity we believe, And it is the first Act of faith we elicite, Or, that
Primigenial Assent which connaturally arises from God's own voice delivered to
us by this Oracle, without depending on Scripture, if we make a right Analysis.
This General truth once established, and none can rationally contradict it; We
now proceed to solue a few Objections.

CHAP. XI.
Sectaries Ohiections solued. The fallible Agreement of all Concerning the
Canon of Scripture, no Proof at all No universal Consent for the Sectaries
Scripture, or the Sense of it. How the Church is both the Verity believed, and
the Motive, why we believe. Other Difficulties Examined.

1. I Speak here of Sectaries Objections, knowing well, some Divines who make
the Churches Proposition most infallible Sectaries Objections only, answered
(and herein all Catholics agree) yet hold it insufficient to be the last
Principle, Whereinto Faith is resolved: For say these, it is only a necessary
Condition by virtue whereof the ancient Revelation is infallibly applied to us.
In this Strife (purely Theological, and some what as, I think, de Nomine) I
shall not long busy my Self, being chiefly to attend to what Sectaries do, or
can propose against our Doctrine.

2. The first Objection. If the Catholic after a prudent Consideration had of
the known Motives already specified, can believe what ever the Church teaches,
and Consequently resolve why Sectaries cannot resolve their Faith into
Scriptures
his faith into the Authority of God speaking by that Oracle: Why may not the
Sectary as well upon this one Judgment. viz. All acknowledge Scripture to be
God's word, as easily believe, and resolve his faith into pure Scripture,
independently of Church Authority? Answ. Such a Belief and Resolution is
impossible, because as we said above, none can in this As Catholics Do into
the Church?
present State assent to this general Truth. Scripture is God's word, or
believe so much as any Verity in it, if the Authority of an Infallible Church
be rejected. To the pretended ground taken from the Consent of all Christians
owning Scripture for God's word, I have partly answered. That consent alone
induces not any to believe one revealed Article by an Infallible act of Faith,
if those whole Consenting multitudes, be all supposed fallible. First, every
one knows, the multitudes of Turks agree thus far, that their Alcoran is God's
word, yet such an agreement though very Universal, induces no wise man to
believe any Divinity in the Book, or to own its Doctrine as Divine, and sacred.
2. And this reason hinted at above is, more a Priori.

3. The Agreement of all Christians; is truly an effect of Faith, or rather of
the Objects Credibility antecedently presupposed The agreement of all,
Concerning Scripture is an effect,
Credible upon other grounds, before men agreed so universally in that
Christian truth: For this Causal is good, Therefore Christians agreed in that
Truth, because it was preuiously made Credible upon other sound Motives: And
not the contrary. It is credible; because all conspired in a Consent so
universal. Wherefore, if very many, who now own Scripture to be Divine, should
leave off to judge So, and reject the Book or any Part in it as fabulous, That
would not diminish its ancient Credibility; And no more, Not the Original Proof
of the Scriptures Credibility.
Say I, would the Addition of any new Consenters, who now reject it (should,
they agree with us) highten one whit our Belief, or make the Truth we Assent
to more Credible, than it was before. And this proves, That the Original
Credibility of Scripture is not grounded upon any universal fallible Consent,
but stand's firm upon other stronger antecedent Motives. Nay it cannot
Originally depend thereupon, Seeing that Consent is an Effect of those other
preuious Motives, as S. Austin often cited, fully and most amply declares. Be
it how will.

4. The greatest Difficulty yet remain's, for if we enquire of The Sectarles
Plea taken from any universal fallible Consent, is groundless.
Sectaries, where we may find this common Consent, we have but a very slippery
Foundation to stand upon? Because not only Heretics of old, denied the
greatest part of Scripture, But, to come to chese nearer times, the
Machiauellians and Socinians also called Christians, hold many things in that
Sacred Book so far above all humane reach, that they Say, it is unworthy God to
require from any a firm belief of them. Add hereunto the multitudes of
Heathens, Jews and Turks, who imcomparably whole Multitudes against Sectaries.
surpass Christians in number; All these, you know, Unanimously reject our
Scriptures. How then can the far lesser number of Witnesses agreeing in one
consent Plead so much as probably against such multitudes of Opponents, If no
other motive be alleged in behalf of the Scriptures Credibility, but only the
Consent of few, against many.

5. But to silence all Sectaries hereafter, Who insist so much upon this
universal Consent, we will here gratis suppose the Argument drawn from thence
to be most conuincing, Yet withal Assert, it so little advantages the
pretenses of Protestants, That Sectaries plainly Convinced.
it utterly ruin's their vndefensible Cause. For where have these men, any
universal Agreement of Christians for their Canon of Scripture? Where have they
it in behalf of their iarring Opinions? Where for their Negative Articles?
Where for their particular Sense of Scripture, which not only the Roman
Catholic Church, but others also reject as false, ungrounded, and Heretical.
If therefore this Common consent for the Bible Observe the Proofs.
were more Universal then it is, it help's not Sectaries, whils't their
singular Opinions, their Canon and Sense, And in a word their whole Religion
(as Protestancy) is so particular to Them selves, That the rest of Christians,
ashamed to own it, will be no Partners with them.

6. And thus you see, where the Weakness of this whole Plea lies. They will have
a universal Consent for the bare letter of Scripture; Let that be so. Its
nothing to the purpose, if afterward, without any thing like a Universal
agreement they misinterpret the Book, and make it speak what God never meant.
But this is done, and I prove it upon an undeniable ground thus. The Book of
Scripture misinterpreted Proves nothing.
Whilst these men cannot name, or Design a Church reputed Orthodox five or six
Ages since, which as universally maintained their new Doctrine, as She then
owned the old letter of the Bible, They misinterpret the Book, And gain no more
But Sectaries do So, and it is proved.
by urging that universal Consent for the mere letter, then the Arians, ^r
worst of Heretics gain. But to name such a Church for their Novelties is
imposible, and consequently no less impossible, to resolve one Article of
Protestancy into God's Divine Testimony, expressed in Scripture.

7. A 2. Objection. Christians faith seems not resoluable into the Divine
Testimony speaking by the Church, because How the Chutch is both the Truth
belieaed. And the Motive also why we believe.
the Church is Res credita, ot, the Material Object believed, Witness that
Article of our Creed. I believe the Holy Catholic Church. Therefore it cannot
be Ratio Credendi, or the Formal Object, which moves to believe. I Answer
first. Sectaries must solue this Difficulty, For is not the very Doctrine
contained in Scripture according to them, the Res Credita, or the Material
Object believed. The Incarnation I hope, whereof we read in Scripture (the like
may be said of every other Mystery) is the Truth believed with such a faith as
they have. And the Sectaries must solue this difficulty
very same Word of God, wherein thief Truths are contained, is also the Ratio
Credendi, or Formal Object moving to believe. For demand why they Assent to the
Incarnation? It Is Answered, because God has revealed it in Scripture. No other
Motive can be pretended. Therefore the same Scripture, differently considered,
is both the Material Object, or Verity believed, and likewise the Formal, which
moves to believe. And thus we Say, The Churches Proposition, Or rather God
speaking by the Church, may well be the Truth believed, and a Motive also why
we believe, wherein there is no Difficulty at all. Take here one Instance in
known Philosophy which teaches, that light both terminates our Vision, and so
considered, is the Material Object seen; withal, it moves By two Instances we
ciear, what is asserted.
the Power to see it, and upon that Account, is rightly called the Formal
Object. In Acts of Faith you have the like Instance. For example. When the
Jews Assented to the ancient Prophets, uttering these words. Haec dicit
Dominus etc. Our Lord speak's thus. They believed that God spoke by the mouth
of those Prophets (it was one of the Materal objects Assented to by Faith) and
they believed also for those Prophets words (as God's own Voice) and had
respect to them, as to a Formal object, Why they believed.

8. A 3. Objection. If the Church be the Primum Credibile, or the first
Belieuable Oracle, whereby God speak's to all How, and in what Order we believe
the truths Proposed by the Church?
in this present State, We are to declare, how and in what order, those Truths
are delivered by it, which all are obliged to believe: And this cannot be done
without Confusion, and perhaps danger of a Circle also We have partly Answered
above, where it is said, That as the Apostles after the Knowledge had of our
Saviors Miracles, believed first in a General way, He was the true Messiah; So
we, in this present State, induced by all the Motives of Credibility already
laid forth, believe first in General, That this Manifested Oracle is Christ's
own Spouse, This general Assent first precedes.
which infallibly teaches the right way to Salvation. And this truth we Assent
to immediately upon the Churches Proposition, or rather upon God's Testimony
speaking by the Church, without depending on Scripture; Just as the Apostles
believed Christ our Lord to be the true Messiah, upon his own Testimony proved
Credible by Miracles, and other Signal Wonders. Thus far there is no Confusion
at all, nor any danger of a vicious Circle. Now further. This General truth
admitted, we proceed to the Belief of other particular Verities proposed, and
herein also follow the Apostles Steps and practice, who assented to every
single Article which our Savior delivered afterward, upon his own Word. Why
therefore may not we also Afterward we descend to other particulars.
believe every particular Article proposed by the Church, speaking in the name
of God, If (which is already proved) the same God delivers Truth as well by
this Oracle, as he did anciently by the Prophets and Apostles. No disparity can
be given.

9. Hence I Say, whoeuer will make a full Proposition of Divine Faith, and give
a Satisfactory Resolution thereof, must both Propose and Resolve it into God's
Authority speaking by this one Signalized and euidenced Oracle. And here in few
words is the vltimate reason of our Assertion. If we exclude the infallible
Authority of an euidenced Church, neither the Canon of Scripture, nor any
verity in it, nor its true sense, which Heretics deprave, can be admitted as
Gods infallible word. Therefore S. Austin Spoke most profoundly, where He The
reason why faith must be resolved, into Gods Testimony Speaking by the Church.
professes: He would not believe the Gospel without Church Authority. Hence it
follows, That though one might believe the Mystery of the Trinity, or the
Incarnation, for the truths revealed in Scripture, yet if a further Question be
moved concerning the Authenticalness of these very Scriptural Expressions, All,
if they will finally resolve their Faith, must rely on Gods Testimony speaking
by the Church, and believe that very Doctrine to be Divine, because She own's it
as Divine.

10. Thus we said. Chap. 20. n. 11. That the infallible Authority of the
present Church consummates the ancient Revelation, which long since past and
remote from us, cannot move to believe, unless Her Testimony conuey's it to
us, and in this sense compleat's it; And what way of believing or resolving
Faith can be more easy, then to Say. I believe the This way of believing most
easy.
Incarnation, both because S. John wrote it, and because God speaking by the
Church, says he wrote it. These two Indiuisibly taken may as well make up one
total Motive of believing, as the Royal Prophets Testimony, and. S. Peter's
infallible declaration added to it. Act. 2. V. 25. became one entire total
Motive to those first believing Christians. I say Indiuisibly; And The Churches
Testimony not merely a Condition.
therefore the Churches Testimony concurres not merely as an extrinsecal
condition preuiously assented to, but jointly terminates Faith together with
the ancient Revelation, as shall be Presently declared. Herein also there is
nothing like confusion, but the greatest Clarity, free from all danger of any
vicious Circle.

11. A. 4. Objection. The Motives inducing to believe that God speak's by the
Church, or that all ar called to seek their Salvation in this one Euidenced
Oracle, are Church Doctrins. For we all believe that the true Spouse of Christ
is Holy, How the Motives inducing to believe
united in Faith, universally spread the whole world over etc. Therefore they
can no more rationally induce to believe, that first necessary Truth. Viz. All
are called to one Communion of Faith, Than one Article of faith obscure in it
self, rationally induce to believe another, wholly as obscure. We have
Answered above. These Motives may be considered two ways. First, as they are
evidently perceptible by sense, and so naturally they precede Faith, and induce
to believe. 2. As attested Are Doctrine of the Church also.
upon Gods own Authority speaking by the Church, And in this Sense they precede
not Faith, but are Articles believed, wherein there is no Mystery at all, if,
which is certain, The same thing can be both known and believed by different
Assents, upon distinct Motives.

A. 5. Objection. Scripture when newly written, and proposed by the Evangelists
or Apostles to the Primitive Christians, In what sense Scripture was Complete
to the Primitive belieuers.
was to them so total, and complete a Formal Object to ground faith upon, that
they needed no Authority of the Church to complete it more, Therefore it is
still a full and perfect Motive of believing, in order to all this very. Age,
independently of Church Authority. The Objection brings with it its own
Solution, For if those Holy Writers of Scripture were Infallible (whereof no
man doubt's) and proposed all they wrote as Gods Divine word, That very
Proposition was fully as certain to them, as any Church Authority, whether past
or present, can be to* us. Hence I say, though Scripture was then (That
infallible Publication supposed) a full and complete Motive to ground faith
upon, yet now it Cannot be so Qu^ad nos, or in order to Belieuers in this
present State, without more, not because there is any want in Scripture,
considered in it self, But upon another account that Circumstances are very Why
not so now to us, without Church authority?
different, and notably changed since those first days, For now we have
neither Apostle nor Prophet at hand, to Testify or publish the Scriptures
Divinity; The ancient signs of Credibility which adorned those first blessed
men, and made Scripture most acceptable, are out of our sight; Therefore God's
Church succeed's with her Luster, and Supplies, as it were that want, or takes
the place of those deceased Prophets and Apostles.

13. By what is here Said, you may easily understand the Two Terms, explicated.
sense of those two Terms, Quoad se, and Quoad nos frequently used in this
matter, though not free from Sectaries Cauils, Who say; Whateuer is Quoad se,
considered in it self a Formal Object, must be so in order to others, because
it is a Relative, and cannot but have respect to our understanding. Answ. All
this is true, after a full and infallible Proposition A Revelation may be in it
self Divine.
made of the Object; Otherwise most certainly a Revelation may be in it Self
both Divine and infallible, though it appears not so to all, for want of a due
application to Belieuers. Again, It may be in some Circumstances a complete
Motive to ground faith upon, and in another State cease to be so. Many Verities
in Scripture, when first written and proposed by Apostolical men, were complete
Objects of faith to the Primitive Christians, yet are not by virtue of that
Proposition Thought it appears not so to all.
now, so to us, Because They neither write in this State, nor immediately
Propose the truths contained in Scripture. Hence it is, that the Church, as we
said, Supplies that defect, and compleat's by her Proposition those ancient
Revelations, which issued from Christ and his Apostles. And for The Churches
Testimony Clear.
this reason Her Testimony, Quoad nos, is more clear, more known, and more
immediately Credible, than Scripture can be.

14. 3. Difficulties may arise concerning the Scriptures Canon, and sense also,
which none can decide but the Church only, and upon that Account, She is more
Credible and more And necessary for other Reasons.
immediately known to us, than the Scriptures abstruse Sense, which is very
often remote from us, before God speaking by this Oracle, lays the truth open
in clearer Terms. And what wonder is here? Whilst Sectaries confess, (to
understand the true sense of God's word in matters most Fundamental) other
Rules and means must be used. The Original Languages are to be examined,
several Passages compared together, daily Reading and pondering the different
places with much Prayer also, seem What Sectaries acknowledge.
necessary. What is this to Say, but that their reading, pondering, and
comparing, are in order to them, means and Rules more immediately known* then
the hidden Sense of Scripture? Herein then lies the difference, that we in Lieu
of their fallible reading recurr to an Infallible Church, and Say her Testimony
is more perspicuous, easy, and clear to us, than the dark Verities in Scripture
are to them, after all their pondering and comparing.

CHAP. XII.
The last Objection Proposed: Whether the Churches Testimony may be called the
Formal Object of Faith. Other Notes and Considerations, Concerning The
Resolution of Faith.

1. A 6.th Objection. If God, (whereof no man doubt's) once said in Scripture.
The Word was made flesh, its needless to speak the same Truth again by the
Church, Nay, this God has spoken the Same Verity by different Oracles.
seems impossible, unless the Churches Testimony be properly the Formal Object
of Faith. Answ. The first part of the Objection contains no difficulty, for it
is certain God has spoken the same Verities by distinct and different Oracles,
by different Evangelists, for example. And why cannot he as well speak them
again, by an Evangelist and the Church? If the Church be absolutely infallible,
for the Diversity of the Organs or Oracles He speak's by, diuersifies not at
all his Sacred word.

2. Now to what is hinted at concerning the formal Object. A question proposed.
I Ask, whether this Assertion in Catholic Principles be not de Fide, and
revealed by Almighty God? Every Doctrine proposed by the Church is true. The
Catholic Answer's affirmatively, And here is one Verity, as an Instance for
many. The Church is infallible, or cannot err. I Ask again, whether this very
Proposition made by the Church, may not be believed upon Her own Authority,
What some Divines answer.
by an Act of Divine Faith? Some Divines Answer negatiuely, and Discourse thus.
The Assent given to the Authority or Proposition of the Church is not Faith,
but rather an extrinsecal disposition to Faith, So that by one Assent we first
Say, The Churches Proposition is infallible, and afterward by a true Act of
Faith, believe the Truth proposed by Her, upon God's pure Revelation contained
in Scripture, or upon Apostolical Tradition.

3. Though this Discourse, which defend's the Churches absolute Infallibility,
gives no advantage to Sectaries, yet it seems Their Answer Seems difficult.
difficult for two reasons chiefly. First, if a firm and infallible Judgment
terminated upon the Churches never erring Proposition, which fully declares
Christ real Presence in the Eucharist, for example, Precedes the true belief of
that Mystery grounded on Scripture, or Apostolical Tradition, That very faith
as grounded on Scripture, would be a necessary obscure act generated by the
Discourse, or ineuitably inferred from the Connection between the Churches
infallible Proposition (not assented to by Faith) and the Divine Revelation in
Scripture. The Inference is clear. For the Church Says infallibly, Christ is
really present, And I Assent to that Truth, but by no Act of Faith (say these)
Yet from thence I evidently infer. That He is really present, and this is done
before I believe the Verity by Supernatural Faith. I think this cannot What is
necessarily inferred upon that Judgment.
be granted. Some Answer that preuious Judgment is only a condition disposing
to believe, and not the Cause or Motive why I believe. Contra. Call it cause,
call it condition or what you please, by virtue of that Judgment, I Assent to
the truth of the Mystery in it self, and from thence must necessarily infer
that God has revealed it, before I believe it by supernatural Faith. And this
is to Discourse, not from the formal Object of Faith to the material (which may
be probably defended) but from one Principle purely extrinsecal to Faith. viz.
The Churches Proposition obscurely known, to the Divine Testimony and the
matter revealed.

4. A second Reason. God truly speak's by the Church which is as well known by
its own luster and Miracles to be a Divine Oracle, as ever Prophet or Apostle
were known to be so, The Church immediately Credible.
by their Signatures and Miracles. No Disparity can be given. But these
Prophets and Apostles were made by their Marks and Wonders, immediately
Credible, therefore the Church hold's Parallel, and is also by it Self and for
it Self immediately credible. And hence it follows, That the Churches
Infallibility may, and must in a General way be believed, before we come to an
infallible Belief of Scripture. For to Say, I must first believe by true Faith
the Churches Infallibility upon Scripture, And to Say again, I cannot first
believe that very Scripture to be Divine This way of believing, impl^x and
intricate,
or to speak truth, But upon the Churches Testimony, seems, if not impossible,
at least a very implex, intricate and a difficult way of Believing. I say first
believe, For none in this present state can know the Scriptures Divinity,
without Church Authority.

5. For these and many other Reasons I Conclude, that this Proposition made by
the Church. She is an Oracle teaching all The Church can ground an act of
Divine Faith.
truth whereby men may attain Salvation, is a sufficient Motive to ground an
Act of Divine Faith upon? The learned Suarez, to omit many other Divines. Disp.
9. de Fid^. Sect. 9. n. 14. Speak's most profoundly, and pertinently to my
purpose. Ipsa Ecclesia seipsam proponit vt veram, and quia etc. The Church
proposes Herself as true, and because she is sufficiently and evidently
proposed, therefore she obliges all to believe such a Verity, no less then
other things appertaining Divines teach So.
to Faith: Just after that manner, as a true Prophet who sufficiently proposes
truths revealed to him by God, Consequently, Sufficiently proposes himself to
be a true Prophet. Moreover. Disp. 3. de Fide Sect. 11. n. 11. Quod Ecclesia
definit, Deus per Ecclesiam testificatur. What the Church Defines, God
testifies the same Verity by the Church. Scripture accord's
Scripture is Consonant where the Church is called the Pillar and ground of
truth. The Fathers accord so universally that a Volume would not set forth
their expressions. Take only these two in place of many. S. Cyril. in Conc.
Ephesians. Tom. 1. de Nicaenis Ancient Fathers Speak most significently.
Patribus. They (the Fathers there) were inspired by the Holy Ghost ^ot to
recede from Truth. Non enim i^si loquebantur etc. For they spoke ^^t (but
Christ our Savior witnessing) ^t was the Spirit of God and the Eternal Father
that spa^e in them. S. Greg. Lib. 1. Regist Epist. 24* Is yet more significant,
where he professes no less Reverence to the four General Councils, then to the
four Evangelists.

6. Whoeuer read's these and the like Authorities cannot but Say, the Voice of
the Church as it Proceeds from that Oracle, is the Voice of God, And therefore
Divine, certain, and infallible, Or contrariwise must grant, it is only Humane,
fallible, and may ^r. Speak so: And it follows first, that if the whole
Church should err in the most essential Points of Faith, God would not be yet
Said to deceive any, because his increated Authority Speak's not by it; nor is
engaged to rescue this his own Spoufe from error. It follows. 2. If any one
denied, either Purgatory, or Transubstantiation explicitly defined by the
Church, and not so clearly expressed in Scripture, He would not be guilty of
Heresy, though he peruersly refused to believe these Articles, precisely upon
this account, That the Church Defines them. The Inference is Reason also proves
the Assertion.
clear, for in doing so, He denies not Gods Revelation, because the Churches
Definitions (no Divine Testimony) are in a lower rank, and much inferior to
all, that God has spoken. It follows. 3. We believe the Churches Definitions
by a very different infused Habit from that, whereby we Assent to the Truths
revealed in Scripture, and to find such a supernatural and Infallible Habit
distinct from Faith, when we Assent to the Churches Definitions, seems to me a
new learning, unknown to Antiquity.

7. Thus much and more well considered, which might be Said in behalf of
Christ's glorious Oracle, And this one Principle added, which all Catholics
grant. viz. That the Church and Scripture Speak always the same truths, and
can never be at Variance,

8. Why may we not in this present State, resolve Divine Faith into the first
Verity Speaking by the Scripture (or Infallible Faith may be resolved into
Scripture and the Church together.
Tradition) and by his own Oracle the Church also? For example We believe the
Sacred Trinity, the Incarnation, Original Sin etc. because God revealed them in
Scripture, or first conveyed them by Apostolical Tradition; But these Verities
which the Apostles and Evangelists long since made Credible, are now remote
from us without the Churches refl^x Testimony, whereby God ascertain's all in
this State, that both Scripture is Divine, The reason.
and that his Church speak's the very same Verities in Scripture, And
consequently we Assent to every particular upon a Twofold Motive or rather,
upon this one Formal Object, jointly, and indiuisibly Scripture and the Church
make but one joint indivisible Motive
taken, because Scripture and the Church Assert's them. Neither is there the
least Difficulty in joining one reflex Testimony with another former, or
anciently delivered, whereof we have examples in Holy Writ, For we all believe,
God made a Covenant with Abraham of multiplying his Seed, because Eternal Truth
said so some Ages before Moses. Again, we believe that Verity, because the
reflex Testimony of Moses reiterat's the same Verity, anciently spoken to
Abraham. Genesis 17. 4. An instance
Other Instances of the same nature you have above, and more are found in Holy
Writ.

9. Thus much supposed, It Is (Methinks) easy to Say (if all be not de Nomine)
how the Churches Testimony may in one Sense be called the Formal Object of
Faith, and not in another. Consider it as Divine, infallible, and God's own
Voice, proceeding from no humane Authority, but from the First Verity speaking
by How the Church yeild's to Scripture?
this Oracle, it well merit's the name of a Formal Object. Compare it again
with the Primary Revelation, which it only compleat's in order to us, and
consequently presupposes more Ancient, more excellent, and all things
considered more worthy, it must yield to Scripture, And may be called an
intrinsecal condition, whilst it Declares what anciently was Revealed.

10. Now if any Ask wherein the Excellence and Dignity of Scripture consists,
when you compare it with the Churches Definitions? Divines answer. 1. Every
word and reason in Holy writ is de Fide, but not so, in the Churches
Definitions, where the Sense only of the Definitive sentence has weight, as
coming from the Holy Ghost's Assistance. 2. The Church The excellence and
dignity of Scripture*
has her limits, and Defines nothing but what was long since revealed or
necessarily connexed with the ancient Doctrine, And upon this account the
Hagiogrophers are deservedly called our first great Teachers, who made first
every Truth they wrote a matter of Faith. 3. When she Church Defines or
interpret's Compared with the Church.
Gods word, All is done for Scripture, and looked upon as the end of Her
labors. But what is performed for another, yeild's in worth and weight to that
other it is done for, as S. Austin observes. Lib. de Magist. c. 9. Whoeuer
desires more of this Subject may read Bellar. Lib. 1. de verbo Dei C. 15. and
Serrarius, in Proleg. 6. 7. 9. 12.

11. To solue other difficulties proposed by Sectaries, please to Note first.
This Primary Act of Faith. All are called into the Communion of one infallible
Church, whereby God teaches the true way to Salvation, is grounded immediately
upon the Authority One Primary act of Faith, is grounded on Church Authority.
of this Oracle, manifested by her Marks and Supernatural Signs, Although yet
the Book of Scripture be not admitted as God's word; Notwithstanding, when it
is once owned as Divine upon Church Authority, I can believe this Oracles
Infallibility, with another Act of Faith grounded on Scripture, How Scripture
also terminates that Faith?
yet if we make a search into the vltimate Principle, or final Resoluent of
that very Belief, We must as is said above, come at last to Church Authority,
whereby Assurance is given, that such a truth is Scripture.

12. Note. 2. This General truth supposed of the Church being immediately
Credibl^, or known by her Motives as an Oracle, which teaches the right way to
Salvation, it therefore follows not, that every other particular Verity (for
example) the ^^pes Supremacy, the Infallibility of Councils etc.) can in like
manner be first and immediately Credible, or believed explicitly, when I Assent
to that General Truth, For it is enough that such Particulars, be consequently,
or, afterward assented to, upon the Divine Revelation in Scripture and the
Churches own Proposition, as is already declared.

13. The Reason is, because the Marks and Motives manifest in the Church
immediately induce to believe, that She is How other particular Truths are
believed afterward.
God's Oracle, constituted by Providence to guide all in the way of Truth, But
how or in what manner this Duty is complied with, must be learned by the
Practice and Doctrine of the same Church, by Scripture, and Tradition also. Now
that it is most Connatural to know first in a General way, The Churches
Infallibility, before we descend to believe every Doctrine She teaches in
Particular, you may well conceive by the Instance given above of the blessed
Apostles, who first acknowledged Christ our Lord, as a true Prophet sent from
God, before they believed many other Verities, which afterward were taught by
that great Master, and learned by them.

14. Note. 3. In the Resolution of Faith into Church Authority, we understand
not in the first place the Church Representative* We understand by the Church,
the wh^le moral body of ^hristians united in one Faith. What the Belief of
Councils presupposes?
consisting of the Head and Members conuened in General Councils, but rather
this whole large diffused Body of Christians united in one Belief all over the
world, Wherein the way to Salvation is laid forth to all. The Reason of my
assertion is, first. Because that more explicit and distinct Faith had of
General Councils, Connaturally, as we now said, presupposes the other General
Truth assented to. Viz. This manifested Society of Christians is God's Church,
and the only way to Salvation, and the truth is assented to by Faith,
antecedently to the belief of the Churches Representatiues. 2. Because all
Catholics asfert, that the whole Moral Catholic Body consisting The promises
in Scripture belong Properly to the universal Church.
of Pastors and Hearers, cannot totally err, or Swerue from Christ's Sacred
Doctrine: Whence it is, That those Promises of the Gospel. Hell gates cannot
prevail against the Church. The Spirit of truth abides with it for ever, most
Properly and Primarily belong to this one diffused, and united Society of
Chtistians, To the Pastors as Teachers, to the Hearers as Scholars or
Lear^ers, And if the First (according to Christ's promise) teach infallibly,
the instructed must learn also infallibly, And thus the whole Moral body guided
and directed by the Spirit of Truth, is that strong Fortress whereupon all
must rely at last, if a ^ight account be given of Faith, or the true Analysis
be made. Neither can what is now said, Prejudice in the least the infallible
Authority of the Church Teaching (I mean of the Pope and Council assembled
together) for this notwithstanding, is most properly called the Church, has and
hold's the keys whilst it vnlock's the Mysteries of Faith, and lays open
Explicitly A lawful Representative, properly the Church also
our Christian Verities. Children teach not, Layicks teach not, weomen teach
not, Therefore the Church Representative properly teaches, although it be not
first known, via Analytica, that is, when faith is brought to its last
Principles.

15. Note. 4. When Sectaries demand, where does the Church taken universally as
one diffused Body, teach, that She is Infallible, or, that She deliuer's Gods
truths, Whilst yet, neither Scripture nor Councils which teach so, are
reflected upon, or known in All Oracles sent by God to teach, were first made
Credible by Motives,
that Priority of nature, when we believe that great Moral Body is an
infallible Oracle. If this I Say be demanded, I Answer by proposing a like
Question. Where did Moses, where did the Prophets, or Apostles explicitly and
signally Say at their first Appearance. We are Infallible, we are the sure
Rule of Faith, and because we say it, you Hearers are obliged to believe. Not a
word to this Purpose. What then was done? God Honored And so the Church was,
and i^ yet.
and privileged such Persons with Miracles and other visible supernatural
Wonders; These Euidenced, They actually taught the truth, and were credited
upon their Teaching, not because they Said in Actu Signato, They taught it; but
because really they did so in Actu exercito, and confirmed all by Signs from
Heaven, And thus the Church teaches to this present Day, and gain's Belief.

CHAP. XIII.
Protestants have no Faith to resolve, And upon that account are freed from a
vicious Circle. Some yet are in a Circle. Two Sorts of Sectaries refuted.

1. I Prove the first part of the Assertion. The Protestants supposed Faith, is
either reduced to the Belief What the supposed Faith of Protestants, is?
of their own Negative Articles, No Transubstantiation, No Sacrifice of the
Altar. No Purgatory etc. Or, to a Faith common to all called Christians, which
consists in believing One God, and one Jesus Christ, as a Redeemer. This, or
something like it, must be called Faith common to all, For to believe the
Sacred Trinity, the Incarnation, with other great Mysteries, is no common
Faith, because many deny these Articles. Now my Assertion is. What ever can be
conceived out of the The Object of this Faith must either be their Negatiues,
List of these Negatiues, or is not inuolued in that Common Faith, cease to
be an Article of Protestancy, as Protestancy. For example. To believe one God,
is a Tenet common to Jews, Turks, and Christians, That Is no Article peculiar
to Protestants. To believe the Sacred Trinity, and the Incarnation, is common
to Catholics, Protestants, and other Heteredox Christians, therefore no
singular, no Special Protestant Doctrine. Besides these, imagine whateuer can be
Imagined, you must either Or a Doctrine* Common to all Christans.
pitch upon things which no Christian has obligation to believe, or finally,
upon such Doctrins as Catholics own, and are disowned by Protestants.

2. Thus much Supposed, it is demonstrable, That the Protestant has no Faith to
resolve, who first does himself so Their Negatiues no revealed Verities.
much Justice as to Cashiere all his own Negative Articles from being truths
spoken by Almighty God, which therefore are not resoluable into the Divine
Testimony, because God never revealed any of them. Again, his Articles common
to all Christians without more, cannot be resolved into Divine Revelation,
unless, he first excludes with the Arians, The belief of The Trinity and
Incarnation, as not necessary to Salvation, And afterward proves by plain
Scripture, or the Authority of an Orthodox Church, that such an Abstract
Doctrine wherein Catholics, and all Heretics agree, is sufficient to save
Souls. But to Euince either, by Scripture or any Church Authority, will be
wholly as impossible, as to prove, that the Negative Articles are Doctrins
revealed by God.

3. Upon these grounds my Proposition stand's so firm, that none can contradict
it. For, if whateuer they do or can believe A Doctrine Common to all as
Unsound, a^ their Negatiues.
as Protestants, be evidently such Doctrins as God never revealed, it is
manifest they have no Faith to resolve, and consequently are easily freed from
all danger of a vicious Circle; But this is so, For cast away Their Negatiues,
All that remains as matter of Belief to them, can be no other but the Common
faith now mentioned; Or, if they require more as necessary to Salvation, That
More will either be Confessedly no Their particular Doctrins no revealed Truths.
Doctrine revealed by God, Or not peculiar to Protestants. For example. Suppose
the Protestant lays Claim to these two Articles: Scripture Contain's all
things necessary to Salvation. Or thus. What Scripture speak's plainly is the
Protestants Doctrine, and no more. I say first. Neither of these Articles are
Confessedly truths revealed by God, And this I assert, not only because The
Roman Catholic Church denies them to be truths, in the Sectaries sense, But
upon this Account Chiefly, that it is impossible, to Show, where or in what
passage of Holy Writ, God ever said plainly. Scripture Contain's All things
necessary to salvation: Or that such Doctrins as are plainty expressed there
(without more) Comprehend Matter enough to Salvation. This cannot pass for an
indubitable Principle, whilst evident Experience tell's us, That What
Sectaries ^ccount clear Veritios, Others do no^
such Verities as Sectaries hold clear and indisputable, are yet to this day
Controuerted, and not esteemed clear by many* who go under the name of
Christians. Observe well.

4. What Verity can be more clear, then the Incarnation of the Eternal word?
Yet Arians deny it. What more clear, then the real Presence of Christ in the
Eucharist? Yet the Caluinists reject it. Therefore when we Come to Examine,
which Verities are clearly expressed in Scripture and which not; we are thrown
into a Labyrinth, whilst no other Judge is made use of but the bare words of
Scripture, manifestly perverted, when Opposite to the Interpretation of a
Universal Church.

5. But here is my least Exception. We will Contrary to truth, grant gratis,
That Scripture Contain's all things necessarily to Salvation; Withal, that the
plain Doctrine thereof, is matter enough Sectaries clearly convinced by their
own Principles.
for Belief. The Sectary yet gain's Nothing, unless He descend's to the
Particular Tenets of Protestants (Mark my words) And truly Assert's. These and
these Doctrins are plainly set down in Scripture. These, and these Doctrins I
am (as Protestant) Obliged to believe under pain of Damnation, and no more.
Thus much I say ought to be done, which is utterly Impossible, And the Reason
is. Either those Doctrins laid claim to, will not be plain express Scripture;
Or, if plain and express, they cease eo ipso to be the particular Tenants of
Protestants. The last reason of all, rest's upon a Truth already proved, and
It Is, That Protestants have no Essence of Religion, and therefore have no Faith
to resolve.

6. In passing, you may Ask. What Say we to such Protestants, as make the
Negatiues now mentioned, Articles of their Faith? These we dispatch in a word,
and urge them to prove their Negatiues by Scripture, which is impossible. But
what is to be done, if they Pretend to believe the Catholic Doctrins (the
Trinity, the Incarnation, or any other revealed Mystery) upon God's divine
Testimony?

7. Here we must distinguish between Protestants and Protestants. Two sorts of
Protestants refuted.
The older sort believe the Scriptures Divinity attesting the Incarnation, For
example, by virtue of a secret and hidden Divine Spirit of God working in their
hearts, this being the only light or means, whereby that Divinity is laid open
to their intellectual The Private Spirited men, plainly in a Circle.
Eyes. These ineuitably fall into a Circle, for they prove Scripture to be of
Divine inspiration, because the Spirit tell's them so, And again they believe
this interior light or Spirit to be from God, moned thereunto by the very
light or letter of Scripture, not known at all to be Divine, but by this hidden
Spirit, which is as much unknown as Scripture, without their light. But because
the recourse to the Private Spirit in the Resolution of Faith, is amply refuted
by every Polemick Author, And now much undervalued by our latter Sectaries,
I Will only briefly Propose one Argument against all that Patronize it.

8. Either this Spirit is Scripture, or really distinct from A Conuincing
Argument against the Private Spirit.
Scripture. Grant the first. Scripture; no Self evidence, is yet believed for
it Self only, and so no more is Said, but that Scripture is believed because
it is Scripture, without all further Probation. If secondly you distinguish this
Spirit or light from Scripture, it follows that the Divinity of Gods word is
Assented To, and believed Upon a Motive, which is not Gods word, For this
supposed Light of the Spirit, not at all contained in Scripture, is no revealed
word of God, and consequently Scripture is believed, for That, which is no
Scripture.

9. The newer Sectaries with whom Mr Stillingfleet Sides, suppose a fallible
Tradition, as a Preparatiue to receive the mere Books of Scripture, which once
owned upon the account Other resolve Faith into the internal Evidence of
Scripture.
of Tradition, The Resolution of their Faith is made into the Divine Light,
which Shines in the very Doctrine of God's word, That is, into the rational
Evidence thereof. So* Mr. Stilling. P. 226. And P. 222. Discourses thus. Though
Tradition does not open our Eyes to see this light, yet it present's the Object
to us to be seen, and that in an unquestionable manner. To give his Doctrine
Tradition, Say these, Conueyes the Book,
more Luster, he set's it forth with the sparkling of a Diamond. Nay not a man,
Says he, very probably believe that a Diamond is sent hi^ foom a friend, upon
the Testimony of a Messenger who brings it, and yet be firmly persuaded of it,
by discerning the Sparklings of it? He He would Say, Tradition resembles the
Messenger that hand's Scripture to us, but the very innate Splendour and
Sparkling of its Doctrine is that, which Faith must be finally resolved into,
without regard had to Tradition.

10. This way of resolving Faith differ's from the Former, that it makes the
pure Verity of Gods word considered Obiectiuely in it Self, the last
Resoluent, or the only Formal Object of believing, How these men differ from
the Formar.
whereas the more aged Protestants superadd to that, an internal vital act,
called the Private Spirit, or an infused instrinct of Grace, whereby the
Scripture is clearly discerned to be Divine, and into this Instinct, as a
Medium Cognitum, or the only means to see by (which both discouer's the
Scriptures Divinity and it is sense) they resolve their Faith. This way being
already rejected.

11. We now Argue against Mr Stillingfleet, and Say first. The similitude of a
Messenger delivering the Diamond is nothing The Similitude of a Diamond,
Proofles
to the Purpose, For were that Diamond found in the streets, a skilful Ieweller
(And who more skilful then Protestants, when they read Scripture) would soon
know its worth by his Art, and presently tell you, whether the sparkling were
Counterfeit or no. Can the Sectary, as easily discover the Divinity in
Scripture by its innate Light and Splendour? Speak plainly. If The Disparity
plain, between the Diamond and Scripture
he can, Tradition no more conduces to its Sparkling, then if a Boy first put
the Book into our hands, or were found by chance in the Highway, For as the
Diamond Sparkles by it self, without dependence of the hand which gives it, so
the Scripture must do, if it have that splendour in it, whether Conveyed by
Tradition, or not. Nay, if another Scripture were now dropped down from Heaven
(were the Parity of the Diamond worth any thing) All skilful and well spirited
Protestants might without any Tradition, know it to be God's word. This double
resolution Supposed,


12. Yet more. Our Adversaries maintain a twofold Resolution of Faith. First
into the Books of Scripture, and these Books, fallible Tradition without any
Divine light seen as yet, Conueyes to us, For Tradition, as they say, is not
Divine. 2. ^to the internal light of the Doctrine contained in the Books, And
into this light of Doctrine they Resolve their Faith, not ^to Tradition.

13. Now here you shall have an unanswerable Dilemma. The Tradition which only
Conueyes the Books, as Contradistinct from the internal Doctrine, makes that
very Divine Doctrine to sparkle we Argue against Sectaries
more, than it would sparkle without Tradition; Or not. If ^ot: The light, the
Splendour the internal Luster of that Doctrine, Considered as Doctrine, is, and
must be independent of Tradition, and Shine as I now said by it Self as a
Diamond does, though the Books were found in the Streets. Contrariwise, if the
Tradition of the Books Augments in the least, or makes the internal Doctrine
there contained to appear more Divine, than it would appear without Tradition;
That very Tradition must be a joint Motive, whereupon we believe the Divinity
of Scripture. I prove it demonstratiuely. That which lays before the
intellectual Eye of a Belieuer, the Luster, light, and Sparkling of the
internal Doctrine contained in Scripture, is the true cause, or a Partial Motive
at least, The force of the Argument.
why He belieues that Doctrine, Tradition does this, Ergo it is a Partial Motive
why he belieues the Doctrine, Or if it ^ail's not at all to discover that Luster
of the Doctrine, the precious Diamond of Scripture, may be well discovered and
known without Tradition. I would willingly hear what our Ad^ersaries can reply
to this very plain, and as I think, no triuial Objection, without reminding us
of their killing flies.

14. To Say more in this place is needles, having proved in the other Treatise
that the Majesty and sparkling of Scripture, what the true Majesty of Scripture
is.
lies not in the exterior Syntax, or in any outward Connection of words (common
to other pious Books) But Contrariwise, in the Special Assistance wherewith God
directed the Hagiographers to write, as also in his own Divine Volition which
Sealed and approved all that is Writ, as Verities issuing from no other
fountain, but from Truth it self. Herein consist's the Dignity, worth, and
Majesty of Holy Scripture.

15. Now because that Divine Assistance and God's internal Volition, whereby
Scripture is approved as most sacred are no Objects of sense; It necessarily
follows, that none can discover The true Excellence, not discouerable by our
exterior Sonses,
the true Excellence of that Holy Book by any Inspection, though most
diligently made, into the Syntax or outward words of it only. Hence I said,
Had. S. John not at all recorded that truth in his Gospel. The word is made
flesh, bu^ some other without Divine Assistance, had left the Verity written in
Velume, The words and Truth also would have been the very same, now and then,
yet very different in their value, if Considered, as Proceeding from the Spirit
of truth in the one case, and from no Divine Assistance in the other.

16. By this its plain, that the Majesty of Scripture lies not in any
expression of outward words. Howeuer admit gratis it did, does that Majesty
think ye, help any to understand its Though the Majesty of Scripture lay in
the words.
true Sense in Matters controuerted? Evidently no. For manifest experience
teaches that whole Multitudes of dissenting Christians, both read and Reverence
the same bare letter, Yea, and have the same Majesty of words laid open to
their view, yet so notoriously oppose one another, and in Points most
fundamental concerning the genuin Sense thereof, that plain contradictions That
would not auail to understand the Sense.
are forced out of this sacred Book, after their Reading. But enough of this is
said above; And much more you have of Mr Stillingfleets strange way of
Resoiuing the Protestants faith, in the other Treatise. Discourse. 1. C. 9.
Where you may see that Protestancy is never meddled with, nor brought to any
better Resolution by him, than Arianism or a worser Heresy. Yet I Say, he took
the right Course, for in real Truth, Protestants have no Faith to resolve,
which truth will better appear in the following Chapter where we examine,
whether true Religion Can be found out by Reason.

CHAP. XIV.
The Mistakes of some Sectaries in this Controversy. Its necessary to
distinguish between true Reason, and fallacious Reasoning. Private Reason
liable to Error. Principles presupposed to the Decision of this Question.
Reason easily finds out true Religion, by a rational Evidence preuious to Faith.

1. SOme who endeavor to make a Friendly Agreement The Attempt of some
Sectaries,
between Reason and Religion, wholly omit to discuss the mainest point of all,
which concern's Christianity. And It Is in a word to tell us, whether amongst
those innumerable Religions now swarming in the world, (whereof certainly many
are false, and Only is true) men by the force of prudent who Omit the main
Business concerning Religion
Reason, can come to the Knowledge of the true One. This is the Vnum
nec^ssarium worth our knowledge indeed: For, what auailes it to hear of an
Agreement between Reason and Religion, if I cannot by the light of Reason find
out that Religionwhich God has established? It would be but a comfortles Word
should One Say. Sir, There is a rich Inheritance in the world belonging to you,
but neither you, nor I, nor any other after all diligence used, can tell you
where, or what it is.

2. This, and it is a grand Omission, may be well grounded The ground of their
Omission.
on another error, these Authors Maintain, who first make, a Religion
according to their own Phansy, and then offer to Show the Reasonableness of it;
Whereas All justly expect to have at least in a General way, some Hint of that
full Doctrine which Christian Religion comprises, before we Cry it up as
reasonable, or yield our Assent to it. Thus much neither is, nor can be done by
any Sectary; And mark how we are left dissatisfyed.

3. After some general Duties pointed at, which belong to Their Distinction of
Fundamentals and others, improbable,
natural Religion, we hear of a Distinction between the Fundamentals of Faith,
and Others. Then we are told, that All the Fundamentals, are contained in the
Apostles Creed, And that, if we go beyond the Creed for the Essentials of
Faith, none can Say, where we shall stop. Answ. Sr, you are told in this
Treatise where the stop is to be made, And there also, you will find this late
Invented Distinction of Fundamentals and no Fundamentals, cast away as unsound
Doctrine. All I will Say at present, is, that you build upon Sand, you make a
mere fancied Supposition your Proof, in Calling That a Reasonable Religion,
which the greatest Part of Christians reiects, as both false and Improbable.

4. What Scripture I beseech you, what Orthodox Church Why improbable.
what received Authority, Nay what Reason, ever yet made a few owned Verities
(and the fewer the better) of Christian. Religion, The whole, the full, and
only Essentials of it? If this once pass for sound Learning, I se not why a
Turk, that Own's one God, and Christ our Lord as a Very great Prophet, May not
as well account those two Articles the Essentials of Christianity, as our
Sectaries do their Few Fundamentals; For if we once begin to Divide Christ's
sacred Doctrine Nothing less, and more valuable in Christ's Doctrine
into different Shreds, More and Iesse Valuable, Say I beseech you, where shall
we stop in the Division? And thus your own Question is retorted.

5. You tell us indeed, you take some few Fundamentals to be Religion, and can
prove so much Reasonable. I Answer The ground of our Assertion.
you Mislake, For no half Pieces of Religion can be proved reasonable, without
the whole entirely taken, and Assented to. Here is the Ground of my Assertion,
and it is amply Proved in this Treatise. Either All that Doctrine which Christ
our Lord taught, And the Church ever since delivered as Faith, is Fundamental,
Or Nothing at all can be Fundamental.

6. Other Flawes I find in this Gentleman's Discourse, but have not time to
pursue half of them. Here is One, and of main Importance also. He never
rightly distinguishes, between that Object whereupon Reason rest's, And the
Object of Faith, Considered in it self. Reason ever precedes Faith, A want of
Distinguishing between the Object of Beason, and Faith.
and is grounded upon those rational Motives which Induce to Believe. Faith,
precisely Considered as Faith, relies upon a quite Different Object, God's pure
Revelation, and Cannot Discourse, For the Reasons given above, not here to be
repeated. Only know thus Much in passing, That the wrong done by this Author to
the Learned Perron, Veron, and Others, has its Origin from this Oversight, of
not distinguishing between the Object of Reason, and Faith. These Says He,
loudly declaim against Reason, All know it very well. I Answer, they declaim
Perron and Others Causlesly blamed.
against Reasoning or Arguing, in the very intrinsic Act or Tendency of Faith
(For Fides non quaerit cur, aut quomodo) is most true, and So you and the whole
world must do, if you Believe. They declaim against Reason, or all rational
Discourse built upon Manifest Motives Inductiue to Faith, is a Calumny, and
most untrue.

7. Another Mistake. The Divine Authority of Scripture, is to be proved by
Reason, and only by it. Yet more. The great Argument Another error.
for the truth of Scripture, is the Testimony of the Spirit in the Miracles
wrought by Christ and his Apostles. Sr, I thought ye all pretended to believe
the great Miracles of Christ and of his Apostles by Divine Faith, founded upon
God's Revelation in Scripture; This granted, the rational ground why you
believe such Miracles, Cannot be your very Act of believing them, But must be
extrinsecal both to your Faith, and its Immediate Object also. What I Say is
Manifest, For Questioned by a Jew, upon what rational ground (I say rational)
you believe the Incarnation, or any Miracle in Scripture, you will not answer
the reason of our believing is your Belief, but must fall upon prudent Motives
extrinsecal to Faith, Otherwise you Confound again the Object of Faith, with
that of Reason.

8. You Say moreover. Though Reason Cannot of it Self, immediately prove the
truths of pure Revelation, Concerning the Trinity, for example, or the
Incarnation; Yet it Demonstrates the Divine Authority of the Testimony that
declares them; And that way, (Viz. by demonstrating the Testimony) proves even
these Articles. Evidence of the Divine Testimony infer's evidence* in the thing
attested.
This Certainly is a Mistake; First because great Divines teach, That if the
Divine Testimony be demonstrated, Or evidently proved to exist, The Verity
attested by it is also evidently known. Therefore who ever has evidence of this
Truth. God that Cannot err, Reueals the Trinity, must evidently infer The
Trinity is, And So Faith would be evident both in respect of its Formal Object,
and Material also. But here lies not my greatest exception.

9. I say in a word, There is no Principle in Nature or Grace which has force
to demonstrate (and mark my word) That No Principle gives Evidence of the
Divine Testimony.
God ever said; The Mystery of the Trinity Exist*s. And first, the Doctrine in
Scripture, (no Selfe-Euidence) demonstrates not its own Verities. The Belief
of Orthodox Christians, terminated upon the Divine Testimony, is Faith, and
under that Notion, obscure. Infallible Tradition you own not, and Though you
did, it would Lay no Evidence of the Divine Testimony before Reason. Nothing
then remain's, if you seek for Rational Evidence, but that you recurr to the
known Motives of Credibility, which Induce to believe, Now, Sr, These Motives
demonstrate not the Truth of the Divine Testimony, Evidence of Credibility and
Evidence of truth,
But only make it evidently Ctedible. And here by the way I must needs reflect
upon another Mistake. You seem not to distinguish between Credibility, and
Truth; Nor between Truth and Infallible Truth. A thing may be Credible which is
false^: Are to be distinguished.
As if three or four of good reputation, for ought I know, Should Conspire to
inform me of the death of a Friend in England, who yet lives, The Relation to
me would be prudently Credible, yet false. Truth implies a Conformity with its
Object, and Cannot be false. Infallible truth in the present matter of Faith,
requires moreover the Influence of Supernatural Principles, whereby the Act of
Faith is determined to rest upon its own Object, the First Verity. All these
Particulars are largely explained in this Treatise.

10. Thus much briefly noted (Though more might be said) we Shall Examine by the
help of Good Principles, How far Reason can proceed in Matters of Faith; And
whether by prudent reason, all may Come to know, where true Religion is taught
and professed?

11. Cardinal de Richelieu. Traitte pour Conuertir ceux etc. Lib. 1. C. 11.
well observes with the best Philosophers, That when a Verity stand's sure upon
one clear, rational, and indubitable Principle, its needless (though sometimes
not amiss) to bring in more Proofs. For, frustra fit per plura etc. One solid
Ground is equivalent to many.

12. I am you se engaged to answer the Question proposed. All debates
concerning Religion may be decided by Reason.
Viz. How far reason is to meddle in matters of Religion, And Say in a word.
All debates in this most weightly Affair, may be decided and easily, by Reason
only. But to clear the Assertion from Mistake, we are first To distinguish
between a nicknamed or miscalled Reason, And that which really is Reason, There
being no word more abused, or fallacious than this, This word, Keason, abused
by many.
which vphold's all the Heresies in the world, Yea and Atheism also. For Every
Atheist, every Arian, Every Donatist, lays claim to Reason, And thinks his own
Error built upon reasonable Grounds.

13. I Say first. The private Reason of fallible men, considered as private and
fallible, Discerns not easily between truth and falsehood, chiefly when the
contest is about this or that particular Controuerly of Religion. The Assertion
stand's firm upon this indubitable Principle. None can prudently acquiesce in
so weighty a matter as Religion is, to that which The weakness of Private, and
clouded Reason
of its own nature may probably be clouded with Ignorance and Error (to say
nothing of passion) And for that cause, seems unable to discern between Truth
and falsehood, But the private Reason of falltble men considered as private and
falltble, may be so clouded, that it discern's not between Truth and falsehood,
Therefore It Is most unmeet to decide in particular Controversies.

14. To confirm what I Say: Imagine that a Protestant and an Arian, were at an
earnest dispute concerning That which each Party belieues. Both plead by
Reason. What result An Instance
think ye can follow upon the contest, whilst both the one and other may justly
avouch, Neither of us know our own Ignorance or weakness? Therefore unless you
with whom I Argue can ascertain me, And I you, That our Reason is purely
disinteressed, free from mistake, and all clouds of Ignorance, We must of
necessity quit this Tribunal of our own private Reasoning, and take rccourse to
some Judge that gives Satisfaction, And finally declares, whose reason is more
reasonable.

15. One may Reply, And it is the only Objection of Sectaries. Were it possible
to find our such a judge (as it is not) the private Reason of these two
Disputants, And of every other particular Man, is, in points of Religion to
ponder well the Sentence given, It Is He, and no other, that must The chiefest
Objection of Sectaries*
conclude within his own Interior, whether the Sentence given be reasonable or
no, And consequently the last Vmpirage, the final Decision of all in the choice
of Religion, is brought to every Man's private Reason. Here is the true Rule of
Faith, (Say these) when that choice is made; For to say Men are damned for
Proposed in their own Terms.
not following the Judgment of another, whilst their own Reason hold's it not
Reasonable to do so, is harsh Doctrine, dissonant to the Principles of nature it
self, And to all Euangelical liberty. Wherefore though Atheists, Jews, and
Turks be Justly reprehensible, because they abuse the Principle of following
Private Reason, yet Sectaries who use the Principle with moderation, And ever
believe something within the compass of Christianity, seem not blamable. Here
you have the Ground of all Heresy.

16. To Overthrow this false Pretense, and to lay before you a manifest Truth,
its necessary to premise a few Postulate, before we come to our Second
Proposition. I Suppose first, with all Christians (Jews and Turks accord also)
That God Principles pr^mised to the
has established one true Religion only, The Verities whereof, as revealed by
the first Verity, are infallible. I Suppose. 2. The end why he revealed these
Truths, was that all Should believe them, and believing, gain eternal Happiness.
Now seeing the Apostle. 2- Tim. 1. 12. send's before his Belief a measure or
Decision of this Contr^uersy.
degree of knowledge. Scio cui credidi; I first know, it follows, that all
prudent Belieuers must have the Evidence of Credibility, before they elicite
Faith. I Suppose. 3. That God's eternal Design in establishing Religion (which
comprises revealed Truths) was to have it known or found out by easy means,
obuious to the Reason of every one, learned or unlearned. And certainly its far
more easy, to know by sensible Marks and Signatures, where, and by whom true
Religion is taught, than with an industrious and almost endless Scrutiny, to
find it out by examining every particular Tenet, contained in it.

17. The Ground hereof is clear, for true Religion cannot Two Reasons showing,
but Show its own facile, Obuious Marks, and rational Discernibility, Otherwise
the Ignorant and Unlearned, would be exempted from all obligation of believing,
seeing none can Assent to the high Mysteries of Faith, without Preuious Evidence
of Credibility, laid forth to Reason.

18. Now if you Reply, The learned in case of Ignorance and obscurity are to
instruct the illiterate, I Answer, That Is very why true Religion is easily
found out.
true, But if after all Instruction they bring not the Learner to a due Degree
of preuious Evidence, The Instruction void of substance becomes both vain and
fruitless. Again. And here is my second Ground. The Purpose of Almighty God in
found^ng Religion, was not to puzzle Men's wits with it, or to set them at
endless debates concerning so weighty a Concern, But if it be not obuious and
easily found out by its own rational, and clear Indications represented to
Reason, There arises ( not from Man's malice as now a days falls out) But from
the very Nature of it, everlasting Quarrels, which breed distaste, and rather
inuit all to loath, then to love Religion.

19. Hence I boldly Assert, could Religion not be known without so many
Injunctions, as Sectaries usually lay upon us. The Sectaries way of Seeking is,
Were it not attained, before an exact perusal made of the Fathers, and
Councils large Volumes. Did it lie in Obscurity, till such and such Inferences
were drawn out of Scripture. Had it dependence upon This and That Deduction
framed by every fancy, that reads Gods word, were Libraries to be turned over,
and Languages to be learned as necessary to settle all in Truth. Could I Say,
none come to the true knowledge of Religion long, tedious, and dissatisfactory.
without without fo much Ado, And so many endless Encumbrances, The most of
men might well Supersede all further Disquisition, and rightly Judge, all
further Enquiry too intricate for them, being out of the reach of that we
call, easy and obuious Reason. God I am sure, Disowns such Perplexity in the
Religion he founded, who tell's us Deuter. 30. 11. His commands (And what is
more severely commanded then to embrace revealed Truths) are not hid from us,
nor far off. We need not to The word of truth is near us.
ascend to the Heavens, or Cross the Sea to find them out. No. The Word is
near to us, in our mouth and heart etc. But of this enough above.

20. A second Proposition. Reason clear from Passion find's out (and easily)
True Religion by an undoubted Evidence, before debates arise concerning
particular Controversies. One Proof of our Assertion is already hinted at. God
obliges all to embrace true Religion, and consequently afford's means to know
it, for to Say on the one side, He will have us to believe, and on the other,
not clearly to give light concerning what we are obliged to believe, is to
assert that His Goodness Abandon's the care of our Salvation, and leaves all in
darkness Now fur^her. The Obligation of believing arises from
The clear obligation of believing arises not from Faith it Self, nor from the
Evidence of the Mysteries assented to, for no man says (as is often noted) I
believe because I believe, or because I see the Divine Mysteries Evidently in
Themselves, but contrariwise He Speaks thus: I therefore believe, because I
find my self anucedently to my Faith, obliged to submit to the Divine
Testimony with a clear Evidence, known before we believe
a most firm Assent, But that which lays so strong an obligation on him, must
of necessity be a clear Judgment grounded upon Obiectiue Evidence, nothing
less certain, can auail in this weighty affair concerning Faith.

21. I prove the Assertion. Whoeuer firmly belieues upon Gods infallible
Revelation must antecedently Judge, He cannot err by believing; or, if He
Judges he may err or be deceived, it is impossible to believe fimly upon the
Divine Revelation. The Assertion Proved.
What I Assert is clear; For to Say, I will infallibly believe because God
Speak's infallibly, and withal to keep in mind this Judgment. I may be
deceived by my Faith, is plainly to Say, I do that which my Conscience tells
me cannot be done, Therefore that preuious light must arrive to Evidence of the
Objects Credibility, whereof more presently.

22. Now you shall see how the force of our Argument hinted The Argument taken
from the Obligation of believing
at, is drawn from the Obligation of believing. Ask any whether one thought
ready to elicite Faith, hold's himself bound to Assent with a firm Adhesion,
because God speaks; Or Contrariwise, stand's as yet Houering and uncertain,
what to do. In case he clearly sees his Obligation, that necessarily implies
the evident Judgment we plead for, And hence arises a firm Faith. But if He
remains in a wavering Condition, ambiguous whether to believe or no, He can no
more resolve to Assent firmly upon God's infallible Testimony, than one in a
Journey doubting which of two ways to follow, can prudently prefer Further
urged,
the one before the other. A Judgment then which bring's all to an inuariahle
State of believing, is absolutely necessary: And hence Divines Teach, that none
can believe before he finds himself obliged to do so, And when He see's
clearly that obligation, he is bound under Sin to believe.

23. A further Reason hereof is thus, and seems very conuincing. Whoeuer
belieues induced by a doubtful or probable Judgment, without that degree of
Evidence now mentioned, Pash Faith, blamable
may Justly fear least by his too forward Assent, He imputes to God a falsehood,
reckoning that amongst the Articles of his ouerhasty Belief, which was never
revealed. This open wrong Sectaries seem to disown it.
Sectaries endeavor to avoid, who before they believe the Verities in
Scripture, Prerequire a high Moral certainty grounded on Universal Tradition,
whereby Assurance is given that the Books are Divine. As therefore a mere
probability would be too weak an Inductiue, to lead in that Faith they pretend
to; So it would be in our case also, and Consequently all must Come to a degrce
of Credible Evidence preuious to Faith, or Faith cannot stand firmly grounded.

24. Now seeing Evidence is necessary. There difficulties may occur* concerning
it. The first. What we understand by the Three difficulties, concerning this
Evidence.
Evidence hitherto only spoken of in General Terms. 2. From whence it proceeds?
3. What Christians have it? These particulars discussed, we shall easily make
way to our third Proposition, as also to the last Decision of the Difficulty
proposed.

25. Briefly, Evidence in this matter of Religion implies so strong a light, so
great a Moral certainty (at least) That every well disposed Understanding, may
without fear or hesitancy boldly Say. God founded this Religion. If this be
error, you great Soueraign have deceived us. This or none is the sure way to
Salvation. All other Sects are improbable. And to this sense that stout
Champion What this Evidence implies*
of Jesus Christ F. Edmund Campian Spoke vndantedly. Testor Dei Solium, and
illud tribunal ad quoad stabo etc. I call Heaven to witness, And that high
Tribunal where I shall once stand to give an Account of all I have said. Aut
nullum Caelum esse, aut nostrorum esse. That is. Either we Catholics are right
in Faith, or There is no Faith. Either Heaven is Ours, or there no such thing
as Heaven. The Evidence here touched on, though called Moral, is not yet
inferior to Physical certainty, Why Called Moral?
but bears that name, because the Nature and Tendency of it is such, And of so
great Conviction, that it quit's every rational Man of doubt, and peaceably
settles the mind in a quiet State, when the choice is made of true Religion.
Arnob. Lib. 2. Cont. Gent. Proves the truth here asserted by and excellent
Argument a Posteriori. Nisi aperta res esset etc. Unless, says he, Arnobius
his Argument.
Christian Religion had been manifest and more clear to all than Dayclight,
Incredulum humanum Genus etc. Man's nature most incredulous and hard of belief,
would never have consented to the difficult Mysteries of it. Hence S. Austin.
Lib. de vera Relig. C. S. Austin and S. Chrisostom accord.
2. Tells us, none can doubt which amongst so many Religions is true, And the
only safe way to Salvation. S. Chrysostom. Sermon. Quod Christus sit Deus. Says
more. Viz. That the Man is wholly stupid, Mad, and deuoid of sense, who sees
not so clear an Evidence, or, goes about to Contradict it.

26. The Reason hereof more largely handled in the other Treatise. Disc. 1. C.
8. is taken first from the Insinite knowledge and power of Almighty God, who in
founding Religion engaged as it were in a Dispute with Hell, Heresy, and all
Opposers. He engaged; Therefore He is sure to Convince, The fundamental
Ground, of our Assertion
otherwise it had been vain to have Commenced the Dispute (He began it not
either to be foiled, or to have it end in shame, or finally to leave the
matter doubtful). Now further, if He be sure to Convince and conquer, He does
it by the power and efficacy of rational Arguments, laid forth to all that have
the use of Reason, For, He Argues in behalf of these: But clear Arguments are
potent Orators, and plead so powerfully that they induce Reason to acquiesce,
and quit the understanding of all doubt. Herein lies the Evidence we enquire
after, whereof more presently.

27. I Say Clear. For were the Arguments doubtful, all would be left in
Suspense which Religion to embrace. Were Probability insufficient.
they only probable ( or more probable) then the pretended Arguments of
Sectaries, of Arians (for Example) are, They destroy not eo ipso Probability in
Arianism, or in any other false Sect, Therefore the Conviction drawn from these
Arguments must be so strong, That one (as is now noted) may without Hesitancy
The Strength of this Evidence.
boldly Say first. Induced by the force of Evidence, its manifest to reason
that God has founded one only true Religion. 2. Induced by the force of
Evidence, I'ts manifest, This and none but this, is the Religion, He founded.
3. Induced by the force of Evidence, its manifest to reason, that All other
Sects called Religions are false, And not only false, but in the highest degree
perniciously improbable.

28. These Assertions Stand firm, upon this one Principle. God Gouern's the
world (whereof no Christian doubt's). He The works in nature speak Gods power
and Wisdom
gives Being to every creature; His Power and Wisdom are most discernable by
these works in Nature. And shall we have no clear knowledge think ye of his
Wisdom, care, and singular Providence drawn from the Noble works of Grace, laid
open to all Men's View, and most manifest before our Eyes, in that admirable
Fabric of true Christian Religion, founded by him? Shall the works in Nature
speak plainly their Creator, And the Admirable wonders of Grace, be silent And
shall the manifest works of Grace be silent?
of their Author? The common Sense of all rational men disclaims the Paradox,
And must, if induced by Reason, acknowledge an Evidence in that Oracle whereby
God vouchsafes to Speak. But if a false Sect could either Surpass in its Marks
and Indications (or so much as Equalize) The true Religion, That Specious
Evidence leading to believe would Cease, and be so much Eclypsed that none
could by the force of Reason Say. This is the way that lead's to Heaven. This
is the Religion which God founded, And consequently all might shake of the
Obligation of believing, seeing none can believe without a preuious Clear
knowledge had of what, He is bound to Assent to. The Religion therefore, I am
obliged to live and dye in, must be Clearly made discernable by its Marks,
from all false Spurious Sects, or This obligation ceases, whereof enough is
said already.

CHAP. XV.
From whence the Evidence hitherto mentioned Proceed's? That Religion only is
reasonable, which Heaven declares reasonable. The Declaration is evidently made
in behalf of the Roman Catholic Religion. Who is the misled reasoning Man?
Other Particulars handled. The readiest way to Convince Sectaries.

1. IT remains now to Examine from whence the rational Evidence here pleaded
for, proceeds? Methinks That received Maxim in Schools. Qui dat Formam dat
Consequentia God who founded Religion
ad formam, Help's much to Answer pertinently; For if the Cause that gives a
Thing being, gives it also what is consequent or belongs to its Being, And if
all Unanimously agree concerning the Cause and Author of true Religion, This
necessarily follows,

2. The same God and infinite Goodness that founded Religion, lays also be fore
us the Evidence we Propugn. But Lays forth its rational Evidence.
an Evidence proceeding from such an Author (whose works are perfect) and is
annexed to the Religion which Wisdom it self gives Being to, must needs be
clear, and have force to Convince the most obdurate hearts; May Prudence Sway,
and Passion be laid aside. To explicate what is here said, is to prove it. All
know that God, who will have us walk to our last End by obscure Faith, gives no
Evidence of the Mysteries Considered in Themselves, For none knows the

Trinity, or that great work of the Incarnation by any Evident It is called the
Evidence of Credibility. On what it is grounded.
Principle clearly proposed to Reason, Therefore the Evidence we seek after,
must be Extrinsick to the Mysteries believed, which Divines rightly call the
Evidence of Credibility, and it is grounded upon those visible supernatural
works of Grace, which an infinite Power only can produce, And upon this ground
I Said, The same God that found's Religion, lays before the Eye of reason its
rational Evidence also.

3. Hence I boldly Assert (and It Is no less of singular comfort to all Faithful
belieuers, then of shame and Confusion to Heavens declaration.
Jews and Heretics). That Religion only is reasonable (and brings with it an
Obligation of believing) which Heaven it self declares reasonable. That
Religion only is reasonable, which Evidently Supernat^ral Signs.
bears the Marks the Characters, and Supernatural signatures of an Infinite
Power and Wisdom. That Religion only is reasonable, which ha^ been approved by
the public Judgment of the very best, the most choice Publicly approved.
and learned, who have lived since the Creation of the world. That Religion
only is reasonable, which by God's special Assistance has wrought Admirable
Conuersions. Never Censured.
Strange Conuersions, gives in Evidence of undoubted Miracles, preserue^ unity,
and was never yet Censured by any known Orthodox Christian. That Religion
finally, is only reasonable, which Assures every one by a present Universal
Tradition of a Church diffused the whole world over; What God has Said, what
Christ has taught, and what Doctrine the Apostles preached. Here is both Reason
and (in Tradition) the Rule That gives Assurance.
of Faith with it. Find me out then such a Faith, such a Religion as evidences
these Illustrious Marks, the Cognisances and Signs of Heaven, that is only
reasonable, or none ever was, or can be accounted Reasonable.

4. We are now in the last place to Examine, what Prophets, what Teachers, or
finally what Church, have been Signalized with these strong pleading
Testimonies, with these Signs and Marks of Who, or what Religion can show these
Masks and Signs?
Power and Wisdom? The Jewish Church had them in some measure, when Almighty
God. Exodus. 9. 16. told Moses Posui te etc. I have placed thee my Servant, vt
^stendam in te fortitudinem meam, to show my Power and Might, And that by thee,
my name may be spoken of through the whole earth. Certainly Christ our Lord
manifested yet far greater Wonders. John. 15. 24. If I had not done among them
works which no other Man has done etc. Whilst the blessed Apostles preached,
none can doubt of their Miraculous Signs, which Heaven Euidenced, and God
himself manifested by them. Thus much supposed, and no Sectary can Question
the certainty of my Supposition.

5. I will come nearer home, And to lay Forth the Evidence of the Roman
Catholic Church, Speak this great truth. None but She, ever Since those
Apostolical times, has had not only the like Unity in Faith, The like
Supernatural Marks and The effects of power and wisdom
wonders wrought in Her, by an Infinite Power and Wisdom, But also more
Miracles, greater Conuersions, a greater number of Belieuers, and Consequently
a more Universal consent of Hearts joined together in one Belief. In a word as
full an refulgent in the Marks of the Roman Catholic Church
Evidence every way, as the Apostolical Church was made glorious withal.
Therefore Reason cannot but acknowledge, that this Oracle ever since these
first blessed Men preached, is the only Marked and Manifested Church in the
world. Deny the Evidence we Propugn; its own Sensibility and Visibility Obuious
to all, that have Eyes to see, or Ears to hear, is our Proof, And because it
stand's upon clear Principles both Sensible and Visible, we do here Challenge
all the Heathens, all the Jews, and all the Sectaries in the world, to bring
to light any thing The Evidence because Sensible, i^ undeniable,
like it, in behalf of that they call Religion. But there is no fear hereof,
For such an Attempt would be desperate, yea utterly impossible.

6. Now if on the other side, the Evidence here pleaded be granted the Church,
We have our Intent, For this Principle If granted* we have our Intent.
stand's firm. Where God preserues the same Evidence of Credibility, Where He
set's before all the legible Characters, the Public Signatures of his own
Power and wisdom, There Reason cannot but acquiesce. By such lights and no
other, it must be guided, and take direction to find out Truth. Upon these
Grounds,

7. I Say lastly. True Religion is easily discovered by Obuious, By what Reason
true Religion is found.
reason, And in this sense, Reason Regulat's Faith, but. know withal; That,
that Man's Reason only is reasonable in this weighty matter, which has for its
Object the Signal Marks of an Infinite Power and Wisdom now hinted at, and
Argues by them. Whoeuer therefore makes choice of Religion, and is not induced
to believe by these public Indications. which. Heaven True and misled Reason,
distinguished.
manifest's, err's grossly, is seduced, and Judges falsely. And, thus we
distinguish between false and true Reason. The misled discoursing Man makes his
own formal Act, Reason, whilst he pitches on a Doctrine, and auouches that
reasonable, before he knows by any rational Motive, whether God be Author of
it or no. So Sectaries proceed in every thing they believe, as Protestants.
Contrariwise, One that is guided by right and prudent Reason See's, before He
belieues ( Scio cui credidi) that weighty Obiectiue Evidence, whereby Millions
have been gained to Christ. Hence I Say. As that Man only belieues with Divine
Faith, who Assent's unto what God has Revealed, So He only follows Wh^t bose
are that follow reason in points of Faith?
true reason, who is induced to believe upon God's own Evidence, laid forth to
Reason. For I hold this Principle indubitable. The Author of Religion, gives it
also a rational Evidence of Credibility. Whoeuer follows not that Light, run's
astray, and cannot believe.

8. By all hitherto noted we may yet more clearly Discover, what is meant by
this word, Reason, in our present Controversy? Briefly, it imports (as is
already said) an Intellectual light grounded By all said: we better understand
what is meant by Reason.
upon the Evidence of Supernatural Motives, which God from the beginning of
Christianity has manifested to every rational Understanding, and by it induced
the wisest of the world, to become Orthodox Christians.

9. A second Inference. By this easy obuious Rule of Reason grounded upon
rational Motives, All Controversies relating to Religion are clearly ended. For
find me out the forementioned Evidence of Credibility, Those signal Marks, I
mean, of an Infinite Power and Wisdom, We have with them the manifested Oracle,
whereby God Speaks to the world. Now whoeuer refuses to hear God's own Language
spoken by such an Controu^rsies ended, by reason.
Oracle, is of necessity thrown into a State of perplexity, For thus, if reason
regulates, he must Discourse. Shall I deny this Evidence of Miracles, of
Conuersions, of Vniuersallity to the Roman Catholic Church? I deny that which
the whole world How Reason discourses in this matter of Religion.
owns, and is visible to Sense. Shall I grant all, and Say its forceless, or
infufficient to induce to believe that Oracle? I Destroy the rational Evidence
of Christianity, yea of the Apostles Themselves, And cannot believe either
Prophet or Apostle, were such Messengers sent now from Heaven to teach me. For
no particular Prophet, no Apostle, ever showed the like full Evidence of
Credibility, as this one Oracle has manifested to the world, for fixteen Ages.

10. A. 3. Inference. Sectaries never yet took, nor can Sectaries follow no
probable way of ending Controversies.
take the easy, right, and Reasonable way of writing, much less, of Ending
Controversies. This one Principle proves the Assertion. As the Truth of
Christian Doctrine stand's firm, when an Euidenced Church teaches it, So by the
Nullity of an Euidenced Church, you may, in this present State, easily gather
the uncertainty, and falsehood of any Doctrine taught Contrary to that Oracle.
But most evidently Sectaries have no Euidenced Church which ever taught their
Doctrine, or opposed ours; Therefore they are impossibilitated to write, much
more to The Reason why they cannot.
follow any short, easy, or rational way of ending Controversies, by an
Euidenced, Oracle, which yet as St Austin cited above against the Donatists
says, is, in the first place to be found out. This found by her Marks, and
Signatures (And Digito demonstrari potest Adds the Holy Doctor, its pointed out
with your Finger) all further Contest ceases, or might we speak in Cardinal de
Riclelieu's own words, lately quoted, Seems little profitable, because The true
Church cannot but Ascertain all of true Doctrine.

11. Hence you have a 4th Inference. Sectaries who in all their quarrelling
Polemicks Still insist upon particular Controversies. The Real presence,
Transubstantiation, The worshipping of Images etc. And dare not so much as offer
to have their Protestancy Sectaries make known the weakness of their own cause.
tried by the Judgment of any Euidenced. Orthodox Church, Publish to the world
the weakness of their vndefensible Cause, and plainly give over to plead by
Reason.

12. I Will tell you a Story for the substance very true, concerning a Discourse
between a Pert Nouellist, and a Catholic. The first would needs debate the
Controversy of the Real Presence of Christ in the Eucharist. The Catholic,
though Sectaries manting an Euidenced Church.
not very learned, yet of a good Judgment; willing to see some effect of the
Conference, prudently demanded, upon what Grounds the Dispute was to be held
on, and finally ended? The other replied upon Scripture; But said the
Catholic, what shall be done, If you and I agree not about the Sense of
Scripture? Nouellist. We are if things be so, to Appeal to the Fathers. Catho.
But what if we vary as much about the Sense of Fathers, as about Scripture?
Nouellist. We are then to recurr to the Primitive Church, and examine what
Doctrine are driven off all grounds of Arguing
She delivered, relating to our Question in those purer times? Catho. O Sr, We
are yet in Darkness, far off from the last sound Principle, For how shall you
and I, after our private perusing those few ancient Records left us, end our
debate, whilst you will turn them to one Sense, and I to another? Nouel. Reason
shall end all. Catho. That I wish for, But quit me yet of one Scruple. What if
your private Reason be biased one way, and mine another? Or, what if you Judge
that Reasonable, which I do not? Here the Nouellist like one struck dumb,
spoke not a word.

13. Yet the Discourse might well have gone on, for I would have further
inquired, whether to do as all the Christians what is to be Judged reasonable?
in the world, learned and unlearned have done, be not reasonable? None can
deny it. Then I would have inferred. But all these Innumerable Christians, The
very Apostles themselves, and others have upon prudent Motives Constantly
judged it reasonable, to submit to Mysteries above the reach of humane Reason,
Ergo that must pass as a reasonable Principle; But the Reason cannot be taken
from the very Act The Evidence of Credibility, not taken from Faith.
of submission, For that is Faith, nor from any Evidence in the Mystery
believed, or obscurely proposed, nor finally from Scripture alone, for that
Book Considered in it self, is not its own Evidence, Therefore the Evidence of
Credibility, Or the Evidence Proposed to Reason, is extrinsecal to what ever I
believe, and fundamentally lies in the Marks, and Signatures of Christ's own
manifested Church.

14. Hence I Conclude with this Dilemma, and hold it unanswerable. Either God
has set before all Men's Eyes An Oracle (which now teaches truth) most
discernable by clear Marks and Motives from all false erring Societies, Or
omitted to do so. Grant the first, Reason is as much obliged to believe A
Conuincing Dilemma.
that Signalized Oracle now, As the Primitive Christians were anciently bound
to believe the Apostles. Say Contrary; There is no such Marked Oracle
distinguishable from erring Sectaries, Reason is left in a Labyrinth, and shall
never find out true Religion, Wherefore Protestants who seemingly stand for
Reason, and slight the Doctrine of our Euidenced Sectaries unreasonable.
Church, are the men amongst all other, most unreasonable, and as daily
experience teaches, mere Scepticks in matter of Religion.

15. A 5th. Inference. The readiest way to convince a Sectary How they are
easily Convinced?
(and one though no great Clerk may easily do it) is in the first place, at
least, to wave that long tedious work of handling particular Controversies
(which depend upon Authority) and to plead by Reason; Thus I would Argue, and
have often done so, with good Success. You as a Protestant, lay claim to a
reasonable Reformation, and consequently to a Reasonable Religion, Say I
beseech you, from whence have you the Moral Evidence, which makes this
Reformation Credible to Reason? I speak not yet of it is Truth, for Evidence of
Credibility e(...) preced's the anouching of it true. We Catholics proceed
heartily, Evidence of Credibility is first to be laid forth.
and propose to the reason of every one learned and unlearned, the very Marks
and Signs of truth, manifest in our Church, which Christ our Lord and the
Apostles euidenced to the sirst Converted Christians. You set up a new faced
Religion, and when that is done, put it out of Countenance, because Reason sees
nothing in it, which has appearance of Credibility. You avouch it true, before
you make it Credible, which Sectaries avouch their reformation true, before it
be made Credible.
is to put the Conclusion before the Premises.

16. One perhaps will Say first. The reason of your Reformation stand's upon
this rational Ground, that we Catholics were deformed, or out of all right
fashion in our Religion. Lamentable. And are you the doughty Doctors that must
mend what was marred, and prescribe a new Model of Religion? Can you Say what
is, or what is not Catholicism? It is too much Boldness not only to teach more
learned then They make a false supposition, their Proof.
you Selves, But a high Injury also, to make a mere Supposition (and very false
too) to pass for a rational Proof. You know we deny your improbable
Supposition, And you upon no Principle call it reasonable. Howeuer; Suppose the
falsehood, that we are out of Fashion, does it therefore follow that you are
got into the right Mode of Religion? No truly; If the Supposition stand's, we
are both out, And both need a new Reformation.

17. Some may yet Reply. Sectaries regard not that new coined word of Evident
Credibility (a Term wholly Popish) They endeavor to prove the Truth of
Protestancy by Scripture and Fathers, And to do so much, is more than to make
it Credible. Contra. 1. Were it possible (as it is not) to prove the truth of
Protestancy, That Is besides the matter here in hand, They are still besides the
matter now agitated.
whilst we only Treat of ending Controversies by Reason. Now all know that
Authority, whose Credibility must first be Euidenced before it have weight (
precisely considered as Authority) is not the Reason here spoken of. For
Example: I Assent to the Mystery of the Incarnation upon Gods own Authority,
that is Faith, but no rational Inducement to believe. What we demand of
Sectaries, is to have the rational Motives which induce to believe this
Protestancy, laid open before the Eyes of rational men? Herein we require
Satisfaction, but have none.

18. Contra. 2. Could these men prove their Protestancy by If the Reformation
could be proved true.
Scripture and Fathers, it should, Methinks, be very easy to point at an
Orthodox Church which Six Ages since, publicly owned the particular Tenets of
it. Here is my Reason. Whateuer Doctrine the Scripture and Fathers teach, the
Orthodox Church conceal's not, but openly Professes. She is not ashamed, if
Orthodox, to teach what God has revealed. Now further. Some Orthodox Church
must have owned it.
Had such a Church ever owned this Reformation, it must either have been like
an invisible Ghost, not perceptible (which our Newer Sectaries Disclaim) or
contrariwise discernable, by the like Marks and Signatures of the Apostolical
Church, And if their Doctrine was ever taught by it, They are to talk no more of
its Truth, before Its Credibility be euidenced to Reason, by the Marks and
Signs of that Church, which is now supposed to have taught pure Protestancy.
That is in a word, They are first obliged to Say plainly, what Articles of
Faith, Protestants (as Protestants) hold Essential to their Religion, And then
to make so much Doctrine, and no more, first Credible, then true, by the known
Authority of an Orthodox Church. But This is impossible. Hence.

19. And it is the last Inference, whereby one grand Cheat of our Sectaries is
discovered. Long have we inquired but without Satifaction, Where their Church
was before Luther? The Common Answer returned by some latter. Protestants,
making little Account of an invisible Church, is much to this Sense. Our Church
was there where it now is, and where it always was, The same Christian Church
as before the Reformation, Having lost nothing that made it so. And if you
Object. The Church in How our Adversaries. Shuffle.
England before Luther was certainly Popish, now its Protestant, Ergo it is not
the same Church, They Answer and vow it to be the very same, though it ceased
to hold Popery.

20. Much might be said against these mere Empty words. I Will here only
entertain you with two Reflections upon the whole. Paralogism. First it makes
the worst of Heresies defensible, For might not Arius have pleaded in like
manner. My Church They make the worst of Heresies defensible,
is where it was besore, The very same Christian Society, though changed into
Arianism, as the ancient Religion in England, now is into Protestanism. So also
the Pelagians, The Macedonians, and all other Heretics could have Argued,
excepting perhaps a few Donatists, who confined the whole Church to their
little Part in Afric. Again, As the Thing is reformed., it passes with
Protestants for a Part of the Catholic Church, Therefore as reformed, its
supposed a Piece of Reasonable Religion (Sectaries And their Reformation
unreasonable,
pretend not to an unreasonable Reformation) And i'ft be So, before the
Professors of it talk of the Truth of this Reformation, They are obliged to
make it Credible, by such Miracles, Signs, and wonders as an Infinite Power
and Wisdom (and no other) Proposes to Reason. But all is contrary. They begin,
Becauss stripped of all rational Motives.
and bring in a Reformation so naked and stripped of rational Motives, that none
can Say. God himself declares it reasonable, by any Signature, which may be
esteemed an effect of his Power and Wisdom, Or in a word Supernatural.

21. And here in passing, You have the true Reason, why Sectaries in their
Polemicks, keep close to the Procedure of all condemned Heretics. The Arians,
for Example, never Sectaries follow the strain of Condemned, Heretics.
went about to give Reason the least Satisfaction, in behalf of their Rupture
made with the Church, but leaving that Rational way, pleaded by Scripture. So
do Protestants. Before they had Shown any thing like a rational Evidence of
Credibility, to countenance that shameful Divorce, They voted it Just. So do
Protestants. Wauing the Ancient Sense of Scripture received by the Church, they
glossed it after their fashion. So do Protestants. Tradition, that strong
Tenure whereby the Church hold's Her best Inheritance, or Deriues Christ's
Doctrine down from Age No Motives Proposed to Reason.
to Age, The Arians slighted, And so do Protestants. But All this while, though
we earnestly wish to hear of Motives proposed to Reason, whereby this
Reformation may be made Credible, we are turned off with mere Talk, And never
yet heard, or shall hear os more Evidence for That, than the worst of Arians,
can allege for Arianism. Wherefore, I conclude, Protestancy is an unreasonable
Nouelty, and consequently no Religion, for merely to Say a Religion is true,
and from God, before it be made Credible by Supernatural Signs, Vphold's
Arianism, Donatism, Quakerism and the greatest fooleries in the world.

CHAP. XVI.
Objections solued. Sectaries pretending not to Se the Churches Evidence, are
either blind, or wilfully shut their Eyes. The Assertion clearly proved. A
Parallel of the Primitive, and the present Churches Evidence. How far Reason
may be said to Regulate Faith.

1. AGainst our pleading Evidence of Credibility for Catholic Religion
manifested by the Luster of supernatural Motives, One may first Object. Every
Man's private Why the Evidence of Credibility is most Conuincing.
Reason is to Judge whether this Evidence Conuinces, or no, And consequently
the last Judgment belong's to the Tribunal of private Reason. I have Answered.
The Evidence (upon two rational Principles) is so great that it cannot but
convince, First because the Author of it is no other but God, who certainly was
no Impostor when he set before Reason the light of most glorious Supernatural
Signs, And by virtue of Two Reasons
them, has induced both Jews and Gentiles to believe in Christ. 2. Because,
That which the most Wise and Learned of the Christian world, have Judged
Evidently reasonable, May upon so great Authority, be supposed Reasonable. But
All those Vast Multitudes Converted to true Christian Religion, have Judged the
Evidence of Credibility manifest in the Church, both rational and conuincing,
Therefore, it is so.

2. Hence it follows. 1. That the, true Judgment concerning The Judgment
long Since given, now is not reuersable.
this Evidence, was long since given, antecedently to the weak Censure of this
or that particular man, who now would Cauil at it. 2. That all Exceptions made
against it, are evidently unreasonable upon this ground, That those Thousands
and Thousands most Wise and Learned, who owned the Evidence, And have been
induced by it to believe; must (if Misled) be No other Inducements, excogitable.
accounted not only temerarious, but also Mad, besotted, and grossly Seduced by
Fooleries. This cannot be Granted. Perhaps you will Say. Those Wise and Learned
believed upon other Inducements, Distinct from our Churches Motives. Answ. Not
one can be Assigned distinct from these, if we speak of Motives Proposed to
Reason, as is proved already.

3. A. 2. Objection. Sectaries for all this, Pretend not to se the Churches
Evidence. I Answer; it is not for want of Light, but for want of Ey-sight, That
is, bebause they will be blind Thousands, As is now Said, as Wise and Learned
as they, have Sectaries want not light, but Eyesight
seen the Light and followed it, Why then do They stumble in Darkness, when the
same Evidence is Set before their Eyes? I have no other Answer, but what Truth
it Self Delivers. Joan. 1. The Son of God, The Light of the world came amongst
us, Et mundus eunt non cognouit. The world would not know him, Both Jews and
Gentiles wilfully shut their Eyes, to the Signal Marks of his sacred Preaching,
And so do Sectaries at this day, to the Churches Evidence.

4. Some may Reply. What we now Say, is only to Preach, and not to Prove, For
how can we Euince that Sectaries Shut their Eyes to any Light of Evidence?
Answ. They wilfully Shut their Eyes
Enough is proved Already, Howeuer to come closer to the Matter, and to leave
them without all excuse, I Will Add one word more, which shall be Conuincing.

5. Pray you Imagine, That some of our Sectaries had lived in those happy Days,
when the Holy Evangelists set forth the Life of our blessed Savior, And the
Apostles preached his Sacred Doctrine to the first Converted Christians: Would
not An Argument drawn from the primitive Evidence.
They think ye, have as readily believed what ever Doctrine those Blessed men
then wrote, and Preached, As the other vast Multitudes who came flocking in,
believed? Yes Certainly, Their Obstinacy, though great; would not have
surpassed that of Jews and Gentiles, These yielded, after they heard such
Oracles speak, And so I think Sectaries would have done also.

6. Now I Demand (and the Question is very pertinent) upon what Evidence of
Credibility; By what prudential Motives laid forth to Reason, could These men
(had they then The Primitive Evidence of Credibility, was not, as some may
Imagine
been in the world) believed that S. Matthew (for example) wrote truly the
Life, and Preached exactly the Doctrine of Jesus Christ? Did God Ascertain all
men then living by private Revelation, that the Evangelist was his Divine
Oracle? Or, did He openly proclaim that Verity to the world by an audible
Voice, in the Air? Was an Angel sent from Heaven to testify, that S. Matthew
delivered Truth, and nothing but Truth? Or, was the Holy Ghost seen in any
visible Form to suggest all He spoke and wrote, And to secure his tongue and
hand from Error in every Syllable, in every least Iota? No. Although God could
have done all this and more, yet we read of no such Wonders.

7. Say Therefore, Upon what prudent Motives, by what Evidence of Credibility
would Sectaries, had they then lived, been Induced (with Jews and Gentiles) to
believe the Words and Writings of this one blessed Evangelist, or of any other
The Brt^^itiue Evidence explained.
Infallible Oracle? The Gospel Answers. Luke 16. They went forth and preached
every where; Our Lord working with them, Confirming the word with Signs which
followed, And the Signs are known to all. They cast out Devils, raised the
Dead, cured the Infirm, Suffered persecution, Converted Nations to the Faith of
Christ; which was one, and perhaps not the least, among their many other
glorious Miracles. The great Apostle Heb. 2. 4. Speak's most significantly this
Sense. God withal testifying by Signs and wonders, and diverse Miracles and
Distributions of the Holy Ghost, according to his will. Here we have the
Apostolical Evidence laid before us, And by it the Doctrine they taught made
Credible to Reason. Hence I Argue.

8. But most certainly the Roman Catholic Church, and The Roman Catholic
Church only Shows the like Evidence,
no other Society, demonstrat's the very same Miracles, the very same Signs
and wonders, not one Excepted, as is largely proved above, And to raise Her
Glory above that, which a short, time allowed not the primitive Christians to
Se, Hitherto never wanted the trial of a 1671 years Persecution from Heathens,
with an Aduentage.
Turcks, Heretics, licentious Catholics, and Devils also, And yet, to Gods
Glory be it, She keep's Her Posture Still, immovable, Invincible.

9. One word more. Had we lived in those happy Days, Particulars insisted on.
we should have seen or heard of a great Conversion, wrought by our Savior
upon one Zacheus, a Principal Publican, a rich man, and a Sinner. A plain
Miracle cries one of the Older Protestants, And therefore The Conversion comes
in with an Ecce. Behold the wonder. It this so? was it indeed a Miracle?
strange Conuersion^.
Ecce. Behold Innumerable notorious Sinners, accustomed to vice Converted to
the true Faith, and reclaimed from their lewdness by the incessant Labor of
this one Roman Catholic Society.

10. Again, Had we lived in those Days, we should have seen or heard of a
Courageous S. Stephen who sealed with his blood, that very Doctrine which the
Evangelists wrote, And the Apostles afterward Preached, We should have seen or
heard how Martyrdoms
zealously the blessed man prayed for his merciless Persecutors, And from
thence have concluded, no other but God, gave the Martyr that Courage to fight
on to the end, and Charity to dye as He did most Gloriously. Here cast your
thoughts again upon the Roman Catholic Church in after Ages, and Manifest in
the Church.
Ecce, Behold, for one S. Stephen you have had Thousands armed with Courage,
with Charity, and Constancy, who as behooued true Valiant Soldiers of Jesus
Christ, stoutly shed their blood for that very Doctrine, She maintains at this
day.

11. Thirdly, had you lived in those days, you would Contempt of the world in
those Primitive tirnes.
have heard a new Doctrine preached contrary to corrupted nature, and the worlds
Vanity, you would have seen moreover whole Multitudes of Conuerts, repair to
the Apostles, and cast their wealth down at their feet, calling nothing their
own, but God only, who rich in Mercy was their Possession; And would you not
have Said, after to great a wonder, such Preachers were certainly inspired by
the Holy Ghost to teach, And that those who complied with the Doctrine, were
faithful Servants of the most high God? None can doubt it. The like in the
Church, at this day.
Now. Ecce: Behold, the very same Learning is yet, and has been ever taught in
the Roman Catholic Church, And to prove by real Effects, of what Power it is,
Thousands, ouerflowing with worldly Fortune slighted all, and to contemn the
Vanity retired Themselves; Some into Desert places, others to the Solitude of
Religious Cells, where rich in Virtue, they lived and dyed happily. Thus much,
for a hint only.

12. Besides, we have in this ancient Mother Church, other More Advantages
yet. Rules of Perfecteon.
great Advantages of Holiness and Devotion, answerable to the Practice of the
Primitive times. We want not those, who earnestly strive to observe the highest
Rules of perfection, and to follow the footsteps of the most blessed Saints,
that now are glorious in Heaven. We want not Means to reclaim Imitation of
Saints. Means to reclaim sinners, Submission.
the most obdurate Sinners; and to help on aspiring Souls in the Exercise of
mental Prayer, and Divine Contemplation. We want not Doctrine worthy of God, set
forth in the profound Mysteries of our Faith, nor a dutiful Submission to them
by the greatest Capacities of the world. We want not our Fasts, our long
Abstinences, and other Corporal Mortifications Hard lodging, poor Fare, course
Apparel, watchings, And the like medicinal Austerities weary not out, but prove
delightsome to Innumerable, that might have had both pleasure Fasts and
Austerities.
and plenty in a secular Condition.

13. By the little here briefly hinted at, you may learn (though a volume might
be written of this Subject) How exactly the Roman Catholic keeps Parallel in
every particular with that Primitive and most perfect Christian Society. The
The Parallel Every way, Exact.
Evidence of* Credibility is the very same in both Churches. The signatures of
Divine Power and Wisdom, are no less illustrious in the Church at this Day,
than when the Apostles preached.

14. Hence I Argue, And remind the Reader of my Proposition above, much to this
sense. Sectaries either Se, or A most pressing Argument drawn
will not Se the Evidence of our Church Motives, already spoken of. These
Conuersions, these Miracles, These Martyrdoms, These Austerities etc. Appear to
them no less clear Effects of Gods Divine Power now, than the very like
Signatures or Motives appeared to the first Converted Christians, when the
Apostles Preached. Say; They are no less clear, no less perswasiue From what is
Said already.
now, Sectaries are as much obliged to follow this light of Evidence, And to
believe the Church, as they would have been obliged to believe the Apostles,
Had they been Eve-witnesses of their Wonders, and heard them Preach. Say
Contrary. The Evidence of Credibility seems much abated, from what it was in
those Primitive times, I Will first urge these Nouellists to give a Disparity
between that ancient Evidence, whereby Nations were Converted, And this we now
plead for, And if none can be given (as manifestly there is none) I must
conclude they are either blind and Se not, what the whole world has seen, Or
which is a Truth, that they wilfully shut their Sectaries Obstinate.
Eyes, and upon that Account are peruersly Obstinate.

15. Again, Because such Miracles, and those other Signs are manifest in the
Roman Catholic Church, and in no other Society of Christians, I will Demand,
what God (for they Gods Intention was not, to delude any,
are the works of his own Power) intended by them? Was his meaning think ye, to
fool the world? To delude poor Christians? To Contenance and Color falsehood,
by His By His admirable Wonders.
own admirable Wonders? Most certainly, No. For, they have not only inclined,
but obliged all to believe Christ's Doctrine under pain of damnation. Again,
Truth it Self can oblige none to Err, The very light of nature teaches, there
never was, nor will be any necessity for God to work Miracles, in Confirmation
He loves truth for truth.
of Falsehood, which He abhorr's, loving Truth for Truth, as well in others, as
in Himself.

16. Some, who for stark Shame, cannot deny all our Churches Miracles, grant
many, and withal Assent to the other signal Motives already Specified. Yet. 3.
Object. None of them have any necessary Connection with Truth. I have Answered
above. This Argument either destroies the first great Evidence of Christianity,
manifest in our Saviors wonders and the Apostles, or becomes forceless.
Besides, the Ground of it The ground of chis Objection, worth nothing.
hinted at, is null, For I have proved already a necessary Connection between a
Real Miracle, and Truth, upon this conuincing Principle. True Miracles, as is
now Supposed, are, and have been wrought in the Church, And by no other but by
the Infinite Po^er of God (they surpass the force of Nature) Therefore Wisdom
it Self either deceiues, equiuocates, and openly speak's Real Miracles infer
truth
untruth, when He shows these supernatural wonders, Or this Inference stand's
firm. A real Miracle and Truth are necessarily con^exed.

17. Others Argue. 4. And more impertinently. Were All that profess the Roman
Catholic Religion, holy and virtuous, we might better plead for the Churches
Evidence of Credibility, But many, and very many are great Sinners, and this
seems much to obscure Her Evidence. Now if we retort the Whither sin and
sinners can obscure the Evidence of Credibility?
Argument upon Sectaries, and tell them also of their lewd Livers, that Dar^en
Protestancy, its easily replied, ( and very truly) They have no Evidence of
Credibility to Obscure. Therefore We, who certainly have it, and not They, are
obliged to Solue the Objection. Answ. That Is quickly don. And to solue it, I am
once more to lead our Nouellists to those hapy Days of the Primitive Age, and
Demand, Whether all The Answer is negative, and
then, were Saints? No certainly. We read of a wicked Judas, who betrayed his
Master, Christ our Lord. Say I heseech you, would that have extinguished the
luster of Christ's Glorious Miracles, or withdrawn them from believing in the
true Messiah? We Read also of a covetous Demas that abandoned S. Paul, and
returned to the world. Demas me reliquit, diligens hoe s^culum, would his bad
Example have obscured the Apostles Wonders, Proved by many Examples in the
Primitive times.
or made the Belief of His Doctrine, less firm? Finally we read of an
incestuous Corinthian, infamous for Luxury, would Sectaries think ye thereupon,
have been dismayed, or given over the Practice of Virtue, because he was
naught? Not at all. For if Wise, they know, that Cockle and Wheat grow up
together in the same large field of the Church, and it will be so (the Gospel
is my warrant) until the Harvest, makes the separation. Say then, did those
Iudases, those Demases, those Incontinent Livers dishearten any, or Eclyp's in
the least that Apostolical Evidence We speak of, when vast Multitudes were
found faithful and eminently virtuous? You will Answer No. Why therefore should
lewd Livers at this day, Eclyp's, Sin Eclypses not
or discountenance the Glorious Evidence of the Roman Catholic Church, whilst
we find in it, Innumerable just, Innumerable strong in Faith, confident in
Hope, Zealous in Charity, And The resulgent signs of power and Wisdom.
moreover, which is ever to be noted, behold to our great Comfort, Gods own
illustrious Signatures most apparent Age after Age, in this one Blessed Society
of Christians?

18. Some to Oppose what we said above, Object in the. 5. Place. The Church
cannot be according to the Principles Another Objection
of a Catholic the Rule of Faith, But contrariwise, the Catholics own
internal Judgment of Reason, must regulate, For this makes the best Catholics
in the world, to believe the Church. If you will have a Proof Hereof: Ask any
knowing Orthodox Christian, Why he hold's the Church His Rule of Faith, He
cannot Answer, because He belieues so, but will presently tell you, He is
assured of that truth by prudent Reason. Answ. No man, whether Sectary or
Catholic, can make his own internal Judgment, though fancied reasonable a
hundred times over, the Rule of Faith, Unless more be added. Now If you
enquire Pretended Reason, without rational. Evidence, no Rule of Faith.
after what I express by this word. More? I Answer. It implies an Obiectiue
Evidence, set before every rational understanding which laid hold on, makes a
the Judgment Reasonable, without this Obiectiue Light, or Evidence, every
condemned Heretic, may nickname things, and call his own fancy Reasonable,
though He has nothing like a rational Motive to settle it upon. This is the
main thing to be noted, in our present controversy.

19. Now here is the whole Contest between us and Sectaries. We ground our
Judgment of Credibility upon such an Evidence of Motives as Converted the
world, We say, An Infinite The Catholics rational Evidence grounded.
Goodness cannot permit the world to be led into Error, by Evident Miracles,
^uident Conuersions, and other both Signal, and Supernatural Wonders. All this
is Reason, and undeniable reason, The Signs are Manifest, Sensible, and
Visible. In the next place, We urge Sectaries to speak in behalf of
Protestancy, or to give in the like Evidence for that Nouelty? They recoyle,
draw back, and talk (it is true) of Reason, but turn us off with the bare word
alone, having no obiectiue Evidence to ground a rational Judgment upon. I
Sectaries have none at all.
speak truth, And will defend it. No more can these men, if you set aside A
selfe-wilful Persuasion, satisfy Reason why they believe as they do, then the
worst of Arians tell you, why they believe Arianism.

20. It would be ridiculous in this contest, to bring in Scripture as a Rule
of their Faith. For first we here enquire not after the Object of their Belief,
But call for rational Motives, whereby they are induced to believe Protestancy.
2. We Say, Though Scripture were in a General way owned Scripture here not
pleadable.
The most immediate Rule, and the Sense of it could be known by the private
Reason of some men in the world, yet The Sectary gain's nothing upon the
Concession, because He knows not, nor shall ever know upon any sure Principle,
That his The Reason.
Reason has the singular Privilege to hit right on the Scriptures true Sense,
whilst all His Adversaries (and they are very many) openly oppose it, as
improbable.

21. One may yet reply. For as much as The Sectary Belieues, which is not much
(For it lies in a few Fundamentals) If the protestant abstract's from what
Doctrine he likes not.
He has the same Evidence of Credibility as we Catholics have, And so far
ioyn's with us in Belief: In other Matters of Contest, He neither Belieues,
nor Disbelieues, but Abstract's from all. Contra. 1. Thus the Arians and all
Heretics proceed, who first choose, and lay claim to so many Tenets of
Christian Doctrine as pleases Fancy, and then tell us, They have Reason to
choose, to Divide, and separate from the rest. We why may not the Arian do the
like?
demand (and here is the main Point)* what rational Evidence have they to do
so? Who made Beggars (For all they have, they took from the Church) such bold
Chusers? Again, if they prescind or abstract, They are obliged to Design an No
Church favors this Doctrine.
euidenced Orthodox Church, which abstracted like them, and positiuely taught
so much Doctrine is precisely necessary to Salvation, And no more. This is
impossible. O yes. The Primitive Church seems to have abstracted from many
Doctrins now taught by the Roman Catholic. Contra. Who tell's you so? Your
lame Negative way of Arguing? We read not of Purgatory, nor of
Transubstantiation etc. Pitiful. The euidenced Roman Catholic Church by Her
Constant Tradition speak's of both, and also positiuely auouches, that all now
taught, was then Anciently delivered, Here is our Principle, and we Sectaries
urged to name the Orthodox Church, which abstracted as they do now.
urge Sectaries to oppose it by producing the Authority of another more ancient
Church, which Spoke then, as they speak now, Or which abstracted from such
Particular Doctrins, as they would abstract from. But this is Impossible. Out
of all I Conclude, Sectaries have no Evidence of Credibility for any Doctrine
believed by them, and Consequently no true Faith at all, but Opinions only, and
those false too. Now we must solue two or three difficulties of another Nature.

22. A. 6. Objection. Reason Assures the Catholic, that God speak's by the
Oracle of the Church. Ergo, his Another Objection.
Faith is vltimatly resolved into Reason. I Deny the Consequence, For if we
make a right Analysis, The Act of Faith is not yet in Being, in that Sign, or
Priority of Nature, when Prudence tell's Him. God speak's by the Church. The
nature of that Judgment, serves only to induce the understanding to Faith, or
to fix it upon an unvariable state of Believing, And Consequently must be
resolved, into its own clear Principles, Preuiously penetrated, before the
Catholic belieues. Faith follows, and relies immediately upon its own Object,
which is God's Revelation proposed by the Church, or by Scripture infallibly
interpreted. Now,

23. If you Object. 7. It is my private Reason which The equiuccation
discovered.
makes me to believe the Church. I Answer. The Proposition is equiuocal, For it
may either signify, what I call Reason independently of all known Obiectiue
Evidence, makes me to believe the Church, And that Sense is very false, Nay
its impossible, One sense false.
to hold every internal Act, not resoluable into Obiectiue Evidence in a matter
of such Consequence, Reasonable. This as I said above Patronises the worst of
Heresies, and Atheism also.

24. Or Contrariwise, the Sense may be. The Church The other true, when the
Judgment is grounded on rational Evidence
glorioussly marked by clear and Conuincing Motives, known, and applied by my
formal Act of Reason, makes it Reasonable, and that is most true. Wherefore,
every rational Judgment in the ^resent matter, must be fixed upon rational
prudent Motives, distinct from the Act we judge by. The Judgment is no more
but Conditio applicans, a Condition, whereby the Obiectiue ^uidence is laid
hold on, and set before an Understanding. The Ground hereof is clear, For we
know not by Objects extrinsick to our Knowledge, but by vital Acts which
interuene between the Intellectual Power, and Objects. Now if any Ask, why may
not this Judgment mistake and err? I Answer first, by Proposing the like
Question. Why might not the Judgment of the Primitive Christians, when they
saw or heard of the Apostles great Wonders, have also been a Mistake or Error?
Solue Why this Judgment cannot be erroneous.
the one, you solue the other. I Answer 2. The Judgment cannot (if it pitch
upon what really is the Obiectiue Evidence) be Erroneous, For no fundation of
Error, as we now Suppose, Lies there; Therefore, none can be derived from
thence into any understanding. A pure fountain yields no pudled water.

25. A. 8. Objection. Faith is an Act of a reasonable power, and consequently
Conformable to Reason, Therefore. Faith Considered two ways
Reason regulates Faith, or is its immediate Rule. Answ. The Act of Faith may
be Considered two ways. First, as it is a prudent reasonable Submission to
Gods Revelation. 2. As its terminated upon the Revelation proposed by the
Church, or As prudent, how it is resolved.
any other infallible euidenced Oracle. Consider it under the First Notion of a
prudent Submission, it ever Implies, or rather presupposes, the rational
prudent Judgment now mentioned, And this Judgment preuiously set fast upon
such Motives, The resolution otherwise, if considered as it relies upon the
Divine Testimony.
as converted the world, may well be Said to denominate* the Act of elicite
Faith, a rational Obsequiousness, Yea, and its extrinsecal Rule also, as will
appear to every one, that makes a right Analysis, or brings Faith to its last
Principles. But consider again the very Act, it Self, or precisely as it
tend's upon the Divine Revelation proposed by an Infallible Oracle, it reason's
not at all, nor more proves; or Scientifically knows its Object ( as Faith)
Than Science as Science belieues. This Proves that submissiuely Belieues. Not
can Faith, which ever presupposes its Object and Rule proved to Reason,
Scientifically prove either, without lossing what is Essential to it, I mean
Obscurity. Se more hereof in the other Treatise. Disc. 1. C. 5. n. 12. 13.

26. By all hitherto Said you se* How the Private Reason Particular
Controversies examined by this and that particular Authority not easily ended
of this or that Man may more easily swerue, or lose the right way of Arguing,
when a Dispute is held upon particular Controversies, then when its brought to
the Censure and easy Trial of an euidenced Church. This Oracle Speak's clearly,
Whereas if the debate be of particular Points examined by Scripture, or
Authority, We find by experience that two Adversaries seldom or never agree
upon the Sense of those very Authorities, they would have Matters decided by.

27. You se. 2. The Sum of all handled in this Chapter The sum of all
hitherto handled,
to be as follows. The Catholic hold's his Faith infallible, which
essentially relies upon a Revelation Divine, and Infallible. Now because God
proposes not by Himself or immediately His own sacred Doctrine to Every faithful
Belieuer in particular, He has established a Church, and made Her an Oracle
briefly hinted at
to speak in His name. She comes as it were, between God and Belieuers; And
conueyes unto us the true Divine Doctrine of the first revealing Verity. Now
because, She is an Oracle immediately Credible by supernatural Signs, which an
Infinite Power and Wisdom Demonstrates, We Justly call Her the Infallible Rule.
Though Scripture faithfully interpreted, be our Rule also, but not so
immediately Credible. The Church once discovered, by the Evidence of an Assent
grounded on conuincing Motives, Regulates Faith, plain Reason preuiously
resting upon those Motives, tell's us, God speak's by Her. Here we rest, by
this Rule we are guided.

28. Hence you se. 3. Whoeuer depriues the Church of her Luster and Signal
Wonders (manifest to Reason) makes her Doctrine, and the very Scriptures also
not worthy Belief, Ill' Consequences follow, the Denial of Church Motives.
dead's Faith, Eclipses Gods revealed Truths, and does the utmost to bring in
Atheism. In a word He makes Christian Religion unreasonable, which is utterly
to Destroy it. what I say seems manifest. For Suppose, we had, had no Miracles
since the Apostles times, no Succession of Commissioned Pastors, no further
Conuersions of Nations. No more eminent Sanctity in this great Moral Body,
after that first Age; No Martyrdoms, no Generous contempt of the world. Who I
beseech you would, or Could have certainly believed, either the Sacred Trinity,
or the great Mystery of the Word Incarnate, upon the bare report of a few
fallible vncommissioned Men or women, that might Perhaps have Spoken (and
Perhaps not) of these, and other sublime Mysteries, but without The world, not
with standing most glorious Motives Shown, is much incredulous.
rational Motives. Appeal now boldly to the Tribunal of Reason, and Ask,
whether such a Doctrine, appears not to all Prudent men more than improbable?
Whilst experience teaches; that a great Part of the world both now, and in
former Ages also (though the Church ever showed Her Self the only glorious
euidenced Oracle) remain's notwithstanding in a State of Incredulity. What then
would so many Nations have done? without them, would have not believed any
thing.
How cold would Their Faith have been? Who would have believed, had all the
After-Motiues of Faith perished, and nothing been heard of but high Mysteries
mentioned, without supernatural Signs Confirming the Doctrine, In a word without
all Evidence of Credibility? Hence,

29. You Se. 4. The hideous sin of Sectaries, who do not only rob the Church of
her Glorious Marks manifed to Reason, and so make Her Doctrine and whateuer
Scripture teaches, The sin of Sectaries.
incredible; But to ruin all, They will have the Mysteries of our Faith talked
of, but not one Taught Infallibly, And thereby destroy Faith it Self. Thus
Reason and Religion go to wrack at once.

30. You Se. 5. It is impossible without subuerting Christianity, to Separate
the evidence of Credibility grounded on Conuincing Motives, from true Christian
Religion. Wherefore Evidence of Credibility not Separable from true Religion.
I conclude, That as God has ever hitherto, assisted the Orthodox Church to
Teach Truth, So also he has, and will preserve in Her the evidence of
Credibility, whereby all Rational men may find truth, And indubitably Assert.
This and no other, is the only Society of Christians, which teaches God's
revealed Verities, and can best inform us of every Doctrine the Church taught in
foregoing Ages.

CHAP. XVII.
A Digression Concerning Doctor Stillingfleets Discourse Where he treat's of
the Protestants Faith reduced to Principles. He is all a long quite besides the
matter handled, and Says no more for Protestancy, than for Arianism, or any
other Heresy.

1. KNow Courteous Reader, that when this Treatise The Occasion of writing this
Chapter
was under the Press and toward an end, there came now very lately to my hands
A Discourse concerning the Idolatry practiced in the Church of Rome. A stale
worn-out Cauil, by Edward Stillingfleet D. D. Doctor, as I interpret, of
Divinity, though in his Account he was only B. D. and therefore, hitherto named
by me plain Mr Stillingfleet. The fault (if any) is easily amended, He shall
have his due hereafter, and be called Doctor. In this Discourse, which very
heartily I have not read, nor I believe ever shall; For the matter appears
very triuial, and look's like a Rapsodie, I find toward The Doctors quick
Dispatch,
the end of it a Flurt, and no more, at a Book Entitled Protestants, without
Principles. I know, Says he, no other Answer Like one Loath to engage.
necessary, not only to this present demand, but to a Book called Protestants
without Principles, the falsity of which, will appear by what follows.

2. You may well imagine, I hastened to this. What Follows, And saw in the next
Page, Six Principles agreed on by ^oth Sides. 1. That there is a God, from whom
Man and all other Creatures had their Being. 2. That the Notion of God does
imply, that he is a Being absolutely perfect. 3. That man receiving his Six
Principles, remote from Protestancy.
Being from God, is thereby bound to obey his will, and so on to the Sixth,
which, Methought, seemed as remote from Principling the Protestants Faith, as
if he had told us. Adam was tempted by Eve.

3. The next Leaf turned over; I found this Title, Contrary to Protestancy
without Principles. The Faith of Protestants reduced to Principles, with this
Addition. These things (viz. The six Principles) being agreed on both Sides, we
are now to inquire into the particular ways which God has made choice of for
revealing his will to Mankind. He should also have said. And Concerning the
Faith of Protestants (here lies the main Business) if mankind be concerned in
it, but this is waued.

4. Nay more is waued, whereon all depend's. Observe I A promising Title. But
the main matter is waued,
beseech you. We have here a fair Title. The Protestants faith reduced to
Principles, before we know what these men believe. Yet most certainly, we
should first have had some light concerning their Belief, before we hear talk
of its Principles. We should know how many Articles the Professors of it
maintain as necessary to salvation, How many also they reject as Heretical? We
should know what it is, one may boldly renounce Particulars omitted.
as an Opinion, proper to Protestants; And what it is he must hold, as
Protestant, or be damned? All this I Say and more, Should in the first place
have been fully explained, to the end we may have some hint of the Thing
Principled, before we are informed of its Principles. The Proof of a Thesis
ever presupposes the Thesis plainly set down. You never heard of any Tenet
publicly exposed in Schools, to The pretended Faith of Protestants Cannot be
known. All may abjure that Faith without danger of Salvation.
the Examination of others, But every Opponent knows, what is Asserted. All
here run's in a contrary Strain. A Faith is spoken of reducible to Principles,
which is so remote from all humane understanding, that none shall, or can ever
tell me, what i^ is. Or speak thus, And you speak truth. What ever the
Protestant maintain's (as he is Protestant) though called Faith, may, without
danger of our Souls, be boldly renounced by him, by me, and the whole world
besides.

5. The Conuincing Reason of what I now Assert, is so groundedly laid forth in
this present Treatise, that no Sectary shall overthrow our Proofs. Read I
beseech you, The. 1. They have no Essence of Religion.
Disc. C. 20. n. 7. and what follows, you find there a Sect of men called
Protestants, but without the very Essence of Religion. Read also the. 2.
Discourse, you have there in several places, the whole Faith of Protestants
brought to a List of mere false Opinions, or rather to flat Heresies. Their
Their Negatiues, disowned. Doctrine Common to all Insufficient.
negative Articles, of not Praying to Saints! Of no Transubstantiation are
cashiered by them. The Doctrine common to all called Christians, without more,
is a plain Fourb, unless they deny the sacred Mysteries of the Trinity and
Incarnation also, with Arians. Their Pretense to believe so much of Catholic
Doctrine as pleases their Fancies, is not singular to them, but common to
others, no Protestants.

6. Now (and its ever to be noted) we enquire after the singular Faith of
Protestants as contradistinct from Popery, And Where the main difficulty is?
And what Should be Answered?
all other known Heresies, And desire, That this Faith as it is Peculiar, may
be reduced to Principles? I Say the Reduction is utterly impossible, and the
Reason is best expressed in few words. Their Faith is Phansy, They have nothing
like Faith to found on Principles. But to Se this proved, You are once more
wished, to read the Discourses and Chapters already quoted, for I will not take
so much pains for the Doctor as merely to blot Paper, and repeat in this place,
what is there Convinced. Thus much Noted.

7. Be pleased to hear two Propositions, which come nearer to our present
matter. One is. VVhateuer Faith the Sectary (...) Claim to, as peculiar to
Protestancy (be it what you will) if Two Propositions.
contrary to the received Doctrine of the Roman Catholic Church, is not
reducible to Principles.

8. Another Assertion. All the Principles, tediously made use of by the Doctor
(we may Suppose him very conversant in the best) are wholly impertinent, And
have no more to do with the Faith of Protestants; No more support that
Nouelty* then if one should tell you. Abraham begot Isaac. If I prove this,
you will Say, the Doctor has ventured upon a desperate Attempt; If not; I disgrace
my self.

9. To go on and prove. We must first well distinguish The Doctrine contained
in these Principles,
between the Doctrine contained in these Principles, supposed to uphold the
Protestants Faith, and the Application or Inferences drawn from it, in order to
that end. The Doctrine is sometimes true, sometimes false, and often (not well
expressed) dubious. But the Application of it to Protestancy, And this And the
Application, are to be distinguished.
most Concern's the Doctor, when true, is as remote from the purpose, or no
more Concern's the faith of Protestants, then if one should Say. God made the
world, I say when is true, for if false or dubious, its wholly impertinent.

10. Thus the Doctor begins (and pity me that I trouble the Reader, and my
Self also with mere Parergons, which relate The first Principle.
not at all to Protestancy) First. An entire Obedience to the will of God being
agreed on to be the condition of Man's happiness, no other way is in it self
necessary to that end, than such, whereby Man may know what the Will of God
is. Answ. This general Doctrine, though true, Support's no more the particular
faith of Protestants (be it what you will) then the Faith of Arians, or
Pelag^ins. For all these and Catholics likewise, may grant. A mere parergon,
to the present Controversy.
There is no other way necessary to happiness than such, whereby a Man may know
what the will of God is, yet must withal acknowledge the Inference, the
Reduction, or Application to this or that particular Doctrine, wherein these
Parties dissent from one another, wholly impertinent, unless more be Said. For
Example, the worst of Heretics hold with Catholics. There is no other way to
be saved but by Christ Jesus our Redeemer, But as the Arian never offers,
immediately to draw from thence his Denial of a Mysterious Trinity, So the
Catholic would be as far to seek, should he adventure, without more, to build
the Infallibility The reason, why it ^s impertinent?
of the Church, or the Doctrine of Transubstantiation upon that General owned
Truth only. The Reason is. A Principle Common to all, or more, Considered as
Common, stand's firm, gives light, It Is true, so sar as it reaches, but cannot
possibly extend it self, to all the different Tenets Whereupon Men fall, when
they vary and dissent among Themselves. Here the Principle becomes useless
without more light, or a new Supply of other Proofs, which relate immediately to
every particular Doctrine, really true, or pretended to be so.

11. Thus you Se the Doctors error, whilst first he gives The Doctors error.
you a Principle common to all, And will next build the particular Faith of
Protestants upon it. I Say this is impossible, For a truth so General, (as is
now noted) gives no more Support, or Light to Protestancy, than to Arianism.
Had the Dr better explained these General words. There is no other way than
such, whereby Man may know what the will of God is, And then adjoined. But
Protestants in behalf of their new Faith, Teach and Prove such and No
application made of the general Principle.
such to be the only only ways, whereby Man may know the Will of God, and
Papists cannot do it; He had offered at something, But in doing so, He would
First have receded from the General true Principle, And next have spoken a loud
untruth, because Protestants have no such ways. Now only to tell us, what all
the world knows, and to make that a Principle for Protestancy, is certainly
more then a strange Impertinency. Yet this Strain run's through all his other
miscalled Principles.

12. Observe it in the three following Paragraphs. Man, The want of
Application, hold's ^n
Says He, being framed a rational creature may Antecedently to any external
Revelation certainly know the Being of God, and his dependency upon him. What Is
this to the Purpose? All is true, but the Truth is so General, that it reaches
not at all to the Protestants particular Faith. No more do the other two which
follow immediately, as every Reader will easily perceive, at the first view.

13. Perhaps the Fifth in order may prove better. There can be no other means
Imagined whereby we are to Judge of the truth of Divine Revelation, but a
faculty in us of discerneng truth and falsehood in matters proposed to our
belief, which if we do not exercise in Iudgeing Another Principle proves
nothing, Unless Sectaries suppose themselves, the only upright Judges.
the truth of Divine Revelation we must be imposed upon, by every thing that
pretend's to be so. The Assertion Still too General Euinces nothing for
Protestancy, Unless these words ( If we do not Exercise). (We must be imposed
upon) Signify that Protestants only are to Judge, excluding others, both
Catholics and all called Christians. Say that Protestants only can judge, you
speak a Paradox. Allow others a Faculty in Iudgeing, the Question will be who
Judges best? Which is far from being decided by this abstract Principle,
Therefore as its worth nothing, it concludes Nothing, without a further
Application. Now if you desire to Se how Reason proceed's in Judging of
Religion, Read the. 3. Discourse. C. 15.

14. The sixth Way or Principle. The Pretense of Infallibility in any Person,
or Society of Men, must be Judged in the same Way, and by the same means that
the truth of a Revelation is. Say good The Doctor speak's of a way, but t^ll's
us not,
Reader, who can know what to do by force of These General Terms, whilst
neither Way nor Means in particular, are so much as hinted at? The Arian takes
his way, The Protestant another, the Catholic proceeds contrary to both.
Therefore unless the Doctor can prove that Protestants take What Christians
follow it?
the right way, and All the rest of Christians do not (and it must be proved
by a Principle distinct from this General one) He abuses the Reader, and will
seem to speak in behalf of the Protestants Faith, though he comes not near it.

15. The. 7th. Principle. It being in the Power of God to make The 7th.
Principle as bad, as the rest*
choice of several ways of revealing his will, we ought to enquire what way
God has chosen? Answ. Once more who are these We, that ought to enquire? What,
Protestants only? Have not others before Sectaries were born, both sought and
found the true way to Salvation? But let this pass. The Principle too General
concern's not Protestants at all, before it be shown upon better Proofs, that
they only have hit on the right way, which neither is proved, nor can be made
probable.

16. The. 8th. and 9th. Principles only fill Paper, and concern not the matter
now in hand. In the 10th. we are told, that God can as well declare his Will by
Writing, as by men Infallibly assisted. Answ. All grant God can clearly declare
his mind in Sectaries have not the singular grace, to understand Scripture
before all others.
Writing, But the Question is, whether this be done de Facto, in the Holy Book
of Scripture? S. Peter cited above, Says no. Howeuer, suppose it done, A
second Question follows, and It Is a hard one. Viz. Whether that singular
Privilege of understanding Gods declared Will, expressed in Scripture, can be
granted Protestants, before all others called Christians, and particularly
before their Elder Brethren, the Roman Catholics? Affirm, The Paradox must be
euinced by a strong Proof in deed. Say No; or grant that others besides
Protestants may as well understand it, as They, The Principle no more Concern's
them, them the rest of mankind. And thus you Se, The Application of all true
Principles to Protestancy, ever Fail's, and Cannot but fail.

17. The 11th. Principle is true, But touches Protestants no more, then other
Christians. The 12th. Where it is Said, we are to Judge by those writings (of
Scripture) what the will of An untrue Supposition.
God is in order to Salvation, is no Principle, but a false Supposition, in
case the Authority and infallible Interpretation of the Church, be rejected.
But grant all. Ask again, who are those, We, that must Judge? What Protestants
only? Or others What follows, if all diessenting in the high matters of Faith,
may Judge?
with them? If all may Judge, and differ, as is most evident, in the highest
matters of Faith after the perusal of Scripture, A new Question ensues, Whose
judgment is finally to be stood to, which shall never be decided without
introducing another Principle, whereby all must say. Such an Oracle Judges for
all.

18. Hence I briefly Answer to 13th. and 15th. Principles (The 14th. is a mere
Parergon) In the first we are told. It is repugnant to the Design, to the
wisdom and Goodness of God, to give infallible Assurance to Persons in writing
his will, for the benefit of Mankind, if those writings may not be understood
by all persons who sincerly endeavor to know the meaning of them* in such
things as are necessary for their Salvation. Answ. And mark, How remote we are
yet Who are the Sincere Seekers.
from Protestancy? Grant those writings may be understood by all who take the
right Way, and endeavor to know their meaning, Nothing follows, whilst the
Doctor proves not by another distinct Principle, that Protestants only are the
sincere Inquirers, excluding others, who after all endeavor used, Dissent
Still* want of Application
from them. This not done, he turn's us off with a general Proposition, making
no Application of it to his own particular Cause. You will Se what I would Say,
by this one Syllogism. Euidenced by this one Syllogism.
Those writings may be understood by all who take the right way, and endeavor
to know their meaning, But Protestants do this, and Papists do not. Here the
Minor is evidently dubious (I say absolutely false) and therefore the
Application of the general Principle to Protestants, fail's, But this failing;
or not applied home by another Proof; The general Proposition no more Supports
Protestancy, then Arianism or Pelagianism. Of this want of application which
transcend's all the Doctors Principles, when true, you shall have more
presently.

19. In the mean while take notice of it again in the. 15th Way. These Writings
being owned as Containing in them the whole will of God so plainly revealed,
that no sober Enquirer can miss of what is necessary for Salvation, There can
be etc. First its false, that the whole Will of God, is plainly revealed in
Scripture. And An Untruth. Supposed.
had we no more, but Thus much only. Viz. The vast multitudes of Christians who
zealously defend that sense they Conceive of Scripture, yet contradict one
another in Points most Though the Assertion were supposed true, it helps not
Protestants.
Essential, Proves it false, whereof enough is said in the several parts of
this Treatise. But let that Pass. Suppose it a Truth The Propositions or Proofs
must run thus. No sober Enquirer can miss of knowing God's will, or of what is
necessary to Salvation. Now add this Minor. But the Protestant only, is the
sober Enquirer, For No Arian, No Pelagian, No Quaker, No Papist soberly
enquires, excepting the Protestant. Thus much must be Assumed or to the General
Proposition Vnapplyed, help's the Protestant no more then others, that execrate
his Doctrine; For if these or any of them, may be listed among the number of
sober Enquirers The Reason hereof.
(its ridiculous to exclude all) and yet reject Protestanism, The general
Proposition (for ought appears yet) may be applied as well by every one to his
particular Religion, as by the Protestants, to Protestancy, Therefore it
signifies Just Nothing, before a right Application be made by distinct Proofs,
to the One only true Religion. Some may reply every Man is to enquire, and
Answer for Himself. Pitiful That Is to Say, we must always be Scepticks, ever
learning and never well taught. Weak reason and fancy are thus made Sectaries
after their long Enquiry have no Union in Faith.
our Doctors, if this Principle be owned. Se Disc. 2. C. 17. Per totum. In the
Interim know, this long inquiring after one whole Age, brings no union in faith
to Protestants, who are as the world Sees; at endless Iarrs amongst themselves.

20. The 16th Principle Opposes such Men as pretend to infallible Assistance,
without giving an equal degree of Evidence, that they are so assisted as Christ
and his Apostles did, by Miracles as great, as public and conuincing, as these
were. Answ. This This Principle is first against Protestants.
Principle is quite besides the matter. First, because Protestants own a Church
infallible in Fundamentals, without giving an Evidence equal to that of Christ
and his Apostles. Why then may not such an Evidence as proves the Church
Infallible in Fundamentals, be further extended, and induce All to believe* Her
Infallible, in every Doctrine She teaches. 2. The Principle Secondly, false.
is falfe. We have Apostolical Evidence in the Church ever since those
Primitive times, as is largely proved Disc. 1. C. 14. 15. 16. And Disc. 3. C.
3. Lastly it is no more Thirdly, though Supposed true, it help's not
Protestants.
but a Proofles Assertion against the Church, which lays claim to
Infallibility, And cannot though it were true, advantage Protestancy one whit.
Please to observe my Reason. Suppose the Catholic Church, and the Protestant
party were like one another, equally fallible, upon what Principle can the
fallible Protestant Party plead better, or Say more for his Cause, then the
Supposed fallible Roman Church in behalf of Her Doctrine? Both of them, as is
proved in the second Discourse, would in this case, be a Public scorn to Jews
and Gentiles, whilst they The reason hereof Conuinces.
Out-braue one another, with the Mere Nothing of fallible Principles, And
(which is ever to be noted) can stand on no surer Ground then what is fallible,
and may be falfe, if no Church be owned Infallible.

21. In the. 17th Principle we are told its absurd, to pretend the necessity of
an Infallible Assistance, to assure us of the truth of Scripture, And at the
same time to Prove the Assistance Nothing yet for Protestancy
from those writings, from which nothing can be certainly deduced. Answ. Here
again is nothing for Protestancy. For Suppose which is false; we prove not an
Infallible Assistance, Are therefore Protestants in a better condition then
Catholics? How The Churches Infallibility is first Proved.
But to speak truth, the Doctor wholly Mistakes, we prove the Churches
Infallibility independently of Scripture. Read Disc. 3. C. 5. In the. 18.
Principle we hear talk again of the best Means for understanding the Scripture,
but whether we Catholics, Arians or Protestants happily light on it, is not so
much as hinted at by the Doctor, wherefore I Said above, these Generalities
prove nothing, without a nearer Application, made by Proofs, yet more immediate.

22. The. 19th Principle. The Assistance which God has promised to those who
sincerely desire to know his will, may give them greater Assurance of the truth
of what is contained in Scripture, than it is possible for the greatest
infallibility in any other persons to do* Supposing they have not such
assurance of their Infallibility. Answ. All this (were it true) is to say Just
nothing concerning Protestants, unless they be supposed the only Men who
sincerely desire to know Gods Will, for if any other called Christians
Sectaries gain nothing by this abstract Principle.
of a different Belief, be as Sober Inquirers, or desire as earnestly to know
Gods will, as Sectaries, What gain they by this remote abstract Principle? Now
to Suppose all other Christians negligent, in the Inquiry after God's will, and
Protestants only the zealous Seekers, comes nearer to a bold Presumption; than
to any thing like the nature of a Principle. In a word here you have all. The
Application to the Protestant Faith is wanting. But what will you? The Doctor
cannot Unless they Suppose Themselves, the only sober Inquirers. Want of Sense.
be drawn to plead for his own cause. Finally, sense is wanting in that last
clause. Supposing they have not such assurance of their Infallibility. Which is
only to Say. Supposing the Church be not Infallible, Catholics cannot believe
Her Infallibility.

23. The 20th Principle. No Man's Faith can therefore be infallible, merely
because the Proponent is said to be Infallible. Answ. But if This Principle
concern's not Sectaries*
the Proponent be both Said, and Proved Infallible (and this is amply proved)
Faith with the Assistance of God's Grace may well, yea and must depend upon it,
and be infallible. Howeuer, let all here Said pass. There is yet nothing drawn
from the Principle more concerning the Faith of Protestants then of the More
then the Arians.
Arians. Observe well. Both hold the Proponent of Faith which is the Church,
Fallible; Make now the Inference. Ergo the Protestants Faith seems more sound
then the Arians, is a pure Non-sequitur, not at all Deducible from this
Principle alone, nor indeed from any other.

24. In the three folloing Paragraphs. 21. 22. 23. You have only gross
Mistakes, though if all were true, Protestancy has None can infer, if Taith be
infallible,
no advantage by them. The Substance of all is thus. If Divine Faith cannot be
without an Infallible Assent, all other Infallibility (He means in the
Proponent) is rendered vseles. Answ. Why so I beseech you? The Apostles Faith
was certainly Infallible, That therefore an Infallible Proponent of Faith, is
unnecessary.
did that render our Saviors Infallible Doctrine Infallibly proposed, vseles?
In like manner the Church teaches Infallibly, The Faithful Man elicites
Infallible Faith, grounded upon Her Doctrine, Does this make Her Teaching
Vseles? When the internal faith of every Belieuer so necessarily depend's upon
an Infallible Oracle, that none ever believed without some one or other,
absolutely Infallible.

25. But now Ad rem* Make havoc of Faith as much as may be, Destroy Christian
Religion, Say boldly (and falsely) Were all Proponents of Faith fa^lible.
the Roman Catholic Church both is, and ever was fallible. Say also,
Protestants, Arians, Pelagians, and all the rest are fallible. Speak once to
the Purpose and tell me (For here is the only doubt) Why should the Protestant
with his fallible Faith, be in a The Protestant yet would not be in a better
Condition then the Arion.
better and a more Secure condition, than the fallible Papist, or the fallible
Arian, with that faith they lay claim to? This the Doctor never meddles with,
nor can the difficulty be solued by him.

26. And Hence To rid my Self of the rest, which follows (for really I am
more weary of this Sport then the Dr ever was at killing flies) you shall Se
with what Candor I Proceed. I freely permit the Doctor to make use of all his
following Principles, yea of the whole Thirty in Number, And say
notwithstanding this ample Concession, He shall never Prove or infer from any
of them, So much as One true Tenet Though all were granted which the Doctor can
rationally desire
peculiar to Protestants, which can be owned by these very men, that pretend to
believe Protestancy, an Article of Faith necessary for salvation. Here is my
Reason. The General owned Truths ( as that a rational creature may antecedently
to any External Revelation, certainly know the Being of God etc) no more belong
to Protestants, than to others. The Doctors false Principles, as Nothing, yet
proved.
his 16. and 17. are, though Supposed true, euince nothing for Protestancy, as
is already Proved. No more do his other Controuerted Principles, denied by
innumerable Christians, prove any thing. His obscure Ones (and his 27 and 29.
appear to The reason hereof, briefly given.
me of the darker sort) must be further explained, For truly I understand not
what is meant by those obscure words. Which reiection is no making Negative
Articles of Faith, with the rest that follows. Be it how you will, thus much I
defend, that, whether the fore mentioned Principles be True, False,
Controuerted, or Obscure; no Verity peculiar to Protestants can be deduced from
them, absolutely necessary to Salvation.

27. I Say deduced, either by lawful Consequences, or by the Addition of any
received Principle, And I Speak thus, because Perhaps the Doctor may Answer, He
intended no more at present, but only to set down some general Grounds,
whereupon Protestancy, by the aid of further Proofs adioynable, though not as
yet not made use of, Can be established. If this be his Reply, I Answer First.
He has gone most lamely to work, The Doctors whole work hitherto, most imperfect
leaving the whole Matter undertaken, half done half undone, in a word
incomplete. I Answer. 2. There are neither Proofs nor Principles, to go
forward withal, I mean, whereby to Euince the truth of one Pure Protestant
Tenet, held by Sectaries themselves, necessary to Salvation, And I conjure the
Doctor (who must hold his abstract Principles hitherto laid forth, very
imperfect) He cannot go on, and Complete it
to advance further, That is, to euince by some other more immediate Proofs,
the absolute necessity of Believing one Protestant Article. This cannot be done.

28. The Reason why I Speak thus boldly, is the Verity hinted The vltimate
ground of my Assertion
at in the beginning, and proved above. Protestancy as Protestancy has no truth
in it, No Essence of Religion, No One Article Conducing to Salvation. And Hence
it is, that the Doctor keep's off at distance, Or rather run's on as you se,
partly by assuming false Principles against the Catholic Church; Partly with
Generalities, which relate no more to Protestancy then to Arianism.

29. Now here in passing you may well observe The different Procedure of
Catholics, from Sectaries. The first tell you plainly what their Faith is.
Besides the common Doctrine admitted by all Called Christians, They give you in
particular, a list of theer Credends. The Real Presence, Transubstantiation,
Purgatory, Invocation of Saints, and in the first place, of the Infallibility
of their Church, peculiar to Catholics only. They moreover How differently the
Catholic and Sectaries Proceed.
Assert, without the Belief of these Articles after a due Proposal made, none
can be saved; And, here to omit other Probations, taken from Scripture,
Councils, and Fathers, They ground their Belief upon the Authority of God's
own universal euidenced Oracle, which has taught the world from the Apostles
Age.

30. The Sectary on the other side, neither dares nor Can name one Article,
Singular to Protestants (Mark my words) Or Preach this Doctrine to any of his
Hearers. Such and such particular Articles, you are, as Protestants Obliged to
believe, as most essential Tenants of our Religion, or will be damned, if you
reject them. The Sectary cannot name one Protestant Article, judged by him
necessary to Salvation
He cannot build one peculiar Protestant Article, upon plain Scripture, upon
ancient Tradition, or any other received Principle, much less Prove its Truth
by the Authority of a Church, which ever Showed the Marks and Signatures, of
God's Infinite Power and Wisdom. It may be, Some Sectary will here Cauil at our
Articles, and Say indeed, we plainly deliver them, but needlessly multiply too
many. If this be Objected, I Answer first. The Assertion is no Principle, but a
mere unproven Supposition. I Answer. 2. in this place, it is an Impertinency,
where we only urge the Sectary to name but one A possible Cauil answered.
Article, Judged by him Essential to Protestancy and necessary for Salvation,
As we plainly give in our Several necessary Articles. Thus much Complied with,
We are as ready to Prove the Truth of our Catholic Positions, as to Euince
upon sound Principles, the Sectaries false and Improbable.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Doctors Inferences, proved no Inferences, but untrue Assertions. Having
answered his Principles and Inferences, Satisfaction is required to some few
Questions, hereafter proposed.

1. IT follows, Says the Dr 1. There is no necessity at all of an Infallible
Society of men, to assure men of the truth The first Inference is a mere
Tautology.
of those things, which they may be certain without etc. Answ. Here you have
neither Inference, nor Principle; (In very reallity neither true Consequence,
nor Consequentia) No Inference; because, its a mere Tautology, or a bare
repetition of what the Doctor had formerly asserted, without Proof or
Probability, And Consequently far enough from the Nature of either Principle or
Inference. Had the Doctor brought in any thing like an Inference; He Should
have Said. Upon such and such grounds already established, It follows, that
these and what Should be proved.
these particular Doctrins of Protestants are true, and immediately deduced,
from this or that Principle, But he totally abandon's the Protestants Faith,
and leaves his Fellow-sectaries as faithless, as they were before he wrote
these Principles. The True Inference therefore, or all that follows, is, that
he has lost his whole Labor.

2. The. 2. Inference. The Infallibility of that Society of men, yet no
Inference.
who call themselves the Catholic Church, must be examined by the same
Faculties in Man, the same Rules of trial, the same Motives etc. Answ. Here is
no Inference, but the same thing repeated again, which for the substance lies
in his 6th Principle. what Reason is to examine
Now if we Speak of this Doctrine considered in it Self, we easily grant, that
the rational faculties in men, both may and ought to examine by the Light of
prudent Motives, what Society of Christians is Infallible, as also what Divine
Revelation is made evidently Credible to Reason. But herein a double Caution
seems necessary. The first. That Sectaries assume not to themselves, the sole
Faculty of examining and judging, but leave to others a share of it also. The
second A twofold Caution to be observed.
Prouiso is, that Reason in this Search, go not beyond its Bounds, but pitch
upon that which is Reasons proper Object, I mean upon those Signatures of God's
own Visible Wonders, already explained. These two Conditions observed, All is
well. Sectaries will soon Se their Error.

3. The. 3. Inference, deduced out of no Principle, falsely No want of Motives,
and Miracles in the Church
Supposes but proves not, the want of Miracles, and other conuincing Motives in
Roman Catholic Church. It is largely refuted upon several Occasions, in every
one of these three Discourses.

4. The fourth Inference (From whence it comes, I know not) is thus. The more
absurd any Opinions are, and repugnant to the first Principles of Sense, and
reason, which any Church obtrudes upon the Faith of men, The greater reason men
will have, to reject the A Speech like that of Jews and Arians.
Pretense of Infallibility in that Church, as a grand imposture. Answ. Had a
Jew, who hold's it against Sense and Reason, to believe that God became an
Infant; Or had an Arian that denies the Trinity, because the Mystery seems
repugnant to his weak Reason, Spoken after this manner, None would have much
wondered; But that a Doctor, who pretend's to believe these Fundamentals of
Christian Religion, Cannot find room enough in his head for reason and Faith,
in every particular the Church Teaches, argues some little want, both of the
One and Other. But say on, what is it he boggles at? O, a Consecrated Wafer
appears to be bread, and is not bread, this is repugnant Sense beguiled.
to sense and reason. Contra. Those two Angels that came to Lot. Genesis 19.
appeared to the Sodomits like mortal men, but were not so: Was not Reason here,
upon the suggestion of Sense How rectifyed?
beguiled? And are not both these faculties now rectifyed in us, by what we
read in Holy Writ, which ascertain's us they were not men but Angels? Thus it
falls out in the Mystery of the Blessed Sacrament. Wherefore I Say, Were it
not that God, Speaking by Scripture and the Church assures us, that what we se,
is not substantianly bread, the whole world would (guided by outward
Appearances) hold it bread, as those wicked Citizens judged Lots entertained
Guests to be men, and not Angels, But when eternal Truth interposes his
Authority, and tell's us by his own Oracles, what is here contained under the
Forms of bread, is God in this Mystery interposes his Au^h^rity and vnbeguils
reason.
not bread, but Christ's Sacred body; Reason yields upon this most prudent
Ground. It is the highest reason in the world to believe God, though by reason
we know not how things are. Here is our Principle, not possibly to be reuersed,
unless the Doctor proves his Contrary Doctrine by the Authority of another
Scripture, or some other Church, more euidenced by Supernatural Wonders, and
Consequently more Orthodox, than the Roman Catholic Church is. You may read
the First Discourse. C. 12. n. 4. where its Proved, that the immediate Object
of Sense Ceases not to be, in this Mystery.

5. Wherefore I Infer, that if the Doctor would have the Infallibility of that
Church rejected, as a grand Imposture, because A hint giued to Jews and
Arians, to reject the Scriptures Infallibility.
it obtrudes upon us Doctrins, in his Opinion repugnant to Sense and reason; He
ought also by good Consequence, to Inuit both Jews and Arians, to reject the
Infallibility of Scripture, as a grand Imposture, where it Speak's of the
Incarnation, and the Sacred Trinity, for certainly these Mysteries, are far
more above all Men's weak Reason, then this other of the Blessed Sacrament is.

6. The Doctors 5th and 6th Inferences deserve no such names, because they are
not deducible from any Principles, being Untrue Assertions in place of
Inferences.
only his own plain Assertions, and most untrue. Say I beseech you, From what
Principles can He infer, That to disown a Church which teaches Doctrine above
the reach of weak Reason, is not to Question the Veracity of God, but to adhere
to that, in what he has revealed in Scripture? How can this be done, Whilst
the whole No knowing what Script^re Speaks, without an Infallible Church.
world see's, the holy Book of Scripture so variously Sensed by dissenting men
called Christians, that none can conclude upon any clear Principle, which sense
is true, which false, without owing a Church Infallible? I Say, above the reach
of weak reason, But not repugnant, as the Doctor supposes, For no Catholic
Verity can be repugnant to Evident reason, though much above it. In a word.
That Doctrine is repugnant to Reason, from whence two Contradictions clearly
follow (now I urge the Doctor to give us any thing like a Contradiction in the
Mystery already What Is Contrary to Reason,
mentioned of the blessed Sacrament) That Doctrine is above Reason, which cannot
be known by the aid of natural Principles only, And thus the Mystery of the
Sacred Trinity, of the Incarnation, of Original sin, and Transubstantiation
also, are so far removed from our natural faculties, that none but God only,
can discover them by his Supernatural Revelation. The 6th Inference And What Is
above it?
where the Doctor tell's us, That the Church of Rome, neither is the Catholic
Church, nor any sound Part or member of it, is his own bare Assertion, already
proved a loud Untruth.

7. Having now done with this List of Principles and Inferences, we may, I hope
without offense, justly require the Doctors Express, direct, and Categonal
Answer to these few following Questions.

8. The first, and of main importance, though already plainly The first
Question Proposed
set down, may be thus. What that Essential revealed Doctrine is, now peculiar
to Protestants, and held by them necessary to Salvation, which distinguishes
that Religion as it is Protestancy, from Popery, and all known Heresies? I
Speak of Doctrine indubitably revealed by Almighty God, or taught by any
Universal Church, which these men own as a Truth peculiar to themselves, and
necessary for Salvation. If a List of some such few Articles peculiar and
necessary (mark my words) can without dispute be clearly given in, Protestants
will highly advance their own Cause, and most easily point out some ancient
Christians, that in former Ages believed as they do now. But Contrariwise, if
not so much as one revealed Article of this nature, I mean peculiar to Not one
Truth revealed by Almighty God, taught by Protestants, as Protestants.
them, and in their Judgments nec^ssary for Salvation, can be owned or laid
claim to. It follows evidently, that Protestancy as Protestancy, is no
Christian Religion, because in the whole Essence of it, you find not one truth
revealed by Almighty God, or taught by any Universal Church.

9. In the. 2. place, Dr Stillingfleet who charges flat Idolatry upon the Roman
Catholic Church, is desired to Answer Two Demands more.
Categorically to these two Demands. The first. If he acknowledge with Dr
Bramhal and others, that the first Protestant Bishops received their Ordination
from the Roman Catholic Bishops, or will assert with Luther, that the first
Protestants had the Bible from the Catholic Church; My demand, I Say One
concerning the ordination of the first Protestant Bishops.
is. Whether Mr Stillingfleet will roundly grant that the Protestant Bishops
received their Ordination from Idolatrous Popish Prelates, or that Luther and
Sectaries had their Bible from an Idolatrous Church? Affirm (and it must be
granted) Mr Thorndicke in his Just Weights and Measures. Page. 7. tell^ us
plainly. If it be true (Viz. That the Papists are guilty of Idolatry) Orders
taken from Idolatrous Prelates, argues an ungodly Communication.
We cannot without renouncing Christianity, hold Communion with those, we
charge with it. And what greater Communion Can there be then to take Orders
from such Idolatrous Prelates, and the Bible from an Idolatrous Church? Again,
in the Contents of the first Chapter, Mr Thorndicke add's. They that Separate
from the Church of Rome, as Idolaters, are thereby Schismatics before God.
This truth he proves very amply in the following Pages, And in the 7. P. now
cited, Concludes thus. So that, Should this Mr Thorndick's Judgment
Church declare, that the Change, which we call Reformation, is grounded upon
this Supposition, to wit of Idolatry, I must then acknowledge, that we are the
Schismatics.

10. Moreover, whereas the Doctor Charges the Church with Idolatry upon this
twofold account Chiefly, That She adores Another Concerning worship and
Adoration.
Christ in the blessed Eucharist, and allows the Veneration of holy Images, Mr
Thorndicke. Chap. 19. in the Contents free's Her from both these Calumnies. The
worship of the Host in Papacy (Says he) is not Idolatry, and he Proves the
truth in the Context, because no Papist will acknowledge, that he honors the
Accidents of bread, for God. Again. Reuerencing of Images in Churches is not
Idolatry. Se the Probation hereof in his Page. 127. For it is not now my Intent
to debate these Controversies, but only to let the Reader know, how clearly the
old Doctor (and I think the far more knowing man) Contradict's the younger; And
this Two Doctor^ Contradict one another
is done not in Matters disputable, or agitated in Schools, but in a Point of
the highest Concern Imaginable touching the very essence of Religion. Wherefore
he that Err's in a thing of such weight (unless invincible ignorance excuses,
incurr's God's Just The one or other of th^se Doctors, horrid Sinners.
Indignation, and Sin's damnably. If therefore Mr Thorndicke clear's the Church
(were She guilty of Idolatry) from that Crime, He wrong's God, that hates
Idolatry. But if our younger Doctor lais an Aspersion so abominable upon the
most ancient Mother Church, and thereby send's to Hell all his own Ancestors,
with Millions and Millions of other Souls; It Is He, that draws God's heavy
Judgment upon him, and for this loud Crying sin, besides Shame and Confusion,
will have many a sorrowful thought laid to his heart, before he dies.

11. My Second demand Proposed to the Doctor, includes A second demand,
contains two things.
these two things The first. Whether the Roman Catholic Church, which the Dr
expressy Says, err's not against the Fundamentals of Faith; yet withal boldly
auerr's, that She teaches Idolatry, be not a most open, plain, and manifest
Contradiction? I Affirm it is. For to auerr on the one side, that She err's not
in an open Contradiction.
the Fundamentals of Faith, and on the other to say, she teaches Idolatry,
which is a fundamental error, is with one breath to affirm. She Err's, and
err's not, in the fundamentals of Faith. One A Turk errs not so far as he
teaches truth.
may reply, so far as the Church teaches truth, She err's not in fundamentals.
Answ. No more does a Turk who hold's one God, err in that, yet because the rest
of his Religion is false, and destructive of Salvation, he can never get to
Heaven by it. In Idolatry makes Salvation impossible, though the Church teaches
some truths.
like manner I Say, Though the Church teaches twenty fundamental Truths, yet if
She spoil's all by maintaining one Point of Idolatry, Her Condition is
damnable, and can no more bring any that belieues Her whole Doctrine to Heaven,
then Mahometism can, which owns the Believe of one God.

12. Hereupon you have another manifest contradiction, and the Doctor shall
never quit himself of it. In his Rational Account, He grant's a Possibility of
Salvation to Catholics, because they believe in a Church sound (though not
every way The Doctors open Contradictions.
safe) in fundamentals: Here again, he taxes Her with the horrid Sin of
Idolatry, which most evidently makes Her Doctrine damnable, and Consequently
Salvation impossible to those that The Church ^an save her Children. She cannot
save them
believe it; Therefore unless these two Propofitions which are Contradictory,
be true. There is a Possibility of Salvation in this Church to save Souls.
There is no Possibility in it to save them, the Doctors Assertions are as
evidently Opposite to one another, as, if you should Say. She can save souls;
And she cannot save them. Or, She is a true Church, and she is not a true
Church.

13. A third Question. Whereas it is manifest and granted by Sectaries, that
the Roman Catholic Church once was confessedly Orthodox, at least for the
first three or four Centuries, yet A third Question grounded, on what Sectaries
grant
as our Aduerfaries assert, failed afterward, and brought in strange new
Doctrins, yea flat Idolatry. We urge the Doctor to satisfy Reason in this one
particular. viz. Why Protestants deal not as Heartily with us, as we do with
them. I would say. We accuse them, for deserting a Church wherein their
Progenitors had lived for a thousand years, and as a little Method lately
published, observes excellently well, Speak open, and acknowledged Evidence; We
tell How plainly we deal with them.
them who began this new Mode of Reformation, we exactly Point at the time of
its first Rise, we Show how it was Propagated, what Abetters it had, and omit
no Circumstance, which may Conduce And how darkly they with us?
to a plain discovery of the whole Nouelty. Sectaries on the other side accuse
the Church of heretical, yea of Idolatrous Innouations, and yet as the Method
notes, their charge is so obscure, so utterly unknown, that the very Accusers
cannot say, who first published them, Or where they began; from what occasion
they had their Origin? who patronized them? Or who opposed them?

14. Please now to mark, what my demand is in this place. The Doctor and his
Partisans suppose, these and the like wicked Innouations, of an vnbloodly
Sacrifice, of Adoring the Sacred Host, what the Doctor is obliged to.
to have been evidently brought into the Church, Contrary to the Primitive
Doctrine. For that public act of Adoration came not in by night, but was a
thing notoriously known, notoriously practiced. Is not therefore the Dr
obliged, either to tell us plainly, when, where, and how, this visible worship
first began That is, to prove by Evidence, what He supposes evidently
innouated, we accuse and give in Evidence.
Or, to give a reason; Why when Catholics evidently prove the Sectaries revolt
from the Roman Church; Protestants cannot upon the like Evidence Prove, that
the Roman Church in latter Ages receded from any former Roman Church, pure and
Orthodox? Observe well the difference. We accuse them of an actual Revolt from
our Church, (whether they had reason for it or no, is not here disputed) The
ground whereupon our Accusation relies, is evident and notoriously known. They
accuse as boldly as we do, But when their Proofs come to the Test, all of them
dwindle into lame guesses, false Suppositions; in a word into Sectaries accuse
upon guesses and false Suppositions.
a mere Nothing, as will better appear in the next Chapter.

15. Now here is a Point, I would have every prudent Reader to reflect on, for
I hold it a manifest Conviction of our Sectaries open Injustice. If, whoeuer
accuses a whole Kingdom (ever known loyal) of Treason against the Soueraign
Power in it, ought A Point worthy Reflection.
to Produce no less then Evident Proofs in so weighty a Matter. Much more ought
he or they, who impeach a whole ample Church of high Treason, plead by
Evidence, or sit down Silent. The The Loyalty of the Church euidenced.
Loyalty of this Church to the most Supreme Soueragn Christ Jesus, is manifest.
She has, as is noted in the Other Treatise, dilated his Empire, defeated his
Enemies (perfidious Heathens) gained him Friends, and innumerable Servants. Her
repute was never yet stained by any, nor Fame blemished, but only by Infidels,
Jews, or known Heretics. Now Start's up a little late Knot of inconsiderable
Sectaries, who both Cauil and accuse boldly, Of what poor Condition her
Accusers are.
They impeach this Church of high Treason, For, She has changed the true
Doctrine of Christ, and in place of it taught, and yet teaches Plain Idolatry:
She is therefore a Rebel against that King, whom She has served so long, and
most faithfully. Here is a loud and evident Impeachment, an abominable Treason
The impeachment loud and criminal.
laid to the charge of a Spouse, most evidently Loyal. But where are the
Evident Proofs (answerable to this evident Accusation) against the already
Loyal Euidenced Church? There are But Proofs answer not.
none so much as Probable, as shall be euinced in the following Chapter, where
I positiuely prove, that Sectaries most injuriously Calumniate the Church,
without Law, without Authority, or any rational Argument.

16. If Doctor Stillingf. Shall please to return a plain Answer to How the
Doctor may gain applause.
what is here briefly proposed, as also to the rest which follows Concerning
^his very point, in the next Chapter, he will certainly gain the applause of a
singular great Doctor, but if he Fob's us off with his old Raillery of killing
Flies of Small Grains, Woolsacks, and such like stuff, the world will judge
(as to my knowledge many do already) That He cannot Answer, For thus they
Discourse and Methinks reasonably: Had he not found himself more then a little
in the briars, that is in plain language unable to Answer such Arguments as are
pressed upon him, by thole two Authors he Slights, He would most indubitably
before this day, have replied to what is Objected, The Dr bewrayes his weakness
in wauing difficulties, which urge
without mispending time in publishing a triuial threadbare Cauil, as is now
done, Concerning the Idolatry of the Roman Catholic Church, which destroys
not only Catholic Religion, but Protestancy also, as is amply Proved in the 2.
Disc. C. 4th and 5.th In this wauing of difficulties, and he is told above
which they are, he bewrayes too much weakness.

17. The fourth Demand is, and it will give the Doctor some trouble. Suppose
falsely, the Roman Catholic Church to what Church Succeeded in place of the
Roman, Supposed I dolatrous?
have brought in that abominable Sin of Idolatry many Ages before Luther, It is
evident that when Luther and Protestants deserted Her, She was far (if
Idolatrous) from being the pure Spouse of Christ, or any thing like an Orthodox
Church in the very Fundamentals of Faith. Hereupon a great doubt Occurr's which
ought to be cleared. It is. What other Church, neither Idolatrous nor notably
erroneous, succeeded in the Place of this supposed Pestiferous erring Roman
Society? Such a Church distinct from the Roman, free from Idolatry and gross
Error must be Pointed out, and plainly named, or it follows ineuitably that
the world was then without a true Church.

18. Perhaps the difficulty may yet be more significantly Proposed Christ's
Promises made void. if then there was no Orthodox Church in Being.
after this manner. When Luther revolted from the Roman Catholic Church
infected, as is now imagined, with Idolatry and false Doctrine, There was then
another Church in the world pure and Orthodox; Or not. If not; All our Saviors
Promises of being with the Church to the End of the world (He made no Promise
of being with an Idolatrous, or any notorious erring Church) are false. Again,
All that the Apostle writes. Ephesians. 14. 11. of the Continuance of Pastors and
The Apostles words also, and
Doctors in the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of Christ's Mystical
body till we meet in one Unity of Faith (most Certainly he Spoke not of any
deluded or Idolatrous Pastors) are likewise utterly false. Nay more, that
Article of our Creed. The Creed falsified
I believe the Holy Catholic Church ceased to be true in those dismal days,
when the whole Roman Catholic Church made Idolatrous went to wrack, and the
res't of Christians (if not Idolatrous) were all Professed Heretics.

19. Contrariwise, if there was at that time another Orthodox Church in Being,
when Luther Separated from the Roman Catholic What follows if then there was
a true Church?
Society; One of these two Consequences necessarily follows. Viz. That Luther
and his Associates (the Protestants) either made themselves Members of that
Imagined pure, Spotles, and Orthodox Church; Or founded a new One upon their
own Authority, never before heard of in the Christian world. Now further. It is
most impossible to nominate any such Christians as Luther and Protestants made
a new Church.
Constituted a pure Orthodox Church distinct from the Roman Catholic,
Therefore Luther and Protestants have by their own Authority made a new One,
never before known to the world.

20. There is yet a third Inference which methinks pinches such Protestants as
Say: They and we make but one Church Orthodox in fundamentals. How can this
Doctrine stand, if the The Church, if Idolatrous err's in the fundamentals of
Faith
Roman Catholic Church teaches flat Idolatry? For upon this Supposition She
err's grossly in that fundamental Point of Idolatry, And consequently
Protestants must either leave her as horridly erroneous, or maintain Idolatry
with Her. If it be replied though thus tainted, She yet teaches some few
Truths, and Sectaries can exactly tell us which and how many they are; They
Sectaries improbable Supposition.
first argue upon an improbable Supposition, and secondly make the lovely
Spouse of Christ, beautiful and ugly, treacherous and loyal, false and true
together, whereof enough is said in the former Discourses.

21. The last question proposed, is, that the Doctor give Satisfaction
concerning the Mission of Protestants. In a word we demand who sent them to
teach as they do, that the Roman Catholic^ Church is fallible and Idolatrous?
That man has no free will? That the Body and blood of our Savior are not
really in the blessed Sacrament, with a number of other Novelties? Our demand A
difficult Question Concerning the Mission of Sectaries.
is grounded upon the Apostles words. Romans 10. 15. How Shall they preach unless
they be sent. Say therefore, who commissioned these men, who countenanced them
to preach such Doctrins? Dare they tell us, that as their English Bishops
received Orders from the Supposed Idolatrous Catholic Prelares, So also they
had Commission from them (Idolatrous as they were) to teach Idolatry? They
never had, nor can have Commission to teach Protestancy.
Grant this and they make their Mission not only ridiculous, but null also, and
utterly void of Credit. Whither will they run next think ye? Can they pretend
to have had their Mission from the Arians, from the Hussits, or Waldenses etc?
No certainly, For they teach not in all things as these Heretics taught, And
besides never received Commission from them, or The Assertion proved.
from any men called Christians, to teach at all. Therefore they are unsent
Preachers and consequently in the Apostles Judgment ought no more to be heard,
than the Arians or Pelagians.

22. Some Sectaries tell us, its needles to Question their A reply answered.
Mission, whilst the Testimony of the Spirit assures them that they teach the
true Doctrine of Jesus Christ. Here is first a Supposition for a Proof, because
The whole world, excepting themselves, deny what is now assumed, of their
teaching truth. Howeuer, admit gratis this false Supposition, The mere speaking
truth, gives them no Commission to teach it, For Children, Vagabonds, and
Devils also, may Speak eternal truths, yet are not therefore authorized to
preach, or made Christ's lawful authorized Ministers. The Reason hereof seems
manifest. To teach truth argues no Lawful Mission.
To preach truth is an effect of a lawful Mission, and not the cause of it,
Wherefore this Causal or Inference, is good. I teach truth, because I am
lawfully Commissioned to teach it, and exactly Comply with my Duty; Not the
Contrary. I teach truth, therefore I am Authoritiuely sent to teach it.

23. By what is hitherto briefly noted, you se in what The desperate condition
of Sectaries.
case Sectaries are, who first suppose a long interruption of Orthodox Pastors
in the Roman Catholic Church, and consequently never received Commission from
them to teach, and though (which is true) they continued Orthodox, yet these
Catholic Pastors never gave them any Authority. Again, They No Church Orthodox
or Heretical* sent them to teach.
scorn to receive their Commission from known Heretics, nor can they pretend
it, because being in most Essential points opposite to Protestants, Such
Heretics could not empower them to teach Protestancy. For these Reasons
Sectaries are obliged to renounce all claim to that Mission which is called
Ordinary, because No Church, No Society of Christians, whether Orthodox or
Heretical, sent these Nouellists abroad to teach as they do, their reformed
Gospel.

24. Now if with Luther they challenge to themselves a Calling Some with Luther
plead a Mission Extraordinary
and Mission extraordinary; Not by men, or from men, but by the Revelation of
Christ Jesus, Their Plea no less Proofles then Presumptuous, is highly
improbable upon this ground, that never any since the beginning of Christianity
was sent as extraordinary by Almighty God to preach, who made not his Doctrine
Credible by manifest Supernatural wonders. So Christ our Lord did, and the
Apostles also. Others that followed in the after Ages, laid forth the Miracles
and signal Marks of the Church whereof they were Members, and euinced by Signs
the They have neither extraordinary, nor Ordinary Mission.
Authority of that Oracle which sent them. But Sectaries who began with Luther
to teach extraordinary Doctrine, neither plead by extraordinary wonders (having
none to produce) nor can so much as hint at any Church, false or true, which
commissioned them to publish Protestancy, Therefore they are unlawful
Ministers, never sent to preach Christ's true Doctrine, nor so much as their own
false Novelties of Protestanism.

CHAP. XIX.
The supposed grounds of our Protestants Reformation manifestly ouerthrown.
Protestancy no Religion, but an improhable Nouelty. The conclusion of this
whole Treatise.

1. I Say the Supposed Grounds, for in very truth Protestancy What Sectaries
pretend to?
has not any real Ground to Stand on, as is amply proved in the forecited
Chapters, Howeuer, because Pretenses are not wanting to such as Oppose God's
verities, and our Adversaries seem to build the whole Machin of their
Reformation Upon what they would build their Reformation
upon one Principle Chiefly, we will here in the first place, Show you what
they pretend, and utterly destroy it.

2. In a word. The main ground of our Protestants late The Protestants pretense
laid forth.
Reformation, or the Chiefest cause why they deserted the Roman Catholic
Church, is best declared in their own language. The Roman Catholic Church (Say
they) though once sound and Orthodox, yet in after Ages turned from God,
betrayed his truths, brought in Idolatry and damnable Heresies. Hence it is we
boldly accuse her, hence it is we write against her notorious Errors, and out
of love to our Souls leave Her. Nos iussu diuino, Babylone Egressi, Says
Riuet, in Sum. Trac. 2. q. 2. n. 3. We, by God's command are gone out of
Babylon (he mean's the Roman Catholic Church) not so much for her vnpurities,
as for Her What Sectaries Assert
Idols and Heresy. More he has in the following words, often accusing this
Church of Idolatry and Heresy, Consonant to what Mr Stillingfleet teaches in
the several passages of his Account.

3. To overthrow this whole Plea, I Argue thus. Whoever The ground of their
Doctrine ouerthrown,
evidently impeaches an ample Church of Idolatry or Heresy, once universally
acknowledged Orthodox, and proves not evidently the truth of his Accusation by
clear and unquestioned Principles, but desert's that Society without Evidence
alleged against her Doctrine; by this one Syllogism.
Acts most unjustly, Err's notoriously, and Sin's damnably. B^t Protestants do
So. That is, They evidently impeach a whole ample Church (once universally
reputed Orthodox) of Idolatry and Heresy, and have also most evidently deserted
Her, without Evidence alleged against her Doctrine, which can be grounded upon
unquestionable Principles, Ergo, They act most unjustly, Err notoriously, and
Sin damnably.

4. The Mayor Proposition stand's firm upon a Principle hinted at above. Viz.
That an evident Accusation in so weighty a Matter utterly loses force, unless
evident Proofs support it. The Mayor Proposition proved, and confirmed.
This may be further Confirmed by one Ratiocinations, in the like Form of
Arguing. Whoeuer should evidently impute to Holy Scripture (once universally
received as God's Sacred word) Idolatry and Heresy, or so much as impeach it of
flight and incredible Doctrine, as the Machiauellians and Socinians do, without
What if one discoursed of Scripture, as ^^ctaries do of the Church?
clear and evident Proofs, would be a most desperate Plaintiff, and Sin
damnably, because he endeauours to bring into public disreputation God's own
truths, which the wisest of the world ever reverenced as Sacred and Divine. And
though he should plead (as Sectaries Discourse of the Church) or Assert that
the Book indeed was once pure and Orthodox, but afterward falling into wicked
hands, notorious Corruptions, false Doctrins (when or how no body knows)
clancularly got in, and spoild its purity; Though I say, He Should plead after
this manner without a clear demonstration, or Evidence of Proofs, He would yet
be a most unjust Accuser, and Sin damnably. Ergo, He or they that tax a whole
Church once owned for God's Spouse, and most certainly Orthodox, of notorious
corrupted Doctrine (with an addition of Idolatry) are guilty of the very same
open Injustice, and Sin damnably. The Parity holds exactly.

5. The Minor Proposition. viz. But Sectaries impeach etc. Says two things.
First, that they evidently accuse a whole Church, The minor Proved.
and have evidently derserted Her, which is manifest Ad oculum. Secondly, that
they have done so without Evidence of Proofs against her Doctrine, grounded on
unquestionable Principles; And this we shall most easily demonstrate, if our
Adversaries will please to own with us these following Principles, or any of
them, as most unquestionable.

6. First the plain and express words of Holy Scripture, without Mixture
Indubitable Principles supposed, where upon proofs must stand
of their particular Glosses, or ours also. 2. The unanimous Consent of ancient
Fathers, but still without Glosses. 3. The clear Judgment of any Orthodox
Church, whereunto we add the express Definitions of ancient approved Councils,
and universal Tradition received by all. 4. Manifest Reason. No Principles can
be better, or equalize these in worth, Proofs if solid, must stand upon One, or
more of them.

7 Speak therefore its high time. Let us not eternally word Sectaries are urged
to follow closely the main point,
it, but go closely to Work. We are here in a main Matter Concerning Salvation,
can you Dr Stillingfleet, or any Protestant in England, as Euiduntly prove that
such and such an Article of Catholic Religion is Contrary to all, or any one
of these mentioned Principles, as every Grammarian can evidently tell you, that
this or that Solaecism is evidently against the Rules of Grammar? I here boldly
challenge you; vouchsafe to Answer without tergiuersation, if you can reioyn,
you are worthy Doctors, if not; be pleased to surcease from writing
Controversies hereafter. Yet one word more.

8. You say Evidently, we are Idolaters, because we Adore Christ By Proofs
drawn from ihe Principles already mentioned
in the Blessed Sacrament. Hold on I beseech you, and prove your Evident
Assertion Evidently by plain Scripture, by the unanimous consent of ancient
Fathers, by the known Judgment of any Orthodox Church etc. When you pretend to
have done thus much (But begin you first) I Will boldly Confront you, and
demonstrate, that the Scripture you allege is no Scripture, your supposed
Fathers are false Oracles, your supposed Councils, your Tradition, and
Sectaries Prooss mere Pha^sies.
lastly what you call Reason, merit not so much as the very Names you give
them. All this is to Say in other terms, You grossly abuse these Oracles, you
either Corrupt their very words (as is most usual) or violently force from them
a new perverse Sense, which God never intended to speak by them; And
Consequently the Evidence you pretend to, is nothing But a strong Illusion, or
an ungrounded Phansy, not resolvable into the Clarity or Truth, of any one of
the forenamed Principles. Thus much premised.

9. I prove the Minor positiuely. If it be a manifest Truth, The minor
Proposition proved
that Christ our Lord had an Orthodox Church on earth, for the last ten
Centuries; If it be also manifest, that the Professors of this Church (be it
yet where you will) were either Idolaters or damnable Heretics, it is most
demonstrable, that Sectaries cannot Evidently Euince the Roman Catholic Church
guilty of Idolatry.

10. The ground of my Assertion is. Whoeuer evidently Whoeuer proves the Roman
Church Idolatrous, ruins Christ's true Church.
proves the Roman Catholic Church guilty of Idolatry, euinces eo ipso, That
Christ had no Orthodox Church on earth for a thoufand years. To make this
manifest, Please to divide the whole Moral Body of men called Christians into
three Classes, into Orthodox Belieuers (if yet there were any) into Idolaters,
and known Heretics. This Division made, I boldly Assert, you The reason
hereof.
may justly cast away that Class of Orthodox Believers, and call all the
Christians in the world according to Sectaries, Idolaters, or known professed
Heretics. Catholics you se, are listed amongst Idolaters, because they Adore
Christ in the holy Eucharist, as the ancient Orthodox Graecians did; Those
Graecians yet of the Schism, pray to Saints, that is plain Idolatry, Say
Sectaries. The ancient and modern Gra^cians, supposed Idolaters
The rest of Christians nameable the whole world over, from Luther to the third
or fourth Age, (whether Macedonians, Pelagians, or Arians) were all professed
Heretics. These and none but these Imagined Idolaters, and known Heretics
(a Monstrous heteroclite Progeny of men) essentially constituted Christ's
Orthodox Church. Therefore he who proves Evidently, that Catholics The rest
were Heretics
are Idolaters, and rightly supposes, All others called Christians to have been
Heretics, Proves and rightly Supposes, Christ The Inference clear, against
Sectaries.
to have had no Orthodox Church on earth for a thousand years, which is a
desperate Improbability, deduced from our Sectaries Principle, who blush not to
charge an ancient Church with that Shameful crime of Idolatry, though no Proof
meanly probable (as we shall se hereafter) much less Evident, vphold's the
Calumny.

11. Some may here demand, why we require to have these Why Evidence is
required?
supposed Errors and Idolatry of our Church evidently proved against us? Is it
not enough to euince this upon moral Certainty? The First Question is easily
answered, by proposing another of the like nature. Would not these Protestants
justly require An Instance taken from Scripture proves what is required.
Evidence from a new Sect of men, should it now start up, and pretend on the
one side to believe in Christ, yet on the other, as boldly impute error and
Idolatry to the holy Book of Scripture, as Sectaries do to the Church? They
would certainly not be satisfied with lesser proofs then evident. Hence it is,
that we in like manner, exact neither Topics, nor guesses, but clear Evidence
against the supposed errors of our Church; and reasonably do so, First
because, She by God's Special Providence, has hitherto preserved Scriptures
pure, without Corruptions in Doctrine. 2. Because all must own Scripture as both
Divine and pure, upon the Authority of Christ's Church. Therefore It as highly
concern's all to defend the purity of Christ's Church, as the purity of God's
written word.
it as highly concern's Christians, to maintain the purity of Christ's Church,
as to maintain the purity of Scripture, And Consequently, if nothing less then
Evidence can bring that Sacred Book into contempt, or Euince it of error,
Nothing less then Evidence can cast a blemish on the Church, which gives us
Scripture, and ascertain's all, that it is Divine.

12. That other Pretense to moral Certainty is a mere whymsy rejected above in
the second Discourse. The Reason there hinted at, much to this sense,
Conuinceth. A Doctrine in Matters of Religion Contrary to the Public Judgment
of the whole Christian world, cannot be morally Certain, But what Sectaries The
pretense to Moral Certainty refuted.
Assert Concerning the Errors and Idolatry of the Church, is a Doctrine
Contrary to the public Judgment of the whole Christian world, Ergo. I prove
the Minor. One great part of the Christian world, is the Roman Catholic
Church, She stiffly opposes this loud Calumny of Idolatry and errors laid to
Her Charge. Add hereunto the Sentiment of the Chiefest, and the most A Doctrine
Contrary to the public Judgment of the world,
known Arch-heretiques, Who, whilst they were in their wits, that is, before
their wicked Apostasy, Judged as the Church Judged, and believed as she
believed. This Universal Consent of an Euidenced Church, together with the
Sentiment of Her once Orthodox Members (though afterward wilful Reuolters) I
call Cannot be Morally certain.
a Judgment of Christians so public, and undoubted, that nothing Contrary to
it can be morally Certain. Give me but one Instance of any Truth reputed
Morally certain amongst men, which ever What may well be called this public
Judgment?
merited that name, when witnesses so universal, so numerous, and well
qualified opposed it, and I shall acquiesce, But this is Impossible.

13. Here again fitly comes in, what we now Said of Holy Scripture. Suppose
which is true, that your Chiefest Archhereticks once reverenced that sacred
Book as God's Divine The Instance concerning Scripture, introduced again.
word, with the same high respect as the Roman Catholic Church ever did, and
yet does. Suppose. 2. That Some Abetters of those first wicked men, whether
Arians, Socinians, or Others, should begin to charge the Book with false
Doctrine, would such a supposed Calumny, think ye, ever arrive to so high Moral
That Sacred Book cannot be justly calumniated
Certainty, as to bring Scripture into open Contempt, whilst a whole learned
Church defend's its purity? No the Calumny would not be meanly probable upon
this Ground, that neither Probability (much less Moral Certainty) can stand in
force, when whilst a whole Church defend's its purity.
Witnesses of so great worth, so universal, and numerous oppose it. Apply what
is here noted to the Church, and you will find an exact Parity. Both She and
her own Arch-aduersaries, once maintained Her Doctrine as Sacred, and Orthodox,
Now rise up a Company of iarring Sectaries, who will, forsooth, have their
Charge of Idolatry and notorious Errors against Her, pass for No more can a
few iarring Adversaries justly Calumniate the Church
a Moral certain Truth, The Assertion cannot arrive to moral certainty before
the whole Body of Christians becomes mad, and makes Scripture it self, no
less an erroneous Book than the Church Idolatrous, For here is my Principle.
With one most certain Assent, I hold the Church inerrable, and the Scriptures
Divine: Destroy the Churches infallibility, or Say she has erred, you make
Scripture eo ipso, a Book of no credit.

14. A. second Argument. Those who exactly follow the A second Argument, taken
from the procedure of old Condemned Heretics.
strain of all old condemned Heretics, and as wickedly implead the Roman
Catholic Church of error, are upon that account like them, that is, guilty of
horrid Sin and Heresy. But Protestants do so, Ergo they are guilty of horrid
Sin, and Heresy. The Mayor is unquestionable, For if our Modern Sectaries
exactly close with the mode of all condemned Heretics, it follows thas as
those first Apostates for their malice, were guilty of Heresy, so also these
latter are.

15. The Minor is easily proved. Your ancient Heretics Our Sectaries accuse
like them, rebel, and would reform as they did.
accused as boldly the Roman Church then in Being of error, as our modern
Sectaries do the present Church. They rebelled against it, and deserted it, so
do our Protestants. They sought to reform it, so would our Protestants. For
example. The Arians were as earnest to reform the Churches Doctrine concerning
the Consubstantiality of the Son with his Eternal Father; The Pelagians as
busy, to cancel Original sin; The Donatists as Zealous to persuade men, that
the true Church was not universally Therefore their sin and Apostasy, the very
same.
extended; as ever Protestants were earnest, busy, and Z^alous, to have this
present Church reformed in her Doctrins of Transubstantiation, of Adoting the
Sacred Host, praying to Saints, And what else you will. Now I Subsume.

16. But all these Accusers, all these rebellious Reformers Because all tend to
the destruction of Christ's true Church.
(as like, as like can be to one another) are wicked, and aim at the Ruin of
Christ's true Church, which is Manifest, For had every one of them done what
they desired, or reformed according to their Capricious humors, There had not
been at this day any Orthodox Church in the world. Now here in my Question
which certainly deserves a candid Answer. If all Heretics, A difficult
question proposed.
ancient and Modern reform the Church according to their particular Sentiments,
most evidently Christ's true Church is destroyed. Why therefore should I or any,
if we were yet to seek a better Religion, rather adhere to the Reformation of a
fallible Protestant, than to that other, of a fallible Arian, or a Pelagian?
You Shall have a Strange Answer.

17 We are told, when the Arians went about to reform, the Church was pure, but
now Her known corruptions force Sectaries, out of true love to their Souls (at
least) to reform themselves, Our Sectaries Answer, is an unproven Supposition,
If the Church will learn Her duty by their good example, She may, if not; She
must remain in her errors. Answ. Is not this more then ridiculous? First to
make an unproven Supposition their Proof, and then to say nothing, but what
both the Arians and other Heretics have put in their mouths, and And
contain's nothing but what your old Heretics taught then to Speak.
taught them to speak. For did not these wicked men pretend as dear love to
their Souls? Did they not Clamor as loud against the Churches imagined errors
in those ancient days as ever Protestants have done in these latter? Say
therefore why should the Protestants Reformation be esteemed more secure, and
Orthodox, than what the Arians endeauored to introduce? It will be hard to
Answer, whilst this Principle stand's firm. If all reform, the Church is ruined.

18. Some may Reply. Protestants without all doubt (who have divorced
themselves from the Church) therefore clamor so loud, because they have strong
Proofs at hand, whereby to Another Reply examined.
euince that, that once faithful oracle, is now guilty of notorious errors,
which no Arian could then do. Answ. Here is the main Point I would willingly be
at, and have examined to the bottom. I therefore press these Nouellists to
pitch upon some one particular Sectaries are urged to pitch upon Some
particular controversy
Controversy ( Transubstantiation, for example, or this now debated point of
Idolatry, in adoring the Consecrated Host) and urge them first, to Argue by the
plain words of Holy Scripture. When all they can Say is said, I will
demonstrate, that the Arians produce Passages of holy Scripture far more
significant (might we rest in the mere sound of words) for their Heresy, The
sound of words in Scripture, more plain for Arians then for Protestants
than ever Protestant alleged against Transubstantiation, or any other
Catholic Tenet. It Is true, your Arians make little account of any Authority
but what seems to them plain Scripture, or appears deducible from Scripture
(and this was the old Protestant way) But our Newer men have some respect to
the Consent of Fathers, and an ancient Church: These, we press to dispute
closely in Form and to make our supposed errors, or Sectaries Objections
hitherto Proposed have been solued.
their Contrary pretended truths known, by virtue of any one received
Principle. It is Answered, thus much is done in their Books already set forth.
We Reply. All their Objections hitherto proposed, have been as fully and
clearly solued, as either they or we, solue the Arguments of Atheists against
God, and the Jews Cauils against Christ, Or, if they have any new ones yet in
store, which require further satisfaction, it is certainly most easy to propose
them in good Form. This done, I will engage, they shall no sooner appear in
public, then have a full and satisfactory refutation.

19. We are told again, such and such Books published Sectaries pretense of
Books not answered, rejected.
by Protestants have not been answered, As if forsooth, all Books set forth by
Catholics were refuted. In a word here you have all. It is very true, the
Cauils, The Ieers, and tedious length of some books have not been answered,
with the like Cauils, Ieers, and length, But what is this to our purpose, whilst
we urge for Arguments, whereby it may appear to a disinteressed what has been
answered by Catholics, and what not?
Judgment, that Catholics have forsaken the ancient Orthodox Faith, And that
Protestants now lately had the singular Privilege of settling Religion right on
its old firm foundations? All Arguments hitherto proposed of this nature, or
which tend to infringe any particular Catholic Doctrine, have been dissolved
and torn in preces, over and over, Or, if, as I now said, there yet remain any
unanswered, our Adversaries may vouchsafe to let us hear them.

20. Sectaries reply. We have indeed offerred to solue their Objections, as
also to attaque Protestancy with many Arguments; An other plea of Sectaries
but as our Solutions are slight, so our Arguments against them seem light and
forceles. Call me to mind one or two only.

21. They have been told, If the Roman Catholic Church be fallible, and
Protestants as fallible, Jews and Gentiles may Arguments vnder^alued by them,
as forceless
justly Scorn Christianity, when they se a fallible Protestant attempt to
settle an erring Papist in the right way to Salvation, or a fallible Papist to
do the like on an erring Protestant, whilst neither the one nor other can know
infallibly, which is the right way to Salvation. They have been told. 2. To
make Scripture alone Though most Conuincing.
the sole Rule or Judge in Controversies, increases the Scorn of these Aliens
from Christ, who hold it more then ridiculous, to appeal to a Judge for the
Decision of their doubts, when none of them after the appeal made, can
Certainly know what the Judge Of Sectaries unreasonable appeal to Scripture
alone.
Speak's, or this Rule of Scripture regulates. What I say is manifect, for So
various and discordant are all rhese in their Interpretations of God's word,
that the Arians avouch it Speak's Arianism, Protestants Protestanism, Papists
Popery, Pelagians Pelagianism, and so of the rest. Imagine I beseech you, that
two who accuse one another of high Treason Should come before a Judge and
desire to have the final sentence pronounced against the Criminal person (Both
I suppose are not guilty) The Judge speaks once, and no more, but these two at
discord agree not Their unreasonable proceeding declared by one Instance.
about the main point, which ^ the true meaning of his Sentence, may not Both
return home as wise as they came, and contend till Dooms Day, unless some other
Judge break's off the quarrel, and says plainly. Thou art the Traitor?

22 This is our very case, either we or Protestants betray This Discourse
driven home, and applied to these two dissenting Parties.
Gods truths, The one or other Party Contradict's the first Verity, and boldly
auerres, he Speak's what he never Spoke. We appeal to Holy Scripture and would
have our Debates decided by that Oracle, Two or three Passages ( He that hear's
you hears me. The Church is the Pillar and ground of Truth. He that hears not
the Church, let him be as a Heathen etc.) literally taken, denote the guilty
Party, But our Sectaries tell us, we mistake the Scriptures meaning, They
Sectaries cast themselves into in extricable difficulties
vary from us in the main Point concerning the very Sense of our Judges
Sentence, Is it not therefore evident, that they must either recurre to some
other Tribunal for a final decision, or Secondly ingenuously Confess, they are
the men, who will not have the traitorous Party discovered, Or lastly
acknowledge, Controversies can have no End, and that God has not left any means
on earth, whereby the notorious Deprauers of his revealed Truths may be known?
One only Instance will give more light to what I have said.

23. We and Sectaries appeal to Christ's sacred words. This is my Body. We
understand them literally and strongly plead our cause what different senses
are made of Christ's own words?
alleging for us, not only the Authority of the western and eastern Churches,
but, (if need were) of the Lutherans also. They reject all, yea Say, we grossly
mistake the sense of Christ's words, and therefore hold us the Traitors that
commit gross Idolatry, in the sight of God and Angels. Consider good Reader,
are not such Adversaries obliged to plead their Cause before How the Catholic
plead's*
this Judge of Scripture by a Church as universal, by witnesses as Faithful, by
an Authority as great, as we produce against them, or to confess ingeniously,
This Controversy cannot be decided. They may, It Is true Oppose the Caluinists
to Lutherans, but to Sectaries allege nothing for their Sense.
denote a Church either Latin or Greek, that maintained their Opinion of the
Eucharist, Shall never be made so much as meanly Probable. O yes, the Primitive
Church taught as they teach. Contra. Its utterly untrue, as is largely proved
in the first Discourse. Again that is a thlng yet in Controversy, and therefore
far from being a manifest sentence against us, yet their Clamours against our
Idolatry are manifest, and as injurious as manifest.

24. These, and yet far more forceable Arguments proposed by Catholic Authors
against Protestancy, our Adversaries call Flies, Small Grains, gnawing of Rats
etc. We wholly Contrary hold them conuincing, and the cause we defend most
just. Here both Parties Stick in the hight of their heats, Stiff in their
ways, without yiedling to one another. Is it not therefore full time, and
reasonable think A Judge distinct from Scripture proved absolutely necessary.
ye, to appeal to some Judge distinct from Scripture^, by whose just Sentence
it may appear, whether we old Papists, or our young Nouellists are the guilty
men, that impiously oppose God's truths?

25. You se whilst the sense of Scripture and Fathers is not agreed on, we are
advanced no further but only to quarrel, as if Contention is not the last end
of writing Controversies
Contention were the final end of writing Controversies. Or, as if an eternal
Debate were desired and after that, to have nothing decided. For this sole
Reason, A Judge is absolutely necessary, though our Adversaries will hear of
none, having an horror to admit of any Churches Judgment, whereby the cause
now in debate may be happily* ended. Yet if we follow the Rule of Catholics
appeal to one Judge,
Reason, what can be more Satisfactory then to appeal to Church Authority in
this weighty matter? We Catholics stand to the Sentence of our own euidenced
universal Church, She is our Protestants are forced to appeal to* another of*
equal Authority, or their Cause is lost.
Judge. Are not Sectaries therefore obliged (if their Arguments against us be
thought solid, and their cause good) to appeal to the Judgment of some other
Church, as euidenced by Miracles, and as universal, as ours is, which once
taught as they teach, and publicly decryed our supposed Errors?

26. What we now propose seems reasonable, because Protestants most certainly
( a^ they defend Protestanism) will not pretend to publish a Doctrine (with a
strict obligation laid on their They cannot pretend to tea^h a Doctrine, which
no ancient Church ever taught.
Partisans to acquiese in it) which no Orthodox Church ever taught, or if any
Church ever taught so, This must be as clearly euidenced, as it is evident,
that the Roman Catholic Church taught Popery, seven or eight Ages since. Here
in a word is the true trial of their whole Cause. Denote, Point out, or name an
Orthodox Church which owned this Protestancy five or six Centuries since,
Controversies are ended; But if it be (as it is) most impossible to name such a
Church, The Abetters of Protestancy* Sectaries prove themselves, heretics.
only follow the strain and Method of all Condemned Heretics, and prove
themselves by their own procedure Heretics. That is, They plead against
Catholic Doctrine, by false Calumnies, weak Cauils, lame conjectures, vnsensed
Scriptures, and Calumnies, their only Defens^.
abused Fathers, without any Church Authority to rely on, And thus all your
ancient Heretics have Proceeded.

27. Wherefore to conclude I Say in a word. Protestancy Protestancy* proved an
Improbable Religion.
as Protestancy is a most improbable Religion, or to speak more plainly, no
Religion at all. The ground of my Assertion will be best laid forth in these
few words. No ancient universal Church, no Orthodox Christians in any part of
the world, ever taught Protestancy, Ergo its improbable. Nay more; no Heretical
Society The ground* of our Assertion.
of men ever* taught that whole Doctrine, Therefore it is an vnpatronized
Nouelty, rejected by the Universal Christian world, whether Orthodox, or
others. And Hence it is, that whateuer Protestants can Say in behalf of their
own Tenets, or Contrary to Catholic Doctrine, comes to no more but to
improbable and unproven Suppositions. Observe I beseech you.

28. They tell us the Roman Catholic Church once true, deserted Improbable
Suppositions, the only Proofs of Sectaries.
the Ancient Faith, we urge them to prove the Assertion, and with good reason,
because neither ancient Church, nor any sound Christian ever said so before
themselves. And what Answer have we? The very Calumny without more, and their
own unproven Suppositions, serve both for proof and Answer. We demand Again,
Questions proposed* ^ when the Church failed*
when, or in what Age the Church became thus accursed and traitorous to Christ?
They fob us off with fooleries, of beards growing Gray, and weeds peeping up in
a garden inperceptibly. Is not thy ridiculous? We Ask. 3. Seeing the world was
never Since the Apostles preached, without an Orthodox Christian what other
pure Church succeeded in place of Roman supposed Idolatrous? How many different
Churches will* Sectaries own* why Should the Protestants Reformation be better,
then that of the Arians?
Society, what other pure Church succeeded in place of the Roman now supposed
Idolatrous, and heretical? None hitherto has offerred to answer this Question,
nor can it be Answered, unless Sectaries admit two or three distinct different
Churches. The first Primitive and pure, the second corrupted which came in when
the Roman Catholic began her supposed Idolatry, The third again pure and
spotless, which closely followed the Roman fallen into Error, And this is a
mere chimera. We lastly demand why this Protestant Reformation, should be more
liked, more looked on, or held any ways better, then those precedent
Reformations of their elder Brethern the Donatists, or Others? Will it be said
Protestants came after the rest, or in the last place, and therefore think
themselves more skilful, the only gifted men in this business of mending
Religion? Plead thus, I answer, They speak improbably, and are worse then all
their Predecessors upon this very account, that having For one weighty reason
it is far worse.
seen the Malice, the weak Attempts, the unlucky success of defeated
Heretics in former Ages, will not learn by such woeful examples to be more
wise and wary, then to run the Risque with them, and thereby to incurr God's
heavy Indignation.

29. Whoeuer desires to make a further inspection into that The improbability
of Protestanism further declared* in a very unequal Parallel. The first
reverenced the other scorned The one has a head, the other is headles.
Tradition teaches the one* fancy the other The one far and near diffused, the
other hid in corners. Councils and no Councils, Unity and Divisions visible
Pastors and invisible, Compared together
high improbability, which other Christians Charge Protestancy with, may please
to compare a little our Catholic Religion with this other late risen Nouelty.
If things be well weighed (without Controversy so evident that they need no
Proof) The first will be found always reverenced, and never opposed by
Orthodox Christians; Contrariwise, the other will appear an object of scorn,
not only to the wisest of the world, but also to innumerable that profess it
against their own Consciences. The One has an Ecclesiastical Head for its
Guide; The other is an vngouernable Body without head, or joints to tie its
iarring parts together. The One shows you manifest and most evident Miracles,
The other (if ever nature wrought Miracles) a Miraculous boldness to deny the
greatest wonders, God has wrought by the Church. The One teaches what it
anciently received, by a never interrupted Tradition; The other what is
suggested by every Private Phansy. The one is diffused the whole world over,
The other only Creeps up and down in a few Corners of these Northern parts, in
so much that some Religious Orders are further extended than Protestancy. The
One has had several Ecumenical learned Councils; The other never any, learned
or unlearned. The one still retain's a strict unity in Faith, the other
manifestly is torn in pieces with Divisions. The one gives you a large
Catologue of its ancient visible Pastors, and visible professors, for full
Sixteen Ages* The other cannot name one Protestant Village, nor one Protestant
man, before the days of the unfortunate Luther.

30. The one hold's its Catholic deceased Ancestors worthy respect and
veneration, The other makes them all besotted Idolaters, Respect and a high
dishonor
and worse then mad men. The one Religion Stand's firmly built upon plain
Scripture, and the Authority of an euidenced universal Church; The other
utterly vnprincipl'd, has not* one word of Holy writ for it, nor either
universal or particular Church, which ever taught Protestancy. The one has
Principles and no Principles An Interpreter and no Interpreter Faith and no
faith Infallibility, and fallibility, a An ancient Possession, an open vrong,
Divine Assistance, and no Divine Assistance.
a Mysterious Bible and a certain Interpreter, the other a mere body without a
Soul, the bare letter without life, words without sense, and Phansy to
Interpret. The one resolves its faith into God's infallible Revelation, the
other has nothing like Faith to resolve. The one Religion Proves its truths
Infallible, The other seek's for fallible Doctrine, and has found enough of what
is both fallible, and false also. An Ancient Possession vphold's the One, and a
public injurious rebellion against the Mother Church gives the other all the
Right it has. The Professors of the one, prove God to have been the Author of
it, who yet preserues it unalterable and pure by Divine Assistance. The
Professors of the other say plainly that God never revealed one Article of
their reformed Protestancy, and therefore need no Divine Assistance to preserve
it. The Professors of the One, show you a Church gloriously marked with Signs
and Wonders (peculiar effects of God's Infinite Power and Wisdom) which make
the Religion evidently Credible to Reason. The Professors of the other, in lieu
of such Marks, Show you A glorious euidenced Church, and a mere Naked Nothing,
paralleled.
a bare Naked Nothing, without Miracles, without Conuersions, without
austerity, or any thing that appears like a work of God in it, and therefore
is most evidently incredible.

31. Thus much for an Essay only which might be further enlarged, but its
needles, for you have every particular proved in the Treatise here in your
hands. If our Adversaries hold themselves or cause injured, whilst we so highly
extol the one What Is required, if our Adversaries hold their Cause wronged?
Religion, and extenuate the other to Improbability, it will, methinks, be very
easy to right Both, by showing plainly ( upon sound and very sound Principles)
wherein our mistakes lie, or in what substantial Matter we have erred. But
still remember Principles.

32. What I here propose Seems reasonable, and it is done for this sole end
(Almighty God knows) that after our long The sole End why we propose this.
Debates, it may at last appear to every one, on which side Truth stand's. Now
if upon so fair an Offer we have nothing returned, but Sectaries wonted strain
of Cauils, trimmed up with pretty ieers. I, for my part, have done and shall in
place of Arguing further, mildly exhort as Blessed S. Austin once did in We
exhort with Blessed S. Austin.
a like Occasion. De Unit. Ecclesiae. C. 19. fine. S^ au^em non potestes, quod
tam just a vobis flagitamus, ostendere, Credit veritati, Conticescite,
Obdormiscite a furore, expergiscimini ad salutem. If you, Sectaries, cannot
Convince our Church guilty of error, by undeniable Principles (this we justly
require) Believe Truth. Let your weak Attempts and fury sleep, Surcease from
this frivolous And appeal to their own guilty Consciences.
charging us with Heresy, and Idolatry. You know, Gentlemen, you know full
well, we are no Idolaters, your own Consciences tell you your Plea is naught,
your Cause vndefensible, Expergis^imini ad Salutem, Wake, open your drowsy
eyes, and look about you.

33. You se our Noble England set on fire by your unfortunate dissentions
concerning Religion, bring your tears to After ^ long drawsy sleep its time to
wake.
quench the flames. You se your Selves upon your different Engagements (some
brainsick with Fanaticism, some with no man knows what) worrying one another;
Wonder nothing, it must needs be so, whilst you are out of the peaceable Fold
of Christ's united Church. You have been too long Prodigal Children straying
from the house of God, return with a hearty Peccaui, A tender Mother (the
Catholic Church) is willing to receive you, and a good old Father, Christ's
Vicar upon earth, as ready to embrace you with open arms. You se Atheism
enters, and is rife among you; pernicious Leuiathans, and other like Monsters
range up and down, and poison innumerable. How Should it be otherwise? Atheism
follows upon what you have done, For those who Separate from the true Church,
soon Separate from Christ also, and cannot after that double Divorce, long
Continue Friends to God. Wherefore once more Expergis^imini ad salutem, be The
Authors hearty wish,
vigilant. Hora est iam nos de somno surgere, it now high time to wake. Your
Concern is no less a Matter then eternal Salvation. My earnest prayer is, that
Christ our Lord, the Light of the world, may break through the thick clouds of
all darkened hearts, and with the radiant beams of Divine Grace illuminate
every one, Ad salutem, to endless Bliss and Happiness.

FINIS.

