THE Wounds of a Friend: OR, A LETTER Mentioned by Mr Love upon the Scaffold,
in his SPEECH, a little before his Death:

Sent unto him the night before he should have been executed in the Month of
JULY:

Which is upon the occasion of the said Mention thereof published, BY John
Price of Colemanstreet, London.

LONDON, Printed by I. M. for H. Cripps and L. Lloyd, and are to be sold at
their shop in Pope's Head Alley, 1651.

The Wounds of a Friend; OR A Letter mentioned by Mr Love upon the Scaffold,
etc.
READER,
I Understand that Mr Love in his Speech upon the Scaffold, a little before his
death, amongst other things, made mention of a certain Letter, sent unto him
the night before he should have been executed the last Month, which he called
an insulting Letter, importing a resolution in some to publish in print several
things reflecting dishonor upon him after his death: The truth is, the Letter
he spoke of was written by my self, and his jealousy of any man's writing
concerning him after his death had its rise only from a marginal note of the
said Letter, which it seems made a deep impression upon him; and since his
death I perceive that not only Mr Love, but some of his friends, did take that
Letter very ill at my hands, especially considering that deep sense, pity and
compassion that did (as they say) seem to appear in me toward him in his sad
condition but a little before that Letter was sent, which was (I confess) so
great, that as on the one hand, I could not be well satisfied how the
Parliament could in Honor and Conscience have vouchsafed him a Pardon, (they
being indeed not their own but Trustees for the Commonwealth, and therefore
obliged to pursue the public and common benefit in saving or destroying him
(his life being forfeited to the Commonwealth,) and no probable, much less
certain public advantage appearing to accrue from his Pardon, but rather a
giving up their cause so maintained and assetted by him during all the time of
his trial; and nothing appearing to the contrary in all his post addresses, how
ever slily and cunningly couched and penned;) so on the other hand my bowels and
affections did so melt and yearn toward him that I verily believe I could have
been contented in Gods way to have parted with one of my limbs for his life;
and however I was by him and am by others unhappily mistaken in that letter;
yet God and mine own Conscience do witness for me the uprightness, plainness
and singleness of my heart and spirit, out of which I wrote it, for the
spiritual peace and advantage of his soul, had he been pleased to have improved
it to that end, being as I conceived, very genuinely and naturally improvable
thereunto; And mine own Family can bear me witness (which I would not mention
but upon this occasion) that with many prayers night and day, I did, according
to my poor measure, importune the Almighty for grace and mercy for him until
the time of his death. The truth is, I was plain and clear with him in my
Letter, applying my self to him in such matter, which I thought might be most
healthful and profitable for him; It is now about eleven years sithence my
first acquaintance with him, in which time I have had very many advantages, by
a strict observation of him and his deportment in public and private, of
inspection, as into his worth and excellency (whereof he was always
sufficiently sensible,) so into his weakness and infirmities (for I hope they
were no worse,) and I found (and it was not only my observation of him, but
also many others, for alas it could not be hid) that he was exceeding apt, not
only to be courted, but even captivated with that secret, close, and dangerous
lust and sin of popularity, affecting multitude of followers, and not able to
bear opposition and contradiction; and therefore well perceiving the policy of
Satan, that great adversary of mankind, adepting and sitting this fear of
death wherein his foot was so aptly and easily taken, and mounting him upon the
wing and pinnacle of popular observation, and considering also his seeming
penitential Addresses unto the Parliament, though cloudily, obstrucely, and
very uncertainly framed and penned, arguing (at least unto me) a kind of a
trembling, shaking and exceeding dissatisfactory frame and temper of mind, to
venture his life upon so bad a cause; and understanding also by some of his
very near friends that were daily with him, how uncertain he was in his
disposition to an ingenuous, christian, and plenary acknowledgment in his
Addresses unto the Parliament for mercy, and that by reason of the various and
diverse disposed and opinionated persons that were his constant Visitors, some
inclining him one way, and some another; some endevoring (as it seemed to me)
to make him a mere Very tamperable for such a purpose, being of a rash,
furious, hasty, violent and popular temper and disposition.
Calf, or Heifer, a Victim to their cause, though happily instructing him in
that black art of double dealing, dis-ingenuous distinctions, and reservations
to save his life, together with their cause (could it so be brought about) some
of which friends I fear stuck too close to him even to his death Whose altum
silentium, when their dying brother vented such bitter invectives against the
present Authority, bespeaks either their own minds and judgments in the same;
or themselves very unfit ghostly fathers at such a time.
,) Others again advising him to acknowledge his sin, and to give glory to God; I
say, perceiving this poor young man thus harrassed and hurried in his thoughts
and mind; and ready to offer up his life in this perplexed temper and
disposition; And lastly, calling to mind the most dangerous and desperate
estate and condition of his poor Soul, should he offer it up unto the service
of this lust, not withstanding his seeming zeal for Gods glory, and the great
temptation hereunto by a mighty concourse of people to see the manner of his
death, and hear his last Scaffold Oration. These Considerations wrought upon
me, out of very faithfulness, to write this ensuing Letter, which take as
follows.

Mr Love,
I do not know, nor am I much solicitous, whether you esteem me an enemy or a
friend; but as I abhor to salute you with the Kisses of an enemy, so I judge it
unseasonable to afflict you with the Wounds of a friend; and yet the bowels of
a spiritual Brother (I know not whether you can echo Brother to me,) do so
implacably importune me, that I am compelled, by the workings thereof, to be
bold with you in one word of Counsel, before our final parting; it is this,
Offer not up your precious life, with all its concernments, natural, spiritual,
a victim to the great Godess of vain Professors popula^ity, (though confind
within the Circle of a certain Party:) You may call this Censoriousness for
want of love, but my conscience calls it Faithfulness through the abundance of
love: to be praised while you live, and talked on after you be dead, for a
valiant Assertor even unto death of that Cause judged by many of your own
Friends and Judgment to be weak, yea wicked, is but a small price for this
precious life, and the hazards of a better. It is well if the arms of Christ do
bear you up above these troubled waters, and not windy bladders; but it is very
rare, considering your Cause, the projecting, promoting, actual producing a new
bloody War, a War between Saints, a War against Saints, a War to restore a
wicked, a bloody Family, so signally and eminently dethroned by the vindicative
Justice of Almighty God, so decryed, so imprecated with such zeal, expectation
and confidence by your own self in public, in private, and you not so much as
touched with the guilt of a Busiy-body in all your Trial and sufferings; how
ever you have valu^d or undervalued your precious life, yet let not Bassilix
eyes destroy your Soul, viz. an ambition to be looked at, and admired: It is
now high time to recollect your self, your Breeding, your Education, (...)
at whose charges, from what sort of Professors you have received mercy and
favor all your life, and how you have requited them at the last, by not only
not doing the least thing for them, but striving to undermine them in their
Liberties, and failing therein to cut them off by a bloody War: (...)
I should have been glad, had the due consideration of your miscarriages
wrought you to an ingenuous and Christian acknowledgment in due season for your
life sake; I should now rejoice, might it be yet considered for your Souls
sake. Do you plead your Conscience? If it be so indeed, consider the strange
hand of God upon your Judgment, not much unlike his hand upon the late King, (
in whose Cause, how ever palliated, you must yield up your life,) who could not
submit to the Power that tried him for his Conscience sake. That a Minister of
Jesus Christ should intermeddle with the State and Condition of several
Nations, so as to involve them in a bloody war, yea to strive to subvert that
Government under which he might live a peaceable and quiet life in all
godliness and honesty, a thing never practiced by any of the Prophets of old,
by Christ, his Apostles or Successors, that your self have judged faithful,
(except you judge Jesuits to be such,) should do all this, not only without
hesitansie, but with a zealous Conscience, argues a great hand of God upon such
a Judgment. Again, do you plead Conscience, and therefore cannot subject to a
Christian Consession of your miscarriage, though it might have saved your life,
and that for Conscience sake? See here another strein of divine Justice; you
endeavored to bring in a Power, though by an Army, to compel men's subjection
against their Consciences, and your self now must perish upon the same account.
But once more, Consider, is it Conscience indeed? Is it not rather Popularity,
then Conscience? Shall I submit now? Will not the world say, it is base, it is
dishonorable? etc. Well Sir, consult God, and plead not Conscience against
Conscience; it is bad to live, but worse to dye with an ill Conscience,
especially under the vizor of a good Conscience; an ill Cause, yea and an ill
Conscience may be slily palliated with many good prayers, Scripture phrases,
and a zealous show of a very tender Conscience, and to dye stoutly in such a
Cause, may be reputed Martyrdom amongst men, and just punishment with God; it
may have a show of pure Christianism with man, but it is pure Atheism with God;
the more close, secret and spiritual any sin is, the more dangerous and noxious
it is unto the sinner. Sir, I do not judge you, but I fear you, I would I had no
cause; if I am mistaken, it is well, this can do you no hurt; if I am not
mistaken, this may do you good, that is my aim, and the desire of my Soul; for
if I know my heart, I could willingly part with my right hand in Gods way for
your life, and with my very life in that way for your Soul: That the Lord of
Life and Glory would so communicate himself yet unto you before you go hence,
that having a due sense of the riches and freeness of his grace in our dear
Lord Jesus Christ, and so rest, peace, and fullness of satisfaction upon that
account, and also a due feeling of your own miscarriages in all your ways, and
chiefly of that that has brought you to this precipitated end, that you may
yield up your life as becomes such a sense, and that eternal life may second
your temporal, is the hearty prayers of

Sir, Your very faithful and truly affectionate Brother in our Lord Jesus
Christ, JOHN PRICE.
Coleman street, London, July 14, 1651.
REader, Thou have the Letter truly and faithfully committed to thy strictest
view and examination, and submitted to thy Judgment; if thou find any thing
of an insulting nature therein, nay any thing but love and faithfulness unto Mr
Love, most certain I am, thou reapest that which was never sown by me; nay it
past a strict examen by a judicious godly man, one of Mr Loves very good
friends and acquaintance, and very zealously industrious for his Pardon, before
it was sent unto Mr Love; for indeed I feared Mr Loves sinister interpretation
and misconstruction of it, who was very importunate with me to send it unto
him: but it is true which Solomon says, That a froward heart finds no good.
All that I shall say of Mr Love is this, His sin, vanity and folly have found
him out, and pursued him to his grave, but I hope shall follow him no further:
As for my self, I cannot with my self better (in wishes of this nature) then to
desire God to g^^e me as ^^^^^ful a friend in the day of my departure from this
world as I did desire to approve my self to Mr Love, and a better heart to
improve the same. Farewell.

FINIS.

