A SERMON Preached to those, who had been Scholars of St. PAUL'S School, IN
GUILD HALL Chapel, LONDON, At their Anniversary-Meeting on St. Paul's Day,
1678/9.

By W. WYATT, M. A. and Student of Christs-Church in Oxford.

LONDON, Printed for Benj. Took, at the Sign of the Ship in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1679.

TO THE Right Reverend FATHER in GOD HENRY Lord Bishop of LONDON.
May it please your Lordship,
ALthough the ensuing Discourse might by many more Titles justly be styled your
Lordship's, yet since it was preached and made public under your Lordships
Government, no Person (but your Lordship) ought to be dissatisfied, that I
presume to affix the Name of so Great a Patron, to the Dedication. I had the
happiness (though in a lower Sphere) to be known unto your Lordship, in a
College where I lived under your light: I had the advantage to partake of
those influences constantly dispersed and diffused by the example of your
Noblest Education; I there contracted that Veneration and esteem for your
Lordship, which I ought always to preserve and acknowledge; and not this
Reverence alone, but an ambition of being sheltred under a Name so truly
Illustrious, put me beyond all choice, and in a manner destined me to this
Address. I most humbly beg the protection of your Lordships Name for an Author
newly complemented (against his nature) into the Press, perhaps at first not
altogether with his will persuaded into the Pulpit. If your Lordship shall
vouchsafe to favor me so far, I shall be encouraged to have a better opinion
of my performances in this kind, and I hope to do better. I may without Vanity
say, I have done some things with more accuracy and correctness, but there is a
fate in Writing, as in men, the smaller and most inconsiderable are very often
preferred; and this is the first known by my name, and the most early Testimony
I could with any tolerable excuse (for the occasion) give the World of my
endeavor to express my self,

My LORD, Your Lordships most devoted Servant, William Wyatt.

A SERMON Preached at GUILD HALL Chapel.
1 COR. VIII. 1. Knowledge puffs up, but Charity edifieth.
THE great Apostle in this Epistle having severely reprehended, and to no less
a punishment than a total exclusion from happiness, condemned some abominable
irregularities in the Corinthian manners; having declared, that Drinking might
be acceptable to a Grecian, but could not to a Christian's God; that Avarice
and Extortion could not purchase, nor Thievery break open Heaven; that railings
and contemnings would never produce the same effects, as Prayers and
humiliations; much less, that the practices of those sordid beastlinesses which
deserve not a name among Mankind, could ever approach those pure eyes, which
are not able to behold the least iniquity; having branded, I say, some brutish
sins which Custom had made familiar, and great Examples gentile, he proceeds
now to an impiety grounded upon, and protected with their knowledge; the
occasion this: Corinth, the Metropolis of Achaia, and a City so haughty, that
it contended with Rome it self, (which was the occasion that L. Memmius humbled
it to ashes) was, as all other rich and populous places, excessively proud, and
to a wonder luxurious. It was the Metropolis of Vice, as well as the Country;
and grew into a Proverb for Sin, as well as for Beauty and Magnificence; its
Buildings were far more regular, than its Morals; and there was more Order in
their Palaces than in their Lives: Softness and Ease had expelled all the
thoughts of the laborious exercises of Virtue. Pleasures were their practice,
and Venus was their Deity, and yet (as it often happens) the men were
ingenious, though they were wicked, they retained their Wit, though they lost
their Virtue; they were Men in their understandings, though they were Beasts in
their lives; and very good at proposing, though very ill at practicing. The
best were better at a Supper, than a Sermon; yet a general neatness and
politeness of Parts remained among them amidst all their Sensualities, and they
made subtle Philosophers, though impious men: in a word, all the world
condemned them for their debaucheries, but admired them for their endowments.
Their delicacies had drawn to them all the loose that were learned; and there
was always among them a conflux of great Wits, as well as great Wickednesses;
and this was the leading Cause, that they were obstinate against, and deaf to
all sober Counsels; this obstructed all the ways and passages by which
instruction should enter; and their pride still excluded their information.
It Is in vain to give directions of walking to those who are already conceited
that they are in the way: of all Fools, the opinionated are the most
incorrigible; it is a work of great difficulty to beat them from their holds and
fastnesses of misapprehension: there is a double labor with them (as with all
wild Creatures) they must be tamed before they are taught: and this was the
case of the Corinthians, they were the Sophi and the Virtuosi of the World, and
who should presume to teach them that were perfect? What arguments could win
upon those, who had already concluded for themselves, who hated all
retractation, who magisterially determined always on their own side, and with
as much arrogance fixed a note of infallibility upon their own determinations?
and what need of edifying to those that had finished themselves? But St. Paul
is not one of their irrefragable Society. He tells them, That their Knowledge
is the Original of all their Error; that they may swell and boast as much as
they please, yet they are under a grand mistake; and the faster they run, the
farther they are out of the way; though through their own false Glasses they
seem Giants to themselves; yet they are but Pusio's and Pygmies to those that
stand in better lights: all their Tumors must be discussed, before they can be
in Health: they may be blown up by Knowledge, but they must be edified by
Charity; for, Knowledge puffs up, but Charity edifies.

Which words being plain, easy and intelligible, we shall not rack them to
make them speak more than they intended. They contain two Affirmative
Propositions, That Knowledge puffs up, That Charity edifies men.

I begin with the first; where it will be necessary to explain what Knowledge
is intended in this place: for Knowledge may have here three several
acceptations.

1. If we look upon the words as bearing a relation to the preceding; Now as
touching things offered to Idols, we know that all have knowledge; then they
import thus much, You Corinthians upon presumption of your great Knowledge
above other men, especially in the case of Idols, abuse your liberty, and by
eating meat offered to Idols in their Temples, you give Scandal to many, and in
that sin your selves. You know that an Idol is nothing, and we also know that
an Idol is nothing in the World; but you must take heed lest this knowledge of
yours become a Stumbling Block to those that are weak. Whilst you pride your
selves in your Knowledge, you may Offend your Brother, and whilst you Offend
your Brother, you must displease your God. Your opinion must not make a breach
of your love; your Knowledge must give place to your Charity; That may make you
proud, but this must make you happy. But

2. If the (...) here in the Text relates to the Heresy of the Gnostics,
considering that Self-security was one of the leading Principles in their
Divinity, and those Latitudinarians thought no compliance sinful, by which
their Persons were protected; as also if we inquire what Mysteries of Words
they doted on, and what unintelligible Methods of Science they pursued; how
much they did pride themselves about fruitless Genealogies, perplexed
Conjunctions and Poetical Pedigrees; How highly they were elated with the
occult Philosophies of (...) and (...), and empty aerie Speculations about the
Aeones -- by which obscure Cant and dark ways of Expression (as all other
Enthusiasts) they set so high a Value upon themselves, that they contemned and
slighted all the rest of mankind, looked upon themselves as the only Adepti of
the World, scorned and vilified all others both in their Parts and persons, and
as great Monarchs in Learning and Religion, received Laws from none but
themselves; I say, if we inquire into this, and consider, that they were the
only pure as well as the infallible, and thought their Lives Demonstration as
well as their Doctrine, St. Paul had just reason to reprehend these
vainglorious and turgid Sciolists, and to declare; That Religion consisted not
in such Knowledge; that science may make a man vain, but not good; that though
they were Gnostics by name, they were Ignorants by their practice; and that a
little Charity toward an offended Brother was more acceptable in the eyes of
Heaven, and more improved a Professor of Christian Religion, than all their
Subtle Theorems or those of the Schools of the Philosophers, or the positions
of the most celebrated Dogmatizers. But

3. If we look upon the words as independent upon them that go before, and an
entire Sentence, without any Relation in themselves, then they evidently imply
thus much, That Knowledge in its utmost Latitude is very apt to make the
Professors of it proud and arrogant. The reasonableness of which Proposition
because it contains very much of Truth in it, and by very great Authors is
taken to be the sense of the place, I shall endeavor briefly to evince, and
that

1. From the Nature, and consequently of Mankind. 2. From the Practice of
Mankind.
1. There is nothing which the Nature of man is more earnestly desirous of than
to be accounted Learned; this ambition is rooted in every individual, and there
is no person so ignorant and so dull but uses all the Artifices he can to seem
ingenious. The Clown whose education has not raised him to the first particles
of Words, whose Alphabet is as unintelligible to him as Hieroglyphics, and the
conjunction of Syllables as Algebra; with what wisdom will he now and then turn
over a Book, and look profoundly upon those Characters which make nothing but
confused impressions upon his Brain? He that can read his own Native language
will still be spelling at a foreign, and if he Masters but two or three words
of it, he takes or makes all opportunities imaginable to stammer them forth,
and looks upon the parrotting out of some futile and contemptible Elements of
speech in a strange tongue, as more of Ornament to him than the discoursing a
whole day intelligibly and coherently in his own: in all companies what
strivings and contentions are there, who should be accounted superior in
readiness of discourse or smartness of Wit? one maintains a Paradox to be
accounted of a deeper reach than his Neighbor, and with much violence the Fool
tires out the assessors with attempts of making out his contradictious
nonsense, and being obstinate to all conviction, the confused but irrefragable
creature goes away in Triumph, and is satisfied to himself that he is the
Privy Counselor of Nature; another sits gravely and speaks demurely, and very
superciliously condemns and explodes all other men's Opinions, though he has no
foundation in himself to establish any of his own: He that is the tenderest in
his Intellectuals, at a meeting is still racking and tormenting himself, to put
out something that may please; and when after all the heavings and throes the
little ridiculous saying creeps forth, if it is not acceptable to the height of
his expectation, the narrow-soul'd wretch breaks out into flame and disorderly
passion, and disturbs and raises the company, because he is not reputed the
Wisest. There have been more contentious Brawls and Rencounters about
precedence of Knowledge, than that of Place: Honor is as tender in the Matter
of Wit, as that of Courage; and the Word Fool draws forth the Sword as swiftly,
as that of Coward: that ignominious term brings with it a Degradation something
beneath the Dignity of his being; it levels him to the Ass and the Mule, that
have no understanding. Some men have had the Patience to hear their Family, but
very few have suffered their Reason, to be abused. You may with more safety
despise any part of a man's blood, than that which is elaborated into Spirits
for his Brain. Since then Knowledge is of so inestimable a value among Mortals,
and of all the infinity of Pretenders to it, there are so very few that attain
to an indifferent portion of it; certainly those who upon solid Principles of
Reason are convinced, that they are able to foil and distance others in the
contentions of Wit and courses of Learning, must be of a miraculous temper, if
they do not pride themselves in their own strength and swiftness, and highly
contemn the infirmity and slowness of others. Superiority in all cases puffs
men up: He that is seated above, looks down with scorn and disdain at those at
his feet; and he that knows most, makes his insolent Triumphs upon the Weakness
of another. Every man without a Flatterer, has a very great kindness for
himself: Self-love is as universal as mankind. There is no man but carries his
Darling about him: his own Sayings are all Oracle, and his Actions, Wonder. The
Negotiations of a Market, and a prudent Bargain; the Intrigues of a Parish, and
the business of Vestry, has many times made men look big and stately over
their brethren, less employed in such grand and intricate affairs, made them
contemn all others in their Precincts, and think themselves the only Politic
Heads, and the fittest Materials to make Ministers of State. As for those who
are really so, and deserve that title by a natural acuteness, constant exercise
in great business, and long observations of the events of circumstances in
humane Actions: with what proud State and Grandeur, they rule the more ignorant
and inferior Officers! How do they overlook Suppliants! What offerings must
be paid, before you can come to the Grandee himself! What kind of beleaguering
there must be of a man! What slow and regular approaches must be made, before
you can have any hopes to take him in! let them enquire who are the Followers
of Courts, and Hunters of Fortune. And 'twere very well, if the ill effects of
Knowledge did not appear any where else. True it is, that knowledge puffs men
up, as well as riches: without them it can make a man proud, but in conjunction
with them, it is commonly in sufferable.

We come now to speak something to the Practice of men in this particular: and,

1. We shall speak of the Ancient Philosophers. And, 2. Of some since
Christianity began. And,
1. If we look among the Ancient Philosophers, with what strange dogmaticalness
did they lay down all their Positions! How imperious were they in their
Conclusions! How earnestly did they endeavor to tie down Man's free Reason to
their narrow Principles! and aspire to a Dominion over men's souls, more eagerly
than the worst of Tyrants ever did over that of their bodies! They gave another
interpretation to (...), and improved it into self-conceit and arrogance. How
did they plume up, and swell themselves upon every little invention! Nay, their
pride oftentimes transported them into foolish, and sometimes into Tragical
Attempts. If Pythagoras hit luckily upon the solution of a Problem, as if the
World were made by it for ever happy, an Hecatomb falls for sacrifice, not so
much in Gratitude to the Gods, as to raise a Value upon the Worth of the
Inventor. An unexpected Accident, and the glory of lighting upon it, makes
Archimedes run naked, bawling out his (...) through the streets; and his
Knowledge devests him of his Shame. But these are things which perhaps may be
subjects of mirth, and might please in Comoedy. But when an Empedocles shall
hurl himself into the flames of Aetna, because he cannot explore the causes
from whence proceed those Fountains of Burnings, and inexhaustible sources of
Sulphur: or when the great Aristotle himself, (I speak according to Justin
Martyr; for Diogenes Laertius and Dion. Halicar. give another account) shall
tumble himself into the Sea, because his mind is not vaster than that, and
cannot comprehend the Nature of it; we ought to deplore that insufferable Pride
which an inquisition into the Nature of things brings along with it, which
drives men into such desperate Attempts, that they endeavor to be nothing,
because they cannot be Gods. Innumerable almost are the Instances of this
nature which might be produced: insomuch, that if a true account could be
taken, as the Vanity of Sciences might make one of the best; so the Pride of
the Sciolists would make one of the most Voluminous Books of the world. What
made those Numerous Sects and Divisions amongst them? What cause can be
assigned of their being minced into several Factions and Conventicles, but only
Pride, occasioned by an opinion of Excellency in Knowledge? This formed them
into different Classes and Congregations; made them wear distinctive beards and
habits; every one had a badge of his Order, and looked very oddly upon any one
that wore not the same Character. Their Principles and their Dictates seem
always to be framed, rather to oppose, than to establish; and they are not so
eager in searching after truth, as in serving their Hypothesis. Nay, when
sometimes an ordinary Reconciliator might easily have made them speak the same
things; and perhaps there might be something of Truth in both; yet they were
still obstinate in not understanding one another, still perplexed the matter
with abstruse Subtilties and nice Speculations, with new coined words and
phrases, which were sure to keep them at distance enough; and they dared do any
thing, rather than hearken to an accommodation; lest the first Proposer should
be thought to give up the cause to his imagined adversary. Thus the maintaining
a Party, still kept up quarrels and dissentions among them, and their whole
Lives was nothing else but a state of War: no Rivals in Empire or Love ever
more mortally hated one another, than the Stoic did the Epicurean, or the
Cynic all; they flew from one another, as men do from a Plague; thought one
another Breath contagious; and there was not more difference in their
Doctrines, than in their Dispositions. The Stoic was a Creature of Paradoxes,
a very formal piece of Hypocrisy: He was exactly the Pharisee of Greece; his
pace was solemn; and the longer was his beard, the more he presumed was in his
head: he had kept all the commandments of Virtue, or rather commanded Virtue
from his Youth: he had odd Expositions on the Laws of Morality and Nature; he
talked of nothing but high rants of her; and his discourse was still of
perfection: he think'd the Gods, that he was not like other men; for he was not
only not guilty of all Vice, but of all Passions. He was feated forsooth above
all those Storms and Tempests that roll in the breast of Humane Nature: and yet
after all this extravagant boasting, there was so much turpitude found in the
lives of most of his Sect, that by some more civil, though not so supercilious
men, they passed into contempt and a Proverb. The Epicurean (or at least,
Epicurus himself) was frugal, sober and temperate enough; but then having gayer
Principles, was a man of more refined conversation: his Brow was not contracted
into Wrinkles, nor his Mind into Moroseness: there was an even stilness in his
life, like that of Nature in the World, whose operations he best made out, and
whose beauties he contemplated. But thus they lived with different manners and
irreconcilable Opinions; wrote much of Friendship, but practiced none;
condemned pride in their Books, and made it Canonical by their Examples. Nay,
if ever Fortune brought them to a conference, their passion still quite
extinguished their reason; their Disputes ended in Reproaches: and that might
very well be, if it is true as one says, Qui autem unquam ex Philosophis
Virtutem propter se expetendam maxim contenderunt, tanta arrogantia inflati
fuerunt, ut appareat non ob aliud Virtutem expetiisse quam ut superbiendi
haberent materiam.

I pass now to the times of Christianity: and here we find Antichrist working
in the very dawn of it. The pride of the Gnostick made the first Heresy; and
the plainness and simplicity of the Gospel, was that which made the esteemed
learned World oppose it. In all Ages ambition or self-conceitedness has raised
persecutions, and framed divisions: a Julian, a Lucian, or an Hierocles, were
men too gallant in their own opinion to stoop to the dictates of Fishermen: the
Master's being crucified, was one great cause that his Doctrines were not
received: and those which for so many years had been poring after, and tracing
Cabbalistick mysteries in Philosophy, mightily despised that more great one of
Godliness; and sought both by their swords and pens to eradicate that Religion,
which still grew the faster for its members being pruned. For the Sword did
rather prune, than root out; and still new Armies arose from the slain: there
was a kind of seminal principle in the primitive Christians Blood; and their
very graves were prolifique; so that after so many Volumes of Satyrs, severe
Edicts and merciless proscriptions, it was confessed, that Christianism was no
more to be expelled the World, than Light. When the greatest Fences and Banks
were thrown up against it, it still insensibly gained upon them; and at last
like an uncontrollable Sea overwhelmed all oppositions, carried all things
along with it in the inundation; and against all the trifling Machinations of
weak, but malicious Humane Nature, proved it self the Child of Heaven, the
Salvation of Mankind, and the Ruin of its Opposers. It Is an Arrius or a
Socinus that makes the deepest wounds in Communion: that is, men elated with a
strange opinion of their own worth, whose knowledge has screwed them up to the
venturing upon nice points and subtle Argumentations: and rather than think
with the Vulgar, they will blaspheme the Nature they cannot comprehend; involve
the World into eternal disputes, and themselves into as durable miseries, a
Scaligers (...) (though in it self no great matter) puffs him up into a whole
period of Commendation of himself; and indeed the whole race of Critics had a
particular passion for themselves: his Son contemned mankind, and Schioppius
him: Lipsius more often comments in praise of himself, than his Author: and
Salmasius rather than be thought to be confuted, flies into the face of that
most Venerable and Sacred person Dr. Hammond, whose almost only knowledge not
puffed him up, and scurrilously affronts him with the meanest of Wit, ill
language; whose Name shall flourish, and piety be revered, when whole Armies of
the little saucy Grammarians shall rot into forgetfulness, and lie unregarded
buried in Dust and Oblivion. It would be too great an injury to your patience,
and no very pleasant labor to my self, to present you with all the dirt and
filth interspersed in Authors famous enough for Learning, and as infamous for
the concomitant of it, Pride. How many Volumes are there in the World, whose
subject is little else but breach of Charity? How many great Authors Ink makes
nothing but blots upon another name? and endeavors to send them down foul to
posterity? How few Replications are there, which carry not poison in them to
the Reputation of the Answered? From all which instances and actions, we may
very well gather, that knowledge is commonly a troublesome thing to others, and
of a fermenting nature in the person that possesses it; and however it may
aggrandize a man as to himself, yet really his swelling is his disease; and he
may be puffed up by Knowledge, but it is Charity that edifies, the next thing
briefly to be considered. And here should I speak of Charity in its full extent
and Latitude, I might include in it all the Duties of Christian Religion. I
intend to speak of it briefly: and 1. In General: 2. In particular, as it
relates to private persons or Societies.

1. In General. And as so, it is the noblest and the sweetest of Graces: Charity
is the Christian Name for Love: by this I have a kindness and respect for all
mankind; and the bounds of my Charity extend as far as those of the Sun: by
this I pity the poor Indian, Persian, or Turk that dies in torments by the too
severe sentence of a merciless Governor; and I could wish, there were no
Tyrants in the World, though I live out of the reach of their long hands, am
far enough disjoined from the injustice of their commands, and the severity of
their rage: my good wishes reach as far, and my prayers enlarge themselves to
the extension of the Universe. By Charity and mutual Love, by what firm bands
might Societies be joined? 'twould bring down the conversation of Heaven upon
Earth, and plant a constant Peace and Serenity here, in some degree like that
which the blessed enjoy above. Friendship (which is one of the most beautiful
things in the World) is but Charity contracted: and though the rays may burn
fiercer, yet they lose the glories of expansion and diffusiveness. Charity
veils over the fault of an offending Brother, and has mercy upon failings and
infirmities; because it considers, that Error sticks as close to man, as his
Nature. It Is the Devils property, to be Malicious; and his most glorious
appellation is, that of Accuser. In all that incomparable Encomium of Charity
in the 13th to the Corinthians; there can nothing be said of it greater, than
that Charity suffers long, and is kind, and bears all things. There is
something looks divine in pardoning: and it is an attribute of the Deity, to be
long-suffering. Charity then lifts us near to Heaven, and assimilates us to
that God, who is infinite in forbearing. In a word, it is Charity that may make
us happy here, and must crown us hereafter. Let then the foolish Pretenders to
the Wisdom of this World, grow as big as they please with whimsical Notions of
Globules, Vortices and Atoms, let them dote on a Diagram, and be never so
deeply immersed in Number; let them have the tongue of men and Angels, if they
have not Charity, they are in the Apostles phrase, as sounding brass, and the
tinkling cymbal: things of more noise, than use: which shine, perhaps, but have
not any great Reputation for solid Worth. It Is Charity, and not great Words and
fantastic Hypotheses, that must set a luster upon all our actions. Heaven is
not to be gained by proud looks and arrogant suppositions; but by a constant
Tenor of bountifulness in our Lives, and integrity in our Actions. He much
mistakes his Creation, that thinks, he was made for no other End, than to
reflect upon, and admire, and caress himself. That new commandment of loving
one another, must be sedulously obeyed: the emanations of Good, must constantly
stream forth to our Neighbor; and we cannot any way attain to our own
happiness, unless we be tender of his. The way of Charity is an easy and a
noble way to blessedness.

Since then Charity is so highly accepted of Heaven, and so beneficial to Men,
how great and glorious is it in those which endeavor the propagation of it to
Numbers? place it beyond the narrow confines of an Household; and as much as in
them lies, strive to dilate its Empire, and make it coextensive to Nature? Now
though this Universal Charity is every man's duty, yet there is another
Particular, the Second thing to be considered; for since it is impossible this
Universal should have any real effect over all the World; that is, I may love
all men, but cannot be acquainted with, or at hand to help them; therefore men
always though they do not bound, yet they more evidence their Charity according
to Relations or Conjunctions, which arise either from Blood, Society or
Converse: and indeed every Man (without any injury to Religion) is so much Lord
of his own Charity, as to choose the chiefest object of it. It Is true, that I
must love my Neighbor, and every man is so; but certainly without offense, I
may more incline to him, by whose Wisdom I am instructed, or by whose Bounty
supported; I may select him for my Companion before another, who best suites
with my humor, provided it be not vicious; and the Benefits or innocent
Gaynesses of Life, are Causes enough for preference in Election. I know there
are some Men of more Envy, than Wit or Wisdom, that esteem such Meetings and
Feasts of Charity, as these we this day celebrate, as the effects of Pride, and
the Parents of Separation in a Community; that think Men by thus doing, esteem
much better of themselves, than of others; and suppose they make a League
against all others, whilst they make one of Friendship among themselves; and
what is only Concord, they name Conspiracy. But let such men know, that whilst
they pretend a Breach of Charity in others, they make an extremely wide one
themselves; and for want of line to sound the true depth of things, like all
Zealots, they grow Malicious, whilst they would approve themselves Instructers.
But we are not at this time more bound to satisfy their ignorance, than to
love it: Certainly there cannot be any more Natural Cause for the uniting Men
into the Conjunctions of Love and Charity, than a Similitude in Education: the
sames Rules and Principles produce most commonly the same Manners, and in spite
of Business and all the other avocations of humane life, something will remain
of what was formerly imbibed. We see men of the greatest Business, Wisdom and
Grandeur still recollecting what they acted in their first days, and then
bringing in some Person, whose Familiarity then, was perhaps the Greatest Cause
of a Friendship now. If then Likeness and Congruity may be admitted to be the
Causes of Friendship and Love; and similitude of Education is the most apt to
produce that; we have all the reason in the World firmly to link our selves
into a Society, whose first meeting together, sprang from so great a Cause, and
has since produced so good effects of Friendship. I know there are some indeed
whose neither Wit or Manners could ever prove that they had been in a School;
who are always traducing, not only the Method, but the Authors of their
education: and of such, the next subject will be their Parents, and the next
their God: But certainly all sober men must acknowledge, that they deserve
exceedingly well of the Public, that can make themselves so miserable, as to
labor in the instruction of Youth: the Toil is theirs, though the fruit be
Ours: And yet let the best Man here sink into himself, and he will soon
confess, that if he had followed strictly those Principles he brought with him
from School, he had been much a better Christian, though not perhaps a Richer
Man than he is. It Is not the fault of a Seneca, but of Nero himself, that he
proves wicked. Let us all labor to live after the practical Principles, at
least, which were instilled into us within those Walls, and make that place
henceforward as immortal by our Piety, as some have done already by their
Learned Parts. Let us imitate the action of the great Apostle in this day; and
if any Man has been a Persecutor of his Savior (as every Sinner is) the
greater his Malice has proved, the sooner let him return, and appear the more
faithful Servant to his abused Lord. Let our Charity to one another increase,
as the Years grow more numerous upon us; and in this innocent Custom continue,
till Years shall loose themselves into Eternity: other Actions perhaps may
proclaim us Great, but this will declare us Good. Let others upon very strange
Principles (as much as they please) think Rebellion Meritorious, and Murder
Lawful; Canonize the Authors of Discord, and make Traitors Saints: but let us
show our selves Christians by those Nobler ways of Unity, Concord, Peace and
Love, and then our Great Master (who was himself the Miracle of Charity) will
lead us into those Serene and Blessed Places, where Love reigns in its full
perfection, and a constant Unity and Concord makes Heaven. Let us put up our
Prayers then to Almighty God, that He would continue in us this Gift of
Charity, the very Bond of Peace; that in helping, sustaining and doing
Kindnesses one for another here, we may lie down in the Arms of the Eternal
Love hereafter.

Now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, be ascribed as is
most due, all Glory, Honor, Praise, Might, Majesty and Dominion now and for
ever.

The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Love of God and the Fellowship of the
Holy Ghost, be with you all. Amen.

FINIS.

