A perfect Narrative of the particular service performed by Thomas Wright
Firemaster, with a Morter-peice of fifteen Inches and a half diameter, against
the Castle of Elizabeth in the Isle of Jersey, being commanded thither by Order
of the Council of State, under the Command of Coll: Jamer Haine, humbly
represented to the Honorable Council of State.
Right Honorable:
I Humbly conceive it is not unknown unto you in some measure, what service I
have performed, (I speak it to the glory of God, whose good hand of Providence
was over me) in the Isle of Jersey, being called thereunto by Your Honors
Authority, as appears by this ensuing Order signed by Mr. Row.

Mr. Thomas Wright Gunner in the Tower is hereby desired to bespeak these
particulars underwritten, and ready Money shall be paid for them upon delivery.

Whitehall, July 15. 1651. William Row.


100^ Fuzes for the (...): 600 Hand Fuzes: Four wooden Mallets: Four Iron
Rammers: 600 Tomkins: Two large Chests: Two large Quadrants: Two plain Tables:
Two Chains: Two pair of Callipers.

W. R.


Hereupon I had a Commission from Colonel Heane Commander in chief for that
Expedition, as follows.

BY virtue of the Power and Authority to me derived from the Parliament of
England, and my Lord General Cromwell, I do hereby authorize you Thomas Wright
as Fire-master, to Command one of the Great Mortar pieces, and all such persons
as are appointed for your assistance, with all those provisions and materials
thereunto belonging; the which are appointed for the service of the Isle of
Jersey. Which assistance, provisions and materials you are to Command, and
order for the Reducing of the said place, according to your best Judgment and
discretion; And all persons whatsoever appointed as your assistance for the
service aforesaid, are hereby required to obey you as their Commander: and you
are to observe such Orders and directions for the carrying on of the said
service, as you shall from time to time receive from me.

Given under my hand this 24th day of September: 1651. To Mr. Thomas Wright
Fire-master. Ja: Heane.


May it please Your Honors, after this service was ended; upon my return into
England I could not but look upon some various reports which have been made
concerning that great and weighty Employment of reducing the Isle of Jersey,
and Elizabeth Castle, unto the obedience of the Parliament, in which service,
by Your Honors Command, (not to derogate from the honor and worth of any
Officer) I was under God in my place isntrumental; and therefore I humbly
conceive in further discharge of my duty, I am bound to represent a perfect
Narrative of such particulars wherein my self was an Actor, together with some
other things which either concern my self, or that Island.

After we got footing in the Island, and Sir George Caretret and those of his
party were forced to retreat into Elizabeth Castle (a place which unto them
seemed impregnable) it was our chiefest care to reduce the said Castle, without
which we could not settle the Isle in a condition of peace and security, or
lessen the charge of the State, in maintaining of men and other necessaries for
that service. And when I came to view the distance betwixt the place where I
was to raise my battery, and the Castle; I found it to be seven eights of a
mile, or 924 paces Geometrical, five foot to a pace, which was so great a
length, that I humbly conceive there has not been any instance in former
actions, of execution done so far by a Mortar piece.

Nevertheless upon Monday the fifteenth of November last, I planted my
Morter-peece upon the Battery, and levelled my shoot at Sir George Caretrets
Lodgings which were on the farthest part of the Castle: and I proffered to lay
a wager of ten pounds with Captain Dover, that my first shot should strike the
Castle, or fly over, and not fall short: And when I was commanded to play my
Granado, I gave fire my self, and through Gods providence it did strike one
fide of the great Tower, where the Granado brake, to the exceeding terror and
amazement of the Enemy, and gave all on our side good grounds of
encouragement, and assurance that the work would shortly be effected.

Whereupon I proceeded to make a second shot with the same proportion of powder
and degree of elevation, which proved also a very fair shot upon the same Line
as the other fell; and the Granado brake very kindly, though it fell shorter
then the first, for the distance was very great, and the Carriage of my Gun but
weak, and not able to perform that violence of execution which was necessarily
required. Yet I proceeded to make a third shot upon the same Line, and having
altered my degrees of elevation, and my proportion of powder to a much larger
length then the last, I did my self give fire to the Granado and Gun as before,
and had wonderful great success and operation in the execution; For this shot
struke quite through the Roof of the Church, and fell into a Warehouse
underneath the Church, where the Enemy had their Magazine of powder and other
things, which by the Granados breaking there, it was all set on fire, their
Church thrown down, and many dwelling houses, Warehouses and buildings there,
of about 200 foot square were totally ruinated by this blow; and as I was
after informed by many Gent^ that came out of the Castle, there was in the said
houses and Sellers, about 30 Tun of Syder, 12 Tuns of Sack, great store of Corn
and Biscuit, with a vast number of Fish and other provisions of victual, and
for the War. Also a large Cestern which was made for the receiving of
rainwater, very serviceable for the Castle, and joined to the said buildings,
was utterly made unusefull, and sixteen or eighteen men were killed outright,
and six or seven more, so mortally wounded that most of them are since dead;
and I my self did see at the same time three men lie dead under the Church wall
where no man could come unto them; Likewise Sir Phillip Caretret did since tell
me, that most of his own wearing Apparel, and his other goods of consequence
were destroyed by the same blow.

After this I made a fourth shot by the same degrees of elevation, and with the
like proportion of Powder, which fell something short of the other, for the
Carriage of my Piece not being able to do more, did break: with many of the
Irons belonging thereto; So that without Gods infinite goodness and providence
in my preservation, I had lost my life by this shot, and I was in much danger
both at this time, and every other shot which I made.

On Thursday following, which was the eighteenth day of November, my Carriage
was repaired and amended, and held five or six shoots, and toward the evening
my first shot did its execution, the Granado falling into a Reek of Corn, set
the same on fire, burnt and destroyed all their Corn and Provisions in the
Mowes, that was for Horse and man, my self and others beholding the fire to
burn three quarters of an hour, before they could quench it, or throw it into
the Sea.

Upon the nineteenth and twentieth of November, I made five shot on the
farthest part of the Castle, and two about the middle of the Castle, and two
shot upon the Out-lynes, every one of them breaking, and doing their execution
in one kind or other. At the last of these shot my Carriage brake all her Iron
work in pieces about me, and my life was again preserved, with great difficulty.

About eighteen days after my Carriage was mended again, and I made five shot
more, three whereof, I carried quite over toward the farthest part of their
Castle, which fell amongst their Vessels, and did them some harm, beating them
out of the places of security, where they lay; And to that place I shot (near
an English mile) the two other Grenades; the one whereof fell into the
Chancellours house, and the other not far from the same place, and now my
Carriage brake the third time, in a more desperate manner then it did before.

Thus far I have humbly thought good to set down a particular account of the
state of my Morter-peece, the distance of place, the number of Grenades that
were spent, and the execution made thereby; wherein it appears that the whole
number of Shells which were spent in this service, were but sixteen, nine
whereof fell into the Castle, and did their Office, as is before recited, and
the other seven fell in and near the Enemies out works, beyond their utmost
lines, among their shipping; and some near their other shipping, lying on the
hither part of their works, which did all break, and do their Office, though
they were very long shoots, and my carriage so weak and unserviceable as
aforesaid; for had my carriage been as strong as my Gun, I am able to affirm
with much confidence, I could have thrown those Shells and many more, into any
part of the Castle, and not one have fallen forty yards in distance from the
other.

After my carriage was broke the third time, (to the end that no time might be
lost for the effectual carrying on of the work) whilst the same was mending, I
undertook to make able and sufficient Fireworks, to fire the Enemy: shipping
which lay under their Castle Guns, which I brought to maturity and perfection,
and my Mate Rich: Facey (who approved himself a deserving man) undertook that
service, and went down to a ship that lay within Pistol shot of the Castles
Fort, (taking only one of my men along with him) and notwithstanding the enemy
did play upon them from the Fort very thick, both with great and small shot;
Mr: Facey entered the ship and set it on fire, by which means both the ship and
the goods in her were consumed. In acomplishment whereof, he underwent very
great danger, himself and my man that went with him being much burnt, and
scorched, hardly escaping with their lives; and before my carriage was mended
this third time, the Castle was surrendered; Then I made a far-well shot with my
Gun upon the Sands (shooting near an English mile) and so left it safe and
sound.

These Right Honorable are the Particulars of my service in this Employment,
of which both Col. Hayne the Governor, and diverse eminent Gentlemen of the
Country have also given their Certificates of the matter in General.

Colonel James Haynes Certificate of the service performed by Thoms Wright
Fire master, for the reducing of Elizabeth Castle.
Whereas Thomas Wright one of the Gunners of the Tower of London was appointed
Firemaster, and Richard Facey another Gunner of the same place, his Mate, by
order of the Council of State, to serve under my command, in the expedition
against the Isle of Jersey. These are to certify that the said Thomas Wright,
and Richard Facey have faithfully and carefully served the State in that
service, I attest that they have acted with so much Zeal and Judgment, that
more could not be expected from any men; And thus much I must moreover inform,
that they have not neglected or slighted any duty or Command, but have been
very isntrumental under God, to the rendition of Elizabeth Castle in this
Isle. I could speak more of their deserts, but their services when made known,
will speak them large enough, I have only paid them their bare pay, from the
time I entertained them, until the 22 of this instant December: viz: for Mr.
Wright 4 s. per diem, and Mr. Facey 2 s. 6 d. per diem, besides their men and
assistants with some small encouragements for their eminent service, and 3 li.
1 s. which I gave them in their purses, besides their pay; I should have been
glad if I had been able to have given them a greater gratuity, but I remain
their friend and Servant,

Jersey 22. December: 1651. Ja: Heane.

The Certificate of diverse eminent Gentlemen of the Country, in behalf of Tho:
Wright Firemaster for the service of Jersey.
WE certify to all whom it may concern, that Mr. Tho: Wright (one of the
Gunners of the Tower of London, was appointed Firemaster, by order of the
Council of State, to serve in the expedition against this Island and the
Castle here) has approved himself a very skillful and gallant man with the
Morter-peice, against Castle Elizabeth, by reaching and overreaching it,
beyond the expectation of most men, Ruinating the best Lodgings therein, and
firing a Magazen of the Enemy; As also with his other fireworks firing one of
their Vessels, by which means they became glad to embrace a treaty, whereby the
said Castle was surrendered to the Commonwealth.

Witness our hands given hereunto in Jersey, this 23. of December. 1651. Lemprie
Baily Judge: John Filkins. Samuel Chase. George Eaton. Coll: Stocker: Lieut:
Grout. Matthew Thoroughgood. Tho: Hooper. Lieut: Vyvyan. Will: Willis. John
Sumerfield.

I shall in the next place humbly make known unto Your Honors, the certainty of
what moneys I have received for pay or otherwise, and what my necessary
charges and disbursements have been during this Employment, as follows.

First, it appears by Order from Mr. Roe, before recited-that I entered upon
the service of the State for this Employment the 15 day of July, 1651. and I
have continued in the same until the 28 of this instant January.

During which time I have received only 13 weeks pay at 4 s. per diem of Col:
Hayne, which in all amounts to 18 li. 4 s.

I likewise received 13 weeks pay for my men of Col: Hayne, which at 4 s. per
diem comes to 35 li. 19 s.

Item, allowed unto me by Coll: Hayne for my charges to bring me from Jersey to
London, 3 li. 10 s.

Item, given unto me by Colonel Hayne the same day the Church was blown up by
my Mortar piece, 1 li.

Item, Coll: Hayne gave to Mr. Facy, my Mate, as a gratuity for the service in
firing the Ship, 4 li. 10 s.

Item, received of Coll: Hayne toward my charges in going to Jersey, 2 li. 3 s.

So that we received in all, 64 li. 17 s.

Whereof I received for my own part, but 24 li. 8 s.

Which is all that I have any ways received of Colonel Hayn.

In the next place I shall humbly present to your Honors view, what my losses
and expenses have been, from the time I went out upon this service, until my
return again to London, and refer the rest to your Honors wisedoms, relating
to what Materials were found in the Castle, which in the like cases have been
claimed as a right by other men; As also how small my pay was, and what has
been given to other men, though their service has been nothing at all, or at
the best very inconfiderate.

First, I have been constrained to be at the charges in carrying and recarrying
my self and my men both by Sea and Land, to and from Jersey, (having beforehand
engaged my word to them in that behalf) which has cost me no less then ten
pounds sterling.

Secondly, By reason of the length of the Journey, and violence of the service,
I have worn out and spoiled in Linen, Woollen, and other wearing Apparel, to
the value of above 14 li. sterling.

From whence it appears, that my necessary charges, besides other expenses in
the Island, does amount unto four and twenty pounds at the least, and that all
the wages or pay that I have received of Col. Hayne as Firemaster, amounts to
but 18 li. 4 s. and I had of the State but ten pounds when I went for Jersey,
which is all that I have any ways received for the service.

Thirdly, It has taken up a considerable part of my time, in preparing for the
said Journey, before my Commission did begin or Commence, besides the setting
on work of several Artificers, to get in a readiness provisions fit for the
expedition, on whom I will averr upon Oath, I expended the whole sum of six
pounds.

Fourthly, Whereas there were many Instruments of War and broken store in
Castle Elizabeth, which by Discipline of War upon the surrender, did appertain
unto me, as appears (amongst other Emmunities and Privileges granted to the
Train of Artillery by Charles the fifth Emperor, Arricle the 9th. and has
been observed by all Nations) viz.

When a City or Fort is taken by Assault, then there belongs to the Master of
the Artillery and Gunners the best Piece of Cannon, all Cannon dismounted, or
broke by battery, the Charges in all the Cannon; all Powder Barrels that are
open, the Ammunition in the Magazine, and the Bells. Also when a Victory or
Field is gotten, and the General destres the Magazine, it ought for to be
prised, and to give according to equity, that the Master of the Artillery be
content therewith.

Nevertheless the Governor Col: Hayne conceiving that they were fit to remain
in his custody, I had not any part thereof, or penny profit for the same,
either directly or indirectly.

Fifthly, Upon occasion of some conference which I had with diverse able
Gentlemen of the Country (whom I found very Cordial and real for the
Parliament.) they conceiving that my present allowance was not a sufficient
competency, to maintain a man of my employment, made a proffer (for my better
encouragement in the service of the Morter-peece) to make a Collection or
gathering throughout the Island, which they would undertake should amount to
one hundred pounds to be given unto me, nevertheless although I could not but
acknowledge it as a great favor from them, yet for the Honor of those whom I
served, and being unwilling to be a charge to the Country, I refused to accept
thereof.

And after the Castle was surrendered, and I was dismissed by Col. Hayne, some
of the Gentlemen of the Island did declare much Civillity and Courtesy to me,
and told me that if I would stay 3. or 6. months there, they would provide me
a Horse, and I should have Meat, Drink, and Lodging gratis, yet being unwilling
(as before) to be chargable unto those whom I conceived had been sufferers
under Sir Geo: Carteret, I rather made choice to expedite my return, (though by
reason of the time of the year, it was a time of Danger and Peril) then to
protract time in staying there.

This discourse having occasionally led me to make mention of some persons of
that Country, me thinks it lies upon me as a part of my Duty, to give a Glimps
of what I observed in that Island in general.

When we came before Jersey, my Mate Facey did land with Major Purling, and
diverse others at the first, who affirm unto me, that they discovered not any
great considerable party that came down to fight or oppose us in our Landing,
and that there was not two hundred Horse and Foot discovered in Arms in a Body;
And it is humbly conceived by my self, and others who have Judgment, that if
but 2000 of the Islanders had stood to fight in Caretrets Cause, we had been so
far from gaining the Island, that we had all been destroyed before we had
gotten to Land. And notwithstanding, both my self and others heard of great
numbers that were in Arms before the Parliaments Forces appeared against the
Island, yet is it also affirmed by Persons of good Repute, that when the
Parliaments Forces came, many ran to their own homes, and that all the men that
were able to bear Arms in one whole Parish (which was Populous) were threatened
to be hanged by Sir George Caretret, for not appearing at his Summons, some few
days before our Landing there, and the generallity of people during my abode
there, expressed much love and affection to the Parliament of England.

As for the Country it is full of Rich Corn-land, Meadows, and Orchards, and in
the Summer (especially) is a place of very sweet and pleasant Habitation; The
Men and Women are generally courteous, and of a good deportment, the Poorer
sort only excepted.

FINIS.

