THE Writ of Quo Warranto Served upon the Lord MAYOR, COMMONALTY, and CITIZENS
of LONDON, To inquire by what Authority they use and lay Claim to their
LIBERTIES, PRIVILEGES, and FRANCHISES.
Per Jud. Mich. xxxiii Car. Secund. Reg.
Land. ss.
MEmorandum quod Robertus Sawyer Miles, Attorn. Dom. Regis nunc Generalis, qui
pro eodem Dom. Rege in hac part sequitur, in propria persona sua ven. hic in
Cur. dict. Dom. Regis coram ipso Rege apud Westminster. die Lunae prox. post quinden'
S. Martini isto eodem term', and pro eodem Dom. Rege dat Cur. hic Intelligi and
Informari, quod Major and Communitas ac Cives Civitat. Land. praed. per spacium
unius Mensis jam ult. elaps. and amplius usi fuerunt and adhuc utuntur, ac
clamant habere and uti absque aliquo Warranto sive Regali Concessione infra
Civit. Land. praed. and Libertat. and Praecinct. ejusdem Civitat. diversis
Libertat. Privilege. and Franches. sequen. videl. Fore de seipsis unum Corpus
Corporat. and Politicum in nomine Majoris and Civitat. ac Civium Civitat.
London. ac per idem nomen placitare and implacitari, respondere and responderi,
ac etiam habere Vicecomit. Civitat. and Comitat. Civitat. Land. and nominare
and eligere ex seipsis duas personas fore Vicecomit. Civitat. praed. and Com.
ejusdem Civitat. Ac ill. sic nominat. and elect. praeficere and constituere
Vic. Civit. praed. and Com. ejusdem Civitat. ad Execution. and Retorn. omnium
Brevium, Billarum, and Praeceptorum Dom. Regis pro Administratione and
Executione Justic. infra Civit. praed. and Com. ejusdem Civit. exequend.
faciend. ac ad faciend. and exequend. omnia and singula al. infra Civit. praed.
and Com. ejusdem Civit. quae ad Officium Vic. faciend. pertinent. Ac etiam
habere Vic. Com. Middlesex, and nominare eligere and constituere ex seipsis
Vic. Com. Middlesex, pro eodem Com. ut Vicecomes inde deservitur. ac omnia
Brevia, Billas, and praecepta Dom, Regis infra Com. Middlesex praed. pro
Administratione and Executione Justic. ibid. exequend. and retorn. inde
faciend. absque aliqua Commissione sive aliquibus Literis Patentibus a Dom.
Rege inde obtent. sive obtinend. Ac etiam quod Major and Aldermanni ejusdem
Civit. fuerunt Justic. Dom. Regis ad pacem infra Civit. praed. conservand. ac
ad Sessiones pacis and placita Coronae infra, eandem Civit. tenend. ac ad omnes
Felon. Riot. and Conventic. illicit. infra Civit. praed. inquirend. audiend.
and terminand. Authoritate ipsorum propria, absque aliqua Commissione, sive al.
Authoritate a Dom. Rege in ea part concess. sive obtent. De quibus quidem
omnibus and singulis Libertat. Privileg. and Franches. iidem Major and
Communitas ac Cives Civit. London. praed. per totum tempus supradictum, supra
dictum Dom. Regem nunc usurpaverunt and adhuc usurpant, in dict. Dom. Regis
nunc Contempt. Praerogativae suae Regiae grave dampnum and praejudicium. Vnde
idem Attornat. dict. Dom. Regis nunc General. pro eodem Dom. Rege pet.
Advisament. Cur. hic in praemiss. and debit. Legis Process. versus praefat.
Major. and Communitat. ac Cives Civit. Land. praed. in hac part fieri ad
respondend. dict. Dom. Regi Quo Warranto clamant habere, uti and gaudere
Libertat. Privileg. and Franches: supradict. etc.

In English thus: By the JVDGES in Michaelmas Term, in the Thirty Third Year of
Car. II. KING of England, etc.
Land. ss.
MEmorand'. That Robert Sawyer Knight, our Lord the Kings Attorney General, who
on this behalf prosecutes for our said Lord the King, appears here in his own
person in the Court of our said Lord the King, before the King himself at
Westminster on Monday next after the Quindene of St. Martin ( viz. Nov. 27.) in
the same Terms and for our said Lord the King, gives this Court to understand
and be informed, That the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of
London aforesaid, for the space of one month last past, and longer, have used,
and do yet use, and claim to have and use (without any Warrant or Royal Grant)
within the City of London aforesaid, and the Liberties and Precincts of the
said City, diverse Liberties, Privileges, and Franchises following, to wit, To
be of themselves one Body Corporate and Politic, in the Name of the Mayor and
Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London, and by the same Name to implead
and be impleaded, to answer and be answered; And also to have a Sheriff of the
City and County of the City of London, and to Nominate and Elect out of
themselves two persons, One to be the Sheriff of the City aforesaid, and of the
County of the same City, and him so nominated and elected to prefer and
constitute Sheriff of the City aforesaid and of the County of the said City,
for the Execution and Return of all Breve's, Bills, and Precepts of our Lord
the King, for the administration and execution of the Justice within the City
aforesaid, and County of the same City, to be executed and done, and to do and
execute all and every the other things within the City aforesaid, and County of
the same, that belong to the Office of a Sheriff: And also to Nominate, Elect
and Constitute Another person out of themselves for the Sheriff of the County
of Middlesex, for the said County to serve as Sheriff for the same, and to
execute there and make return of all Breve's, Bills and Precepts of our Lord
the King within the County of Middlesex aforesaid, for the administration and
execution of Justice, without any Commission or Letters Patents obtained or to
be obtained from our Lord the King on that behalf: And also, that the Mayor and
Aldermen of the said City, have been Justices of our Lord the King to keep the
Peace within the said City, and to hold Sessions of the Peace and Pleas of the
Crown within the said City, and all the Felonies, Riots and unlawful
Conventicles within the said City, to enquire into, hear and determine by their
own proper authority, without any Commission or other Authority from our Lord
the King granted or obtained on that behalf. All and every of which Liberties,
Privileges, and Franchises, the said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the
City of London aforesaid, for all the said time, have usurped, and do still
usurp over our said Lord the King, to the contempt of our said Lord the King,
and to the great damage and prejudice of his Prerogative Royal. Whereupon the
said Attorney General of our Lord the King, does desire for our said Lord the
King the Advice of this Court in the premises, and due course of Law to be
made against the said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London
aforesaid on this behalf, to answer our said Lord the King, By what Warrant
they claim to have, use and enjoy the Liberties, Privileges, and Franchises
aforesaid, etc.

London: Printed for W. Davies in Amen-corner. 1682.


