An Apologetical Narration: Or, a just and necessary VINDICATION OF CLEMENT
WRITER, AGAINST A Fourfold Charge laid on him BY RICHARD BAXTER; And published
by him in Print.

Pure Religion, and undefiled before God, and the Father, is this: To visit the
Fatherless and Widows, in their Afflictions, and to keep himself unspotted from
the World,

Jam. 1. 27. In vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines, the
commandments of men,

Mat. 15. 9. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for
you. FOR I was an hungry, and ye gave me Meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me
Drink: I was a Stranger, and ye took me in: Naked, and ye clothed me, etc.

Mat. 25. 34, 35, 36. Woe be to you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye
shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men: for ye neither go in your selves,
neither suffer ye them that are entering, to go in,

Mat. 23 13, 14. The Second Edition, with an Appendix by the same Author.

LONDON, Printed for Daniel White, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the seven
Stars on the North-side of St. Paul's.

To the Reader.
READER,
I Have here set before thee the whole business between Mr. Baxter and my self,
entreating thee to bear with such faults, as happily thou may apprehend
either in me or the Book; and the rather let me move thee hereunto: First,
Because I may requite thee with the like kindness, when ever thou shall be
provoked, in like manner to make thy Defense, being openly set upon, by such a
potent Assailant as now I have been. Secondly, because it is more then
probable, that thou and I (as well as all other men) may be mistaken in
apprehending of Errors, when indeed and in truth, the Error may be and many
times is merely in our own apprehension, being much vitiated by Custom and
Education. Wherefore I advise thee, once and again, seriously and impartially
to consider the whole matter over and over: and then also not hastily to enter
into the seat of Judgment; because things of such high, deep and weighty
concernment need always due and exact weighing, and that with suitable Balances,
wherein humane learning must neither have the pre-eminence, nor bear any sway
at all.

And especially in thy judging, be very sollicitous and exceeding careful so to
do it, as neither to wrong the Truth nor thy own conscience: For if thou
do, I assure thee (whosoever thou art) all the Honor and Advantage, Profit
and Preferment, which thou shall either retain or get thereby, will prove^tly
unreparable damage at last.

Pray with me, therefore, that the eyes of our understandings may be opened,
and anointed with Eye Salve; that we may clearly see, perfectly apprehend, and
certainly judge between both Persons and things that differ: And in the mean
time, to exercise mutual Charity and forbearance one toward another; (at
least) until our Ignorances be much less, and our Authority much more, to judge
one another in these matters.

Worcester, this 25. of March 1658. Farewell.
Reader, I am against my will provoked by Richard Baxter, to make here my just
Defense against some charge laid upon me by the name of Clem. Writer, in a
Pamphlet of his, ENTITLED, A second Sheet for the Ministry; wherein though he
something mistakes my name, yet I suppose I am the Person he ayms at.
THe first Charge is in p. 6. thus: That Clem. Writer told him; That no man is
bound to believe that Christ did rise again, or the rest of Christianity, that
sees not Miracles himself to prove it.

Answ. 1. I deny these words in manner, form, and sense, to be ever spoken by
me.

And 2. If any such words, or, of like import, were spoken by me, it was to
this effect and meaning; (namely,) That no unconverted or unbelieving man, is
bound by God upon pain of damnation to believe and obey the Gospel, without
Divine evidence, to attest unto him the truth thereof; whereon undoubtedly to
ground that his faith, etc.

This long has been, yet is, and must be my judgment, until I am otherwise
informed; and I conceive, there are sufficient grounds both from Scripture and
Reason, to confirm me therein. But I leave it to Gods will, (not determining)
what Divine evidence he please to use for that purpose, whether Signs, Wonders,
diversities of Tongues, Miracles, casting out of Devils, curing of the Lame,
healing of the Sick, raising of the Dead; for I find, that by these, and other
the like demonstrations of the powerful works and gifts of the Spirit, he
usually confirmed the Word everywhere, preached by his true Ministers for the
conversion of men to the Faith of the Gospel; insomuch, as by the mere shadow
of Peter, and by the very handkerchiefs of Paul, were special Miracles and many
Cures wrought, as may be seen in Mark 16. 20. Heb. 2. 4. Act. 2. Act. 5. 14,
15, 16. Act. 8. 6, 7. 1 Cor 2. 4. Compared with Act. 19. 11, 12, 18, 19, 20.
and many other places. And as for Tongues, these were for a sign, not for them
that believe, but for them that believe not, 1 Cor. 14. 22. And we likewise
find, that the end of Christ's sending of these powerful gifts of the Spirit,
(to abide with his true Ministry and Church for ever, Joh. 14. 16.) was chiefly
to convince the unbelieving world, Joh. 16. 8. Thereby (not only to afford
them (successively in all Ages) an infallible ground of Faith, but also) to
bring them under guilt of much sin, if they obeyed not the Gospel; which
otherwise would have been no sin at all in them, Joh. 15. 24. And hence it was,
that the Apostles themselves were commanded to stay until they were endued with
power from on high, to enable them to do those mighty Works for the attestation
of the truth of their Mission and Message, for the conversion of men to the
Faith of the Gospel, Luke 24. 49. Act. 1. 4, 8.

And it is likewise worthy our Observation, That neither the twelve, nor yet the
seventy, were sent out at first, until they had power given them over Devils
and diseases, etc. whereby to enable them by Divine Evidence, to attest the
truth of that their Mission, although they were then sent but to preach in the
Land of Judea only, Mat. 10. 5, 6. Luke 10. 1. etc. And these being persons
merely of the same Language, Kindred, and Country, might therefore have
challenged to have been credited by the Jews, upon their own bare testimony
only, without producing any Divine Evidence at all (if any had been so to be
credited:) Yet neither were they, nor ought they (nor Christ himself) to be so
credited in these matters, as is most evident, Joh. 10. 37. Joh. 5. 31, 34, 36.
compared with Joh. 15. 24. And since that none of these were, nor ought to be
so credited; how then dare any mortal man or men (of what degree, order, sort,
or company soever, now upon the face of the Earth) assume, or challenge to
themselves any such Authority or Divine Prerogative over any other man or men
whatsoever? For, as the Divine Evidences were formerly, so are they yet (for
the very same ends and purposes*) still useful and necessary to accompany the
Ministry, (and so will they always accompany the true Ministry) for the
conversion of men to the Faith of the Gospel.

But for R. B. thus to extend my words besides or beyond my meaning, or to
confine them short thereof; is not to be allowed by me, nor can it reasonably
be approved by any man: for, whereas my meaning is limited only to the
conversion of unbelievers, he extends them to any, whether converted or
unconverted; as if I had been so irrational, as to say or think, That no man,
after his Conversion to the Faith of the Gospel, was bound to believe or
practice any other or further Duty of Christianity, without some new Miracle
(yea, new Miracles) done in his sight, to prove it; for so much in effect his
Charge amounts unto.

And who would ever think R. B. to be so void of understanding, or ingenuity
rather, as to lay such and so irrational an aspersion upon any man that never
did or thought him harm?

Now let any man in love convince me of my Error in this my Position, and I
shall take it kindly, and be as ready to retract and tread it under foot, as he
would have me; but of all men in the world, R. B. is least able to do it, or to
accuse me for it, having asserted as much, or more, himself: for in his Saints
Rest, Part 2. page 201. of the sixth Edition, he asserts, That Divine Faith
has ever a Divine Testimony: and in page 205. That we must know it to be a
Divine Testimony, before we can believe, fide Divina (by a Divine Faith;) and I
hope, by a Divine Faith, he intends no other then a true and saving Faith,
which must necessarily have a divine and infallible ground to be built on;
seeing of other Faiths he plainly tells us, in page 201. That to believe
implicitly that the Testimony is Divine, or the Scripture is the Word of God,
this is not to believe God, but to resolve our Faith into some humane
Testimony, even to lay our Foundation upon the Sands, where all will fall at
the next Assault. And in page 236. he expresses himself thus: (viz.) I demand
with my self, by what argument did Moses and Christ evince to the world the
verity of their Doctrine? and I find it was chiefly by this of Miracles: and
surely Christ knew the best argument to prove the Divine Authority of his
Doctrine; and that which was the best then, is the best still. And in page 33.
of his book of Infidelity, part 1. he tells us, That Tongues are not for them
that believe, but for them that believe not; that is, (says he) to show them
the power of Christ, and so convince them. And in part 4. page 46. of the same
Book, he tells us, If it had no divine attestation or evidence that it is of
God, then you might And, I hope, no man is bound by God to believe that which
he may without sin or danger reject.
reject it without sin or danger.

Now let any rational and impartial man judge if R. B. himself has not
asserted sufficient and more then enough to justify my Position, and all that
which I hold in the point, yea, and that which is tantamount the same, although
in many places of his writings, he contradicts it; which is no rare thing to
see in men of his undertakings, though they both speak and write much less then
he has done.

And amongst the multitudes of his failings in that and the like kind, in his
voluminous writings, thou may find him friendly remembered of some few in a
small Treatise, entitled, Fides Divina, which when thou have read, then tell
me, If a Bear may not be known by a small Member, even by his foot alone.

And whereas R. B. at the end of that his Charge intayles this: (viz.) Adding
withal, That indeed Antichrist may do Miracles:

What cause of exception can be taken at Answ.
this my so saying, when the Scripture it self affirms, That the second Beast
which came up out of the earth, (who is an Antichrist at least) wrought
Miracles? Rev. 13. 11, 14. Rev. 19. 20.

This R. B. in his Saints Rest, page 206. flatly contradicts, by telling us
there, That no created power can work a Miracle.

Let him be pleased hence to be asked these sober Questions.

1. Do you indeed and in truth (as you pretend) believe the Scripture to be the
Word of God?

2. And that it was confirmed by Miracles, as you assert it to be, about the
midst of your Preface to your Book of Infidelity, and in diverse other places of
the same Book?

3. How then dare you so presumptuously put the lie upon God, by your flat
contradicting his Word, as here you have done?

This Charge lies upon him unavoydably, unless he can prove that Beast to be an
uncreated power: which he can never do.

But we may see here (as in many other places) how he plays Bo-peep with us, in
rendering such persons abominable, who do not with all readiness, and without
any chewing, swallow all that which he pleases out of his own fancy to say of
the Scriptures indefinitely being the Word of God, and that they Which indeed
is the harder for any man to belive, because that some stuck not to raze and
blot out of them sen^ences above 1200 years since, as Socrates reports, lib. 7.
ca. 31. And what has been the boldness of others in that or the like kind, to
do to them before and since, is not known, nor can be imagin^d.
were confirmed by Miracles, when indeed and in truth he believes neither the
one nor the other himself; for if he did, how durst he be so bold, as flatly to
contradict them, as here he has done?

And upon my saying, that Antichrist may do Miracles, R. B. infers thus: viz.
So it seems for all the talk. Miracles themselves would not serve, if they saw
them.

Answ. By this your inference, you imply as if the signs and Miracles wrought
by God himself, for the Confirmation of the Gospel, were no way dscernable by
men from such as were or may be wrought by the Devil and his Instruments.

Is not this a casting a high disparagement upon the wisdom, power and justice
of Almighty God, in his requiring faith and obedience to the Gospel, upon pain
of Damnation, and yet produce no other nor better evidence for the Confirmation
of the truth thereof, then Satan or his Ministers can do for the Confirmation
of falsehood? Does not this amount to high Blasphemy against God himself? For
did not the Signs and Miracles wrought by Moses in Egypt, so far transcend all
those that were or could be wrought by the Egyptian Sorcerers, or by the Devil
himself* as they were apparently discernable by all that saw them, from those
wrought by the Sorcerers, insomuch that the Sorcerers themselves were
convinced, and openly confessed them to be no otherwise wrought, then by the
Finger of God?

And do not you your self, in your Saints Rest, part 2. page 232. tell us, That
Irenaeus affirms, That in his time, the working of Miracles, the raising of
the dead, the casting out of Devils, healing of the sick by mere laying on of
hands and prophesying, were in force; and that some that were so raised from
death, remained alive among them long after? And that Cyprian and Tertullian
mention the Note here, that these powerful gifts of the Spirit were both
ordinary, and yet convincing
ordinary casting out of Devils, and challenge the Heathen to come and see it.

And in your Saints Rest, part 3. page 242, 243. you do likewise tell us, That
it is certain from current Testimony of Church-Records, that the gift of
casting out of Devils, and making them even to the Devils themselves, and
continued 3 or 400 years at least in the Church after the Apostles: all which
is granted and proved by R. B. himself.
confess themselves mastered by Christ, did remain in the Church three or four
hundred years at least after the Apostles.

And for this, you produce diverse Authors, and after say, That no where could
Satan keep his Possession, where the power of Christ did assault him.

And it is likewise evident by the Scripture, That the gifts of the Spirit, and
the Ministry thereof, by laying on of hands, were to continue in the Church,
for all (that were either then or afterward called or converted to the Faith)
to partake thereof, even as well all afar off, as those that were near, Act. 1.
5. Act. 2. 38, 39. 2 Cor. 3. 6. Gal. 3. 5. Comp. Act. 18. 12, 14 to 18. Act.
19. 1 to 7.

And it is evident also, That the Apostolical Office, (to whom the Ministry of
the Spirit was committed) together with the Prophetical and Evangelical, as
well as the Pastoral and Doctrinal, being all such merely by gift) were all
jointly by gifts to continue in the true Church, for the perfecting of the
Saints, etc. till we all come to the Unity of the Faith, etc. in Christ, from
whom the whole body fitly joynted together, and compacted by the effectual
working of that one Spirit, by his several gifts in the measure of every part,
makes increase in the body, unto the edifying of it self in love; being all
baptized into that one Body, by some manifest gift of the Spirit to profit the
body withal, Ephesians. 4. 8, 11, 12, 13, 16. 1 Cor. 12. 7, 13. For God (says the
Apostle) has set in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly
Teachers, after that Miracles, then gifts of healings, helps in Government,
diversities of tongues, 1 Cor. 12. 28.

And as the gift of tongues was to continue for a sign to unbelievers, so also
was the gift of prophecy to continue in the Church, for the profit and comfort
of believers, 1 Cor. 14. 22, 31.

All which laid together, manifestly prove the continuance both of the
Apostolical and Prophetical Offices in the true Church, not only for the first
age, and for four hundred years after, but also that they were and are always
to continue therein: and are and will be therein, wheresoever it is, and
whenever it shall be upon the face of the Earth; notwithstanding all that is
or can be produced or proved by R. B. to the contrary, in his proposing a lame
and imperfect body of Christ, dismembered, and without his chiefest members,
yea, and quite memberless: These spiritual diversities of manifest Gifts, being
the formality of the diversity of the spiritual members of Christ, their
spiritual Head: but R. B. tells the world, That these Gifts are now both
useless and unnecessary, if a man might with safety take his word against both
reason, scripture and experience: and albeit he may therein nevertheless easily
prevail with many weak and inconsiderate men, yea, and please many thousand
others, whose interests are concerned, (who though they be at Daggers-drawing
with him, and amongst themselves, concerning the most material points of the
Gospel, yet) herein his service will be acceptable, in that he affords them
help (though very little) at so dead a lift, even when they were breathing out
their last of divine right both to Office and Benefice, and which was, not long
since, quite dead, as may appear by their petitioning the long Parliament for
its reviving; but the Parliament declared (and that most truly) That all just
power must be derived from the people: hence they proceed to act mighty
matters, and all in the name and authority of the people of England; and still
at the adjournment of the Court, after a solemn cry of O yes, they founded out
with a loud voice, God save the good people of England: whence will follow, as
a necessary Consequence, that if any divine right remains now in England, it is
in the people of England.

But a little further to the point in hand, and to use Christ's argument against
the Pharisees slandering his casting out of Devils to be done by the Prince of
Devils; If Satan, says Christ, cast out Satan, how shall his Kingdom stand?
The like may I say, If God does not apparently distinguish the works done by
his Spirit and Power, for the Confirmation of the Gospel, from those wrought by
Satan, or any other created power; how shall his Wisdom, Truth and Justice,
stand, in his requiring Faith and Obedience unto the Gospel, and that upon pain
of damnation, merely upon the account of the mighty works wrought for its
Confirmation, and yet not to distinguish them by some such apparent signs
(from all other done by Satan or his instruments) as they might evidently and
undoubtedly be known by all men? For, says Christ, if I had not done (and
that) among them, the works which none other man did, they had not had sin,
John 15. 24.

The second Charge is in page 7. If Miracles, says R. B. were ordinary, few
would be moved by them, as any proof of a divine testimony. To this (says he)
Clem. Writer answers me, (miracles were convincing in the first age, when they
were common.) How common? (says R. B.) not as natural operations.

Answ. Who ever said they were as common as natural operations? not Clem.
Writer. But here R. B. sets up a Dudman of his own invention, to affright Daws
from questioning his far-fetcht, false and unwarrantable Doctrines; and then
when he pleases, makes an Adversary of it, fights it stoutly, conquers it,
beats it to Clouts with his Fists; and who now can deny him his just triumph
for so glorious a victory?

But to the Charge it self against Clem. Writer, for answering you, (Miracles
were convincing in the first age, when they were common) is this any offense in
Clem. Writer for so saying, when R. B. himself has proved it over and over,
That Miracles were both ordinary and convincing, even to the Devils themselves,
not only in the first age, but for 400 years at least after (which contain
many Ages?) See this granted and proved by R. B. out of his own writings, a
little before cited.

And he further acknowledges it in his book of Infidelity, part 1. page 35.
where he expresses himself as follows: viz. Whence came the Holy Ghost which
the Lord Jesus did send down upon his Church, which sat on his Disciples in
the likeness of fiery cloven tongues, which filled all Churches in all parts of
the world at once, how distant soever, with the miraculous gift of strange
Languages, prophesying, interpretation, healing, casting out of Devils, or the
like, that fell on men ordinarily (note that) and in such numbers, as soon as
the Apostles laid their hands on them, after they were baptized?

And in page 33. he tells us, That tongues are not for them that believe, but
for them that believe not, (says Paul, 1 Cor. 14. 22.) that it, says R. B. to
show them the power of Christ, and so convince them.

From all which granted and proved by R. B. I thus reason: Even as the powerful
gifts of the Spirit (raising of the dead, casting out of Devils, miracles,
prophecy, etc.) were ordinary in the first Age of the Church, and for four
hundred years at least after, and yet lost not their convincing force, nor were
taken by men otherwise then as some proof of a divine Testimony: So they might
have been ordinary in all Ages since, and yet not lose their convincing force,
nor have been taken by men otherwise then as some proof of a divine Testimony.

The third Charge is likewise in page the seventh, thus: And we (says R. B.)
have experience of Millions that still do actually and stedfasty believe in
Christ without miracles; and many have laid down their lives on that belief;
therefore without miracles men may believe: but to this Clem. Writer says to
me, (These believers of all sorts condemn each other as Heretics) but not
(says R. B.) as Infidels; and none but the ignorant or passionate condemn all
other sorts as Heretics.

Answ. 1. R. B. by his granting here that the ignorant and passionate do it
justifies my Answer so far, as it needs no other defense.

2. By this his grant, he concludes the generality of Christians in this and
late Ages, to be ignorant and passionate; and who would deny it, though thereto
should be added soiteful and malicious, as in a thousand pregnant instances
might be evidenced, though we should omit the late case of Mr. Biddle and
others here, and Mr. Williams and Mr. Gorton, and others in new England, who
merely for difference in judgment from them, in matters of religion, hardly
escaped with their lives?

And is not the mark of Heathens common now upon such as think themselves the
best of Christians, even by this Authors own confession, in his Saints Rest,
part 1. page 137. in the Margent?

3. It Is granted on all sides, That Heretics, and others who have no true
Faith in Christ or the Gospel, may yet lay down their lives in maintenance of
their respective Tenants, true or false, as the experience of all Ages can
witness.

4. Let R. B. therefore prove that these millions were true believers in
Christ, and in the true Gospel of Christ, or did or do so much as truly and
undoubtedly know Christ, and the true Gospel of Christ, without any Miracle, or
other divine evidence to attest the same: which he can never do; being good at
drawing confident and strange consequences from weak, yea, and from groundless
premises. For

1. If these millions believe the true and only Gospel of Christ, How is it
possible for them to condemn each other as Heretics?

2. If they all believe it without miracles, or other divine evidence, How
could or can it be by any divine Faith? for R. B positively aff^rts, That
divine faith has ever a divine Testimony.

3. If they all believe it by no divine Faith, but by some humane Faith, how
then could or can they still, both actually and steadfastly believe, and lay
down their lives on that belief? But that, as it was said before, mis-believers
may lay down their lives for their Opinions.
for all Faiths not grounded upon divine Testimony or evidence, are no better
then humane, whose foundation (R. B. has told us) is laid in the sand, where
all will fall at the next assault?

Here it may be, R. B. will seek to relieve himself by some distinction of
divine evidences, and tell us of some such that these millions had, or that he
himself now has, which was unknown to the primitive Churches, the Church being
then in its infancy, and Christians but Babies (in comparison of us) and then
fed merely with the Doctrine of Christ, and pure Word of God, and had then no
other divine evidence then the gifts of the Spirit, with the powerful
demonstrations thereof, which these (like Children as they were) contented
themselves withal, denying themselves in many good and delicate things of this
life, which we, being grown Christians, have, and know how to use and enjoy
without any hurt to our selves; which the others, being then but Babies in
Christ, knew not at all what to do with, unless to hurt and hinder themselves
in their Christian race and warfare set before them: and therefore many
needless hardships went they through, not knowing how to expound Christ's
injunctions so well and so profitable for themselves, as we now can and do:
such as their forsaking all, and following Christ; these, simple as they were,
instantly forsook the Riches and Profits of this World, contenting themselves
merely with Food and Raiment: as Peter said, Lord, we have forsaken all, and
followed thee, what shall we have? But all such Rocks and Shelves have we
avoided, knowing the meaning of that and the like Precepts, better then so,
viz. never to forsake the World, till it forsake us; or at soonest, not till it
come in direct competition with Christ and Christianity, (which we hope will
never be.) Then, and not till then, we intend to fulfill that, and all suchlike
Precepts.

But to the point in hand: R. B. had need to tell us, if he can, what Divine
Evidence these Millions had, or that he has, which were not Miracles, nor any
such other Divine Evidence, as were formerly exhibited to the Primitive
Churches, and before specified.

And since R. B. himself believes, practices and maintains the sprinkling of
Infants to be an Ordinance of Jesus Christ, and a Doctrine of the Gospel, with
many other Doctrines of the Gospel, which he believes, holds and maintains,
against many other Ministers being of the Reformed Churches, as well as he; Now
let him tell us, what Divine Evidence he has or can produce for any of these,
which the Dissenters from him have not, who hold and maintain the contrary?

It cannot be the Scripture, for all have that; nor can it be humane Learning
(which R. B. makes to be a gift of the Spirit, as by and by shall be shown) for
all have that also: nor can it be the persuasions of the Spirit that he can
pretend to have, which the others may not pretend to have, as well as he. And I
think it may be boldly asserted unpossible for such different persuasions to
proceed from the spirit of God, as to judge or condemn one another for
Heretics, or Erroneous Persons either, as these do.

Wherefore it is more safe and reasonable to deem that none of them all were
nor are endued with the Spirit of God, but such only who could or can, and
also did or do manifest the same by some Divine Evidence and Demonstration, as
none, being destitute thereof, can possibly do.

The fourth Charge is in the eighth page, being thus:

If the Church or Ministry (says R. B.) had an end, Christ's Kingdom had an
end, and he Reigned not for ever. Mat. 28. 20. Lo, I am with you always, even
to the end of the world. To this express Promise, Clem. Writer has no wiser an
answer, but that (it is conditional, if they teach men to observe all things
that Christ has commanded them, he will be with them, else not.) To which R.
B. replies and says, This is your forgery, there is no such words, but an
absolute Promise.

Answ. And does the Promise, indeed, come in so independently, as R. B. has
here set it forth? Reader see with thine own eyes, for thou, and I too, have
looked too much and too long with other men's: see if it has not a necessary
Dependence and Relation to the next precedent words in the Text, which thou
shall find to run thus, viz. Going therefore, teach (or disciple) all (or in
all) nations, baptizing them, etc. teaching them (i. e. the baptized Disciples)
to observe all things, whatsoever I have commanded you: and lo, I am with you
always, even to the end of the world.

The genuine and true sense whereof, I conceive to be this, viz. That in their
so doing and teaching always, Christ promises to be with them and their true
Successors, always, even to the end of the world.

But R. B. his sense seems to be thus much, That Christ does there promise
absolutely to be with them and their successors, always, even to the end of the
world, they teaching whatsoever false Doctrine, or introducing never so many
humane inventions into the Gospel Worship: yet that Christ's promise is
absolute, still to be with them, always, even to the end of the World,
notwithstanding.

An Exposition highly gratifying the Pope, and justifying his Divine Authority,
being Peter's Successor. No Papist can advantage him by an Exposition of this
Text, more or better then R. B. has here done.

And whereas R. B. tells me. This is your forgery, there is no such words, but
an absolute promise.

Answ. Can any man give his Sense of any Text, or explain the meaning thereof,
but he must do it in some other and more words then are in the Text: yea, and
does not R. B. himself, in the next words following, tell us, That the promise
is absolute, Christ being with them, to support and help them in his Work?

Answ. These words not being in the Text, is his forgery also: for how else is
my taking but the same liberty, forgery, and his doing the same thing, no
forgery? But perhaps his Commission is with a non obstante, to pervert or
falsyfie Scripture at his pleasure, and yet have the absolute promise of Christ
still to be with him, to support and help him in that his Work.

How strangely has he perverted the true meaning of this Text? For,

1. He cites the last words thereof, as if they had been entire and absolute,
without dependence upon any precedent words.

2. The word [whatsoever] he leaves out, and also [them] which relates to the
baptized disciples; and instead thereof, he foysteth in [men] as if the
teaching last mentioned in the Text, had relation to men in general, and
unconverted; whereas it is confined only to the baptized Disciples; that they
being converted and baptized, should then be taught to observe all things
whatsoever Christ had commanded those eleven Disciples; and accordingly R. B.
himself has opened (and given the sense of) this very Text in his book of
Infidelity, Part 4. page 40.

And nothing in Scripture is more evident, then that Christ after his
Resurrection commanded these eleven not to go out in the exercise of their
Ministry and preaching of the Gospel for the converson of men to the faith,
until they were endued with power from on high, telling them that they should
be so endued when the Holy Ghost was come upon them, Luke 24. 49. Act. 1. 4, 5,
8. And as these were commanded by Christ, so they accordingly stayed and
waited, until they received this power, before they went forth.

Now if R. B. had been disciplized and baptized by any of these Eleven, or by
any true Ministry succeeding them; he ought and undoubtedly should have been
taught the very same Lesson, viz. to stay until he had been endued with like
power from on High, as these Eleven did; and who had run before they had been
sent, (as R. B. has done) if they had not so stayed.

Multitudes are the Scriptures throughout his first and second sheet, which he
forces against their genuine sense to do him Divine Service, in up-holding the
Ministry he pleads for.

In his first sheet, page 4. he brings in for that purpose, Christ's speech in
Luke 10. 16. He that hears you, hears me; and he that despises you,
despises me; and he that despises me, despises him that sent me.

Answ. These words were spoken by Christ to the twelve Disciples, Chap. 9. 1.
and to the seventy, Chap. 10. 1. Whom he sent out to preach, giving them power
over all devils and diseases, and to do other miraculous works, to attest the
truth of their Mission and Message, as is to be seen, Chap. 9. 1, 2, 6. and
Chap. 10. 9, 17, 18, 19. Charging them to take nothing for their journey;
neither staves, shoes, scrip, bread, purse nor money: giving them also, other
special directions for their behavior wheresoever they came, Chap. 9. 3, etc.
Chap. 10. 3, etc.

Now although these words of Christ were truly applicable to these, to whom
they were spoken, and to all others succeeding them, unto whom God should
himself in like manner bear witness by such mighty works; yet are they not
applicable to any others to whom God bears no such witness: The Reason is,
because their preachings being evidently witnessed by God himself to be truth,
it was, and might therefore be truly said of such, He that believed not them,
made God a liar: And also to such, He that hears you, hears me, etc.

Yet it is no more true nor appliable to the preachings of R. B. nor of any of
the Ministers he pleads for, coming without such Divine Evidence, then it is to
the Preachings of the Jesuits, or of any other, coming without such Divine
Evidence to attest the truth of their Mission or Message.

And strange it is, to see with what seeming Zeal R. B. seeks notwithstanding
to maintain the Ministers of the Reformed Churches to be truly Called, and
divinely Ordained the Ministers of Jesus Christ, and to be such as they to whom
Christ said, He that hears you, hears me, etc. whenas he himself makes bold
very much, and in many things, to contradict and gainsay very many of their
Doctrines, which they preach as from God, to the people. How would he take it
to be charged for his so doing, with a despising of Christ, and of God, and
with making God a Liar? would he (think you) submit unto it, confess and repent
thereof, as of his great and heinous sin? or would he not rather think him that
should so charge him, to be some Fool or Madman, for his labor?

And in page 8. of his second sheet, how strangely and untruly does he expound
and apply the Kingdom and Reign of Christ over the House of Jacob for ever;
making this to mean the Gentile-Christian Church in this World; and from the
endlesness of that Kingdom of Christ mentioned in Luke 1. 33. and in other
Scriptures of like import (there cited by him) he would prove the endlesness of
a true Ministry, and Christian Church upon Earth, in this world; asserting the
Ministers of the Reformed Churches to be the ordinary and true Ministers of
Christ, continued by him since the extraordinary Ministry ceased; and the
reformed Churches to be that his Kingdom and House of Jacob, over which, Christ
by these his Officers reigns for ever.

And this he endeavors to prove by many Arguments, from the Third Proposition
in the seventh Page, to the end of his Book: Arguing in the eleventh Page thus:
Either these Pastors of the Reformed Churches are the true Ministers of Christ,
or else there are none such visible in the world: but there are such visibly
and certainly in the World, else there is no Church.

Answ. I must here confess, that I never so well knew as now I do, what was
meant by the Presbyterial Discipline and Church Government; which they so much,
so long, and so eagerly have pursued and sought to be established amongst us,
and are yet restless to get it up. Yet I have heard of their Horning men in
Scotland (for their not conforming to the Worship, Discipline and other their
humane Inventions) even to the utter ruin of the Men, their Wives and Children.

But now I perceive their Government is Imperial and King-like: Their Parishes
their Kingdoms, wherein And see what blind obedience he requires us to yield to
these Rulers, in the second Part of his Saints Rest, page 241. Where he tells
us, That if these Rulers and Stewards require us to believe, when we know not
our selves whether it be Truth or not; or if they require us to obey, when we
know not our selves, whether it be a Duty commanded by God or not, here it is
(says he) that we ought to obey them.
they are to Rule and Reign; and their silly Parishioners their Subjects and
Vassals, over whom they are to Reign as Stewards and Deputy-Kings in Christ's
stead.

And I must also confess, that I never saw in so small a Compass, so much
Sophistry used, and so much Scripture with so much impudence and with so much
Ignorance expounded and applied, as in these two sheets of his. For by Christ's
Kingdom and Reign over the House of Jacob, mentioned Luke 1. 33. can be meant
no other thing then the Throne of David, which Christ is to inherit, mentioned
in the 32 verse, and in Isa. 9. 7. wherein he must sit and Reign over the House
of Jacob for ever; according as it was Covenanted and sworn to David, who (as
Peter says, Act. 2. 30.) Being a Prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with
an oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins according to the flesh, he would
raise up Christ to sit on his Throne.

Now where David's Throne and Reign over the Twelve Tribes or whole House of
Jacob was, there Christ's Throne and Reign over them must be: but David's Throne
and Reign over them was in Jerusalem, in the Land of Canaan; therefore Christ's
Throne and Reign over them must be there also.

It being therefore foretold by the Prophet Ezekiel. 37. 16, 19, 20, 21, 22. That
all the Tribes or whole house of Israel shall be brought again into their own
Land, and be there again united into one Kingdom, and one King shall be King to
them all, and they shall be no more two Nations, neither shall they be divided
into two Kingdoms any more at all.

And the Prophet Jeremy, Jer. 3. 17, 18. likewise tells us of a time when they
shall call Jerusalem the Throne of the Lord: And the House of Judah shall walk
with the House of Israel, and they shall come together cut of the North to the
Land which was given to their Fathers to possess. And therefore it is that
Ezekiel, in Chap. 20. 41, 42. tells us that they shall be gathered out of all
Countries, wherein they are scattered (or wherein they yet shall be led captive
by the power of Antichrist, upon his surprisal of them, at his taking of
Jerusalem, mentioned in Zach. 14. 1. compared with Dan. 7. 25, 26. which is not
yet, nor will be until a little before the Personal coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ, whose coming will be to avenge them on Antichrist, and on all other
their Oppressors) to redeem them out of captivity, to set up that his Kingdom,
and to set them therein from thenceforth and for ever; then will the Kingdom be
restored to Israel, and Christ's Reign over them and the whole earth shall be
thenceforth everlasting, World without end, Zach. 14. 3, 4, 5, 9, 17. compared
with Luke 19. 11, 12, 15. and with Luke 21. 23, 24, 27, to 33. and Luke 18. 5,
9. with Jer. 30. 4, to 11. and Act. 1. 6. with Act. 3. 20, 21. and Isa. 45. 17,
18. Heb 2. 5. with Psalm. 93. 1. This being the same Kingdom wherein Christ
promised his Disciples that they should eat and drink at his Table, and sit on
Thrones judging the twelve Tribes of Israel, Luke 22. 29, 30.

This Kingdom also is mentioned Dan. 7. 14, 18, 20, to 28, and which shall not
begin until the fourth and last Monarchy, together with Antichrist (set forth
by the Little Horn, verse. 8.) be destroyed, which will not be until the
Personal coming of Christ, as Saint Paul informs us, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7. compared
with Chap. 2. 1, to 9. and which also is pointed out in the seventh of Daniel,
verse 8, to 12.

For Satan is the Prince of this world, John 14. 30. The portion therefore of
the righteous in this life, is Tribulation, as Christ tells his Disciples, John
16. 33. 2 These. 1. 4. The Church State in this world, being a persecuted and an
afflicted estate, wherein they are to exercise much patience, expecting rest
and reward in the Kingdom of Christ at his coming, 2 These. 1. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
Mat. 5. 12. They having here a race set before them to run with patience, and
hold out to the end of their lives, before they can get the prize; And a
warfare, wherein they must fight, hold out to the end, and conquer, before they
can obtain the Crown in the day and Kingdom of Christ, 1 Cor. 9. 24, 25, 26,
27. Heb. 12. 1. Jam. 1. 12. 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. Yea, and hold out unto death, and
overcome, before they can receive the Crown of life, and sit with Christ in his
Throne and Kingdom, Rev. 2. 10, 26. Rev. 3. 21. Come ye blessed of the Father,
and inherit the Kingdom, prepared for you, Mat. 25. 34. This will not be said
and performed by Christ to the righteous, until after his coming in glory,
verse 31.

All which places, with many more that might be cited, (if need were) do
evidently show, That the Church in this world, is not the Kingdom of Christ
intended and meant in Luke 1. 33. Isa. 9. 6, 7. nor in Psalm. 145. 13. as R. B.
very inconsiderately expounds it to be: for the Children of God must through
much tribulation enter into that Kingdom, Act. 14. 22. Through it, (note that)
and be past all, for they shall have none at all after they once enter into
that Kingdom.

I hope, by this time, I have quit my self of being an Infidel, intimated by R.
B. page the seventh; which, I conceive, cannot justly be charged upon any man,
though he should but believe an Almighty God, Maker of heaven and earth, and
that he is a Rewarder of them that seek him, being no Respecter of persons; but
in every Nation, he that fears him, and works righteousness, is accepted of
him.

But as for his term Heathen, I know not well his meaning; but it may be
feared, That the righteousness of many who are by us called Heathens, will
find acceptance with God, when neither the faith nor righteousness of most
called Christians will find any. A Gentile I confess my self to be; so also
must he, unless he be a very Jew.

Thou see, Reader, that R. B. his whole drift in this his second Sheet, is to
prove himself, and the Ministers of the Reformed Churches, to be the true
Ministers of Jesus Christ; which he endeavors to do, by laying this ground:
viz. Christ (says he) must always have a true Church upon Earth, even to the
end of the world. Whence he infers a necessity of a true Ministry there also;
because (says he, page 8.) The Church never did nor can subsist without its
Officers, who are an essential part of it, as it is a politic body; and the
most eminent part, as it is a Community.

Then he endeavors to prove the Ministers of the reformed Churches, to be
those Ministers or Officers, by an argument, page 11. thus framed: Either those
Pastors of the reformed Churches, are the true Ministers of Christ, or else
there are none such visible in the world; but there are such visibly and
certainly in the world, else there is no Church.

So then thou may see, That the whole stress of his Arguments to prove the
Ministers of the reformed Churches to be the true Ministers of Christ, hangs
merely upon this single pin, namely, That Christ must have a true Christian
Church upon the earth always, even to the end of the world: and his chiefest
proof for that, is,

First, Mat. 28. 20. from Christ's promise to be with his eleven Apostles always,
even to the end of the world.

This promise R. B. says, is absolute, that Christ will be with the eleven
Apostles and their successors always, etc. and therefore a true Church must be
always, upon earth, even to the end of the world.

Secondly, from Luke 1. 33. and other Texts of like import, where it is said,
That Christ must reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of that his
Kingdom there shall be no end.

This house of Jacob, and Kingdom of Christ, R. B. expounds to be the Christian
Church upon Earth in this world; and thence concludes no end of the being of a
true Church or Ministry upon earth.

Both which Expositions of his, I have denied; and thou have seen my Proofs and
Refutations.

And may yet further see how these two Scriptures do interfere and cross one
another, and that in the main and chief point, for which they are produced by
R. B. to accord in, (viz) to prove the time of the continuance of the Christian
Church upon earth.

For if it be granted, that both these Texts do mean the Christian Church in
this world, (as they do not) yet the one refers the continuance thereof but to
the end of the world, and the other refers it to no end at all, but to be
everlasting and for ever; even as the Kingdom of Christ must be from the time
of its first establishment, Rev. 11. 15. Dan. 7. 14, 18, 27. Micha 4. 7.
compared with Luke 1. 33. Isai. 9. 6, 7. Psalm 145. 13. These last three, being
the Scriptures cited by R. B. to prove and uphold the kingly priesthood and
reign of the Ministers of the reformed Churches in Christ's stead, in his
Kingdom over the house of Jacob everlastingly. And this must be the fulfilling
of the prophesies of Christ's inheriting of the Throne of his Father David, and
of his restoring the Kingdom to Israel, and to be the Kingdom wherein he will
drink wine new with his Disciples; and also the Kingdom wherein the Mother of
Zebedees children desired of Christ, that her two Sons might sit the one on his
right hand, and the other on his left, Mat. 20. 20. Unto whom Christ answered,
That to sit on his right hand and on his left, was not his to give, but to them
for whom it is prepared of his Father.

Whereby it is evident, that such places are prepared of God, for some to fit
both on the right and left hand of Christ in the Kingdom: Whence will clearly
follow, That Christ will be personally present in his Kingdom, and therein sit
with some on his right hand, and some on his left.

But Christ is no where personally present so to sit in the reformed Churches,
nor in any of them, nor in any other Church upon Earth, no not in the Church of
Rome, nor yet in R. B. his Catholic or Universal Church.

Therefore the Refomed Churches, nor any of them, nor any other Church upon
Earth, no not the Church of Rome, nor yet R. B. his Catholic or Universal
Church, is the Kingdom of Christ.

Moreover, and besides all which, Let it be considered how that the Promise in
Mat. 28. 20. was not to the Church, nor to any inferior Officer thereof: for
neither any such Officer to officiate in a Church, nor any such Church wherein
to officiate, was then constituted: but the promise was made merely to the
Eleven Apostles themselves, who afterward were both to plant Churches, and
appoint inferior Officers therein; and therefore whatsoever the promise was, it
was specially and principally to the Eleven Apostles, and to their Successors
in the Apostolical Office. Whence will follow, That if this promise be
absolute, (as R. B. would have it) then it will prove the Apostolical Office to
continue always, even to the end of the world: but this promise, though it
should be absolute, yet it will neither prove the continuance of the Church,
nor of any inferior Officer, any otherwise then by a Consequence, and that from
the continuance of the Apostolical Office, which (together with the
prophetical, and the rest of the powerful gifts of the Spirit) R. B. grants is
ceased long since; and by consequence, both Church and inferior Ministry
likewise; for the inferior Ministry was by gift, as well as the superior, and
the superior as well as the inferior, and both were of equal continuance, and
for many reasons were both of them useful and necessary to continue with the
true Church, the one as well as the other, and the superior office most
necessary of any, Ephesians. 4. 8, 11. 12. 13. 1 Cor. 12. 28.

Wherefore it is the less to be marvelled at, That R. B. (being so learned and
so wise, yet) makes no learneder nor wiser a Reply to Clem. Writers foolish or
no wiser an Answer.

And now, I hope, a man may without any blasphemy or forgery, either say to
this great Clerk, That he erreth, not knowing the Scripture nor the power of
God. As for the Scripture, see how grossly he has wilfully or ignorantly
perverted it. And as for the power of God, (which always did accompany the true
Ministry of the Gospel and Church, for the Conviction and Conversion of
unbelievers to the Faith) this he denies, rendering it now useless and
unnecessary; as if now there were no unbelievers in the world, nor any Children
born unbelievers to be converted; and as if Christ's sending of that his
powerful gifts of the Spirit to accompany and abide with his true Ministry and
Church (for that purpose) for ever, had been for the most part useless and
unnecessary, John 14. 16. John 16. 7, 8, 9. whereby he casts a foul aspersion
on the Wisdom of Christ himself, in his doing that by much, which he might have
done by little; a sault seldom or never committed by a wise man.

But the task here undertaken by me, was only to make some necessary defense
for my self, against his open assault made upon me by his fourfold Charge:
which having done, I shall not follow him in the rest of his fallacious
Arguments, to discover the vanity and falsehood of them, but shall leave that to
be done by some abler pen, who can thoroughly anatomize and lay the faults of
them open particularly, and in their Colors; which I am as unable to do, as
that plain and unlearned man was (who assembled at the first Nicene Council) of
whom Socrates (Lib 1. Chap. 5.) relates this Story: (viz.) Before the Bishops
met together in one place, the Logicians busied themselves, propounding against
diverse others, certain Preambles of Disputation: and when diverse were thus
drawn to Disputation, and allured, as it were, by bayts, a Layman, one of the
number of Confessors, of a simple and sincere mind, set himself against the
Logicians, and told them this in plain words: That neither Christ, neither his
Apostles, had delivered unto us the Art of Logic, neither vain fallacies, but
an open and plain mind to be preserved of us, with faith and good works. The
which, when he had spoken, all that were present had him in admiration, and
held with his sentence: then the Logicians, after they had heard the pure words
of plain truth, quieted and settled themselves aright; so that at length, by
that means, the stir raised, by reason of Logic, was wholly suppressed.

From which we may observe, how great the bashfulness of humane learning was in
former times, as so to be repulsed (from meddling or intermixing it self in
matters of Divinity) by the check of one plain man; and how impudent it is now
become, even to bear all the sway therein, getting admission (no doubt) at
first under the color of being but a Servant or Handmaid to Divinity: but now
this Handmaid maid has gotten into the Chair and Room of her Mistress, (the
gifts of the Spirit) and justled her quite out both of Doors and esteem; These
being now deemed both useless and unnecessary matters, and Humane Learning
having now gotten the sole possession of all the Glory, Honor and Praise, due
only to her Mistress: for do not some make great boast, What a Whereas the more
learned they are in humane Arts and Sciences, the more able they are to delude,
by transforming the grossest Errors into the similitudes of the purest Truths.
learned Clergy is now amongst us that the whole world has not the like? Yea,
and how does my Assaylant, R. B. glory and boast therein, and that so
transcendently, in his Book of Infidelity, part 1. page 37, 38. as there to
express himself thus: (viz) Let the wisdom of God be observed, both in the
stream of Doctrine, and in the effect of the Holy Ghost, in illuminating the
Church; so that you may look over all the rest of the world at this day, and
easily see that they are all but Barbarians, even in humane and common
knowledge, in comparison of the Christians; especially, in the things of God
they are utterly blind. (He further goes on.) Indeed, Christ did at Rome and
Athens, cause a Star of humane learning to arise, but it was only for a time;
and that at that season, a little before his own coming in the flesh, of
purpose Note, how he all along denies the powerful gifts of the Spirit, to be
now useful or necessary: yet see how useful and necessary he here makes humane
learning, as to be even a Star caused by Christ to arise of purpose to direct
men to the Son of righteousness, and to be an Usher to prepare the way for the
Gospel; and after all that, he makes it a gift of the Spirit, and continued in
the Church by Christ; as if Christ's being exalted at the right hand of the
Father, and by his receiving of him, the promise of the Holy Ghost, and his
shedding it forth on his Disciples, Act. 2. 33. was meant humane Learning. Is
not be with the cloven foot filled with this gift of the Spirit, as much as R.
B. or the most learned in Europe?
to direct men to the Son of righteousness, and to be an Usher to prepare the
way for the Gospel; and when the Gospel was come, he has now delivered even
all the learning in the world that is worth the speaking of, unto his Church,
and continued even these common gifts of the Spirit therein.

If this be the best Divinity he can afford us, I shall send him to a Cobbler,
(Samuel How by name) to learn better out of a Book extant, (entitled, The
sufficiency of the Spirits teaching) being a Sermon of his, upon a Text given
him by Mr. John Goodwin, and afterward preached before him, and diverse other
earnedmen, upon very short warning, and far shorter prepa^^tion, of my
knowledge.

But what may we think ^e plain honest man before mentioned, were he now alive)
might and would say, upon his seeing how much honor humane ^earning had now
got even among reformed Christians, as to be esteemed essentially necessary to
Christianity, and to be so much advanced, as even by eminent Pastors of the
reformed Churches, to be accounted a gift of the Spirit, and to be continued in
their Churches, in the room and place of those powerful and true gifts of the
Spirit, which were at first established by God in his Church, whereinto
Christians were all baptized by that one Spirit, and thereby made partakers of
some manifest gift thereof, whereby to become serviceable and profitable to the
Church or Body of Christ, even as all the Members of a natural body are
serviceable and helpful one to another.

Answ. I conceive he might and would tell us, That it is no marvel that the
true-born gifts of the Spirit are now ceased and withdrawn from all their
Churches, upon their entertaining such a Bastard as humane Learning into their
Communion and Fellowship, as a necessary Fellow-helper and gift of the Spirit.
And that God, who had commanded them not to be unequally yoaked, could no^
possibly endure to have his own holy and blessed Spirit so unequally yoaked:
For, wha^ Communion has Light with Darkness? An^ what concord has Christ with
Belial? 2 Cor. 6* 14, 15.

Yea, he might tell us, That no virtuous an^ Christian Woman in his days, would
endur^ Co-habitation with a nasty Strumpet, th^^ did partake of her Husbands
Affections, an^ Conjugal rights with her self, but would make use of her
Christian liberty, and depart.

He might also tell us, That humane Learning, and the true gifts of the Spirit,
are not necessary to be both in one Church; for they having the gift of
Tongues, what need have they to acquire them by humane Learning? And if they
have them by Acquisition, what need have they of them also by mere gift of the
Spirit? Besides, if these were both in one Church, there would be some
Emulation between them, and a contest for Superiority.

He might also tell us, That humane Learning is no gift of the Spirit given
forth by Christ, Act. 2.

1. Because Peter and John, who had these gifts of the Spirit poured on them,
were both of them ignorant and unlearned men, in respect of humane learning,
Act. 4. 13. yet were both of them able to communicate the gifts of Tongues to
others by mere laying on of hands, Act. 18. 14, 17. compared with Act. 19. 6.

2. Because the gifts of the Spirit (as that of Tongues) were given by Christ
to attest the Truth of the Gospel, and to convince unbe^ievers, giving them a
sure ground of Faith: But so are not Tongues, nor any other Science acquired by
humane Learning or Indu^^ry. For,

1. In case we would fain know whether R. ^. his dogmatizing the baptizing of
Infants to be a divine Ordinance of Jesus Christ, be true or not, this cannot
certainly be determined by humane Learning; nor is it any divine evidence to
prove it, because Mr. Tombs, and many more, by humane Learning, maintain and
attest the contrary.

But if either of them had the gifts of the Spirit to attest the truth of his
respective Doctrine, then it might soon be determined whether taught the truth,
because the true gifts of the Spirit never did nor can witness any false, but
always true Doctrine: but all Heresies and false Doctrines, yea, the most
absurd Doctrines among the Papists, or that are or can be invented, are
maintained and attested by humane learning. And,

2. In case we would know whether the many Arguments produced by R. B. to prove
the Ministry of the reformed Churches to be the true Ministry of Jesus Christ,
be true and sound, or not: And whether the multitude of Scriptures pressed by him
to that service, be truly and in their genuine sense cited, or not; this cannot
be determined by humane Learning: Because the Papists be furnished altogether
as well, and have as great a measure of humane Learning, whereby they are as
able to pervert Scripture, and produce as many Arguments to prove their
Ministry to be the only true Ministry of Christ, as any of the Ministers of
the reformed Churches can do, to prove theirs the true Ministry of Christ: but
by the true gifts of the Spirit, all these doubts and questions would soon be
determined, and that infallibly.

And since the true gifts of the Spirit are now wanting, let us yet see what
may be said for the determining of these questions and doubts, and that from
grounds granted by R. B. himself; wherein I shall be very brief, leaving the
further Amplification thereof to others more able.

The Grounds on which I shall raise my proof, are only two:

The first is in page the fourth of his first sheet, where he cites Luke 10
16. He that hears you, hears me, etc. This saying of Christ, he uses in
the behalf of the Ministers of the reformed Churches, holding them to be the
true Ministers of Jesus Christ; whereby he grants, That this speech of Christ
is truly applicable to all true Ministers of Jesus Christ. This is the one
Ground.

The other is in the sixteenth page of his second sheet, where he proposes, If
a Minister be in quiet possession of a place, and fit for it, the people are
bound to obey him as a Minister, without knowing that he was justly ordained or
called.

For the proof whereof, he produces three Arguments; the last whereof he draws
from an absurdity which would follow, thus: viz. Else (says he) the people are
put upon impossibilities.

Whereby he grants, That God puts not people upon any impossibilities. This is
the other Ground.

From both which true and undeniable Grounds, the plain man before mentioned
might conclude, That the Ministers of the reformed Churches are not the true
Mini^^ers of Jesus Christ; for this Reason: Because they of the Synod of Dort
were all Ministers of the reformed Churches, both the Remonstrants and
Contra-Remonstrants. Now it is impossible for any to believe both these
parties; nor does God require any to believe them, nor can he in justice
require it of any, it being impossible; but he requires the obedience of Faith
to all his true Ministers: therefore the Ministers of the reformed Churches,
are not the true Ministers of Christ.

And To instance in particular all the contradictory Doctrines and Ten^nts
which have been, and are between the Ministers of the reform^d Church^s, would
be a task too hard for any man to undertake, they being so in^in^te. I have
here instanced in^, which may serve as well as many, to state and determine the
case of the rest.
then again, For us to believe only one of the parties, (they being all
Minister; of the reformed Churches, and so true Ministers of Christ, as R. B.
asserts) we shall then be necessitated to despise the other party, and by
consequence to despise Christ and God himself: but God puts no people upon any
such necessities; and therefore also the Ministers of the reformed Churches are
not the true Ministers of Christ.

Whence will, as a necessary consequence, follow, That all the Arguments which
are or can be brought by R. B. to prove them such, are fallacious and
deceitful; and all the Scriptures brought by him to ground and make good the
said Arguments, are perverted and abused, because no good or sound Argument,
nor any Scripture, in its true and genuine sense, can be brought or produced to
prove a lie and falsehood, as this is.

And if they, who said they were Jews, when they were not, blasphemed, Rev. 2.
9. What do they less, who say, They are the Ambassadors and Ministers of Jesus
Christ, when they are not?

Now if any skilful in humane Arts, will please to put these Grounds and
Reasons into Syllogistical Forms, he may: but I must let him know, That this is
not desired by the forementioned plain man, for we may gather his Opinion of
humane Learning, and of the Art of Logic, by his words uttered at Nice, who
had therefore rather, with a plain and sincere mind, with Faith and good
works, trust to such plain and downright Grounds and Reasons of his own, then
to any Artificial, Logical or Fallacious Arguments brought now into the
Churches by humane Learning, whereby such a cunning Sophister (as R. B.) is
able to make plain men (such as he was) believe The Crow is white, the Swan
black, and the Moon to be made of green Cheese.

A POSTSCRIPT.
READER,
THe supposed ground of this Charge (if he had any at all from my mouth) was
from a small Conference he had with me some five years since; after which,
about three years since, he sent me a Book of his Infidelity, desiring me
impartially to read it over; which when I did, I found therein very many things
unsound, (at least to my apprehension;) some few whereof I noted in the Margent
with my Pen, with some hints of my exceptions thereunto: which Book, when I had
thus gone through, I returned unto him again, with an Epistle in a blank Page
thereof. The Copy of which here follows.

To Mr. RICHARD BAXTER, At KIDDERMINSTER, This deliver.
SIR,
I Have read over this your elaborate Piece, most Learnedly and Zealously
compiled; wherein are many observable Things, some excellent Good, and some
liable to Exception, being asserted with much more Confidence then Proof, (at
least, as I conceive.) I have noted some few Places; bear with the Rudeness and
Imperfections thereof, being sudden Conceptions, hastily expressed, not in the
least intending it for your scanning, but marking them merely for my own
further Consideration upon a Re-view: But in my second Thuoghts, considering
your Ingenuity and Worth in diverse respects to exceed the ordinary Pitch of Men
of your Function, I altered my Intention, and resolved to subject the same,
notwithstanding all its Defects, to your View; well knowing, that you, by your
far greater Abilities, can easily descant what further and more exactly to that
or the like effect might be urged by an abler Pen; which I wish you would
please impartially and without offense to consider, as I have done your Book,
sent me, I hope, in much Candor and Love: for which, being much obliged, I
kindly thank you. Farewell.

December. 1. 1655. Clement Writer.


The Reasons of my thus returning the book, were chiefly these.

First, I saw the contents thereof were such as made me something suspect that
it was sent me as an Assault to provoke me to some open Contest with him; which
I desired to prevent, as being not only indisposed thereunto, but also utterly
unable to encounter with such an Assailant, though it were to defend Truth
against him.

Secondly, considering if I should have made no return, nor given him any
account at all of my reading it, he might have imagined that Truth had been on
his side, and have ascribed the modesty of my silence to the prevalency of that
which he mis-calls Truth. Wherefore, to prevent both these, I sent him (in this
loving and private manner) my notes for him to consider of; taking him then to
be both honest and ingenious (but I am not the first that has been mistaken in
that kind) and therefore thought that by my communicating to him my
apprehensions in this Friendly and private manner, I should have had the like
Love and Friendship returned me, or at least never any way to have been
quarrelled with, about our different persuasions, otherwise then by some
friendly and private conference about the same, which I expected and desired.

But I heard nothing from him at all about my Notes, nor ought else, until
about August 1657. He (being then in Worcester) sent to speak with me: I
readily went my self alone, thinking then, he intended some such Conference:
but I was much deceived therein; for coming to the House where he was, he sent
for me up to him in a Chamber, whereinto I had no sooner entered, but in came
one slinking after me (in a Ministers habit) and without speaking any word,
sat him down at a distance from us, in the same Room: which observing, I
resolved in my self to be very reserved, whatsoever his business was with me.

The Scoene being thus set, in a stern authoritative manner, he began to
question me about a small Treatise then lately come forth, (entitled Fides
Divina) wherein, as it seems, some few of his Doctrines are touched, demanding
of me who was the Author of that Book. I told him, If I knew, I would not tell
him without the Authors leave, seeing the Author himself had concealed it. He
then told me, That he knew that I was the Author, because it concurred with my
Animadversions or Notes which formerly I had sent him. To which I answered, If
he knew the Author before, why did he but then, ask to know who it was? Telling
him withal, that he might be much mistaken in his Conclusion, from such a
Ground; because there were very Many in England, of the same Judgment with my
Notes, and far abler then my self to compile such a Book.

After which, he would have had me declare my Faith, and he would declare his,
and then see how far we agreed; and in that we differed he would reason or
Dispute it with me: but this I declined, telling him, That I was no meet Match
for him, so great a Scholar, unless I had some as great as himself, to unty his
fallacies, wherewith he might else soon entangle me.

Yet then, the better to allure me to speak out fully, according to the
monstrous shape and ugly look of his aims, He said to me, What, dare you not
declare your Faith? You need not fear any thing now in this time of Liberty.
But this Bait neither, would be swallowed by me; for I then asked him, If it
would be his wisdom, without all fear, upon such terms, to declare his Faith,
if he were in Spain. He answered me, No: But soon after he would have supped up
again that his answer, by telling me, If it concerned the Glory of God, he
would.

After all which (with a low voice) I told him, That if we were alone, I might
(happily) be freer to speak, and to tell him more of my mind. Then stepped he to
the Lurcher, and dismissed him, with words to this effect: You may now be gone, I
have done with you: there is no more need now of your stay. Which hearing, I
concluded (as before I suspected) that he was on purpose appointed in that
manner to be there; which made me think it best to say little more to him, but
rather to forbear, until I had studied and found out the man and his aims more
perfectly: only, I wished him to answer the Book, and not to be so inquisitive
to know the Author; and also, to seek out some meeter Match then my self, for
him to Dispute and Contest withal: Telling him in effect thus much, further:
That when any great Boy encountered with a little one, in the Street, the very
Women and Wenches passing by, will reprove him, saying: Thou great Knave, why
quarrelest thou with this little Boy, who is quiet, not meddling with thee? nor
is he any meet Match for thee, so great a Lubber: For shame, let him alone, and
meddle with thy Match. And having thus spoken, I took leave, and departed;
being glad to be so well quit of such a Companion; well discerning of what
Spirit he was.

Lo, this is the sum of the whole (that is worth the relating) which then
passed between this busy Bishop and my sell.

Since which came out his second sheet, thus publicly charging me, which I
have here answered, and freely told him part of my mind, and something of my
Faith too, (which he so much desired to know) for which I hope, no Impartial,
Wise, Just or Rational Man will in the least blame me, doing it in my own
Defense, being so much assaulted and provoked thereunto, and that both
publicly in print, and otherwise, as is here already declared.

And now lest my Notes (being in his hand) should likewise be sent abroad
either in some disguise, or without the right and proper Sentences of the Book
to which they relate, I shall here make bold to publish them my self, even as
they came rudely and hastily at first from my Pen, not in the least suspecting
that I should ever have been thus caused to publish them in my own Defense, as
now I am.

Wherein (for the Readers better satisfaction) I shall first set down the
Sentence, as it is in the Book, and the page where it is; this shall be marked
in the Margent with the letter [B.] for Book.

Next to which shall be my Note thereupon; and this shall be marked with the
Letter [N] for Note.

And where any need is to add a word for explanation, this shall be marked with
the letter [A.] for Addition.

The Title of the Book. The Unreasonableness OF INFIDELITY: Divided into Four
Parts. By RICHARD BAXTER.
1. The Spirits Extrinsick Witness. 2. The Spirits internal Witness. 3. The sin
against the Holy Ghost. 4. The Arrogance of Reason.
The First PART.
Page 16.
B. TO one is given, by the Spirit, the word of Wisdom; to another, the word of
Knowledge, by the same Spirit; to another, working of Miracles; to another,
Prophecy; to another, discerning of Spirits; to another, diverse Tongues; to
another, the interpretation of tongues: but all these works that one and the
same Spirit.

N. Why is Faith here omitted, seeing the Text has it?

Page 18.
B. If we were in a case of doubt between several Teachers, and one of them
should write thus to public Churches, even the Churches of England, Scotland,
Holland and Germany, I appeal to your selves, whether you did not by that
Doctrine which I delivered to you, receive the Holy Ghost, by which you all
received either the gift of tongues, healing, prophecy, or the like.

N. Can any Minister now truly so write to any Church, or infallibly tell what
that Gospel or Doctrine was, which was so confirmed to the Galatians?

Page 30.
B. We have yet Copies of Scripture extant, of very great Antiquity.

N. Admit all this, and that they all accorded, (as they do not) yet the Quere
will be, Who gave those Copies, or any Translations, Authority to be a ground
of true Faith to the world, whereby they might be saved by their believing
them; or damned everlastingly, for not believing them?

Page 32.
B. Men must not believe Gods Law ceased or abrogated, without good proof.

N. But the Gospel was in like manner confirmed to the Centiles also, who had
not the Law.

Page 32.
B. We have the full use and benefit of the Holy Ghost which was given then:
that seal that was then set to the Christian Doctrines and Scriptures, stands
there still.

N. Hereby every several Opinion and Doctrine drawn from Scripture, is
justified, the one as well as the other.

Page 33.
B. Tongues are not for them that believe, but for them that believe not, says
Paul, 1 Cor. 14. 22. that is, to show them the power of Christ, and so convince
them.

N. What, are not now unbelievers in the world, as well as then?

Page 33.
B. But now the Scripture is sealed by these.

N. Who, but Mr. Baxter, dare to affirm this?

Page 34.
B. These glorious Experiments, and potent Workings, will not suffer them to
change their Religion.

N. This justifies the Quakers, as well as Mr. Baxter, if not more; at least,
they may pretend the same, as well as he.

Page 35.
B. The gifts of strange Languages, healing, casting out of Devils, fell on men
ordinarily.

N. These gifts being ordinary, Why do you elsewhere term them extraordinary?

A. Yea, and why do you (in the seventh page of your second sheet for the
Ministry) say, If Miracles were ordinary, few would be moved by them as any
proof of a Divine Testimony. And also (in the thirty sixth page, part two, of
your book of Infidelity) say, Miracles, if common, would lose their convincing
force, and be as none. Yet here you tell us, That they were ordinary, when no
such inconvenience followed their being so.

But these, with other like slights and juggles, are so common in your
VVritings, as no man in his Wits can take them for Miracles, nor your
VVritings for any proof of a Divine Testimony.

Page 35.
B. That puts such a new nature into the soul of every Saint.

N. ^quere, Whether this be any otherwise then by Faith, or their believing
the promise of having it? 2 Pet. 1. 4.

A. Afterward, viz. at the Resurrection, and now to have it merely by promise:
See the Text. Page 36.

B. If you would open your eyes, you might see very much of it (i. e. of the
gifts of the Spirit before specified) in the holiness of the Saints.

N. If it be with any now, show it, and so end the Controversy; but if not,
then rest only on that that is past: halt not so between both; if either be
sufficient to uphold your Doctrine, then cleave to that: but you seem to doubt
either alone, why else make you such use of both?

A. For do not you say, page 32. as before is noted, That you have the ^ull use
and benefit of the Holy Ghost, which was formerly given? which (if true) is
sufficient, without your having it now your selves in particular; for it alone
was sufficient to them that then had it; and if you have the full use and
benefit of that now, it alone is sufficient for you also; and now to have it
your selves too, is supersluous, and over and above what is sufficient: but
they formerly manifested their having of it; so must you, before any wise man
will believe your having it, because the manifestation of the Spirit was given
to every one (that had the Spirit) to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12. 7.

Page 38.
B. Christ has now delivered up even all the Learning in the world that is
worth the speaking of, unto his Church, and continued even these common gifts
of the Spirit therein.

N. The Church of Rome will challenge this as much as you, if not more.

A. But the Church of Rome is more wise and reasonable, then to account humane
Learning any gift of the Spirit, or to make it any mark of a true Christian,
since Heathens and Unbelievers may have humane Learning, and had it in great
measure among their Philosophers, etc. but the gifts of the Spirit were given
only to believers, and that after they believed, Ephesians. 1. 13. Act. 19. 2. Act.
2. 38.

Page 46.
B. The Scripture being true, and the Christian Religion certainly true, every
part of it must needs be true.

N. Where is that Bible or Scripture?

A. And is not the Church of Rome, the Quakers, the Antinomians, and diverse
other (whom you oppose) all Christian, and their Religion, Christian Religion?
and if true in every part, Why do you then oppose them in many (if not in
most) parts of their Religion? but happily by Christian Religion, you mean only
your own Religion. Let me then ask you, Is your Religion true in every part? If
it be, why then do so many (as learned Christians, and as true Ministers of the
reformed Churches as your self) oppose you, and you them, in so many parts of
your Religion, being all Christian Religion, and true in every part, and all of
you also true Ministers of Jesus Christ (as you assert?) How fell you out? and,
How comes it to pass that you be at so great Odds, even about the most
essential Doctrines of the Gospel, yea, and about the very Person and Nature of
Christ himself?

Nay, How comes it to pass* that you so heave and cast out one another out of
Habitation, Liveli-hood and Maintenance, and so much seek to get places of
profit from one another, as you do, all of you being the true Ministers and
Officers of the Kingdom of Christ? Surely the Apostles may fear to admit you as
such into the true Kingdom of Christ, lest you should there likewise heave them
out of their places appointed for them to eat and drink at Christ's Table, and
also justle them besides their Thrones, whereon they are to sit, to judge the
twelve Tribes of Israel in the Kingdom of Christ, Luke 22. 29, 30.

Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum. Page 57.
B. As the bodies of men do live and speak and reason by the soul; so does the
Church live and move by the spirit of Jesus.

N. In which of the many sorts and Sects of Christians is this Church to be
found, since Rome, and all other, challenge to be the true?

A. And also to have this Spirit of Jesus, yea, and to live and move thereby;
yea, and by that Spirit of Jesus, (which each will pretend to have) they will
judge each other sort dissenting from them, to be led by the Spirit of Error.

Page 80, 81.
B. Jesus did send forth his Spirit into his prophets before his coming, and
more fully into believers since his coming, to be his infallible witness to the
world, to convince the unbelieving, and confirm believers; and that this Spirit
was poured out on the Church, especially on the Apostles, causing them to
prophecy, and speak with strange Languages, and cast out Devils, and heal
Diseases, and that the same Spirit is given to all true believers in all ages,
to guide, etc.

N. Is it the same, and not the same powerful works of manifestation to
accompany it?

A. Yea, and which did and will always accompany it? for by Spirit of God, and
Power of God, is one and the same thing meant in many places of Scripture. As,
Stay until ye be endued with power from on High: (i. e. with the spirit) Luke
24. 49. Ye shall receive power when the Holy Ghost is come upon you, (or, the
power of the Holy Ghost coming upon you) Act. 1. 8. My speech and my preaching
came not with persuasive words of man's wisdom, but with evidence and
demonstration of the Spirit, and power: that your faith might not stand in the
wisdom of men, but in the power (or Spirit) of God, 1 Cor. 2. 4, 5. And it
cannot be imagined that this self same Spirit which was then so powerful, is
now grown old, weak and feeble, nor that it has lost, or is separated from
that its might and power.

Page 81.
B. That it is and must needs be the holy Spirit of God which does such
Miracles as were then wrought, and attesteth and reveals so holy a Doctrine.

N. But where are any such to attest the Truth of your Doctrine? or are we
bound to take it on trust?

Page 83.
B. It is most expedient that Christ our head should be bodily present in
Heaven, but send his Spirit to his lowest and remotest Members.

N. In 1 Cor. 12. these spiritual Members of Christ's body are set out by
manifest gifts only.

Page 84.
B. It actuated the first Church after Christ, with a force extraordinary, by
Miracles, Prophecy, Healing, Languages, etc.

N. Here you make a difference without warrant, see Mar. 16. 16. Joh. 14. 12.
and by limiting it to the first, you contradict your self elsewhere, in proving
these continued long after the first Church.

Page 85.
B. John 14. 16. I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another
Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever.

N. The same Spirit and Power to be with the true Church for ever.

A. A little before (to wit) in page 80, 81. you say, That the same Spirit (by
which the mighty works were wrought formerly) is given to all true believers in
all ages. Whence will necessarily follow, That all true Churches, and all true
Ministers of the Gospel, must be endued with the same power as formerly. And
thus (and not otherwise) the text in John 14. 16. is truly expounded.

Page 87.
B. He that has not the Spirit of Christ, is said to be none of his.

N. That is, no member of his Body or true Church.

A. For this Body of Christ is capable only of profitable Members, by having
some manifest gift of the Spirit to profit the Body withal; for the
manifestation of the Spirit, for that purpose, was given to every Member of
that Body, 1 Cor. 12. 7. etc. Whence will follow, No manifestation by some gift
of the Spirit, no Spirit of Christ; and no Spirit of Christ, no Member of
Christ's Body.

Page 87.
B. The Spirit by extraordinary works formerly, and by holy actuating the
Church to the end, is Christ's great witness to the world.

N. Christ's great witness to the world by his Spirit, is by outward works, not
by inward workings in the hearts of his Saints.

A. For how can any unbeliever be convinced and brought to the Faith, by the
secret workings in another man's heart or spirit, without some powerful
manifestation thereof outwardly?

Page 96.
B. All this you know is Scripture.

N. Although all this is Scripture, yet little of all this is of Scripture; and
that which is, is little to the purpose, to prove that which is endeavored by
the Author.

Page 98.
B. For the same spirit will not say and unsay.

N. How ill will this prove the generality of preaching now to be of the
Spirit, since the same is so full of Contradictions?

Page 99.
B. The spirit of Illumination is the same, and given only by Scripture; and
for any spirit that shall contradict Scripture, it can never be holy, nor true,
nor faithful, as contradicting Truth.

N. When various and contradictious Expositions are made of Scripture, how may
we certainly know, which is for, and which is against the Truth, and when or by
whom were Miracles ever wrought to confirm Scripture or Doctrines taught now by
our Ministers; or whether all Scriptures, Ministers and Doctrines now extant,
be or have been so confirmed, since all do or may challenge it the one as well
as the other?

Page 105.
B. There is the Spirit of God within, that does second these Doctrines, and
take the received Species of them, and impress them upon the Soul, and does
this effectually and potently, according to the mighty unresistible power of
the Agent.

N. How then is unbelief any sin deserving damnation, or belief any virtue, if
it be wrought by an inward unresistible power?

Page 106.
B. You see the truth of Christian Religion, by the Spirit of holiness, besides
that of Miracles formerly.

All Sects and sorts of Christians pretend to have this Spirit of holiness, and
may challenge the former Miracles, to give evidence for the one as well as the
other.

The Second PART.
Page 32.
B. And to make the giving of the Holy Ghost to be that seal which should
credit this report with their hearers.

N. Where is this seal to credit your Doctrine and Ministry? if you had it, it
were more to purpose then a thousand such Books as this.

Page 34.
B. No man can know that the Magna Charta, the Petition of Right, or any other
Statute of this Land, are indeed Genuine and Authentic.

N. Nor is any man bound upon Pain of Damnation so to know or believe it, as he
is the Gospel, that hears it declared and attested by Signs and Gifts of the
Holy Ghost: wherefor the Comparison is frivolous.

Page 34.
B. The most unlearned man is so far bound to believe the Statute of Felony to
be authentic and in Force, that he shall be justly hanged if he break it.

N. But no man can justly be hanged for not believing it only; nor can any man
be justly blamed for not believing you, more then another contradicting you.

Page 36.
B. Miracles, if common, would lose their Convincing Force, and be as none.

N. Miracles, though common, in the first Age, lost not their Convincing Force:
Then Miracles, though common, in after Ages, may not lose their Convincing
Force: But the first is true. Besides, in page 242 of the Third Part of this
Book, you tell us, That it is certain from current History and Church-Records,
that the Gift of casting out of Devils, and making them confess themselves
mastered by Christ, did remain in the Church for long time after the Apostles,
even for three of four hundred years at least.

Page 45.
B. God does still effectually convince millions of men of the certainty of
Christian Religion, and that without renewed Miracles.

N. All several sorts of Christians have this Conviction respectively, yet
condemn one another for Heretics.

Page 50.
B. It was the Office of the Apostles, and the Duty of all other that saw
Christ's Miracles, to bear witness of them.

N. It was the Office and Duty of such to stay, until they were endued with
power to do the like Miracles. See Luke 24. 49. Act. 1. 4, 5, 8. before their
witness was to be received.

Page 50.
B. Those that saw not those Miracles, were bound to believe their witness.

N. Prove this if you can.

Page 55.
B. Lillies Grammar may be mis-Printed, or the Writings of Cicero, Virgil or
Ovid, (which were written before the Gospel) and yet we are past all doubt,
that their Writings are not forged.

N. That which God binds men to believe upon Pain of Damnation, comes with
more certainty then these or any other Writings or Words either; especially
they coming to them in an unknown Tongue.

A. As the Scriptures did from the Penmen thereof, unto nineteen parts of
twenty men in the world.

Page 55.
B. Must you not believe him that tells you the Truth, and proves it to be so?

N. If one by his Scholarship proves it true, and another in like manner prove
it false, which of the two is a man bound to believe? or must he believe both?

Page 56,
B. Object. Christ says, If I had not done the works which no man else could
do, ye had no sin. Answ. But does not say, If ye had not seen them ye had no
sin.

N. This Text is cited falsely and deceitfully, for it affirms (in effect)
that which is denied in the Answer.

A. For you wilfully have omited [among them] and (that they did both see and
hate both Christ and the Father) which being cited, and duly considered, will
quite overthrow that Doctrine which you seek here to up-hold by omiting it:
which is neither fair nor honest.

Page 58.
B. All Historians are fallible, and liable to Error.

N. How then can it be any sufficient ground of true and saving Faith?

A. Or how then can any History or words from men fallible and liable to Error,
without infallible Evidence, be any sufficient Ground for Divine Faith, since
you tell us elsewhere, That Divine Faith has ever a Divine Testimony? but no
Testimony that is fallible and liable to Error can possibly be a Divine
Testimony.

Page 59.
B. Such are the Scriptures, and it was necessary that the Language should be
suited to the matter, so to the capacity of the generality of the Readers.

N. How is this true? when it is Barbarism to the generality of men, being in
an unknown Tongue to them.

A. Especially as it came from the first Penmen thereof.

Page 81.
B. As these Testimonies were left by him (to wit) Christ on certain Record.

N. Upon what Record was it so left by Christ?

Page 149.
B. Would you have him bring you another Gospel, when Paul would hold an Angel
from heaven accursed, if he should so do? Gal. 1. 7, 8, 9.

N. The sense of this Text is perverted, being applied to the Scripture.

A. For the Text runs thus: Though we, or an Angel from heaven, preach any
other Gospel unto you, then that that we have preached unto you, let him be
accursed: As we said before, so say I now again, If any man preach any other
Gospel unto you then that ye have received, let him be accursed.

So that it is evident that Paul here had reference only to the preaching of
the Gospel to the Galatians, whereby they were converted to the Faith; which
preaching was confirmed to them by miracles, and by ministering to them the
Spirit, after their believing; as may be seen, Chap. 3. 5. Insomuch that this
Text being rightly understood, and duly considered, quite overthrows that
Doctrine which this Author would maintain, and here prove by it.

Page 150.
B. This is the Word which is able to make men wise to salvation.

N. Through Faith in Christ Jesus.

A. And through that alone the Gentiles were also made wise to salvation, who
knew not the Scripture.

Page 150.
B. By this word it is, that those must be washed and cleansed, and sanctified,
whom Christ will present pure and spotless to his Father at last, Ephesians. 5. 26.

N. The Word preached by the true Ministry, witnessed by God, and not the
Scripture, is here meant.

Page 167.
B. That many Heathens excel in this Learning, (to wit) Humane Learning, and it
was Gods Truth which they received by the study of the Creatures, though they
detained it in Unrighteousness: yea, so much excellency was in it, that the
abuse of it will leave them without excuse, though they never had the
Scriptures, nor heard of Christ: for that which may be known of God is manifest
in them; for God showed it unto them: For the invisible things of him from the
Creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are
made, even his eternal Power and Godhead; so that they are without excuse, Romans
1. 19, 20.

N. If I am not much mistaken, the sense of this Text is here much mistaken.

A. For these Heathen came not to the understanding of the Eternal Power and
Godhead by Humane Learning, nor by the Study of the Creatures, but by Gods
manifesting it to them in the preaching of the Gospel, which was invisible (or
hid) from (or ever since) the Creation of the World; being the mystery which
from the beginning of the World has been hid in God, Ephesians. 3. 8, 9. and hid
from Ages and generations, but then made manifest, Coloss. 1. 25, 26. This
mysterious hidden or invisible power and Godhead (or Divine Essence) did God
show to them, and was clearly seen by them, and that by the preaching of the
Gospel, and by the mighty and powerful works done or wrought among them, for
the Confirmation thereof.

[Made] is very unaptly put into our Translation; instead whereof [done or
wrought] would more fitly set forth the sense of the Apostle in that place. And
then when these Heathen (after so clear a discovery and manifestation to them
of the only true and powerful God, by the Gospel) fell back again to their
former Idolatry, this was it which aggravated both their sin and punishment to
so great a height: but if the same discovery had been made to them by humane
Learning, or the study of the Creatures, then they had been guilty of the same
sin, and so would have been made liable to the same punishment ever since the
Creation, and their attaining humane Learning, because they formerly committed
the same Idolatry, but yet were not at all guilty of the same degree of sin,
nor liable thereby to the same punishment; for in respect of the times before
the coming of Christ and the Gospel, God winked at, as times of their
Ignorance, Act. 17. 30. which could not be, if that the eternal Power and
Godhead had been so clearly manifested to them (as in the Text is set forth)
by the Creation, or the study of the Creatures by humane Learning.

Nor was it the Apostles drift or business to tell the Romans there, what means
of knowledge the world had 4000 years before; nor was it to set forth or
declare the virtue or excellency of humane Learning, nor of the knowledge
attainable by it, or by the Creation: but to set forth the great and mighty
power of God (which had been hid from Ages and Generations since the world
began) but was then made manifest by the power which accompanied the Gospel,
beginning at the 16 verse, thus:

16. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ; for it is the power of God to
Salvation, to every one that believes, to the Jew first, and also to the Greek.

This he proves, and sets forth by its effects in diverse instances, in the four
next following verses, thus: For there-in, or by it,
17. Is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith: as it is
written, The just shall live by faith. 18. The wrath of God is revealed from
heaven, against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the Truth
in unrighteousness. 19. That which might be known of God, is manifest to them,
for God has showed it unto them. 20. The invisible (or hid) things of him,
from (or ever since) the Creation of the world, are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made, (done or wrought) even his eternal
Power and Godhead.


This may plainly be seen to be the drift and sense of the Apostle in that
place: and to this sense the Scripture accords elsewere, Heb. 2. 3, 4. Heb. 6.
4, 5, 6, 7, 8. but to the other sense, no where.

And therefore, seeing that humane Learning is so pur-blind, as not in one
thousand six hundred years to find out the true scope and genuine sense of
Scripture, which lies so obvious and plain, as here, and in diverse other places
it does, where the true sense is hitherto mistaken, and not to this day
attained unto by humane Learning; How then can it reasonablybe thought
possible, that Christ did ever advance humane Learning to so great and
honorable an employment, as to cause a Star thereof to arise, of purpose to
direct men to the Sun of Righteousness, or to be an Usher to prepare the way
for the Gospel; or that he has now delivered it up unto his Church, to be
continued therein, or esteemed a gift of his Spirit, as our Author R. B. in his
book of Infidelity, part 1. page 37, 38. most presumptuously has asserted.
Cujus contrarium verum est.

Page 174.
B. Are not our Divines themselves disagreed about the Definitions of Faith,
Repentance, and almost all Graces?

N. This proves them no true Divines.

The Third PART.
Page 9.
B. If we can evince this, That Christ's great works, and his Disciples, were
done by the Holy Ghost, and not by evil spirits, then I think we show the
credibility and certainty of Christian Religion.

N. I conceive the doubt lies not in this.

A. For it being granted, That those works were done by the Power of the Holy
Ghost, yet the doubt still remains in full force, namely, How your Doctrines
are any more confirmed by Christ's or the Apostles works, then the Jesuits, or
Dr. Kendals, Mr. Crandons, or Mr. Tombs his Doctrines, (by all whom most of
your Doctrines are contradicted) or then his Doctrines who may contradict both
yours and theirs also.

Page 55.
B. And what I speak of sight, I say also of just report; he that will not
believe, etc.

N. But by what warrant do you equalize these, since Christ has put so vast a
difference between them? John 15. 24. John 10. 37.

Page 59.
B. What evidence can be mentioned (de facto) of a divine attestation, that
ever God gave to mankind in any case, that is higher, clearer, and more
convincing, then those works by which he has sealed the Scriptures?

N. This is most true, being applied as it ought, to the preaching of Christ
and his true Ministers, whose preaching they did seal and attest; but not the
Scriptures, nor any man's preaching from them, is sealed by those mighty works
formerly This and diverse other reasons, are here urged, which are not so much
as hi^^ed, by the Author of Fides Divina.
done: for a thing sealed, precedes the sealing thereof.

Page 62.
B. The inward work of the Spirit is either of common gifts, as Learning, or
the like, succeeding our industry; or extraordinary, as Miracles, Tongues,
Prophecy, etc.

N. Is it learning which makes Learning attained by Industry a Gift of the
Spirit? or is it not (at least) in consideration? and if this may be justified
by a distinction of Common and special or extraordinary, then every natural
gift and Science or Trade, may as well be accounted a gift of the Spirit, and
given forth upon Christ's Ascension.

A. Wherefore, as the Art of making Hats, Gloves, Shoes, Kettles or Pots, and
other the like Crafts acquired by Industry, be not any of the gifts of the
Spirit, shed forth by Christ upon his Disciples, mentioned Act. 2. so the Craft
of humane Arts and Sciences, acquired by Industry, is no gift of the Spirit
given forth by Christ: for whatsoever is attained by Acquisition, is not by
gift; and so on the contrary. Page 67.

B. Such works were done, when in all Churches many of them were so common, etc.

N. Were these common? why then do you elsewhere term them extraordinary? And,
why might not we expect them to be as common now as then, if we had true
Ministers and Churches now as then? Mar. 16. 17.

Page 69.
B. There being but one Regeneration, but one Baptism to signify and seal it.

N. Where in Scripture is Baptism termed a seal of Regeneration?

A. Or of any other thing. Page 71.

B. If I had not done the works which no man else could do, etc.

N. Among them, is here and elsewhere omitted.

A. Which is no fair play, nor just dealing. Page 73.

B. In case they hear only of Christ's Person, Sufferings and Doctrines, etc.

N. This hearing of Christ's Person, etc. need to be attested likewise, to bind
men to believe, else men may wave it without sin, unless the Servant be
greater, and of more Authority then Christ their Master, John 10. 37.

Page 74.
B. It is a not believing, when they have fullest evidence to force belief.

N. The fullest evidence was to them in whose sight and presence the mighty
works were done; but not to such who only hear of them by the report of
another, or by tradition, or the like. Page 75.

B. The Spirit of Christ, especially in his extraordinary works, is the
convincing, attesting seal, to draw men to believe; and there is but one such
Spirit and Seal.

N. Then where this one is wanting, convincing is wanting, John 16. 7, 8, 9.
Whence I quere, Whether the ground of this sin against the Holy Ghost be not
also wanting, since it is granted, That there is but one such Spirit and Seal,
and this one being wanting.

A. You your selves confess, That those convincing gifts poured out upon the
Apostles, are ceased, against which the sin against the Holy Ghost might be
committed: and you never yet produced any thing in its stead, armed with like
Power and Authority for Convincement, whereby to bring men under sin, much less
under the sin against the Holy Ghost, for not believing any of you all.

Page 76.
B. It is now the duty of all men to believe and repent.

N. Men's duty is in their power, else not their duty required by the Gospel;
unless you can make it good news to any man, to be required either to carry
Paul's Church on his back, or else be hanged. Page. 133.

B. They (to wit, the Mahometans) will not suffer it to be disputed nor
reasoned of but absolutely to be believed, without asking any evidence for its
truth.

N. This is a fault among many who call themselves Christians, as well and as
much as mong Mahometans.

A. Yea, and most of all, among such as call themselves Ministers of the Gospel.

Page 191.
B. The first Declaration of this undertaking, (to wit, of Christ's conquest
over the Serpent, etc.) was to the Serpent himself, Genesis 3. 15* but doubtless
in the ears of man to his comfort.

N. This is more then you find made known in Scripture. Page 191.

B. Here is meant the Devil himself, the tempting Serpent.

N. So also is this, and many other things affirmed by you.

A. Besides, the Scripture tells us, The tempting Serpent was a Beast of the
field, Genesis 3. 1. but so is not the Devil. Page 195.

B. Whether the Angels were ministering Spirit^ to Adam in Innocence, is more
then I find made known in Scripture; and therefore I think it unsafe and
imprudent to conclude either that they were, or they were not.

N. This Moderation had been well used in many other places, instead of your
peremptory Assertions in things as doubtful.

A. Yea, and more improbable by much.

Page 219.
B. He (to wit, Christ) tells us, That it was he (to wit, the Devil) that
deceived Eve, 2 Cor. 11. 3.

N. How does this appear? or, Where does Christ tell us so?

A. Not in the Text cited by you; for that tells us, It was the Serpent that
beguiled Eve. Page 245.

B. Christ has appointed the first day of every week for this end.

N. Where is this to be found?

Page 244.
B. Christ used other kind of weapons then theirs: they pleaded by words, and
he with mighty works; they used Sophisms, etc.

N. If we consider by what argument did Christ evince to the world the truth of
his Doctrine, we shall find it was by this of Miracles; and undoubtedly Christ
knew the best Argument to prove the divine Authority of his Doctrine: And that
which was the best then, is the best still. See Saints Rest, page 236.

A. Yea, and do not all the Ministers of the Gospel, (as they call themselves)
I may say, of all the various Gospels now on foot in the world, contest against
one another, only by words and Sophisms, etc. without using any of the
forementioned weapons used by Christ, as well and as much as any of the
learned Philosophers, and Artificial men, here specified by you? Page 247.

B. Christ obtained victory over Satan, and his best armed Soldiers, both
Jews, Idolaters, Conjurers, Sorcerers, Heretics, with their Witchcrafts and
juggling Delusions, the great learned Philosophers of all Sects, with Orators
and Poets, and the rest of their learned men.

N. Are not all these sorts of Enemies to the Truth yet remaining?

A. Yea, and has not Christendom since given entertainment even to such as are
the most notorious Deluders of them all, and admitted them into highest place,
Rule and Authority in the Church? witness our Author, who informs us, That the
Supremest Officers, even Popes themselves, have been Heretics, Whoremongers,
Sodomites, Symonists, Murderers: See the lives of Silvester 2. Alexander 3 and
6. John 11, 22 and 23. Gregory 7. Urban 7. and abundance more. John 13. was
proved in Council to have ravished Maids and Wives at the Apostolic doors,
murdered many, drunk to the Devil, asked help at Dice of Jupiter and Venus,
etc. in his second sheet, page 13. And can it be imagined, but that such heads
had suitable bodies and members? If any Reformation since be urged, Answer: not
in Rome, nor in the Reformed Protestant Churches: witness Mr Whites Centuries,
being all Protestant Ministers, and that of the reformed Churches; and witness
yet their continual supplying their Churches with teaching Ministers generally
out of their Magazine of Artists and Sophisters, even to this day. Yea, and
does not our Author (being one of the most eminent Ministers of one of the most
eminent reformed Churches) so highly magnify and advance humane Learning, that
he accounts it a gift of the Spirit, delivered by Christ himself to the Church,
and therein to continue, as before is noted, out of his book of Infidelity,
part 1. page 38?

Nor is any of all this more then what we find foretold, (vizt.) That
Antichrist should sit in the Temple of God, and be there worshipped as God. I
shall not say that humane Learning is a special Limb of that Beast, but I will
say that Antichrist shall never attain to that his Advancement, but by the
special assistance and means of humane Learning: nor shall I say that this
worshipping of humane Learning as a Gift of the Spirit, is a part of the
fulfilling of that Prediction; but this I must and dare say, That the Scripture
informs us, How that the Apostle Paul, by the spirit of Prophecy, declared to
the Church, That after his departure grievous Wolves should enter in among
them, not sparing the Flock; and that of their own selves should men arise,
speaking perverse things, drawing Disciples after them: and that in the latter
times there should be a departing from the Faith, and a giving heed to seducing
spirits, and Doctrines of Devils, speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their
Consciences seared with a hot Iron: And that Christians should turn away their
Ears from the Truth; and having itching Ears, should be turned unto Fables, and
should heap to themselves Teachers for the purpose, Act. 30. 29, 30. 1 Timothy 4.
1, 2. 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4. which also is confirmed by Peter, telling Christians,
that there should be false Teachers among them, who should bring in damnable
Heresies, denying the Lord that bought them, 2 Pet. 2. 1.

Now tell me, is not here work cut out sufficiently meet, for the most
notorious and exquisite of this learned and artificial Rabble (aforementioned?)
yea, even for the very worst of them, as, Witches, Sorcerers and Conjurers,
etc. for who is more meet to teach Doctrines of Devils, damnable Heresies, etc.
then Such, unless it be the Devil himself?

The Fourth PART.
Page 40.
B. His teaching is jointly by his Word, Ministers and Spirit.

N. Where or who are they? Page 40.

B. Mat. 28. 19, 20, 21. where he bids them first disciple the Nations, which
contains the convincing of them (of age) of the Fundamentals, and procuring
their consent, and then baptize them, that they may be solemnly engaged.

N. That is, whom they convincingly did disciple, those only they ought to
baptize. A good and honest confession for the Anabaptists. Page 40.

B. Now there are two gross Errors which Professors do often run into, to their
perdition; the one is when they do not first lay the Fundamentals as
Certainties, but hold them loosly.

N. Can any make Fundamentals of Uncertainties? Page 41.

B. If they read the Scriptures, etc. and when they are at a loss, they do not
go to their Teachers.

N. How ill is it that the Bible had not been kept in an unknown Tongue, and
not made so common? Page 42.

B But they go as confident censurers, and as Boys that will go to School to
dispute with their Master.

N. And who, many times, are these Masters? even very Boys, coming from the
University. Page 42.

B. They receive not the truth in the love of it, that they may be saved; God
often gives them up to believe a Lie, and reject that truth which would have
saved them, if they had received it.

N. This is only of such as reject such a Ministry which is absent from among
us. Page 45.

B. I have showed you already, how fully he has sealed his Testament.

N. At his last Supper he said, This is the blood of the New Testament: which
was before any of that which we call the new Testament was written. Page 46.

B. If it had no divine attestation or evidence that it is of God, then you
might reject it without sin or danger.

N. Here it is confessed, whatsoever Doctrine is brought by any for divine,
without divine attestation, may be rejected without sin. Pa. 56.

B. But when God has put his seal to it, and proved it to be his own, if after
this you will be questioning it, etc.

N. This need better proof, if the Scripture be here meant.

A. Or your, or any other man's Doctrine drawn from Scripture. Page 46.

B. Think not the proved sealed Word of God is ever the more to be suspected,
because the matter in it does seem strange and unlikely to your reason.

N. No rational man is guilty of this by his so thinking.

A. But he must upon some sufficient ground know it to be the sealed and proved
word of God, else he cannot in reason but doubt it to be such.

About the middle of his Preface.

B. The Holy Ghost by special inspiration, was the author of these Scriptures,
and by extraordinary endowments, was the Author of those Miracles which were
wrought for its Confirmation.

N. When or by whom was this done, or any Miracles wrought for the Scriptures
confirmation?

A. The Scripture reports the Miracles; can the Miracles reported by Scripture,
confirm that report? The Scripture rather confirms the Miracles it reports, if
any confirmation at all be between these two.

I shall here (for a Conclusion) only note one passage more of his, (and that
is in his Saints Rest, part 4. page 149.) being as follows: God does not
regenerate thy soul, that it may be able to know him, and not know him; or that
it may be able to believe, and yet not believe, etc.

By which is employed, That none but regenerate persons are able to believe, and
that regeneration is wrought only by God.

Whence I may quere of him; 1. How then comes unbelief to be any sin in the
Unregenerate?

2. Or, is it a sin in the Regenerate only? and if so, then regenerate Persons
only must be damned for not believing; it being inconsistent with the
Goodness, Mercy and Justice of God, (especially by his Gospel of Grace) to
require impossibilities of men, and that upon pain of Damnation.

FINIS.
An EPISTLE to Mr. BAXTER, Collected, for the most part, out of his Prologue to
Mr. KENDAL.
Sir,
BE pleased to mind what Solomon advises, Not to strive with a man without
cause, if he has done thee no harm, Prove. 3. 30. and, Not to go forth hastily
to strive, lest thou know not what to do in the end thereof, when thy n^ighbou^
has put thee to shame, Pr. 25. 8*

It seems a st^ange thing to me, that you could find no Man, among all your
learned Opponents, to contest withal, but that you must make to your self an
Adversary of one so unlearned as my self, unless it be because you are likely
with such a one to have the easiest conflict: but then you should have
remembered, that the victory will be as small. I pretend not to such a piercing
Knowledge or Acquaintance with the invisible Regions of humane Arts and
Sciences, as infallibly to determine of what Province or Degree that Spirit in
you was that raised this Contention, or to know exactly the Name or Surname of
that fury that animated these your practices or lines against me. Have you
already levelled all those high Mountains that lay in your way, and fel'd to
the ground all those Cedars with whom you formerly contended, that you seek now
to stock up all Shrubs likewise, that bear not your Impress and Mark upon them?
Doubtless this proceeds rather from your Presumption and Pride, then from any
just Authority you have, either from God or Man: but seeing you are pleased to
choose me for your Adversary, I must desire you to bear with me, if I have
spoken something less pleasingly; and to use what patience you have yet left,
as knowing you have drawn this trouble upon your self, by your causeless
Provocations and Assaults made upon me; which, I hope, will excuse me in the
eyes of all impartial and ingenuous Men.

I confess my self destitute of School-Learning, and humane Arts and Sciences
(so much applauded in the world;) herein I freely give you the day, to wear
those Titles and Robes of Honor appurtenant thereunto, contenting my self to
have right to that far better Title, of being an honest Man, which (in respect
of your self) you have much hazarded the loss of, by your dis-ingenuous
carriage toward me. I contend not to have the Reputation of learning, or being
a rare and excellent Scholar, but freely allow you the due praise thereof,
scarcely thinking it worthy my labor, till I have higher thoughts of the
Prize; men's applause being but an airy nourishment, merely feeding vainglory in
men empty of all true worth. Only I must crave this of the Reader, that my
confessed weakness be no prejudice to the Truth here vindicated by me; and that
he will not judge of the cause by the person, nor take the name or person, nor
yet the rarity of the thing for a fault; which is the thing that the ancient
Christians did much deprecate of the Pagans; and therefore, I hope, every
ingenuous and impartial man, will grant it me in the present case. And I must
also desire, that the want of Eloquence, Rhetoric, or smooth and pleasing
Words, may not be judged the want of truth: [Enim vero dissoluti est pectoris,
in rebus seriis quaerere voluptatem, etc. inquit Arnobius, Li. 1 adv. Gent. p.
49.] viz. [It is the condition of a dissolute heart, to seek pleasures in
serious matters; and when thou have to do with those that are ill at ease, and
sick, to fill their ears with pleasing sounds, and not apply medicine to their
wounds.] I confess, I deeply compassionate the generality of Professors, to
think how unpossible it is for them to discern the truth among the multitudes
of smooth Words, plausible Arguments, fallacious School-distinctions and
reasonings of the learned Contenders on each side: usually they think each Man's
Tale good, till they hear the other, and then they think it bad; and at last,
when they see what fair glosses a learned Sophister can put upon the worst
cause, they are justly occasioned to believe or regard little or nothing they
say.

The Reader that I expect should profit by this discourse, must neither be the
careless vulgar, utterly unlearned nor any so learned as your self; for the
former are scarcely capable of it, and the learned think themselves beyond it,
and will hardly learn any thing from any man that is less learned then
themselves: it is the middle sort, and plain-hearted people, who are sincere
Lovers of truth, whose instruction I intend, who are neither quite above, nor
below information, nor so engaged to any party or Opinion, but that their minds
lie open to the evidence of Truth, by what hand soever it be made known to them

And although I come extremely short of you in humane Arts, and Philosophical
Notions; yet let not the Reader thence conclude, That you are therefore right
in your Divinity, or more right then another man that comes short of you in
humane Learning; for if he does, let him be assured to be miserably deceived in
the end. And I could wish, that you had so mean thoughts of your Philosophy,
and other your humane Arts, as that you would not build your Divinity so much
upon it, as you do, nor think much the better, either of your Writings or your
self: for doubtless, when the Canon of a Council forbad the reading of Heathen
or humane Authors, this kind of Learning was not so highly valued as now it is;
which may likewise evidently appear by Socrates, L. 1. C. 5. cited P. 33. of
the foregoing Treatise. Farewell.

C. W.
Land Aug. 10. 1658.
An Appendix and Supplement to the foregoing Discourse, by the same Author.
IF it were lawful further to dive into this mysterious fraud, we should find,
That the Gospel preached by this Author R. B. and the Gospel preached by St.
Paul, to be different and not the same: First, because the Gospel preached by
St. Paul was accompanied with infallible Divine evidence to attest the truth
thereof, for the conversion of men, and whereon infallibly to ground their
faith and obedience thereunto; without which he neither would nor could bind
any to believe and obey it: but the Gospel preached by this Author has no such
evidence; yet he will dare to say, That all (at least) those that hear it, are
bound to believe and obey it. Secondly, Because illiterate men are incapable of
the Gospel preached by this Author, without their taking many things implicitly
upon trust and upon the word of their Teachers, as he himself tells us, in page
238, 239. of his Saints Rest, where he thus expresses himself, (viz.)
Something must be taken upon trust from man, whether we will or no, yet no
uncertainty in our faith neither: For,

First, (says he) The mere illiterate man must take it upon trust, that the
Book is a Bible which he hears read, for else he knows not but it may be some
other Book.

Secondly That these words are in it, which the Reader pronounces.

Thirdly, That it is translated truly out of the Original Languages.

Fourthly. That the Greek and Hebrew Copies out of which it was translated are
true authentic Copies.

Fifthly, That it was Originally written in these Languages. These with many
more (as he there tells us) the vulgar must take upon the word of their
Teachers. Behold here, what use and benefit this Author makes of his having now
the full use and benefit of the Holy Ghost which was formerly given and then
sealed the Christian Doctrines and Scriptures, and stands there still, as he
tells us (if we could believe him) in his Book of Infidelity, Part ^. page 32.

And must we needs therefore take these and all other his Doctrines which he
has raised or may raise, either from Scripture or out of his own fancy, for
true and undoubted Christian Doctrines formerly sealed by the Holy Ghost upon
the account of his bare saying, That he has now the full use and benefit of
the Holy Ghost formerly given, etc.

Sir, If this be your meaning, then speak it plainly out, and for shame, do
not impose upon the world such G^olleries as these merely by implication.




But the Gospel preached by St. Paul, and other the true Ministers of Jesus
Christ, needed none of all this: it being preached to all people in their own
Languages, and to the understanding of the meanest; and this was all the
Originals, Copies and Translations that they were troubled withal or needed,
to bring them to the faith of the Gospel; they not being necessitated to take
the least tittle thereof impli^itely upon trust, or upon the word or credit of
their Teachers. For, When Philip went down to the City of Samaria, and preached
Christ unto them, the vulgar people (as illiterate as they were) with one
accord gave heed to the things which Philip spoke, hearing and seeing the
Miracles which he did; and without more ado, they believed and were baptized
both men and women, Act. 8, 12.

All which was done before any of these believers had received the Spirit, for
(after this) were sent from Jerusalem, Peter and John, who administered the
Spirit to them by laying their hands on them, ver. 17.

Even as Peter declared their ordinary method of administering of the Spirit to
be after faith and baptism, Act. 2. 38, 39. by his bidding the Jews to repent
and be baptized every one of them, and that they (i. e. every one of them)
should then receive the gift of the Spirit, because the promise (to wit, of the
Spirit) was to them and their children, and to all that should afterward be
converted or called to the faith of the Gospel, as well all afar off, as those
that were near. And therefore it was that Paul demanded of the Disciples at
Ephesus, If they had received the Holy Spirit since they believed: and they
answering, That they knew not whether there were any Holy Spirit or not; He
presently asked them, Unto what then were they baptized? He well knowing that
the gifts of the Spirit was necessary to be administered to all, and to every
one after their believing and being baptized: and therefore by laying his hand
on them, he administered the gifts of the Spirit to them; for thereby the Holy
Ghost came on them, and they spoke with tongues and prophesied, Act. the 19. 1,
2, 3, 6. compared with Ephesians. 1. 13.

This also is contrary to the Doctrine of the Gospel now preached by this our
Author and others.

So then it is most evident, that to the true Ministry of the Gospel
appertained these three special administrations, as essentially necessary
thereunto.

1. The administration of the Word infallibly and evidently attested for the
conversion of men to the belief and obedience thereof.

2. The administration of John's baptism by water, for the remission of sins.

3. The administration of Christ's baptism with the Spirit, by the laying on of
hands, whereby the gifts of the Spirit were conveyed on the baptized believers.

Moreover, St. Paul tells the Corinthians, That his preach^ng to them, was not
for them to take any thing from him implicitly upon trust, or upon any
persuasive words of his, or of man's wisdom; but upon the demonstration of the
Spirit and power (which he produced before them, to attest the truth and Divine
Authority of his Doctrine) that so their faith should not stand upon the word,
credit, or wisdom of men, but upon the power of God, 1 Cor. 2. 4, 5. for if
they should have taken it implicitly upon the word and credit of Paul, (so
great an Apostle as ^e was) without the aforesaid Divine infallible evidence,
This had not been to believe God, but to have resolved their faith into some
humane testimony, even to have laid their foundation upon the sand, where all
would have fallen at the next assault, as this Author himself has told us, in
his Saints Rest, page 20^.

3. The Gospel preached by St. Paul, was joyful news to every creature under
Heaven, Col. 1. 23. But the Gospel preached by this Author is far short of
that, being sad news to most men, especially to such as believe not his
Doctrines, when they often interfere and thwart one another, as in part is here
already showed; yea, and some things published by him in print, has he already
in print Next to the 160. page of his Saints Rest, part 1. He thus writes,
(viz) Reader, understand that since I wrote this, I begin to doubt of the
soundness of what is expressed in the four next foregoing pages; which I am not
ashamed to acknowledge, but ashamed that I published it so rashly.
revoked, and so may he do (as there is just cause) many more before he die:
yea, it is hoped that he will ere long publicly own this truth, which he now
publicly opposes; for he has so closely pursued it, and so nearly approached
it, that he cannot but see some glimpses of its glory. For why else would he,
or needed he to have so perverted Joh. 15. 24. as he has often done, to
obscure its luster, to prevent its shining forth to the view of all men, and
that so purposely and ^^advisedly, if the truth opposed by him had not glanced
its light fully and directly into his face? and he cannot but know how unsafe
and dangerous it is in any man to persist in opposing a truth, after it is once
discerned by him.

Fourthly, The Gospel which St. Paul preached was the same which Christ
preached; but the Gospel preached by this Author is not the same which Christ
preached, because the Doctrine of the Gospel which Christ preached would be
proved and upheld by Joh. 15. 24. being truly and in its genuine sense cited;
but the Doctrine of the Gospel preached by this Author would be disproved and
overthrown by its being truly and in its genuine sense cited, for why else
would he or needed he so much and so often (as he in his writings has done) to
have perverted it to a contrary sense, or to any other then its true and
genuine sense to prove his Doctrine: He being no Baby not to know what he did,
nor why he did it, when he did it.

Whence will necessarily result these conclusions, First, That the Gospel
preached by this Author (not being the same which Christ and St. Paul preached)
must be some other, and being any other, cannot be the true, nor he any true
Minister of the Gospel.

Secondly, That none can be blessed by believing or obeying the Gospel which he
preaches, because St. Paul positively asserts, Gal. 1. 8. Though we or an
Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel unto you then that which we have
preached unto you, let him be accursed. This he duplicates in the next verse
(thus,) As we said before, so say I again, If any man preach any other Gospel
unto you, then that ye have heard, let him be accursed.

And who now can secure this our Author from the reach of these Comminations,
or reasonably imagine, how any man can be blessed in believing or obeying that
Gospel, for the preaching whereof, the preacher is accursed?

Thirdly, That this Authors Sermons and Books are liable to the same destiny
unto which he himself has doomed almost all other men's: In his Saints Rest,
Part 1. page 132. where he makes these pathetical demands (viz.) How many
Sermons zealously preached? How many Books studiously compiled will then (to
wit) in the world come by the Authors be all disclaimed?

These interrogations implying negations, are as if he should have said, That
the Sermons and Books, which will (in the world to come) be disclaimed by the
Authors, are so many as they can hardly be numbered.

And why may we not put into this numerous company, the Sermons and Books also
of the rest of the Presbyterians, of whom one both learned and Mr. John Goodwin
in his fresh discovery of the high Presbyterian Spirit, page 38, 56.
judicious thus writes, (viz.) That day after day they preach broad-faced
contradictions, and make the Scripture to say and unsay, which being
interpreted, is to make them say just nothing. Nor are many of their writings
any whit more excusable upon the same account.

And that he had thoroughly tried many of their Doctrines and tenants, and found
them liars; yea, and had opportunity to stigmatize them for such publicly, and
alarm the world concerning the hatefulness and danger of them.

Wherefore I could wish, that our Author in his future undertakings, would
please to look round about him, and to grasp and duly weigh the whole matter of
which he intends to treat, and to lay aside whatsoever he finds vain or
sinewless; and no more to obtrude upon the world such empty humane traditions,
for necessary Divine Doctrines, as he has done, and that with such
unwarrantable and groundless confidence, as thereby he has given many great
advantages, more then I find has been yet taken against him by any.

Alas poor mortals! silly wretches, dust and ashes, mere baggs of warm dung as
we are! can we command back the Sun when it is set, or instead thereof, place
in the Firmament some equivalent light, to prevent the darkness which
necessarily will follow its setting? No more can we (though furnished with all
the acquired Arts of humane learning our natures are capable of) call back the
light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, when it is withdrawn by God, as now
apparently it is; the times and seasons for these things, being solely in his
own power and dispose.

For does not the Scripture plainly fore-tel of these times of general
Apostasy? was not the woman, Rev. 12. (expounded by the learned to typifie the
true Church) to be driven into the wilderness from the converse and sight of
men, to be fed there by God? (and therefore not by Popedoms, Bishopticks,
Masterships of Colleges or Hospitals, Parsonages, Tithes, Augmentation, or any
other forced maintenance from men.) And was not her Man-child (the Masculine,
Divine and powerful gifts, he fir^tborn fruits of the Spirit) to be taken up
unto God and to his throne, from whom, and whence they were at first received
by Christ, and given unto men, Ephesians. 4. 8, 11. compared with Act. 2. 33. and are
not these in more abundance to be powered out on the sons of men, Before the
great and terrible day of the Lord, Joel 2. Act. 2. compared with Esa. 44. 3.
even when he shall send his Angel to preach and make known his everlasting
Gospel unto them that dwell upon the earth, Rev. 14. 6. and when he shall call
his ancient people the Jews; until which time this Babylonish darkness which
has overspread the world, is like to continue, even that darkness which (the
Prophet tells us) shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people (or
Gentiles,) until they shall come and partake of the Jews light, when the Lord
shall arise to them, and his glory be seen upon them, Isa. 60. 1, 2, 3. And
therefore the duty most incumbent upon us (now in these Aporetick times) is not
to hate, persecute, judge, or condemn one another in matters of Religion, but)
to join in prayer, for, and with the Jews, That God would be merciful unto
them, and bless them, and cause his face to shine upon them, that his way may
be known upon the earth, and his saving health among all Nations: then shall
the earth yield her increase, and God even their own God shall bless them; God
shall bless them, and all the ends of the earth shall fear him, Psalm. 67. For
then many people shall go and say, Come, let us go up unto the mountain of
the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us his ways, and
we will walk in his paths; for out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the
word of the Lord from Jerusalem, and he shall judge among the Nations, and
shall rebuke many people, and they shall beat their swords into plow-shares,
and their spears into pruning hooks, Nation shall not lift up sword against
Nation, neither shall they learn war any more, Esa. 2. 2, 3. Mic. 4. 2, 3. add
to this Zech. 8. 23.

And this great and general Apostasy is likewise plainly foretold in many other
places of Scripture; As, that all the world shall wonder after the beast, and
worshipped the Dragon which gave power to the Beast, and they worshipped the
Beast, and all that dwell on the earth shall worship him, Revel. 13. To which
add that of St. Paul, 2 These. 2. 3. where he wills the Thessalonians, To let
no man deceive them, for that day shall not come except there came a falling
away first: and tells Timothy, 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4. That the time will come, when
they will not endure sound Doctrine, but after their own lusts, shall heap to
themselves teachers, having itching ears, and they shall turn away their ears
from the truth, and be turned to Fables.

Where it is to be noted, That he does not say some of them, or some of you,
(as he did when he warned the Elders of Ephesus, of the beginning of this
Apostasy, Act. 20.) but they indefinitely will not endure sound Doctrine, and
they indefinitely shall turn away their ears from the truth, and be turned to
fables.

And the same Apostle foretells the restitution of the truth with life and power
again; for writing of the rejection and restoration of the Jews, Romans 11. 15.
he thus expresses himself, If the casting away of them be the reconciling of
the world, what shall their receiving be, but life from the dead, (namely,) to
the world, which shall then be in darkness, and in effect dead, being destitute
of the powerful and lively ordinances of the Gospel of Christ, from which
darkness and death, the world shall then be delivered, enlightened and revived.
Hence we may see, that it was not for naught that our quondam Bishops continued
among us the use of that common and necessary prayer, which begins thus,
Lighten our darkness, we beseech thee, O Lord, etc. And it were well if the same
were still continued, and that our present Rulers both civil and ecclesiastical
would themselves also join with us in the use thereof, even as all our great
need requires. I thought here to have raised an objection against the
premises, but I find one already made to my hands, and that by this our Author
himself in a sheet of his, lately put out against the Quakers, where with much
confidence he thus objects; (viz.)

Object.
The Quakers are but of late years standing, they rose from among the Papists,
Seekers, Ranters and Anabaptists, but a while ago; and if Christ had no
Catholic Church before then, and ever since his Ascension, he ceased to be
Christ in Office, the head and Savior of the Church: for no Church, no
Savior; no body, no head; no School, no teacher; no Kingdom, no King: no
wife, no husband.

Answ. There being a Triumphant Church in Heaven (as they teach) this may
supply Christ with a Kingdom, a Body, a wife and Church, to whom he may be
King, head, husb^nd and Savior, when there may be no true Church amongst us
mortals, upon the face of the earth. For the making good whereof, they teach
us, That the Souls of the righteous ascend immediately into Heaven to God,
there to partake of present bliss and glory: and that the Soul of the penitent
thief went immediately into Paradise, whither (no doubt) the Souls of many
penitent thieves have gone since, as sure as that thieves Soul went thither:
but now the greatest thieves crucify, hang, rob and plunder men, and are
neither crucified nor hanged, yet do think upon that account to lodge their
Souls there also when they die, though they neither repent, nor make
restitution so much as Judas did; wherein they will (I fear) at last find
themselves miserably cozened.

These Doctrines being both true, and doubted by none but Heretics; then
Christ has a double supply of a Kingdom, wife, body and Church, the one in
the highest Heaven, and the other in Paradise: but and if these Doctrines
should both fail of making good the proposition of a Triumphant Church in
Heaven (as it is feared by many they will, in that they do propose two
different receptacles for the Souls of the righteous) I shall mind them of one
more, better then both these; namely, The bodies of many of the Saints which
slept, arose, and came out of their graves after Christ's resurrection, went
into the Holy City, and appeared unto many: These, I conceive, would much
better make a Triumphant Church in Heaven, then either or both of the other,
whereby Christ may be supplied with a Kingdom, body, wife and Church, and all
the supposed absurdities in the objection prevented; though Christ neither now
has, nor never is like to have (until the calling of the Jews) any true Church
upon the face of the earth.

And as to his parallels of School and Teacher, King and Kingdom, (I say) a
head-School-master, being lawfully established such in any place, may afterward
be so interrupted by reason either of war, or some contagious sickness there
raging, as he may not have one Scholar left for him to teach; does this
Schoolmaster therefore lose his right, or so much as his title of being
head-School-master (especially he readily attending to perform that his office,
when ever his Scholars shall return again to be taught by him?) I think not.

And as to Christ's Kingdom (I say) if Christ at his Ascension was a King (as
is granted by the objection) and then had no Kingdom; he may also as well then
be a head, a husband and a Savior, without either body, wife or Church upon
earth: but Christ was then a King, yet had no Kingdom on earth, because his
Kingdom was then, and is yet to come, as may be thus proved.

Christ taught his Disciples to pray, That his Kingdom might come; a
consequence whereof would be, that Gods will would then be done in earth, as it
is in Heaven.

This prayer was by the Apostles left to following Christians, and has been
ever since, and yet is used in the world, and the will of God not being yet
done in earth as it is in Heaven, shows plainly, that Christ's Kingdom was not
then, nor is yet come.

The general conformity to the will of God, both of Jews and Gentiles, and
their subjection to Christ in the time of his Kingdom and reign, is in many
places of Scripture foretold, as Psa. 110. Thy people shall be willing in the
day of thy power: consonant to this, Moses prophesied, which is by Peter
repeated, Act. 3. 22. (thus) For Moses truly said unto the Fathers, A Prophet
shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me, him
shall you hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you. And that the
fulfilling of this is not to be until the personal and second coming of
Christ, the three precedent verses do show.

And in Ps. 67. 7. God shall bless us (i. e. Jews) and all the ends of the
earth shall fear him: consonant to this, is Esa. 2. 2, 3. Zac. 8. 23. before
cited.

Likewise Zac. 14. informs us of the coming of the day of the Lord, ver. 1. of
Christ's personal coming, ver. 3, 4. of his being King over all the earth in
that day, ver. 9. of the subjection of all Nations to Christ, and their
worshipping of him, being then King at Jerusalem, ver. 16, 17. even as it was
foretold by the Ange to Mary, Luke 1. 32, 33. That he should be great, and that
the Lord God would give him the throne of his Father David, and that he shall
reign over the house of Jacob for ever: hereunto contribute, Luke 19. 11, 13.
and Luke 21. 23, to 33. where when Christ had set forth his personal coming,
and his redeeming of the Jews out of captivity, he then after all this tells
them, That when they see these things come to pass, then they should know that
the Kingdom of God will be nigh at hand.

Note, but nigh then, therefore not in being at his Ascension, nor at any time
since. And as to his conjecture, that the Christian Church in this world, is
the Kingdom of Christ, and his only Kingdom upon earth, as some imagine;

These conceits are already answered and refuted, in the 24, 25, 26, 27, 30,
and 31. pages of the foregoing discourse.

And as to the phrases in Scripture which some stumble at, (such as these) The
Kingdom is near you, or in you, (this is to be rendered among you, as the
margent in King James his Bible shows) and the taking the Kingdom from one
people, and giving it to another, and the like: These are to be understood of
the Gospel of the Kingdom, being a special means of obtaining the Kingdom, and
that to be near them, or preached among them, whereby they might come to inherit
the Kingdom; for the word Gospel, or good news of the Kingdom, cannot be the
Kingdom it self: and by the phrase of taking the Kingdom from any, is only
meant the taking from them the Gospel, or means of their attaining the Kingdom,
which (in effect) is the taking the Kingdom it self from them.

It is evident therefore, though Christ was a King at, and ever since his
Ascension; yet his Kingdom is not yet, nor will be, until the sound of the
Seventh Trumpet, When the Kingdoms of this world, will become the Kingdoms of
our Lord and his Christ, thenceforth for ever, Rev. 11. 15. Then, and not till
then, shall the Heathen and the uttermost parts of the earth, be taken into his
possession; although his right thereunto, and Lordship thereof, was given him
of the Father long before, Psa. 2. 8.

The result of all which is this, That as he was a King before his Kingdom was
set up; so might he be made Head and Savior before his Body or Church was
constituted; and so may he remain, whilst the Church is extinct, driven or
withdrawn from off the face of the earth, as it must needs be, when all that
dwell upon the earth shall worship the Beast, Rev. 13. 8. and when the way of
God is not known upon earth, Psalm. 67. 2. For although the relation between a
natural head and its body be such, as neither can subsist without the other;
yet it is not so between Christ and his Body the Church, being spiritual, as by
and by I shall make appear.

And therefore to that part of the objection, No body, no head; I shall here
offer him this short Dilemma: Christ (being made Head of his Church at his
Ascension) either had a Christian Church then upon earth, or he had none: if
none, then was he a head without a body, a husband without a wife; and if he
had one, then there was one before that time: for there were very many, and as
many baptized Disciples and believers before his death, as there were at or
after his Ascension, until the pouring down of the gifts of the Spirit, and the
conversion of three thousand mentioned in Act. 2.

How else could he have been seen of more then five hundred Brethren at once,
and of many other of his Disciples, with whom he conversed at least forty days
after his Resurrection, and before he Ascended? 1 Cor. I would fain know of R.
B. If he and his Fellow Members of his Catholic Church, are any fitter or
truer matter, or in a better capacicy for Membership in Christ's Body and Church
now, then these Apostles, Disciples, and Brethren were in, before Christ
Ascended: these had true faith and baptism, has he and his fellow members more
or truer? I think not, but that it will be found (upon due examination) to come
many degrees and in many respects short of the others. How then can they be a
true Church, and the other none?
15. 5, 6, etc. Act. 1. 3. And if any of these were a Christian Church, before
his death, or before his ascension, then there was a body and wife before he
was made a head or husband. Or else thus: either these were a Christian Church
before Christ ascended, or they were not: If he say they were, then there was a
body without a head; if he say they were not, then there was no Christian
Church upon the earth, for certain days after he Ascended, and until the gift;
of the Holy Ghost were powered down upon the Disciples, mentioned in Act. 2. And
then for that distance of time, between his Ascension and his pow^ing down of
these gifts, there was a head, but no body. Let him now choose which of these he
please, since either of them invalidates his objection.

And indeed the very truth is, That these were nobody or Church of Christ,
until they had these gifts of the Spirit poured down upon them mentioned Act.
2. presently after which (but not before) they were denominated a Church, being
then formed into several Spiritual memberships, for the several Offices and
services of the whole body: like as the several members of a Natural Body are
serviceable to the body: Now if these gifts of the Spirit formed Members, and
knit them together, and also to their head, from whom they received
nourishment, growth, and increase of the whole body (as is most evident) they
then neither were nor could be any body or Church of Christ, until the pouring
down of the gifts of the spirit upon the Disciples at Pentecost, (ten days
after Christ's ascension;) when it is granted by the Objector, he was invested
into Headship: and I suppose it must also be granted, that this Head-ship was
conferred upon him before that time, even at his Resurrection: for how else
could he presently after and before his Ascension have told his Disciples, That
all power was given unto him both in Heaven and in Earth? Mat. 28. 18.

But all power had not then been given to him, if the Headship or Lordship over
his Church had been omitted or suspended until his Ascension.

This Jesus, God raised up, and made him both Lord and Christ, Act. 2. 35, 36.
And he was the first born from the dead of every creature, that in all things
he might have the pre-eminence, Col. 1. 15, 18. For nothing was left that
should not be made subject unto him: but neither then, nor since, are all
things actually made subject unto him, although he then was actually crowned
with the Glory and Honor of Lordship over all things, Heb. 2. 5, 6, 8, 9.
which hereafter are to be actually put in subjection unto him, as these
Scriptures witness, Psalm. 110. 1. Act. 2. 34, 35, 36. 1 Cor. 15. 24, 25, 26,
27, 28, Phil. 2. 8, 9, 10, 11, Heb. 1. 6, 13. and 10. 12, 13.

All which shows the imbecility of the objection, being composed merely of
non-sequiturs.


unto which the Apostle plainly alludes, and compares the Church, 1 Cor. 12.
where he also tells them, That they having these spiritual gifts, were thereby
all of them baptized into that one body of Christ, by that one Spirit; before
which they were not of that body, nor suitable matter for Membership in that
spiritual body of Christ their Spiritual Head and husband: Even as the Apostle
writing to a true Church, Romans 8. tells them, That if any (of them) had not the
Spirit of Christ, the same was none of his: (i. e. none of his body or Church,)
which is as a building fitly framed together, grows to an holy temple in the
Lord, in whom they were builded together, for an habitation of God through the
Spirit, Ephesians. 2. 21, 22. and Romans 12. 4, 5. as we have many Members in the body,
and all the members have not the same office; so we being many are one body in
Christ, and every one members one of another, holding the head, from which all
the body (by these gifts of the Spirit, as by joints and bands) having
nourishment ministered, and knit together, increases with the increase of God,
Col. 2. 19.

Wherefore this learned Objector may as well and as soon truly define a Natural
body without members or joints and sinews, to knit them together, as to define
a true Christian Church or body of Christ, without these gifts of the Spirit.

For see we not how the most learned on all sides, flounder and fall before
each other in their definitions of a true Church and each different party
challenging their definition to be truest, and the true Church to be amongst
them; each crying, Lo here, and lo there? as if the Church of Christ, when
and where it is, will not be perspicuously and distinctly discovered (as a
light set upon a hill) to all beholders, even by her own eminency, and by that
divine light and power which always did and will accompany her, without the
help of blind guides with their dark-lanthorns of humane Arts and Sciences to
discover and find her out. This consideration alone, is sufficient to evidence,
That the true Church is withdrawn from the earth, or at least so far removed,
that we know not where to find it.

I shall instance in the definition made by one of the best reformed Churches
(even the Church of England) as it was most advisedly framed by the wisest and
ablest of them, and then publicly held forth in the Articles of the Church,
which they stoutly defended against the world; insomuch as whosoever would not
conform thereto, was obnoxious to censure; and being a Minister, was liable to
be reprobated and cast out as refuse and unsavory salt.

In the ninteenth Article it is thus defined, viz. The visible Church of Christ
is a Congregation of faithful men, in the which the pure word of God is
preached, and the Sacraments be duly administered, according to Christ's
Ordinance.

Now let a Heathen be told, that by these marks he may know the true Church,
may he not then demand how he shall know the pure word of God when it is
preached? etc. must he not then be told, that he must know that by the true
Church? and then again may he not ask, How he may know the true Church? and
must he not then again be answered, That he must know the true Church by their
preaching the pure word of God, etc.

And thus may he run the round again and again to the worlds end, and be never
the nearer knowing the true Church, until he return again into his own
country, and there or elsewhere learn undoubtedly to know what the pure word
of God is, when it is preached, and what the due administration of the
Sacraments is according to Christ's ordinance: and as soon as he has learned
undoubtedly to know all these, he may then return hither again if he please,
and find out the true Church of Christ amongst us as soon as he can.

But how unlike are these marks unto those which Christ himself gave to know
his true Church by, Mar. 16. 17, 18. These signs shall follow them: In my name
they shall cast out Devils, they shall speak with new tongues, they shall take
up serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them, they
shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover. Unto this also accords St.
Paul's description of a true Cburch, 1 Cor. 12. 28. God has set some in the
Church, first, Apostles; secondly, Prophets; thirdly, teachers; after them,
miracles; then gifts of healing, helps, governments, diverse kinds of tongues.
And accordingly Ancient Christians judged these gifts of the Spirit, to be
absolutely necessary to the being of a true Church: for Eusebius informs us,
That one Miliades disputing with certain Heretics, proves them no true Church,
or right Christians, by the discontinuance of the gifts of the Spirit amongst
them (thus:) If that as they say, after Quadratus and Ammias the Philadelphian,
those women of Montanus succeeded in the gift of Prophecy, Let them show who
afterward succeeded Montanus, and his women; for the Apostle thinks good,
that the gifts of Prophecy should reign in every Church, even unto the end;
but now for the space of these fourteen years since Miximilla dyed, they are
able to show us not one, Eusebius. lib. 5. chap. 15.

And so modern Authors likewise do judge these gifts necessary to the being of
a true Church: for in a Book entitled The Doctrine of Baptisms, set out 1652.
by a nameless author (supposed to be Mr. Dell,) in page 22. it is asserted, That
as Spirit-Baptisme makes us one with Christ the head; so with the Church, the
Body, 1 Cor. 12. 13. for by one Spirit are we all baptized into one body, etc.

And a little after he says, There are no more of that Church, which is the
body of Christ-then they that are baptized with that one Spirit.

The truth of all which our Objector himself so far acknowledges, as (in his
Preface to the second Part of his Saints Rest) to tell us, That they spoke with
Tongues before people of many Nations; and that it was not one, nor one
hundred, but multitudes of Christians that had one gift or other of this sort,
either miracles specially so called, or healing, or prophecy, or tongues, He
might have said, Not one, but bad one such gift or other.
etc. and for proof thereof, he cites 1 Cor. 12. Mar. 16. 17. both which
Scriptures mention manifest gifts, and outward and visible works of the Spirit
only; and not inward invisible workings thereof.

And he likewise tells us, That these manifest gifts did remain in the Church,
at least three or four hundred years after the Apostles.

How easy by these gifts might any Heathen having but the use of reason
undoubtedly know the true Church, and all at once, without any circumcursoes or
wanderings hither and thither to find her?

And since a true visible Church is here defined to be a Congregation; I quere,
When or where this Objectors Catholic Church (whereof he professes himself a
member) was ever congregated? I think he can hardly tell me; and if it was
never congregated, How then can he prove it to be a congregation (or Church,)
Act. 20. 28. 1 These. 5. 7. Col. 3. 16. Heb. 3. 13.
much less any true Church of Christ? the Elders whereof are to feed and take
care for all the flock, and the particular members thereof ought to edify,
admonish, and exhort one another daily: but how the Elders and members of this
his Catholic Church do, or can perform all these their duties, he need to
inform us, before we can or ought to believe it to be any true or visible
Church of Christ.

I have been much the larger in answering this Objection, because I find the
framer thereof, to build many great errors upon this fabric, founded upon
meerfallacy and quicksand. But I now hope, that upon his review, a speedy way
may be opened to him, no more to deceive others, nor longer to be deceived
himself therein; it being an ingenuous, valiant, pious and glorious thing in
any man, at any time, upon any occasion, to forsake an error and repent.

And that he may the rather be induced thereunto, I shall mind him of one at
least as wise and as learned as himself, viz, Mr. John Goodwin, well known to
be both grave and judicious, against whom the like Objection is made, by Mr.
Pawson (thus,) That notwithstanding such a purpose in God to save whosoever
believes, all might perish, and Christ be an head without a body, a King
without Subject, etc.

Hereunto, Mr. Goodwin in his Triumviri, page 38. gives this sober and solid
answer following, viz.

These are offered under a pretense of high absurdities, in case they were
truths, have nothing in them but what even a child might readily vindicate
from such an imputation. For what absurdity or inconvenience is it, that Christ
should be an head, actu signato, i. e. a person fit or meet to make an head,
and not be an head actu exercito, i. e. not an head actually united to a body?
there is the same reason of his being a King also. When Solomon says, That he
had seen Princes walking as servants on the earth, Eccl. 11. 7. he judges it
no absurdity to style those Princes who had no Subjects, nor any thing else
externally comporting with the state of a Prince; but ascribes unto them the
honor and denomination, upon the account of their truly noble, and Prince-like
qualities and endowments: but besides the regularness and inoffensiveness of
such consequences, in case they were regularly deducible from their premises,
the clear truth is, they are plain non sequiturs.

It does not follow, that if all men might perish, that Christ should be an
head without a body, or a King without Subjects; for might he not, yea, should
he not have been an head to a body of Angels, whether men had been any part of
this body or no? Are not Angels also now his Subjects? If it were lawful for
him that is Orthodox to learn any thing from a man that is erroneous, Mr.
Pawson might have informed himself of these things, from page 438, 439, etc. as
also from page 215, 216. of my Book of Redemption.

Thus far Mr. Goodwin, to whom I refer this our learned Objector, for his
better learning and information in these particulars. It being no small cause
of grief to see a man so studiously industrious as he is, (with so much zeal
for God, and so much charity toward men, as he seems to have) to be in so many
things so extremely mistaken.

The Authors last farewell to his Reader.
Reader,
Be entreated for thine own sake (in thy perusal of the foregoing discourses)
to lay aside all prejudice, which often so prepossesseth the minds of most,
that it quite puts out the very eye of the understanding, or at least so
transports the whole man, that we can by no means relish or down with any
thing that is contrary, or different to our education, or the approbation of
the time and place we live in; though never so evidently made out unto us, to
be both sound, wholesome and good; for when it is presented so to be, and that
within our view, we then usually wink with our eyes, lest we should see.

This deadly enemy to our peace, is bred and fostered in some by ignorance; in
some, by perverse and willful obstinacy; in some, by malice; See Act. 19. 24,
to 36.
and in many by self-interest and wordly emolument: but never habituated or
justified in any, but by extreme weakness, or exceeding great wickedness.
Wherefore be entreated, as before, First, clearly to rid thy self of this evil
Spirit; and then seriously and impartially to read and consider what is there
said: And the Lord give thee a right understanding therein, and the exercise of
a pure conscience in all things. Farewell.

From my Lodging in London this fatal 3. of Sept. 1658. C. W.


