A SERMON PREACHED IN LONDON BY A FAITHFVLL MINISTER OF CHRIST. AND PERFECTED
BY HIM: AND NOW SET FORTH TO THE PVBLIKE VIEW OF ALL, FOR THE JUSTIFICATION of
the Truth, and clearing the Innocence of his long suffering for it,

Act. 5. 29.We ought to obey God rather then men.

Printed by Margery Mar-Prelate. 1641.

A SERMON PREACHED IN LONDON BY A FAITHFVLL MINISTER OF CHRIST.
GENESIS 3. 17. Because thou have hearkened to the voice of thy wife, and have
eaten of the Tree of which I commanded, saying, Thou shall not eat of it,
cursed is the ground, etc.
When Adams eating of the forbidden Fruit, was so manifest by his nakedness,
shame, and fear of Gods presence, that he could not hide it, nor deny it, He
had no excuse but only this, That the Woman whom God had given to be an help
meet for him, She gave him of the Tree and he did eat, verse. 11. Some perhaps
will think that this was a sufficient excuse for Adams part; for why should
not he respect her, and hearken to her voice whom God had given him for a meet
help? What affection of men and women one to another can be so great as the
affection of Adam to his wife? She was bone of his bone, and flesh of his
flesh, chap. 2. 23. framed and made of a rib taken out of his side, in the same
Image of God with him, and was his second self, the Queen and Lady of the
inferior World, who had with him equal dominion and rule over all visible
creatures in the earth, and in the Sea; why then should not Adam be excused for
his eating, seeing he did it not of himself, nor by the persuasion and
example of any other, but one by his wife, and out of respect and affection to
her, and to her words and voice. But the Text here shows, that no such excuse
could free him from the foul stain of sin in the eyes of God the righteous
judge of all the earth. For as the eating it self contrary to Gods
Commandment, so the harkening to the voice of his wife, and respecting her and
her persuasion more then the Word of God, is laid to his charge as a sin, and
an heavy curse is laid on the ground for his sake, and many grievous pains
and sorrows on him and all his posterity, yea and death it self also, as a
just punishment of his transgressions; Because thou have hearkened (says God)
to the voice of thy wife, etc. Cursed is the ground for thy sake. The
consideration whereof offers to us this general Doctrine.

That no affection or respect to any man, no word, command, Doct.
or threatening of greatest Kings and Potentates, no persuasion of them that are
most near and dear, no importunity of them to whom men are most obliged in
love and duty for many great favors, can excuse any act which thereby they are
drawn to do against the commandment of God, from the foul stain of sin,
nor the doers of such an act, from the guilt of sinful transgression: or to
express it in fewer words briefly, No affection of one man to another, whether
fear or dread of Superiors, or reverence of Benefactors, or love of them that
are most near and dear, can excuse any person from the guilt of sin before
God, when by them he is moved and drawn to do a thing which God has
forbidden in his word and Law.

If any such affection or respect could excuse any unlawful act before God,
then had Adams excuse been very good, for the reasons before named, (viz.)
because he did eat by the persuasion of his wife, who deserved more love and
respect at his hand then any frail sinful person of all his posterity can be
worthy of, or expect at the hand of any other: But this excuse was of no force
with God (as here we see) that great and righteous Judge, whose will is Law,
and the rule of Justice, pronounces him guilty and worthy of death, and of all
the pains, sorrows and punishments which are expressed in this verse, and the
two next following: And this God is no respecter of persons, but most just to
all without partiality to any. Wherefore this Doctrine holds most true, firm
and sure, among all men, even all Adams posterity of all ages, and in all
Nations of the World.

For the further illustration whereof, and confirming of our hearts in the
truth and steadfast belief of it, we have the plain word and testimony of God
himself in his Law, Deuteronomy. 13. Where he gives a strict charge to all his
people, under greatest penalties, to take heed, that neither reverence and
respect of extraordinary Prophets which have certainly foretold beforehand
things which afterward have come to pass, nor the love and affection of any
one to his brother, the son of his Mother, or to his wife which lies in his
bosom, do at any time draw them into the transgression of his Law by
worshipping other Gods: And if a whole City be seduced by some wicked person,
and drawn to serve strange Gods, and the people thereof be found to commit
Idolatry, (in which Cases many are moved and drawn out of affection and
respect, Some to Superiors, some to Parents or Masters, some to Husbands, or
Wives, or Brethren, or Friends, and Benefactors) the Lord declares all to be
deeply guilty, foulely stained, and worthy of death, out of what affection or
respect soever they are drawn to serve False Gods, and adjudgeth them all to
the sword; For he commands the whole Nation of his people, to destroy every
soul therein with the edge of the Sword, and to burn all the substance
thereof as a cursed thing, and to make the City an heap, for a terror to all
others.

Thus we see God in his Law admits no excuse or plea for the breach of his
Commandment, whether men plead, that the fear and Commandment of Superiors,
(as Judges, Magistrates, Parents, or Masters, or love and respect of Husbands,
Wives, Brethren, Benefactors, and dearest Friends, or reverence of
extraordinary Prophets, and Teachers esteemed for men of God) did move and
persuade them, they shall not be found nor judged innocent. And to this purpose
are those words of God in the body of the moral Law in the second Precept,
where he forbids making of any Image, of any thing in Heaven or Earth, to bow
down to it, or to worship it, as being a similitude of him* or a sign of his
divine power and presence; I am (says he) a jealous God, and visit the sins
of the Fathers upon the children to the third and fourth generation of them
that hate me. Mark the words; First, the Lord says, I am a jealous God. Now
jealousy is the indigna^tion and wrath of some person against those who
withold and withdraw from him that love and respect which is due to him, and
bestow it on others who do not deserve it, and to whom it is not due: As for
example; when a wife bestows the love and affection due to her husband upon
other men, this provokes him to jealousy, and fills him with anger and
indignation against her and her lovers.

Here God compares himself to such a person; saying, I am a jealous God, which
is all one in effect, as if he had said, I am the Lord, the Creator of all
things, there is no God besides me, no religious or divine worship is to be
given to any but to me alone; and therefore, whosoever gives such honor to any
besides me, and does break any of my Commandments out of fear, love, or
other affection and respect to any creature whatsoever, he provokes me to
jealousy: And then, what follows? I will (says he) visit the sins of the
Fathers upon the children to the third and fourth generation of them that thus
hate me.

Now the meaning of these words is not, that he will punish the innocent
children for the Idolary of the Parents, For he is the righteous Judge of all
the earth, he will not destroy the righteous and innocent with the wicked and
the guilty, Genesis 8. 25. He himself protests with an oath, That the Father
shall not dye for the Child, nor the Child for the Father, for all souls
(says he) are mine, the soul of the Child as well as the soul of the
Father, Ezekiel. 18. How then can this saying stand, that he will visit the sins
of the Fathers on the Children to the third and fourth generation? Surely the
meaning is, That because men often times live to see their Children and their
Childrens children to the third and fourth generation, and if they be wicked
Idolaters, haters of the true God, they are examples of evil to their
Children, and by exhortations, commandments, and examples draw such Children
to commit the same sins, and their Children are led by affection and respect
of their evil ways. And hence it is that the Fathers sins becomes the
sins of their children, and the sins which the Children commit in
imitation, and by the persuasion of their Fathers, are called the sins of the
Fathers: And it is no excuse of the Children; that the example, and their
respect of their Parents did draw them to follow their ways, but the Lord in
fury and jealousy will proceed against them as hateful sinners, and will
visit their sins upon them: And least any should think or imagine, that the
justice of God is not so strict in this point now under the Gospel, but the
rigor thereof is much remitted: We have a most clear testimony from the
mouth of the chiefest Evangelicall Preachers and Publishers of the Gospel; the
holy Apostles, wherewith joint consent and one voice they protest, that they
might not for fear of men, nor upon the commands and threatenings of the chief
Rulers in the Church and State of Israel transgress the Commandment of
Christ, and by obeying men, disobey God, Acts 4. 19. and 5. 29. Yea, though
their preaching of the Gospel publicly in the Temple (as the Angel commanded
them from God, Acts 5. 20.) and to all the people in all public Assemblies and
their proclaiming of the Lord Christ (whom Pilate by instigation of the
Highpriests and Elders had condemned, crucified, and slain) and their
declaring of him to be the just and holy one of God, and the Redeemer promised
to the Fathers, was no less then Scandalum Magnatum in the highest degree, for
hereby they brought the blood of Christ on Pilate the Chief Governor of the
Romans, and on them the chief Rulers of the people, and in that respect they
did out of State-policie charge them, and straightly command them, not to
preach any more in the Name of Christ. as our Savior had commanded them,
Matthew. 28. 19. Yet Peter and the rest of the Apostles answered resolately, We
ought to obey God rather then you; and they appealed to themselves (though most
unjust adversaries) to judge whether it were not right so to do: And therefore
it is as great a sin now under the Gospel, as it was under the Law, to break
Gods Commandments, for fear, or any other affection or respect of men, or
upon the commandments and threatenings of the greatest Kings and Potentates.

If you will yet see this Truth made more clear and manifest, look into the
examples of those several persons, and also of those multitudes of people
which are noted for great sinners, and were most severely punished for doing
wicked acts, contrary to the Law of God out of obedience to their Rulers, and
at the commandment of their Kings who had power and authority over them; the
holy Scriptures afford many examples of this kind in several places, where
they commend Subjects and Children for refusing to obey their Superiors and
Parents in things which they commanded against the Law of God; and condemn
others for obeying such wicked commandments out of Fear, or for any other
respect.

When King Saul commanded Jonathan his son and all his servants that they
should wait for an opportunity to slay David his innocent servant and son in
Law, and Gods great and Noble Champion, he had a fair pretense of
State-policie for it (to wit, that David did steal away the hearts of his
people, and aspired to the Kingdom, and sought to depose him and to disinherit
his sons: But because Jonathan feared God, he would not obey his Father in
murdering an innocent, contrary to Gods Law, but used all means that he could
devise to discover his Fathers wicked purposes to David, and to reserve him out
of his cruel hands; and this disobeying of the word and threatenings of the
King, his Father commanding him to slay an innocent, is highly commended in
Jonathan, and recorded for his praise and honor in the Holy History, I Sam.
19. So likewise we read that Jonathan did ignorantly break his Fathers rash and
foolish vow before he knew it, by eating honey which God unexpectedly offered
to him when he was faint and weary in his pursuit of the Phihstines, whom he
and his Armor bearer had rowted and put to flight, and thereby brought great
deliverance to Israel; and when King Saul his Father for this act done out of
inuicible ignorance, adjudged him to death, and swore with a great oath, that
he should dye; the people of Israel his Subjects fearing God more then his
anger, did not only abhor the act, and refuse to yield to his commandment,
which had some show and pretense of Religion, but also did stand out and oppose
themselves against it, and did save and rescue Jonathan out of his hands,
saying, God forbid that Jonathan should dye, As the Lord lives there shall not
one hair fall from his head to the ground, for he has wroughe with God this
day, I Sam. 14. 45. Which speech of theirs implies, that it had been a great
sin to slay Jonathan, as Saul their King commanded, or to suffer him to dye
for such a cause.

But the most pregnant example of all is that of Doeg the Edomite, Saul's chief
Heards-man, I Sam. 22. where we read that when King Saul commanded the men of
his Guard (whom he had obliged to him by many preferments and gifts, as his
upbraiding words in the seventh verse seem to imply, that they should slay
the Lords innocent Priests whom he out of false and unjust suspicion and
jelousy supposed to conspire with David against him, they would not put forth
their hands to fall upon them, as the Text says verse. 17. and Doeg the
Edomite who at the Kings Commandment slew the Priests and mangled and
murdered their wives, and children and innocent Sucklings, and like a bloody
oppressing Tyrant spoiled their City and all their substance, is by the Spirit
of God in the mouth of David cursed with most dreadful curses, though he did
these things in obedience to the King his Lord, upon whose favor all his
preferment did depend, the sentence of judgment passed upon him, Psalm. 52.
that God would destroy him for ever, pluck him out of his dwelling, and root
him out of the Land of the living, does most plainly show, that his Act was a
most heinous sin and wickedness.

In like manner when Jeroboam commanded the Israelites who had chosen him for
their King, to worship God who brought them out of Egypt in the Images of
golden Calves, such as Aaron had before made at Mount Horeh, it is said in the
Text, that he made them to sin, his Command^ment did not excuse them, and
their worship of Images, neither did God spare to punish them for it, but (as
the Prophet Hosea testifies, cap. 5. 11.) Ephraim, (that is, the Israelites of
the ten Tribes) was oppressed and broken in judgment, because he willingly
walked after the Commandment (that is) of Jeroboam, and also of Baasha, and
other wicked Kings, who walked in the ways of Jeroboam, and made Israel to
sin. And although Omri, Ahab, and Iezabel were cruel Tyrants, and by
Statutes, tyrannical commands, terrors, threatenings, and slaughter of the
Lords Prophets, teachers of Gods true worship, did not only draw* but drive
and force Israel their people and subjects to worship Baal, yet this excused
not the peoples Idolatry, but the Lord threatens them by the Prophet Micha 6.
16. that because they kept the Statutes of Omri, and walked in the counsels and
ways of the house of Ahab, therefore he will make the Land a desolation, and
an hissing and reproach; and for their forsaking of Gods covenant, and
worshipping of Baal, Idols and Groves, Eliah the man of God accuses them all
as great offenders deeply guilty, saying, The Children of Israel have forsaken
thy Covenant and broken down thine Altars, 1 King. 19. 14. And God in his
answer to Eliahs accusation exempts none from the guilt of these sins in all
Israel, but only those seveven thousand men who had not been drawn by the
terrors, threatenings, and cruel commands of Ahab and Iezabel to worship Baal,
but had kept their knees from bowing to him, and their mouths from kissing
him, as we see verse. 18 What man can plead more plausible for any disobedience
to any Commandment of God, then the man of God which came from Judah to Bethel
to prophecy against Ieroboams Altar, might plead for his eating bread and
drinking water in that wicked Idolatrous place, contrary to Gods particular
Commandment given to him; First, the thing forbidden, was a matter in it self
very indifferent, there was no appearance of any evil in it, so long as he did
not eat and drink with infectious and infamous Idolaters which might be a
snare and scandal to him: Secondly, his resolution and endeavor to keep this
Commandment was such that when King Jeroboam thankfully invited him to eat
and drink out of kindness for healing his withered hand, he could not be
overcome with any entreaty, nor promise of great gifts and rewards. Thirdly,
when he was seduced and drawn to eat and drink in the place forbidden, it
was the authority of the old Prophet, and his respect to his words which he
confidently affirmed to be the words of God which persuaded him to return with
him and to eat bread with him; and yet all this could not excuse this man of
God from sin in doing contrary to Gods Commandment given to him, for God
presently makes the old Prophet which deceived him, a Messenger of death to
declare unto him his untimely death for his disobedience, and that his dead
carcass torn by a Lion should not come to the Sepulcher of his Fathers, 1
King. 13. Whereby it is manifest that no power or authority of any man how
fairly soever it is pretended to be from God can excuse any act done against
any known Commandment of God, though it be a Commandment of a small
indifferent thing, given only to try man's obedience, but whosoever upon any
respect to any creature, or by any persuasion does transgress any Precept or
word of God, he is guilty of sin and worthy of death before Gods just
Tribunal: Saul's letters from the Highpriests which gave him a Commission and
authority to persecute Christians did not excuse him from sin though he did it
in ignorance and blind zeal for he calls himself the greatest of sinners for
that act of persecution, 1 Timothy 1. 15. But I hold it needless to spend time in
rehersing more examples to prove this doctrine, though it is of all Doctrines
the chiefest and most necessary to be believed, continually kept in mind, and
observed of all Adams posterity. I will only add one strong and invincible
argument and demonstration to convince all men of the truth thereof grounded
upon diverse solid principles of Reason and Religion.

First, it is a thing which none but Atheists can or will deny, Reason.
that when any creature stands in competition with God, and seeks to be
respected and obeyed before God, and to have his demands and commands yielded
unto, which are contrary to the will and Law of God, as he in that case seeks
to rob God of his due honor and glory, and to exalt himself above God, which
is Luciserian pride and rebellion; so they who in such a case obey him, whether
for fear, or love, or any respect and affection in a thing contrary to any
Word or Commandment of God, they do undobtedly rob God of his glory and of the
honor which properly belongs to him, for God as the Creator of all things, and
giver of being, life and breath to all creatures severally, who also upholds
and preserves them all in being and well being, and sustaines them by his
providence; so he is the chief Father of all, worthy to be respected, loved,
and obeyed above all other Parents and Benefactors, who are but instruments of
his bounty, and subordinate means of our being and other benefits: He also by
the right both of Creation, and also of redemption is the chief King, Lord,
owner and possessor of all things in heaven and earth, to whom all hearts,
hands, wills, desires and affections ought to be subject and obedient in all
things, and at all times. Besides, if we consider God in himself as he is
revealed in his word and works to be the one only true Jehovah, eternal,
omnipotent, immortal, immutable, infinite in goodness, bounty, wisdom, mercy,
justice, faithfulness and truth, most mighty wise and prudent to order, rule
and govern all the world, most bountiful to reward all obedience, and most
just to punish, and dreadful and terrible in revenging all disobedience
against his Word and Law; We cannot but acknowledge and confess, that he is
the supreme Lord of all Lords, King of Kings, and the eternally blessed and
only Potentate, who is in all things to be obeyed above all, and before all;
and all Lords, Kings, Fathers, and Benefactors are to be obeyed only in and
under him as his Substitutes, subordinate Vicegerents, Stewards, and
Messengers, whosoever do, out of fear, love, or any affection and respect to
any creature, do any thing contrary to his kowne will, word and commandment,
they rob him of his honor and glory, set up the creature above the Creator,
and make it their God, which must needs by all reasonable men be confessed to
be a most heinous and grievous sin worthy of Gods wrath and all punishments.
This is the solid argument and invincible demonstration which fully proves the
Doctrine, which I will briefly reduce into the strict form of a Sylogisme,
thus,

Whosoever robs the King, and Lord of Lords, the blessed and only Potentate
and chief Father and Author of all being goodness, and bounty, by taking
from him the honor and glory which does properly belong to him, and sets up
the creature and servant above his Lord and Creator, he is guilty of most
heinous sin and transgression.

Every one who out of fear, love, or any affection and respect to any
creature, does any act contrary to the revealed will, word, and Commandment of
God, robs thereby God the supreme Lord, King, Father, and Benefactor; and
sets up the creature and servant above his Lord and Creator.

Therefore he is guilty in this of heinous sin and transgression; and by
consequence it follows necessarily, that (as this Doctrine teaches) no
fear, threatening, or commandment of earthly Potentates, no love, or respect
of Parents and Benefactors can free from the foul stain of sin in any act,
which they draw men to do contrary to the Commandment of God.

This Doctrine is of special use: First, to admonish all Use 1.
Gods people to be careful and diligent above all to know and acknowledge God
aright, and to set their hearts and affections chiefly on him as the supreme
Lord and Father of all, and the chief Author and Fountain of all goodness,
and to put on a settled resolution to obey all his Commandments, though all the
world should persuade and command them to the contrary. It is true that Kings,
Rulers, and Potentates of the world are set up by God to rule by him and under
him, as his Vice-geren^s, Stewards, and Messengers, and all men who are under
them, especiaily Christians (Gods free and willing people) ought to give them
all honor and reverence and to fear and obey them for conscience sake in and
under God; the very law of Nature binds all men to love, reverence, honor and
obey their Parents and Benefactors, who are Gods instruments of their being and
well being; and not only Civility and the Common Law of Nations binds men to
honor and respect them who are honorable in wisdom, gravity, and authority,
but Religion and Gods Word teach men to honor and affect such as are Prophets,
Preachers, Ambassadors and Messengers of God unto them: But yet all these are
to be loved, feared honored and respected in and under God, and with fear,
love, and affection subordinate to the fear, love, and affection which they
have toward God above all: Wherefore let all Gods people take heed and beware,
and carefully look to it, that they give not too much way to humane passions
and affections by regarding and respecting secondary means and inferior
causes more then God the first and chief cause, Author and bountaine of all
blessings, or by accustoming themselves to esteem too highly, or to love,
fear and admire too excessively the persons of men, how great, wise, and
learned, or how aimiable and honorable soever they appear in their eyes; If
men once give way so far to the reverence, awe, fear, and dread of earthly
Kings, Rulers and Potentates, that they become more afraid of their faces,
angry countenances, menacing and threatenings, then of the terrors of Gods Law
and of his wrathful judgments; this is that which will draw them to disobey
Gods Word and Law, out of respect to mortal men and will bring them under the
stain and guilt of unecusable sin laid open in this Text and Doctrine: So
likewise excessive love, carnal affection, and respect of Parents and
Benefactors (while men set their eyes and hearts on the things which are
visible and sensible, and on the outward means more then on the invisible
hand, power and goodness of God) may easily supplant them and make them fall
in like sort into heinous sin and inexcusable transgression. But most
dangerous of all is that superstitious fear, reverence and respect which men
out of blind and undifereet zeal without knowledge do show to such as are set
over them to rule and direct them in things which concern God, Religion, and
godliness, and hold the place of Prophets, Messengers, Bishops, wise Pastors
and learned Teachers in Gods Church; when men are so enthralled in their wills,
and become Slaves in their affections, that they are ready to believe and
embrace whatsoever they hold and teach without proof from Gods Word, or
examination of things taught by the word or consent with the word and rule of
Faith, they are in the high way to horrible and dangerous errors and
disobedience to the Law of God, into which whosoever fall being led by
immoderate affection and more then due respect to any persons whatsoever, he
may here learn from Gods proceeding against Adam (the common Father and root
of all mankind) that God will admit no excuse for breaking any of his
Commandments out of any respect, or any fear, reverence, love or affection to
any persons, how great, wise, learned, honorable or aimiable soever they
appear to him. As Adam by his excuse could not turn away the guilt and
punishment of his disobedience, but had a curse laid on the ground, and all
pains, sorrows and death it self on himself and all his posterity: So it
shall fare with all Adams seed and children in the like case, For there is no
respect of persons with God.

Secondly, this Doctrine discovers unto us abundance of error Use 2.
in the judgments, and iniquity in the practice of many worldly-wise and
learned men, especially in those State-polititions, admirers of worldly power,
greatness and authority, who do think and hold, that they may lawfully do
things commanded by such as have the rule over them, without examining whether
they be allowed or forbidden in the Law of God. If Kings and great Potentates
command them under great penalties, as loss of goods, liberty, or lives,
torturing, imprisoning and death to make Images of God, and to bow down to
images and Altars of wood and stone, and to practice superstitious
will worship, or to do as proud and potent Nebuchadnezar commanded all his
people to worship his Image under pain of burning to ashes in an hot fiery
Furnace: Or if a law and decree were made (like that which Darius made by the
advice of his wicked and malicious Princes) for a snare to Gods people,
forbidding the true worship of God. It is the common opinion of self-conceited
wordlings abundantly wise and politic in their own opinion, that there is no
danger in obeying, no fear of unexcusable sin, and that they who are afraid to
obey such commands, and to stir their consciences with guilt of sin by
breaking Gods Law, are too scrupulous, worthy of contempt; yea that they are
mad men, who in such cases will hazard their lives, goods, or liberty. But the
3. faithful servants of God, full of the holy Spirit were of a contrary
opinion and resolution, (as Dan. 3.) Though Nebuchadnezar was a mighty
Potentate, and had highly promoted them to honor and dignity, and the thing
which he commanded was only to fall down and worship his golden Image, yet
they utterly refused to do such an act forbiden in Gods Law, and did rather
choose to yield their bodies to death and to be burned in his hot fiery Furnace:
And so likewise Daniel that holy servant of God, so famous in his time for
learning wisdom and favor with God, he regarded not the Decree of the wicked
Princes which restrained him from the worship of his God and from praing to him
for the space of thirty days under pain of being cast into the den of Lions,
but notwithstanding it was confirmed by his great Lord and King Darius and
sealed with his Seal, he would not refrain from his constant course and
custom of prayer and worship of his God, which he knew to be a duty daly and
continually required by the divine Law, and did choose rather to forgo all the
honors and promotions which the King had bestowed on him, and to be cast into
the den of Lions, then to disobey Gods Commandment by obeying the Kings
decree: and such has the opinion, resolution and practice of all Gods noble
Wortheys and faithful serevants been in all ages. Wherefore let me here be bold
to spend some few words in arguing against, and conuincing the blind carnal
wicked world, and in discovering that wisdom which is commonly callen
State Policy, to be folly and enmity against God, which I will do very briefly
by answering and taking away those foolish excuses of carnal men which are as
vain and unable to shroud and defend them from the stain of sin and Gods just
wrath, as the fig leaves patched together by our first parents were unfit to
cover their nakednes^

Some when they are commanded by great Potentates and cruel Tyrants to worship
God in Images and in Altars of wood and stone or the like, or are forbidden to
profess the truth and true religion and to practice the holy worship of God,
that under pain of death, persecution, imprisonment, spoiling of their goods,
and loss of all worldly substance, they are very f^^ward and earnest to plead,
that authority must be obeyed and the powers must not be resisted, and that it
is no wisdom to undergo loss of goods, liberty and life for conscience and
needless fear of breaking Gods Commandments. But let me tell such pleaders,
that Ephraim, and the Israelits of the ten Tribes had as good a plea, and the
same excuse for their forsaking of the Covenant of the Lord, and for
worshipping of Baal, Calves, Idols and Groves, in the days of Jeroboam, Ahab
and other wicked kings, their Kings did comaund them so to do for a politic
reason of state even to keep them from going up to worship God at Jerusalem,
lest by that means they might be drawn away and revolt to the house of David,
and reunite themselves to the Kingdom of Judah: Also some of their Kings were
cruel Tyrants which persecuted the true. Prophets and worshippers of God, and
by fear of death and other great penalties forced and compelled men to commit
Idolatry, as we read in the days of Ahab and Iezabel, and as appears by
Eliahs complaint unto God, 1 King. 19. And yet this was no excuse of the
peoples Idolatry and sin, for Ephraim was oppressed and broken in judgment
because he willingly walked after Ieroboams commandment, as Hosea testifies,
Hos. 5. 11. And because they kept the Statutes of Omri, doing the works of the
house of Ahab, and walking in their counsels, the Lord gives this sentence
against them by the Prophet Micha, That he will make their land a desolation,
and them an hissing and reproach, Micha 6. 16. Our Savior in the Gospel
discovers to us how vain and frivolous all such excuses will be found before
his Tribunal, where he says, that whosoever loves houses, lands, goods, or
life it self more then him, insomuch that they will rather deny, and not
confess him before men, then endanger or lose their life, liberty, or wordly
goods, they are not worthy to be counted his Disciples, and he will deny them
in the presence of his Father and before his holy Angels; and as they feared
them who could kill the body only and were not able to kill the soul, more
then God who could destroy both soul and body in hell; so they shall lose
their life which they loved more then him they shall also be excluded from life
eternal, and so cast wholly both souls and bodies into hell, into the fire
which never shall be quenched, and dye and perish eternally, Matthew. 10. 28 Mark
8. 35. Luke 9. 24. Secondly, whereas oaths are to be given and taken in truth,
in judgment, and righteousness, Ier. 4. 2. That is, men must not swear any
false thing but only what is true, neither to raise up strife, nor to do
injury, or to hurt any man, but to put an end to strife by laying open in
judgment things as they are, neither must they bind themselves by oath to do
any vain, unjust or wicked against Christian charity, or to execute any
unlawful office. Now there are and have been in all ages diverse politic
worldlings and cowardly Hypocrites, who when vain or sinful oaths are
imposed on them, such as the Elders and Nobles of Iezrael imposed on the wicked
men whom they set up to swear falsely, that Naboath blasphemed God and the
King; or such as the Jews took to kill Paul, Act. 23. 12. or such as Traitors
take to conceal or act Treasons; or as many corrupt men take to execute
unlawful offices and unjust designs, which are hurtful and injurious to
diverse others either in Church or Commonwealth. If these oaths be imposed by
men of authority, who rule over them, or under great penalties, as trouble,
vexation, imprisonment, and loss of liberty, or with hope of some preferment,
profit, and gain, which they may reap by executing an unlawful office; they
are ready to plead for themselves that they are excusable, because they did
take such oaths, and do execute such offices by command of Superiors and in
obedience to authority, and that otherwise they should forgo a profitable
office and trade which does maintain and enrich them and their Family, and
should be vexed, troubled, fined, impoverished, imprisoned, and deprived of
their liberty. But let me answer such in the words of Holy Job, chap. 27. 8.
What is the hope of the Hypocrite that he has gained, when God takes away his
soul? What will his gainefull office advantage him when God finds and
judges him guilty for profaning his holy Ordinance and taking his Name in
vain? Yea, our Savior fully answers such Hypocrites, and discovers the
folly of such worldly Polititions in express words, saying, What is a man
profited to gain the whole World, and lose his own soul; or what shall a man
give in exchange for his soul, Matthew. 16. 26. All the liberty and freedom
from bands and imprisonment, all the worldly profits, pleasures, goods, and
wealth which men purchase and procure to themselves by their obsequious
observing of great ones, and obeying the authority and commandments of men in
things contrary to the Word and Law of God, will yield them no comfort at all,
but rather add to their torment in that flaming fire wherein God will render
vengeance to them, and punish them with everlasting destruction from his
presence and the glory of his power, and shut them up with the Devil and
damned spirits in the prison of blackness and darkness for ever world without
end. Lastly, whereas many who are wise in their own conceit, and most
politic for the world and in wordly matters, when they are commanded as Doeg
was by Saul his lawful King to mangle, murder, and massacre the innocent
servants of God, and to oppress and spoil them of goods, lands and lives, as
the Nobles of Naboaths City were by Iezabels Letters written in Ahabs name and
fealed with his Seal, or to execute cruel and bloody sentences given by
Judges of unrighteousness under the name and color of the Law, by haling to
prison, torturing and punishing Christian people men and women; as Saul did
when he was a persecutor armed with Commission and Letters from the High
Priests, they persuade themselves and plead confidently, that it is no sin in
them to do such things, though in themselves most unjust and contrary to the
Law of God, but that the sin and guilt lies wholly on their Superiors, and
on the Judges, which by their authority and imperious commands, do impose upon
them such executions, and they the executioners shall never be called to
account, nor undergo the punishment of just revenge from God: Let all such be
admonished by this Doctrine, that this their plea and persuasion will never
excuse them before God, but as they have an hand in wicked works, and are
executioners of cruel and ungodly sentences, so they shall have their share in
the just punishments of such heinous transgressions, and the righteous and
supreme Judge will cause just vengeance to be executed on them also: It is true
that seducors and perswaders of others to sin; and all they who by their
power and authority, fear and awe cause others to commit wickedness, as they
are chief Authors there of next under the Divill, the Father of all iniquity,
and the blood of those whom they have seduced, compelled and caused to
transgress Gods holy Commandments, shall ly heavy upon them, and God will
certainly require it at their hands, so shall they chiefly bear the curse and
punishment: But they who are seduced and led by them through blind obedience
shall not escape, but shall also fall with them into the pit of destruction;
And all they who are voluntarily instruments of cruel oppression, violence, or
any wickedness, they shall undoubtedly dye and perish in those sins of which
they are partakers with them, who set them on work to do wickedly, there is
no way for them to escape Gods revenging curse but by godly grief and sorrow
to repentance, and by seeking and finding pardon in Christ. Wherefore behold
your folly and wilful madness ye worklly Polititions who are so wise to
work your own ruin, who by vain excuses and subtle fallacies of fleshly
reason do blind your own eyes, and hardon your hearts not to repent; Alas!
what comfort will it be to you that your great Lords whom you feared and
obeyed, and the unrighteous Judges, whose cruel sentences ye executed, do
chiefly bear the curse and punishment of that cruelty, injustice, and
iniquity, which they acted by your hands? what ease or mitigation of sorrow,
pain, and grief, will it be to you, that you see them lead the way and go
before you? when you also follow them at the heels, and dance after them
attendance unto Hell, there to remain for ever in the lake which burns with
fire and brimstone, where the worm dies not, and the fire never goes out,
but burns eternally, and is unquenchable world without end. From which wrath
and eternal woe the Lord deliver us for his mercies sake, and through the
meritorious satisfaction of the Lord Jesus Christ our Redeemer and Savior; To
whom with the Father and the blessed Spirit be all glory, honor and praise now
and for ever.

Amen.
^INIS.

