THE Beauty of Unity. IN A SERMON PREACHED AT PRESTON in Lancashire, At the
Opening of the GUILD-MERCHANT held There. September 4. 1682.

By RICHARD WROE, B. D. and Chaplain to the Lord Bishop of CHESTER.

LONDON: Printed for Benj. Took, at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard.
MDCLXXXII.

To the Worshipful ROGER SVDELL, Mayor of PRESTON, And to the ALDERMEN and
COMMON COUNCIL of that Ancient BOROUGH.
GENTLEMEN,
WHen I received the intimation of your desires that I would preach your
Guild-Sermon, I was very ready to comply with your request, that I might
manifest my willingness to serve you, and own that respect which you were
pleased to show me by making it the unanimous Vote of your Common Council. But
when I was importuned by you, and those worthy Persons that were present to
honor your Solemnity, to Publish what I had Preached to you, I was much more
unwilling to yield to it, being averse to appear in Print, and loath to be
exposed to the Censures of a Critical Age. But I have denied my self that I may
not seem to deny you any thing: and in this only am ambitious that I may be
able to gratify so honest and Loyal a Corporation.

The solemnity of a Guild-Merchant is peculiar to your Town, and (I think) no
where else observed in England, at least not with that Formality and Grandeur,
and with that respect and free Entertainment given to those Persons of Quality
and Gentry that from all parts flock to see it, and are wellcomed with the
honorary Freedom of your Corporation.

It seems strange that so ancient and laudable a Custom should be singular: and
if an account of your decent and regular management of it were made public, I
doubt not but it would invite other places to follow your example.

But as this is your peculiar Privilege, so I reckon it your great happiness
that you live like a Fraternity, and are not more careful of your own
Franchises, than conformable to the Laws, such especially as are made to
preserve Society by preventing Dissension and Division: and you may justly
glory in this, that for sundry years last past, no Separate Meeting, or
Seditious Conventicle has disturbed the Peace of your Corporation, or divided
you into Parties and Factions, but you have lived as Brethren in Peace and
Unity, and worshipped God with Order and Uniformity.

I heartily wish it may always be the honor of your Corporation, to be famous
for Agreement and Unity: and have endeavored all I could to endear it in the
ensuing Discourse: which if it may any way contribute to so good an effect, I
have my design, and let God have the Glory. I am sure the meaning was honest,
to persuade to Love and Peace, and promote Union and Agreement, and will hope
it may be serviceable to that end, since you were pleased to think it so. I
know not what entertainment it may find amongst those that read it: but I
cannot wish for a more kind reception than it had from them that heard it: what
ever others judge of it, it challenges a favorable Construction from you whose
Importunity made it Public; and thereby have given me an Opportunity to tell
the World, how much I am,

Your most Humble and Obedient Servant, RICHARD WROE.

A SERMON ON Psalm CXXXIII. 1.
Behold, how good and how pleasant it is, for Brethren to dwell together in
Unity.

UNity is a word that carries joy and pleasantness in its sound; a thing so
Divine and Excellent, that among all the perfections of this inferior World,
there is no more lively Resemblance, or fairer Emblem of Heavens Glory; which
is therefore perfect, because it cannot be confounded by disorder, nor
disturbed by disagreement, but is completed in an eternal Unity. And were
there Art equal to the Subject, to set out its graceful Lineaments and comely
Proportions, it would be found most true of this Divine Grace of Unity, what
has been said of Virtue by some of the Ancients, that she is so lovely in her
self, and so comely to behold, that could she be seen embodyed, all the
Beholders would be ravished with her Beauty, and fall in love with her. But
though I cannot hope to reach its due Character, or make a just transcript of
so fair an Original, yet I shall expose her to your view in the Psalmists
Description of her Beauty, Behold, how good and how pleasant it is, for
Brethren to dwell together in Unity.

A subject never unseasonable; and now very suitable to the times we live in,
and proper to the Occasion we are met about. For when our divisions are so
many, and our distractions so great; when the Peace of the Church is rent by
Schism, and that of the State endangered by Faction and Discontent, what remedy
can be effectual to heal our Distempers, and close up our Wounds, but Agreement
and Unity? and where shall we hope to behold that pleasant prospect sooner than
among them who are already embodyed into an united Society, by mutual
Interests, and particular Obligations? And when can we more properly Discourse
of it, than before a Fraternity, whose very Essence consists in Unity? their
Privileges being the result of mutual Society, and the very Title of
Corporation, implying that Correspondence and Relation which the Members of the
Body have both to the whole, and to one another.

Let me therefore bespeak your attention, both as Brethren, adopted into one
Common Fraternity (which you are here met to represent;) and as fellow Members
of the same Body, Subjects of the same Government, whose Peace and Prosperity I
hope you all wish well to and pray for; whilst I endeavor to recommend to you
the excellencies and advantages of Unity, which is the only solid and lasting
Foundation of our peace and settlement both in Church and State.

For the Design of general Unity must first begin at particular persons and
places: and there is no hopes to see its happy Influence Public and Universal,
till the exercise of it be made exemplary in the lesser Societies of Families,
and the larger Corporations of Towns and Cities.

May you lead the way; and set the pattern of a complete Fraternity, united not
only in Franchises and Privileges, but in mind and affections; and so begin
that blessed Concord which would undoubtedly make us an happy people among our
selves, and a terror to the Nations round about. Were our Towns and Cities
modeled as Jerusalem once was, a City at Unity with it self; we might then
expect to see that thorough Reformation which has been so long talked of, but
is impossible ever to be effected by Schism and Faction. Would they that
pretend to contend so earnestly for the Faith, but as zealously endeavor to
keep the Unity of the Faith in the bond of Peace; would every one of us in his
own Sphere contribute his Prayers and Endeavors hereto, we should then rejoice
to behold the blessed and happy effects of Agreement and Unity, and by joyful
experience find, how good and pleasant it is, for Brethren to dwell together in
Unity.

The Words being an Argument for Unity, it may seem less proper to divide them;
and my design being to set out the excellency and advantages of this Divine
Grace, I shall pursue it in the Characters here given in the Psalmists
Description of it, it is both good and pleasant. Which two, are prevailing
Arguments, and the most forcible perswasives to engage our love and affections
to any thing recommended to us, for these two generally sway men's choice; and
all their pursuits are after what they apprehend as good or pleasant.

But before I press the Motives to Unity, it seems necessary to know what it
is: since it is so rare to be met with, that it seems to be little understood;
though indeed it is generally better unstood than practiced.

Unity, however single in it self, yet is diversified by its Object; and so is
as various, as the respects in which men may be united: but I instance only in
three sorts, both as most comprehensive, and chiefly to be endeavored after.
1. An Unity in Faith and Profession. 2. In Worship and Practice. 3. In Mind and
Affection.

1. Unity in Faith and Profession: which is so named by the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.
13. Which is absolutely necessary to the being of a Christian; who by Faith is
incorporated into the body of Christ; and by Unity of the Faith, is conjoined
to the members of that Body, which are all united under one head. For the Faith
was once delivered, (says St. Jude) and being but once delivered, can be but
One: and as there is no way to be saved but by Faith, so there is but one Faith
to be saved by: and therefore they that hope to receive the end of their Faith,
the salvation of their Souls, must maintain the Unity of the Faith, which is
lost if divided; and is no Faith, if not the same that was once delivered. In
this respect, we make it part of our Christian Profession to believe One
Catholic Church: because all agreeing in the same Faith, though the Members be
many, yet the Church is but one, because the Faith is but one: for there is but
one Lord, and one Faith, Ephesians. 4. 5. One Lord, as the Foundation of all: and one
Faith, whereby we assent to those truths which were received from Christ by the
Apostles, and by them delivered to Believers, who are therefore all Members of
one and the same Church, because they profess one and the same Faith. Now as we
cannot be Christians without Faith, so we cannot be of that One Catholic
Church, without the Unity of it; and therefore (as St. Jude exhorts) ought to
contend earnestly for that Faith once delivered: that (as St. Paul presses it)
we may keep the Unity of it in the bond of Peace. For we may contend earnestly
in this Case without breach of Peace or Charity: since the end of this holy
contention, is an happy Unity, namely of Faith and Profession.

2. There is an Unity in Worship and Practice. Which is consequent on the
former; when they that agree in the same Profession, wear the same Badg and
Livery, and are known by the same signs and symbols of Worship and Communion.
This is that Unity of the Spirit, Ephesians. 4. 3. or Spiritual Unity, both as an
effect of the Spirit, and a sign of Spirituality; when we manifest our Unity in
the Faith by the correspondence of our Practice, whether in the same Rites of
Worship, or the expressions of our Christian Communion: thus we are made one by
Worshipping the same God, in one and the same manner. We become one by Baptism,
the Sacrament of our Initiation, which being (as the Apostle says) but one,
they which are admitted to it, in receiving it are one, and we are made one by
participating of the same Supper of the Lord, who commanded, Eat ye all of
this, and drink ye all of this; and so by communicating of one, become as to
that Communication one; according to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. 7. We
being many, are one Bread, and one Body, for we are all partakers of that one
Bread. So that, when we list our selves under the same Banner, as we do in our
Baptism, and engage in the same Warfare, against the Devil, the World, and the
Flesh, whose Friendship we renounce, and declare enmity against them: when we
all participate of the same Body, whereof we are all Members, and like the
Israelites, all eat the same spiritual meat, and all drink the same spiritual
drink: when with the first Apostolic Church, we continue in the Apostles
Doctrine and Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread, and in Prayer, when we are
unanimous in the Worship of God, and the holy Offices of Religion, then do we
hold fast the Bond of Unity, and maintain the Communion of the faithful.

3. Unity of Mind and Affection. Which is the Unity of the Spirit in the bond
of Peace; that great badg of Christianity: the new Commandment that the Son of
God prescribed to his followers: that dying Legacy which he bequeathed to his
Disciples, that they should love one another: that Unity which the Apostles so
frequently and pathetically press in their Epistles. St. Paul to the
Corinthians, 2 Epist. 13. 11, Be of one mind, and live in Peace: to the
Philippians 2. 2, That ye be likeminded, having the same love, being of one
accord, of one mind. St. Peter to the dispersed Christians, 1 Ep. 3. 8. Finally
be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of another, love as Brethren, be
pitiful, be courteous: This is the peculiar Badg of our Profession, which in
its Nature and Design is a Religion of Love and Unity; and nothing unites more
strictly than kindness and affection. For as in the Body Natural, the Members
however different in shape, and distant in site from one another, yet being all
animated by the same Soul, become one Body; so the collective Body of
Christians however distant in Place, or differing in Language, yet being all of
one mind and affection, make up one Body, the Church of Christ. On which
account we offer up our Prayers to God for the preservation and protection of
the Church Catholic, to testify our Unity with all the Members of that Body,
and express our hearty wishes for their welfare and prosperity: and though the
Gospel has extended our Charity, and made it universal, yet we are to have a
more peculiar regard and love to them that are of the household of Faith.
Christians are all Brethren, and thereby obliged to all the endearments of
Brotherly Kindness and Affection; and when their Unity in the Faith, and
Agreement in Worship, is completed by the Concord of their Mind and
Affections, there needs nothing more to make that perfect harmony which was
once beheld in the Primitive Church, when the whole multitude of Believers were
all of one heart, and of one soul, Acts 4. 32. a joyful prospect to behold, and
lovely to look upon: that which raised envy in their Enemies, yet astonishment
withal, Ecce quam se mutuo diligunt Christiani, behold (said they) how
Christians love one another! but a ravishing sight to them that wish well to
Sion, to see Brethren so dwell together in Unity.

I know there are other kinds of Unity besides these already mentioned; as
Unity of Discipline and Government. Wherein, that the Christian Churches did
once all agree, seems plain from hence, that all sides admit this as a great
Truth; that is the best Form of Government which comes nearest to the Primitive
Platform: so that in the Primitive Church there was an Unity of Discipline, the
same Order of Men, the same Form of Government in all the Churches of Christ.
Happy had it been, had it received no alteration: happy were we, were all our
differences in that respect silenced into an amicable agreement: that as there
is no Church, where there is no Order, no Ministry; so we might all be of one
and the same Church, by enjoying the same Order and Ministry.

There is also an Unity of Opinion; when men not only build upon the same
Foundation, but raise the same superstructure, and agree not only in
fundamentals, but shake hands also in less necessary truths, and have the same
Sentiments and Opinions, as well as Interests, in all things. An Unity that may
be seen in Parties and Factions, especially to promote an Interest, or secure a
Design, but otherwise is very rare to be met with. For as long as there are men
of different Complexions, and divided Interests, there will be different
Conceptions, and disagreeing Opinions among them. Certain it is, that men's
Tempers and Complexions strongly incline them to some Opinions more than
others: and no less evident it is, that the prejudices of Education,
Acquaintance, and Custom, do no less strongly bias men's fancies with kindness
to some Opinions, and a dislike of others: so that till all men are cast in the
same mold, and act upon the same Principles, and drive on the same end and
design, Unity in Opinion is not like to be Universal.

Indeed both this and the other, are rather to be wished than hoped for, for
till men be willing to part with their Opinions (which yet few men are) there
is small hopes of Union that way; and till men become Humble and Obedient to
the Discipline and Government of the Church, no hopes to be united under any
one Form. Besides, that Opinions increase with the age of the World, and are
daily multiplied; and men grow more fond of their own Form of Discipline, and
more averse to all others. So that there is small hopes of a perfect
correspondence in all things, till we come to that happy Union which the
Apostle describes, Ephesians. 4. 13. till we all come in the Unity of the Faith, and
of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ.

But if we cannot hope to see them, yet we may and ought to pursue after them;
which would every one of us in his several capacity sincerely endeavor, we
should enjoy that blessing of the Lord, to behold Truth and Unity met together,
to see Righteousness and Peace kiss each other: and the only method to pursue
those ends a right, is to maintain inviolable that threefold Unity, in Faith,
in Worship, and Affection, which is indispensably necessary to make us One with
that Body whereof Christ is the head. For Unity in the Faith is Catholic
Unity, without which we cannot be Members of the Body of Christ. Unity in
Worship, is Church Unity, without which we cannot hold the Communion of Saints;
and Unity in Mind and Affection, is that Unity of Charity, without which we
violate the Commands and Obligations of the Gospel. But if we keep these
entire, and twist this threefold cord, we make it strong, and not easy to be
broken. And when our Faith is One; and our Worship uniform and agreeable, and
our minds conspire in united affections, we then wear his Livery whose Coat was
seamless, the Emblem of Unity, not rent by Schism, nor torn by Separation; then
like Brethren we dwell together in Unity: and how good and pleasant that is to
behold, is next to be made out.

It Is good and pleasant: excellent properties to rerecommend a thing to our
love and affections: for good is the great Object of our choice: And What more
endearing than that which is good and pleasant too? it is good, that intimates
its necessity and usefulness: it is pleasant, that implies its delight and
comeliness. We Will survey each property distinctly, that we may better behold its
perfection.

1. Its Necessity and Usefulness. Of which we need no other Evidence, than the
strong Enforcements and Obligations which the Gospel lays upon us to Unity, and
the powerful Arguments wherewith the Apostles of Christ press it upon his
Disciples and Followers. I instance only in St. Paul, and observe in this
Argument, 1. The strength of his Reasoning. 2. The persuasiveness of his
Oratory: The one is, that every thing in our Religion is an Argument to Unity,
as you have it, Ephesians. 4. 4, 5. there is one Body, and one Spirit, and one Hope
of our Calling; one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all:
every thing in our Religion is one; and so ought all they to be who are
Proselytes to that Religion. The other is, his powerful Eloquence, and
persuasive Rhetoric, whilst persuading his Philippians to love and amity; and
perhaps in no Author whatsoever, occurs a more pathetick and endearing strain,
than that in which he wooes and beseeches them to Unity and Uniformity, Phil.
2. 1, 2, If there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any
fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfill ye my joy, that ye
be likeminded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind; per
sanctum amicitiae nomen; per chara amoris pignora; per mutuo datam fidem: these
are powerful Charms, but far less prevailing Oratory than the Apostle here used
to press the Philippians to be of one accord, of one mind; and no doubt but the
great earnestness wherewith the Apostle enforced it, proceeded from his sense
of the necessity and advantages of it. For it is good in all those respects
which conduce to the good of Society, or the Interest of Mankind: good for the
public, and for every private man: good for them that rule, and for them that
obey.

1. Good for the Public, since it is not only essential to Society, but the
foundation of all the Privileges we reap thereby; a Society cannot consist
without Union and Concord, but dissolves into a rout, and unruly herd, when
divided and disunited: and there can be neither Order nor Government, where
there is not mutual agreement; as Aristotle observed of Thieves and Robbers,
that they must agree together, and be true to one another, or else must needs
dissolve, and cannot hold together. For there is no other bond of public
Society, but Union, and when that is broke, all things tend to Ruin and
Confusion. But whilst Unity is maintained, Society stands firm, and Agreement
always upholds a Government, and secures those public blessings which we reap
under the Safety and Protection of it. Where there is Unity, there is Peace;
and Peace is the foundation of all those advantages which conduce to our
public welfare. The great imperfection of this State is, that all things are
transient and uncertain, and we are never secure of the happiness we enjoy: and
all the security we can have of those favors which the bounty of Providence
does indulge to us, is by the blessing of Quietness and Peace. It Is this
preserves Liberty and Property; it is this gives ease and plenty, and makes
every man sit down under his own Vine, and under his own figtree; to eat and
drink the fruit of his labors, and taste the sweet of those enjoyments which
God has appointed for his Portion and his Lot.

2. It Is good for every private man; which must needs be consequent upon the
former: since the benefit of public blessings must needs redound to every
particular person, and each man shares in the good of the Community. But
besides the common advantages it affords of Peace and Safety, it largely
contributes to each man's peculiar happiness; chiefly in this respect, that it
tends highly to beget that composedness of mind, and calm temper of soul,
without which we cannot be happy in this life. Whatever ruffles a man's mind,
robs him also of his happiness, and he that is disquieted with Discord and
Dissension, cannot make his Soul enjoy good in his labor (as the wise man
phrases it.) But where there is kindness and correspondence among those he
converses with, there is calmness and serenity; and as nothing disturbs him
from without, so he finds all ease and satisfaction from within; and thereby
reaps that inestimable blessing of content and quiet of mind, which is the
highest pitch of worldly felicity. So great is the excellency of this Virtue;
it has an universal influence on all the happiness we are capable of enjoying
here, and tends highly to the good of every man in what station or capacity
soever God has placed him.

More particularly it tends directly to the ends of Government, which God under
his Providence has made the instrument of the greatest blessings which we are
capable of in this life; and so it is further good.

3. For them that Rule; for where men are at Unity among themselves, how easy
is it to manage the reins of Government? How does it lessen the burden that
lies upon the shoulders of Governors? Certainly whatever men may pretend, they
love not their Prince, nor are Friends to his felicity, who foment differences,
and create Jealousies and Discontents, which add to the cares of a Crown, and
make the affairs of State difficult and uneasy; they cannot be good Subjects
who are always murmuring and querulous, uneasy and unsatisfied, turbulent and
troublesome, on all occasions alarming their Rulers with fears and suspicions,
and still keeping them awake to watch the designs of restless and unquiet
Spirits. But where Subjects are quiet and peaceable, friends both to the State,
and to one another, there a Kingdom prospers, and Rulers reap the fruits of
their Care and Vigilance in ease and plenty. Where People are unanimous, and do
not divide themselves into Parties and Factions, there need no penal Laws to
reduce them to Uniformities: and happy is that Government, where Restraint and
Compulsion is needless: happy are those Governors, whose People are of one
mind; doubtless it is both their Security and their Glory.

4. It Is good for them that Obey. For it leads directly to that end for which
men are entrusted by God with Power and Authority, which is that mentioned by
the Apostle, and made the ground of his Exhortation, That we put up Prayers and
Supplications for Kings, and for all that are in Authority, that under them we
may lead quiet and peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2. 1,
2. But how can that end ever be attained? How can men lead quiet and peaceable
lives, without Unity and Agreement? where Discord and Dissension divide the
Interests and Affections of Subjects from each other, they cannot so well enjoy
the common Influence of their Governors Care and Protection; and however such
peevish and angry men as foment strife and division, may think to wreak their
spleen upon the persons of those that are set over them, yet the mischiefs of
Discord and Disagreement always chieflly redound upon the Subjects head, who
thereby looses those blessings which Peace and Unity would have devolved upon
him: Little do men think how much they contribute to their own Ruin, who
create Jealousies, and increase Differences, to expose the Persons of their
Superiors, or weaken their Power and Authority: since the People must needs be
unhappy, where they cannot lead quiet and peaceable lives; and to be sure they
have always the greatest share in the Evils of Anarchy and Confusion. Let men
talk what they will of their love to Religion and their Country, and delight to
be called Patriots and Popular, yet they are no Friends to either, who are
Enemies to Peace, and least of all to the People, who suffer most in the loss
of it. But where Peace is preserved, and Unity maintained, both Prince and
People equally share in the advantages of them, and rejoice together in the
blessings of Amity and Concord.

You see in all these respects the necessity and usefulness of Unity, how good
it is, and it will appear no less pleasant too. Which is the

2. Its delight and comeliness. For all Beauty arises from Proportion and
Agreement; and there can be nothing lovely where there is not Harmony and
Order: and among all the Perfections of Unity, none more comely and graceful to
behold than that of Brethren, whose very name imports Nearness and Conjunction,
and their Relation implies Union and Familiarity; and wherever we can see it
acted, it affords the most grateful and ravishing prospect: and is pleasant to
behold, 1. To God. 2. To Angels. 3. To Good Men.

1. To God, who made all things in Order and Harmony, and prescribed them
eternal Laws of Correspondence and Agreement; and as every thing that he had
made was very good, when he surveyed all the Works of his hands, Genesis 1. 31. So
they continued to be so, till sin violated the Unity of the Creation, and first
made a Breach and Division among the Creatures. But of all the Creatures, Man
was the most lively Emblem of Unity, being framed for Society, and designed for
mutual love and friendship: and however the All-wise Creator, to show the
wonders of his Wisdom and Power, has made such an infinite variety in the faces
of men, that whereas all consist of the same kind and number of Parts, scarce
two can be found wholly alike in Symmetry and Proportion; yet there is no such
disproportion and dissimilitude in the minds of men, but they are all cast in
the same Mold, adorned with the same Faculties, and endowed with the same
Principles of Reason, that thence they might all learn to agree in the same
common Interests and Designs of Human Life: and whilst man acts like himself,
not only as a reasonable, but a sociable Creature, and delights to herd himself
with those of his own kind, and makes use of the Principles of Nature and
Reason, to the ends of Society, Correspondence, and Friendship, and seeks not
wholly himself, but the common good of Mankind, and studies to promote the
Peace of the World, God delights to behold such agreeable Harmony, he is well
pleased with it: And indeed it resembles that Celestial Society, whose
Inhabitants dwell in the Regions of calmness and silence, that Kingdom of
Unity, where Peace and Order shall dwell together to eternal Ages.

2. To the Angels, who being frequently employed by God in the affairs of
Mankind, those especially that concern the methods of his Providence in the
Government of the World, rejoice in the welfare of Mankind, and delight in the
Peace and Prosperity of the World: and as nothing more grateful to them, than
to be Messengers of Peace, so do they evermore rejoice to see it flourish. How
cheerfully did they publish the glad tidings of Peace and Reconciliation? Luke
2. 14. even a whole Choire of those Celestial Inhabitants joined together in a
Divine Anthem of Praise, to testify their Joy and Exultation at the
Proclamation of peace on earth, and good will toward men; and whenever they
descend from the Mansions of Peace, from the Kingdom of Order and Unity, they
delight to behold the resemblance of it upon Earth; which is highly pleasing to
those kind Spirits, who wish well to the Sons of men, and well understand the
advantages of Peace and Order, of love and kindness among men.

3. To Good Men, who as they mostly endeavor after it, so more especially
delight to see it, and therein find real Content and solid Pleasure; All the
solid delight of this life consists in good reflections: whatever else may
pretend to pleasure, is but vain and imaginary; as the delights of sense, which
are but skin-deep; or the pleasures of the World, which are but shows and
appearances: that only is solid content which arises from the sense and
reflections of true goodness; and that chiefly which conduces to the general
good of Mankind, as Peace and Union most certainly do: so that they are
pleasant to the good man to behold, and he rejoices in that ravishing prospect,
and reaps the greatest content and satisfaction in himself, to see the Beauty
of Peace and Order, of Love and Kindness among men. So did St. Paul to see
Order and Uniformity flourish at Coloss, Col. 2. 5, Joying, and beholding your
Order, and the stedfastness of your Faith in Christ; so do all good men, who
not only pray for Unity in Sion, and Peace in Jerusalem, but delight to see it,
and rejoice together in the Psalmists exaltation, behold, how good and pleasant
it is, etc.

I know not what can more forcibly recommend the loveliness of Unity to you,
than these Considerations of its necessity and Usefulness, of its delight and
comeliness, it is both good and pleasant. If any thing can further endear it, it
would be the description of the mischiefs of Division and Dissension, of
Confusion and Disorder: as contraries best illustrate each other; and sprightly
Colors are best set off when drawn on a dark ground. But I have not time to
draw so large a Scene.

Suffice it to say, that the want of Unity and Agreement among Brethren, is the
ground of all those Evils which obstruct the prosperity of the Church, or
disturb the Peace of the World; and so is neither good, nor pleasant, but
directly opposite to both in all the forenamed Instances. St James said
rightly, 3. 16. Where envying and strife is, there is confusion, and every evil
work: and I am sure that is neither good nor pleasant to behold.

Not good for the Public, whose Peace it hazards, and endangers its Safety.
Not good for private men, whose Interest is so much twisted in the public
welfare, that they cannot be happy without it. Not good for them that rule,
since how skilful Pilots soever sit at the Helm of State, they may be
overwhelmed with the Waves of Sedition, and the violent Hurricanes of Mutiny
and Faction. Not good for them that obey, since it frustrates the ends of
Society, Peace and Security, and leaves every man exposed to the Violence and
Insolency of licentious men. Nor is it any whit more pleasant to behold. Not to
God, who as he is the God of Peace and Order, so he delights to see them
maintained and flourish: but that which creates Confusion and Disorder, not
only disturbs that Harmony and Concord which he established among the
Creatures, but reflects dishonor upon his Providence, and makes men question
the Equity of his proceedings.

Not to Angels; unless it be those malignant Spirits who kept not their first
station, and ever since they were banished Heaven, being cast too low to make
any further disturbance there, have made it their business to oppose the
methods of Gods Providence on Earth; and no doubt rejoice to embroyl the World
with disorder and mischief: but not so the good Angels, who are employed in
messages for the good of Mankind, and rejoice in the Peace and Order of the
World. Not to good men; who grieve at the disorders and miscarriages of
affairs, and like David, fret their righteous souls even with dwelling among
them that are enemies unto peace.

There are several respects more in which I might expose the Evils that are
consequent upon the want of Peace and Unity; the miseries that attend Division
and Dissension: and that dismal Scene would add grace and luster to this
prospect of Unity which is so pleasant to behold. But it needs no foil to set
its Beauty: and therefore I shall content my self with the Description already
given of it in the Characters of Good and Pleasant, which are forcible
attractives of our Love and Choice.

But that I may further recommend it to you, I shall strengthen my Argument
from the Seasonableness of it, that it ought now more especially to be
embraced: chiefly from these two Considerations.

1. That our Enemies are United. There have always been such as hate Sion: the
seed of the Serpent has hatched a Generation of Vipers, that has always
malign'd goodness, and persecuted Gods Church and People: and they are Brethren
in Iniquity, Confederated together, and jointly carry on their Hatred and
Enmity. I need not tell you who are the Enemies of our Sion; nor point at them
whom every man may behold, and see them at once combined against us, and
industrious to ruin us. Is not the Church endangered by Schism, and the State
by Factions and Combinations? Are not the Enemies of our Peace as busy as ever
to embroil us? And the same Engines employed to undermine our Foundations? By
the Papists we are still condemned for Heretics and Schismatics: and how are
they combined by Oaths and Promises, by Vows and Obligations, to extirpate
Heresy? and if we look that way, may we not see the Edomites and the
Ishmaelites, the Moabites and Hagarens, Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek, the
Philistines and them of Tire, all gnashing their teeth at us, and gaping to
devour us?

Neither does all our danger blow from that Quarter. For have we not Traitors
within our own Walls that are no less sedulous to betray us, and as unanimous
in their Hatred and Opposition to us? Have not Dissenters of all sorts united
against us, who were never at one either among themselves, or with any Church
of Christ? Have not Arts been used to get them owned for Protestants, who were
never yet Christians, rather than want a Party to carry on the Designs of
Schism and Faction? Are not they who formerly entered into a Solemn League and
Covenant against our established Church, Projecting a new, but more wicked and
dangerous Association? And is it not then high time for them to unite, who wish
well to the Government both of Church and State? Certainly we may learn Wisdom
from our Enemies; that since they are so diligent to Confederate together for
our ruin, we may frustrate their Attempts by the same Methods of Unity and
Agreement. Especially when we consider,

2. That there is no other apparent means of safety. Our Savior said, A
Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand. When our Divisions are so many,
what can heal our Breaches but Unity? It Is well known how fatal the Divisions
of Christians have been to the Peace of Christendom. The Turk had never
enlarged his Territories so far, had not the Dissensions of those that should
have opposed him made way for him. Nor can any thing so soon put a stop to his
growing Greatness, as the Peace and Union of Christian Princes, and nothing has
more endangered the Protestant Religion since the happy Reformation of it, than
the Divisions of Protestants among themselves. The Pope and his Conclave know
it too well; and fear nothing so much as the Union of Protestants; nor envy any
reformed Church so much as ours, and therefore use all their Arts and
Emissaries to embroyl us, and divide us into Factions and Parties; thereby at
once weakening our Interest, and strengthening their own. It Is strange indeed
that men of sense and reason should not discern the Jesuit in the Dissenters
Disguise, when he has so long frequented, and so frequently Preached in most
separate Meetings. It Is more strange that they that pretend so much Zeal
against Popery, should oppose that Church. which is the only regular Bulwark
and Defense against it. It Is most of all strange that the most active true
Protestants (as they call themselves) should be the Jesuits chiefest Engine,
and best Friends to Rome. Yet plain it is, that men may go to Rome by Geneva;
and many that seem to Travel to the latter, are posting directly to the former.
It Is to be feared it is no unfrequented path, and is found the securest way to
pass unsuspected. He knows little that sees not how like to each other they are
both in Principles and Practice; that the Dissenter sharpens his Weapons at the
forge of the Romish Philistines; and that the Covenanter and Associator act but
what the Jesuit Teaches: And however some men measure their Zeal to the
Reformed Religion by their Opposition to that of Rome, and ground all their
Cavils against our established Church on pretended fears and suspicions, yet I
think no wise man needs to doubt, but to widen our breaches is the readiest way
to let in Popery. God at last open their eyes, that they may see their danger,
and discover their mistake! and in his mercy turn their hearts (as David once
bowed the hearts of the men of Judah) as one man, 2 Samuel 19. 14. That they may
be faithful in their Allegiance to the King, and hearty in the Religion of our
Church; and then we need not fear the craft of the Conclave, nor the Designs of
the Consistory. Were all men but truly sensible of the advantages of Unity,
they would endeavor after it. Were we so united, we should be happy.

And that we may every one in our several Capacities contribute our hearty
endeavors hereto, I shall close up the Exhortation with a twofold Direction of
the Apostle, both suitable to our Meeting, both highly conducing to the ends of
Union and Peace.

1. The first is his advice to the Thessalonians, 1 Ep. 4. 11, Study to be
quiet, and to do your own business. Would men do their own business, they would
find work enough at home: would they study to be quiet, they would not busy
themselves in other men's matters. And never more need of this advice than in
this Pragmatical Age, wherein men study to be unquiet, and make it their
Employment to meddle in other men's Concerns. Almost every man sets up for a
Politician, or Reformer of Religion; and shall pretend to dictate to his
Superiors, how to manage affairs of State, and compose differences in the
Church. Every Club of idle and talkative Persons, are become as Censorious and
Dogmatical, as if they were as wise as a Council Table, and as Judicious in
Religion as a Convocation. God knows it is the fault of the Age; and God grant
it prove not fatal to our Peace and Happiness. For alas! we have already
almost talked the State into Confusion, and Religion into Atheism, or
Indifferency, which is little better. The best on it is, such Busybodies are
usually caught in their own snares; and it has often been found dangerous to
intrude into another man's Office or Employment. Uzzah would needs put forth his
hand to hold the Ark, and was struck dead, because he meddled with that which
was none of his business, 2 Samuel 6. 6, 7. Uzziah invaded the Priests Office,
and would burn Incense, but while the Censer was in his hand, his sin was writ
on his forehead, he was struck with a Leprosy, and cut off from the House of
the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 26. 16. Dathan and Abiram were Associating against Moses and
Aaron, and the Earth swallowed them up. Sheba blew a Trumpet of Sedition, and
soon after his head was thrown over the wall. Absalom was too busy with the
Kings affairs, and would needs sit in the Tribunal, but was hanged in the Oak
as a fitter place for him; and we may easily call to mind some very lately
among our selves, that have talked themselves into an Halter, and found how
fatal it is to be too traitorously saucy and meddling. Better far for us to do
our own business with quietness, and leave other men to do theirs: and in so
doing we shall find no difficulty from our selves, nor discouragement from
others. Let us resolve to be faithful to our own business, and leave others to
the duties of their Station, and content our selves with the choice Providence
has made for us, and not peevishly think to be our own Carvers. Every Member
(says the Apostle) Romans 12. 4, has not the same Office. Having therefore
different Callings, Gifts, and Places, let every man wait upon, and move in his
own, and therein study to be quiet, and do his own business. Let the Lawyer
Plead; and the Merchant Trade: let Rulers make Laws, and their Subjects keep
them: let the King Govern, and the People Obey him: let the Minister Preach and
Pray; and let the People say, Amen. And if we thus do our own business, we
shall (like Brethren) dwell together in Unity.

But if there be amongst you Tatlers and Busiebodies, Medlers in State, or
Bigots in Religion, that value not the Apostles excellent advice, I leave with
you another Direction of his proper for them, which is,

2. The Caution he gives to the Romans, 16. 17. Mark them which cause Divisions
and Offenses, and avoid them; beware of their Insinuations, and refrain their
Converse and Familiarity, and set a mark upon them. I mean not a mark of
private Grudg and Revenge, but of turbulent restless Spirits, whose ill
suggestions are not to be credited, whose Dissensions are to be avoided; a mark
of Shame and Disgrace, that if their own impudence will not let them blush,
others may be ashamed of their folly; a mark of Infamy and Reproach, that we
may shun their Company; since an Enemy to Peace is no man's friend, and every
Author of Mischief and Disturbance, is to be looked upon as a common Pest, and
public Nuisance. Lastly, a mark of Distinction, which the Laws set on them;
and were they duly put in Execution, would be the surest Antidote against the
Poison of their envenomed Tongues, the malice of their seditious whispers; and
let none think it Cruelty or Severity to have such men made exemplary, as
slander the Government, and calumniate their Governors, since they are men
that obey more for Wrath, than for Conscience sake: whom nothing can restrain
but fear of the Penalty; and without such a restraint, no Government can be
safe or quiet: and let the Magistrate know that in this respect he bears not
the sword in vain; but that it ought chiefly to be drawn against such offenders
as foment Dissentions, and disturb public Peace and Tranquillity.

I hope there is no great need in this Place to press the Magistrate to his
Duty in this respect; nor any great Occasion for it. I am confident there would
be far less need of it, were but these two directions of the Apostle observed,
were such as cause Divisions, avoided, and would we all study to be quiet, and
do our own business. I know nothing more effectual to that Unity which I have
all along recommended; nor any means more certain to make us an happy People;
happy are you if you know and value your own happiness: which doubtless you
will, if all that has been said to endear Unity and Agreement, has had its due
effect upon all that hear me. It has been a scandal thrown on several
Corporations, that they have been Nurseries of Schism and Faction. May it never
be the complaint of yours: but rather may your Amity and Friendship be as
peculiar and remarkable as your Guild; and your Unity be Published, wherever
that is Proclaimed, and may it not only like your Franchises be renewed once in
twenty years, but continued all that Time, and maintained inviolable, that
successive Generations may still behold amongst you the same grateful prospect
of Brotherly Love and Kindness, and twenty years hence rejoice to behold in
your Example how good and pleasant it is for Brethren to dwell together in
Unity.

Now to the God of Unity, Peace, and Order, to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
Three Persons, and One God, be all Honor, Glory, and Praise, now and for
evermore. Amen.
FINIS.

