AN ACCOUNT OF HIS EXCELLENCE Roger Earl of Castlemaine's Embassy, From His
Sacred Majesty JAMES the IId. King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
etc. To His Holiness INNOCENT XI.

Published formerly in the Italian Tongue, By Mr. MICHAEL WRIGHT, Chief Steward
of His Excellences House at Rome. And now made English, With several
Amendments, and Additons.

Licensed Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Snowden for the Author. 1688.

Gio Batt^a Lenardi Romo Inu. et delin. Arnoldo Van Westerhout fiamo. scul^

MARIA D. G. Anglioe Scotioe Francioe et Hibernioe REGINA

R. White sculp. Land:



To the QUEEN.
Gio Batt^a Lenardi Inu-et delin. Arnold. Van Westerhout sc



FEW Months are not yet past, from my presenting Your Majesty an Account of
this Great Embassy, in the Italian Tongue; since which, the importunity of
several honorable Persons, for the having it in English, so far prevailed,
that there seemed a kind of necessity, of complying with their desires.

And before whose Feet could it be more justly laid, than Your Majesty's? and
that in a double respect: The one, in that the former, first appeared in the
World, under the Patronage, of Her most Serene Highness, The Late Duchess of
Modena, your most Illustrious Mother; The other, in that you are not only Heir
of Her Virtues, but so Exquisite a Judge in both Languages.

Nor has it yet been ventured on as a Translation, but a new Original, with
several Alterations, and Additions to the former (which the streightness of
Time would not then permit) and in that respect also, implores Your Gracious
Acceptance.

But I detain Your Majesty too long: Let not The Queen be angry, and I Will speak
this once: Live Royal Madam, The Great Example of Your Sex! Live, The Joy of
England, and Eternal Glory of the House of Este! And since nothing less can add
to it, make it yet more Glorious, in a Prince of Wales.

Your Sacred Majestys Most Obedient, Devoted, Loyal Subject, and Humble
Servant, MICHAEL WRIGHT.

AN ACCOUNT OF HIS EXCELLENCE THE EARL OF Castlemaine's Embassy, To His
Holiness, INNOCENT XIth. etc.
IT having still been the Custom of all the Great Princes, in Communion with
the Church of Rome (on their first accession to the Throne) to send an
Ambassador to that Court, His Majesty thought it became Him also to do the
like; And in pursuance thereof, among the number of able persons, which (to the
glory of the English Nation) this Court never wanted, none (with all due
respect to the rest) stood fairer in His Majestys eye, for that Negotiation,
than The Right Honorable, Roger Earl of Castlemaine, A Nobleman of an Ancient
Family, Polite Learning, ready parts, and who, by a well-digested Travel, and
Experience in Foreign Courts, had rendered himself qualified, for the greatest
Trust.

On him therefore, as a person Parem Negotiis, His Majesty conferred the
Honor, of His Ambassador Extraordinary to His Holiness Innocent the XIth, now
Pope of Rome: A Prince, whose open hand, to the Late Defense of Christendom,
may (to pass his other Virtues) put it out of question, whether He received
more Honor from The Chair, than He has added to it.

In short, all preliminary matters being adjusted, and his Commission, and
Credentials received, His Excellence The Lord Ambassador, made ready for his
Journey; and having formed his English Retinue, of seven Gentlemen, six Pages,
three Valets de Chamber, and such other menial servants, and equipage, as could
be then got ready, most of them were shipped off, about six weeks before him, for
Leghorne, with Orders to wait him there; himself having resolved, to make his
Journey through France: And that, that, might be the easier, His Excellence
took to him as his companions, The Honorable Thomas Arundel Esquire Grandson to
the Lord Arundel of Warder, now Lord Privy Seal; Henry Tichburne Esquire; eldest
Son of Sir Henry Tichburne, Lievt. of the Ordnance; The Honorable Thomas
Ratcliffe Esquire; Son of the Lord Ratcliffe; Barth. Walmesley, of Dunkan-Hall, in
the County of Lancaster Esquire; And Tho. Eggleston, of Eggleston, in the same
County Esquire; (which three last, went before, and met his Lordship at Paris) And
having taken leave of their Majestys, there remained nothing, but to set
forward on his Journey.

On the 5th. of Feb. 1685. S. V. His Excellence took water for Greenwich,
accompanied with several Noble Personages, that brought him so far on his way;
where, after a hearty farewell, and the repeated Wishes, of a good Voyage, and
as safe a Return, he embarked on board the Heneretta Maria Yacht, Capt. Fesby
Commander, who lay there for him, and received him, with the usual ceremony, of
fiering Guns, as in like cases.

His Excellence designing to be Incognito all the way, had none now with him,
but Mr. Arundel, Mr. Tichburne (before mentioned) Mr. Lidcott (since that time,
Sir John Lidcott) Secretary to the Embassy; Mr. Michael Wright, Steward of his
household; Mr. Stephen Piper, Gentleman of his Horse; Signior Francisco, his
Italian Secretary; Mr. Nicholas Furnys, Sewer; two Pages, two of his Chamber;
and some half a dozen others of his Family, for his ordinary service on the
Road; and with these, the Yacht put off that Evening, for Diepe; his Lordships
Plate, Furniture, Liverys, and other the Impedimenta of so long a Journey,
being left behind, with order to take the opportunity of the first wind, and
expect further orders, at Civita Vecchia, the Port of Rome.

In two days and a half his Excellence arrived at Diepe, where, notwithstanding
his resolution, and endeavors of having past the whole Journey, in as much
privacy, as the occasion would bear, he received the Complements, of the
Governor, and City, in a manner urging him, that his Excellence would be
pleased to permit himself, and the Magistrates of that City, to pay him some
public respect; which, his Lordship would by no means hearken to, but sent two
of his Gentlemen to acknowledge, the courtesy, and represent to them, the
resolution before mentioned.

From Diepe, his Excellence, (with the Gentleman of his Horse, a Page, and a
Valet de Chamber) took Post for Roan; and thence, to Paris, where the rest of
his Servants soon after arrived: And in the eleven days his Lordship stayed
there, with the same resolutions, of being Incognito, it was not yet possible,
to avoid the numerous caresses that were daily made him; for (besides the
Extraordinary Envoy of England, and the rest of our Nation (who according to
their duty, almost hourly attended him) The most Eminent Ranutzzi, Apostolic
Nuntio to that Crown; the Marshal d'Humiers, and other considerable Persons of
the French Court, were not wanting, in their personal Visits: And here it was,
that the most Reverend Monsignior Cenci, Vice-Legat in Avignion, first applied
to his Excellence, that he would be pleased to take that City in his way, and
to accept of such entertainment there, as might at least testify the
satisfaction they received, in beholding once more, an English Ambassador in
that City: Nor did the Vice-Legat think this Invitation so sufficient, but that
he seconded it at Lions, and in a manner pressed it, beyond the power* of a
refusal: Whereupon the Lord Ambassador dispatched Mr. Wright, to Avignion, to
complement his Lordship in his name, and withal to signify to him, that his
Excellence accepted his kindness, provided it did not prejudice his design, of
passing privately, even to Rome.

About twenty miles short of Avignion, Mr. Wright was met by the Vice-Legat's
Secretary, where he not only waited his Excellence's coming, but had laid all
cross Roads, with a suitable attendance, lest possibly, by design, or accident,
his Excellence might have past him, some other way: In short, the Secretary
having understood the occasion of Mr. Wright's coming, gave him a Letter to his
Lord, which, with his Excellence's commands, he presented the Vice-Legat;
further assuring him, that the Lord Ambassador would be with his Lordship,
within a day, or two, after him.

Whereupon, the Vice-Legat ordered the whole Garrison to be in Arms, and that
all the Cannon, should be ready for fiering, upon his Excellence's entry; And
the next afternoon went out, toward the Roan, himself, with a noble and
splendid Equipage: The Horse with their Banner displayed, led the way, then
followed his Lordship the Vice-Legat's Coach, in which, with himself, were the
Consuls, some chief Magistrates, and Mr. Wright, surrounded by a Guard of
Swizts, and a numerous train of Footmen, in rich Liveries: Then followed five
other of his Lordships Coaches, and after them, about sixty others, with the
Nobility, and Principal Persons of the City in them, and a suitable number of
Laquies, and other attendance, in which order, they marched to the River side,
where, for near three hours, they expected his Excellence's arrival; but
nothing appearing that evening, they returned; and the next day, marched out as
before, when at last, about Sunset, they might see a covered Barge, wherein
his Excellence was: On this, the Vice-Legat, and his company lighted, and
approacht his Barge; nor had his Lordship sooner set his foot on shore, than he
made up to the Vice-Legat, and after mutual embraces (and the Lord Ambassadors
Complement, to the Nobility, and a full shout of the people) his Excellence
went into the first Coach, with the Vice-Legat, and the Consuls, and then all
marched back, through a multitude of Torches to the City.

Upon the first entry, the Drums, Trumpets, and Joynt-voices of the people,
spoke his Excellence's welcome; which was answered, by the Cannon, from the
Walls, and from thence (through a Guard of Soldiers on either hand, the
Balconys and Windows, so stuck with lights, that one would have thought the
City, some new Constellation) they came to the Pope's Palace; where, the
Vice-Legat having conducted his Lordship, to the richest, and noblest
apartment, left him a while, with those Noble Persons, that had waited on him
to the City; and having put on his Prelatical habit, came back again, to make
his more solemn Visit, which his Excellence (after the Vice-Legat's departure)
accompanied with the same Nobility, returned him again, in his own appartment.

During this time, the Vice-Legat had invited those English Cavaliers (that
accompanied the Ambassador) with two chief Military Officers, and ten Principal
Officers of the City, to bear his Excellence company, at Supper, which was no
less sumptuous, than magnificent: It consisted of four services, each, of nine
grand Dishes, and fourteen Inter-messes, and to render it yet greater, it
wanted not the pride of the Italian Music.

About the middle of Supper, his Excellence began A health to His Holiness, at
which, He, and all the company stood bare-headed, and six great Guns were
fire'd; which in all respects, was as punctually observed, when the Vice-Legat
returned it, in A health to our Sovereign, The King of Great Britain; Nor is it
to be forgotten, that during this time of Supper, his Excellence's Gentlemen,
were nobly treated, in another Appartment.

The day following, being the Feast of the Annuntiation, the Vice-Legat, and
the before mentioned Noble Persons, conducted his Excellence, to High Mass, in
the Jesuits Church of that City; where, after a most solemn, vocal, and
instrumental Music, the young Nobility, Scholars of the College, presented
the Lord Ambassador, with Devises, Epigrams, and other compositions, more
immediately relating to His Majesty, and His Dominions; such few of which, as
they came to hand, were thought fit to be inserted, and that, the rather,
because the English Nation (however discontinu'd, this last Century) had once,
a more than ordinary Genius, and aptness, that way; as he that shall turn
Hall's Henry the 8th. Sir Philip Sidney, or Cambden's Remains, may find much of
this kind, and (perhaps) not unworthy his time. And they, were such as these.

A Stock of Bees, flying to an empty Hive, the King-Bee in their Head. The word
(unde aberraverant) Whence they had fled astray. Intimating thereby, the
general defection of His Majestys Kingdoms, and voluntary return, to their
former obedience.

A Kite, hovering in the Air, and Chickens, running under the Hen. The word (
-- Dispersos congregat --) It gathers 'em again. Denoting thereby, The good
effects of His Majestys Indulgence, when all His Subjects, how divided soever
among themselves, run under His wing for shelter, against the Tyranny of those
Penal Laws, which, have either dispersed them into other Countries, or made them
uneasy at home.

The morning Star. The word ( -- Diei praevius almae) -- Forerunner of the Day.
Showing thereby, That the Day is not far behind; And that His Majestys Subjects
(since the Dayspring from on High, had visited them) want not a Light, to
guide their feet, into the way of peace.

A Ship half foundring in the Sea, The Polar-Star in the Clouds: The word (Dum
videam satis est --) it is yet enough I see 't -- signifying thereby, that
England (which may be well expressed by a Ship) can never miscarry, whilst she
sees her great Monarch, or Cynosure, to direct her.

These, and the like, not without particular Elogies, to the Lord Ambassador,
were the entertainment of the morning; and that over, the whole company
returned to the Palace, where, a Dinner, even superior to the Supper, waited
them, and that, so beautifully garnisht, with intermixed Figures, relating to
the Triumphs of England, that the like, had been scarce there before, or to be
seen any where again, if his Excellence the Lord Ambassador, had made no
entertainment at Rome.

And that it might not be said of Avignion, as once of Rome, That they were
(Populus virorum, deerant faeminae) A people of men, without women, It was
resolved among the noble Ladys of the City, to make the Complement entire, by
bearing a part in the Symphony; And to that purpose, they met in the house of
Signior de Blewac, a principal Gentleman of that City, and therein too, so
gloriously attired, as they had designed a contest, between Art, and Nature;
for could they have wanted Luster in themselves, the splendour of their Jewels,
spoke them no less, than clad in Starlight.

In short, they made his Excellence, and the Persons of Honor with him, an
invitation to an evening divertisement of Cards, which his Lordship accepted;
and after an hour or two's mirth, took leave, and retired to the Palace, where
he was honored with a splendid Banquet, and the morning following, with
another, in regard his Excellence had refused, the Vice-Legat's obliging
violences, of having detained him longer; but nothing prevailing, he was
attended out of the City, with the same solemnity he first entered it; nor could
the Vice-Legat be persuaded to look back, till he had conducted his Excellence
six miles on his way; where at last, the Horse being drawn up, the Coaches
stopped, and all the train allighting, they made a circle about his Excellence,
and the Vice-Legat; when after mutual embraces, and the Pathetick
acknowledgments, of the obligations received, his Excellence mounted the
Vice-Legat's first Coach, and set forward to Cavaillon.

Nor was his Lordship sooner arrived there, than the Magistrates honored him
with a solemn Visit, Speech, and Banquet; so difficult it was to pass any way,
but the report of his coming, flew before him.

From Cavaillon his Excellence came by Litter to St. Massimine; thence to
Canes, and thence, to Nizza, where he took boat for Genoa; But passing by
Monaco, the Master of the Felucca, was obliged to come on shore, and so
discovered whom he had aboard; on which, he was stopped, till advice was sent to
the Prince, who immediately dispatched his Secretary, and a Knight of Malta, to
invite his Excellence to his Castle; which, his Lordship (with due sense of the
obligation) refusing, sent Mr. Lidcott and Mr. Wright, to complement his
Highness, with his acknowledgments of the honor intended him, and to further
signify, the Lord Ambassadors resolutions, of passing Incognito.

However, the Prince would take no denial, but came in person to the water
side, and having at last prevailed, conducted his Excellence to his Palace, or
Castle, situated on an impregnable Rock, (Drums, and Trumpets sounding, and
great Guns fireing) where the magnificence of of that night, and the next
morning, came short in nothing, of Him that made it: Nor would his Highness yet
suffer his Lordship to depart, till Himself, his Court, and Officers, had
brought him to the Felucca; the Guns not giving over, till the Boat was out of
sight.

From Monaco, the Lord Ambassador past St. Remo, Nola, and Savona, without much
trouble; and at last arrived at Genoa, where the most serene Republic sent
three of their Gentlemen, of the first quality (Spinola, Grimaldo, and Durazzo)
to complement his Excellence, and (notwithstanding his privacy) to show him the
Town: They proffered him also a Gally to Civita Veccia; which last civility,
being (with all respect) refused, his Lordship from Genoa, came to Ligorne,
where His Eminence, Cardinal Howard of Norfolk, had already sent, the Gentleman
of his Horse, to complement his Excellence in his name, and wait on him to the
End of his Journey: Capt. Nangle also (on the part of the Grand Duke) and Mr.
Ball (with the English Factory) stood ready to receive him at his landing, and
to conduct him (as they did) to the house, which his Highness had ordered for
Him; There his Lordship found not only all necessary Provisions, but a splendid
Regal, of very curious Wines and Sweetmeats; for which Generosity (so natural
to that Great Prince) his Excellence sent him next day (by the Secretary of the
Embassy) his Acknowledgment and Thanks to Ambrogiana (about thirty miles off)
and then took Post for Rome; lying at Montefiascone, in hopes of having passed
Viterbo early, and undiscovered: But he could not outdo the Diligence of
Monsignior Vincentini the Governor, who met him some miles out of Town, and
bringing him to the Palace, gave him a very great and noble Collation.

Three Posts distant from Rome, his Excellence was met, by a Coach and six
Horses, from his Eminence, the Cardinal of Norfolk; the next Post, by another
from her Highness the Duchess of Modena (Mother to Her Majesty) in which, was
the Count Codebo her Secretary; and one other, from the Resident of Portugal,
with some of his Gentlemen in it; as also with one of my Lord Embassador's own
Coaches, made for him, against his arrival.

A little on this side Ponte Molle (being a mile and half short of Rome) was
the Lord Cardinal himself, with Signior Paolo Falconieri, (a Florentin
Gentleman, that had been in England with the Duke) and afterward (nor
undeservedly) in high esteem with his Excellence: Here, after the usual
complements and ceremonies were ended, the Lord Ambassador went into the
Cardinal's Coach, and so came together, to his Eminence's Palace in Rome, upon
Easter Eve, S. N. about an hour after Sunset; where, Himself, and Family, were
magnificently treated, for about ten days, till Prince Pamphilio's Palace, in
the Piazza Navona, could be put in order, for his Excellence's service.

His Excellence was no sooner thus arrived, but the Grandees began their
Complements of Congratulation, by their Secretaries, which lasted for three
days, and then my Lord returned them in like manner, his thanks; it not being
the Custom of Rome, for Persons of that Rank, to receive, or give Personal
Visits, except privately and underhand, till they have publicly waited on His
Holiness.

About the Wednesday after, his Excellence (being now a little reposed) sent to
the Pope for a private Audience, which was granted him, the following week; and
then taking four of his own ordinary Coaches, and some few Domestics, he was
in the evening conducted by Cardinal Howard to the Vatican Palace, and so by
the back-stairs to His Holiness; who (as it may be easily supposed) received
him with particular satisfaction, and to the great Joy also of all the People,
who in no small numbers got together; though usually such Audiences are performed
without any noise or stir: And when his Excellence was returned home, he found
the Pope's Master of the household, with several of his underofficers there
attending, who had brought the presents of welcome, viz. All sorts of Fowl,
Wines, Sweetmeats, and other Delicacies of that nature.

These preliminaries being now settled, and past, his Excellence fell upon the
most troublesome part of his Embassy; I mean, his Equipage, and preparations
for his public Entry: Troublesome I may call it, since Ambassadors in this
Court, have exceeded in splendour and magnificence, all the world besides; and
whether his Lordship kept not up the Port and Dignity of his great Master, the
Reader is to judge by what follows.

This Equipage (besides what was alreaready prepared) consisted in stupendous
Coaches, most rich Liveries, and store of Horses, of great value; and because
the Brocard, Imbroidery, gold Lace, Fringe, Scarlet, etc. were all to be
bespoken, 'twas easily foreseen, that the said Entry could not be at soonest,
before Michaelmas; In the mean time, though the Ambassador could not visit, and
be visited, with the same Pomp, as when public, yet his ordinary Expense was
the same; for he weekly attended the Pope, had the same numerous Family, and
Retinue, kept the same Table for his Friends and Acquaintance, and had about
forty Horses, still in his Stable.

Artizans in all places have the same methods, and perform their promises
alike; for how pressing soever his Excellency's Officers were, they could not
yet be ready, till the end of October; and just when every thing was thought
finished, the Pope fell so ill of the Gout, and his usual Defluxions, that two
months past, without his giving Audience to any stranger, no, not to the Duke
of Modena himself, who arriving at Rome, in November, could not receive his
Benediction, till the beginning of the following January; during which time,
his Excellence had the great Honor and satisfaction, of often seeing a Prince,
so every way accomplished, and one too, that was infinitely kind, and obliging
to him.

His Holiness being now recovered, and the eighth of January appointed for this
great Solemnity, it will not be perchance ungrateful to the Reader (since the
Preparations and Pomp of it consisted in the Pope's, and King's Arms, in the
Coaches, Liveries and Attendance) if before I further proceed, I describe first
in words the Particulars, and then show the Draught, and Pictures of them.

The Wood-work on which the respective Arms were painted, and placed, were 24
foot high, and 16 broad; the edges of it being carved, or cut out, according to
the Parts of the Figures that reached thitherward; The Boards were not only
brac't, and kept together, with several great Beams, but had above 800 weight
of Iron about them, so that being lifted up with great labor and pains, to the
first story, they had the breadth of the Palace-Gate between them; and beneath,
just over the Gate, stood the Arms of his Excellence in a Round, about two
yards diameter, and encompassed with great Branches of carved Palms, painted
proper.

The Arms of His Holiness were as follows.
They were painted by a diligent hand, not in black and white, but in their
proper Colors, those places only excepted, which were covered, and shadowed
with Gold; not transgressing however, the order of the design; and placed on an
elevated piece of Architecture, on each side whereof, stood an Angel supporting
the gilded compartment, with interwoven Palms, and Laurels, the top of which
was crowned, with A Triple Crown, the Pontificial Keys, and Cordons.

Under the Arms, as in a large Plain, terminating in a Pedestal, were diverse
Figures, double the life; the first of which, represented the Church, in a
grave majestic female Figure, clothed in white, girt about her; A transparent
Veil, and a Glory round her Head; her feet naked, with Sandals; her upper
Garment, a rich Mantle, embroidered with Gold; in her right hand (leaningupon
an Antique Altar, in which, in Basso Rilievo, was expressed, the Manna of old,
falling upon the Children of Israel) she held a Patriarchal Staff, and extended
the other, to receive Britannia.

Upon the Altar, lay the Sacred Scripture, on a Cushion of Crimson Velvet; and
beside it, the figure of a Church, by which stood, a venerable, aged personage,
with a flaming Lamp, in his hand erected, representing piety; And under the
Churches feet, A Mufti, in a posture of rage, and despair; the Alcoran in his
hand, ruffled, and torn; and by him, a vanquished Bassa, his Ensigns, of Bows,
Arrows, Scimiters, Horsetail, etc. all reverst.

Britannia, was a female figure, A mural (or embattled) Crown, on her head, and
A (Civick Garland, or) Wreath of Oak-leaves, about her temples; clothed in a
Royal Robe, lined with Ermins; her Scepter, and Globe, on which, was Britannia,
in Capital Letters, lying on a purple Cushion by her; her self on the left
knee, making an obeisance to the Church, and was attended, by prudence, and
valor.

Prudence, another female figure, had her head, and breast, adorned with Pearl,
and in her Left hand, a staff, with a Serpent twined about it.

Valor, was represented by Hercules, in a Lyon's Skin; his Club, on his
Shoulder, and trampling on envy, who with her Snakes about her, and one twisted
on her right arm, lay raving at Britannia.

Underneath that, an Oval of Gold, supported by two Sphinxes, and adorned with
Laurels, wherein was represented the River Tyber, by an old man, lying at
length, and leaning on an Urne, or Vase of water; A Wreath of Reeds on his
head; in his left hand, an Oar, in his right, A Cornucopia: On his right side,
lay a Wolf, suckling two Children (the Symbol of Rome) on his left, A
perspective of the Bridge of St. Angelo; and under all, in Golden Capital
Letters, the word, Tybris. As may be seen in the first printed Figure.

(...) Michael Camers Pingebat. Arnoldus V. Westerhout fia^. sc.



The Kings Arms.
THey, with the Garter, Supporters, etc. were raised, on another kind of
Architecture, adorned, with Roses, and Thistles

Under them, was Britannia, crowned, and Wreathed, as before; but here,
sitting, in a full Majesty: In her right hand, A Scepter, and A Globe
(inscribed Britannia) in the other; Her Vest, of a Gold Color richly
embroidered at the bottom; Her Mantle, as before; Sandals on her feet, with
Ligaments, to the mid-leg, after the old Roman manner; and trampling an armed
Figure, that lay facing Her, and struggling to get up against Her: In his right
hand, was a drawn Sword, and on his Helmet, a plume of Orange-tauny Feathers;
The first Colors at Edgehill, against King Charles the First.

On her left hand, in the middle, stood Hercules, dressed as before, but now,
leaning on his Club, and in his left hand, an Azure Tablet, with the Royal
Motto (DIEU ET MON DROIT) in large Capitals of Gold, on it; His left foot,
stood firm on the Base, and his right, depressed a grovelling Figure, holding in
the one hand, a Protestant-Flail, and in the other, a Scroul, with the word
Rebellio, in like Letters of Gold.

On the other side of Hercules, was the Figure of St. George (the tutelar Saint
of England) A rich Helmet, and plume of red Feathers, on his head; His Mantle,
and Cross on his Breast, of the same Color; A Sword by his side; The rest of
his habit, after the old Roman: He stood, trampling an Hydra, which, instead of
Serpentine, had humane heads; her Wings displayed, as endeavoring to get up
again, whilst he, fastens his Lance in one of them, more remarkable than the
rest.

Under that, in a like Oval of Gold, supported, and adorned, as the former, was
represented the River Thames, by the Figure of an old man extended, with a like
Wreath on his head, leaning also, on a Vase of water; on his left arm, an Oar;
and on his right, A Cornucopia, with many Ships, and Boats, in perspective: And
beneath all, in like Letters of Gold, the word, Tamesis; as in the Second
Figure.

I Have done with the front, and now it is fit, that I enter the Palace, which
was great in it is self, and great in his Excellences Family, consisting of
above an 100 Persons, 60 of which were in Livery; and those for the Pages
(being eight in number) of Crimson Velvet, their Cloaks, Lac't above half a
yard deep, with broad Gold Lace, with little intermixtures of blew, white, and
black Silk; They were also lined with a rich Brocard, the ground blew, with
flowers of Gold; and their habit underneath, of the Roman Fashion; to wit,
Dublets and Trunks, Lac't as before, and trimmed very thick with Gold and blew
Ribbon: They had all black Castors Lac't, white Feathers; Bands, and Cuffs, of
fine Genoa Point; embroidered Gloves, silk marble-coloured Stockings, and gilt
Swords.

The other 52 Liveries, were of fine Scarlet lined with silk Brocard, suitable
in Color, and Flower, to that of the Pages; 30 of these wore Cloaks, with the
same Gold and blew Lace, six rows deep: The others, being running Footmen, and
Grooms, had Coats, and Breeches laid over, with the same Lace: And blew silk
Stockings, black Hats, edged with a broad Gold-galoon, and gilt Swords.

Besides these, and four Valets de Chamber, (with under officers, of all sorts)
his Excellence had Fifteen Gentlemen of Fashion, who waited in his Lordships
Ante-chamber, to attend in giving, and receiving Visits; nor were these of mean
condition; there being among them, of the Ursini, Spinola, and Bentiveglio
Families; so that it is no wonder that the very wages his Lordship paid,
reckoning the board wages of the Italian Servants (for they eat usually at
their own houses) came to near 2500 pound per annum.

The Palace it self, considering it is Situation, Grandeur, Painting, etc. is
reputed the best in Rome, and was by that Prince (a lover of the English
Nation) as well furnished, with Damask, Velvet, and Embroidery, as Cost, or Art,
could contrive it; besides, there was a private, well-adorn'd Chapel, and two
English Chaplains to officiate and look after it.

In the Stable, his Excellence had five complete setts, of Coach-horses (to
wit) four, for the Town, and a lighter set, for the Campaign, besides several
pairs, for ordinary uses, with saddle-horses, and others for baggage and the
like; so that there wanted nothing now, to make a full equipage, but suitable
Coaches; and of those, there were thirteen in number.

The first Coach.
The design of this, was altogether poetical, and alluding to the Sea; and
therein, besides the exquisite carved Wooden-work, and engraven Iron-work, not
only the figures hereafter mentioned, but the very Wheels, Perch, and even the
meanest part of the whole (as the Pole, Swiveltree, Spring, Tree Transum, etc.
which were carved with Oak-leaves, Acorns, and Ivy-leaves) were all, richly
gilded.

The spokes of the Wheels, were carved into large spreading Foliages, each
spoke, being cut out of the main timber, six Inches thick, and nine broad; and
the rings, or out-circles of the Wheels, as also the Nails, were carved with
Oak-leaves, and Scollop-shells.

Instead of the Fore, and Hind-standards, the body of the Coach, was supported,
by four Tritons, as big as the life, exactly carved, and gilded; having on
their heads, wreaths of Sea-weeds, and so laden with Festons, of Roses,
Thistles, Lillies, and Acorns of Gold; that they seemed to bend under the
Coach, as confessing the immense weight.

Under the forepart of this Machin, issued two large Dolphins, their Tails
inter-woven upon the Perch, and all the spaces adorned, with heaps of
Conche-marine, Scollop-shells, and other things, proper to the Sea.

The Foot-board, represented a triple Scollop-shell, carved one within another;
under which, a little winged Genius stretched out its self, and looking back in
the Coach-man's face, seemed to point with his arm, which way he was to drive.

On the shoulders of the right hand Triton behind, leaned a large figure,
representing Britannia, crowned with Oak-leaves, and Turrets, and a loose
Garment, flying about her.

On the others, leaned a majestic figure, of the same bigness representing
Neptune, with a spiked Crown, on his head, his hair, and beard ruffled, and a
like flying Garment about him: Britannia and He, extend each an Arm, and so
bore up The Imperial Crown of England.

Under the Tritons, on the right, and left, lay a Marine-Lion, and Unicorn, in
proportion to the other figures; their fore-feet, finny, and resting on large
Foliages, their Tails twisted in the intermediate spaces, where also, were two
Genii; the one, curbing the Lion, the other, the Unicorn, with a kind of flying
Bridles, of gilded metal, like Ribbon; and he that was next Neptune, held His
Trident: In the rest of the spaces, were heaps of Scollop-shells, etc. alluding
to the Sea; so that besides the excellency of the Design, and Workmanship, the
whole carriage appeared, as one mighty mass, of entire Gold.

And now for the Coach its self, the outside, or Leather part thereof, was all
covered with Crimson Velvet (which, with what went to the Harness, Coachman's
Cushion, Braces, Strapps, etc. took up 120 yards) And over the sides, or
extreme parts of the Velvet, was a rich Gold Embroidery, of rais'd-work, and on
the Curtains before, behind, and on each side (according to the Italian
fashion) were large embroidered Loops, a foot long, and eight Inches broad; and
all other the void spaces, as the Doors, Pannels, etc. were filled with
flourishes, of the like embroidery, and all the seams, and edges of the said
outside, and corners, were either gold Galoon, or Fringe, of the same.

The four Vases, or Knobbs, at the Ciro ferri Romo. inu:

Anda. Cori. fecit

Gio: Batta. Lenardi delin:

Arnoldo Van Westerhout fiamo. scul^

Ciro ferri Romo. inu: Anda. Cori. fecit Gio. Batt^a Lenardi delin: Arnoldo Van
Westerhout: fiamo. Scu

corners of the Coach, were three foot high above the roof, which falling back
again on it, in large Foliages of gold needle work, and spreading along the
outside of the Valence, in a freezework of six Inches high, met and joined in
the middle, by a large Scollop-shell of the same work. As may be seen in the
third, fourth, and fifth Figures.

THE inside of the Coach, was lined through, with a rich Brocard of Gold, and
all the Curtains before, behind, and on each side, as also the Cushions, were
of the same, and took up, above an hundred yards.

The Cushions, and middle Seat, were edged with a deep, Gold-fringe, and the
Curtains, proportionably: Round the Valence, was a much deeper and richer Gold
gimp-fringe, and round the Cornish (where the Valence joined with the Roof) was
a raised Embroidery, about a foot in breadth, with large Branches that shot
forth, at the corners, and sides; which Valence also, was lined with Cloth of
Gold.

In the middle of the Roof, was his Excellence's Coat of Arms, with Supporters,
Mantling, Coronet, etc. all of embossed Needle Work of Gold, or according to
their proper colors; and these were in length, five feet, and in breadth,
three, or better.

There were also, several Tassels, of Gold, to tie back the Curtains; and all
the main Harness, as well as the Braces, Strapps, and lesser parts, were not
only covered with the same Crimson Velvet, but edged every where, with a thick
Gold Galoon; and embroidered also, on all the meetings, and remarkable places,
with Roses, of the same work.

The cheeks of the Bitts, were doublegilt, and the Bosses embroidered, with a
rais'dwork, upon cloth of Gold, in the figure of Roses; All the Padds were also
covered with Embroidery, and the Buckles (an 140 in number) laid on with the
same.

The Postilion's Saddle, was of the same embroidered Velvet, richly laid; and
the very Stirrups, were covered, and edged as the Harness; and on each Horse's
head, hung nine Tassels of Gold, to complete the Grandeur.

The Second Coach.
That, was little less than the first; the outside also being covered with
Velvet, but the color, blew; The Harness, Braces, etc. covered, and edged, as
the first; The Embroidery, Buckles, Knobbs, etc. little differing, in richness,
but design: For the Knobbs, were not so diffuse, and spreading; and the doors,
and void places, had His Majestys Cipher, crowned, and surrounded with Palms,
nothing inferior in contrivance, to the first.

The inside, was of a rich Brocard, of blew, and Gold; Fringed, Lac't, and
Lined, as the first; and on the roof, his Excellences Arms, after the same
manner, though not so large: The Carriage, Wheels, etc. carved and gilt, but
intermingled, here and there, with blew; and the fore, and hind-parts,
variously beautified, with Festons of Roses, Thistles, Flowers de Lis, Acorns,
etc.

The Figures of the whole, were seven, all richly Gilt; on the top of the
fore-standards near the Coachman, two naked Boys; He on the right, bearing in
his hand a Golden Tre-foil, and his fellow, a Palm; and in their other hands,
each held a Gilt Shield; on the first of which was his Excellences Paternal
Coat, and on the second, his Crest, handsomely adorned, and painted.

On the Corners of the hind-standards (being the most conspicuous part of the
Coach) sat two other Boys; and two more, below; The first, holding in his
right hand a Rose, and resting the other, on the Escutcheon of England; The
second, A Thistle, and the Escutcheon of Scotland; The third, A Flower de Lis,
and the Escutcheon of France; The fourth, A Laurel, and the Escutcheon of
Ireland, in the same manner as the first.

In the middle of these Figures, as it were under a Canopy of Foliages, and the
same under her feet, sat A Majestique Female Figure, representing Britannia:
In her right hand, half extended, she held a Rose, and a Thistle of Gold; in
the other, a Lance; and on her knee, leaned Andrea Cornely inu: et fecit Gio:
Batt^a Lenardi delin: Arnoldo Van Westerhout fiamo. Sculp:

a large Shield, charged with the Crosses of Union; and lastly, over the top of
the said Standards and Foliages, were fixed four Crowns, most exquisitely
Carved, and Gilt; that of England, being mounted much above the rest; as in the
sixth, seventh, and eighth Figures.

Andrea Cornely inb: et fecit Gio: Batt^a. Lenardi delin: Arnoldo Van
Westerhout fiamo. Sculp:



The Third Coach.
THis also, differed little in richness, or largeness, from the two former,
though in the materials, it did; for instead of Velvet, and Embroidery, on the
outside, it was covered with Leather, edged with Gold, and Silk Lace, and Gilt
massy Brass-work, so richly, and curiously wrought, that the two frames, that
held the glasses, before and behind, cost 300 Roman Crowns, which is little
less, than an 100 pound English.

The inside, was Crimson Velvet, Embroidered round, about half a foot deep,
with Flowers of Gold, at the joining of the Cieling, and Valence, and at the
bottom thereof, hung a rich Fringe, of Gold and Silk; The Curtains were of
Damask, Embroidered, with large Loops of Gold, and edged with a Fringe,
suitable to the Valence, as were also the Cushions, and other usual parts of a
Coach.

The Carriage, Wheels, etc. were carved into great Foliages, and differed
proportionably, from the two former, in that they were half, Gilt, and half,
Black; and the Harness, Braces, etc. all edged, with Gold, and Silk Lace, and
covered with Gilt Brass-work, suitable to the Coach its self.

The Fourth Coach.
This also, was of Leather, with Brass-work, lined with Crimson Velvet, seam'd,
and beautified, as the third; The Curtains also, were of Damask, edged as
before; nor was there any Embroidery, except that, of his Excellence Cipher on
the Cieling, encompassed with Palms of Gold; nor the Carriage gilt, but only
carved with Festons, and large Foliages.

This was his Excellences common Coach, when he went privately through the
streets; as was the second, when his Lordship made public Visits, to those of
great quality; for, the first was never used, but at some Solemn Audience,
extraordinary Function, or A first Visit to the Cardinals, and Persons of the
highest note; and then they were all drawn, by six Horses a piece.

The other Coaches.
His Excellences three next Coaches, were all alike, of Leather, adorned with
Silk-Lace, and well-Gilt Brass-work, all Lined with Damask, Curtains of the
same, and all things else suitable.

These, and three others, which were also lined with Velvet, or Damask, were
for his Excellences Domestics, and Attendance, when he went abroad; for his
extraordinary Visits, were ever, with ten Coaches, and his other, with five, or
six; nay, this was the usual number, even when his Lordship went Incognito; nor
were these yet all his Coaches, for there were two, or three other little ones,
for Messages, and common use.

The 8th. of January being come, and The Pope (as I said) pretty well
recovered, in the morning about an hour after daybreak, the forementioned Arms
of his Holiness, and his Majesty (which had been set up some days before) were
uncovered, with a Flourish of Trumpets, which drew a great concourse of people
into the Piazza, every one admiring, both the design, and largeness of them:
Between two or three in the afternoon, the Chief Prelates, with the Pope's
Officers (85 in all) came to attend his Excellence, who at the same time also,
received the complements of the Cardinals, Princes, and Great men of Rome, by
their Relations, and Gentlemen, that brought their several Coaches to wait on
him, to the Pope's Palace.

About four in the evening, his Excellence set out, and (to show his particular
Respect to the Place) was himself, in the Roman Habit, viz. Cloak, Doublet, and
Breeches; His Suit of a rich Brocard, the Ground Black, with great Branch't
Flowers of Gold, and laced thick, with deep Black Flanders Lace, and a broad
Gold-gimpt foot to it; His Trimming was of Gold and black-wrought Ribbon, and
his Band, of the best Venetian Point; And that all things might correspond, He
had great store of Excellent Diamonds in his Hat, Wrists, Sword, Shoes, etc.
and where ever else they could well appear.

There were with him ten Coaches, in his own Livery, such as has been before
described: In the first, was The Lord Ambassador, with six Archbishops, and on
his left hand, Monsignior Barzolini, who had been Nuncio in France: Before this
Coach, went 32 Footmen, 22 in Cloaks, and 10, in close-body'd Coats, and at the
Boots, the Pages, all in Livery, as has been also, before mentioned: By them,
the Dean, or Chief of the Footmen, in black Velvet, the Gentlemen of the Horse
following, on A managed Neopolitan, richly caparison'd; Then followed, his
Excellences other nine Coaches, all filled with Prelates; and after them, their
own, with those of the Cardinals, public Ministers, etc. filled (as was said)
with Gentlemen, that had been sent, to wait on the Solemnity; the whole train,
amounting to the number of three hundred and thirty Coaches.

The weather, was somewhat rainy, but that hindered not, even the Streets (as
well as the Balconys, and Windows) from being crowded with people, all shouting
and crying out, Viva il grand Re d' Ingelterra! Live the Great King of England!
In a word, so general were the Acclamations, through the whole progress, that,
That of Pliny, to Trajan, upon His entering Rome, might not improperly be
applied, to this, of The Lord Ambassador, Non aetas quemquam, non valetudo, non
sexus retardavit, quo minus oculos insolito spectaculo impleret: Parvuli
noscere, ostentare juvenes, mirari senes, Aegroti quoque, relicto medentium
imperio, ad conspectum, quasi ad salutem properare. Nor Age, want of Health, or
Sex, withheld any one, from feeding his Eyes, with the unwonted spectacle:
Children, prattled what it was; young men, shouted; old men, stood in
admiration! Nor would the sick, observe their Physicians, but ran as fast to
see it, as to meet their Health.

His Excellence being come to Monte-Cavallo (where the Pope then Resided) found
the Soldiers drawn up before the Gate; so that entering the Palace, He alighted
at the foot of the great Stairs, and was received (the Lay-persons of Quality
preceding, and the Prelates following) at the Portal of the Great Hall, just on
the Top of the said Stairs, by Monsignior Mugiaschi the Chamberlain, who, with
other Purpled Officers, conducted him to the Anticamera, and thence (after a
little reposing) to the Bedchamber it self) for his Holiness's Indisposition,
hindered him from going to the Sala Regia, where such great Embassies, are
usually first received.

The Pope was clad in Red Silk, with a laced Linen Rocket, and sat in a
Crimson Velvet Chair, not far from his Bed: And as soon as his Excellence had
made his three Obeysances (the last, being down to the feet) he received his
Benediction, and so seated himself just before his Holiness, who after an hours
discourse, dismissed him: From thence, he was brought to Cardinal Cibo's
Apartment, where he stayed about half an hour; and then taking Coach again, was
reconducted, to his own Palace, by the Light of thirty, or forty White-Wax
Flambeaux.

The next day, his Excellence with the same Equipage, visited Cardinal
Ludovisio, Dean of the Sacred College, who (in Functions of this nature)
represents the whole Body; and the day after, the Queen of Sweden; and then,
the particular Cardinals, as they lay most convenient; But before this, his
Excellence, to acknowledge the continual obligations, placed on him by the
great Prelates of Rome, invited them all (in honor of the King his Master) to
a mighty Entertainment, on the 14th. of the Current Month, which was ordered as
follows.

The Great, or outward Hall (which is one of the fairest and best proportioned
Rooms, that can be seen any where) was surrounded with long Tables, covered
with excellent Linen, and filled, with wonderful quantities of Fruit,
Sweetmeats, Parmegian Cheese, and other delicacies, belonging to the Desert,
or last Course; For thus are the Italians wont at their Solemn Feasts, that by
exposing to the Spectators, one part of the Entertainment, they may better
judge, what the whole will be: About thirty Butlers, and Assistants attended
here, and at the upper end of the said Hall, under a Canopy (after the mode of
the Place) stood a magnificent Cupboard, of all kind of Plate, guarded by
Swisse; and over against it, was that of Glasses, which were of Venice, in
great store, and of all sorts; Three other large, and richly furnished Rooms
were to be past, before ye came to the place where they dined; and in the last
of them (under another Canopy) was a great Cupboard of curious Gilt Plate, for
his Excellence's particular use, and service, guarded by some of the English
Servants; and was so extraordinary, that it drew as many Spectators to it, as
did any one thing else; Nor would they hardly believe it to be other, than of
pure Gold, though they were told the contrary; and even those that were
convinced, could not but confess, that Artificers in England were superlative.

The Dining Room, was that gay and pleasant Gallery, so remarkable also for its
Painting, it being of Pietro di Cortona's doing, the greatest Master in his
Time; Its usual furniture, was double Rows of Statues, in proportionable
Niches; but now (by reason of the Time of the year) his Lordship ordered it to
be hung with rare Tapestry; and in the middle of the side, opposite to the
coming in, was placed a Cloth of State, Embroidered with Gold, under which, was
the King's Picture, as big as the Life, sitting Crowned on his Throne, and
clad, in his Regal Habit.

The Table was fitted to the length of the Room, and being covered with fine
Damask, was encompassed, with about eighty fair armed Velvet Chairs, which
touched one another; only between every four, there was place left for a
Carver, and over against him, for a Sewer; So that each eight Persons, had
these two Officers to attend them as to the Eating Part; and behind, every one
had a Servant, to bring whatsoever he wanted, or desired.

The breadth of the said Table was eight foot (which might easily be allowed,
the Room being 24 wide) and through the middle of it, from one end to the other,
ran a Range of Historical Figures (some almost half as big as the Life) which
the Italians, call Trionfi: They are made of a kind of Sugar-Paste, but
modelled, to the utmost skill of a Statuary; So that they are afterward, sent
as Presents to the greatest Ladies; and their use at Entertainments, is to
gratify the Eye, as the Meat, Music, and Perfumes, do the other Senses.

Between these, stood great Vases of Artificial Flowers; and (to fill up the
empty spaces of the middle) there were a wonderful Company of Birds in a flying
posture, on lesser Plates; and as many Lions, Unicorns, and Eagles, on larger,
alluding to the supporters, and bearings, of both their Majesty's: An entire
description of which, as the Table stood all together, may be seen in the ninth
Figure.

AND for a more particular account of the Triumphs themselves, they were as
follows.

The first four, were of Juno, Cybele, Neptune, and Vulcan, in Chariots, drawn
over large Foliages; thereby representing, the four Elements, as if each of
them, had paid a Tribute to the Table; as in the eleventh and twelfth Figures.



THE fifth, and sixth, were of two Palm Trees, the Hieroglyphics of Victory,
and Impress, of his Excellences Family; and under them, several Nymphs, sitting
on Foliages, and representing the Moral Virtues, as in the thirteenth Figure.

THE seventh and eighth, were the Figures of His Majesty's Royal Virtues;
where, upon heaps of Arms, and Trophies, in the first, stood Justice, and
Peace, entwined; with their proper Symbols in their hands; in the other,
Valor, and Victory, as in the Fourteenth Figure.



THE ninth and tenth, were of Daphne, and Myrrha, the one transformed into a
Laurel; the other, into a Tree of her own Name, as in the fifteenth Figure.
Intimating thereby, That His Majesty, whose Victories had planted Him Laurels
in His own time, wanted not the Myrrh of His Virtues, to embalm Him to
posterity.

Gio. Batta Lenardi delin. Arnoldo Van Westerho



AND in the midst of all, over against his Majesty's Picture (of which, before)
stood a Machine of six feet, and two inches high, representing on the one hand,
the Figure of the Church; on the other, Time, drawing Truth out of a Cloud,
through which, the Sun breaking forth, A winged Hero, with a Spear in his hand,
chased Fraud, and Discord: And on the Base, lay a dismembered Hydra; thereby
denoting, Rebellion suppressed, and vanquished: And over all, stood His Majesty's
Arms, as may be seen in the tenth Figure: And on the Reverse thereof, those of
his Holiness, according to the first Figure.

THIS large Table, having (as is said) these adornments in the middle, had
between them, and the Napkins (which were also most artificially folded) two
Rows of Assiets, or Intermesses, on either side, filled with all sorts of
relishing bits, whether salt, sweet, or sour; as Pickles, Butter, slices of
delicate Bacon, Bologna-Sauciges, Taratufoli, Composts, etc. all which, stood
in the abovesaid Order, for two whole days, (according to the Roman way) that
every ones curiosity might have some share in the Entertainment: And truly, the
Concourse was so infinite, that the Palace had bin certainly sacked the second
day, had not his Excellence foreseen the danger, and therefore, provided a
Company of Swissers, for all the Gates and Avenues.

As for the Feast it self (which began about one) it consisted of twenty four
Imperial Dishes, to every Mess, or eight Persons; and these the Italians call
Imperial, by reason of the largeness, and richness of them; as filled, with
whatever Art could devise, or Industry procure: Two, of each of the said twenty
four, were served in at a time, and placed by the Servers, before the
Respective Carvers, who cutting of every thing, gave it to the Servers, and
they, to each Guest in their District, whether he eat of it, or not; And as the
Trumpets, and loud Music from the Balconies, ushered in the Meat, so the
softer (which consisted of Voices, Lutes, etc.) entertained all, whilst they
were eating.

Toward the middle of Dinner, his Excellence (who sat at the upper end of the
Table) stood up, and (calling to his Cup Bearer for a Glass of Wine) began the
Popes Health; and (within some small time after) the Kings, in the same manner,
and order; which was presently pledged with the utmost demonstrations of Joy,
and Satisfaction.

And now, the Company (who had abandoned themselves to mirth) beginning to be
satisfied, the aforesaid twelve courses, or changes were by the Officers (to
avoid tediousness) contracted to ten; and then, the Triumphs, and other
Ornaments, being taken away, they covered the whole Table, with all kind of
Sweetmeats imaginable; which after a little time (as the Liberty or Confidence
of the standers by encreast) were all snatched, and carried away.

Thus (after three hours) ended this Famous Entertainment, with universal
satisfaction, and applause: And though the Delicacy of the Meats, Wines, and
other Liquors, as well as the Abundance (which fed above 1000 Persons) was
wonderful, yet the Order, seemed more surprising; for every one not only eat,
and sat at ease, but was all the while as well attended, and as readily
served, as if he had been at a private Feast: Nay, all confessed and declared,
that the common Fate of Feasts, viz. Beuer Caldo e Mangiar Freddo, Drinking hot
and Eating cold, was here, wholly changed to the contrary.

And now the Month of January was over, when several Great Personages, and
Academies in Rome, thought fit to Complement His Majesty, in showing personal
Honors to his Ambassador. The first, was the Queen of Sweden, who had prepared
an elegant composition of Italian Lyricks, in Honor of His Majesty's Accession
to the Crown; which being now ready, and her Palace fitted for it, Her Majesty
appointed it to be celebrated on the beginning of February, and therefore
invited his Excellence, to be present at it.

It was performed in her great Audience Room, adorned with extraordinary
Pictures, and Lights: At the upper end, under a cloth of State, was placed a
raised Chair for Her Majesty; and at the other, a large Theater, with rising
Benches, for the Music; on either side also were covered Benches, the one for
the Roman Ladies, the other, for their Husbands, or Relations: And now the Lady
being placed, and every thing else in due order, The Lord Ambassador led the
Queen to her Throne, and sat himself, on a Velvet Stool, under the first step
of it, with a Row of English Gentlemen, and other Cavaliers of Her Majesty's
Court, standing about him.

The composition, was sung in Dialogue, by five persons, representing, London,
Thames, Fame, The Ruling Genius, and The Genius of Rebellion; with a Chorus of
an hundred Voices, and an hundred and fifty musical Instruments.

The subject was, The Encomiums of the English Nation, and their Great Monarch,
James the Second; with the Augury also, and Assurance, of happy successes,
under the Dominion of so mighty a Prince: About the middle of which, and just
before the first Chorus, there was a sudden stop; when Monsignior Francisco
Albani, A Prelate (and now Secretary of the Pope's Briefs) stepped into a Pulpit,
there ready prepared, and in A florid Italian Oration, first addressing to the
Queen, continued the Argument, through a world of matter; but how to bring that
world into a Compendium, or Map, will be a question.

In short, he traced His Majesty, from his infancy, to his riper years; and his
early courage, to his full manhood: Followed him, through all his various
fortunes, at home, and abroad: His exemplary Actions in France, and Flanders,
where, to capacitate him for Admiral of the Ocean, Victory shook of her
Pinnions, as resolving, never to part from him: He further went on, That
Fortune had provided new Darts, to wound his succession, yet they broke
themselves, on what they were shot at; nay, all her trials confessed his mastery,
and instead of overthrowing, did but contribute, to the fastening his roots: Nor
ought I (continued he) in the day of so much joy, to have mentioned it, but
that it was not unpleasant to Hercules, to look back, on his past toils.

But now, in that the appearance of Day, had dispersed the Clouds, All the
Ideas, he could fancy to himself, toward the forming A Statue of public
Felicity, were conspicuous in His Majesty: Witness, his Justice, in governing
by his Laws: His Goodness, in forgetting nothing, but Injuries: His Clemency,
in being ever readier to pardon, than offenders to ask it: His Liberality, in
the Patronage of Arts, and Arms: And lastly, his Prudence, in advancing the
Trade of his Kingdoms; thereby supplying the defect of Time, and joining
divided Britain, once more to the Continent: And therefore, if such were his
dawn, what must his full Day be? Or what would we the reward of all? Even that
God give him the accomplishment, of the Promise to Abraham, and multiply his
seed, as the Stars of Heaven.

Nor was it sooner spoken, than echoed back again, by a Chorus (as before) of
an hundred Voices, and an hundred and fifty Instruments; And from thence, the
Dialogue went on, intermixed with three other Chorus's, crying out, New Laurels!
New Palms! Victory, Victory, Victory! And at last, the whole, closed with this
fourth.

Live King of an exalted Name!
Live ever, in the top of years the same!
And as He Is Great in Britain, even,
Let Him be Great in Rome, and Great in Heaven!
And with this, ended the Entertainment of that evening, but not the Queen's
inclinations of honoring his Majesty, for it was for several days together,
again presented, to the general satisfaction, of both Court, and City.

A Queen had led the way, and his Eminence Cardinal Pamphilio (in whose
Brother's Palace, his Excellence then dwelt) A person of no ordinary
literature, sharp witted, eloquent, and (which every Age has not to boast of) A
Purpurated Poet, made his Lordship the next invitation, to his Palace, in the
Corso (a long Street in Rome where, during the Carnival, all people appear in
Masquerade) where, after a splendid Entertainment, he was further caressed,
with an Excellent Tragedy, sung in Recitativo: The Subject, was A particular
Complement to His Majesty, in the History of St. Dimna, an Irish Martyr; The
Stage, beautifully set out with proper Scenes; and the Argument, interwoven
with such variety of noble, yet surprising Accidents, that it appeared
altogether worthy of the elevated Genius, of himself, that wrote it.

Nor stood it with the Grandeur of The Barberine Family, to slip this
opportunity of showing the world that real respect which their Goodness, and
Gallantry, made them always declare was due to the Crown of England; For
Cardinal Francisco Barberini (not long since Dean of the Sacred College) was
Uncle to Carlo, his present Eminence, and had been Protector of the English
Nation at Rome; as had been heretofore (if I mistake not) Pope Urban the
Eighth; famous for his humanity and good nature: This Family also, was allied
to the most Illustrious House of Este, and consequently, to Her now Majesty,
our great and gracious Queen: Under this double obligation, was the said Lord
Cardinal, when he invited his Excellence, and seven other English men of
quality, to an Entertainment at his Palace, on the Shrove-Tuesday following,
being the Eve of the Carnival, viz. The Earl of Salisbury, the honorable Henry
Sidney, and Thomas Ratcliffe, with Mr. Arundell, Tichborn, Wamesley, and
Eggleston: And that there might not be wanting persons of the highest Order in
the Church, he invited, their Eminencys, The Cardinal of Norfolk (Protector, of
the English, and Scotch) Cardinal Alteri (Protector of the Irish) Cardinal
Pamphilio, before spoken of, and Monsignior Barberino, his Nephew, one of the
twelve principal Officers of the Apostolic Chamber.

The day being now come (out of curiosity and pleasure to view, the not to be
paralleled Statues, and Paintings, of that Palace) his Excellence, with his
company, came early; when having past the large Court, famous for the Sculpture
about it, he was led to a magnificent Staircase, which brought him into a more
magnificent Hall, where the Cardinal received his Excellence; and by the
Antichambers, conducting him through the rest of the Palace, showed him the
inestimable Collections, which nothing but a like Family could have brought
together; After this, he led the Ambassador to his Library, inferior (perhaps)
in nothing to the Vatican, but the Manuscripts, and that it is not The Vatican.
And here it was, that his Eminence, presented his Excellence, with forty Books,
Folio's, and others, exquisitely bound, and Printed by the care and Beneficence
of this Family; and here also the Cardinals who were invited, came to them.

The Hall beforementioned, was the place of this Entertainment, where that
scarcely to be expressed Cieling (the hand also of Pietro de Cortona, was (if yet
possible) outdone, by the costly Hangings; wherein (with all the Mastery of
Art, Colors, and Design) were expressed, the most considerable actions of Pope
Urban the Eighth; and upon a Freeze under them, The History of Deborah: And at
the upper end of all, A full Picture of His Majesty, on a sprightly Horse,
trampling, The many-headed Monster of Rebellion, under his feet.

The Hall its self, was set round, with Crimson-Velvet Chairs, edged with a
deep Golden Fringe, and in the middle, upon a small rising, stood a Table of
thirty foot long, and seven broad; through the length of which, ran a range of
Triumphs, and beside them, other lesser, of Arts, Peace, War, Victory, with
their respective Symbols, and Trophys: Nor was the number of the Services, the
vastness of the Dishes, the variety of the Inter-messes, and relishing Plates
round every Trencher, the plenty, and choice of Wines, the nobleness of the
Desert, excellence of the Music, and great Order of the whole, in any wise
disproportionate, to the magnificence of the place, or the person, that made
it: And if it fell short in any thing, of that of the Lord Embassador's, it was
not, that his Eminence's intention, was not the same, but the company less.

The Entertainment lasted above two hours, and from the Hall, they withdrew
into a curiously hung Room, which was a ready conveyance into all the other
parts of the Palace; and from hence they came into A second, hung with Crimson
Velvet, and beautifully adorned with Statues, and Pictures, of inestimable
value; where, his Eminence had prepared, an excellent composition, of Vocal,
and Instrumental Music, in honor of His Majesty, and this glorious Embassy.

From thence, his Excellence, and their Eminences in Cardinal Barberini's Coach
(the rest of the Coaches following) drove through the Corso (of which, before)
And thence, to the Palace of Cardinal Pamphilio, where his Excellence received
a second Regal, and the satisfactory Entertainment, of the Tragedy before
mentioned.

This of the Lords Cardinals, begot an Emulation in The Literati, nor was it
long, ere they followed the example: The first of this kind, were the Fathers
of the Gregorian, or Roman College (founded by Pope Gregory the 13th.) who
invited his Excellence, to an Entertainment of the Muses, on the 25th. of the
same month; At which time, he came largely attended, with Roman Prelates, and
other great men; and was received at the Gate, not only by the Rector, but by
the Assistants, and chief members of that Learned Body; for, as for the General
himself, he was lately dead, and the Vicar sick, even to keep his Bed. At his
entrance they expressed their satisfaction and joy, by ringing their Bell, and a
flourish of Trumpets: Then having with much ado past the thronged Court, and
viewed the Inscription, erected (in honor of His Majesty, and that days
Solemnity) over the Portico, that leads into the first Hall, his Lordship was
at the great Door of it, met by the Prefect of the Studys, who in a short, but
elegant Latin Oration, accosted him, to this effect.

That amidst the noise of the world applauding, and rejoicing at his
Excellence's Arrival at Rome, The Gregorian Academy, neither ought to be
silent, nor indeed, could it: In their name therefore, he first rejoyc't with
His Holiness, in that it happened in his Pontificat, and that James the Second,
reigned in England, and Innocent the XIth. in Rome. In the next place, he
gratulated, To The Christian World, so Great A Defender of the Faith: To
Britain, Queen of the Ocean, so potent an Assertor: And lastly, To his
Excellence, his Embassy; And styled His Majesty, The most Great King of Great
Britain, in that he had chosen, such an Ambassador; the one, only fit to choose
the other, to be chosen.

And now his Excellence had a full Prospect of the Hall it self, the further
end of which, was one entire piece of Architecture, in Perspective; where,
under a Regal Canopy, upon A Throne, raised four Steps, and a round Pedestal of
equal height, between two erected Female Figures, viz. Scotland admiring, and
Ireland rejoicing, sat a Third, on a Lion couchant, representing England: On
her head she bore a Mural Crown; in her right hand, A Scepter; and her left,
held the Helm of a Ship: Upon the Cornishes over that, supported by large
Pillars, were Their Majestys Pictures (as done in Brass) wreathed about, with
Laurels, and Palms, each also supported, by two Angels: And somewhat over that,
in the middle between both, His Majestys Arms, with their wonted Quarterings,
Garter, and Supporters, standing on Festons of Roses, and Thistles: And on a
proportionable Architrave to the whole, four large Urnes, or Pots of Incense.

The Walls on either side, were hung with Arras, of Silk; and upon a Cornish
over them, several Shields, and Tablets, of Devises, Epigrams, and Elogies, in
honor of His Majesty, and that days occasion: Among the number of which, it
may not be unpleasant, to divert the Reader, with some of them.

A Ship, her Sails furled, and lying close, against the weather. The word ( --
Ubi noxia perstant) While dangers are abroad. Signifying thereby, A Tempest may
shake, not rend a wise man's Sails: And therein also, His Majestys prudence, in
giving way to the Storm, which so much threatened him, before he came to the
Crown.

A Leopard regardant, i. e. looking back on his spots. The word (Ornant, non
maculant --) They beautify, not blemish. Intimating thereby, That all the
obloquies against His Majesty, when Duke of York, are so far from giving him
any Blot, that they rather add, so many Flowers to his Crown.

A Cannon, firing. The word ( -- Mensura dat ictum) It Is the true Levil hits.
Thereby denoting, That those true measures, His Majesty took of his Affairs,
gave Him, and his Kingdoms, the happiness, they now enjoy.

A Shield, with an Umbo, or spike of Steel, in the Center. The word (Ferendo,
and feriendo) By bearing, and pushing. Thereby showing, His Majestys readiness
to receive, and repel, the force of his Enemies.

A Horse, ready appointed for War, beating the ground, and (as it were)
neighing for the Battle. The word ( -- Animoque paratior --) More ready in
himself. Intimating thereby, his invincible Resolution.

A Mariners Compass, the Needle to the North. The word (Quo semel, huc semper
--) Once, and ever. Thereby denoting, His Majestys constancy.

A Lion, tossing a large Orbicular Figure. The word ( -- Et tanto in pondere
ludit) And under the great weight, He plays. Alluding thereby, to His Majestys
expeditiousness, and happy dexterity, in the easy dispatch, of so many his
weighty Affairs.

The Sun, throwing his Beams over a Landscape. The word ( -- Circumspicit omnia
--) He has an eye, on all. Thereby intimating, That no part of his Dominions is
so remote, but that he bears, a particular regard to it.

A Harp, full strung. The word (Summis consentit and imis) And every string
accords. Denoting thereby, That (notwithstanding their diversity in Opinions)
all His Majestys Subjects, meet in one Consort, i. e. a general satisfaction,
and delight, under his happy Government.

Lastly (for I intend not a Volume) A Be, flying round a Garden, of Herbs and
Flowers. The word (Non legit infectos --) She takes no poisonous Plant.
Pointing thereby at His Majestys Judgment, that he makes choice, of the Best
men.

Besides these, there were several other Odes, Epigrams, and Elogys, on larger
Tablets, in honor of His Majesty, his Late Royal Brother, and the particular
accidents of his now Majesty's life; One among the rest, more immediately
relating to The Embassy, in which (alluding to his Excellence the Lord
Ambassadors Name, of Palmer) under the Emblem of A Palm, or Date Tree, was
represented, That it is the Nature of that Tree, not to yield to any weight,
but rather, to endeavor the more upwards: In short, they gratulate The Omen;
foretell Him, Victory over his Enemies, of which also, that Tree is the Symbol,
And wish him, A Prince, of many Palms.

From thence in the passage to the Greater Hall, by the Humanity Schools of
Grammar, Syntax, Poetry, Rhetoric, etc. Several Princely youths, (chief of the
Caesarean, Matthean, Imperial, Pamphilian, and Altierian Families) stood before
the doors of their respective Schools, and saluted his Excellence with
Distichs; and from thence, by a fair ascent, he came up to the Hall its self,
which was statelily furnished, with Damask, and Tapestry hangings, heightened
with Gold.

Toward the end of it, was erected A Theater, on which stood the Rhetoric
Master, who complemented his Excellence in a Latin Heroic Poem of 571 Verses,
the Sum and Argument of which, was this.

He took his rise, from the year, or two, before His Majesty's accession to the
Crown, And thus fabled; That the Genius of England, having (by reason of the
late villainous Plot) found every thing, in disorder at home, had traveled all
the Provinces of Europe, and finding them successful in their Affairs, began to
consult, whether Fortune (whereby yet, he meant no other, than that Divine
Providence, which is always awake for the good of Mankind) had not forsaken his
Country, and being half doubtful in it, resolved to go in quest of her: To
which purpose, having advice, that she had betaken her self, to the Imperial
Eagle, he followed her from place, to place, and at last found her, at the
first unsuccessful Siege of Buda: where, having laid before her, the close
Argument, of not pressing Fortune, against Fortune; He encourages her with the
certainty of the next Campaign, and only begs her, that during that vacancy,
she would take a Journey into England, which wanted nothing, but her presence,
to compose it.

In short, the Genius prevails, takes Fortune into his Chariot, and (after a
full-wrought Poetical description of the Journey) brings her into England;
where the first thing they met with, was the death, of King Charles the Second;
and two Rebellions, then rising, against his Brother and Heir, His now Majesty:
This Fortune (that ever hated the profane rabble) covered the Kings Arms,
dispersed the Rebels, and having seated him, in the Imperial Throne, returned
back to the Eagle, for its next more successful expedition against Buda. And
with this, ended the Solemnity, which was all performed, in the Latin tongue.

The next, was that of The Clementine College, founded by Pope Clement the
VIIIth.; which, albeit it be governed by religious persons, has in it yet, an
Academy of The Literati, and (besides their more serious studys) The young
Nobless, and Gallants, are trained up, in all those Exercises, that may render
them useful, either for Peace, or War: Hither also his Excellence was invited;
and came fully accompanied with Prelates, Cavaliers, and others; nor was the
Entertainment less learned, though for the most part, the Composition was in the
Vulgar Tongue; for the Italian wits, by critically considering it in their
Academies, have at length rendered it, both Polite, and Elegant.

His Excellence was received at the first Gate, by the Fathers, and young
Noblemen Convictors, with A double range of Trumpets; and thence, conducted
into the Great Hall, richly adorned with Paintings, and Damask, fringed with
Gold; Where he was seated on A Velvet Chair raised, and beside him, hung A full
Picture of His Majesty, under a Royal Canopy; over which, stood the Impress of
The Academicks (by the name of The Extravagants) viz. two Palms, folded into
the Figure of a Warlike Hand-bow. The word (placidis, coeant immitia) Let Arts,
and Arms, join hands. Thereby signifying, That Gowns, and Swords, are not so
incompatible, but they may very well meet, in the same persons.

The Entertainment began, with a prelude of Music, Then stood out, A Noble
Youth (A Marchese) of about seventeen years (who also bore a part, in the
following Exercises, of Vaulting, Dancing, Fencing, and Horsmanship) and
caressed His Excellence, in a smart Oration, to this purpose,

That the old Historys of Rome, must give place, to modern Annals; In as much
as the Glorys of the first, were more believed, than true, these on the
contrary, carried in them, more of truth, than credibility.

That the multitude of people, made Rome, look bigger, than her self, and Rome
now, might be found, in Rome again.

That Glory, lay not in quantity, but quality, and that the brave men, not the
number, made A Monarchy great, and Illustrious; For otherwise, Vices, and
Privation (that in despite of Noble Enterprises, had destroyed Confines) might
set up for Sovereignty, among the Virtues.

That the Trophys of The August Eagle, surpassed not yet, those of The winged
Lion; And though Antiquity, might pride its self, in her Alexander, Caesar's, etc.
yet the real Grandeur of all, was, to be found in James the Second, and what
was prodigious in them, rendered not only probable, but certain in him.

Then making an Excursion, on the Praises of The Pope; The Emperors Victorys
over the Turk; The Queen of Sweden, Patroness of their Academy; The Lord
Ambassador, and his Embassy, he thus, came back to His Majesty: Let James the
Second live! to the Terror of Evil doers, and the Example of Hero's: Live The
Glory of Britain, and Glory of the Capitol! And with him, increase The Triumphs
of Hungary conquered, and Greece, wounded.

Lastly, in the name of the Academicks, he besought his Excellence, to accept
that Address, so much the more affectionate, by how much the less artificial;
And to temper their boldness, That he would yet content himself, to repeat with
them, what Varius Geminus, once said to his Caesar; Qui de te Jacob audent
dicere, magnitudinem tuam ignorant, qui non audent, Humanitatem. They that
presume to give an account of Thee, James, understand not Thy Greatness, and
they that dare not offer at it, know nothing of Thy Clemency.

This ended with a Chorus of Music; And then, were rehearst several short
Epigrams (of half a dozen, or a dozen Verses) Stanza wise, by the like Noble
Youths, in honor of The Pope; The King; The Queen; The Queen of Sweden; The
late Duchess of Modena; The now Duke; The Lord Ambassador; And Cardinal
Azzolino, Protector of the Academy; Which also was answered by a Chorus of
Music.

Then followed the exercise of Vaulting, on the Horse, performed by six Noble
Youths, with singular dexterity, and variety; and after some respite of Music,
those other, of Dancing, and Fencing, by the same, or like Youths.

The first, was an high Dance, by one single person; And after that, A Duel of
two. The second Dance also, was single; and after that, a Duel of two.

The third Dance, was a French Minuet, of two. And after that, a skirmish of
three; One, defending himself, against two.

The fourth Dance, was in a figure of six; And after that, a Duel of two.

The fifth Dance, was in a figure of four; And after that, a skirmish of three:
One, with a Sword and Dagger, defending himself, against two Swords.

The sixth Dance, was a Saraband of six; And after that, a skirmish of eight;
four, against four; with a flourish of Trumpets.

The seventh Dance, a figure of eight. The eighth Dance, was a French Minuet of
two; And after that, a skirmish of eight; and closed those exercises, with a
Chorus of Trumpets.

And now, while the Academicks were preparing themselves for their riding the
great Horse, His Excellence was entertained with A Symphony of Music; and that
over, conducted into A Gallery, which looked into the riding Court, from whence,
he beheld all the Exercises of Horsmanship, performed by eight Noble Youths of
The Academy; which ending, his Excellence was reconducted to his Palace.

Nor was it long, ere a like festivous invitation, was made him, by The
Academicks of the Infecondi, for the 21 of April following; where, accompanied
with a numerous train of Prelates, and others, he was as splendidly received,
and entertained, with even the height, of Rhetoric and Poetry, in honor of
His Majesty, Himself, and The Embassy; more particularly, with a problematical
discourse, (in Italian) whether The Victorious Arms of the Christians in
Hungary, and Greece, or The Generous Indulgence, of the King of Great Britain
(uniting thereby, his Subjects) were more conducing to the peace of Christendom?

And now his Excellence (having received Orders) prepared for his Return; and
therefore (to begin where he ought) he acquainted the Pope, that (with his
permission) the next Audience, should be that of Congee; So that on the fifth
of May he came in great state to the Palace, and after an hour's Private
Discourse or thereabouts, he received the Embraces, and Benediction of His
Holiness, with the usual Present, of a Pair of Beads, at which hung a Gold
Medal of our Savior.

This Ceremony being thus over, His Excellence was to take his leave of the
Queen of Sweden, and after her, of every Cardinal; all which being in a
fortnight's time performed, he changed his Livery, and (ordering his Domestics
to make ready, with all possible have for his Journey) he put himself wholly
Incognito; that is to say, neither to give, nor receive Visits, unless about
Business, and that, privately, and by the Back-stairs also: But an Accident
interrupted this so necessary a Retirement, to one that had so great a Family
to dispose of, and so many Home-Affairs to settle, before he stirred. For the
four new Cardinals (Ciceri, Petrucci, Caraffa and Medici) who had been long
mewed up, were on the 24th. Current to receive their Hats, in open Consistory;
which being the only Public Papal Solemnity, since his Lordships Reception, it
was thought fit (by the whole Court) that he should have a more particular
Invitation, as he had, and which, he readily complied with.

About ten in the morning that day, his Excellence (attended by all his own
People) came to the Palace, where he was Received by the Officers, and
conducted to the Great Gallery, from whence he might see Cardinal de Medici's
Cavalcade, or Solemn Procession on Horseback; for in this manner was every
Cardinal formerly wont, to come to his First Audience, accompanied by the
Sacred College, and Prelates, on Mules, the other Grandees, and followers, on
Horses: But the Charge being excessive, none had for several years performed
it, nor could it be more properly revived, by any one, than a Prince of so much
Wealth, and Greatness.

The other three Cardinals having been excused Riding, came privately before,
and by noon, the rest; and then, his Excellence went to the Pope's Inward
Antichamber, where he found the Conestable Colonna attending; for he, and the
Duke de Bracciano, are the only Romans, that are Principi del Soglio; that is
to say, Princes that can stand (on great Days) under the Canopy, or Cloth of
State: His Lordship and he, having saluted each other, and discoursed for a
while, the Pope came out, and after his Benediction (they, and some of the
Bedchamber preceding) he was brought to the Vestry; where being Pontifically
Robbed, and Mitred, by two Cardinal Deacons (to wit, Maldachini, and Pamfilio)
his Excellence took up his Train, and so followed him to the Throne, in the
Room where the Consistory was then held; standing close by him on his Right
hand, and discoursing still with him, during the Casmes, and Intervals of the
Function.

The Function it self consisted chiefly, in the Pope's Blessing the people; the
Salutations he received from the Cardinals; and his Prayers (at his giving the
Hats) that God would incline each of them, faithfully to serve his Divine
Majesty, in their respective Stations; and so (after two hour's) he returned in
the former order. After which, his Excellence took the opportunity of taking
his second leave, of all his Friends, and (after many kind Adieu's) was
conducted to his Coaches, which, together with his Liveries, never appeared
more magnificent, nor ever happened to be more descanted upon, than at this
time: For being all intermingled, with the stately Equipage of Cardinal de
Medici, The people had a fit opportunity to compare, and give their judgments
of both, which was highly in favor of his Lordships.

Our Ambassador being again retired, every Servant was at liberty to look after
his particular business; and in three weeks, the Baggage was made up, and All
Persons (as well Tradesmen, as Domestics) paid off: And to obviate the
mistakes; which Chance or Malice, might after his Departure occasion; He
ordered (ten days before he stirred) Printed Bills to be pasted up in the most
Remarkable Quarters of the City, which gave notice of his intended Journey, and
willed every one to repair to the Palace, that had any Dues, or Pretensions:
But so far was this, from creating trouble, to his Excellence or Officers, that
it gave the Town occasion to admire, and wonder, nay, confess it, a thing not
only unusual, but scarce heard of before, in those parts; For through the whole
course of this Embassy, no man (after the stating of his Accounts) ever ask't
twice for his money; nor was any Bill (upon what place soever drawn) which was
not punctually, and precisely satisfied.

And now his Excellence (having disposed of his English Servants, and Baggage,
some to return by Sea, others by Land) began his own Journey the 23. of June,
by night, because the Heats were excessive; and by Post, for expedition-sake,
according to his late Orders: Himself rid in a handsome, commodious Callesh,
made purposely for that service; and was attended by his Secretary, his Sewer,
a Page, a Valet de Chamber, and a Running Footman; and overtaken on the Road,
by the Gentleman of his Horse, whom some necessary Business had hindered, from
setting out with him. But before we leave Rome, it may not be amiss to recount
an Affair, which his Lordship fully settled, before his departure.

One Flori (a Piedmontese of quality, and banished thence, a while since) after
he had luxuriously spent vast sums at Paris, Vienna, and other places, manned
out to Sea (in Person) a Privatier, under the Polish Banner, though that Kingdom,
has no one foot of Land, near Salt Water: When Roving in the Mediterranean, he
met (toward the Coast of Egypt) two English Ships, the Jerusalem and another;
and making them both Prizes (the last, because she wanted a sufficient Pass,
and the other, for having the New Bassa of Tripoli, with his Family, on Board)
carried them directly for Malta: The News of this Insult, being divulged every
where, the Leghorn-Factory presently made Applications to his Lordship, and
acquainted him, that if this past without satisfaction, not only all Christian
Men of War, but every Privatier, would be still searching, and disturbing their
Merchants: That the Turks would do the like also; and all people (for the
future) would load on the French and others, that could protect them from such
dangers, and Inconveniences; Nor were these Gentlemen the sole Plaintiffs, but
Letters came from the Consul of Tripoli, nay the Bassa himself, desiring his
Excellences Help, and Assistance.

His Excellence, who (by his former Travels in the Levant) knew the Turkish
Justice, which usually, makes the National Traders, feel the smart of such
Accidents, borrowed Mr. Hanford (Gentleman of the Horse to the Cardinal of
Norfolk) and sent him in all have, for Malta; having first communicated the
whole Affair, to the Ambassador of that Order, then Residing at Rome.

By the Time Mr. Hanford got thither, Flori had again put to Sea, and given the
Bassa his Liberty, upon security of 30000 Dollars; but represented the matter
so falsely, that many thought, he had some Right on his side; however, the
aforesaid Gentleman followed his Excellences Instructions so well, that he
secured all further Embeazlements of the Goods; Enform'd the Bassa (by Letter)
what Care His Majesty had taken of him; comforted his Wife, and Servants, who
were before, in the utmost Despair; and brought also an Inventory of what was
taken, and what remained behind.

Nor was his Excellence on his part idle at Rome; for he acquainted all the
Neighboring Princes, and Governors with the fact; assured them, that if the
King had not Justice done him, He would do it himself; writ kindly to the
Bassa; left Letters at Genoua, Leghorn, and Naples, for our Men of War (that
called in) to pursue the Pirate: And lastly, satisfied every body in the main
Point, to wit, of having Infidels, and Enemies on Board; For he not only let
them see, the Determination, and Practice of the State of Venice, the Grand
Duke, and others, upon Complaints of ours in like cases, but showed them* how
the contrary Procedure, would be a wonderful prejudice to All Christendom; for
seeing our Merchantmen, carry a hundred Foreign Christians, to one Turk, if
Turks, and their Goods, were lawful Prize to the Christians, they also must be
so to the Turks, and consequently, run the same Risque in their Persons, and
Effects, which now (as 'twas evident to every body) they were absolutely out of
danger of, though the Barbary-Pirates, or the Grand Signiors Fleet, should meet
them at Sea, and even knew, who they were.

In short, after much Negotiation, his Excellence made Flori (as a Bandit or
Outlaw) totally abandon the Sea; Caused the Prized Goods, and Persons, to be
Restored to the Bassa; Had the Security, for his Ransom, declared Null; Sent
his Money, and Jewels, found in the hands of the Captain of the Jerusalem to
Tripoli; and forced the Vessel it self (now discountenanced every where, and
wanting all manner of Necessaries) to run into Villa Franca, where being
deserted by the Officers, and pillaged by her own Men, she remained as a kind
of Wreck: And thus ended this Affair, to the Great Honor of His Majesty, and
the Reputation, and full Settlement, of the English Navigation, through the
Mediterranean; Nor did his Excellence fail of receiving many Thanks from the
Bassa (who in the end, lost no very great matter) and Acknowledgments from all
our Merchants in Italy, and our Turkey Company also.

On the 23d. of June (as before) his Excellence left Rome, accompanied by
Cardinal Howard, the Earl of Salisbury, Sir John Lytcott, and other Persons of
Quality in several Coaches, to the first Post; and having there, taken his
Leave of them, and particularly of his Eminence (so remarkable for his
exemplary Life, and English Temper; And who (Athanasius like) chose rather, to
change his Country, than any one Article of the Catholic Faith) He prosecuted
his Journey, with great satisfaction as to the Heats, and Dust; but not to the
Ceremony, which he now hoped, to have been wholly free from; For he no sooner
arrived (the following night) at the first Village in the Grand Duke's
Territory, but he met there, his Highnesse's Officers (with all necessary
Refreshments) that expected him: From hence (after some stay in a Chamber
particularly furnished for that purpose) he went on, and arrived (a little
before Sunrising) at Radicofani, where he found a Bed put up for him; and not
only Wines, and Provisions of all sorts (even Ortolani's and the like) but the
Duke's Servants, and Cooks attending; And in the same manner was he still
treated, wherever he Reposed, in this Generous Prince's Dominions, as well on
this, as on that side Florence.

At Florence, his Highness ordered Duke Salviati's Palace (which is the best in
Town) to be put in Order for his Lordship; where he was brought as soon as he
arrived; and where Count Magolotti, with great Attendance, was ready to Receive
him: His Excellence (after he had been in Bed, and well refresht) went to Court
to wait on the Duke; and from him, was carried to the Prince's Apartment, whom
he saluted also. Next day, they both came to see his Excellence, and in the
Evening, he waited on the Great Duchess, at her Villa, about a mile out of
Town, where the Beautiful young Princess also was. On the Third day, the Duke
invited his Excellence to see the running of Barbs, after the Italian manner;
which being ended, he took leave of his Highness, and of the Ducal Family, who
were all, then present together; And having after Supper acknowledged his
Obligations to Count Magolotti (who never left him from first to last) he took
Post, and still found the same Treatment on the way, wherever he past in the
Grand Duke's Territories.

Bologna was the next City of consequence; and this, his Lordship passed at
break of day, leaving his Secretary to complement the Cardinal Legate, and so
follow to the designed Resting Place, about ten miles short of Modena; where
(as soon as the Postmaster could give notice) Prince Caesar D'Este was pleased
to come himself; And carrying away his Excellence, they were soon met on the
Road, by the Duke's and Cardinal's Coaches, with Persons of Quality in them, to
complement so welcomed a Stranger.

It Is difficult to express the wonderful Entertainment his Lordship found here;
and therefore, not to lessen it by a low, and flat Relation, I shall content my
self in saying, That his Excellence was lodged in the Palace it self; had
several Gentlemen, Pages, and Officers, particularly to Attend him; was feasted
by His Highness, both in Town, and at his Delicious Villa of Sassoli; received
all the Caresses imaginable from the incomparable Cardinal; and in short, that
nothing was wanting in this Illustrious Prince, or in his most Serene Family,
that might express the high Veneration, and Esteem, they all had, for our
Mighty Monarch, so great in himself, and so happy in his Glorious Consort.

The Embassador's stay here, was about a week, and as Prince Caesar (out of his
profound Respect to the King and Queen) met him (as was said) several miles
from Modena, so he conducted him as far out of the City on the other side, and
then with Embraces left him, having first given Necessary Orders for his
passage through Reggio (which was about midnight) as also through all other places
of this flourishing Dukedom. Nor did his Excellence make any further stop till
he came to Lions: for he past Milan, sending only a Complement, by one of his
Gentlemen, to the Governor: And as for Turin, the Duke and Duchess, were then
at one of their Palaces in the Country.

At Lions, his Excellence was forced to Refresh himself for a day or two: And
now the Weather being altered to the worse, his Journey to Paris, was neither
so Pleasant, nor Easy, as otherwise it would have been: But all the
Inconveniences of it, were well repaired, by the Noble Treatment he found at
our Envoy's Mr. Skeleton, who having in his long Ministry abroad, still kept up
the Dignity of the Character he bore, was now, far from being behind in it: He
met therefore his Lordship on the Road; lodged him in his house; feasted him
there; accompanied him to Versailles, to wait upon the King; nor would he let
him stir in a fortnight; that is to say, till he was probably sure, that the
Yatcht (which was sent for) would be attending at Calis, and so his Excellence
at his Arrival found it: But the Winds withheld him for two days, from going
to Sea; after which setting Sail, he landed in two days more at Greenwich, and
so came to London, staying only there, till he could put himself and Attendants
into Mourning; for at his leaving France, he received the ill News, of the
Death of that Excellent Lady, the Duchess of Modena, who had been so
particularly kind to him, and whom he left well, or at least far from ill, at
his departure from Rome.

To conclude then, on the 12th. of August 1687. his Excellence went to Windsor,
where the King owning his Services, very graciously gave him His Hand to kiss,
as did also Her Majesty, who was pleased to acknowledge, that he had fully
answered her expectation.

And thus ended this Great Embassy, in which kind, no King has done more, and
no Ambassador, that had not studied his Masters Honor, more than his own
Profit, would have done so much.

FINIS.
Upon the foregoing Account of his Excellency the Earl of Castlemaine's Embassy
Extraordinary to Rome, Anno 1687.
LET Mighty Caesar not disdain to view
These Emblems of his Power and Goodness too:
A short Essay, but fraught with Caesar's Fame,
And shows how distant Courts esteem his Name.
Here may Thou see thy wondrous Fortunes traced
With Sufferings first, and then with Empire graced.
Long tossed with Storms on Faction's swelling Tide,
Thy Conduct and thy Constancy was tried:
As Heaven designed thy Virtue to proclaim,
And show the Crown deserved before it came.
Troy's Hero thus, when Troy could stand no more,
Urged by the Fates to leave his Native Shore,
With restless Toil on Land and Seas was tossed,
Ere He arrived the fair Lavinian Coast.
Thus Maro did his mighty Hero feign:
Augustus claimed the Character in vain,
Which Brittain's Caesar only can sustain
Permit, dread Sir, my Muse, though mean, to own
A Truth to Albion, and to Europe known,
You are what Virgil feigned his Prince to be,
Your Valor such, and such your Piety.
Now Theseus Deeds we can receive for True,
And Hercules was but a Type of you.
He made the fierce Lernaean Monster bleed,
From Hydra-Faction You have Albion freed.
The Paths of Glory trod, and Danger past,
Just Heaven allows a pe'ceful Throne at last,
At Home to show the Indulgence of a God,
And send your peaceful Ministers abroad.
While Palmer hastens to the Roman Court,
(And fraught with Worth that Honor to support)
His glorious Train, and passing Pomp to view,
(A Pomp, that even to Rome it self was new)
Each Age, each Sex the Latian Turrets filled:
Each Age and Sex in Tears of Joy distilled.
While Wonder Them to Statues did convert,
Those seemed to Live that were the Works of Art.
Emblems and Figures of such Life and Force,
As, wanting Speech, did to the Eye discourse;
And show, what was despaired in Ages past,
An Universal Language found at last.
Hail Palmer, hail Illustrious Minister!
To Caesar, Britain, Fame and Virtue dear.
Caesar to represent, Great Caesar's Voice,
Named Castlemaine, the British Shores rejoice;
And Tyber's Banks applaud Great Caesar's Choice.
How therefore could the Muses silent be?
And None can want a Muse that writes of Thee!
From Thine, not Phoebus Tree, my Song I Will raise,
And Crowned with Palm, I will contemn the Bays.
N. Tate.

(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
IDEM LATIN.
TEmpus erat, quo ROGERII visura triumphum
Lucebat Latia culta fenestra nuru.
Tunc mirata Viri pompam, currusque nitentes
Auro, Flaminia Roma videnda Via,
Ecquid, ait, toto divisos Orb Britannos,
Viribus insignes, dixerat esse Maro?
Romano sese Imperio junxere Britanni,
Et pompa haec nostras occupat una domos.
Quaeque olim innumeris spectacula vidimus annis,
Jussu ROGERII praebuit una dies.
D. Josephi de Juliis in Bibliotheca Vaticana, and in Collegio Urbano de
Propag. Fide Graecae Linguae Professoris.

Among the Numerous Poems presented to his Excellence by the Roman Wits, only
this out of those inserted in the Italian Account of this Famous Embassy, is
translated
By N. Tate.
WHen Palmer's mighty Triumph now came one,
With Latian Dames the Crowded Casements shone.
Old Rome his Train and Chariots did survey,
And seemed again in the The Corso through which his Excellence made his Entry.
Flaminian Way.
Do we (says she) as Maro sung, still find
The hardy Britains from the World dis-joyn'd.
The British Empire with the Roman meets,
One splendid Pomp unites their distant Streets;
And Palmer by one happy Day at last,
Renews the Triumps of the Ages past.
FINIS.
ERRATA'S.
FOlio 8. line 2. for Swits, read Switzers; fol. 8. l. 8. for Attendance, r.
Attendants; fol. 22. l. 14. for Attendance, r. Attendants; fol. 47. l. 12. for
Attendance, r. Attendants; fol. 53. l. 12. for Swisse, r. Switzers; fol. 73. l.
15. for we, r. be; fol. 78. l. ult. for desert, r. desert; fol. 3. l. 11. r.
Lord Ratcliffe, since Earl of Dunwarrenwater.




