A SERMON AT THE FUNERAL OF HENRY, EARL of WARRINGTON, Lord DELAMER, etc.

Imprimatur,

RA. BARKER.
Martii 15. 1693/4.
A SERMON AT THE FUNERAL Of the Right Honorable HENRY, Earl of Warrington,
Baron DELAMER of Dunham-Massy, Lord Lieutenant of the County-Palatine of
Chester; and one of the Lords of Their Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council,
Preached at BOWDEN in CHESHIRE.

By RICHARD WROE, D. D. and Warden of Christ's College in Manchester.

LONDON: Printed for A. and J. Churchill, at the Black Swan in
Paternoster Row. M DC XC IV.

To the Right Honorable GEORGE, Earl of Warrington, Baron Delamer, etc.
My LORD,
WHAT I now present to Your Lordship is wholly in Obedience to Your Desires,
which are so far a Command to me, as to prevail against mine own Inclinations,
rather than seem backward to comply with any request wherein You are pleased to
judge my slender Abilities serviceable to Your Lordship; and choose rather to
expose my Self and Performances, than be thought wanting in any instance of
Obedience and Deference, wherein I may express my Obligations to Your Self and
Noble Family.

I should be glad of a more welcome Opportunity of giving public Testimony of
my Respects, than such as administers occasion of Sadness, and revives the
afflicting Sense of Your Grief and Loss; and am sorry it falls again to my Lot
at once to Address and Condole: Yet withal shall reckon my self happy, if my
Endeavors may prove satisfactory, especially in doing Right to the Memory of
that Great Man, who I am sensible wanted a better Orator, and deserved a more
ample Character.

But if what I have said of him may contribute to the Honor of his Memory, and
make his Name survive among the Worthies of his Age; or the Influence of his
Example may create emulation in any to write after his Copy; and more
especially, if what I have discoursed on this Subject may tend to the
instruction of others, and promote the designs of Piety, and Regular
Conversation; I have my design, and let God have the glory.

But I will not be troublesome to Your Lordship in tendering an Apology, when I
have resolved to submit the Performances entirely to Your disposal; and hope
Your Honor will pardon my prefixing Your Name to what you have so great a
right and interest in; and which has no other design, than to let the World
know how much I am,

My LORD, Your LORDSHIP'S very much Obliged and most Humble Servant, RIC. WROE.

A SERMON Preached at the Earl of WARRINGTON'S Funeral, January the 14th.
1693/4.
ECCLES. 11. 3. -- If the tree fall toward the South, or toward the North, in
the place where the tree falls, there it shall be.
THAT man is arbor inversa; that the parts of human bodies carry some
proportion and resemblance to an inverted tree, is a known Saying, and bears
the reflection of sundry natural and moral Truths: That the Proverb is as old
as Solomon, I dare not attest, though it may seem not unbecoming his Wisdom,
nor is unlike his sententious Sayings; and his knowledge in that kind (who
spoke of trees (as Scripture tells us) from the Cedar-tree that is 1 Kings 4.
33.
in Lebanon, even unto the hyssop that springs out of the wall; and wrote of
their several Natures, Qualities and Virtues (is the Jewish Rabbis comment)
might administer fair occasion to the similitude; however that be, yet we have
here in his own words some important Truths, couched under a like Metaphor or
Resemblance, if not to a growing, yet to a falling tree: And as Trees have been
made vocal by way of Parable, and brought in as speaking not only amongst
profane, but Sacred Authors (witness that of Jotham) so shall we hear this
Judges 9.
tree speak the instructions of wisdom, when we have unfolded the import of the
Similitude in a short Paraphrase and plain Interpretation.

The words are part of the Wise Man's exhortation to Charity and Liberality;
which Argument is the Subject of the six first verses of this Chapter, and is
enforced in this verse from a twofold Similitude. (1.) Of clouds; If the clouds
be full of rain, they empty themselves upon the Earth; an imperfect Argument,
and to be supplied with such a like inference as this, so they that do abound,
are to dispense their liberality equally and freely. A second resemblance is
from the fall of a tree, which some thus paraphrase agreeably to the Argument;
As the tree which way so e're it falls, remains to the use and benefit of the
owner; so a good Man's charity, howsoever dispensed, turns to his good and
benefit.

But this seems not to reach the import of the Similitude, and therefore othe^s
extend it further, and thus gloss it; As the tree whilst it stands may be moved
this way or the other, yet when it is once fallen, it keeps the same place and
posture, such is the state and condition of man at his death, his works follow
him, and suitable to them, shall he receive his reward; whether he has done
good, or not; he shall receive according to the things done in his body,
whether they be good or bad; and thus they contain a forcible persuasive to
Charity and doing good whilst we live, since death deprives us of all capacity
and opportunity of doing it afterward; so that the duty here inculcated runs
parallel with that of St. Paul, As we have opportunity Gal. 6. 10.
let us do good unto all men; and the reason to enforce it couched in the
Similitude, is drawn from the consideration of our unalterable state and
condition after death, thus expressed in the words, If the tree fall toward
the South, or toward the North, where the tree falls, there it shall be.

This being the common and obvious sense of the words, I shall discourse of
them in that Notion, in which they speak the same in general with that known
truth, that as Death leaves us, so Judgment will find us; as the course of our
lives has been, and concludes to be, such will be our future condition,
without hopes of change, or possibility of alteration. Which general Truth will
appear at once more useful and obvious in the particular Assertions that are
contained in it, and result from the Text, which I take to be these; I. That
there are two different and opposite states allotted to men after death: The
tree may fall toward the South, or toward the North. II. That the righteousness
of men's lives has a natural tendency to happiness, as their wickedness has to
misery; it is from a principle of nature that the tree lies where it falls; and
virtue and vice have no less natural inclination and direct tendency to
happiness or misery, to rewards or punishments. III. There is no middle state
after death, no change of condition, or altering it for the better; the tree
must fall South, or North, and where it falls, it mst lie, there it shall be.


There are two different and opposite states allotted to men after death; the
tree may fall toward the South, or toward the North; States as opposite as
North and South, distant in place and situation, different in quality and
condition: the South, that denotes the Region of Light, of Rejoicing and
Pleasure; the North, that implies the Land of Darkness, Sorrow and Sadness; so
are those terms frequently used both in phophane Authors, and in Sacred Writ,
and very appositely to denote the Distance and Opposition that is between them.

Man, who (in the Wise man's words) was made to be immortal, created to a
never-ending duration, being put into being, was never to cease to be, was by
the bounty and kindness of his Maker designed for a blessed Immortality, and
made capable of the enjoyment of it; but life and death being set before him,
with a liberty to make his choice; by refusing the one, he made himself liable
to the other, forfeited happiness, and became obnoxious to misery. That the
first of human Race did so, we learn from unerring Revelation; that we are all
prone to make the same wrong choice, we are sensible of by sad experience; and
tho Heaven and Hell, Life everlasting, and eternal Torments, be Articles of our
Creed; yet they seem to have no more influence on the generality of men, than
things of mere notion and uncertain speculation; since most men live as if born
merely for this world, and never trouble themselves about the Interest of the
other. A fatal mistake this, and which directly tends to Atheism and
Immorality; for if men be made only for the enjoyments of this life, then it is
natural to conclude, that they may make the best on it, and live as they list:
nor can there be any effectual Remedy to this dangerous Error, but the firm
belief and certain persuasion of a future state, wherein men must give account
of their actions, and receive according to their doings; and therefore it has
been the great design of all Divine Revelation, to impress on men's minds the
notions of Rewards and Punishmets hereafter, as the most powerful Argument to
influence their actions and behavior here; and it is the great Prerogative of
the Gospel, That it has brought Life 2 Timothy 1. 10.
and Immortality to light, viz. has revealed Heaven more plainly, and threatened
Hell expressly, and given the greatest evidence and assurance of both, viz. the
Testimony of God himself.

Now if we consult his Sacred Oracles, we cannot doubt of the Truth, nor be
ignorant of the nature of that State, with relation to the different portions
therein allotted to good and bad men: for Scripture every where tells us in
general, That Glory and Happiness is prepared for Good Men, and Hell and
Torments are reserved for the wicked; more particularly, (1.) It describes the
nature of both states in most Emphatical Charactars. (2.) Heaven is expressly
promised to the Righteous. (3.) Woe and Misery are positively threatened to the
reprobate and impenitent.

1. The nature of both states is plainly described; Under the Old Testament
indeed in more dark Characters, and more general Expressions; yet such as all
center in the notion of two opposite States, the one of Happiness, the other of
Misery; and tho we should grant that Heaven, tho frequently mentioned in the
Old Testament, yet is generally (tho not always) to be understood of the upper
Region of the Clouds, the Firmament, or the starry Sky; and that Hell there
usually imports no more than the grave or state of the dead; yet in the New
Testament, Heaven is the Name of a state and place of happiness; and Hell is
the seat of Torments, prepared indeed for the Devil and his Angels, but
assigned in common with them, as the portion of hypocrites and unbelievers.

On this account, the Revelations of our Blessed Savior are called the Gospel
of the Kingdom, and the St. Mat. 4. 23.
Doctrine of the Gospel is styled the Kingdom of Heaven, as that which most
fully discovers, and directly leads to it; and all the Characters there given
of it, are such as tend not only to rectify men's notions, and raise their
conceptions of that Blessed State; but also to excite their Affections, and
invigorate their Endeavors after the attainment of it; It Is Life and Glory,
Light and Joy, a Kingdom and a Crown, Pleasure for evermore, an Inheritance
that fades not away; and in one word, everlasting Life; which includes all
that can conduce to make man happy for ever both in Soul and Body.

Opposite to this there is another place as distant in situation (there being a
great Gulf fixed between them) as different in quality; being the place of
Torment, everlasting chains of Darkness, where there is weeping and wailing and
gnashing of teeth; where the worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched;
where there is every thing that speaks horror to humane Nature; nothing wanting
that can torture the Body or afflict the Soul of Man. I need not mention all
the places, which are so many that you cannot miss of them; so plain, that you
cannot be ignorant of the meaning of them: And lest any should surmise, that
they are only Legends of a state we know not, the Gospel gives us the greatest
certainty and assurance of the reality of them; For,

2. Heaven is expressly promised to the Righteous; and greater assurance we
cannot have of any thing than the word of God himself, who cannot be deceived,
and will not impose on us; and as we cannot without injury to the Divine
Wisdom, imagine, That the Son of God was sent to purchase with his precious
Blood any thing less than Happiness and Immortality; so can we not without the
highest affront to his Goodness and Truth, doubt of his readiness to confer it
on those for whom it is prepared: No, his Word is faithful and true, his
Promises certain and unalterable; and that there are Rewards for Good and
Righteous Men, is as evident as any Object of Faith, as certain as the Being of
God; For he Heb. 11. 6.
that comes to God, must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them
that diligently seek him; doubtless he is so, himself having said it, and all
his promises are yea and amen. Now to us are given exceeding 2 Ep. 1. 4.
great and precious Promises, (as St. Peter speaks) and the New Covenant is
said by St. Paul to be established Heb. 8. 6.
upon better Promises, in respect of the clearer dicoveries, and greater
assurances that the Gospel gives of a Future state of Life and Glory. Our
Blessed Savior has assured his followers, that in his Father's St. John 14. 2.
V. 2, 3.
house are many Mansions, and that he is gone before to prepare a place for
them; and his Apostle St. Paul (who in a Vision was caught up into, and had a
prospect of those beatifick Mansions) has assured us, That when he shall come
again with crowds of 1 These. 4. 17.
Angels, we shall be caught up together with them in the clouds to meet the
Lord in the Air, and so shall we be ever with the Lord. Assuredly, they that
die in him, shall ever live with him; yea, reign with him in his Kingdom, be
encircled with Rays of Light, and wear Crowns of Glory.

This is at once the great Privilege of His Religion, and the main purport of
the Gospel, to convince Mankind that he was not made merely for this life, but
designed for an Inhabitant of a better world; thereby to raise his Affections,
and invigorate his Endeavors after such a Blessed Attainment; and wherever
this has met with a firm Belief, it has given men the Victory over the world;
it has taught them to overlook its transitory Enjoyments, and disesteem the
Evils and Miseries of it; yea, even life it self: knowing they shall obtain a
better Resurrection, and be made happy in the fruition of God himself; in whose
presence is the fullness of Joy, and at whose right hand there are pleasures for
evermore.

But lest we we should not be drawn with these Cords of a man, and refuse the
Happiness offered to us, God has been pleased to alarm men's fears with a
dismal prospect of Woe and Misery, that awaits sinners hereafter, and the
terrible denunciation of never-ending Punishments.

3. Hell is positively threatened to the Reprobate and Impenitent. If men will
despise the tenders of God's Grace and Mercy, they shall feel the effects of
his Severity and Justice; they that will not be happy, shall lie down in
sorrow: For he that promised Heaven as a reward, has provided Hell too as a
place of vengeance and punishment. It was indeed prepared for St. Mat. 25. 41.
the devil and his angels, being the first of God's Creatures that revolted
from their obedience to him, and were punished with an everlasting separation
from him; tumbled from the highest Heavens, and reserved in Chains under the
blackness of penal darkness; but man by sin joining in the same Rebellion,
involved himself in the same guilt; and became liable to share in the same
condemnation; and the portion of Hypocrites and Unbelievers is declared to be
with the Devil and his Angels.

We are not only told in general, That the wages of sin is death; and we being
Sinners, Except we repent, we shall perish; That indignation and wrath,
tribulation and St. Luke 13. 5.
anguish, is upon every soul of man that does evil: But to Romans 2. 9.
strike the greater terror, the very form of that doleful doom of Condemnation
is denounced, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire; fire, and therefore terrible
and tormenting; everlasting fire, and therefore intolerable; and more dismal
still, with the wretched Society of Apostate Angels and damned Spirits: And
that nothing may be wanting to convince Sinners that there is an Hell for the
ungodly, we have the whole judicial Process described, the Judge assigned, and
the manner of his appearance, terrible indeed to read, but more fearful to
behold, when he shall be revealed from heaven with his 2 These. 1. 8, 9.
mighty angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God,
and obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his power. We have the Books opened, the Witnesses produced, the Sentence
pronounced, and the Punishment described, which is named the second Death, and
consists in the loss of God's Presence, and all other Comforts, and in enduring
the sting of Conscience, and the torments of Hellfire for ever.

Thus are the two States after Death represented in Scripture, vastly different
from each other, as opposite as North and South: And how naturally consequent
they are upon men's Tempers and Dispositions, upon their carriage and behavior
in this life, we shall see in the next deduction from the Text.

That the righteousness of men's lives has a natural tendency to happiness, as
their wickedness has to misery. It Is from a principle of Nature that the Tree
lies where it falls; and Virtue and Vice have no less natural inclination and
tendency to Happiness or Misery, to Rewards or Punishments. Which if so, and it
follows from the nature of the thing; then we need not doubt but all men must
necessarily be either happy or miserable hereafter, since all are either good
or bad here. Now that this Life is the state of trial, and the other of
retribution, we all know and believe; and that according to men's behavior
here, they are qualified for that state and condition they shall be put into
hereafter, we shall as readily grant, if we consider what I take to be an
undoubted truth, namely, That when we leave this world, and go away into
eternity, we carry nothing with us, but only the good or bad dispositions of
our Souls; so that we go into the other World either disposed for the enjoyment
of all that is good, or prepared for the participation of all that is opposite
thereunto.

If our Affections are wholly set on things below, and our desires carnal and
sinful; we are altogether unfit for the unmixt Joys and Spiritual Delights of
Heaven; and our sensual Inclinations, and filthy propensities will sink us
among the herd of wicked and impure spirits: But if our Affections have been
set on things above, if our Souls have centred on Happiness, and unweariedly
pursued it in those ways and methods which God has chalked out for the
attainment of it; we shall naturally arrive at the Rest of Holy Souls, and be
meet to be made partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. All Heaven
is not hereafter, nor Hell only in the infernal Regions; but there is something
of Heaven upon earth, some foretaste of its Happiness, and the first fruits of
its Joys, in the pleasant relishes and ravishing Sense of Virtue, and the
blessed Effects of an Holy Life: and there are that carry with them an Hell
upon earth, that are tormented before the time, and have kindled a fire which
will never cease to burn them; that are pricked with the sting of an evil
Conscience, and bitten with that worm which will never cease to gnaw them.

The Sum is, They that keep close to the rules of Virtue and Purity of life,
and unweariedly pursue the paths of Piety, they also at the same time pursue
their own Happiness, and are in the certain road that leads to Bliss; as they
that persist in Vice, and run on headlong in their own evil Courses, are
hasting on their own ruin, and posting on the broad way which leads to
destruction. For that which is the prevailing temper of Souls in this life,
will doubtless be so in the other too; and they grossly mistake who imagine
otherwise, as they seem to do who trust to a late Repentance, and commence
Religious only in their last sickness; as if a change of Mind and Manners could
be wrought all at once, and men could in one moment divest themselves of old
accustomed habits, and put on new and contrary tempers and dispositions. Death
I know makes a great change, but it is more in respect of the outward, than the
inner man, and is a change of condition rather than of complexion: And tho the
putting off these mortal bodies will leave the Soul and its faculties much more
free, and exalt its powers, and better its operations, and thereby heighten and
improve those minds which were before disposed to Virtue and Goodness; yet I
cannot conceive how it should possibly effect so great an alteration, as in one
moment to change the whole temper of the Soul, and superinduce new habits of
Virtue, and strong dispositions to Goodness where there were none before.

Now if men carry their good or bad dispositions with them into the other
world, suitable to these must their portion there be; since there must be
likeness and correspondence between the Object and the Faculty before Happiness
can result from them; Happiness consisting in the agreeableness of the one to
the other, which unites the Soul to the Object of Bliss, and endears the
Enjoyment of it: So that we may presume to say, That a wicked man cannot be
happy even in Heaven it self; and were such an one caught up with St. Paul into
the Third Heavens, he would find himself uneasy amidst all the satisfaction of
those blissful Regions, as being wholly a Stranger to such pure and spiritual
Joys; and should God forbear to punish wicked men in the other World, yet they
cannot be happy there with the Joys of good men, because their minds are
altogether indisposed for them, and even the delights of Paradise would afford
no relish to their vitiated and depraved Appetites. As all true happiness and
satisfaction of mind springs more from an inward than an outward cause, so is
the happiness of Heaven to be estimated not so much from the place, as the
temper and disposition of its blessed Inhabitants, and their fitness to be
received into, and made partakers of its ravishing Glories; but they that have
never accustomed themselves to the divine relish of true Goodness, cannot taste
the delights of the heavenly Manna: they only that have been nourished with the
true Bread of Life here, are fit Guests to sit down with Christ, and eat and
drink with him in his Kingdom. St. Paul says of the vital energy and life of
Christianity, Our Conversation Phil. 3. 20.
is in Heaven. And so must ours be, before we can be in a capacity to be
received into those glorious Mansions, and welcomed into the blessed Society of
Angels and Saints.

Let not any then that retain their Sins, talk of going to Heaven; No, it is too
heavy a Clog for any to ascend with thither: or suppose they could, alas! poor
Souls, how would they stay, what would they do there? there is nothing to
gratify their sensual Appetites, nothing agreeable to their carnal Desires; all
the Enjoyments there are chaste and pure; all the Delights spiritual, and
cannot be relished by unhallowed minds: And if ever we hope to enter there, we
must predispose our Souls for it, by an holy, that is, an heavenly
Conversation; and then we have trimmed our Lamps, and are ready to enter in
with the Bridegroom, and are clothed in the Wedding Garment, and shall be made
acceptable Guests at the Table of the Lord, and taste the Dainties that are
there prepared.

Now if these things be so, (as the Wiseman says) Righteousness tends to
life, but he that pursues evil, Prove. 11. 19.
pursues it to his own death: If the paths of Piety certainly lead men to
Bliss, but Sin by its own fatal tendency plunges men into Misery; then we see
how reasonable it is to conclude, That there are two opposite states of Rewards
and Punishments hereafter, wherein men's condition shall be correspondent to
their Conversation here; besides the express Revelations of God's Word that so
it shall be.

And there is nothing can shake this Belief, or make men doubt the certainty of
it, unless they can imagine (what some have fancied) that there is a third
state after Death wherein men may repair and better themselves, and so after
some time recover their lost estate. To remove this Scruple, I add

That there is no middle state after Death, no change of Condition, or altering
it for the better; the Tree must fall South or North, and where it falls it
must lie, there it shall be. Perhaps it may be thought that this Consequence is
not necessarily enforced from the words, and it may be said, that possibly the
Tree may fall some other way; for though only South and North are mentioned,
yet there are more Points in the Compass: And I know the Romish Commentators
are very jealous of interpreting this place of a future state, lest it should
seem to thwart their darling Doctrine of Purgatory; and Lorinus craftily
endeavors thus to shuffle it off, That if it should be understood in that
sense, it would not consist with the Notion of Limbus Patrum, the place wherein
they suppose the Souls of the Patriarchs to be detained, till Christ by his
Sufferings had overcome Death, and first opened the gate of Heaven to all
Believers: And we cannot help it, if the place be as repugnant to the Notion of
the one as it is to the other; and since both of them are uncertain, and want
proof themselves, neither of them can be evidence for the other, nor evade the
force of the Argument drawn from these words against the being of any such
middle state or place as these men fondly imagine. For the force of the proof
lies not in the former part, its falling South, or North, but in the relation
that its lying has to its fall; which way so e're that be directed, there it
remains fixed and unmovable: And though I will not insist on that as a
sufficient Argument, that there being only two opposite extremes named,
therefore there cannot be a third (a negative Argument from Scripture being not
always conclusive) yet in matters of Doctrine, and Objects of Faith, where the
Scriptures are silent, there they are not to be urged as necessary Points,
since Scripture is the Rule of Faith, and contains every thing necessary to be
believed. Suffice it then to say, That since Scripture mentions but two states,
the one of the faithful in Heaven, the other of the unrighteous and impenitent
in Hell, we acknowledge no other, we believe no more.

I have already accounted to you how emphatically the Scripture represents, how
particularly it describes the nature of both: I shall here only add to it, that
had we no other evidence than what this Book of Ecclesiastes affords, we may
safely infer, that all Notion of a third or middle state is utterly excluded.
We are told that at our dissolution, The dust shall return to the Chap. 12. 7.
earth as it was, and the Spirit to God that gave it: there is a different place
assigned for each part of our Compositum. And of the state of the dead we are
informed, that there is no wisdom, nor work, nor device, nor knowledge Chap. 9.
10.
in the grave: and if there be no work, nor knowledge how to act, there can be
no change or alteration; and the Text adds to this, the assurance of two
opposite states allotted to the Souls of men, suitable to their different
temper and disposition here, wherein they shall remain without fear of losing
the one, or hopes to escape out of the other.

Besides, since the Church of Christ has never been represented under other
Titles than these two, of Militant and Triumphant, they do necessarily exclude
this third subterraneous Church, which is neither Militant, because ascertained
of Salvation, and freed from the conflicts and oppositions of this world; nor
Triumphant, because scorched and afflicted with the most exquisite Pains and
Torments. Leave we then that imaginary Church to its Vtopian Mansions, the
sooty region of Purgatory, a place no where described in Scripture, never
mentioned in the discoveries of Divine Revelation, but created by the heat of
Fancy and abused Imagination, and its flames when once kindled kept up out of
design, and by deluding Arts, the Dreams of waking men, and feigned Relations
of Specter and Apparitions. But let us to the Law, and to the Testimony,
firmly believe what he has there discovered of a future state, not seek to be
wise beyond what he has revealed: for we can know no more than he will let us
of what is future, and we cannot be more certain of any thing than what he has
told us.

Certain it is that there is a place of rest provided for holy Souls, and that
there are winged Messengers appointed to attend their dissolution, and
transport them (as they did that of Lazarus) into Abraham's bosom. And were we
but allowed to behold the Transactions of that invisible Polity, the
intercourse between Angels and the spirits of just men made perfect; could we
but discern the glorious entrance and admission of a departed Soul into the
Church Triumphant, it would exhibit to us a Scene of the most Ravishing Glory,
far outvying the greatness of Solomon, or that united prospect of Worldly Glory
wherewith the Devil tempted the Son of God. But what we are not permitted to
behold with our bodily Organs, we may discern with the eye of faith, and
therewith follow them as high as the great Apostle was wrapped, and with St.
Stephen, see Heaven opened, and its blessed Inhabitants rejoicing at the
arrival of the Faithful, and welcoming them into those glorious Mansions.

But I leave these delightful Raptures to the enlargement of your private
Meditations; and having raised them where Faith carries them, call back your
present thoughts to more pensive reflections, since Providence has administered
an Occasion of sorrowful remembrance. For alas! the Tree is fallen (as indeed
what can withstand Death's inevitable stroke) a Tree, which, had God so
pleased, might have stood and flourished much longer; but now, like that in
Nebuchadnezzar's Dream, has received the Sentence of the Watcher, and of the
Holy One from Heaven, who cried, Hew down the tree, and cut off his branches;
shake off his leaves, and scatter his fruit.

Trees, however durable in themselves, are yet liable to the stroke of the Axe,
and oft-times the tallest Cedar, or strong-built Oak is cut down sooner than
the useless Shrub: We have it frequently exemplified, and see them tumble down,
who, whilst they stood, not only graced the Forest, but gave shade and shelter
to others: Would to God we had not had the Occasion of meeting here to day to
bewail the fall of the most flourishing Plant that enriched our Soil.

It were easy to pursue the Metaphor, did I design to detain you with a
Narrative of what might be said, and is justly due to the Memory of this Noble
and Right Honorable Person, who, though now the Spoils of Mortality, yet is
not to be laid in the dust like common Mold, nor deposited in the shades with
silence.

For the part he acted on the Stage was so eminent, as would not allow him to
be unknown and unobserved, or pass off unregarded; and the Scene of his Life
was attended with such variety, as made his Name well known, and his Person
remarkable.

But for his public Actions and Behavior under the various turns and
successions of Government, I shall choose rather to leave them to be recorded by
Fame, or read in our Annals and Chronicles, than attempt an imperfect account
of them, or make my self liable to the Censures of Detraction and Envy.

True worth is, or ought to be most valued where it is best known; and they
that were most intimately acquainted with him, had the truest estimate of his
worth, and doubtless have the greatest share as well as most passionate sense
of his loss: give me leave to say, without suspicion of flattery, that he
adorned that high Station which he had merited, and graced that Honor which he
had advanced his Family to.

For his Honor was the Jewel he most highly prized, and could not be tempted
to forfeit or prostitute it; and I doubt not to affirm, that his Conscience was
the rule and measure of it, which two, when joined together, render a man truly
great, honorable and noble: For men to pretend Honor without Conscience, is
to sacrifice to an Idol of their own setting up; but when Honor is guided by
Conscience, it becomes sacred and venerable: Such I am confident was this Noble
Lord's sense and estimate of his Honor, which spirited him with that freedom
of endeavoring Equity and Justice, as well in matters of Lesser concern among
Equals and Inferiors, as in that Higher Station, where Persons of Noble Rank
give Counsel and Sentence in matters of moment, and cases of grand importance.

It is well known how he acted in such Capacities; not as a careless Spectator,
not as one indifferent which way the Scales of Justice were turned, but as one
actuated with a sense of Honor and Justice, not afraid to declare his Opinion,
not willing to conceal his Sentiments, which he seldom found reason to alter,
after he had given his judgment, having founded it upon the best reason, and
most certain information: And in this he was so sedulous and curious, that if
it was not his, it was our unhappiness that his over-earnest diligence this way
is reckoned the Occasion of his last fatal Distemper, which is judged to be
brought upon him by a Cold contracted in the Middle Temple Hall, where he
thought it necessary to be present at a Case between two Honorable Lords,
there argued by Learned Counsel before the Lord Keeper, that he might be better
able to judge of the Merits of the Cause, when brought before the Great
Judicature of the most Honorable Peers.

Nor did this first Item of his Ilness discourage his Endeavors to serve the
Public, or prevent his attendance on the House some days after, being the
hearing of another business of moment, wherein (as he said) the Law was much
concerned, though he had much more reason to have consulted his own safety by a
seasonable absence, than to have added to his Indisposition by bringing it with
him to the House, and there wrestling with it, tho fasting and empty, and would
not leave it when afresh seized with it, till his Strength, though not his
Spirit and Courage failed: And when he could no longer resist the Attacks of
his Disease (which proved a Fever of the Spirits, which is dangerous to most,
and was to him fatal) he then, but not before, left off what he had all along
pursued, the Honor of Justice, the Vindication of the Laws, and the Good of
his Country; and whoever does so, is a Patriot while he lives, and will
survive in the memory of good men when he dies.

His behavior in his last Sickness I wish I were so happy as to be able to
account to you, from the knowledge and observation of those that were Witnesses
of it, especially from that Reverend Person, the Pious and Learned Dr. Horneck,
who was called to administer the last Office of Ghostly Counsel and Comfort to
him; but doubt not but it was suitable to the Religion he professed, becoming his
Profession, and worthy of his Character.

For he had a true Value for Religion, and such Notions of it as became a Great
Mind informed by God's Word, and assisted by his Spirit. His Zeal against
Popery was far from being without Knowledge; and his Love and Charity for all
Protestants, with his warm Endeavors for their common good and safety, were
conspicuous to the World: Yet this I cannot but say for the Honor of our
Church as well as in his Praise, that notwithstanding the Liberty for
Protestants of different Persuasions given by an Act of Parliament (in the
making and advising of which he had no inconsiderable share) yet he kept
constant to our Communion, frequenting the Public Ordinances and
Administrations, and using in his Family the Public Offices, and Service
appointed by the Church.

And his Example was not only an Argument to prevail with others, but a Credit
to the way he professed; manifesting on all occasions a real esteem for true
Goodness, and the influence that his Religion had on his Actions and
Conversation. Of which I shall mention two or three Instances, which never fail
to accompany the true spirit and vital energy of sincere Religion.

1. His forwardness to discourage Vice and Immorality. And that not only among
his Servants and Domestics, but elsewhere in the Neighborhood, where his
Frowns might check, or his Authority command: The Disorders too frequently
allowed in Houses of public resort no sooner reached his ears, than they
received a sharp rebuke from him, with a severe caution for the future to
restrain their entertainment of lewd Company, or of any at unseasonable hours;
the common and too fashionable Vices of Drink^ng and Swearing, were as much
discountenanced by him in others, as they were far from his own practice: Now a
Magistrate both rebukes and commands with Authority, that makes his own Pattern
the Copy for others to write by.

2. His desires of reconciliation and a b^tt^r correspondence where differences
and animosities had been too much fomented, too long retained. Perhaps a
proneness to passion may not altogether be excused yet is less blameable, where
it is the effect of temper and constitution; nor is of so malevolent an
Influence, where accompanied with a readiness to forgive and be reconciled, to
which he was so far from nanifesting an averseness, that there are some that
hear me, that can name the Instances of his great Condescension and Benignity
in pardoning and passing by Injuries, and being reconciled upon easy terms,
when it was in his power to have ruined those who professed Enmity against, or
mis-understood him; and greatly to have profited himself by taking those
advantages which the Law would have given him: Nor was this true Greatness of
Mind expressed only in Relation to matters of Scandal and Calumny, but even to
the most visible Attempts against his Life. That which most sensibly affected
him, was the Grudges and Animosities which had so unhappily divided the
Interest of this County, in which he made so great a Figure; I say affected, I
will add afflicted him too; having heard him passionately bewail the ill
effects of them, and heartily wish that he were able to redress them; and I
think there is not any that will witness against him, that ever he made use of
the Authority that this Government entrusted him with, to widen the Breach, or
heighten the Discontents; but rather endeavored to apply Lenitives than
Causticks; and carried his Power and Interest with so even a Balance, that none
could justly take offense, unless such as were less disposed to Unity and
Agreement than he was. It Is too common in the world to see Power and Authority
exercised merely for the advantage of a Party, or to carry on the projects of
Ambition and Self-design, or perhaps the worse attempts of Revenge and Malice;
whereas it is designed more for the good of others, than the advantage of those
that are entrusted with it; and they only act like God (the Fountain of Power)
who dispense the influence of their Authority in acts of Bounty and Kindness,
and to serve the ends of Peace and public Good. Would those that survive this
Great Man pursue the same methods, and heartily join in the Endeavors of Unity
and Accommodation; they might hope to see what I dare say he would have rejoiced
to behold, the Union of different Parties and Interests happily cemented in a
kind Correspondence and friendly Agreement.

3. His regard to the Sacred Oracles of God, the Holy Scriptures (the Rule of
our Duty, and Guide of our Actions) and his care in reading and consulting
them, to cull out such Directions as might be useful upon all occasions, and
applicable to the several emergencies of his Actions. To which end he had drawn
up several Heads (above an Hundred in number) in a large Book for that purpose,
and under them had noted with his own Hand, such places of Scripture as were
properly reducible to them; whence he might furnish himself with Rules and
Instructions, that he might still act agreeable to the directions of God's Holy
Word. An example so much the more Commendable and Remarkable, as possibly more
rare in persons of his Station and variety of Avocations: and would to God it
were not too epidimical a mistake, not only in Men of Honor, but of Parts and
Wit, yea, and Learning too, to lay aside the Bible as a dull insipid Book, fit
only for the Clergy to consult, or melan^holly folks to pore on: Alas! they
little know the worth of it, that slight or disesteem it; but they that
diligently consult it as the Rule of life and manners, the more they read it,
the more they admire it, and as David and all Good men have experienced it,
find it a Lanthorn to their feet, and a Light to their paths I dare say with
assurance that no one that has seriously set himself to read and consider it,
ever found cause to repent the loss of his time; and that whoever will take
pains to note down such passages as may be of most use and concern to him, (as
this Right Honorable Person did) will find at once a faithful Adviser, a
t^^sty Monitor, and a sure Guide; which will lead him into the paths of true
wisdom and goodness, which two perfect humane nature, and are the highest
attainment of this life.

But to come closer to my Subject, with which I must hasten, lest I should
injure your Patience, which I should hazard, should I trace him through all his
Commendable Qualities, and Praiseworthy Accomplishments. I leave it to his
Servants and Domestics, who best know him to proclaim him the best of Masters,
and honor his Memory, as they ought, with a due testimony of his Freedom,
Affability and Kindness to all that were Dependants, or Retainers to him. It Is
part of the Imperfection of this state, that we learn the value of most things
more by the loss, than the enjoyment of them; it will be verified doubtless in
them, who have lost an indulgent Master, a courteous Patron, an obliging
Benefactor.

I appeal to all the Neighborhood, and as many as had the honor or
opportunity to resort to Dunham, for the greatness of his Hospitality, his
generous Reception, and obliging Entertainment; a Quality, I must needs say,
the less to be wondered at in him, since it has been so long hereditary to that
Family, that it now pleads Prescription, and is become an usage immemorial: May
it remain and be continued as a Mark of Honor to that Noble House, and the
lasting Character of its Posterity.

I appeal to his Country, for his Courage and Resolution to venture himself
for the good of it, when he thought it in apparent danger; and leave the world
to judge of the hazard he underwent to his Person, Estate and Family, and all
that was near and dear to him.

That love to his Country, which was remarkable in all the parts of his Life,
appeared very particularly at the time when he was to be Tried for Imputed
Treason: For when there seemed need of the advice of many of the best Lawyers,
to help him to fence against the Arts of the Council employed against him, he
absolutely refused the assistance of any Lawyer who had been blemished with any
accession to the Calamities of the Times.

Indeed his own wonderful Defense of himself superseded the use of any Lawyer
at his Trial, and I may appeal to written Evidence for his Ability in speaking
and managing that Cause, of the highest nature and concern that could befall
him, (which often confounds men's Intellects) when he defended himself to the
great Joy and Satisfaction of his Friends, the Envy and Surprise of his
Enemies, and the Wonder, if not Astonishment of all that heard him. Yet did he
not in all this sacrifice to his own Net, or ascribe the Success of his Release
and Deliverance to his own Wit and Policy, to his Parts and Management; but
gave the Glory to God, and paid the Annual Tribute of Praise and Thanksgiving
to him for it, setting apart that day as a day of grateful Memorial; which he
solemnly and religiously observed with his Family every Fourteenth day of this
month of January; this very day which now by the Providence of the All-wise
Disposer is become the day of his Obsequies, as if Prophetically chosen for a
remarkable Vicissitude, that what was before a day of Jubilee, must now be writ
in black Letters, and made a day of Sadness and Mourning, and so become doubly
observable to his Honorable Posterity.

His Gratitude to God was rightly accompanied with Charity to Men, and he
solemnized that day not only with Prayers and Praises, and other offices of
devotion to God, but also at the same time clothed and fed Twenty seven poor
People, according to the Number of Peers that acquitted him, that he might
increase his own rejoicing and gratitude, with the joy and refreshment of the
poor and indigent.

But his Charity was far from being confined to an Annual distribution, he was
sensible that the Divine Bounty is repeated and continued daily, and so ought
we too, to extend our Charity, which is the Quit-rent we pay for all our
Receipts. God needs none of our Gifts, yet has obliged us to make suitable
Returns and Acknowledgments, and has withal appointed his Receivers, and passed
his Word as an Acquittance, that what is given to the Poor, is lent to the
Lord. We are all but Stewards, and the more we have received, the more we have
to account for. This Religion taught him, and meeting with a generous Soul and
bountiful disposition, opened his hand wide, and made his Charity large and
extensive. Almost every day was a doleday at his door; but particularly every
Friday in the year a larger distribution was made to the poor and necessitous.
I think I need not call upon them to attest the Truth of it, which we may read
in their Tears and Lamentations for him.

You have heard in these severals, that the Tree, which I said was fallen,
whilst it stood and flourished brought forth choice and pleasant Fruit, and was
what Eve fancied of the Tree in Paradise, good for Fruit, pleasant to the Eye,
and a Tree to be desired. But since such desires are now become vain and
unprofitable, and the Tree must lie where it is fallen, let me refresh your
deprest Spirits with the fair blooming Hopes of a yet tender, but
well-promising Plant out of the same Noble Stock, and sum up our hopes in
affectionate wishes, That he may thrive and grow up to the same maturity of
Worth and Merit, and not only flourish in the Seat, but inherit the Virtues of
his Progenitors, and transmit them to a lasting succession of Posterity. Amen.

FINIS.

