THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THe Books are almost innumerable occasioned by an unhappy Heresy, that in the
last age infected Germany, and after like a Leprosy, Overspread the greatest
part of our Northen Countries. Too many are writ by Those, who style themselves
Protestants, or of the Reformed Religion, not to speak of the Subdivisions as
Arminians, Brownists, Anabaptists, or of their Followers, which crumble into as
many Sects as men. Of These we have VVriters, who with no little Animosity
inveigh bitterly one against an other. Yet (because Self-interest will have it
so) All of them closely join in a Foul dishonorable League against an Ancient
Mother Church That made them and their Progenitors Christians.

This has stirred up the pen of many a learned man, not so much to confute
their weak Discourses, as positively to Assert Truth which cannot be shaken,
and to Vndeceive a poor sort of seduced People, who easily gained by sleek
Words and the Specious Pretenses of some (who have told untruth so long, that
at last they almost Believe it Themselves) insensibly fall into error. To
Vnbeguile these deluded Souls more, I have here cast my Mite also into the
Treasury of these learned labors, and writ this Treatise. VVherin I both lay
forth the Evidence of our Roman Catholic Religion upon undoubted Grounds, and
make it likewise manifest That Protestancy, as Reformed, which is only a
fallible taught Doctrine, cannot be Resolved into Gods Infallible Revelation,
and thersore is no part of Christian Religion, But a mere Opinion only Vpheld
by Fancy.

I undertook the small work you here se upon this occasion. About a year since,
(so much it was when I writ this Preface) A friend sent me a Book with a surly
imperious Title. The Nullity of the Romish Faith; or a blow at the root of the
Romish Church. By Mr. Matthew Poole printed anno 1666. and only desired me to
make a few Observations upon an Appendix by the same Author against a Converted
Gentleman. Curiosity ledd me on to read the whole book, where finding little
worth the Answering, I laid it aside for two or three months, till I was urged
again to return some short Answer to the Appendix. But while this business gave
me a little entertainment, We here (though at distance) Heard a noise of a
Rational Account of the Grounds of Protestant Religion etc. by Mr. Edward
Stillingfleet. The book I saw but lately, yet some Parcels of his Doctrine found
the way to me by several Reports, and Letters also. VVerupon, I laid Mr. Pooles
Appendix aside And was longer in this Treatise then I intended, or was indeed
necessary to Answer the Appendix, which yet may have an Answer timely enough.

By the way, as far as sure Principles can Guide one, and a few Glances at Mr.
Pooles Doctrine will reach to, I refute some weak ground's of His Nullity, which
is as much as it deserves. That of Mr. Stillingfleet Merit's more, I mean a
larger Refutation. Though to speak Truth, it is too tediously long and both
says very much, and very little: Much in Generalities and cavilling at our
Catholic Faith, But little in giving any Account of Protestant Religion as
it is now reformed, which yet was the only Thing I sought for, but found not in
his writings, as I have often noted in this Treatise. Had I had his book
sooner, or more time, I would have refuted some more chief points in it, but I
hope Those have it in hand, that will bring the Author to a better account; for
he who first Tell*s amiss must count twice, before He make a Right reckoning.

I wave all along, as much as may be, an unnecessary Repetition of known
Authorities drawn from Scripture, and Fathers (for that were Actum agere) and
endeavor to ground my Discourse upon undoubted Principles. And my chief aim is,
as I now insinuated, to make it evident, That Protestancy built upon Fancy,
stand's tottering without the Support os any acknowledged Principles, and
consequently Falls of it self. To speak more plainly: When Sectaries go
about, either to impugn the Roman Catholic Doctrine, or to establish their
Own, They give you nothing that look's like a sure owned Principle, but quite
contrary, tire you out with long loos Discourses, which driven on to the very
last, at most come to no more but to Guesses only, vveak Conjectures, and the
unproved Thoughts of those who make them. In a word, They never fall on
Principles, nor can make their own Doctrine good upon any better Argument then
by only saying, It is True, or cavilling at ours: As if it were the way for a
man to Prove Himfelf honest, by saying his neighbor is not so; or enough to
Establish Their House built upon sand to Assert that ours, once certainly
settled on a Rock, is not The ancient building it was but has been repayr'd,
and otherwise Adorned. If all this were true (as it is most falls) what is their
House the better, that is still upon sand? Or, their Religion sounder, that
stand's Vnprincipl'd without Scripture, Church, or Reason? I only say thus much
in a Preface, and prove it afterward in the following Discourses, which I was
advised to write in Latin, having now more use of That (I may thank my long
Absence from England for it) then is allowed me of our Mother Tongue. But
sapientibus and insipientibus debtor sum. I desire to satisfy all, and owe as
much to the Illiterate of my dear Country as to the Learned, and therefore shall
Expose this Treatise in plain English (for I can speak no better) and hope upon
that Account to find the Readers easier Pardon If I often Speak improperly, or
now and then break Priscians head in English.

Sometimes as the matter requires, I am forced to make use of words that may
seem harsh as Toys, Fancies, Trifles not worth the Answering etc. But it is
impossible for me to use other language, if I Will call things by their right
names, and give the world to understand what they are, Smoother terms would
look like Mockery (whilst Sectaries use harsher) rather then Civility. Believe
what you will. I Profess seriously, all I say is without Passion, or Design to
reflect Personally upon our Adversaries whom I pity and pray for, having no
intention to reproach them, but to Reprove Heresy, To rail at any, but to
convince by Reason.

But I keep you too long at the Door, open and read without Prejudice, and if
you be not satisfied with what I write, of Charity give me timely notice, for
my days are almost Don. In the other world I can make no Answer but to
Almighty God, for the sincerity of my undertaking: whereby if any one soul reap
benefit, I have enough; if none do so, my comfort is, that He who knows my
good intention will be my ample Recompense, though infinitely above my desert,

Farewell.
A NECESSARY ADVERTISEMENT FOR THE READER.
1. MAy it pleas Any one to read this Treatise, And either seek to profit by
it, or vouchsafe to return an Answer, He will I hope, after a general thought,
cast on what I intend to prove in the ensuing Discourses, take particular
Notice also of a few Notes here set down which may perhaps conduce to His
better satisfaction.

2. Concerning the first. We need not to say much. My Intent is Chiefly to
prove These four Things. 1. That Sectaries are Churchles, because They
acknowledge no infallible Church on earth. Yet there are Infallible Teachers
(and consequently an infallible Church) as is Demonstrated in the first
Discourse. 2. That They are as Scriptureles as Churchles, and have not one
syllable of Gods Word for Protestancy. Therefore we treat in the second Discourse
of Their mangling and misinterpreting Scripture. 3. That Their Proceeding is
most Unreasonable in some chief controversies handled in the third Discourse. 4.
We prove in the fourth Discourse, the Roman Catholic Church to be the only true
Church of Christ, And there also lay Forth the improbability of Protestant
Religion. All this is Don to make good what the Title briefly expresses. Viz
Protestancy is without Principles of Scripture, Church and Reason. Now a word
of what I would have you to Note.

3. It is truly lamentable, to se how controversies in these our days are
driven on to nothing but to endless quarrels. There is certainly some cause of
so long a work, which might, methinks, be brought to a period with less Ado.
And what is it, think ye? Is it because Christ's true Religion cannot be made
evidently credible to Reason? No certainly. For, that Religion which has stood
invincible in the heat of so many persecutions, which has converted whole
Kingdoms and Nations, and drawn Millions of souls to it, must necessarily
appear most evidently Credible to all rational men. Is it because a falls
Religion cannot be Argued of Falsehood? No. It is as easy to convince an
erroneous Sect of error, as to prove true Religion to be true. And Hence, I
say, it is impossible to conceive any Thing like Religion, that can neither be
Proved evidently credible, or manifestly Argued of Falsehood. The Reason is,
Because the evident Credibility of true Religion (if one only be true in the
World) takes off from the false Religion all Prudent credibility, and leaves it
uttely destitute of Motives founding credibility. In a word, The evident
credibility of Truth makes Falsehood highly improbable. Whence I infer. If
true Religion be made thus manifestly credible by Almighty God, Rational Proofs
cannot fail to countenance that which He will have manifestly known.
Contrariwise, such proofs must of necessity be wanting to a falls Religion,
which God will have to appear both evidently Incredible, and Improbable to
prudent Reason. The Catholic therefore that hold's his Religion at least
evidently Credible before He believes, and certainly true by his Act of Faith,
cannot but have Proofs at hand which Do not only clearly evidence the undoubted
Credibility of it, but also Dash and Discountenance what ever can be said in
the Defense of a contrary Error. On the other side, The Sectary must of
necessity want such grounded Proofs; And consequently whether he Defend's his
own, or impugn's the true Religion, All He says will end at last in mere
Cavils and wordy Fallacies. You have the Reason Hereof more largely laid forth
Disc. 1. C. 8. Because God cannot permit in the Presence (as it were) of his
true Religion a falls Sect to appear so much as slightly Probable, which ever is
and must be inferior to Truth (or rather nothing) in the luster and evidence
of Credibility. Which is to say in other Terms: An Erroneous Sect cannot he
made at all Credible to Reason.

4. What then is the Reason, when the Catholic both supposes and proves His
Religion to be only true and Orthodox, that These strifes go endlesly on
between us and a few Protestants? Scarce any Book, though never so solid and
learned, is set forth by an English Catholic, but presently a Thing called an
Answer sallies out against it. Exceptions are made by Sectaries, This, They
say, Proves not, That Displeases etc. In a word, if we believe them, All is
Answered, when, God knows, A prudent Reader see's the main Difficulties waved,
And very often finds the very state of the Question gtosly mistaken. I Will say
my thought freely, and humbly submit all I say to the prudent Censure of every
learned Catholic. As long as Sectaries (without a just and rational Reproof,
it is all we can Do) are permitted to continue still the strain of writing they
constantly follow, which is to entertain the Reader with tedious Discourses in
general of Christian Religion, when Protestancy is that which should be Proved,
with mere conjectures, bare negative Arguments And unproved Propositions, with
their own forced and violent interpretations when an Authority urges, In a
word, with their Guesses and unworthy Cavils seasoned with jeers when nothing
else will Do etc. whilst this is Don, The close way of Arguing is laid aside,
They may talk on to the worlds end, without fruit to Any but to the Printer
only, that gains money by their Books. You will ask wat Remedy Against this
proceeding? An old Answer says much: It is: When they go about, either to prove
their own Novelties, or to impugn our Catholic Doctrine, That we keep them from
wandering to far from home, and Hold them close to Proofs and Principles (these
are the Shollers laws, our Rules and Canons) Do this, and you will soon se their
long Discourses Shrunk up to little, Their large volumes brought to a few
sheets of paper. Now if they refuse to stand to Principles, we must leave them
to Fancy, And show how they both Disgrace their cause, and themselves also.

5. By this word Principle, or Principles, I understand in our present matter a
strong rational, satisfactory, Intellectual light, that prudently forces
Reason to acquiesce in a Verity proposed: whether it arise from solid grounds
of Reason, or from great Authority, matters little, so it be prudently
Persvvasive and forceably work on a well disposed understanding. Judges Decide
by some measure of it in their equitable Sentences, And Schoolmen should not
want it in their Opinions. But, much more is requisite when we speak of
Religion whereon salvation Depend's; For here a far greater light a better
Assurance (Surmounting mere Probability) is nenessary, which cannot be darkened
by Fallacies, or weakened by Trivial Fetches. You have the ground hereof
Declared Disc. 1. C. 8. Because God, that lead's us in this present state to
the knowledge of His Revealed Truths, not by Enthusiasms or private
Illustrations, but by prudent inducements suitable to Reason, always makes his
true Religion so manifest by undubitable Signs, Marks, and Characters, that not
only the learned, but the more ignorant may come (if prudence Guide him) to a
clear Sight of it by certain Principles. We may, I think, proceed as securely
by light enough laid out to Reason in this weighty matter, as we do in other
great Verities. For example: All acknowledge Gods Divine Providence over the
world, and Therefore have strong Principles to prove the Truth. We Christians
say, That Christ our Lord And His Apostles taught most certain Heavenly
Doctrine. Principles cannot be wanting to prove this our Christian Verity. We
say, Judaism and Mahometism are Falls Sects: The Assertion can be made Good by
sure and undoubted Proofs. The only Question now under Dispute is, whether we
Catholics or Sectaries profess and Teach the Ancient Orthodox Doctrine
established by Christ and his Apostles, And without all Controversy certain
Principles cannot fail in this particular, whereby the difference between us may
be decided: Or if they Do fail, (which is not possible) every one may not only
adhere without reproof to any Religion or none, as Fancy pleases; But,
moreover may most justly blame Almighty God (And this is hideously impious) who
command's us on the one side to embrace true Religion, yet on the Other, Leaves
us in such Fearful darkness, That none after a diligent search can find out by
sure Principles, what or where that Religion is which He will have us to
believe, to make profession of, to live and dye in. And this would be highly
contrary to his infinite Goodness. Thus much premised.

6. I say first. The Sectary, whether He takes in hand to establish his own
Opinions, or to impugn any Doctrine of our Catholic Faith, shall never come to
an Intellectual light that has a likelihood of a sure Principle. The Reason is
most evident in Catholic grounds (I say no more yet) Because Truth cannot be
contrary to Truth: If therefore Catholic Religion be true, what ever the
Sectary says against it, when he either Plead's for his own, or oppugn's our
Doctrine, must of necessity be so remote from sure Principles, That his whole
Talk, ultimatly Resolved, will appear in its own likeness a mere cheat, and end
in nothing but a fallacy; For it is not Possible to force Truth out of
Falsehood, or to make that Probable which is Essentially improbable.

7. I say 2. It cannot but be most manifest to every prudent disinteressed
Judgment, That Sectaries have nothing like sound received Principles to rely
on, whether They oppugn our Catholic Doctrine, or Defend their own Opinions. To
clear this Assertion from Cavils, you shall se what we propose. Be pleased only
to take two or three sheets of paper (much more is not needful) And permit a
learned Catholic briefly to set down in the first Pages of them, the Proofs he
has for his Catholic Doctrine in one particular Controversy now agitated (this
short way of Arguing will do the deed) Then let the Protestant write all he can
say for his contrary Proposition in the other Pages, And if you do not se a
strange unequal Parallel of Proofs, And no Proofs laid together, call me what
you will, I Will bear a just rebuke, yet fear not any. I say, pitch upon One
Controversy now in Dispute. For Example that one long debated (we cannot now
insist upon all) may be thought of. Viz. Whether Recours had to the Saints in
Heaven by the Prayers of the living, be erroneous or true Doctrine? Next permit
the Question to be truly stated, and then Hear what the Catholic says for
Himself. He tell's you first the Roman Catholic Church and the Greek Church
also, whether Orthodox or Schismatical teach, as He believes. 2. He produces
Scriptures to prove his Doctrine. 3. He alleges Fathers both Greek and Latin
quoted by every Polemical writer on this subject. Bellarmin furnishes you most
plentifully lib. 1. de Sanct. Beati cap. 19. The wit of man cannot wrest them
to a sense contrary to our Catholic Position. 4. You will have His Reasons,
and that one most concluding: Good men laudably pray for us here on earth:
Ergo, much more the Saints in Heaven (because in a better state) can do that
Charity. When the Catholic has ended his Proofs grounded on these and the
like undeniable Principles. Cast your thoughts a little on the Sectaries
Contrary proofs, And mark well his Principles. Has He any Church reputed
Orthodox either now, or six hundred years agon, That expressly and positively
defended his Opinion, and condemned our Doctrine? No, most evidently not any.
Has he so much as one syllable of Scripture, that plainly and positively
Denies our Catholic position, and speak's for his? Not a word is found in the
whole Bible to that purpose, much against it. Has he Fathers so numerous and
clear for his Novelty, as we produce for this one Truth, Saints can both hear
and help us? Not one Father is express against us, or plain for his contrary
Opinion. Parallel therefore a Church and no Church, Scripture and no Scripture,
Fathers express for us, and not one against us: And judge you whether it be not
evident to every disinteressed judgment, that Protestants want sound
Principles to rely on in this Controversy. And as you se a Defect of Principles
here, so you will find it in all other Disputes between us. Now if they say,
They value not much of our Church Authority. I answer, They speak without
Principles, For the sole judgment of our Church (had we no more) will be
thought in any just Tribunal a stronger proof for our Doctrine, then their mere
slighting of it can be without a likelihood of proof. If They say again, They
can either Deny or explicate the Fathers we produce, I Answer, They are still
out of Principles: For their Denial is weightles, unles They ground it upon a
surer Principle, then that Authority is, which they Deny. Observe well. We have
innumerable Fathers Greek and Latin express for the Invocation of Saints. Say
therefore, What will it Avail the Sectary barely to reject these Authorities
(because they are the words of men and not of God) Unless He Give you the plain
word of God, or the Authority of an Orthodox Church (in place of them) whereon
his Denial has sure footing? If this be not don, He comes to nothing like a
Principle, consequently the Fathers Authority (most agreeable to the Churches
Doctrine) is a clear Demonstration against him. If He Pretend to allege Fathers
contrary to ours: I Answer, He has not one express or plainly contrary.
However, falsely suppose, He had one or two, The contest would then be, whether
one that stands, as it were, alone opposite to the Churches Doctrine, or many
Fathers that side with the Church deserve more credit? Here I am sure He will
stand without footing on any certain Principle. If He tell you Thirdly, The
Primitive Church prayed not to Saints: They are his own empty words. We prove
the contrary, by the express Testimonies of most ancient Fathers, and the
Tradition of our Church, whilst He remains speechles and without a Principle to
ground his Assertion on. If He Object fourthly. His Reasons, chiefly two viz.
Prayers to Saints lessens our Honor to Christ. And, we cannot say how our
prayers come to the Saints Hearing etc. I Answer. Here is nothing probable, for
an Objection (as soon solved as seen) is far off from the nature of a sound
Principle. We say therefore, if to pray for one an other Here on Earth lessens
not Christ's Honor, there is no danger of lessening it by our recours had to the
Saints in Heaven, now in a most Glorious and happy Condition. And thus, no less
a Doctor then S. Hierom, Adversus vigilantium, Paris print 1609. page 590.
Solves the Difficulty at those words. Dicis in libello tuo etc. Thou,
Vigilantius, says in thy Book, that whilst we live we may pray for one
another, but after Death no Prayer is heard for Any. Here is the Objection.
Mark S. Hieroms Answer. Si Apostoli and Martyrs adhuc in corpore constituti,
possunt orare pro ceteris, quando pro se debent esse soliciti: quanto magis
post coronas, victorias and triumphos. If the Apostles and Martyrs yet living
in a mortal body, can pray for others, when they are solicitous for themselves:
much more, can they do that Charity after their Crowns, Victories, and
Triumphs. He goes on. Vnus homo Moses etc. That one Moses obtained pardon for
thousands Exodus 32. And the first Martyr S. Stephen living, prayed for his
Persecutors Act. 7. Et postquam cum Christo esse coeperint minus valebunt? And
what, shall they be able to do less now, when they are glorious with Christ in
Heaven? Meliorque erit vigilantius cams vivens, quam ille leo mortuus. And can
thou, Vigilantius, a living Dog, be better then that dead Lion, (He alludes to
S. Paul that prayed for others whilst he lived?) Tu vigilans dormis, and
dormiens scribis. I tell thee, Vigilantius, waking thou sleep's, and sleeping
writ's these things against prayer to Saints. Thus S. Hierom. And not only S.
Austin lib. 22. de Civit. c. 8. (to omit innumerable others) Approves the
Doctrine, but that worthy Bishop also, S. Greg Nyssen in his Oration of S.
Theodore Martyr, Paris print 1615. page 1011. and 1017. confirms the Practice
of it. Pray for us, says S. Gregory (addressing himself by an earnest Petition
to S. Theodore when the Scythians threatened a war to the Country) make
intercession to him who is our common King and Lord. As you are a soldier
fight for us and defend us, And as a Martyr speak freely for your fellovv
servants here. A few lines after. And if more Prayer be needful, assemble
together the whole Quire of your Brethren Martyrs, and jointly intercede for
us. Put S. Peter in mind, move S. Paul, and the beloved Disciple of our Lord S.
John, that they be solicitous for the Churches, where once they wore Chains,
passed dangers, and finally Dyed. Say now, what lessening is here of Christ's
Honor by the prayer of this Ancient Saint and most learned Prelate? Or what
answer can be returned to these three Authorities? The other Difficulty is as
forceles: For if Scctaries can explicate how the blessed Soul of our Savior in
Heaven hear's our Prayers, which I hope they will not Deny (I speak of his
Sanctified created Soul) all Difficulty cease in the present Controversy: How
They hear is opinion (se Bell. cap. 20. n. Argumentum tertium) But That they
Hear, is certain Doctrine.

7. Now if Sectaries tell us They can so explicate These Fathers as to make
their words insignificant to our Purpose: I would first learn, what can be said
to S. Hierom, S. Austin, and S. Gregory now cited; But this is not all, for I
am to assure them further, That their explications, when contrary to the
Doctrine of a whole Church, as also to the obvious sense of either Scripture or
Fathers quoted by us, are so far off from being Principles, that they merit not
the name of mean probabilities; which Truth is more amply Declared Discourse 4.
c. 4. n. 8. 9. Where I prove that no Interpretation of Sectaries can be Allowed
of, unles it rely on an extrinsick Ground much surer then His Gloss is that
interpret's, which therefore must be plain Scripture, The undoubted consent of
Fathers, Universal Tradition, or such like convincing Principles. Hence I said,
when the Catholic Interprets a dubious or Difficil Passage, He never makes his
Gloss to be the ultimate Proof of his Doctrine, But supposes that proved by
stronger Principles distinct from His Interpretation. All is contrary with the
Sectary, who makes His Gloss to do all, to be the last and surest ground of his
Opinion, without the Support of any better Proof then his own word is. And thus
much is evident in other Controversies now Debated between us, as you will see
Hereafter.

8. From this want of clear Principles, all the too manifest and most
Discernable Faint proceeding of our Adversaries in matters now controverted,
shows it self so openly, that one with half an Eye may Discover it. It is From
want of Principles, That they now begin to be weary of Protestancy, and hold
that a Faith Common to all Sectaries is sufficient to Salvation: if this may
Pass, They need not herafter to stand more for Protestancy then Arianism, or
for any other condemned Heresy. For the same Principles (were there Any) would
make both Sects equally Credible. Hence it also is, That you have them ever
Cavilling at our Religion (and It Is the easiest thing in the world to Find
fault, Yea, and to cavil at the verities of Holy Scripture it self, you se
Arians do so) but still you find them wanting in that which concern's them
most, which is to bring their Novelties to the grounds of either Scripture, or
any Ancient Church Doctrine: Herin they are as mute, as Fishes, and say not a
word. It is from want of Principles, That, when they explicate a Council or
Father alleged against them, They are tediously long about little, that is in
relating the circumstances to be as They would have Them, but whether they hit
right is ever a matter of Dispute, and nothing like a received Principle. From
hence it also is, That when They make such and such Doctrins to be In^o^ations
(Praying to Saints Purgatory, or what else you will) The very last ground They
standon, comes to nothing but Negative Arguments, weak Conjectures, blind
Guesses, Fancy, and mere Uncertainties. It is From the want of Principles, That
when we produce undeniable History for innumerable Miracles wrought in our
Church, An odd Answer is at hand: They cannot believe them, as if, forsooth,
Their Parole or mere Unbelief had force enough to make null all that is writ of
this subject by most approved Authors. From want of Principles it is That they
ever place against our clear Authorities no more but mere uncertain
Testimonies, And pick out of our Writers all they can pilfer for Their
Advantage, whereas, if they had a good cause in hand and sound Principles to
rely on, They should beat down the Doctrine of long standing Church (...) by
undeniable Proofs, taken from Scripture, Councils, and consent of Fathers,
whereof more presently. From hence it also is, That when a Doctrine pleases
them, Tradition is approved of; But if it be contrary to their Fancy, then
Tradition is of no account or value. For example. Prayer for the Dead is as
well a universal Tradition of both the Greek and Latin Church, as to hold that
Canon of the Sectaries Bible to be the Word of God, yet the one is admitted of,
And the other set light by; And upon what Principle (Distinct from unproved
Conjectures) Do They take and leave as they list? Finally, it is for want of
Principles, That in lieu of solid Arguments in every Controversy now handled
you have words in stead of Substance, margents painted with Greek and Latin,
now a story told of a Pope or Prelate, now a jeer, now a jest in handsome
language etc. And thus they hold on in their Merriments, Thoughtles, as it
seems, of an accounting Day to come before a sever Judge, and a long Eternity
that follows. And to what purpose are these light Skirmishes and petty Doin^^
in a serious matter whereon salvation depend's, whilst God is dishonored, souls
are beguiled, Christ's sacred Truths also infinitely suffer, by them who will yet
be named Christians.

9. I call them here petty Doings. For when on the one side I set before my
Eyes our Roman Catholic Church (once founded by Christ) and therefore must hold
it most Ancient and confessedly true. When again I find it of a vast extent
diffused the whole world over, And as much renowned as largely Extended. When I
see it glorious Evidenced by Miracles, powerful in the Conversions of Infidels,
eminent in Sanctity, And most profound learning. When I consider How it has
stood invincible in the heat of all persecutions, and call to mind the Heresies
vainquished by it Age after Age, To say no more now of other signal Marks
wherewith it is made illustrious and visible to all. When (I say) I consider
these Truths. Methinks evident Reason Tells me, that a few slight Cavils cannot
much annoy or hurt it. No. Either clear Demonstrations, or (were it possible)
more then Demonstrations ought to enter here, and shake this our strong
Fortress, Or, if they do not, Common Prudence obliges me to own this for
Christ's true Spouse, or to Grant, (which is hideously Against the Grounds of
Christianity) that there is no such Thing as an Orthodox Church in the world.

10. Now on the other side, when I cast my Thoughts on a Few late risen Company
of Divided Sectaries, utterly Destitute of all prudent Motives, without
Antiquity, Miracles, Conversions, or other Evidences of Credibility; when again
I seriously ponder how slightly they go to work against us, How weakly They
attempt with mere Trifles (remote from Proofs and Principles) to Vnroot (as it
were) this strong Building of our Catholic Society, I stand astonished, and
must needs say, They seem to be men not too thoughtful of Eternity, And never
can wonder enough at Their boldness, whilst They dare, as they do, to take pen
in hand, and presume to write against an Ancient Church, that made the world
and their own Progenitors Christians. But what is Hitherto briefly hinted at,
will be more largely laid forth in the ensuing Discourses.

11. Now it is high time to end an Advertisement, and to tell our Adversaries
my absolute Resolution. It is thus. Let who will pretend to Answer this Treatis
either in part or whole, Nothing shall draw me to Reply, unles He that Answers
come more closely to Principles, then I ever yet saw in Protestant Writer. It
is a sin to trifle our precious time away in Cavils. I Will heartily thank any
that may pleas to Answer upon Grounded Principles: but if He fail Herin, His
labor will be lost and mine hereafter spared, All I shall Do (if I do so much)
will be to tell him were He misseth in the Main point which is to come closely
to Principles.

THE INTRODVCTION.
BEfore we enter upon the following discourses, I must need's have a word with
Mr. Poole, whose Nullity, and Appendix (but chiefly the request of a friend)
induced me to write this Treatise. It is very true, after one serious perusal
of this Nullity, I had enough of it, and therefore judged it unnecessary, and
indeed not worth the pains to answer (...), or to follow the Author through his
Mazes, and long wandering parergons. I return him undoubted grounds of true
Religion (they are undeniable) which at least destroy his best Principles; and
if I mistake not, this is fully as much as a Nullity deserves. However, if he
desire more, he may probably have it in another Treatise. Now, if you ask, why
I took this way of answering, if yet you will call it an Answer, I Will tell you. My
aim is not so much to meddle with this Nullity, as to speak for the Catholic
cause, and prove something, which shall not be answered. Again:

It is more then tedious, ever to be encountering a few old worn-out Arguments
(set forth in new dresses) which have been confuted a hundred times over.
Thirdly: No small part of this Nullity seems to be too trivial, while later
Catholic writers are introduced speaking, as Mr. Poole thinks,
disadvantagiously, and against our Faith. Now Sixtus Senensis says this, now
Bellarmin that, now Stapleton a third thing, etc. And are these, think ye,
doughty Doings for such an Antagonist, that offers to strike at the very root
of the Roman Church? Alas, what he cites thus, were all he cites true, is a
Nullity indeed, and a mere nothing; for Church Doctrine depends on no man's
private opinion: But, when we make an inspection into these Authors (as I have
done on several occasions, and find them quoted by halfs, weighed out of their
circumstances, mangled, and traduced to a sinister sense) we must speak truth,
That cheats will go on their way, and rather play at small game, then sit out,
or seem to do nothing.

Had Protestants any thing like a good cause in hand, or Truth on their side,
they would certainly plead more manfully for it, and never like poor people in
harvest, go thus a gleaning up and down our Authors (known for professed
Catholics) who little, God knows, intended to favor Sectaries by such
segments, as they are pleased to pick up, much less to furnish Protestants with
armor against Catholic Doctrine. But what will ye? Sectaries can do no better.
Yet I must tell you what they ought to do, whilst they embrace a Novelty, and
cast of the old Religion. They should make the ancient Canons to roar against
our Doctrine, they should confound and overwhelm us with undeniable proofs,
drawn from plain Scripture, ancient Councils, universal Tradition, and the
unanimous consent of Fathers: Of these we hear no great noise. Next (and this
most concerns them) They should also positively prove, and establish every
Article of Protestant Religion, as Protestancy, by such plain, open, and
illustrious Authorities, then a Bellarmin, a Stapleton, a Maldonate and others
might well follow the rear: But to vapor with a few broken fragments, I Will
espied in these Modern Authors (and worse applied) without attending to their
whole drift, antecedent and consequent, and think to defeat an Ancient Church
with such trivial Doings, is so slight a way of schirmishing, that it deserves
no counterblow, but pity and compassion. That incomparable Author of the
Protestants Apology, learn's them anohter way of arguing, whilst he does not
only show the endless clashing of Sectaries amongst themselves, but moreover
solidly proves our Catholic Doctrine positively, and this by the most
satisfactory and undeniable Principles, that a lover of Truth can wish for.

Thus these new men should defend their cause, and it is no fault of ours that
they trifle it out, and do no better. We charge enough upon them, and could
they well acquit themselves, they would certainly go more closely to work, and
answer directly. We say, and will prove it, That, that Doctrine which they
believe as Protestants, contrary to the Roman Catholic Faith, is evidently no
part of any Christian belief, but a mere Opinion grounded on fancy only. We
say, and will prove it, that this new Religion of Protestancy has all the
marks and characters of heresy following it, which can be thought on: not one
is wanting; for, if Arius of old, who quited the ancient Roman Church, and
banded against it, was, upon that account, both schismatic and heretic, our
Sectaries are in eadem nave, and have done so, their cause and case, in other
matters, is the very same. 2. As Arius stood all alone at his first rise,
opposite to the rest of Christians, and was opposed by all, so were they also
both opposite, and opposed by all. 3. As he began without commission to broach
his Novelties against the ancient Faith, so are they as wholly unco^missioned to
preach Theirs: And here we give them matter enough to work on, and conjure them
to produce their commission. 4. As Arius, supported by secular power, vented
what ever he pleased without curb, or any superior law to check him, and
therefore fell into desperate Extravagancies; so are our new men lawles also,
and submit to none but their own fancy and self-judgement. Finally, as Arius,
without warrant of the Church, interpreted Scripture as his own weak reason
taught him, just so do our Sectaries: here only is the difference, That he had
a plausible sound of Scripture-words for his heresy; Protestants have neither
sound, nor syllable, nor sense through the whole Bible for one article of
Protestancy, as Protestancy. This I shall make good hereafter.

Here is charge enough drawn up against them; but by what satisfactory known
and received Principles* which force reason to acquiesce (and we make a search
after these) they can acquit themselves, or rationally answer, is a heavy
difficulty. I Will tell you in a word (and remember it) they shall never answer
by any thing that has the look of a rational proof, or a received Principle.
No: Their own sole proofles word, whereon the whole machin of Protestancy is
built, upholds what ever they teach: They have no more. They say, it is true,
they left the ancient Roman Church, because it left it self, but yet stick
close to the Primitive Doctrine. Observe it: They are here both Accusers of us,
and Judges in their own cause. Their proofles word does all, without reducing
it to any known or certain owned Principle. Not one Council, not one Canon, no
ancient Tradition, no consent of Fathers can they produce, whereby particular
men are lycensed to rise up against an Ancient Mother Church, and condemn it of
false Doctrine. They will tell you, that they stood all alone when Luther rose
up, yet taught, forsooth, the true Gospel of Jesus Christ: and we must believe
them. Here is the last Propositio quiescens. They say so: To what we charge
against their uncommissioned Authority to preach as they did, you have the like
uncommissioned answer: The Lord sent them abroad, and the Truth they taught
secures them. But of these weak wordy replies I have said to much in this short
Digression.

Let us now retourn to Mr. Poole: And I must say, all he has vented in his
Nullity or Appendix against us, comes to no more, but to a most weak assault of
a feeble Adversary; for this man, who endeavorus to prove that both Church and
Councils, and what else you can mention, are fallible, can never assume to
himself, or tie to any Community he joins with the Spirit of Infallibility:
For, if the infallibility of the Church of Rome must down; down, say I, also
with the infallibility of the Protestant Church, of the Grecian Church, and of
all other societies of Christians. With some of these Mr. Poole is listed, and
therefore I cannot but hold him, and his Adherents, men of no more, then of a
fallible Religion. Hence I argue: Suppose, which is utterly false, that the
Church, or all Churches, all Councils, all Fathers are fallible, and that
Christian Religion (as it is taught by these) is likewise fallible: Admit also,
that I were to embrace one of these many fallible Religions, (which I shall
never do) will not prudence dictate, if I have no other certainty then these
mere uncertainties to rely on, that it is better to hold where I am, and stick
to my ancient Religion, glorious with innumerable Martyrs, Doctors, Confessors,
etc. then to give up my Faith to Mr. Pooles post-nate fallible Religion, and
false discourse? How therefore can this man so much as once endeavor, to draw
me, or any, of my more ancient and universal Religion (though supposed
fallible) to another new one, which lies sick of the same disease, totters, and
reel's as much as mine (if not more) and in a word is fallible? Of two evils
the less is to be chosen. It is an evil without doubt, to have no Religion
certain; yet, if I were to choose one of two uncertain Religions, and could by
no certain Teacher learn which of them is worse (being both naught) I would
either pitch where I list, and as my fancy lead's me; or rather choose none at
all, knowing well, that a ruin of all Faith, follows the renouncing of
certainty in Religion. But of this more hereafter. In the interim,

I would know of Mr. Poole, whether this strange and unheard of Proposition:
Christian Religion, as it is taught and delivered by all Pastors, Doctors, etc.
is fallible, be subjectively in him that speak's it, an infallible Assertion,
or fallible? If the first, we have an English Pope (I mean Mr. Poole) who
without either Scripture, Church, or Council, can speak infallibly in matters
of Faith. If that formal Proposition be fallible, it falls of it self, without
further proof, to nothing, and renders this sense: I. M. P. say by a fallible
Assertion, that Christian Religion is fallible; which feeble Assertion (and the
weaker it is, the worse it is for him) cannot at all startle me, or any, who
upon the Authority of thousands more learned than he (to say no more) hold one
Religion, and but one only, certain and infallible. Perhaps he will say, that
though his Proposition be fallible, yet it is highly probable against the
pretended Infallibility of the Roman Church, no other society of Christians
laying claim to infallibility. Mark by the way what this Adversary drives at.
It is to tell the world a word of comfort, viz. That Christ Jesus has now no
certain and infallible Religion taught or learned in the whole Christian world;
And to make this most fallible and false Proposition good, he back's it by
another of his own, as false and fallible, viz. It is at least highly probable,
that the Church of Rome is fallible. Pray you on what legs does this high
supposed probability stand? I Will tell you, it stands only on Mr. Pooles weak
thoughts, and unwarranted word, more you have not. For, never did any ancient
Council, or universal Tradition, or the unanimous consent of Fathers hold it a
thing highly probable, that either Christian Religion, or the Catholic Church
of Rome is fallible. Does the Scripture favor any where this wild Assertion?
No, not one syllable is found to that purpose, we have texts enough to the
contrary; some I shall quote on a fitter occasion.

You will ask what then is it, that Mr. Pooles proves against us in the fourth
Chapter of his Nullity? I answer, just nothing. His whole strain is thus: After
much tampering with those convincing places of holy Scripture, usually alleged
for the Churches Infallibility, and spoiling all with his fallible fancies, he
goes negatively to work, and tell's us: Such and such texts (turned out of
their genuine sense by his glosses) come not home, nor prove any Church
infallible; and it is no wonder, for, as perverted by him, they are none of
Gods Scripture, but his own scribled whimsies. Take here one instance for many,
that text of S. Paul, 1. Tim. 3. 15. where the Church is styled the pillar and
ground of Truth, seems plain enough, open, and significant for the Catholic
sense. Now comes Mr. Poole with his glosses, page 86. and says perhaps, here
may be an Ellipsis, of the word (...) may be writ for (...); and if so, Timothy
was the pillar, not the Church. Again, The Church here spoken of, may be that
wherein Timothy was placed, not the Roman. 3. The term of pillar, notes the
solidity, not the infallibility of the Church. 4. It may note the Churches
Duty, not her practice with a long, etc. Observe well. Upon these wretched
fallible suppositions Mr. Poole seems to conclude, that those words are
unconcluding for the Infallibility of any Christian society. Put I ask by what
Authority must I suppose his Ellipsis, or that the Church spoken of was
Timothy's Church, not the Universal? That the term pillar notes not the
Infallibility, etc? Does God speak thus in Scripture, or rather does not Mr.
Poole vent these wild Fancies without Scripture or any unquestioned Authority?
This later is most evident; And can he think by such farfetcht glosses, either
to rob the Apostle of his plain obvious sense, or to make me believe that his
guesses hit right on Gods true meaning, delivered in this text?

If he reply, the meaning may be as he guesses. I answer, and it may not be as
he guesses, Who is here to judge between us? Who can tell me, that Mr. Pools
May be is a prop sure enough to build my faith upon? He is therefore to show
positively by a Propositio quiescens; that is, by some cogent proof and
undoubted Authority, that S. Paul's words must be understood as he glosses, and
consequently is obliged to make good some one of these desperate Propositions.
Christ Jesus has now no infallible Religion taught or learned in the Christian
world. All Christian Societies are fallible. That holy and universal Church,
mentioned in the Creed, is fallible, etc. But to wave such proofs, to lay hold
on a Text in Scripture, and torture it as he pleases, and after the misusage
to tell us, the Text proves nothing; is only to sport with Gods Word, and say,
that Scripture made no Scripture by whole heaps of fallible glosses, is
proofles. The foundation is good, but the superstructure is naught. Give me the
strongest place in Scripture for any Article of Christian faith, I can by
pidling at the Text with unevidenced glosses, both so pervert and poison the
words, that at last they speak haeresy. Yet on such unproved conjectures
Protestant Religion stands, and can never have better footing, while Gods
unwritten Word is rejected, and no infallible Teacher is allowed of, that
learn's us Truth.

One word more, and I end. Had those two Gallants, Luther and Calvin, when they
took upon them to reform the darkened world of Popery, thus alarmed their
Hearers. My Masters: We Preach indeed a new Gospel upon the best conjectures we
are able; but you must know, that all we say is fallible: How sick would such a
saying have made the strongest stomach amongst them? For, if fallible, if
uncertain Doctrine, it was none of Christ Jesus Doctrine, and therefore stood in
need of a more pure refining. And how know our Protestants, but that yet a new
sort of People may start-up, and make it their task to reform all the fallible
Reformers, that have troubled the world since Luthers days? Had I no other
just exception against our Protestants but thus much only; That they yet know
not where about They are in their reformation, and because fallible, can never
know, whether for example the thing they have in hand; be yet a mere Embrio of
Religion, or of a more perfect shape, a new laid egg, or a hatched chicken;
whether they themselves are yet only Novices, Proficients, or Masters in the
trade of Reformation; I say, were there no more, This alone would fright me
from ever being Protestant.

Believe it, the Professors of an uncertain and endless reformable Religion
shall never come to settlement, till they renounce the cheat and Believe as the
Apostle teaches, ad Gal. 1. 8. Licet nos, etc. Altough we, or Angel from heaven
preach otherwise to you then we have preached to you, let him be accursed;
which is fully to say: Believe him not. And here by the way observe, how
destructive these words are of an uncertain and fallible teaching, in matters
of Religion; for admit (which Mr. Poole grants) that all Christian Communities,
all Councils, all Fathers, all Tradition, etc. deliver only Fallible Doctrine,
(that is, Doctrine liable to error) I only may not, but am obliged to
disbelieve this Truth of S. Paul, and believe him, or, an Angel sent from
heaven, if either of them preached contrary to this fallible Learning. Why?
Doctrine that is fallible may be false; but the preaching of an Angel sent from
heaven cannot be false, and therefore is more certain then Christian Doctrine,
that may be false. But I am obliged to quit the less certain Doctrine, for the
most certain preaching of an Angel; ergo I must relinquish Christianity, if an
Angel preach against it. The reason is. The lesser light yields to the greater,
probability submits to certainty, and my fallible (though highly probable)
Assent cannot but yield to the infallible Assertion of an Angel, if he speak
contrary to it.

These few considerations premised, we must insist more largely on this
subject, and demonstrate that there are living and infallible Teachers of
Religion in some one Society of Christians or other; which is directly opposite
to Mr. Poole, who holds, That no men are so highly privileged by Almighty God,
as to have subjective infallibility, or, to teach infallibly; though, perhaps,
they may deliver truth (as it were by chance) but not infallibly as Teachers. I
say, as Teachers, for by what I can learn by Mr. Poole and other Protestants,
They think all done when they tell us, That the objective Doctrine delivered in
Scripture is infallible, (which yet they cannot know without an infallible
Teacher, and therefore in saying this, they speak only fallibly:) but admit they
know so much, they are never the better for it, unles they jointly own some
Oracle, some certain Master, who by Divine assistance interpret's Scripture
without error, and as exactly convey's into our hearts Gods written revealed
Verities, when any doubt arises, as if the Apostles taught us. These Teachers
are they (can we find them out) that circumscribe our ranging Fancies, and put
a limit to our swerving Thoughts, while we often read, and seldom understand
those great secrets which God has laid up in the book of Sctipture, without
them (as we see by too sad experience) our weak reason, and strong Fancies
pervert all, and produce monsters of haeresies out of Scripture it self, whereof
more hereafter.

THE FIRST DISCOURSE OF INFALLIBLE TEACHERS, AND THE MOTIVES OF CREDIBILITY.
THE FIRST CHAPTER.
There Are infallible Teachers of true Christian Religion.
1. BEfore I prove the Assertion, I would gladly learn of our Adversaries (who
make all men fallible) whether, for these thousand years, the world ever had in
it any Christians, who heard the infallible Doctrine of Christ truly taught, and
infallibly believed it? If they disown such infallible Believers, they must
jointly deny all infallible Faith, and consequently say, That though God has
revealed in Scripture innumerable Verities, yes, and for this end, to beget
infallible Faith in our hearts, yet no man can lay hold on them, nor yield to
them by any other assent, but what is fallible, and may be false. Methinks
therefore, Gods infallible Revelation requires an infallible assent of Faith.
an infallible Verity revealed to us forcibly requires an answerable and
correspondent infallible assent of Faith in us: For to say, God speak's
infallibly to me, and that I either will not, or cannot infallibly believe him,
is in a word to tell him, that his certain Truths may ly close where they are
in the book of Scripture, (they may rest there) without being laid up, or
lodged in my heart as infallible owned and believed Truths. Most contrary are
those golden words of the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 2. v. 12. to this wild Doctrine:
Therefore we thank God without intermission, because when ye received the word
of God, which ye heard from us, ye received it not, as the word of men, but as
it truly is the word of God, who (effectually) works in you that believe.
Observe well: He who receives the delivered Word of God, as it is truly Gods
Word and not man's; He that has in his heart the infallible Word of God, and, by
the cooperation of Grace, yields an assent to it, as to the infallible word of
God, cannot but believe what God speak's, and as he speak's: but God speak's
infallibly, Therefore he believes infallibly; or if he reach not so high, but
faulters with an assent that is fallible, he Believes not God, nor his Word (as
it truly is Gods Word) who never did nor can speak any thing fallibly. Now, if
on the other side our Adversaries grant, that Christians heard the infallible
Doctrine of Christ, and believed it infallibly, They also must admit of a
Subjective infallibility, at least in such Believers. And this truth Scripture
clearly points at, in these and the like undeniable places, obvious to all: I
know who I believe, and am certain. Let the house of Israel certainly know.
Although we or Angel from heaven, etc. Faith is a conviction (...), or a strong
argument of Belief that is infallible, supposes infallible Teachers.
what appears not, etc. But these I wave, because known to every one. Let us
now proceed to the Teachers of Christian Religion, and prove our Assertion.

2. To go on clearly, I would know whether there have not always been, now
are, and ever will be among These true and infallible Believers, some Pastors,
Doctors, or Teachers, who, Authorized by Christ, are by Duty, both to instruct
Christians, in case they swerve from Truth, and also to reduce Aliens from
Christ, to a true Belief of his sacred Doctrine? Certainly, Mr. Poole will own
such Pastors in the world; if not, what are Ministers for in England? Or, why
does He assume to himself this Office of teaching, whilst He endeavors to
reclaim a seduced Captain from his Apostasy, as he call's it? And is it
possible? What? After such an The harsh Doctrine of Sectaries.
acknowledgement, shall we hear this unheard, harsh, and most Haeretical
Assertion: That all these Pastors, who are to unbeguile souls, may be beguiled
Themselves, or teach false Doctrine? And that not so much as one, amongst them
all, is so Highly privileged, as to instruct with certainty? If all are
fallible, and none Teaches certainly, the Blind lead's the blind, the Scholar
is as good as his Master; at least, none can in prudence learn of any, if this
persuasion live in him. He that Teaches me, may as well err as I, who am to
Learn. If an unskilful Traveller enquire the way to an unknown place of one,
knowing it no better then he that asks, He travel's on with no security, and
This is our very case: Amongst so many By-ways, so many mazes of Sects and
Schisms, as now swarm in the world, and like cobwebs intricate thousands of
souls in their journey, we are posting on as fast as Time can drive us, to a
place yet unknown, a long Eternity. The directing thread, that safely draws us
out of these Labirinths, is Sure, Firm, and infallible Faith; we ask to learn
this of our new Doctors, and not one can certainly say, Such is the way: This
infallibly is the Faith that winds us out of error, and most assuredly lead*s
to Heaven: or, if any say so much, he speaks only Fallibly.

3. And here is the summary of Protestants comfortles Protestants doctrine
comfortles.
Doctrine. They have Pastors that talk, but Teach nothing certainly: They have
Infallible Verities locked up in Scripture, but none can open that Book, or
convey them with Assurance into men's hearts: They hear God speak, but none of
them certainly knows what he says: They have Christ's Promises of a Spirit of
Truth' abiding with some Christian Teachers (find them where they can) for
ever, to the end of the world; but now, They must say, because all Pastors are
fallible, That Christ keep's not his word, if all may deceive, and Teach both
fallible and false Doctrine. Finally, they must own such Believers, as S. Paul
mentions, Who receive the word of God, as it Truly is the word of God; but
have not one Pastor, or Doctor, that dare show his face, and say he Teaches
this word infallibly. Yet infallible Believers and infallible Teachers seem
near Correlatives; the one, if Faith come by Hearing, staggers without the
other, and Infallible Hearers of Gods word suppose Infallible Teachers.
methinks when the Apostle says, Romans 10. 14. None can hear without a
Preacher, he supposes as well the Preacher instructing) infallible, as the
Hearer infallibly instructed.

CHAP. II.
The Infallible Doctrine of Christ necessarily requires infallible Teachers.
1. THe proof of my Assertion is more fully declared Chap. 4. n. 6. and relyes
on this Principle Infallible Doctrine taught only fallibly, under that notion of
fallibly taught Doctrine, is not the Doctrine of Christ. We are of God, says
Scripture, John Epist. 1. cap. 4. v. 6. He that knows God, hear's us; he that
is not of God, hears us not. Hereby we know the Spirit of Truth, and the
Spirit of error. Which is to say in other Terms. He that hear's an infallible
Teacher, has the Spirit of Truth; and he that hear's not an infallible
Teacher, wants this Spirit of Truth. Again, Epist. 2. v. 9. Every one that
recedes, (...), and remains not in the Doctrine of Christ, has not God, etc.
But every one, that Hears only a fallible Teacher, easily recedes, and remains
not in the Doctrine of Christ; Therefore he has not God, nor the Spirit of Truth
in him.

2. Upon these grounds I Argue further. Christ Doctrine, infallible in it self,
is either now taught infallibly by some Pastors lawfully sent, or fallibly. If
the first; we must own infallible Teachers of this infallible Doctrine. If the
second, That is, if Christ's infallible Doctrine be taught only Fallibly, ex
part Docentis, it follows evidently, first, That though God speaks
infallibly, yet no man has certainty of what he says. It follows secondly,
That such a fallible Teaching of Christ's Doctrine, may be cavilled at, and
disputed against. For, Doctrine taught Fallibly may be cavilled at, and disputed
against.
all Doctrine taught fallibly, and which by force of its Proposal, or merit of
the Doctrine, may deceive and be false, is liable to cavil, and dispute;
Therefore this Doctrine may be also cavilled at, and disputed against. It
follows thirdly, That really Christ's Doctrine (perchance perverted by a
fallible and false Delivery) may not be Taught at all. The reason is: No other
Doctrine is, or can be taught, but what is fallible, and may be false: but
Christ's Doctrine is nor fallible, nor can be false; Therefore that Doctrine which
is only Taught fallibly (as it is so delivered) is none of Christ's infallible
Doctrine. Consequently, if any man would now utterly abjure all the taught
Doctrine of the Christian world, he might do it without being an Haeretick. I
prove it: He who only abjures and Denies Fallible Doctrine which may be false,
neither abjures nor denies Christ's Doctrine nor any Christian Verity, which
cannot be false: But all Christian Doctrine, that can be Taught (Sectaries say)
is Fallible and may be False; Therefore he who Denies such a fallible taught
Doctrine, denies not Christ's Doctrine, and cannot be upon that account an
Haeretick. You will say: He who Denies all Christian taught Doctrine, certainly
Denies some of those Objective Verities which are revealed in Gods Word, and
therefore is an Haeretick. Very true, if he be sure, That his Teacher delivers
those Verities infallibly: But our Protestants say, Because all Teachers
Infallible Doctrine taught only fallibly, implies no Denial of Christ's
infallible Verities.
are fallible, none can have that Assurance from them, or any; Therefore their
Doctrine, as it is taught fallibly, may be cavilled at, yes, and denied also
without the guilt of Haeresy. The reason is. Whoever, only Denies the fallible
Teaching of infallible Doctrine (yet not known for such) Denies not the
Objective infallible Doctrine in it self, but the Formal fallible Delivery of
it; and this, he may boldly say, is none of Christ's Doctrine.

3. The substance of what I would here express, may No assurance can be had
from men that Teach Christ's Doctrine fallibly.
perhaps more plainly be reduced to Form thus: A society of men, who can do no
more but only Teach fallible Doctrine, which may be false, can assure none, that
they Teach Christ's infallible Doctrine, which cannot be false: But all societies
of Christians can do no more but Teach fallible Doctrine which may be false,
(for all Churches, all Councils, all Fathers, all Papists, all Protestants, and
Mr. Poole with them, are (as they say) Fallible in their Feaching;) Therefore
not one amongst them can assure any, that he Teaches or Delivers the infallible
Doctrine of Christ. I say, That he Teaches; for, if we meet with a Simplician
That tel's us, He builds his Faith and Religion, not upon any Preachers talk,
but on the Objective Verities revealed in Scripture. I answer: Unles Objective
revealed Verities no sufficient ground of infallible Faith.
he first learn of some Infallible Oracle, what Scripture exactly speak's in a
hundred controverted places, he shall never by his own poreing on a Bible
either arrive to the depth of God true meaning, or derive infallible Faith from
those Objective revealed Verities. The reply supposes, That all Truth couched
in Scripture, is as easily understood, with the unclasping of a Bible, as the
sun is seen at noonday. If so, Ministers hereafter may (for the most of men)
shut their books, stop their mouths, and preach no more.

4. Some yet perhaps will say: One may preach the infallible Doctrine of Christ,
though himself be fallible in the Delivery of it, which feem's manifest; for
every Catechist, or Preacher, though he delivers the infallible Doctrine of
Christ, yet delivers it not infallibly; why therefore may not Ministers in
England teach, as those do, infallible Doctrine, though, ex part subjecti
docentis, they Teach it fallibly? I answer first: Ministers in England have no
Infallible Church to recurre to, in case They err; for their whole Community
is fallible. The Catholic Preacher has a sure Oracle to rely on; an
Infallible Church, that unbeguil's him if he swerve from Truth, which is a
mighty Advantage and a great The Advantage of an infallible Church.
Disparity in the present question. Now if you say Sectaries may as well rely
on infallible Scripture for their Direction, as we do on an Infallible Church;
I deny the Supposition, and shall show hereafter, That not so much as one
Article of Protestancy can be proved by Scripture. Again: No man call's into
doubt the Objective Verities contained in Scripture, known as such: But here is
the difficulty, whether the new invented Interpretations made on Scripture by
Sectaries be true or false; and if false, They have no Infallible Oracle to
amend the Error as the Catholic Teacher has.

5. I answer secondly: S. Paul, methinks, lays foundation enough to solve the
Objection, Romans 10. 15. How shall They preach unles they he sent? Why therefore
may we not assert. That every Catechist, every Preacher that has a lawful
Mission, and is sent by the Infallible Church to preach Christ's sacred Doctrine,
if he preach that Doctrine which Christ and his Church approves of, is then,
under that Notion of a Member conjoined with an Infallible Church, Infallible
in his Teaching? Though all vulgar taught Doctrine is not such. Now Ministers,
who are unsent men, and therefore divorced from this infallible Moral Body,
cannot but talk, as they do, Fallibly.

6. I would not have any to mistake my meaning. Know therefore first: I do not
say, That this or that Pastor, purely considered as a Pastor, is infallible in
all he Teaches. Nor secondly, That either Councils assembled, or particular
Bishops, are by any intrinsic inherent quality elevated to a state of
Insallibility. But thirdly, I affirm: That God, who, according to Christ's
promise, will ever guide his Church in Truth, cannot permit All the Pastors and
Teachers in it to swerve from Carholick Doctrine: For, if so, The whole
Catholic Church might err, which is contrary to Pastors* lawfully sent teach
Infallible Doctrine infallibly.
Christ's promise. Hence I say, fourthly: Every Bishop or Pastor, though not
Personally infallible, yet when he is sent to preach Christ's Doctrine, and
complies with his Duty, That is, when he Teaches Nothing, but what he has
commission to teach in the Name of God and his Church; such a man. I say,
considered as a nember conjoined with an Infallible Church in the Delivery of
Christ's Verities, may be said to teach infallibly; For upon this supposition,
he does not only speak Truth as it were by chance (An Haeretick may do so;) But
more, as he speak's in the name of God and his Church, He teaches as the Church
teaches, that is, infallibly. The Reason is Manifest in Catholic Principles;
Because the Holy Ghost ever Assists some Pastors in the Catholic Church to
teach true Christian Doctrine, and it is as certain that Those he Assists teach
it infallibly; Therefore a Pastor, Prelate or Bishop that Delivers Christ's
Doctrine, as is now declared, teaches Infallibly. You will say, This Pastor, or
that Bishop may, trough malice, ignorance, his Mission. You will say again.
Thus much at least follows out of this Principle, That a Bishop when he
Teaches as lawfully sent, is at that instant as infallible as the Pope when he
Defines in Council; or, to speak in Mr. Pooles homely language, has a Pope in
his belly. I answer. Every faithful Bishop may have as Infallible Faith, as the
Pope: what wonder is it therefore if, when he Teaches as both Pope and the
Church teach, he be then said to Teach infallibly? Yet there is a great
Disparity between the Pope and particular Pastors, Bishops, etc. For no
particular Bishop can make any new Declarations of Faith obligeing all
Christians to believe; The Pope with a Council can do so. No particular Bishop,
precisely considered as such, is infallible; For he may Teach to day as one
lawfully sent, and to morrow err by ignorance, yea, and Malice also: But the
Pope, considered as Pope and Christ's Vicar on Earth can never Define in
Councils but Infallibly; and therefore his Assistance is in a higher measure
certain, and supereminently Infallible.

7. The last ground of this Doctrine (which great Devines The whole Church
consisting of Pastors etc. is infallible.
assert) is, That the whole Church of Christ, which consists of Pastors and
Hearers, of Teachers and Learners, Antecedently to Pope and Council
Conciliarily assembled together, is infallible; For the Promises of Christ ever
Assisting the Church, Primarily belong to this whole moral Body, which cannot
err: Against this Church Hell gates shall never prevail, with it The Spirit of
Truth shall re main foor ever, etc. Now this Infallibility cannot but remain
and stand fast in the members of this mystical Body; not in Pastors only, for
it avails little, that These teach infallibly, if none learn their infallible
Doctrine: nor in Hearers only, because they learn not infallible Doctrine without
a Teacher. Infallibility then accompanies both Pastors and Hearers. How Pastors
and Hearers are infallible.
As therefore, These believing Hearers (conjoined in Faith with this infallible
Church) are under That notion, infallible, (no Catholic can deny it:) so
likewise these Believing Pastors, as conjoynd in Doctrine with this unerring
Church, and Teaching what the Church Teaches, under that notion, are infallible
in their Doctrine. Yet, as. I now intimated, there is a great Difference between
the Representative Church of a Pope and Council lawfully and Conciliarily
assembled, and particular Pastors, Particular Christians, and Particular
Churches; For, the Representative Particular Pastors may err.
Church, because of the powerful Assistance of the Holy Ghost, cannot swerve
from Truth in its Definitions; but this Pastor, that Teacher, that Particular
Church may swerve (altogether cannot) though under the notion of a Pastor sent
to teach the Infallible Doctrine of Christ and his Church, he Teaches
infallibly. Separate him from this moral Body, he loses Assistance, and
cannot but teach Fallibly, though he speak Truth by chance; consequently he is
none of Christ's Teachers, for Christ never empowered any to teach Fallible
Doctrine, that may be false. You will say, separate a Minister from the Truth of
the Gospel, and he is also no Teacher. Alas, he separat's himself; For, he has
no Mission to preach as he does, and moreover Professes that he can teach
nothing infallibly. But of this more afferward: In the interim.

8. To cut of all reply to the Argument, I propose it thus. No man that is by
nature liable to error, or wants God's special Divine Assistance in his
teaching, and Positively renounceth all infallible Societies of Christian
Teachers, can teach with certainty Christ's Infallible Doctrine. But all men, now
at least in being, are by nature liable to error, want this special Assistance
in their Teaching, and must (as Mr. Poole will have it) positively renounce all
infallible Societies of Christian Teachers; Therefore no man can Teach with
certainty, or deliver the Infallible Doctrine of Christ. The Major is evident:
For he who by nature is liable to error, and has not infallible Men wanting
infallible Assistance to teach, cannot deliver Christ's Doctrine infallibly.
Assistance to Teach infallibly, or wants the Guidance of an infallible Society
to Direct him, may as easily err and miss in his teaching, as hit right on
the Infallible Doctrine of Christ. The Minor is granted by Mr. Poole; For all
Churches; whether Roman or English, Arian or Grecian, are liable to error,
want special Assistance in their Teaching, and ought positively to renounce all
Societies of infallible Christian Teachers; Therefore, the conclusion undeniably
follows, which is, That none can with certainty Teach the Infallible Doctrine
of Christ. And from hence also follows an utter ruin of Christian Religion
(yea and of Scripture too) as I shall hereafter Demonstrate. For if all
Pastors, all Doctors, all Teachers of Christian Religion may err in the
Delivery of their Doctrine, all Learners of it, may likewise err in Hearing it;
and if so, we have no certainty, That God is now Adored in Spirit and Truth by
either, Teacher, or Hearer.

9. The ultimate reason, why a Total ruin of Christian The utter ruin of
Christian Religion follows the fallible Teaching of it in a whole Church. What
all Euangelical Preachers lakoured for.
Religion accompanies the fallible Teaching of it, is thus proved. None can
teach Christian Faith, that does not Propose, or make Almighty God to be the
Author of it, And therefore our Savior, John 7. 16. told the Jews, That his
Doctrine was not his, but his Fathers that sent him, Yea, The Prophets also, and
all other Evangelical Preachers, chiefly labored in this, to persuade their
Hearers, that God was the Author of that Doctrine they taught. Now say I: None
can Propose or make God the Author of Christian Faith, that does not own it as
a Doctrine asserted by his Eternal Veracity infallibly revealing Truth (for this
is the Formal Object of Christian Faith;) But He that only Teaches fallible
Doctrine, which may be false, deserts this Formal Object, and can neither own
God for the Author of it, nor his infallible revealing Verity: Ergo, he must
own a fallible Authority to uphold this Doctrine, which is utterly Destructive
of Christian Faith. The reason will be yet more evidenced, if you propose it
after this manner. A Doctrine, which by force of all the Principles it has is
merely fallible and The last ground of this Doctrine.
no more, may be salse: But Christian Doctrine, as it is Taught by all Pastors
and Ministers of the Word, etc. is thus fallible; Ergo it may be false: But,
God never sent Christ our Lord, nor Christ his Apostles or any, to Teach a
Doctrine that may be false; Ergo he sent none to Teach a Doctrine or Religion
that is fallible. I prove it. He sent none to Teach any other Doctrine, but that
which is founded, and intrinsecally relies on his Eternal infallible Verity
revealing Truth: But such a Doctrine can neither be false nor fallible. Therefore
this taught Doctrine is certain and infallible: For, to grant that God sent
Pastors to teach a Doctrine which relies on his infallible Revelation, is to
say, He assist's them to teach it infallibly.

CHAP. III.
Other proofs for Teachers, and a Church Infallible.
1. I Argue again thus. Supposing the promises of Christ made in Scripture,
Gods Goodness cannot oblige the whole moral Body of Christians to believe a
falsity, or to contradict his certain revealed Verities. But if all Pastors and
Doctors may err in their Instruction, whilst they teach Christian Doctrine, God
would God cannot oblige us to believe a falsity.
as indifferently oblige us to believe a falsity, and contradict his certain
Verities, as to hear truth when by chance it is taught, which is contrary to
his Goodness. The first Proposition is evident, and confessedly true; For our
Adversaries say, it is repugnant to all conceptions of Gods Goodness to require
of men, under pain of Damnation, to Believe something as infallibly true, which
is really false. The other also is as clear. For if all Pastors, all Doctors,
who have the charge of souls, may (because fallible) as well Teach false
Doctrine as true, as easily err, as Deliver Christ's pure Verities, Christians
are, by virtue of Gods Command already intimated, bound both to hear and obey
them. Matthew. 18. 17. If he will not hear the Church, that is, as S. Chrysostom
expounds, the Prelates and chief Pastors of it, let him be to thee as a
Heathen, etc. Hebr. 13. 17. Obey your Prelates, (...), your Guides, your
Leaders and Commanders, and be subject to them; For they watch as being, to
render account of your souls. Again, verse. 7. The Apostle command's us to
imitate the Faith of these Pastors and Teachers. From these and other
innumerable places of Scripture, known to all, I argue. What is possible may be
reduced to Act, but it is possible, That all Pastors and Teachers may err, and
Deliver false Doctrine to the Christian world; and in case they do so, I am upon
these plain expres Ordinances of God, obliged to Believe them. Therefore I must
Believe them, although they Teach false Doctrine. And if so, God obliges me to
Believe a Falsity; or, which is a real Verity, I am forced to grant this
undeniable Truth, that his All-seeing providence does now, and ever will
Preserve a Church, whose Pastors and Teachers are infallible in the Delivery of
Christian Doctrine. Without this certain established Infallibility in some one
or other Society of Believers, Christianity is no more but a mere tottering,
reeling, and uncertain Religion; yet I must listen to it, whether Those who
teach it, stand or fall, that is, whether they err or not, teach an imposture
or Truth.

2. To confirm this proof, I ask whether God, after he had delivered his own
certain Verities infallibly, and made also (by his Divine Assistance) Those
first Masters of the Gospel, his Blessed Apostles, infallible, in their
Delivery of these Verities; whether then, I say in the ensuing ages he divorced
himself from his A question proposed to Sectaries.
Church, and withdrew all Special Assistance from it, or, yet continued that
gracious favor to some Pastors and Doctors of a Christian society? If he
continued that care and providence for the Direction of some Pastors in Truth,
Those, because so guided, are still infallible in their Teaching. Contrary
wise, if he abandoned that charge, and deprived all Pastors for the Future of
infallible Assistance, This woeful consequence follows. That Christian
Religion, once strongly supported by Gods unerring Spirit, ever since the
Apostles Preaching, has lost that Hold, and now stands tottering on no more
steedy ground, then what the weak, mutable, and erring Sentiments of men can
afford it. Now how unmeet these are for so great a charge, Solomon Sap. 9. 15.
says enough: Cogitationes mortalium timidae, and incertae providentiae
nostrae. The cogitations of mortal men are fearful, and our Providence
uncertain; yet so it is, (and here mark the hideous crime of Protestants) who
first Divorce Christ from his Church, and violently pull Religion How Sectaries
transgress,
from its center, which is Gods infallible directing Spirit; and then make all
the taught Doctrine of Christianity, to lean and rely only upon man's weak,
timid, staggering, and errable conceptions. The proof is evident; for either it
relyes on God, and so is infallible, or upon Humane reason, and therefore as
This is various, Religion cannot but be changeable. Let then the world judge (I
appeal to no other Tribunal) whether Christians can be satisfied with this
comfortles Doctrine. All they can now learn from any Christian Pastor touching
Religion, has only man's weak Thought, and Reason for it; but no certain
Assurance that God speaks by these Pastors, Because all, and every one of them
(left to themselves) are fallible.

3. I must prosecute this matter further, wherefore Man too feeble to preserve
Christian Doctrine in its purity,
I say this Truth boldly. It is above man's power and policy (weak and errable
in his Conceptions) constantly and unchangably to support, or carry on Age
after Age the profound Doctrine of Christ in its Primitive purity, without
Divine Assistance. Wit alone (dazeled as we see in the search of the most
obvious things in nature) is insufficient, either rightly to Penetrate these
high Mysteries of grace, or with certainty to convey them unto us in that exact
sense, as God once delivered them. The reason hereof is drawn from the sublime
Excellency of Christian Religion, Because of its sublime Excellency.
which being (as all know) a Doctrine of Gods own incomprehensible Wisdom, a
Communication of his deepest Secrets, cannot but transcend the force of humane
knowledge; it cannot but lie, as it were, in a region above the reach of weak
Reason only, and stand at a great distance from our fallible Discourses. Whence
I argue thus. All light and knowledge, which flow from a fallible Power and
capacity, cannot but be answerable to such a capacity, id est, Deficient,
uncertain, and Fallible: But all the light and knowledge, which Christians now
have from either Church or Pastors, concerning this sublime Doctrine of Christ
and Gods revealed Verities in Scripture, flow, and are derived from no other,
but from a fallible capacity, which is man's errable and weak understanding; and
not from Gods infallible Assistance (who say our Protestants) has withdrawn
infallibility from the Church: Ergo, This taught Doctrine cannot but be
Deficient, uncertain, Fallible Doctrine is not Christ's.
and Fallible. Grant this, and none can prudently rely on it, none can know by
any Principle, whether it be true or false, none finally can own it for Christ's
certain Doctrine. Rob therefore the Church of its proper Dote, which is Divine
Assistance; take from it the Spirit of infallibility, Cancel that Truth of the
Gospel, I have prayed for thee, Peter, that thy Faith fail not; Destroy that
impregnable Rock, whereon Christianity is founded, Matt. 15. Tu es Petrus, etc.
Though all the Pastors in the world were Salomons for wit, Austins for
learning, Gregory's for vigilance, Chrysostoms for eloquence; yet they would be
too weak, feeble, and fallible Instruments either rightly to illuminate Wit
alone too weak to tamper with Religion.
us (by the force of wit or Learning only) concerning those High Verities
revealed in Scripture, or exactly to Preserve them in their first candor,
without change and Alteration. Alas! might wit alone tamper with Gods Truths at
pleasure, might it turn Religion into as many Forms or shapes as weak Reason
often conceives, This too unskilful Master would, as Fancies and judgments are
various, now build, now destroy, now add, now subtract, now make, now mar, and
bring in more confusion into Christinianity, then the wisest men are able to
redress. And

4. Thus much we se evidently, not only in the old Man's with the cause of
errors.
Philosophers, who, led on by their weak Discourse and guesses, grossly mistook
in their Opinions concerning Beatitude; but in some learned Fathers also
(witness a Examples of it.
Tertullian and Origin,) For, These two great wits of the world, because they
left the Guidance of the Church, and relied too much on their private
Judgments, fell, as we know, into deplorable errors. But most of all this
misery is visible in all condemned Haereticks, as Arians, Pelagians, and
Nestorians (witty and learned enough) but Because wit too boldly entered into
Divine Mysteries, and meddled with matters above its strength, these men lost
themselves; and here was the sole cause Gods special Assistance preserves his
Curch from error.
of their Ruin and falling from Truth. Whence I conclude contrary to
Protestants (who have nothing to support Religion but their own weak and
errable Conjectures) That unles Gods gracious Providence particularly Protect
his Church, and by special Assistance Preserve it from error; The very best of
us all (though never so learned) left to our weak conjectures, and fallible
Discourses, might most easily become Arians, Nestorians, Pelagians,
Protestants, Socinians, now Christians, now no Christians, or what you will.
Protestancy, and all Haeresy, which stand topling on no firmer ground then mere
conjectures are, lead the way to these Downfalls, to no Religion, or any
Religion, as Fancy best likes.

5. To prevent therefore this great Evil, the wise Providence Gods Providence
over his Church.
of God (who well foresaw man's weakness and Instability) first Delivered his own
eternal Truths infallibly; (none doubts of this.) Next, he caused these Truths
to be taught infallibly by the first Masters of the Gospel, his chosen
Disciples; here of also there is no doubt with our modern men. Moreover,
Because his real Intention was, That not only the Primitive Christians, should
exactly receive those revealed Verities from infallible Teachers; but others
also in ensuing ages (for All souls were providently cared for) His infinite
Goodness established a visible Catholic Church, whose Head and Pastors, guided,
not by humane wit or Policy, but by Assistance derived from the Holy Ghost,
should, by virtue of so special grace, Teach Truth infallibly, and preserve
poor souls from error to the end of the world. Without this Addition Preserves
Christianity from ruin.
of a perpetuated Assistance, as well in order to the Later, as first
Believers, providence would not have done its work completely, Christianity ere
this day (too unsteedily built) would have fallen to Ruin, and as often alrered
from it self in the space of 1667. years, as our Sectaries have done in this
last hundred. A more spiteful Blow therefore cannot be given to God, a greater
Chimaera cannot be thought on, then to grant, as Sectaries do, that his All
seeing wisdom first founded a Church upon infallible Teachers, and next to
spoil all with this ungodly Assertion, viz: Afterward, when Christians as much
stood in need of infallible Pastors for their Direction (because of emergent
Haeresies) then it was, He withdrew Assistance from them, Abandoned his charge,
and left a whole Church to the wavering, timid, and uncertain Sentiments of
mere erring men, who altogether, because by nature fallible, might as easily
(without this superior grace of infallibility) have taught gross errors, as
the Verities of Christian Religion. This sequel follows from our Protestants
Principles, where you se enough (I say it once more) of their great sin and
Haeresy,

CHAP. IV.
Replies to these Arguments are answered.
1. ONe perhaps may be. God surely will never permit all the Pastors of
Christianity to err and deceive the world: at least this is no Consequence,
They may err, Ergo they do and will actually err, for many things may be,
which never will be. I answer, and many things actually happen, Rome, and all
condemned Haereticks with it erred: set then these aside, it is impossible to
design plainly such Christian Teachers as never de facto erred. 2. The very
possibility (yes and facility also) of All falling into Error, makes the
actuality of it fearfully doubtful, now men had been mad to loose both Lives
and Goods, to dye ignominiously on Gibbets, for any doubtful and uncertain
Doctrine. The Apostle put other thoughts in the primitive Martyrs hearts, other
words in their mouths: Scio cui credidi, and certus sum. I know who I believe,
and am certain. No Hearers therefore, can certainly rely on any doubtful and
uncertain Religion.

2. The second reply. Admit that all Christian Pastors Second Reply.
teach erroneous Doctrine, yet no great mischief follows; for Those who hear
them are either conscious of the Falsity; And if so, they are not to believe
their Teachers, or, They err invincibly, which is a blameles Error, and
Therefore cannot in justice be held an Offense. The first part of the Reply
supposes some instructed Christians wiser then all their Teachers together,
which is an Impertinency never heard of. The second touches not the difficulty;
for here we blame not such as may, perhaps, invincibly err; But say, That the
blame goes higher, and is unworthily cast on God, who obliges Christians to
believe the Pastors of a Catholic Church, and yet gives them such disabled
ones, that all of them may err universally, and teach Doctrine contrary to his
revealed Truths. Here lies the mystery of iniquity, upheld Protestants Mystery
of iniquity.
by Protestants, and the uglines of it appears in this wrethched Assertion: God
will have me to believe a Catholic Church; yet this whole Catholic Church,
that is all the They cast blame upon God.
Pastors, all the Councils, all the Fathers, Doctors and Prelates of this
Church, may teach me such false Doctrine as God never intended I should learn.
They may, if fallible, teach us, that Christ is not God, that Heaven is not a
place of Eternal Happiness, nor Hell an abode of Eternal torments: Such
Haeresies have been spread by Those who went under the name of Christians; and
why may not, I beseech you, all Christian Pastors abuse the world as much, if
Gods gracious ordinance, concerning the Churches infallibility, faill us?

3. A third reply: It is one Thing to teach Truth, Teaching Truth infallibly.
and another to teach it infallibly: Put therefore the case, That Almighty God
foresaw from Eternity, that though all Pastors of the Church, potentia
antecedente, antecedently might err, yet some at least, ex suppositione
consequenti, or, consequently, would not err, but teach Christian Verities
faithfully. Suppose, I say, only thus much. We have sufficient Assurance of
Truth actually taught in the world, without that Previous infallible Assistance
we plead for, which seems here useles; for if either man or Angel Delivers a
Verity, it matters nothing, whether it arise from a Fallible or infallible
cause. Our Faith therefore has strength enough, if it rely on Truth actually
Taught, though the Teacher wants infallibility. I answer: If God foresaw, that
all the Pastors of his Church would not err or teach false Doctrine, This
Verity is either revealed to Christians; as a Divine Truth, or no: if not, we
make that revealed, which is not revealed, and consequently can ground no
Assurance on it: if it be revealed and known to us, this very Revelation, viz:
All the Pastors of the Church shall not err, is an undoubted Principle, which,
assented to by true Faith, is our Security, Because such a Faith supposes the
contrary Actual error of all essentially excluded by virtue of Gods
Revelation; For it is impossible that God tell us this Truth. All the Pastors
of my Church shall not err in any age, and yet, in sensu composito of this
Revelation permit them to err universally. Observe in one Instance the
security we have by force of such a Revelation.

4. Suppose, that God had revealed to Isaac, that his Father Abraham would not
sacrifice him, and withal, that Isaac firmly believed that Verity; He had been
as indubitably secured from dying at that time, as if Abraham's hands had been
tied in chains, or wholly made impotent to give a fatal blow. Now mark the
Application. As Gods Eternal Prevision of Abraham's not taking Isaacs life away,
Antecedently supposed the cause thereof actually also foreseen (antecedently, I
say, in a foregoing sign os nature) so likewise it is in our present case,
when from Eternity he knew, that all the Pastors of his Church would not
actually err, and revealed this Truth in time; His All-seing wisdom Previously,
pro priori signo rationis, foresaw also the total cause of their actual not
Erring, which cause (as I have already proved) was not the power of man's weak,
variable, and mistaking Reason; But the most certain Principle of Gods special
and Divine Assistance. When therefore God (as the Objection supposes) revealed
that Verity* All shall not err, he did not only, by virtue of his Revelation,
impossibilitate the contrary universal error, bur warranted more, that, all of
them, because prevented by special Assistance, could not err. And this is what
Scripture Energitically tells us, of Hell gates not prevailing against the
Church, of Christ's Being with the Church to te end of the world; whereof more
hereafter. In the interim you see; that Christian Christian Faith relies on
Truth taught by an Infallible Oracle.
Faith does not only rely on a mere contingent (or hap hazard) Delivery of
Truth; but on Truth, taught by an Assisted and infallible Oracle, which All
must assert, or grant, that although Christ himself, by a supposed
Impossibility, had been fallible in No certitude of Truth had Christ, and his
Apostles taught it Fallibly.
his Preaching, or the Apostles likewise fallible in Their writting Scripture,
and only (because liable to error, had delivered Gods Verities contingently,
by chance, Christian Religion might yet have stood as firm and unshaken as now
it is, which is a horrid, and an unheard of Haeresy.

5. A fourth reply: We cannot prove by good reason (if we set aside some
ambiguous Passages of Scripture, which only seemingly say the contrary) that
the immediate Proponent of true certain Christian Faith (Catholics say It Is the
Church) ought to be certain and infallible. It seems enough, say some, that
this Faith be taught upon a rational Evidence, which Evidence, finally
resolved, comes to no more but to a Moral certainty. These (as I am informed)
ground themselves on this Principle, That all the Assurance we can have of
Christian Religion, has for its whole Foundation moral Certainty only, and it
seems a prop firm enough to support it. More it cannot have.

6. The Objection contains two parts. To the first I answer: If Divine Faith be
in the world, Reason Divine Faith must have an infallibie Teacher.
convinces, that the object of it be propounded by a Certain and infallible
Teacher, and then most, when Points fundamental lie under Dispute, and are in
controversy. Faith therefore requires two things essentially, (to omit other
Necessaries) an Object, which is Gods Revelation, and a Proposition of this
object made by some Teacher to Christians, which Doctrine the Apostle ratifies,
Romans 10. 15. How shall they hear without a Preacher. By virtue of this
Proposition (whether we call it Cause, or an Essential Condition) the Elicite
Act of Faith follows in a Believer, and intellectually lays, as it were hold,
both on Gods Revelation and the Thing revealed. Observe now well. Gods
Revelation (none doubts it) is certain and infallible. Divine Faith, which
rests on this Motive, and proceeds from Grace, is also certain and
infallible. The only Difficulty remaining, concerns this Proponent of Faiths
Object, and it is, whether He that Directs me, and endeavors rightly to settle
my Faith upon Gods infallible Revelation, do his work with assurance, fallibly,
or infallibly.

7. I say first. Gods infallible Revelation avail's nothing in order to Faith,
unles Christians by their Faith lay hold on the Certainty thereof, or own it as
infallible, and the assured ground of their Assent. The reason is. Because God
speaks infallibly to Christians for this End, That his infallible Word may have
influence into Faith, and support in with Certainty. If therefore this revealed
Word be not Certainly Proposed (as it is) infallible, if it be not duly
applied to a Believers understanding, under its The object of Faith must be
infallibly applied.
own Notion of certainty, that strength of infallibility lies as it were dead,
without Operation, and profits Belief no more, then Food does a Body into which
it cannot enter. The similitude is fit: For as Food, though apt to strengthen a
Body, is just as if it were not, unles it be duly Applied; so Gods Certain
Revelation, though most Proportionate to strengthen a Soul in Faith, yet in
order to this Effect, it loses all Efficacy, while a due Application of its
infallibility is wanting.

8. To illustrate more this necessary Truth; I say secondly. When a Revelation
lies darkly in Scripture, as it often does in High points of Controversy,
according to the measure or degrees of Certitude, which the Proponent of Faith
gives to the Revelation, and says, God speaks thus, An Assent answerably
follows with like Certitude in the Hearer, and not a stronger. If therefore the
Proponent only say Doubtfully, I think God speak's as I preach, but am not
Certain; Gods Revelation is received according as it is propounded.
Doubtful also is the Assent given to this Preaching. If he say, What I teach
is Probable, The Assent can be no more but Probable. If finally He truly say,
I teach Infallibly what is revealed, the Assent Answers, and is Infallible. The
reason is clear. For, as no Eye can see Colors in darkness before light makes
them visible, yea, and according to the measure of light it see's them: so no
Intellectual Eye can discover a dark Revelation, before he borrow light from
his Teacher, and as The light is less or more, so He see's that object less,
or more perfectly. A dubious and uncertain Proposal therefore, made of a certain
Revelation, when it does not Clearly manifest it self, is like a glimmering
light, And neither does, nor can apply the Objective infallibility Thereof with
Assurance to man's intellectual Faculty, which yet seek's after Certainty in
matters of Belief. This needs no proof. For he who proposes only Doubfully a
Revelation, which is Certain in it self, both in actu signato, and exercito,
says no more but timidly thus much: Perhaps I declare A timide proposal of
Divine Revelation begets no more but a doubtful Faith.
what God speak's, and perhaps I do not: For my Declaration only Doubfully
guesses at the Certainty of the Revelation, And it is against the nature of all
Doubt to convey Certainty into any understanding. As long therfote as the
infallibility of a Revelation stands remote from me, For want of an undoubted
Application made by an infallible Proponent, it can no more transfuse Certainty
into Faith, then fire, at a great distance, warm, That is, no more Then if it
were not Certain in it self, or not at all in Being. Whence I conclude. That a
certain Revelation (if obscure in Scripture) requires a Certain Proposition,
Because It little avail's me to know this truth, That if God speak's, he
speak's infallibly, unles, hic and nunc, in these circumstance when he speak's
to me for my Salvation, I yield my certain Assent to the infallibility of his
Word, which cannot be done, unles I have Assurance from my Teacher, that he
speak's (as I ought to believe) infallibly. Upon these undeniable Principles I
say, thirdly. Our Sectaries can have no Divine Faith.
Sectaries can do no more but doubtfully guess at what they Believe, and
consequently (as Protestants) never yet had, nor can have Divine, certain, and
infallible Faith. I prove the Assertion. All Faith, which has no other
Certitude, then what is derived from Those, who propound the object of it ( id
est, Gods Revelation) uncertainly and doubtfully, is no more but wavering,
Opinative and doubtful. But the Faith of Protestants is evidently such, Because
no man, or Society of men amongst them, can without doubt and fear infallibly
say: God speak's as I preach, and I infallibly preach as God speaks; For, if he
averr thus much with Truth, he Propound's the object of his Faith infallibly,
and therefore is so far infallible. If he do They cannot propose Faith
infallibly.
not, his preaching must be finally resolved into his own timid, weak, and
wavering Opinion, which weighed, comes to no more but this Levity. I hope well,
and think I preach what God has infallibly Revealed, yet am not certain,
because all I say, (for ought I know) is fallible.

9. If you will se this Truth farther Evidenced, do no more but ask of any
Protestant, Why, for example, He believes that all the Churches on earth are
fallible? That Christ is only figuratively in the Eucharist? That Faith only
justifies? That there are two Sacraments and no more, etc. His first refuge
perhaps will be to Scripture. But demand again. Whether Scripture in plain and
Express Terms, Delivers these supposed Doctrins? If he be not more then
impudent, he must say, No. All therefore he can reply, is, That the Ministers of
his Church, after a perusal of Scripture, find these Verities contained there,
and Propose all to him as things Certainly revealed, Therefore he believes them.
Here we come to the trial of Protestants Faith, and mark well, How unavoydably
They are forced to grant, That when a pretended Revelation, Sectaries must own
an Infallible Proponent.
is not manifest for them, But lies (if at all) very darkly in Scripture, it
must be brought to light, and made more clear by some Teacher. Some one or
other (if it have influence into Faith) must Apply it and Propose it to a
Hearer, as Gods certain Word. Without this Application made by a certain
Teacher, no Christian can ( but most temerariously) admit of the Revelation, as
Divine, and Certain.

10. Demand therefore in the last place, Whether all the Ministers in England
are able to propound certainly and infallibly the above mentioned Doctrins
(darkly at least, and indeed, not all contained in Scripture) as Gods revealed
Truths to any? The answer must be Negative. They cannot (for if they propose
them infallibly, Ministers are infallible) Ergo, say I, none can Believe these
Doctrins for Gods certain Revelation, Because the Proposal of them (absolutely
necessary to apply the Revelation) is defective, weak, dubious and uncertain.
The Faith therefore, which follows upon so unsteedy a Teaching, cannot but be
answerably rolling, That is in one word, no Faith at all. And Protestants have
no better.

11. Some perhaps may say: Though Protestants have no great Certainty of the
Doctrins above specified, because they are neither expressly in Scripture, nor
Asserted by any infallible Teacher, yet their Faith in Fundamentals
(universally held by all Christians) stand's sure enough, and is infallible.
Such Truths shall never fail, and so far the Pastors of the Church may, it is
likely, be held infallible.

12. Hereafter we shall treat more largely of Fundamental points, and Therefore
at present will wave what is not pertinent to answer this Reply. And pertinent
Why Doctrine of Protesta as Protestants is uncertain.
it is to say first: That not one Doctrine peculiar to Protestants, (as
Protestants) because neither expressly found in Scripture, nor Asserted by any
infallible Teacher, can certainly be believed upon Divine Revelation. That
these Sectaries teach not their own Protestant Tenants infallibly, is granted.
That Scripture does not in express Terms, without intolerable glossing, deliver
one of them, shall be made, after a few pages, most evident; And thus, if this
last Reply be to any purpose, it brings Ruin to that part of Doctrine which is
called Protestancy. I say secondly, There is scarce one Article of Christ's
Sacred Doctrine, so clearly expressed in Scripture, which may not, would men
take the liberty, as Sectaries do, by wilful Glosses to alienate it from the
Churches sense, be perverted. Arians have taught them this mode of Glossing,
and they exactly follow it. Separate therefore the words Doubful words of
Scripture, separated from the sense of an Infallible Interpreter, ground not
Faith.
of Scripture from the Sense of an infallible Interpreter, we can Believe
nothing, we have no more but a body without a Soul, guesses without certainty.
And upon such uncertainties the whole Faith of Protestants does and must rely,
which is deplorable. And here ask them, when They appeal (as They ever do) to
Scripture, What they mean by Scripture, which needs Interpretation, even in
Points most Fundamental. Must we admit of their Interpretation? Why so, more
then of others as learned as They? Why not as well on the present Churches
Interpretation? This is as good (to say no more) as their fallible Guesses are.
But of this Subject hereafter. I say thirdly. Never The Church in all her
Doctrine equally infallible.
any Catholic Church hitherto held it self infallible in a few Fundamental
Doctrins, and not in others. Therefore Protestants are more insolently bold,
whilst they attempt to make this Distinction, then ever any Church yet was.
What? That mere fallible Men shall be my Doctors, and ex tripode define, So far
the Church holds infallible Doctrine, But no further, It Would be well nigh eight
Degrees of madness in me, to believe them. Admit once of this: A new Haeretick
may step out, and defend as stoutly, yea, and upon as solid grounds, that
Scripture it self it not infallible, but only in a few Fundamental Matters, yet
unknown to the world. If you say this sounds too harshly, and cannot be
granted. Parallel I beseech you, your own wild Assertion with it, The Church is
Christ's Schole.
and se whether that runs much smoother. Thus it is. Christ has erected a
School, which is his Church, where Christians are to learn his Sacred Doctrine:
But when they come to it, They find more then the half of its Doctrine doubtful,
fallible, unsound, uncertain. Alas! Aristotle's or Plato's School can cfford us
Topics, and uncertainties enough: I hope Christ's School can learn us better.
Fourthly. Were the Church falsely supposed Fallible in the delivery of some
Doctrine less Fundamental, it would be much safer to believe it, then
Protestants, who may err in all they say, And then most, when being void of
proofs, They stand trifling with a Distinction of Fundamentals, and not
Fundamentals. Herein as in all other things, they are most fallible, and must
I, think ye, credit men, that can say nothing certainly?

13. Fifthly, and I end: Admit once of a Church with this half infallibility in
fundamentals; our Sectaries, who so furiously oppugn that whole infallibility
which we ascribe to the Roman Church, must Answer their own Arguments against
us. For here we question them. as they do us. Where or in what Rational Queries
made to Protestants.
Subject is that partial infallibility lodged? What Pastors designable are
endewed with it? How shall we make our Addresses to them in doubts and
difficulties, if none know where, or who they are? What kind of infallibility
is this? By whose assured Testimony can we learn what is de fide funaamentali,
what not? What if these Pastors be divided amongst themselves in their
Decisions of fundameetals, whose judgment is finally to be stood too, etc.?
These and the like Questions, most easily answered by Catholics, when They
give an account of their Belief (as I shall show in the Resolution of Faith)
press so strongly upon Protestants, that not one of them shall ever have a
satisfactory Answer. Perhaps to Protestants pretense to a private Spirit.
solve them, some will recurre to the private Spirit, and say, This tell's them
all Truth in these doubts. Contra. Ask only here: Whether this Spirit makes
them or their Pastors infallible, or can direct others to find out such
infallible Pastors? If they reply: Those are such, as Teach Gods Word purely;
the Answer is impertinent, for we ask whether it Assists any to Teach Gods pure
Word infallibly, And who they are? It may be others will say, that Christ never
had since the Apostles time, any infallible Church on earth even in
fundamentals, All therefore we have now to Direct us, is only the book of
Scripture (without other Proponent) and every man's private Reason. Contra. It
is Evident, That Scripture makes no man infallible, both Arians and Others read
it, and yet grossly err in Points most Essential. Deny therefore a Church
unerrable in Essentials, and say boldly, that as Arians have already erred in
some Fundamentals, so others might before this day have wholly erred, and outed
both Christ and Creed, with every Article of Christian Religion. For weak
Reason alone, is insufficient. to Preserve Christianity in its Purity, as I
have showed above, whereof also more hereafter.

CHAP. V.
A word with some later Sectaries concerning Moral certainty.
1. HEre we come to examine the other part of the Objection proposed above, n.
5. And thus Mr. Stilling fleet.
some later men Discourse concerning the certainty of Christian Religion. They
say first, (and most truly) That the ultimate Motive whereon Faith relyes, is
Gods infallible Testimony, with all, That none can question the fallibility of
this Revealed Testimony, when it is Sufficiently proposed, and made known to
us. The only Question therefore is, How it comes to be made known, or,
discovered in order to those things Protestants Doctrine about Moral Certainty.
which are immediately Revealed. They say secondly. Moral certainty may be a
sufficient foundation For the most firm assent, if the matter to be believed,
be the infallible Truth of a Doctrine, upon suitable Evidence. Though we have now
but Moral Certainty of that Evidence, The Assent may yet be firm to such a
Doctrine, as infallible. They say thirdly: Moral Certainty may be as great as
Mathematical and Physical, supposing as little reason to doubt in moral things
as to their natures, as in Mathematical and Physical, as to Theirs. Here
briefly is their Doctrine. Some further Explications of it, will perhaps more
opportunely have place, while we make our Exception against it. And

2. My first Exception is. These Authors do not sufficiently explain what they
would have here understood by Moral certainty, wherein there is a great
Latitude. One Degree of it excludes all Rational doubt. Degrees of Moral
Certainty.
And thus we say: He, who never saw Constantinople, may yet upon the
indubitable Testimony of so many witnesses, who have seen it, affirm without
fear, There is, or has been such a City in the world. An other Degree of this
Certitude reaches not so high, As we se in School Opinions. Some Philosophers
Tell you, it is Morally certain, That sublunary Bodies, as Fire and water, are
composed of Matter and Form. That Accidents are really distinct from Substance
and Motion, yet now there are some, that deny it, and hold, as they think, a
contrary Philosophy more Morally certain. Therefore, when we come to apply this
Moral certainty to Disputable matters, we do seldom or never agree about it. I
doubt not, but These very men, we now treat with, will say (what They judge,
God knows) that, That part of Protestant Religion, wherein it differ's from all
Christians, is upon Moral Certainty True, yet the Rest of the world opposes
them, and Avouches it has not so much as one Degree of Probability for it,
That therefore, which is here meant by Moral certitude, must, if these Authors
speak to the purpose, be a Certainty, whereof no man can Rationally doubt. Thus
much supposed,

3. I say first, (and by this Assertion you may discover the grand Cheat of
these Novellists) Christian A grand Cheat of Navellists discovered.
Religion as it is fancied, and variously Professed by innumerable, who go
under that name and Notion, has so little of this Great Moral Certainty for
it, That it is an Haeresy to Allow it a mean Probability. Why? Arians,
Pelagians, Eutychians, Donatists, Socinians, And all other condemned
Haereticks, called Themselves Christians, and professed some part of Christian
Religion truly; But had They, I beseech you, a great Moral Certainty For the
other part of their Errors and Haeresies, falsely vented by them as Christ's
Doctrine? You will say, No. But they had it for the Fundamentals of Christian
Religion, whereof no man ever doubted, and thus much they Defend upon that
Certitude. Admit of this as True, (though I hope, Prorestants grant, That
Arians do deny Fundamental Doctrine.) What is it to the Purpose to tell us. All
condemned Haereticks, and Protestants These men wave the main Question.
with them, have Moral certainty for one Part of Christian Religion, whereof
None ever doubted; And to give us nothing of this High Certitude for the other
Part, which is in Controversy, and Specifically belongs to Protestants? Had
these men therefore come home to the Dfficulty, They would not have here misspent
time in Proving what needs no Proof, viz. That the General Doctrine owned by all
Christians (as is a Belief in one God, or, of Christ a Redeemer etc.) Has at
least Moral certainty for it; But They should have showed, That Arianism, as
Arianism, or (which had been to the Purpose) That Protestancy, as Protestancy,
stands so firmly built on High Moral Certainty, That None can prudently doubt
of Protestants under the general name of Christians persuade Nothing for
Protestancy.
it. Now this They fraudulently wave, And only put us of, with a general word
of the Certainty of Christian Religion, as if Protestancy, hid under that
Specious name, had safety and Sanctuary enough; or, as if it were all one to
say. The part of Christian Faith universally agreed on is certain. Ergo
Protestancy, as Protestancy, goes along with it upon equal Certitude. Alas!
This is that which only requires proof, and is the thing we Absolutely deny.

4. Again, (And here is my second Exception) These Authors cannot apply their
Moral certainty to the Faith of any Religion, that bears the name of
Christian. At least, it is neither appliable to Catholics, nor Protestants.
For proof hereof, Note first: That moral Two Reflections made on Moral
Certainty.
Certainty taken in what Height you please, is an Act of the Judicative Power
in man, subjectively settled in his Mind, who has it, And ever falls on a
Determinate Object, (for in Objects, a part rei, there is neither Probability,
nor moral Certainty.) Every Thing imaginable being either in it self Real and
Stable, or not, independent of any Moral Assertion: As is clear, For should one
say now: It is morally certain, that there is such a City as Rome in the
World; Rome is, or is not, independent of what is asserted morally Certain.
Note secondly. Though the greatest Moral certainty Moral Certainty may be False.
usually excludes a rational doubt in order to what is asserted certain; yet in
rigor it may be false, And Therefore ever implies some weak Degree of Fear, of
anxiety, and suspicion to the contrary. Had any one said a few days before the
Burning of London (little then foreseeing that sad Disaster) that, That Noble
City would not in so strange a manner be consumed with fire, He would have
been thought to have uttered a Truth Morally certain, yet the contrary doleful
Effect proved it untrue. And the like may happen now, while we upon Moral
Certainty Say, Rome or Constantinople are Cities in Being. These Grounds
supposed,

5. I say first. Whoever, when he Affirm's, that Christian Religion is only
Morally Certain, and has for the Object of his Affirmation, that which
Essentially Moral Certainty only destroy's the Being of Christian Religion.
constitutes Religion, I mean true Divine and Supernatural Faith, highly wrongs
Christian Religion, yea, and destroys the very Being and Essence of it. I
prove it. The Certainty of Divine Faith, is as far above, and distant from
all the Degrees of Moral Certitude (which may be false) as Heaven is from
Earth, and more. Therefore he who allows no greater Certainty to true Faith
then Moral, which may be false, destroys both Certainty of Faith far above
Moral Certainty.
the Life and Essence of Christian Religion. That the Certainty of Faith far
surpasses all the Degrees of Moral Certitude, is Demonstrable upon Principles,
granted as well by Orthodox Christians, as by our Adversaries, who say, That
true Faith dot not only affirm, That what God Reveals is most Certain (for
thus much, supposing a God, we know by Science, were there no Faith) but by
Faith we affirm without fear at all: God speaks Thus and Thus. He reveals that
the Divine Word took flesh. That Christ dyed for us. That there is a Trinity of
Persons in one Divine essence etc. Such Truths, we already own as Delivered by
one, who neither can, nor will Deceive us.

6. Hence I argue. The Sole and Adequate Object of Divine and Supernatural
Faith, is Gods infinite Veracity, which Actually speak's to us, and is liable
to no error. Faith then, if it be Divine. Tend's unto no other Object, neither
is the now infused Habit of it, though fortified with a thousand Illustrations,
enabled to Rest upon any other Motive in this present State. What therefore this
Infinite Veracity actually Reveal's, that Faith lays hold on; It cannot
believe more or less, Now I subsume. But this Infinite Veracity (when it is
duly Proposed) Transfuseth more Gods Veracity transfuseth more certainty into
Faith, then the Motives of Moral Certainty can do.
Certainty into the Elicite Act of Faith, Then any Moral Certainty derived from
inferior Motives can have; For all Moral Certainty is at least capable of
Falsity, and may deceive us: Gods infallible Veracity cannot be False, nor
deceive if Faith Rest upon that Motive; And if it Rest not there, it is no
Faith at all. It is therefore absolutely impossible: if God speak's, and, I
Believe him as he Speak's, That all the Power in Heaven can Falsify this Faith
if it rest not on Gods Veracity is not Faith.
Act, or Separate a most High infallibility from it. Contrariwise, There is no
Moral Certainty, but may, by all the Principles it has, be false and fallible,
yea, and often is so.

7. From this undoubted Ground. I infer also, Supernatural Faith more Certain
then Metaphysical Science.
That Supernatural Faith is more Certain and infallible, then all the
Metaphysical Science, which Nature can give us. It is true, Metaphysical
Science has more of the Evidence, and therefore excludes all indeliberate Fear
or Doubt to the contrary (for no man can so much as indeliberately Doubt,
whether a whole City be greater then one House;) But for Absolute Certainty,
and Infallible Adhesion, Faith yet surpasses it. The Reason The Energy of
Faiths Motive.
is; Because the Infinite Veracity of God, which only supporteth Faith, Majori
vi, with greater Force, Energy, and Necessity transfuseth into it a
Supereminent Infallibility, supereminent, I say, and above all the Certainty,
which Principles of nature can afford. As therefore this Infinite Veracity
surpasses all Created certainty, so Faith, which relyes on it, goes beyond all
Natural and inferior certainty. Upon this Principle we see first, How Divinely
the Apostle spoke: Licet nos etc. Although we or Angel from Heaven preach
contrary etc. Let him be accursed. And, how well St. Chrysostom delivered
himself, when He says, Hom. 12. (pondering those words ad Hebr. 11. Fides est
Argumentum etc.) That he held them more certain, then the Things he saw with
his Eyes. These Truths (and great Truths They are) cannot subsist, unles Faith
be stronger in Certitude, then all the Principles in Nature, and consequently
far more strong then Moral Certainty is, which may be false. Now with such an
Assent the Roman Catholic Church Believes, Therefore a Faith only Morally
certain Belong's not to it. If Protestants Disown it, They have no Faith, no,
nor so much as a Belief Morally certain, whereof more presently. We see
secondly. How the very Essence of Christian Religion is destroyed, if we make
Faith no more but Morally certain; which is, what I intended to Prove.

8. Perhaps, These Authors will tell us: When they Religion founded on Moral
Certainty confuted.
Assert Christian Religion to be founded on Moral certainty, Their Assertion
falls not immediately upon the Assent of Divine Faith, which is firm and
certain; But rather upon the Object of it Antecedently applied to us Before we
believe; whereof we can have no greater Assurance, then what is Moral. And it is
no wonder; For, say They, There can be had no greater then Moral certainty of
the main Foundations of all Religion, which are the Being of God, and the
Souls Immortality. To quarrel therefore with Moral certainty is Madness, when
the Foundation of all Religion is capable of no more. By the way, if this be
Madness, I se very little Wisdom in some, who, to oppugn the Churches
infallibility (proved as they suppose by motives of Credibility only morally
certain) Ring out nothing but Peales of Impossibilities, and say it cannot be
That the Assent to a matter Believed, Rise higher or stand firmer, then the
Assent, which is given to the Testimony whereon we Believe. But the
Infallibility of the Church is the thing Believed, upon the Testimony of
Motives, at most but Morally certain; Therefore we cannot Believe this with a
stronger Degree of certainty, then those Motives give us, which afford at most
but Moral certainty. If this Discourse be good, I argue thus, Ad hominem. No
greater certainty have Christians now Antecedently to their Actual Belief, that
God speaks to them by either Scripture or Church, then that God is in Being;
But the very Being of God is only known by Moral certainty; Ergo, that he
speaks to Christians cannot be known antecedently to Belief, by any greater
Certitude, then what is Moral, and may deceive them. How then, I beseech you,
comes the Elicite Act of Supernatural Faith unto such a Height of Certainty, as
not to Credit an Angel, if he Preach against it? Upon what Motive stands it so
firm, when no other Certainty supports it, but only what is Moral, and may be
false? The Medium is fallible, Therefore the Belief founded on it is no better,
but Moral and fallible. Mark well your own Argument. It Is thus.

9. The Motives of Credibility for Christian Faith, Because only known by Moral
Certainty, cannot ground a certain Belief of any Churches Infallibility: Ergo,
I say, The very Existency of God and his Revelation, Because only known by a
Moral Certainty, cannot ground a firm Belief in God, or any Christian Verity,
unles you say, that These Motives for Christian Faith, far surpass in
Certainty all the certain knowledge we can have of Gods Existency. I know not
what these men can answer. My thought is, They must make Faith a mere Opinion,
and allow it nothing of Certainty, or Supernatural infallibility, Though they
seemingly speak otherwise, as if Moral Certainty might be a sufficient
Foundation for the most firm assent. Would to God they would declare themselves
intelligibly, And say plainly, whether this firm Assent here mentioned be only
of the like Nature with probable firm Opinions taught in Schools? Or
contrariwise (if this firm Assent be Faith) whether it does not Supereminently
surpas the Certainty of All other obscure intellectual Operations, which
Christians now have on Earth? This should be explicated, but is not.

10. Now to the Reply. Though an exact Answer An Answer to the Reply.
cannot be well returned, without entering upon an other question (the
Resolution of Faith) which here lies out of the way, and Admit's not in this
Place of a full and diligent Examination. I say first. No obscure intellectual
Operation, which preced's Divine Faith, or is independent of it, can arise to
those Degrees of Certainty which this Supernatural Act requires. Admit then,
that the Existency of God (which is true) can be Demonstrated by natural
Reason, Admit also, that those strong Motives for Christian Religion
Antecedently known by Humane Discourse, demonstratively convince the Verity of
it, yet because Faith (as I now said) Relyes upon a Superior infallible
Principle (Gods own unerrable Veracity) it far surmont's both these
Certainties, and much more would it go beyond them, were they known as Moral
Truths only. Why? A natural Discourse, whereby these Vetities are known, is
Science; But no science gives the last, or least Degree of intrinsic No
Science gives the least Degree of certitude to Faith.
Certitude to Faith; and Therefore Divines say: Gods Supreme Verity, which ever
supports Belief, upholds it not as known by natural Reason; For if it did,
Faith would be at last resolved into one natural Principle thus. I believe God
to be the Highest Verity imaginable, not Because he says so, But because I
know this great Truth Scientifically, where you se, the last Analysis rest's on
an extrinsecal Principle of knowledge, with which Faith, as Faith, meddles not.

11. Thus much therefore is clear. Although the Motives of Credibility manifest
(as they do) most undoubtedly, that God speak's to Christians, yet, when we
bring an Act of Faith by a true Analysis to its Home and Center, we find it
ever Resting on Gods Veracity only, as the last Stay and most certain Motive.
Notwithstanding, Motives to Faith absolutely necessarly.
the Praeambulatory Motives avail infinitely to Faith, Because they indubitably
point out that Society of Christians, wherein Gods Verities are certainly
taught, and make this Discernable from all other Haeretical Conventicles. In a
word, They show Christian Religion to be either evidently Credible, or as some
later Divines will have it, evidently True in Attestante. And if this be so,
the formal Object of Christian Faith is known, as it were Scientifically,
either before, or when we Actually Believe, which seems grounded on those words
of the Apostle: Scio cui credidi, and certus sum: I know, and then believe
certainly.

12. At present I wave this Doctrine, and say secondly. It is one thing to know
Scientifically, and another Difference betwixt a Certain Belief and a
Scientificall knowledge.
to Believe certainly. Both intervene in the matter now handled. Faith
Prerequires a Science, and Moreover essentially includes Certainty. Thus it is.
While one of Prudence ponders those strong and pressing Motives, which (as
Light does the Sun) gloriously evidence true Christian Religion (such are
Miracles the long continued Consent of Nations, Sanctity of life, Efficacy in
Doctrine, the blood sheding of Martyrs etc.) He knows, What and how these
Motives convince.
that God cannot permit the world to be cheated into error by them. He knows,
that his goodness cannot proclaim, as it were, and publish to Christians a
Religion manifested by such evident convincing Marks and Signs of Truth, and
afterward Signify a mere nothing. It cannot be, that God speak's in so powerful
a Language, and deceives us; For who can persuade himself, That all the
Miracles done by Christ and his Blessed Apostles, the eminent Sanctity They
showed, and admirable Conversion wrought by them, (open to men's eyes and
senses) were permitted like Charms to Delude the world? Yet this follows, if
either no Religion answered to these great visible wonders, or, if such
palpable convincing Signs could make a false Religion as Speciously Credible,
as Gods true Religion is. Therefore Rich. de S. Victor. lib. 1. de Trin. c. 2.
with just Reason Exclaims. Si error est quem credidimus a te decepti sumus. If
it be Error we Believe, it is you, O God, who have deceived us: and He gives
this Reason, Iis enim signis etc. For by such forcible Signs, the Doctrine we
believe is confirmed, which could not proceed from any, but from you alone.
Observe now well. Two Judgments may ensue upon the Consideration of these
exterior Judgments upon these Signs.
Signs, which manifest Christianity. The one after this manner. God certainly
Delivered his Eternal Truths by the Preaching of Christ, and his Blessed
Apostles, who had no other Exterior Testimony for their Doctrine but Miracles,
Sanctity, Conversions of Nations etc. I now see, says this prudent Man, as
evidently the like Miracles, the like Conversions with great Sanctity etc. in
the Roman Catholic Church: If therefore it was Evident that God spoke to the
first Christians by the wonderful works of Christ; it is as Evident, that he
Speaks now to me by the Still continued Miracles of this Church. This Discourse,
or Judgment, whereby he affirms, There are These wonders, Faith and Science
Tend differently.
God speak's by his Church, is not Faith, but Science; Because it Relyes on
Motives, which Reason knows evidently enough. Now further. When He is thus
disposed and prepared to Believe by so firm an Evidence, The other Judgment of
Elicite Faith follows, which tend's not into the Evidence of those Motives;
for if it did so, under that Notion it would not be Faith; For Faith, as Faith,
totally Relyes on Gods Sole Revelation, and for this, as the only Formal
Object, a Christian Believes what ever mystery is Revealed after a due
Proposal; as is already Declared.

13. Some will say. The Elicite Act of Faith Scientifically knows not the
Object whereon it Relyes, and therefore cannot be Certain. Answer. It is a
Catechresis, or an Abuse in Speech to say, That either Faith, or any other
intellectual operation knows its Object; The understanding informed by these
vital Acts knows, if we speak properly. Yet, if we go on in that vulgar
Language, significant enough. Faith can no more Scientifically prove or know
its Object, then Science, as Science, can believe its Object.
I say Faith, as Faith, no more Scientifically knows or proves its Object,
then Science, as Science, Believes what it knows: This proves, That certainly
Believes, whilst it Rests immediately upon Gods Revelation, which is most
amply proved by the Preambulatory Motives now touched on. Neither can Faith
Scientifically know or prove its Object, without loosing an Essential
Predicate, which is Obscurity. All therefore, who destroy not the very Nature of
Faith, must allow it the greatest Certainty under heaven, Faith both obscure
and certain.
and withal grant, as the Apostle does, that it is Argumentum non apparentium,
of a dark, and obscure Tendency.

14. You will reply again. The Mode then and Tendency of Faith unto its Object
is here supposed Obscure, and that Previous judgment of Credibility after all
possible weighing of those Motives, which do manifest the Credibility of this
Truth. God speaks by the Church, is no more but Morally certain; Ergo the
Belief of that Truth stands still wavering upon Uncertainties. I answer. If
these Motives have an infallible Connection with Divine Revelation, That is, If
they clearly convince, that God cannot but de facto speak to Christians, after
so many Signs and wonders, The Judgment Previous to Faith, is Metaphysically
certain. However give it a lesser Certainty, we must yet say with the Prophet:
Testimonia tua credibilia The Motives bring Reason to an invariable State of
Believing.
facta sunt nimis; These motives well considered, bring Reason to an invariable
State of Believing, in so much, That none can Disbelieve without Sin, and
Madness. Again we must say, That Judgment which thoroughly penetrat's them,
Evacuat's both Doubt and Fear to the Contrary, and far exceed's all Degrees of
Probability, which gives Reason the Freedom to Alter an Opinion when Stronger
Proofs come against it. But no Real Proof whatever, is capable to Overthrow No
real proof can weaken this Judgment.
the Certainty of this Judgment, though Fallacies may puzzle it. Call it then
as you please Moral or Metaphysical Evidence, it has proved its own Strength,
for never Any without it, since Christianity began, either rightly believed in
Christ, or Church.

15. This Judgment therefore which like an Interior voice (supposing the
Exterior Proposition of the Church) summon's us to hear, or, like a Light that
discover's Gods own Language delivered by Revelation, makes the Language, once
dark, clear enough to us. Now being thus manifested, we lay hold on it, and
yield Assent to the Revelation for it self, and not for the antecedent Motives.
And because this Revelation is without Dispute more infallible then any Truth
in Nature, it cannot but Answerably, as I said above, impart and contribute a
Stronger Certainty to Faith, then the most evident Principles do to any
Science. Upon this strong Fortress then Christian Religion stands firm, which
undoubtedly implies a greater Certainty then only Moral. And I think, our
Adversaries will say so too; Sectaries own a Faith more then morally certain.
who, though They take the Canon of Scripture upon Moral Certainty, yet they
Believe the particular Revealed Mysteries contained in that Book, with a far
surer Assent then what is only moral. Moral Certainty therefore necessarily
help's to Faith, though Faith Instances how moral certainty help's to Faith.
ultimately Relyes not on it. Thus, you know, the will loves Good either Real
or Apparent, yet need's not to love the cognition which represents goodness. For
that is only conditio applicans, a condition applying the Object to the Power,
but no Cause of Love. I may also adhere to a Doctrine in St. Austin for St.
Austins Authority, upon the Moral certain Word of one who tells, me, This great
Doctor says so. Why therefore may I not, induced by far Stronger Motives to
believe this Truth. God speaks by his Church, Adhere only to his Revelation
without touching on the Motives, which serve well as Conditions to Apply that
Object to the Power, yet want the Strength of a formal Object to support Faith?
But more of this Subject in another Treatise, where we shall show that the
Certainty of Faith (at least unevident in respect of the material Object) is
not so much a Speculative, as a Prudent submissive and Practical Certainty.

CHAP. VI.
Faith only morally certain, is no Faith. Protestants have no Moral certainty
of Protestant Religion.
1. LEt us here suppose (contrary to Truth) that all Religion, brought to a
just Trial, comes to no more but to a High Moral certainty, which, Though it
implies no absolute Impossibility of being False, yet is so strong, That none,
considering the great Evidence we have for Christianity, can without madness
Practically doubt or hold it otherwise then it is; most Morally certain. Put
the case then, That we arrive to this Degree of Certitude only, you will ask,
why is not such a Faith steadfast enough, and very sufficient to Salvation? Thus
far, if I mistake not, some Neoteriks make Faith certain, and strip it of all
further infallibility. I answer. A Faith only Morally certain is no Faith, and
prove my Assertion. That whereon all Moral Certainty imaginable Essentially
depend's, is fallible, and may Deceive us. That, That whereon Faith relyes is
infallible. That whereon Moral Certainty depend's is fallible.
whereon true Faith Essentially depends, which is Divine Revelation, is
infallible and cannot Deceive: Ergo, what ever ground's a Moral certainty only,
which may deceive, is as unproportionate to uphold true Faith, as Revelation
owned as Divine, is unfit to ground a fallible Opinion. As long therefore, as
the Object of pure Moral Certainty, becomes not Gods Revelation, (which can
never be) so long Faith cannot rely on it: Or, if it do rest here, it Mistakes
its Object and call's tbat Revelation, which is none. The ultimate Reason of
this Discourse stands Two sure Principles.
firm upon these two Principles. 1. All moral Certainty may be False. 2. Gods
Revelation, Because it is Infallible as God, Essentially excludes that weaker
Degree of Certitude, and cannot be false; which is to say in plainer Terms: God
neither does nor can speak any thing, only morally certain.

2. That all Moral certainty may be false is evident. For invent the strongest
imaginable (as This is distinguished from Physical, or Metaphysical Certainty)
and say what you will within that compass, Viz. Rome and Constantinople are now
Cities in Being. Or, That when one in a large City sitt's imprisoned at
noonday, and hears no body; yet says. Most surely all the Inhabitants of this
place are neither dead nor asleep. Such an Assertion, though most Morally
certain, is capable of Falsity; For God may have destroyed all those men; or
given them over to a strange unheard of drowsines; That Is no impossibility if
it were so; Why? Because the Assertion only stands upon these Negatives, or
some like Foundations. Never yet was seen such an Effect as this, Secundary
Causes never yet concurred to so Universal a Sleep or Mortality. Here is the
best Assurance which can be had, and yet it may be false. Contrariwise. Suppose
that God Reveal's to the Imprisoned party this What God Reveals is always most
Certain.
Truth, duly proposed. All the men of this City are not dead; His Belief
resting on this Revelation is so Certain, that no power in Heaven can falsify
it. Where you see a vast Disparity in order to Infallibility, between Faith and
Moral certainty. The one Difference between Faith and Moral Certainty.
because of its weak motive may be falls, the other strongly upheld by
Revelation cannot be falsified. Perhaps you will say. At least we know not,
that God speaks to us, but only upon Moral certainty. Of this more presently.
Here the Reply is not to the purpose; For all we convince now, is, That Faith
(if any be in the World) must finally Rest on Gods infallible Revelation, and
consequently, That no Motive of Moral certainty has Strength enough to support
it. Now by what means it comes at last, to be settled in this Center of Gods
infallible Veracity, is another question; Thus it must Rest, or, as our
Adversaries confess, loose the Essence of infallible Faith.

3. Briefly. We shall now make good the other Assertion in the Title, and show,
Though Moral certainty were (as it is not) a prop strong enough to Protestants
Religion has not Moral Certainty.
support Christian Religion, yet Protestants have no Degree of it for their
Pretended Religion. I prove this Truth. By Protestancy, we must either
understand those Prudential Motives, which induce men to Believe the Specifical
and particular Doctrins of Protestants (such are Miracles, Antiquity, great
Conversions etc.) Or rather the very Tenants and Doctrins actually believed by
them. For example: That all Pastors may err in delivering Christian Doctrine.
That there are two Sacraments only, or, what else you will. If we speak of
Motives, this Religion is so naked, that it cannot show you so much as one, as
is largely Demonstrated in the 8. 9. and 10. ensuing Chapters, whether to avoid
an unnecessary Repetition, the Reader is remitted. Waving therefore at present a
further Proof hereof, I Argue thus against the Moral certainty Protestants
Doctrine. without Rational inducements.
of their Doctrine. A Doctrine broached without Previous rational Inducements,
(whose very Professors were and are no more but Fallible) and which at its
first Rise, or Appearance in the World seemed a mere Paradox to the far greater
part of Christians, and yet thoroughly examined, is held still by this far
greater number (most knowing and learned) false, and improbable, cannot be a
Doctrine morally certain. Protestancy is thus consestedly fallible, and both at
its A Conuincing Argument.
Rise was, and is Still Opposed, not only by the vast number of Catholics, But
by all other Haereticks also, as falls and improbable; Ergo, it is not a Doctrine
Morally Certain. That a Doctrine so meanly thought of and universally Decryed,
cannot be thus Certain, is proved out of the very Notion of Moral certainty,
which though not absolutely infallible, yet, when the Grounds and Motives of it
are perfectly known, it passes for an uncontradicted Truth, and free's men
from Doubt, destructive of such a degree of Certainty. Thus we say morally.
Rome and Constantinople are now Cities in being. All the inhabitants of China
are not dead. These, And the like Assertions pass for current Moral Truths,
without Opposition, without Contradiction. If therefore Protestant Religion The
reason of the Argement.
were in such a measure Morally certain; That vast Multitude of Christians,
whereof innumerable are Pious, Conscientious and Learned, could never hold it,
as they do, false and improbable. No Verity Morally certain ever met A Verity
Morally Certain was never so long and universally opposed as Protestancy is.
with such a strong Contradiction. If ye say, This Opposition arises out of
Malice, ye speak not probably, and more justly draw on your selves the like
Censure, for beginning so strange a Religion. If you say again. These Learned
Men penetrate not too well the Depth of this new Doctrine, you talk at random.
Their Knowledge is not inferior to Yours; what you se, they se, and perhaps
more. Charge not therefore Ignorance on them, whereof your selves are more likely
guilty.

4. Yet some Replies may be here expected. One is. Protestants have moral
Assurance of their Bible, Because all say it is Gods Word; Ergo they have
Assurance Moral Assurance of the Bible is no Assurance of True Religion.
of their Religion also. The Antecedent is bad, and the Consequence worse.
Arians, Pelagians, and all Haereticks are as morally assured of their Bible, as
any Protestant. Have they, I pray you, as great Certainty of those pestilent
Haeresies proved, as they think, out of the Bible? You say no, Because they
Interpret amiss, and you do not. Learnedly answered. But who makes your
Interpretation better then Theirs? They have that Book, and spend their private
Judgment on it; you have no more. Unles therefore your Book or Judgment be
better then Theirs, You are Altogether as uncertain of your particular
Doctrins, as They of Theirs. The Reason is: Because Protestant Glosses no more
Scripture then the Glosses of Arians.
you have not one Sole Expres Text of Scripture for Protestancy. You may add
your own Glosses, and make it speak Protestancy; But these Glosses are no more
Scripture, nor more morally certain, then Those of Arians, Pelagians etc.
Therefore a moral Assurance of the Bible which is easily abused, gives no man
moral certainty of sound Doctrine. But of this subject hereafter.

5. A second Objection. As what is False, may be by error judged Morally
certain, so often what is True, may not be held Morally certain. Therefore
though Protestancy want's that High Moral certainty now required, yet it may be
True. I answer. But if it want Moral certainty, it has it not, which is all we
prove at present. Again. Though it may be true (which is impossible) so also it
may be falls. Now Protestants, I hope, do not believe a mere Possibility
Sectaries can not believe the actual Truth of Protestancy.
only, nor the May be of Truth (for many Things are not which may be) but they
Believe more, the Actual supposed Truth of Protestancy. And this they cannot do
without Moral Certainty of that which they hold Actually true.

6. A third Objection, and, It Is more to the purpose. Our Argument now proposed
proves too much, and Therefore proves nothing, For its best Force lies in this
one Assertion, viz. That a Doctrine or Religion, which is Opposed by the
greatest part of Christians, as False and Paradoxal, cannot be Morally certain.
If this Principle hold good, it if follows, That much, and very much too, of
the Roman Catholic Doctrine, want's also moral Certainty, Because a very great
number of Christians oppugn it as falls. Some deny the Popes Supremacy, Others
the Real Presence, Others Purgatory, Others Praging for the Dead etc. And
Protestants, after their long study, deny all These at once; Therefore such
Doctrins cannot be Morally certain.

7. I answer first. This Objection, without doubt, Proves too much and impugn's
a Certain Truth of Christianity. For tell me, when the whole world, as St.
Hierom says, growning under Arianism, saw that Haeresy far and near diffused:
Did that Opposition weaken the Moral certainty which Orthodox Christians had
then of a Trinity of Persons in one Essence? (And we only speak now of Moral
Evidence Antecedent Ancient Motives never loose their Force.
to Faith.) If so, the Motives morally evident for the Belief of that Mystery
ceased, or, at least lost their Ancient Vigor, which is false. And one great
Realon is; Because that true Doctrine of a Trinity had no first Rise, nor
appeared like a new Paradox in Catholic Doctrine had no first Rise like
Protestancy.
the world as Protestancy did, peeping out like an unknown Stranger, when
Luther and Calvin first broached it. No, That Catholic Doctrine was universally
believed by all faithful Christians, before Arians were born. The Motives
therefore, which made it evidently Credible before Arius, continued firm
(notwithstanding His Opposition) and still induced Christians to Believe as
They had done formerly. Which Reason also holds good to our present purpose,
And does not only give an immense Disparity between the Moral evident Certainty
of Catholic Religion, And what ever Certainty Haeresy can Pretend to; But
also, Demonstratively makes both Protestancy and all Haeresy improbable. And
this Truth I shall evidence, having first cleared the Fallacy which intricates
the Reply now in hand.

CHAP. VII.
How Sectaries err in the search made after Religion. Of their weak and
Improbable Opposition. The Objection is more fully answered.
1. Our Sectaries and all Haereticks err grossly in a main Principle, which
breed's nothing but Confusion to themselves, and Others. Thus it is. Haereticks
error in their search of True Religion. Some for Scripture only.
In their search after True Religion They run on, But how? Extra viam, in a
wrong and mistaken way. Some will find it out by the Book of Holy Scripture,
which few exactly read, and none can understand by his private judgment, These
err, not knowing Scripture, And may, as St. Austin notes Epist. 40. ad Deo
gratias, end their Lives, before they end Difficulties this Others fly to the
primitive Church Doctrine.
way. Others fly to the Doctrine of the Primitive Church, and loose Themselves.
For, what private man can now by his mere reading, Morally ascertain me, or
any, of the indubitable universal Sense of that Doctrine? Whereas all, which the
Church held then, was not writ: Of what was writ, part is lost, and much of
what remains, is (as experience Teaches) Others are for Reason only.
liable to Cavils and Misinterpretations. Others (and it is a Socinian jogg)
Decide all by weak Humane Reason, as, if forsooth, Wit alone were able to
Fathom Gods Incomprehensible Secrets. Others finally without Ohers stay on the
difficil Mysteries of* Faith.
further Inspection, stand poering on the material Objects or Mysteries of
Faith, and after many a misspent Hour, ask at last of a very unskilful Master
(their own weak Reason) what it Judges of these Mysteries? All labor loft.
If Reason, as it often falls out, find's them difficil, It Cast's them away,
as mere Improbabilities. Thus the Arian reject's a Trinity, The Pelagian
Original Sin, The Protestant Christ's Real Presence in the Eucharist, Because
they run into Dark matters, whick only puzzle Reason, and wave those further
Considerations, which clear all, And make Faith, if not evidently certain in
Attestante, at least evidently credible.

2. I say therefore. The most easy way to find out true Religion, or the first
unquestionable Evidence The way to find out True Religion is easy and evident.
which points it out, lies open, and is obvious to All, Before we either examine
particular Mysteries of Faith, or enter upon Proofs, Drawn from Scripture,
Councils, or Fathers. It is true, from these Grounds, we have irrefragable
Arguments against all Sectaries; But can They think, that the wise Providence
of God has put, as it were, Religion so far out of sight, or set it at so
great a Distance from us, That none can come to the knowledge of it, Before
Scripture, Fathers, and those large Volumes of Councils are exactly examined,
whic few read, and fewer understand? No certainly. True Religion evidenceth it
self, and is True Religion evidenceth it self.
most Discernable from error by an other clear and conspicuous Light, which
none can but se (unles he wilfully shut his eyes) Antecedently to the Perusal
of Scripture, Fathers etc. This Light or Evidence we may rightly call Gods own
persuasive Language, whereby he Speaks to Reason before we Elicit Faith, and
rationally convinces all of this general Truth. One Society of Christians
There is, wherein my Eternal Truths are Taught, this I make manifest by evident
Signs, by the Light of clear and undeniable Motives, whereof none can, but most
unreasonably, doubt. So it is, says Origin Hom. 30. in Matthew. Ecclesia plena
est fulgore ab Orient usque ad Occidentem. The Church, like a Resplendent Sun,
casts out Luster from East to West; and They are blind, who see not so clear
a Brightness. Thus much premised.

3. I Answer to the Objection above, and say. Sectaries groundles impugning
Catholic Doctrine.
Though thousands more then Sectaries impugn part of the Roman Catholic
Doctrine, yet as long as God demonstratively Evidenceth the absolute Credibility
of that Church which teaches it, By such rational prudent, and pressing
Motives, as have gained Millions of Souls to Believe, our Adversaries in
banding against Church Doctrine, only bewray Malice, Ignorance, or Both, And do
no more but cast dirt at a Sun, which providence (maugre Their weak Attempts)
will have to Shine, whilst Christianity lasts. So Urgent therefore, so
Illustrious are these Motives (as I shall presently declare) for the total
Belief of what the Roman Catholic Church teaches, That they do not only
suppress and silence such weak Opponents, But also make Protestancy, and all
other Sects improbable, and incredible. The reason hereof (most amply laid
forth in the three next following Chapters) stand's sure on these two
undeniable Principles. First; That Church which Christ Jesus founded, (and
Christ manifest to All, and so is his Church.
his Blessed Intention was to gain the whole World to it) is so Eminently
Glorious, so Clearly Marked with unboubted Signs and most Legible Characters of
Truth, That the Simplest Man, if he follow Reason, may find it out, and Believe
securely. No other but the The Roman Catholic Church only, Evidenced Credible.
Roman Catholic Church only is thus Evidenced. Se Chap. 8. 9. 10. The second
Principle. This Holy Church, which Age after Age (without any late rise, like
that of Protestancy) has stood constantly ever since Christ, and drawn whole
Kingdoms and Nations to its Belief; was either on set Purpose raised up by It
was not founded by Christ to cheat the world.
Almighty God, and conserved in Being, for so long a time, to Cheat the world
into a false Belief (which is Impious to think) or must be owned, as it
deserves, for the only undoubted most manifested, and gloriously evidenced
Church of Christ. Se Chap. 8. n. 5. 6.

4. You will say. Notwithstanding all the glorious Marks we can lay claim to,
and grace our Church withal, very many Learned Men do oppose it. If then the
Argument above have force This very Opposition of so many, Weaken's much, and
takes of no few Degrees of that Moral certainty we stand for. Contra. Very many
Learned men opposed both Apostolical and Slight Opposition not Valued of.
Primitive Doctrine, Atheists band against God, and Jews against Christ, the
Arians yet impugn a Trinity. Are our Sectaries affrighted upon that Account, or
weakened in their Moral Certainty of thar Mystery, whilst They Believe it? No.
Every Trivial and slight Opposition therefore, made against a Verity which
strongly Defend's and powerfully plead's fo^^it felf, can neither dant, nor
discountenance it. The Opposition then in our present Matter (if to the
purpose) It ought to be deeply rational and brought to certain Principles.
ought to be well Grounded and deeply Rational; grounded, I say, not upon what,
This or That private person by his sole fallible bosom Thoughts, holds
Reasonable (for so every Arian will make good his Haeresy) But the Opposition
if rational must go further, and rest at last upon a Solid and satisfactory
Principle, which well laid forth, gently forces every Prudent Sectaries
destitute of any Rational Proof against the Catholic Church.
and Disinteressed Man to Acquiesce and yield to it. But this cannot be done in
our present case; for Sectaries are so utterly destitute of what ever look's
like a Rational Proof or any received Principle, They are so disinabled to
speak with sense against the known Evidence of the Roman Catholic Religion,
That (And I do assert it boldly) They shall as soon turn Christianity out of
the World, as rationally abate or lessen the plain and undisputable Evidence of
this one Christian Society.

5. This blessed Society therefore, stands thus upon firm Solid Principles for
the Catholic Church.
Ground, upon solid and undoubted Principles. I show you, says this Church,
Those very Motives, which anciently countenanced the Preaching of Christ, and
converted the world, And These plead for me. With what urgent contrary Proofs
can you, my good Protestants, deface such Glorious Marks of Truth, or make them
either Insignificant, or forceles Arguments? Is this weightily done by drawing
a few trivial Glosses Sectaries trifle.
out of mistaken Scripture? By telling us of Council contradicting Council, By
quoting our Authors wrongfully, By relating a story not worth the hearing of a
Pope, or Prelate? Are these Manly proofs, think ye, or sufficient to Eclipse
the Glory of the Ancient Church? Toys, Trifles, Frivolous. I show you again,
Other Evidences of the Catholic Church.
says this Church, That the most Wise of the World, the most Learned, the most
Holy (Their Number is numberles) notwithstanding the Opposition made against
me, have Age after Age (even before and after The most wise and Learned of the
world, notwithstanding the Opposition made against this Church, lived and dyed
in it.
your Haeresy began) Constantly professed my Faith, lived and dyed in it
without Change and Alteration: Tell me, were These Millions of Souls, learned
and unlearned for a thousand years and more, All mad, All besotted, all seduced
by Fooleries? It is worse then Madness to say so. Here then is a principle, in
moral matters, the Surest imaginable, for our Church. This Nubes testium alone,
and of such witnesses (which is ever to be reflected on) makes it evidently
Credible. And by what contrary rational Proof or received Principle, can our
Adversaries enervate, or make null the Testimony All These wise and Learned
cannot be supposed mad, or seduced by Fooleries.
of these innumerable Givers in of Evidence, who led on by Motives, which They
thought Rational (and what passed for Reason amongst so many and such qualified
Persons, ought to pass for Reason with all) Believed this Church and dyed in
it happily? I Will tell you, had our Sectaries Salomons Wisdom, Protestants
cannot Answer This one Argument.
They would yet be unable to satisfy This one Argument probably, much less to
Evidence it forceles, upon either solid Proof or, any received Principle. The
reason is. No proof can vainquish an evident Verity; But it is an evident
Verity, that God Cheated No proof against Evident truth.
not the World by means of so numerous a multitude of Catholic Professors. It
is an evident Verity, That all those Wise and Learned Catholics were neither
Mad, nor, for so long a time, Deluded by Fooleries. He therefore, who, when
rational Proofs fail, cannot If Sectaries slight such witnesses, They slight
themselves much more.
speak a reasonable word against these Millions of witnesses, But slights and
undervalues them; does not only slight the greatest Authority on Earth, But
also, if he be a Protestant, must slight Protestancy; if an Arian, Arianism.
For these Sects have neither Authority, nor Witnesses comparable to those of
the Catholic Church.

6. For conclusion of this matter, be pleased to note, That as our Adversaries
are destitute of rational Proofs (reducible to received Principles) whilst They
impugn the clear Evidence of our Church, so they also want them in all other
particular Controversies. For, whether They go about to oppose our Doctrine,
Soctaries never come to Principles.
or to prove their own, You can never draw from them Proof brought to an
undoubted Principle, as I shall most amply show hereafter. They are Opponents
('It Is true) when they tell us we have changed the Ancient Doctrine of the
Church, brought in novelties, and I know not what. We hear such Talk, but where
is the Propositio quiescens, or grounded Proof to make this Charge good? They
say so, And that is all. And yet, if possible, They are worse at it, in proving
Their own Doctrine. Take here one Instance, you shall have more hereafter. We
demand A question proposed.
upon what rational Proof can These men Believe the Sacred Mystery of the
Blessed Trinity, and deny the Catholic Doctrine of Christ's Real Presence in the
Sacrament? Are they forced to Admit of the one, and Protestants believe one
Mystery, reject another with out proof.
Reject the other by clear and manifest Scripture? Evidently no. Scripture is
without controversy, more openly Significant, and Expressive for the Real
Presence, then for a Trinity. Does the Difficulty of the Sacrament rationally
retard their Belief? The Trinity is yet a more difficil Mystery to Reason. O,
but the Trinity was ever Believed by the True Church: So, say I, was The other
Mystery also. But speak Reason now, And say, what Church was it which ever
believed the Trinity? The Roman Catholic Church surely, For Arius and others
impugned that Mystery. Now Protestants say this Roman Catholic Church erred in
believing Christ's Real Presence; and if so, They are most unreasonable in
relying on it for the Belief of a Trinity; For, if it erred in the Belief of
one Mystery, it may as well have erred in the other. They may say, the best and
most Ancient Fathers held a Trinity. Very true; And as evidently They believed
Christ's Real Presence in the Eucharist. But what will you say, if I infringe
the Authority of these learned Father in this matter? I can do it (though not
in Real Truth) most easily, being assisted by the Principles of Protestants,
who tell us, that the whole Roman Church, That is, All the Fathers and Doctors
of it, erred for a thousand years together in believing the Catholic If the
Church had erred, the Fathers may more likely have erred.
Doctrine of the Blessed Sacrament. Whereupon I infer Those Ancient Fathers,
who both learnedly defended, and piously believed a Mysterious Trinity, may
more likely have erred in doing so, then, that a whole Church, for so vast a
Time, has patronised erroneous Doctrine, and falsely believed the Real Presence.
Most undoubtedly, The wisdom and Authority of this long standingh Catholic
Church, is, in true Prudence, of greater sway and value, then the sole
Authority of those far fewer Ancient Fathers can be (though most Venerable, and
worthy all Respect) that writ of the Sectaries who slight a whole learned
Church may more rationally slight the Ancient Fathers.
Sacred Trinity. Those men therefore, who have the Boldness to slight so great a
Church, cannot wtih so much as a color of Reason Reverence more highly those
Ancient Fathers. But enough of this Subject. Let us now go on to a further
consideration of these prudent Motives, and se more particularly, what Religion
gives us the best Evidence of Them.

CHAP. VIII.
A few Reflections made upon these Motives of credibility. No Religion has
Motives founding moral certainty but One only, which is the Roman Catholic
Religion.
1. NOte first. If God (as we now suppose) guides All Christians prrfesse not
Christ's true Doctrine.
us by his Providence, and has established true Religion in the world, it is
as certain, that all who profes Christianity (for example Arians, and
Pelagians) believe not intierly Christ's true Doctrine, as that some, blessed by
so singular a Favor, both rightly believe, and profes it. It is again most
certain, That How God lead's us to the knowledge of true Religion.
if this wise Providence draws us not to the knouwledge of true Religion by
Euthusias'ms, private Illustration, or the ministry of Angels; it leads us on
by extrinsecal Motives, suitable to Reason, by rational Inducements, or
discernable Evidence: And, these we call known Signs, Cognisances of Truth,
evident Marks, clear Characters, or plain speaking Language, which plead as it
were in Gods behalf, and as clearly show us where true Religion is, as These
visible Creatures manifest a Deity, or, as that Star which brought the Sages to
Bethlem, pointed out the Savior of the world. None can Deny These plain
Inducements of Faith; But such as deny those first and most clear
Manifestations of Truth, which Christ our Lord and his Blessed Apostles
evidenced, when by Their admirable Miracles, strange Conversions, Sanctity of
life etc. They withdrew beguiled Souls from Error, and wrought Faith in Them,
Before one Word of Scripture was registered.

2. Note 2. (And it is the Reflection of a learned Author.) As no man enters on
a Dispute with others, God, as it were, Disputes against Falsehood with rational
Arguments.
but be hopes to get the better; so God, when he proposes true Religion to
Christians, engages as it were in a Dispute with the Devil, and all those
Sectaries who oppose it, And therefore cannot hope, But is sure to conquer and
convince his Adversaries; otherwise it were folly to begin a Dispute; which
would not end to his Honor. Now, if he convince, he does it, And silences all
Opponents of Truth.
by the Force and Efficacy of such powerful Arguments, laid out to Reason, as
are able to silence all Opponents: For, strong rational Inducements
perswasively work on Reason, And clear man's Intellectual power from all
Mistrust and Doubt.

3. Note 3. It is impossible (after the Establishment of true Faith amongst
Christians) That God, either will or can permit a false Religion to be more
Speciously evident to Reason by Force of rational Motives, then his true
Religion is. For were this possible, He would oblige Reason A false Religion
cannot be more Speciously evident to reason, then Gods true Religion is,
by rational Inducements to embrace a falls Religion, which is highly repugnant
to his Goodness. And, upon this ground I say more. It is impossible, That a
false Religion equalize the true One, in the Evidence of rational Motives; For,
if the evidences for Falsehood be equal with those other of Truth, God would
stand guilty of arguing less efficaciously, in behalf of his own Verities. We
Nor can equalize it in the Evidence of Credibility.
must then conclude, That Gods true Religion, ever, most eminently surpasses
falsehood in the grace and luster of those Motives which evidence it to Reason.
And from hence it follows, That no man can in Justice appropriate those
rational Inducements, which draw reason to Rational Motives belong not to all
called Christians.
find out true Religion, to all, who go under the name of Christians; For
amongst these (whether Arians or others) you have false Religions; but the
Marks, Motives and Cognisances of Truth cannot belong to a false Religion,
unles God propose error as Speciously evident to Reason, as his own Revealed
Truth, which is now proved impossible.

4. These few Reflections premised. Let us look about Two Religions in
Competition.
us, and cast a serious Thoughr on two Religions only, which as it seems,
stand justling with one another, yea, and will needs come into Competition for
Truth. The one is, the Ancient and long Continued Roman Catholic Religion. The
other, is that late Novelty of Protestanism. Let reason, I say, go here
impartially to work, let it make a diligent enquiry after the Rational Motives,
which, as it were, plead in behalf of these two different Religions. Both are
not Both cannot be True both have not the like Evidence.
true, and Therefore both cannot be evidenced by the like Marks ande Cognisances
of Truth, the One must yield to the Other. What do I say yield? The first
appears like a glorious Sun Procedens and crescens usque ad perfectum diem,
which, as Origin says, casts such luster from East to West, that all eyes
Behold it. The other of Protestancy, Reason finds so nakedly Poor, so destitute
of Light, and Motives, That its mean Appearance makes it despicable, and not
worth the looking at.

5. Briefly then I Argue for the moral Evidence of our Catholic Roman
Religion. A Religion, which, after the just Condemnation of so many undoubted
and acknowledged Haereticks, has permanently stood Visibly victorious for 16.
hundred years, And which never yet was Moral Evidence for the Roman Catholic
Religion.
condemned by any known true Church of Error or Haeresy. A Religion, which has
drawn thousands of Infidels, and Aliens (from Christ) to its Belief. And which
has had Age after Age, whole millions of constant Professors, whereof
innumerable were not only most Wise, Learned and Virtuous, But willingly also
lost their temporal Fortunes, and courageously shed their Blood for it. Such a
Religion, I say, which has It has gained innumerable Believers.
thus perswasively wrought on the Reason of so many Wise, and Learned etc. And,
gained to it whole multitudes of Believers, and Martyrs, shows by this one
admirable Effect (had we no other Proof) Strength and Evidence enough to
convince the most obdurate Heart in the World. For, either (as I noted above) we
must say, That all these Wise and Glorious Men were mad, as being induced by
Fooleries to Believe, and dye as they did; or grant, That They had clear and
undeniable Evidence to warrant their Belief, for which we now plead. Nay, I say
more: So general a Mistake and Delusion, Gods Providence over his Church could
not permit so general a Delusion.
is upon an other Account most impossible; For, that great Care and Providence
which God had ever of his Church, could not permit (if true Faith were in the
world from the fifth Age to Luther) so learned, so numerous, and precious a
part of Christians as Roman Catholics were in those Days, to be led into a
falss Belief by either trivial or foolish Motives. If we swallow down this vast
impossibility, we must Conclude, Note well, a vast impossibility.
that, for so long a time, God had no true Church at all; For none, called
Christians, were then in being But Catholics only, and known condemned
Haereticks. But of this particular most largely Hereafter. In the interim

6. I propose a second and most convincing Argument. No Religion Ex terminis
Evidently true or false.
No Religion, whether it be that of Jesus Christ, or Mahomet, that of
Catholics, or Sectaries, either is, or can be ex Terminis evidently True or
False; neither can a bare Affirmation for its Truth, without farther Proof,
force Convincing Arguments for Catholic Religion.
Reason to accept of it: Otherwise, every man might now begin a new Religion as
he list's, and sufficiently warrant it by only saying, He speaks Truth. True
Religion therefore must have its Evidence, and known Discernibility from Error,
before it be accepted of. And now, because both Catholics and all Sectaries
suppose, that the Religion, which Christ Jesus and his Blessed Apostles taught,
was indubitably and clearly evidenced by Marks, and convincing Signs of Truth.
We are in the first place to ponder well those Motives, which made evident that
first Christian and Apostolical Doctrine; and next to Consider, whether the very
like Motives have not evidenced the Roman Catholic Faith Age after Age.
Briefly. The greatest and most visible Evidences for that Apostolical Doctrine,
were (to omit others) first, most known and unquestioned Miracles. (The Dead
rose up to Life, the Blind saw, the Deaf heard, Devils were ejected out of
possessed Persons etc.) 2. Admirable Conversions wrought upon Infidels and
Gentiles. 3. An examplar Neglect of the World, conjoined with great Sanctity of
life etc. But these Evidences are clear, Apostolical Evidences of Miracles,
Conversions etc. are the Churches Evidence.
without dispute for the Doctrine of the Roman Catholic Church, and for no
other Religion. Therefore if those primitive Miracles, that Efficacy of Doctrine,
those great Conversions, that admirable Sanctity of the first Apostolical Men,
perswasively induced Aliens from Truth, to believe in Christ, They are yet, as
powerful and forceable to induce All, who follow Reason, to Believe both the
Antecedent Church of Rome, and this modern Church also, now in Being. No
tolerable Reply can be given to this Argument. Will our new Men deny eminent
Sanctity to innumerable, who profess our Roman Religion? The contrary is
evident, by all those apparent Evidence of Sanctity.
Signs, whereby Sanctity can be known in this mortal Life. Witness the Contempt
of the World manifest in Thousands, the charitable Alms deeds of Seculars, the
Austere and mortified Life of Religious, whereof more Herafter etc. O, but all
Pastors and Doctors of the Catholic Church are not Saints like the Apostles.
Frivolous. No more were all the Primitive Pastors or People for 4. or 5. Ages
after Christ so Eminently Holy, (do out Protestants arrive to that Degree of
Sanctity?) Yet thousands then were, and are still without debate, Innocent,
Holy and Virtuous.

7. Again. Can Sectaries deny those prodigious Conversions of Nations, wrought
by this Church upon Heathens and Aliens from Christ? If they do, All are upon
Record, both Friends and Enemies attribute these Wonders to that Mother Church.
Tell me, I beseech you, who converted our once most Catholic Evidence of
Conversions.
England to the Faith it Anciently had, but Roman Catholics? Who reduced
Germany, Polony, Spain, France, Denmark, Swedland, and the Low Countries to the
same Faith? They were Men united in Belief with the Roman Church. Who yet send
Missioners to those remoter Parts of the world, to China, Iapony and other
Places? This Church only does God that Service, whilst our Ministers sit at
home with ease, tied fast to their fine Wives, and fat Benefices. If Finally
they doubt of our Miracles, They may as well doubt of the Suns light at noon
Day, so Conspicuous They have been ever in this Church, and are still to this
present Age. Whereof more in the next Chapter. All I ask now is, Whether it be
not morally certain, that the World had once in it such Men as were called
Alexander, Caesar, Pompey, Cicero? yes. As great Evidence we have for most
eminent Miracles done by this Church: Constant Tradition, known Records,
Evidence of Miracles done by the Catholic Church.
undoubted History, convey them to us; All which none can Deny, without wilful
Perverseness, And a High degree of Impudency. Yet suppose Men so impertinently
bold, as to question some Miracles; whether for example, ever since the
primitive Age any were raised from death to life? Whether Devils have been Cast
out? Whether Sight were restored to the Blind, Strength to the Lame (All these
are upon Record?) Yet Conversion of Nations a great Miracle.
they cannot deny that grand and convincing Miracle of Conversions, which is
Proof enough, as St. Austin Learnedly Consider's lib. 22. Civitat. Cap. 5.
Chiefly at those words. St. Austins Discourse.
Si rem credibilem crediderunt. If men, says he, Believed a thing credible (he
speaks of the Resurrection of the dead, and the like is of any other Mystery in
Faith) videant quam sint stolidi, se what fools Those are, who will not
believe. Si autem res incredibilis est. If the thing be incredible. This is
most incredible, yea, and the strangest miracle of all, that, That which was
deemed Incredible, gained Belief the whole World over. The Argument is
convincing, and proves as well, that those after Conversions wrought upon
Infidels by Roman Evangelical Preachers, were Admirable, and truly Miraculous.
Millions have been converted by them. These numerous multitudes therefore of
Believers were either drawn on by fooleries. If so; Fooleries could not induce
Millions to contemn the world and become good Christians.
They were mad, And here lies the Miracles, says St. Austin, Viz. That
Fooleries could induce so many to Contemn the World, and become good
Christians: Or, Contrariwise, They believed this Roman Catholic Church upon
weighty rational Motives. If so; Why are not our Protestants obliged to believe
as they did, upon the same prudent Inducements. If They Tell us: The Church
Taught an other Doctrine, when these great Conversions were made, then it
Teaches now; They do not only most unlearnedly Suppose what is to be Proved
(yea cannot be proved because utterly false) But also speak not one Word to the
Purpose; For, both our Progenitors in England and innumerable others, were
drawn from Error by Popish Preachers. And even in this present Age, the like
glorious Conversions are, and have been wrought by these Blessed men's Labors,
Why these Conversions are to be esteemed Miraculous.
and Theirs only. Now if you ask upon what Account such Conversions are to be
esteemed Miraculous? This one Instance answers you. Imagine you saw a little
Flock of Sheep or Lambs, sent into a Desert, full of ravenous Wolves, withal;
That these Lambs, though at first many were devoured, yet at length rendered
the Wolves so Tame, and so abated their Rage, that they became like Lambs, mild
and submissive. Would you not say, that such a work were prodigious, and above
the force of nature? This is our very case. Behold says our Savior, Luc. 10.
I send you as Lambs amongst Wolves* And these you must subdue. It was done.
Behold, says the Roman Catholic Church, I send my Preachers still abroad to
the Remotest parts of the World, and have changed Wolves into Lambs, That is, I
have made Infidels, once Rebellious to Christ, Subject to his laws, the
Vicious I have made Virtuous, and brought thousands of them to no other
Religion, but Popery. This work, with the Assistance of Gods Grace is done, Et
est mirabile in oculis nostris, and it is admirable. Had our Protestants made
such Changes, or drawn so many Infidels to their new Faith, they would have
talked of wonders; But because Catholics Why Protestants flight Miracles, and
Conversions?
gained them to the old Religion, all is Nothing. So it is. They have no
Miracles, and therefore Slight them: No Conversions, and thersore undervalue
them. A Strange proceeding. Those very wonders which induced the world to
become Christian, Because they yet eminently appear in the Roman Catholic
Church, must ly under Contempt; Those Ancient Proofs of Christianity are now
proofles, Those Primitive Evidences of Miracles, Conversions etc. (the Church
is in fault for showing them) cannot be seen by these later Men, who yet have
Eyes to discern the Book of Scripture by its own Light and Majesty. And by the
way mark the Paradox. The exterior words of a Bible (for of these A Paradox of
Sectaries.
we only speak) are Evidences enough for Scripture; yet those glorious works
now mentioned are (forsooth) no Evidence of this Church. The very Majesty of
the style Ascertain's these men, that God Speak's by that Sacred Book; yet all
the perceptible miraculous Majesty, which the Church shows us, cannot persuade
them, that he speaks by this visible, audible, and most known Oracle of Truth.
A Bible (well known, its true, upon other Grounds to be most Sacred) discouers
its Divinity, and immediately proves who writ it, Yet a Church so gloriously
marked, says nothing who Directs it. Is this Reason, or Religion think ye? Can
Reason produce this unreasonable Thought in any, That the wise Providence of
God has permitted so eminent, so numerous, so pious, so learned, and so long
standing a Multitude of Christians, as Catholics have been (and yet are) to be
Cheated into Error, even whilst they evidence their Faith, by such Proofs and
Motives, as Christ and his Apostles manifested Christian Religion? What? Shall
we think that Miracles, Conversions of Souls, casting out of Devils, Sanctity
of life etc. which were once convincing Arguments of Christianity, are now
showed to countenance a Falsity? To judge so, is the most improbable Sectaries
judge improbably.
Thought that ever entered a Christians Heart, yea, and impossible, unles we
hold, that God can leave of to be Goodness it self, or, make Falsehood more
apparently evident then Truth the whole World over: which is proved to be a
gross error.

8. Other Arguments we have for a greater Certainty then moral, previously
Evidencing the Roman Catholic Religion before we Believe; whereof more in the
next Chapter. It is now sufficient to say, That our Protestants grant thus
much. First, because Protestants grant Evidence of Credibility to the Roman
Catholic Religion.
the more learned of them allow Salvation to those, who live and dye in this
Faith; But most sure it is, That Saving Faith has at least moral Evidence, and
Certainty for it. 2. Whilst They talk of no man knows what Evidence
manifesting Christian Religion in General, They only plead for our Catholic
Faith, and speak not a word in behalf of Protestancy. The Reason is. If both
these Religions are not True, Motives Evidencing true Religion inseparably
follow that.
but the One only, The Motives which Evidence true Religion inseparably follow
That, and cannot belong (as I have already proved) to the Other, which is
false. Therefore They, or We, are obliged to show them. But Protestancy cannot
show so much as one prudent Motive for it self, as will most clearly appear in
the 10. Chapter: Ergo, what Evidence there is for true Christian Faith,
Catholics have it, or there is none in the World for any Religion.

CHAP. IX.
A short Digression concerning the Shufling of Protestants in this matter.
1. HEre I cannot but reflect on the slight endeavors of some later Sectaries,
who offer at Mr. Stillingfleets weak endeavors.
Much in an Empty Title called The Protestants way of resolving Faith; yet in
prosecuting the matter, They handle it so unluckily, that no man Hear's a word
more spoken in behalf of Protestanism, then of Arianism, or of what ever other
Haeresy. Motives and Reasons they give none for Protestant Doctrine, as
Protestancy, As They ought to have done in the first place, after so glorious a
Title.

2. To prove what is said, have patience to hear some few parergons. There are,
say They, in the question of resolving Faith these three questions to be
resolved. First, Why I believe those things to be true, which are contained in
the Book called Scripture? 2. Why I believe the Doctrine contained in that Book
to be Divine? 3. Why I believe the Books themselves to be of Divine Revelation?
Mark here a Shufling, and remember once more the Title. The Protestants way of
resolving Faith. Is it so? Is it the Protestants way? Yes. Surely then the
Questions here proposed, and the Answers returned are most Pertinent to help on
Protestants in their resolving Faith, That is, to make Protestancy These
Authors wave what they should Explicate.
evidently credible by clear and rational Motives. You will say, They are so.
And I say, They are no more to that purpose (of Protestants resolving Faith, or
giving of prudent Motives for Protestancy) then if such a Religion had never
been in the world. I prove my Assertion. The Arian will say. I believe Arians
believe Scripture as much as Protestants
those Things to be True which are contained in Scripture. I believe the
Doctrine in that Book, to be Divine. I believe the Books themselves to be of
Divine Revelation, and this I do upon as good Grounds, as you Protestants, if
not on better. For if you admit of these Verities, upon the greatest Evidence,
which things of that Nature are capable of, So do I too. But say, I beseech
you, what more Advantage have you upon this Concession, for your particular
Religion, then I have for mine? For, let these Books be True, let them contain
Divine Doctrine, let us believe the Revelation in them to be Sacred, yet both
you and I are to seek which of us has the better Religion, and this cannot be
decided by owing three Truths, whereof no Christian ever doubted. Why therefore
do you, when it is your particular Task to resolve Protestants Faith, never
meddle with the Question? But wast time in proving that, which when it is
proved, help's you no more then all other Christians, who are contrary to you
in Belief. Will you se this clearly?

3. I freely grant, that those things in Scripture are True, They are Divine,
the Books themselves are of Divine Revelation. But next ask, What is this to
Protestant Religion? Or, how, is the Resolution of Protestants Faith advanced
upon the owning These Verities? Nothing at all. And the Reason is, for rhough
all Christians acknowledge in general Scripture to be most Divine, yet they are
at endless Disputes concerning the Doctrine of it. Now, no Man, I hope, To have
Scripture in our hands gives no Assurance of true Faith.
will say, Because he has this Book in his hands, or owns it as Gods Word,
that therefore He rightly Believes the particular necessary Doctrine in it. For,
were this true, known Haeretiks would be as sound in Faith as any. To conclude
then, The Roman Catholic enquires not here after any general Proof of
Scripture (He proved that before Protestants were born) But he urges for
Motives, What Catholics require of Protestants.
and rational Inducements, whereby Protestancy, as Protestancy, is evidenced to
have any ressemblance with the Primitive Doctrine of Christ and his blessed
Apostles. Known Marks and Cognisances of Truth, must manifest this particular
Doctrine, And not a general talk of the Divinity of Scripture, which every Arian
and Haeretick would own, were there no such thing as a Protestant in Being.

4. They hold on in this proofles strain, and tell us how Moral certainty is
Assurance enough, that Christian Religion is infallibly true. Be it so, it is
nothing to the purpose; For we enquire not in this place after the moral
Evidence of Christian Religion in General, which, as it professed by condemned
Haereticks, Protestancy unevidenced.
has none; But we ask for the moral Certainty, whereby Protestancy is
evidenced. This is not so much as spoken of, though the Title of resolving
Protestants Faith requires a direct Answer to this Difficulty. They say again,
There can be no greater then moral Certainty for the main Foundations of all
Religion, and the chiefest is the Existency and Being of God. The Assertion is
falss, as I could demonstrate, were it now pertinent to handle that question.
But Let it pass. Give us, I beseech you, as much Moral certainty of Protestant
Religion, as All acknowledge for the Existency of a Deity, and we are
satisfied; But of this we hear not a word. We have Talk enough of the Moral
certainty of Christian They Answer not to the difficulty.
Religion, which Answers not to the Title of resolving Protestants Faith.

5. They say thirdly. Suppose, God gives the must infallible Evidence of any
Religion, some who are bound to believe that Religion, can have no more then
Moral certainty of it. Transeat totum, at present. What makes it for
Protestancy? We here ask, Why Protestants believe as they do? Why They adhere
to their new Faith, and prefer that Before all other Religions? Rational
Motives Can be produced, or not. We hitherto hear of none, And therefore
suspect, yea, know very well, there are none for it.

6. They say fourthly. Moral certainty yields us sufficient Protestants
altogether in Generals.
Assurance that Christian Religion is infallibly true. What Religion is
infallibly true upon moral certainty. Is it Arianism or Pelagianism? No. Is it
the Roman Catholic Religion? No. Is it Protestancy? Yes. Then produce Rational
Motives which may ground a moral certainty more of this Religion, then of any
other Sect, and we acquiesce. But this you cannot do.

7. They say fifthly. Where there is evident credibility in And prove nothing
for their Religion.
the matter propounded, there does arise upon Men an obligation to believe.
Very good! To believe, what. Give us this evident Credibility of Protestancy,
and something is said to the purpose. Hereof yet we have no news, nor are like
to have, and consequently Protestants cannot be obliged to Believe as they do.
After some other Parergons,

8. They say sixthly. The last Resolution of Faith is not into the
infallibility of the instrument of conveyance, but into the infallibility of
that Doctrine which is thereby conveyed to us. Shall we eternally have these
Empty words, and no Substance? You talk here of an infallibility of Doctrine,
and we would have the Riddle expounded. Is it the Roman Catholic Doctrine? Or
yours? Or Arianism? What for Gods sake, avail's it to hear a noise of
infallible Doctrine, and not to know, who rightly professes it? Your Doctrine
therefore of Protestancy is to be Evidenced, this is all we look for.

9. They say seventhly. If the Doctrine of Christ be true and Divine, then all
the promises made were accomplished: Now that was one of the greatest, that his
Spirit should lead his Apostles into all Truth. Very true. But what is this for
Protestant Doctrine? We ask still by what Signs and Marks of Truth, do these new
Men prove their particular Faith to be Apostolical? Here only lies the
Difficulty, never touched on by them. Admit therefore at present, that they have
in their hands the infallible Records of Gods Word, they are far of yet from
proving their particular Doctrine of Protestancy to be Scripture, or the
infallible Word of God. This is the sole controverted Question between us.

10. They finally end. Thus much may suffice in general concerning the
Protestant way of resolving Faith. Very little, it seems, serves their turn,
who hitherto never Loct labor to talk of Christian Religion in General.
meddled with that Resolution; But have lost their labor, by a talking in
General of Christian Religion, which no more concern's Protestancy, then it
does the worst of Haereticks. And after this manner They hold on in another
Chapter entitled. The sense of Fathers in this Controversy; Where Justin
Martyr, Irenaeus, and Clemens Fathers cited to no purpose.
of Alexandria are cited* but to what purpose God only knows. Are they quoted
to evidence any thing like Protestancy? No. The whole-Discours of these Learned
Fathers look's another way, and never medles with this Novelty. Read them as
they are, either in These Authors (with all the Advantages of their Glosses on
them) or rather in the Originals, as I have don exactly, you will find them so
great Strangers to this new Haeresy; That they never thought of it. To
transcribe again their whole Discourse would prove tedious, read Iustins words
in these Authors Part. 1. Chap. 9. page 264. and add to them the reflection
made page 265. What part (say they) is there now of our Resolution of Faith
which is not here in (that is in Iustins Testimony) asserted? I answer, Nothing
at all, as will appear by your own Questions and Answers wholly irrelative to
Protestancy. Thus then you go on.

If you ask why you believe there were such men in the Justin makes nothing for
Protestants.
world as these Prophets whereof Justin speaks. Answer. The continuance of their
Books and common Fame sufficiently attest it. Be is so, what is this to
Protestancy? Can any one probably infer, Because He believes there were such
men in the world as Prophet, Apostles, or Evangelists, Therefore he has the
true Doctrine of Weak inferences.
these Prophets? No. For both Arians and Pelagians yield Assent to that general
Truth, and so do Catholics also; are all These right in Faith upon that
Account precisely? Toys. No more then are Protestants. 3. If you ask, say you,
why you Believe them to be true Prophets? Answ. The excellency of their Doctrine
joined with the fulfilling of Prophecies, and working Miracles, abundantly
prove it. Prove what for Gods sake? No more but this, that those Prophets
taught excellent Doctrine, and wrought Miracles; Does it therefore follow that
Protestants, Arians, and other Haereticks teach such Doctrine, or work Miracles?
No. Herein lies the Difficulty, not so much as glanced at, or touched on. And
thus Nor Clemens Alex.
they run on to no purpose for many pages, with Testimonies drawn out of
Irenaeus, and Clemens Alexandrinus, which no more relate to Protestancy then
those first Words of Genesis do: In the beginning God created Heaven and Earth.
Nay more. Clemens cited But Confutes them.
by these Authors, page 273. expressly confutes our Sectaries, whilst he
requires two things necessary to attain to the true knowledge of true Faith in
Christ, (...), and (...): the Enquiry and Discovery of it. The Enquiry is an
impulse of the mind (say these men) for finding Truth out, by Signs which are
proper to it. Discovery, is the End and Rest of this Enquiry, which lies in the
comprehension of the things, which is properly knowledge. A most true and
admirable Expression. Clemens according to these Authors, proceds thus. Now the
Signs by which Truth is Discovered, are either Precedent, Concomitant, or
Subsequent. The precedent Signs, whereby we discover Christ to be the Son of
God, are the Prophecies declaring his coming. The Concomitant, were the
Testimonies concerning his Birth. The subsequent Signs, are those Miracles
which were published and manifestly showed to the World after his Ascension,
etc. Most true and Divine Doctrine, which is entirely for the Roman Catholic
Religion, and against Protestants. Why? We enquire after the precedent Signs,
whereby their new Religion is discovered? We ask for subsequent Signs, which
were publicly known to the world soon after the broaching of their new Faith,
and yet cannot hear of any showed by these new men in confirmation of their
Faith. Finally, we urge for Miracles and other Prudential Motives Evidencing
Protestant Religion in the ensuing Chapter (but find none.) Read it, and give
an impartial judgment.

CHAP. X.
Protestants have no rational Motives, whereby their new Faith is evidenced to
be so much as probable.
1. TO prove the Assertion, we here friendly demand, Whether, when Scripture,
Fathers, and the best Authority of former ages Assert. That the Marks and
Cognisances of Gods revealed Truth, are as follow. Antiquity, A Lawful mission,
Unity, Efficacy of Doctrine, Universality, Miracles, Succession of Bishops,
Sanctity, yes, and the very name of Catholic etc. My demand, I say, is whether
our new Men will own these old Signs as lawful and approved Manifestations of
Truth, or disown them? If this later; They are Compelled to show them unfit or
forceles Arguments for the evidencing of Truth, and consequently are obliged to
produce others more clear and persuasive for their supposed true Religion,
which is impossible. On the other side, if they shall please to own them as
lawful Cognisances of Truth, My Task is to prove, That they have neither the
complexum of all these Motives together; nor, so much as one of them in
particular for Protestancy.

2. Antiquity (granted to Popery, for at least a Protestants want Antiquity.
thousand years and upward) Protestants have not. Those two Brethren of
Iniquity Luther and Calvin, first brought this Religion forth, as is evident by
all known History. Before their days, no man can show me, so much as one Town,
Village, or Household of Protestants.

3. Lawful Mission (most justly and without dispute A lawful Mission is wanting.
challenged by Catholic Doctors) These two wretched men had not, (no more have
their followers) Enquire after it, you will find them all unsent Preachers,
contrary to the Apostles Doctrine Romans 10, How shall They preach unles they be
sent? They never had license to talk as they did; But by their own Will and
unknown Spirit, which as well authorized James Nayler to be Christ, as them to
be lawful and Apostolical Preachers. Say, I beseech you, when the blessed
Apostles first taught the Doctrine of Christ Jesus, and by their preaching
turned Idolatry out of the World, Did They only word it, Christ and his
Apostles were sent, and showed their Mission.
or, without Commission talk of a new Gospel? No. As my Father sent me, says
our Savior. Joan. 20. so I send you; And They evidenced their Calling to the
great Work they had in hand, by clear and undoubted Miracles, which proved
forcible persuasive Arguments, and strongly wrought upon the most obdurate
Hearts. Yer, fifteen hundred years after, our Novellists appear, broach a new
Gospel, aim at no les a matter then to pull down the Idolatrous Babel of
Popery, (so they style our Ancient Church) and we must take their Word for all
They say, though they neither show Letter-missive, or Patents to warrant their
Doctrine, no, nor one miracle to confirm it. So destitute they are both of
ordinary and extraordinary Mission. Some will say. Though they preach without
Mission, they preach the Doctrine delivered in Scripture, and the Ancient
Miracles (without need of new ones) were wrought to confirm Scripture-doctrin,
which is now purely Sectaries word it, without proof.
taught in the Reformed Churches, and not in the Church of Rome. Thus most
pitifully Mr. Poole page 195. where you se first, an unlearned begging the
Question. 2. Every Arian licenced to assert for himself, what Mr. Poole too
simply assumes here without Proof. 3. This is most falss Doctrine. For no man
yet ever lawfully preached true Christian Doctrine (no not Christ himself)
without a Mission: Sicut misit me Pater etc. For, when He Blessed Lord, first
established the Doctrine of Christianity contrary both to Jews and Infidels, He
did it not by Words only without Commission, nor proved the Verity of his
Gospel by the Ancient and long since pas't Miracles wrought amongst the Jews,
as these men do their Doctrine by the Primitive Miracles of Christianity ( which
belong not to them,) But He evidenced it, and confirmed it, by new manifest
Protestants obliged to show undoubted Marks and Signs, when they preach a new
Gospel.
Miracles, visible Signs and Wonders. And thus our Protestants should have don,
when they first published their new unheard of learning, and by it attempted to
throw down that long standing Church of Popery. Undoubted Miracles,
unquestioned Signs of Truth should, as we read of the primitive Apostles Mark
16. 20. Have followed them also. But in lieu of these what have you?
Unwarranted talk, mere proofles Words of uncommissioned men. Miraculous words
indeed, if able to subvert an Ancient Church, to pull down Popery, and build up
Protestancy.

4. Unity in Doctrine (most known and remarkable No Unity of Doctrine.
in the Catholic Church) they have none, witness those innumerable Sects which
now swarm amongst them, and This new Faith has produced of Arminians,
Zwinglians, Brownists, Independents etc. And now our late Quakers are sprouted
out of it, the last spring, perhaps, (though no body knows) of this Reformed
Gospel. I need not to say much on this point. A serious thought cast upon the
different procedure of a Catholic and Protestant, will lay The Blessing of
Unity, and Curse of Division.
open the great Blessing of Unity in the one, and the contrary Curse of
Division in the other. Observe well. Catholics you shall find like right Noble
men, Standing upon a long continued Pedigree, on their Ancient Tradition, on
their never interrupted Succession of Popes, of Princes, of Bishops, of People
united in one Belief. You look on Protestants like new Vpstarts, unfortunately
divided in their very first Progenitors, Luther and Calvin, that begot them in
discord, And this Spirit of Division, as a Ghost, does, and will Hant them to
the worlds end, if they last so long. Catholics you will find, like deep and
silent Waters running together in one Channel, concentred in one Principle,
settled on one Rock, the Churches Infallibility. You se Protestants, not only
destroying both Rock and Center, But also so giddily unconstant Sectaries
unconstants.
to their own Tenants, that you have them at a stand no where, And this often
shifting has undon them. Once the 39. articles were points of Faith and
Religion, now they are no more so. Once the Pope was Antichrist, now with many
Protestants he is the first Patriarch. Once he was a horned Beast, now more
then one of our New men take of his Horns, and make him Rational. Once Rome
was the Whore of Babylon, now with most, it is purer, yes, and Orthodox in
fundamentals. Once our Bishops were all Idolaters, unlawful Pastors; now They
are so Legitimate, that our new men must either derive their Ordination from
them, or have none at all. And thus unsteedily they dance up and down, say and
unsay, Now yea, now no, as the Fancy takes them, And they must do so, until
they have a firmer ground of Unity to set footing on.

5. Mr, Poole page 201. to impugn the Unity of the Mr. Pooles instance of
Pagans and Devils against Unity is impertinent.
Church tell's us, That both Pagans and Devils had it; yet, in the very next
page complains much of the want of Unity in his Protestant Brethren. Methinks
unreasonably enough, For if Unity be so proper to Pagans and Devils, the more
Protestants are divided, The better it is for them, Because further of from the
Spirit of these agreeing Monsters. But, says Mr. Poole, Unity without Verity
is not to be regarded. I answer. Every one knows so much; But what is that to
our present purpose, where we solely treat of Unity, and assert it, with the
Nicene Fathers, to be a Grace or Dowry of the Church, a Badge or Cognizance of
Truth? And this our Protestants must acknowledge, who I hope will grant some
large Christian Society agreeing at least in Fundamentals, Protestants hold
some Unity laudable in the Church
which they call the Catholic Church. I ask therefore, Whether such an Unity,
extended to all Christians, be not Laudable, and a good Mark of Truth? If so;
Why are Pagans and Devils introduced to slight the Churches Unity? If not. We
have now not one laudable united Catholic Church in the whole world. What
follows in Mr. Pools 203. page, Mr. Poles simple Objection.
concerning Divisions between Dominicans and Jesuits etc Is so profoundly
simple, that no man's patience can so much as hear it. Every Puny knows these
differences are not in Faith, but Opinions only. I pass by such trifles.

6. Efficacy in Doctrine (an undeniable Mark of No Efficacy in Doctrine.
the Catholic Church) our Protestants have not. Observe my proof. It is most
certain* That these men came but late into the Vineyard of the Church (sure
after the eleventh hour) and found it, as They say, in a Sad condition,
overgrown with Weeds of Popish Errors, pestered with Arian, and Grecian
Haereticks, opposed by Heathens and Infidels. What our new Zealots should have
done.
All these needed the Light of this new Gospel to shine upon them. And who
would not have expected, before this day, greater Conversions wrought among so
many straying Souls by these new Zelots? Popery ere now should have been
dissipated, Arians reclaymed, Thousands of Infidels converted to Christ, David's
courage long ago should have defeated some one or other of these Sectaries ill
success in Conversions.
massy bodies, chiefly that of Popery. But the ill succes they have had in such
Conversions, proves them, if not downright Cowards, at least unlucky
Combatants. Popery holds still its posture, maugre their weak attempts against
it; And I never What one Blessed man did in the space of Eleven years.
yet heard of good don upon Arians, or other Ancient Haereticks by these men's
labor. Now touching the Conversion of Infidels, Strangers to Christ, the
Assertion of Thomas Bosius Tom. 1. De signis Ecclesia lib. 6. cap. 3. Signo 20.
is Remarkable, viz. That one Blessed man of our age, St. Francis Xaverius,
reduced more to the Catholic Faith in the space of eleven years only, Then all
the Protestants in the world (add to them what other Sectaries soever) have
gained of Infidels to their Haeresies, since the beginning of Christianity. My
God! Had the Blessed Apostles been as slow in rooting out Idolaty, as our late
Masters yet are lazy about so noble a Work, the dumb Idols of the Gentiles would
have preached against them, and still stood unshaken. But, God gave These first
powerful Preachers and their Catholic Followers, a vigorous Spirit, the
Efficacy of Doctrine, an illustrious Character or mark of Truth, which to this
day the Church wear's, and manifests to the world. Sectaries never had it.

7. You will say they have yet gained many to their Few Infidels reduced by
Protestants.
Protestant Profession. What History relates them, I beseech you, If we speak
of reduced Infidels? If we mention others whose Progenitors, at least, were
Catholics, you may boldly say it. They, with the help of Secular power, have
perverted many a poor Soul by preaching Liberty, which corrupted nature as
easily follows as a stone falls downward. Faith only justifies. Good works are
of no value. Fasting is superstition. Mortification is Popery. The use of
Pennace is needles. And yet worse, might modesty speak it, if the Wife will not
etc. Tenants, more fit for Devils, then Doctors to preach; yet Christians have
heard such Libertins talk. How Haresy has gained followers.


8. May I upon this occasion say my Thought concerning those poor souls drawn
from us to Protestanism, since the unhappy breach began in England? I conceive
it thus. A certain indifferent careless A careless humor first brought in by
Haeresy. Homebred Education.
Humor of having this or that Religion, Any or none (Haeresy first brought it
in, and it tend's to Atheism) got them some company. Homebred Education, that
see's little abroad (As it must needs happen to them that live in an Ileland)
has brought Penal Laws. Ignorance perverse in some, deplorable in others. But
above all Liberty increased the number.
in more. The Penal Laws, and the fear of loosing a temporal Fortune, has
forced in very many. Ignorance, peevishly perverse in Some, and deplorable in
Others, greatly increased the number. But, above all that Liberty, now
mentioned, to Do, and Believe what every man lists (a Sauce that suits best
with unsettled Stomachs, we may call it Luthers Ratsbain) has allured
innumerable. In one of these Classes, you will find them, except perhaps some
of the more Learned (whose consciences I touch not) God only knows, what Grypes
they feel, for misleading others, and wronging Themselves. But, what will ye?
It Is Interest. Their fat Benefices, that timely follow the low fortune they
were born to, hold's them fast. It must be a powerful Grace, that can so much
as stir them, much more that can draw them from their Haeresy.

9. Set these Classes asside, the Churches in England would, I think, be very
Empty of company. Sew of the more able are in love with Protestancy.
There are few or none among the Abler sort, that are much in love with
Protestancy upon the account of Religion. Yet more. We find by experience, that
when those First sort of men now named have some feeling of God, and Eternity,
when the Second step out of England, and se the Practice of Catholic Religion
in neighboring Countries: When the Third, dare loos a little mammon for God:
When the Fourth Hot Spirits are somewhat cooled, And the poor Beguiled get open
their eyes: When the Fifth have don with Youth and Liberty (of the Sixth I say
nothing but, God help them.) Experience I say learn's us, That all of them draw
nearer to Catholic Religion, so far at least, as to judge well and Honorably
of it, Many at their death become Catholics, few or none turn to be Protestants
and we se not a few turn good old Papists, when they come to dye (men deal
then most seriously) Though I never yet heard of any, that had lived Catholic,
desert his Faith upon Scruple, as not being in a right Belief, or dye a
Protestant.

10. Universality, which the very name of Catholic Protestant have no
universality, Of Time,
implies, and the Apostles Creed allows of, is no Mark of Protestant Religion.
If we relate to time, Not one Age, ever since Christ came into the world, can
produce so much as one slender Family of Protestants before Luther. This point
has been often Nor Place.
press't, but never yet had Answer. For place, it is as meanly poor; For take
this Religion in the greatest Latitude, as it is made up of all those jarring
and dissenting People, that go under the notion of the Reformed Churches, it
only creep's up and down in some few Corners of our Northren world, without
Luster or Glory. And if we speak more strictly of Protestants in England (I
mean the 39. articl'd men) I believe a good large Village would hold most of
them. Mr. Poole has no good liking to the long Duration and Amplitude of
Religion, and therefore disdainfully kik's at both with his Pagan-instance. Is
it not pitiful to mispend time on such intolerable Trifles? I Will do so no
more, And therefore am with good Reason forced to wave most of Mr. Pools
Noobjections.

11. To the Amplitude of Catholic Religion, we may here well anex the
continued Succession of Protestants have no succession of Bishops.
Bishops, the Sanctity, and Purity of our Catholic Doctrine; both are marks of
Truth and evident in the Roman Church. Protestants can lay no claim to
succession, and therefore I challenge them as Tertullian did the Ancient
Haereticks De praescript. Cap. 32. Edant Origines Ecclesiarum suarum, evolvant
ordinem Episcoporum suorum. Let them show us the Origin of their Churches, and
declare the order of their Bishops. Let them say who they were? Where they
lived? Who knew them? What good they did No Protestant Bishop or Pastor before
Luther.
in the Church? Sustinete me, and ego loquar. Have patience, and 'Ill tell you.
They had not so much as one Bishop, one Pastor, one Doctor, or one Preacher,
before the days of unfortunate Luther, whereas, the Catholic Church
demonstratively gives a Catalogue of her succeeding Popes, and Bishops, from
Blessed St. Peter, to this present Pope who now sitt's in that Chair. And if
you will know of what account this perpetuated Succession of Pastors is, read
St. Austin Tom. 6. contra Epistolam fundam. cap. 4. In Catholica A continued
succession of great account.
Ecclesia tenet me (says the Saint) ab ipsa Sede Petri Apostoli, cui pascendas
oves suas post resurrectionem Dominus commendavit, usque ad praesentem
Episcopatum, successio Sacerdotum. The continued Succession of Priests until
now, from the seat of St. Peter the Apostle, to whom our Lord after his
Resurrection commended his Flock to be fed, holds me in the Catholic Church.
And afterward. No Donatist can show such a Succession, no more, say I, can any
Protestant. Se more in his Book De utilitate credendi c. 17. at those words:
Dubitamus nos ejus Ecclesiae gremio condere etc.

12. Sanctity and Purity of Doctrine (which neither Purity of Doctrine
Infidel, nor Sectary could ever yet cavil at, But upon the account that there
is too much of it in the Catholic Church) is pitifully wanting to
Protestants. I prove it. As the Tree is known by its Fruit, so Holy Doctrine is
best known by the Holy life of those who profess it, and the Saintly effects
that Saintly Effects follow Holy Doctrine.
follow it. If we might insist on the first, tell me, where have our
Protestants Their holy Hilarions, their retired Paul's and Antonies, their
Gregory's, their Bernards, their Malachies? Where have they Apostles Like St.
Austin of England? Bishops of such Austerity as a St. Charles Boromaeus?
Doctors so profundly learned and humble, as St. Thomas of Aquine, and St.
Bonaventure? Where are their undefatigable Missioners, sent for Conversions to
the remotest parts of the world with a Blessed St. Xaverius? Where are their
Mortified Religious, Sanctity manifest.
their Solitary Monks, their Tender Virgins shut up in Cloisters without hope
of enjoying the world, or Friends any more? Such Holiness manifest's it self in
the Catholic Church; Protestants have nothing like it, and yet those two
impure Founders of the new Gospel, Luther and Calvin, had far Les of Sanctity.
Let every Conscience speak its own Thought, and say plainly, whether these Two
now A parallel.
named, were Patterns of Virtue like a Renowned St. Benet, a Glorious St.
Dominick, an Humble St. Francis, a Prudent St. Ignatius, who endeavored (not to
amend the Church ever sound in Doctrine) But only to better the world by their
Incessant labors, by their Charitable works, and Blessed example. Heaven now
crowns these Saints with Glory, and earth yet celebrat's their Memory with
immortal Praise, whilst Luther and Calvin lie buried in Oblivion, only thought
on for founding a Gospel upon Liberty, which makes all the Followers of it
Libertins, and therefore we must acknowledge that Christianity has been much
wors Protestancy ruin's Alt.
for their once being Christians. More Atheistical Principles have been settled
in men's Hearts, since these two new Preachers came amongst us, more Fantastic
Opinions vented, more Kingdoms undon, more Commonwealths ruined, more Innocent
blood shed, after this Tragical Gospel got footing, than before were heard of
for a thousand years together in time of Popery. And

13. Here we may briefly touch something on those Sad Effects of this new
Gospel.
sad Effects, which have followed Protestant Doctrine, And (setting Passion
aside) friendly ask of any Impartial man, what good has this new Religion don
in the world? What amendment has it made in Life and Manners? What Conversions
has it wrought amongst Heathens and Infidels? What Sanctity has it yet showed
us in the Professors of it? What Churches has it built? What Hospitals has it
erected? What Universities has it founded, either comparable to our Ancient or
modern Catholics? All runn's on in a Contrary strain. Ruins, ghastly ruins
follow these men where ever they go, to the Horror of those who have Eyes to
se, and Hearts to deplore the sad Spectacles yet left of their impious Sectaries
Sacrilege.
Sacrilege, and worse then Barbarous Reformation, viz. Of our Churches
defaced, of our Cloisters demolished, of our Altars and Monuments pulled down
(whilst yet they live on our Revenues) as if the very Memory of Christ and the
Temples, where once he was Worshipped, were grown abominable to these new
Spirits. And why all this Confusion for a new nothing? O Strange and Prodigious
Spirit! what shall I say Impiety.
of thee? Thy Doings are only to undo, thy Building to destroy, thy Piety is to
profane Sanctified Places. Thy Light is to bring in Horror and Darkness,
Rebellion.
thy Turning from Christ and his Church, has Turned Kings out of their
Thrones, Bishops out of their Sees, Religious out of their Cells, Nobles out
Confusion.
of their Estates, Sense out of Scripture, Charity out of the World, and Men
out of their wits. This Turning from Christ and his Church, has Turned Unity
into Schism, Peace into War, Religion into Policy, Virtue into Hypocrisy,
Learning into Ignorance. Such are the known Effects of this late Doctrine, all
upon Record, reserved to the final Sentence of our most impartial Judge in the
Vale of Iosaphat, where it will appear, whether I have wronged these men in
drawing up this dreadful Charge against them, or They themselves for such
Impieties done before God and his Angels.

14. Our Sectaries are wont to object against the St. Austin long since
answered the Cavil. Amongst good Corn have Cockle, with wheat you have Chaff
mingled, in a slorishing Kingdom you find Traitors, amongst married women (it
is St. Austins instance) some you may have les Loyal. Are therefore all to be
blamed upon the Account of some? It Is open Unjustice. Se St. Austin in his
fifth Book All not blamable upon the account of some.
against Faustus cap. ultimo, and his 137. Epistle. Blessed be Almighty God
(though the guilt of Sin lies heavily on many) yet great Sanctity is still
eminent in the Church amongst all Sorts of people, whether, Princes, Prelaets,
Pastors, Religious, Seculars, Rich, or Poor. Great Conversions we se daily, not
only made from Haeresy to Faith, but also from Vice to Virtue, from a looser
sensual Life to great Austerity. The Rich often voluntarily become Poor, The
Proud Humble, the Avaricious Liberal, the Riotous Frugal, the Impatient Meek,
the Secular Religious, and quit all they have in this tumultuous World to serve
God in a quiet Cell. Such changes from Worse to Better are Evident changes from
worse to better.
undeniably evident in the Catholic Church, which yet Erasmus his acute Eye
could never se amongst our New men. Profer mihi (says He in his Epistle to
Vulturius Neocomus) quem istud Euangelium ex commessatore sobrium etc. Give me
the Man, whom this Gospel of a Gurmandizer has made Sober, of Fierce and cruel
has made Tractable, of an Extortioner Liberal, of a filthy Speaker fair
spoken, and of an unchaste liver shamefast, And I will show you many, who are
grown Wors, then they were before* Thus Erasmus.

15. Miracles, the most glorious marks of Truth, Miracles the most glorious
Marks of Christ's Church*
manifested in our Savior John 15. 24. wrought by his Apostles Mark 16. 17.
and amply promised to those who Believe in Christ, John 14. 12. The Roman
Catholic Church has from Age to Age undeniably Evidenced (and she only) if we
speak of clear and undoubted Miracles; I mean of such as answer in Analogy and
Proportion to our Saviors works. The Blind se, the Lame walk, The Lepers are
cleansed, the Deaf hear, the Dead rise etc. These are the Churches Miracles.
Never had our Protestants, or other Haereticks any like them. Read Coccius and
Bellarmin of Martin Luthers and Calvin's famous Miracles. The story is
notoriously known. I wave it.

16. Of Ancient Miracles, se Irenaeus advers. Haeret. Of ancient Miracles.
lib. 2. cap. 57. St. Ambros. Sermon. 91. St. Austin lib. 22. de Civit. cap. 8.
Theodoret in his 8. Books de curan. Graec. Affect St. Hierom against
Vigilantius; Ruffinus, St. Gregory with Of Modern Miracles.
others. And for the more Modern, be pleased only to read Iustus Lipsius (a man
of Credit and Reputation) in his 3. Tome, Antwerpe print anno 1637. toward the
end with these Titles Diva Virgo Hallensis, Diva Sichemiensis. It is but time
cast away to say more on this Subject, most largely handled by our Writers, who
produce their Proofs, answer to all contrary Cavils, and cite their Authors of
unquestioned Authority, Both for passed and present Miracles.

17. And here, because we mention Cavils, read first, I beseech you, those
Sacred Words of our Savior John 14. 12. Amen, Amen, I say unto you, he that
Believes in me, the works that I do, shall he do also, Cavils of Sectaries
against Miracles.
and greater works then those shall he do etc. Next he pleased to say whether
he Cavils not, that Asserts these great Works and Wonders to have ceased after
the time of Christ and his Apostles, when not only approved History relates
them, but Reason also pleads strongly for their Continuance in ensuing Ages.
For, had these Glorious marks of Truth failed in the Church as our Protestants
would have it (Because they have none) Why Miracles continue in the Church?
Christian Faith ere this day (believe it) would have grown cold in the Hearts
of thousands and thousands. Therefore to prevent Incredulity, the Wise
Providence Miracles still necessary.
of God, rowseth them up, and quickens their Belief with these forcible
Incitements, which neither Infidels can Deny, nor Haereticks Own. Again.
Miracles were necessary in the Beginning of the Church to demonstrate the
Verity of Christian Religion against Jews and Infidels; But there is the like
Necessity of them still for these men's Conversion; All are not yet Reclaimed,
nor will Believe Scripture without farther Evidence.

18. The Cavils of Sectaries against Miracles are Christ, Luk 11. v. 15. He
cast out Devils, and Devils helped him. 3. Why are not such Miracles wrought by
Arians or other Haereticks, who surely come nearer Devilish Doctrine then
Catholics? They object again. We know not by Infallible and Certain Faith,
that these Miracles, recounted in history, were done. I answer, No more did the
Primitive Christians, who beheld Christ's Miracles, know them by Faith; For,
they first saw them, and afterward Believed. We have therefore Indubitable moral
Assurance of these wonders, and that is enough. They say* 3. Many Miracles are
Fained, and perhaps not truly related. To the first I answer. Gentiles might
have in like manner Cavilled at Christ's The Gentiles might have Cavilled at
Christ's Miracles as Sectaries do at the Churches.
own Miracles, and said they were Fained, yea, and at true Scripture also,
Because counterfeit Gospels have been writ. Know then, we speak not here of
either Fained, or Doubtful Miracles, But of such as are Clear, Visible, most
severely examined, Attested upon oath, And manifestly proved, before they
receive warrant from either Church or Prelate. We We rely on no doubtful
Miracles.
have innumerable of These.

19. To the second I answer. Though Miracles only recounted in History, are les
assured then others approved by the Church, yet it is a degree of madness to
deny them all; And if some only of those many be True, we have our Intent. By
the way, pray you, observe a pretty Humor of our Protestants. If these
Sectaries believe fables and deny Credit to Authentic History.
men read a Story (though never so Unauthentik) to the disgrace of a Pope, of a
Prelate, of the Clergy or Religious, Praedicant, Clamitant, They noise it all
abroad, and vent it openly in Print, as most precious ware, And all are bound
to believe it; But when a very Saint, or a choice Historian writ's of a
Miracle, Tell's the Time, the Place, the Circumstances, and make it morally
Indubitable, That is decry'd as an Imposture, a Dream, a forged Tale, a mere
Fiction and what not? Is this think ye Evangelical Sincerity? They object 4.
Both Heathens and Haereticks had Miracles amongst them ( Mr. Poole I think
somewhere Triflles with the Wonders of Heathens and Apollonius Tyanaeus;) Ergo
They are not Signs of Truths. Observe first, how the Argument (if of any
Strength) strikes with equal force at Christ's Miracles, as it does at the
Churches. I answer therefore with St. Austin: The few seeming Miracles of
Heathens, or Haereticks, The Miracles of Heathens and Haereticks not comparable
with those of the Church.
are not comparable to those of the Church, either in Power, Greatness,
Continuance, splendour, or Majesty. These as far go beyond the other in Worth
and Excellency, as the raising of a dead man to life surpasses the taking a
little water in a sieve, or cutting of a whetstone asunder with a Rasor; all
slight work fesible by Conjurers and the Devils help, and much of that nature,
of those Egyptian wonders done before Moses. Whence it is that Blessed St.
Austin little esteemed the Donatists Miracles, and those of other Haereticks.
Aut falluntur, aut fallunt, says the Saint, they either are deceived, or
deceive. Se him in his Hom. 13. in Ioannem, and more de Civitat. lib. 10. c.
16. and in his Book de Vtilit. cred. c. 16. Concerning the name of Catholic
which Protestants never had, nor Those they Nickname Papists (a word newly
coined with their Gospel) ever yet lost, Read St. Austin contra Epist. fondam.
cap. 4. and de utilit cred. cap. 7. Christianus mihi nomen est (said the
Ancient Pacianus (Catholicus cognomen, illud me nuncupat, istud ostendit.
Christian is my Name, and Catholic my Surname, that indeed names me, but this
declares what I am, And in both these we Catholics Glory.

CHAP. XI.
Arguments drawn from Reason against Protestants, upon the consideration of
These declared Motives.
1. WE have seen already both the Weakness and Two Churches very different.
Strength, the Obscurity and Glory of two different Churches, Protestant and
Catholic. The first pitifully Naked, The other richly Adorned with such Noble
Marks of Truth, as force Reason to give a final Sentence, and say, If Religion
be in the world, it must be found amongst those Christians who demonstrate it
Credible with most urgent and convincing Motives. But this Catholic Religion
only does, and not Protestancy: For Protestants (I Assert it boldly) have not
so much as one Rational Motive (much les the complexum of all now related) that
works upon Prudence, and (Antecedently to their new Faith) makes them Believe
as they do. If They have any such, my earnest petition is to hear of Them, or
se them clearly laid forth to the Reason of other men; or, if They fail in this
(as of necessity they must) let them Speak the plain Truth, Viz. That all They
Write and Preach, is lost labor, whilst they go about to draw Rational men to a
Religion, for which there is no Reason. And

2. Here I answer to the trivial Talk of Protestants (pretending to follow
Reason in all they Believe) and once more Assert. They have nothing like a
shadow Protestants have no shadow of Reason for their new Religion.
of Reason previous to their Faith, either for their new Religion in General,
or any particular Tenent in it. To prove my Assertion, We must distinguish
between the prudent Inducements that draw one to Believe, and the Elicit Act of
Faith it self. These Inducement Precede Faith, and are properly the Object of
Discourse. Faith solely relyes on Gods Revealed Testimony, without the mixture
of Reason for its Motive, The Previous motives well pondered, bring with them
an Obligation of Believing, and not Faith it self: For no man says. I am
obliged to believe, Because I believe; But therefore I believe, Because
antecedently to my Faith, I find my self obliged upon Prudent Reasons to
believe as I do. Thus much supposed.

3. Make a search into all the Motives imaginable, that may Prudently induce a
Seeker after Truth, to embrace Protestant Religion, you shall find nothing
proposed to Reason, That has the Appearance of Reason in it. For example. Ask
first in General, upon what Motive Extrinsecal to their Faith, do these men own
Protestancy, as the only true and pure Religion? Why dare they so boldly prefer
it before the Faith of the long standing Catholic Church, yea, or before that
of their homebred Sectaries, of Quakers and Independents? Silence will prove
the best Answer, They can Show no Motive at all. Perhaps we may hear them say,
They reject the Ancient Church because of its Errors, and Novelties. If so,
They first lamentably beg the question, and Suppose that* which is yet to be
Proved. 2. They answer not to the Difficulty. For grant (which is utterly
false) that the Church has erred, we ask not here for Arguments to Refute
those Errors, But inquire after Rational and persuasive Motives, whereby Truth
is proved to stand on the Protestant side? A poor A poor Comfort, to learn that
my Religion is not good unles Sectaries prove theirs to be better.
Comfort, God know's, it is for me, To hear from a Protestant, that my Religion
is not Right, unles upon weighty Reasons He convince me that his is better.
For, say I, If the old Religion be naught, This new one may be worse, and more
erroneous. Sectaries are therefore obliged to bring in palpable Evidences,
whereby their Religion is positively demonstrated Credible and only the best,
which shall never be done.

4. If yet, to answer the Difficulty, They take post Recourse to Scripture
clear's not the difficulty.
to Scripture for Proof of their Religion, They are out of the way, and at the
Conclusion before they put the Premises. For in this place we make no inquiry
after their formal act of Faith, nor the immediate Object thereof, (we know well
their Answer) But only Protestants have no Motives to believe contrary to the
Church Or contrary to the Quakers.
Ask for the Rational Motive (perceptible by all) that preced's Faith, and
Prudently obliges them to believe, contrary both to the Ancient Church and
their own honest Quakers; And this (if the Reply be pertinent) must be
evidenced, Before they talk of a new Faith grounded on Scripture. Had the
Primitive Christians, when they left of Judaism and Believed Christ, been
Ask't. Why they received Christ's Doctrine, and preferred that before their old
Religion, They would have answered: The blind se, the lame walk, the dead arise
etc. We behold strange Wonders with our eyes, which powerfully work upon
Reason, and cannot but proceed from God. When therefore our Protestants deserted
the Ancient Church, and taught a new Faith contrary to it, certainly some
visible Apparent wonder, A new Religion must have Signs of Truih and weighty
Inducements.
some persuasive Sign of Truth should have ushered it in, and sounded the
Trumpet before these new Preachers. All, convinced by Reason, should have cried
out, Here is Antiquity, here is Unity in Doctrine, here we se the Pedigree of
our Ancient Church Showed forth. Now, and not before, our Eyes behold most
glorious and undoubted Miracles, God certainly speak's by these new men etc.
But when we look about us, and find nothing to countenance this unknown Faith
(which like a Stranger came amongst us) when we hear a Novelty preached without
either Sign, Motive, or Inducement to make it Credible. When we se a new
Religion brought Words only given.
in by uncommissioned men upon their bare parole, and unproved Fancies only:
what can we think, But that both Arians, and Pelagians (yea, and all condemned
Haereticks) have evidenced as strongly their old Errors, by a verbal venting of
them, as Protestants do now their new Gospel? For beside Words you have nothing
to warrant it.

5. Perhaps they will say, They are a part of Christianity, Old Motives no more
for Protestants then for Arians.
and Therefore the old Motives belong to them. I answer. No more then to Arians
or Pelagians, who went as well under the name of Christians as Protestants do.
O, But their Religion now professed is the Faith of the Primitive Church. I
dare swear it, the Arians, and our modern Quakers will yet A claim to the
Primitive Faith, no received Principle.
say as boldly They believe exactly the very Doctrine which pure Scripture
Teaches, But there is (...), a vast distance between saying and proving what is
said, by a Rational satisfactory and received Principle. I say therefore, their
bare Assertion of holding the Primitive Faith (which we utterly deny) is so far
from being either a probable or convincing Principle for this Religion, That it
must be either further proved by Rational grounds, or, it is wholly Forceles and
falls to Nothing.

6. They say again: They have three evident Principles 3. Principles of
Protestants answered.
to ground their new Faith on. First, What God speak's is true. 2. Gods pure
and uncorrupted Word is in their hands. 3. They know what God speak's in this
Word. I answer, the first Principle is certain. The second more then doubtful.
The third, on which all Relies, and touches more upon their Faith, then on any
Rational Antecedent Motive evidencing it, is demonstratively improbable: For,
upon no Proof, upon no received Principle, By the light of no Rational Motive,
can these men so much as meanly show, That They are better at knowing what God
speak's in Scripture, then a whole ample learned Church, or, then Their own
Ancestors both knew of old and believed for a thousand years together. These
men long since deceased, held (and upon Scripture well understood) as firmly
the Real Presence of Christ's Sacred Body in the Eucharist, as a Trinity of
Persons in one Divine Essence. The first, Protestants now Reject, the
Protestants Reject and Admit at pleasure.
other they Admit, And why. Upon what Conviction, upon what Rational Motive do
they take and leave, assert and deny as they list? Press this and other like
particulars home, instead of Reason or rational Proofs, you shall have Their
own reeling sentiments Sectaries self-seeming no proof.
given in for Answer. And thus, forsooth, it is. They read Scripture, and
verily it seems to them, It ought to be interpreted as they will have it. I
Ask a Reason for this new Seeming, against the old received Sense, And that
very seeming which is in question you have prooflesly returned for an answer.
Observe well that I say here, and you will find Protestancy reduced to Fancy
only.

CHAP. XII.
Protestants, for want of rational Motives cannot convert an Infidel to
Christian Faith.
1. IT has often occurred to me: If by a supposed They have no way to Convince
a Heathen*
impossibility (Schoolmen sometimes Argue so, and profitably) Popish Religion
were utterly extinguished, or, the Proofs thereof quite rased out of all men's
Memory; yet, that Protestants with all they can in justice lay claim to
touching Religion, should still stand in the world as now They do. This
Thought, I say, has more then once seized on me, Viz. How mean, how poor, how
destitute and naked a Thing Protestancy would appear to be in the Eyes of
either Jew, or learned Heathen Philosopher; For all it has (if yet it have so
much) is a borrowed Bible from others, But no Miracles, no undobted Marks of
Truth, no certain Tradition, no Succession of Ancient Bishops, no Pastors, no
Doctors, In fine, no Rational Motives (if this Supposition stand) can enable
these new Owners of the Bible, to say with Assurance: This Book is Gods own
Word, and in This or this Sense God speaks by it.

2. To clear the matter further, Imagine, That a learned Philosopher (no
Christian) curious to learn A short Dialogue between a Philosopher and a
Protestant.
what Christian Religion is (as we now Suppose it only among Protestants and
other Sectaries) should for better satisfaction, Address himself to so wise a
man as Mr. Poole, who I suppose will tell the Heathen, That God is to be Adored
in a certain Religion. The Philosopher will Answer. I do so; For my Religion
is to follow Principles of nature, to live a moral Life, to submit to the
Government I am under, to do as I would be done by, And here is All. O, says
Mr. Poole: Sr, you have yet greater matters to look after, you must believe in
Christ, if you will be saved. Who was this Christ, Demand's the Philosopher?
Poole. He is God and Man, born of a Virgin, and one that manifested himself by
a most Holy Life, wrought many Miracles, Dyed for us all, Arose from Death to
Life, and afterward Ascended to Heaven. Phil. A strange Story indeed: But can
you make the Story credible to my Reason? Poole. O Sr, it is undoubted; For
this, and much more, is writ in a Holy Book we call Scripture, And you are
bound to believe it. Phil. In a Book called Scripture? Here is no Reason, for I
ask upon what Motive can you make All that is writ in this Book credible to me?
And here (because I shall instantly press the point farther) my Demand only is,
From Whom you received Scripture, and how long since it came to your hands? We
had it, says Mr. Poole, about a hundred When, and from whom Sectaries had
their Bible.
years agon, partly from men that now are (supposed) forgot, (I think they were
called Papists) partly from other Haereticks as Arians, Graecians of no great
Credit, (for they are contrary to us.) Phil. And is it possible? Dare you admit
of this strange and Mysterious Bible, upon no stronger proof, then the
Authority of Haereticks and such beguiled men. Answ. We do so, For we have no
better Testimony. Phil. What Professors of Christianity had you in the world
before your time, That taught truly, and purely the Doctrine of your Bible?
Poole. For a thousand years at least we know not of any. The best I can mention
are the later Graecians, and yet They highly dissent from us in points very
fundamental, as I read in Leo Alatius against Hottinger, Arcudius, and other
Authors. Phil. Tell me once more. Had you no Professors No Pastors, no
Protestant Bishops.
of your Protestancy before these last hundred years, no Protestant Bishops, no
Pastors, no Doctors, that handed unto you this Bible? Poole. None at all. Phil.
That is pitiful, and makes me suspect your Religion. However, since these last
hundred years, have you made any known and notable Conversions upon Infidels by
Preaching the Doctrine of your Bible, or have you wrought undoubted Miracles in
Confirmation of its Truth? Answ. We must Confess the want of great Conversions,
and of known Miracles also. Phil. Satisfy me yet further in one doubt? When you
are at variance amongst your selves, concerning the difficil passages of this
Book (which are many, No cert. Judge to reconcile differences.
for I have read it) who have you to Reconcile those differences, in whose
certain judgment do you finally Acquiesce? Answ. We acknowledge no infallible
Teacher, no certain Judge on Earth, every man gives his private sentiment,
concerning those difficulties, though not infallibly, And it is not in our power
to do more. Phil. Here can be no unity in Doctrine. But No Commission to teach
uncertain Doctrine.
say on, I beseech you: Tell me who sent you to teach these uncertain
Sentiments of your Bible, from whom had you Commission to preach such unsettled
Doctrine? You know that in Civil affairs, if one uncommissioned assume to
himself the Title of Legate, or any Dignity in a Commonwealth, he is either
Traitor, Tyrant, or both. You call your selves Legates sent from God, you
assume the Dignity of Priesthood, give me warrant for either, show your letters
Missive; For if you cannot, I may as prudently believe Arius old Haeresy, as
your new learning, Truly Sr, replies Mr. Poole, my Answer is: The Lord, I
hope, senr us; I cannot say more.

3. Here the Philosopher busies his thoughts, and question's Reason, whether he
may in prudence ground The Philosophers reflection.
his Belief in Christ upon a Mysterious and yet unevidenced Book, which above
thousand years together, was never owned by any true Professors of Christ's,
Doctrine? Whether he may do so upon the bare Word of these late men, who without
Mission began their Preaching only a hundred years agon? Who have no unity,
want Miracles, have made no Conversions, nor are able to tell him, what the
Book says in those difficil places that puzzle his understanding? It is
impossible, says he, to Acquiesce, without further Proofs drawn from Reason.
Tell me therefore, good Mr. Poole, seeing Scripture, as you say, contains
strange Mysteries above my Reach, and no few seeming Contradictions, which,
standing in reason, rather affright, then invite me to accept of it, can you
give me Assurance by good Motives or Arguments Protestants cannot prove the
Holy Scripture. Not from Papists.
extrinsecal to the Book, That it is Divine, or writ by the holy Ghost, and not
by Chance of Ignorance or Illusion? Answ. I can. First the Papists once owned
this Book as Gods own hand Writing. Phil. O, never mention these men, They are
now, as we suppose, forgotten. Surely you are able to evidence your Book, which
is the sole Ground of your Faith, without Aid or Arguments borrowed from
Papists. I Will do it therefore, says Mr. Poole. The Spirit of God bears witness
with my Spirit, that this book is Divine, and Gods Sacred Word. I am yet an
Infidel, answer's the Philosopher, Nor from the Spirit.
and know little of Gods Spirit, much les of yours: my search is only after
Prudent Motives, to which Reason ought to yield and accept of this Book as
Sacred and Divine. Which, Sr. you are obliged to produce, and not wink and
fight it out with me, by an unknown Spirit, which in Real Truth, warrant's as
well a Jew, to make good his Talmud, or a Turk his Alcoran, as you your Bible.
There is yet one Argument more, says Mr. Poole, to prove the Divinity Nor from
the Majesty of Style.
of Scripture independent of Popish Tradition. viz. The Majesty of the Style,
the Sublimity of the Doctrine, the Purity of the Matter etc. These, and the
great Reverence all bear to Scripture seem powerful Inducements to admit of it,
as Gods Word. Philosop. They are strong Fancies of your own head, and how void
of all Reason, I will evidently demonstrate. Scripture not like the first
Principles in Nature.
First, no man can Assert that Scripture is the Primam Cognitum, or, per se
Notum, a Thing known Immediately by its own light, as the first Principles of
Nature are, (which yet this Majesty proves or nothing;) for if so, I should se
it, yea, and All without dispute, would admit of one, and the same Canon of
Scripture. 2. As much Majesty appears in the Book of Wisdom, or
Ecclesiasticus, which you Reject, as in the Song of Solomon, or, Ecclesiastes
Admitted by you. 3. If contrary to our Supposition, we might once call to mind
that now forgotten Church of Popery, There was no want (you know it well)
either of exterior Luster, Glory, Majesty, Conversions, Miracles, or, of
Preaching sublime Doctrine, to set it forth: Yet this Glory and Majesty you
scornfully cast of, as an Insufficient Proof for that Church; and here without
either Conscience or Reason, you Adore a far lesser Exterior Majesty, and by
it will Out-brave me with a Book, the Truths whereof are yet as unmanifested to
me by Arguments drawn from Reason, as those very Writings are, which you call
Apocryphal.

4. And here by the way, observe your great Nor by the Purity of it, which is
the thing to be proved.
Simplicity in arguing. You prove the Divinity of Scripture by the Purity and
Majesty of it. The first is in question; For I, who have perused Scripture, and
find no few seeming Contradictions in it, must have my doubts cleared, and that
Purity evidenced by Proofs extrinsecal to Scripture, before I believe it Pure.
Concerning the Majesty of the Style, Learn your Error. Two things are to be
distinguished in The Exterior Connection of words, not the Divinity of
Scripture.
Scripture. The Exterior Syntax or Connection of the words we read, which
solely considered is common to other pious Books writ by Holy men, without
Special Assistance of the Holy Ghost; And here is all the visible Majesty that
Scripture presents, either to our eyes or Reason, which therefore convinces
nothing. What makes Scripture Divine.
The other is (and herein consists the Virtue and Majesty of Scripture) That
God by his firm Decree, and gracious Ordinance has pleased to seal as it were,
This Book, and own it as his Sacred Word. Now this signature, because External
to the Letter or Syntax of Scripture, is no Object of Sense, nor your reason:
For you do not evidence it by Antecedent None proves the Bible by his Faith,
but his Faith by the Bible antecedently owned Sacred. The Reverence showed to
Scripture* no proof.
rational motives. You may well say, it is the Object of your Faith, or Fancy;
But, I hope, you will not prove the Divinity of your Bible by your Faith, but
Evidence your Faith by your Bible, Antecedently proved Divine to Reason, by
good Inducements. Hence I Answer to that weak Argument drawn from the Respect
and Reverence, which all give to Scripture, And say, it carries not one grain
of Weight with it. For, even Christians (much more Infidels) must first know
upon Prudent Inducements, That the Bible is Sacred, before they Reverence it,
and not prove it Sacred Because they Reverence it. For none proves this man to
be a Prince, or Prelate, because he does him Homage; But therefore He complyes
with that duty, because he is Antecedently known or owned for a Person of such
quality. Here, says the Philosopher, are a few Exceptions against your
Religion, and my Difficulties proposed. To solve them,

5. Believe it, old Papists hitherto forgot, must Catholics prove their
Religion.
show themselves and be remembered again. They, and only they, though we Imagine
no Scripture written, are able by an Oral and never interrupted Tradition to
Assure a Heathen of Christ our Lord, of the Miracles he wrought, of the
Apostles he called to Found a Church, of the great Conversions they made. They,
And the Scripture.
and they alone, can warrant Authentic written Scripture, and show who writ
it, and how it was handed down by continued Professers of their Faith Age after
Age, to this present day. They, and only they, do still preserve Unity in
Doctrine, Reclaim Infidels, Show their Credentials.
Produce their Credentials for what they Preach, and teach. They only can show
to all the World their Popes, their Bishops, their Pastors, their Doctors, who
successively have taught and governed Christ's Flock, since the Beginning of
Christianity. They, and only And glorious Marks of a long standing Church.
they, show you a Church, marked, and made glorious by innumerable, known, and
undoubted Miracles, a Faith sealed with the Blood of innumerable Blessed
Martyrs, Beautified with such eminent Sanctity and Holiness of life in
thousands, as has caused Admiration to very Infidels, and drawn in no few to
follow the like Austerity. Such are the Inducements which plead strongly for
the Roman Catholic Religion, and no other. They fully convince Reason, and
prove, That if God (as I noted above) can conquer Infidelity and Haeresy by the
force of prudential Motives, here they are seen; If ever he spoke by As God
spoke anciently by his Prophets and Apostles, he speak's now by the Church.
the mouth of his Prophets, or Apostles, he speak's now by the mouth of this
one, and only Society of Christians; yea, and he yet uses (as I may say) the
same powerful Language: For if the miracles of our Blessed Lord, and of his
Apostles; if their efficacious Doctrine, their Sanctity of life, their Blood
shedding were Conviction enough to Infidels in those days, They are now as
forceable in the Church, and as manifest to our Senses; Which caused that
Blessed man Richard de S. Victore lib. 1. de Trin. c. 2. to exclaim: Si error
est quem credidimus, a te decepti sumus. If it be error we Believe, it is you
who have deceived us. Iis enim signis etc. For, with such Signs this Doctrine is
confirmed, which can proceed from none, but you only. If we speak of
unquestioned Miracles, as are the Resuscitation of dead men, More since the
times of the Apostles have been raised from death to life, then in the
Primitive Age. To deny these miracles, is is to deny all History which supplies
the want of senses in Those, who saw them not. To owm them, to disown
Protestancy, and profess plain Popery. Our new men Therefore speak at random,
when they talk of I know not what Abstracted Evidences for Christian Religion,
and Tell us, that the Motives for Scripture are agreed on by all. I answered
above. No Evidence for Christian Religion in general, nor for Scripture but by
the Church.
There neither are, nor can be Motives for Christian Religion in general, if
the word Christian compriseth all professed Haereticks; For were it so, God
would deceive us, and make Falsehood as credible as Truth. No Motives can
evidence Scripture, unles they first evidence a Church, that indubitably gives
us certain Scripture; Which is to say, in other Terms: All Motives, as well for
the verity of Christian Faith as Scripture, are only to be found in the Roman
Catholic Church, and in no other Society of Christians. If Protestants can
prove their Faith, or Scripture, by so much as a likelihood of either These now
Named, Sectaries are obliged in Conscience to make their Motives known.
or any better Inducements, They are obliged in Conscience to make them known,
that men at last may se that clear Light of the Gospel, whereof they endlesly
talk in their Pulpits. True Candor and Sincerity cannot but speak plainly to
this Point without intricate Tergiversation, if so much as a spark of zeal
lives in their Hearts, and Rational Motives do not fail them. We expect a candid
answer.

CHAP. XIII.
Protestancy for want of Rational Motives dishonor's Christ, and makes way for
any new coined Haeresy.
1. I prove the Assertion. That Religion highly Protestancy dishonor's Christ.
dishonors Christ, which must of Necessity confess, That a False erroneous
Church is more eminently glorious, and better marked with all evident Signs of
Truth, then that pure Orthodox Religion is, which Christ has now established
in the world. But Protestants must confess thus much, And to prove my Minor ad
hominem, I need no more But two Proved by their own Principles.
certain Principles of their own. One is. The Roman Catholic Religion has
been at least for a thousand years Erroneous (yea some say Antichristian) it
still contradict's the Primitive Doctrine, Holds an Unbloody Sacrifice,
Transubstantiation, Purgatory etc. contrary to Scripture. Such Doctrins gave
Sectaries just cause, as they say, to leave this Church, and Lash us so severly
as they have done, to pull down our Monasteries, to Bannish the Ancient Clergy,
to Ruin those who professed our Religion* They were not mere Trifles, nor petty
mistakes which made our kind hearted Countrymen to use us so unkindly. Here is
my first Principle granted by Protestants. The second is as clear, viz. That
their new Religion of Protestancy, as it stands now Reformed, is the pure,
true, and most Orthodox Christian Religion; For, set this and the Primitive
Church aside of three or four hundred years continuance, You never yet had (say
they) any Society of men that taught purely Christ's Doctrine. No God wot, a
Deluge of Popish Errors overran Christianity for a thousand years together,
until these later men brought unto us the Joyful Tidings of their Refined
Gospel.

2. Upon these two undeniable Suppositions, you shall plainly se what an
Eternal Disgrace, what Affronts Protestants will needs put upon our Dearest
Savior (do what we can to hinder them.) He Blessed Lord founded a Church (it
cost him dear, the Effusion of his Sacred Blood) and promised us an Indeficient
glorious Church to be raised out of all Nations; yet after all these ample
Promises, he has A glorious Church promised, and an obscure one showed us of
Protestancy.
given us a pitiful one indeed, no better a Thing then Protestancy, which is
utrerly disgraced, obscured* dishonored, and quite put down by the Majesty, the
Miracles, the Antiquity, the Unity, the Sanctity of that Church which must now,
forsooth, be styled False, Erroneous, and Antichristian. If this pass for
current Doctrine, you have with it sport enough for the How Christ is dishonored.
Devil (and Protestants only make it) Who upon their warrant, may most justly
reproach both Christ and his Church, and thus powerfully plead at the bar of
Reason. Savior of the world. My false Popish Antichristian Church has stood
a thousand years in Error, How the Devil may plead and most rationally, if
Protestants speak Truth.
yours of Protestancy only a hundred in Truth. Mine both is, and has been
Universally spread the whole World over, yours yet see's little out of some few
corners in Europe. My Church has had most learned General Councils, yours
never any. Mine produces a long continued Succession of Popes, of Bishops, of
Pastors; yours not a man before Luther. Mine is glorious with those very Notes
and Marks of Truth, which you manifested in your own Sacred Person, and induced
Infidels to Believe you. Your late Congregation shows nothing like them. My
false Church Fasteth, Prays, Contemplat's, Converts more then yours, it has
more Unity in Faith; Yours is Rent and torn apieces with Divisions. And Lo,
great God; Here is that Glorious Edifice which you, after all your perfect
Idea's of a Church, have erected; For this you dyed, and never shed your Blood
to Establish my false erroneous Synagogue of Popery. Permit Reason to judge in
this case, and say, whether the Devil be an ill Advocate, if Protestants avouch
Truth, And stand to their professed Doctrine; That the Church of Rome (drowned
in a Deluge of Errors) abandoned the first Verities of Christian Religion for a
thousand years together, And that their Church, as it is now in Being, is the
most choice, goodly, and only refined Religion in the world.

3. My last Argument hinted at in the Title is Foundations laid of new
Haeresies.
thus. A new coined Haeresy, without Motives of Credibility, may be as well, or
better defended by plain speaking Scripture, then Protestancy. It is, believe
me, the easiest thing in the world to draw Haeresy out of the Words of
Scripture. To make good my Assertion, Read first St. Hierom in his Dialogue S.
Hieroms Reflection.
Adversus Luciferianos, Paris Print, anno 1509. at the very end of the
Dialogue. This great Doctor then, to reduce some beguiled by the Luciferians,
who held that a Bishop, or Priest, once Deserting their Faith, could never
again be admitted into the Church, (which they endeavored to prove by that text
of St. Matthew cap. 5. v. 13. You are the Salt of the earth; but if the salt
has lost its savor, wherewith shall it be salted? Ad nihilum valet ultra, it is
good for nothing hereafter etc.) St. Hierom, I say, to refute these, has an
excellent Reflection. Nec sibi blandiantur, si de Scripturae Capitulis videntur
sibi assumere etc. Let them not flatter themselves if they seem to assume out
of Scripture Of Errors drawn from Scripture,
what they say; For the Devil has spoken things out of Scripture; Scripture
(God know's) does not consist in what we read, but in the sense of it.
Otherwise, says the Saint, Possumus and nos etc. I am able to coin a new
Opinion out of Scripture, and say, That none are to be received into the Church
that wear shoos, or have two coats; For that is Scripture.

4. It were most easy to go on with this true Reflection of St. Hierom, and
draw new Haeresies every Particulars.
hour from Scripture. One will say: The Sabbath Day is to be kept Sacred in
place of Sunday, and bring Scripture for it Exodus 20. 8. Another. That we are
as well to abstain from Eating of Blood, or things Strangled, as from
Fornication; it is a Decree of the Apostolical Council, and Scripture, Actor.
15. 29. A third: That Infants aae not to be Baptized, There is ground for it
Matthew. 28. A fourth: That we are not to Contend in Law, but quit our Coat, if
any man will take it, and Cloak also, Matt. 5. A fifth: That no Euangelical
Preacher is to carry Gold or Silver with him, or, have two Coats Matt. 10. 7.

5. Suppose that a new Sect of men should rise up A new Sect of men rising up.
this year in whole Multitudes, and rigidly adhere to the exact letter of
Scripture in these Particulars, is it possible to convince them by Scripture?
It is impossible. And have they not, think ye, more plain Text's of Gods Word
for these Tenants, then Protestants have for pure Protestancy? Yea, most
evidently; For they produce nothing but express Scripture, without Glosses. And
do they not believe in Christ, and admit of every jota in Scripture? Yea, and
therefore are sound in Fundamentals. Moreover. Do they not acknowledge both
Christ and Scripture upon the same Tradition, or other Evidences, as
Protestants do? Yea, and are ready, perhaps, to join in Belief with them, when
they se Scripture as plain for any Protestant Doctrine. They only add a
Superstructure Have as good a Church as Luther had.
of these Articles. And have They not as good a Church as Luther and Calvin had
a year after their new Preaching? Yes, They swarm with multitudes of Followers,
and multitudes make a Church. Why then is not the Belief of these men (all
grounded in Scripture) as good as that of Protestants? I think it is (of two
Evils) the Better, if more Words of Scripture can more advance the Worth of
either Religion. But I tell you, and truly, That neither of them is good,
because unreasonable; and they are therefore unreasonable, Because no man's
Reason can in this present state of Christianity (whilst God Govern's us by the
Light of Prudence) fall upon a Religion, or Believe a Church which evidently
Appears A Religion without prudent Motives is no Religion.
naked, and destitute of all Rational motives, inductive to True Belief. Now
Scripture alone, without the Interpretation of a Church evidenced by forcible
Motives, is, what you please to make of it. And a Church not at all manifested
by rational motives, is no Church, and Therefore cannot interpret Scripture. If
you ask why we say, That Protestancy is so bare of Motives and consequently no
Church? I have answered above. Because this Religion never had, nor shall have
any such persuasive Inducements, or the like Signs of Truth for it, as Christ
Jesus and his Blessed Apostles manifested when they first taught the World, and
by virtue of those Motives, gained innumerable Souls to Christianity. Look then
about you, and find me out a Society of Christians, that is evidenced by such
Signs as hold a strict Analogy with those of Christ and his Apostles, and you
have the True Church. But this is the Roman Catholic Church What proved
Christianity anciently, proves now the Roman Catholic Church.
only, and no other, as I have largely proved. Dare you therefore own the true
Christ, and his Blessed Apostles who wrought Miracles, lived Holily, preached
Efficaciously upon such Motives? You must also own this true Church, upon the
like grounded Proofs. Were Miracles, Sanctity, Efficacious Doctrine etc.
Rational inducements to Believe in Christ? They are now both powerful and
persuasive to Believe this Church. To Deny, as I said above, all Miracles to
this Church, even the greatest (as is the Raising of dead men to life) is to
Deny Sense, Reason, History, The forceable Motives of Faith cannot be taken
from our Church.
and all Authority; And to appropriate These, and other Motives to Protestants,
is only an attempted Plagiary, which cannot be done. It is true, These men
glory in a stolen Bible, (and it is all they can pretend to, besides the bare
name of a fruitles and unevidenced Church) but the marks and Characters of a
true Church They shall never have, nor take from us. And thus much of
infallible Teachers, and the Motives of true Faith.

THE SECOND DISCOURSE OF SCRIPTVRE.
THE FIRST CHAPTER.
Scripture is useles, if none declare infallibly the sense of* it.
1. WHen on the one side I consider the Sacred Book of Scripture, inrich't with
the deep Secrets of Gods Divine Wisdom, I mean, the great Mysteries of our
Christian Faith, which highly Transcend the Reach of human Reason: And A
Mysterious Bible and Fallible Teachers, inconsistant.
on the other side, cast my thoughts on a Thing that talks of those Mysteries
all alone in an English Pulpit, Professing himself fallible in all he says,
(as He must do having no other Oracle of Truth to teach him but a Mysterious
Bible, and his own weak Reason) when, I say, I consider the vast Disproportion
between such a fallible Master, and this infallible Mysterious Book, I cannot,
for my life, Discover what either He, or his Bible (as it is used by him) is
good for. It is most apparently useles and unprofitable in his hands, at least
in all points of Controversies now debated amongst Christians, And thus much I
will Demonstrate.

2. To go on groundedly. Do not we see by too lamentable experience as many
Strong Pretenders to Scripture, as there are or have been Sects and Religions
in the world? All acknowledge the Book for All pretend Scripture.
Gods Sacred Word, But, highly dissent from one another, when they come to
examen the particular revealed Verities therein concerning Religion. The Papists
say this Book speaks for them: Protestants say it is on their Side: Arians deny
all, and will have Scripture for them: The Donatists say it speak's Donatism:
The Quakers Quakerism, the Puritans Puritanism, and so do all other Sects or
Religions, even to the Bottom, call them yet as you please.

3. It is most evident, That These Dissenting men speak not the Truth of
Scripture; For they contradict one another, and in matters of High Importance.
And, It Is as clear, They all speak not the Truths of Scripture Infallibly. What
shall we do in this Confusion All deliver not the Truths of Scripture.
and robbing Scripture of its Verities? Shall every one be left to his own
Spirit and Judgment of Discerning? If so, The Arian may be an Arian still, the
Socinian a Socinian, the Donatist a Donatist, which is to say: Haereticks may
laudably Continue in Their Haeresy, without Restraint or Blame. Will you have
an Arian take Mr. Pooles word, that Protestants only exactly deliver God's
Verities revealed in Scripture? The Arian laughs at so great a folly, and
tell's Mr. Poole: Because we are both fallible Men, your Word, Sr, is as
forceles to persuade me, That Scripture speaks what you would have it, as mine
is, to work in you my contrary Opinion. What is next to be done? Shall we have
Recours to the very Letter of Scripture, and hope to find Debates clearly
decided between these two Disputants? It is impossible. For, the Letter of
Scripture is the very thing Scripture les clear, Occasions dissentions, and
therefore cannot End them.
they quarrel about; how then can it. when it occasioneth the Iarrs, be a
useful means to Reconcile them? For example. The Arian allegeth for his
Haeresy, that Text of St. John c. 14. 28. My Father is greater then I, and
concludes from thence that Christ is les then his Father, and consequently not
the High God. So the Arians speak. Mr. Poole, to prove the Verity of Christ's
Godhead, allegeth ( and thought it no robbery to be equal with God) also that
of St. John 1. 5. 20. This is the true God. Observe.

4. Here are two seeming Antilogies (Christ is less Two seeming Antilogies.
then is Father, Christ is Equal to his Father) drawn out of two certain
revealed Verities, which yet Scripture reconcil's not: For the whole Bible no
where expressly says, That Christ according to Humain nature is Inferior to
his Father, and Equal to him in his Godhead; which, though a Catholic Truth,
is not so fully expressed, as to gain an Arian to Believe it, who yet stands as
much for Scripture as any Protestant does. That is his Impertinency, says Mr.
Poole, Because he will not se Light put before his Eyes. Farewell, Sr, if you
talk so idly. The Arian will storm as much at you, in not yiedling to the
Express letter of his Text, My Father is greater then I, as you do at him, in
not yiedling to yours, He thought it no robbery etc. Fallible interpretation
dissatisfactory.
O, says Mr. Poole, I Will explicate his Text. You explicate: And who are you?
What is your Fallible explication worth? The Arian explicats your Text also. Se
the wicked Volkelius in his pestiferous Book Scripture explicated by Arians.
entitled De vera religione, lib. 5. cap. 10. where he largely discusseth St.
Paul's words: Qui cum in forma Dei esset, and says first, that particle (...),
or, forma, signifies not the same nature with God; sed speciem tantum and
similitudinem, which similitude, He deposed, taking on him the form of a
fervant, Quod in Altissimum Deum cadere nequaquam potest. Next he glosseth on
thofe other words: Esse se aequalem Deo. Dei enim est, says He, tempestatibus,
morbis, morti, daemonibus imperare, ut nutui ejus sine mora parere cogantur.
Dei est, ab hominibus religiose coli atque adorari. Dei est, in rebus omnes
hominum vires long superantibus invocari. Vnde efficitur, Christum merito in
Dei forma Deoque aequalem fuisse a Paulo dici, quod tanta ab ipso potestate in
omnes res Coelo subjectas donatus erat, ut mari, ventis, morbis, morti, denique
summa cum potentia imperaret, ideoque a plurimis divino honoris atque
invocationis cultu afficeretur, quia, videlicet, summa hac auctoritate atque
potentia quam in se perpetuo manentem, cum aliis quoque communicare poterat,
signisque mirandis Deum tanquam, vera ejus effigies referebat. Thus Volkelius,
whose Latin (to conceil his impiety) I english not. In the 11. Chap. of his
fifth book, He explicates those words: Verbum caro factum est, and in other
places confesses, that Christ is truly the Son of God, Because God begot him
in a particular manner by the Operation of the Holy Ghost in a Virgins womb,
and Because he honored him with a Permanent power of working miracles, and other
admirable Gifts above all other Creatures. Nay, he says: He is true God, and
Vnigenitus Patris (but not Altissimus Deus Creator, of Heaven and Earth) Because
the name of God is common to creatures of a lower rank then Christ was, who by
reason of his Singular Dignity, and Supereminent Endowments, is to be Adored
before all other creatures, whether in Heaven or Earth; And therefore merit's
the Title of true God, yet not Dei Altissimi, of the High God.

5. I intend not, by giving you These impious Glosses of an Haeretick, any way
to favor his execrable Haeresy (Though I profess ingeniously they are as good,
if not better, then the best Interpretation that Mr. Poole gives of Scripture,
against the Catholic Church) But only to show you, how useles a Book; These
impious Glosses are laid forth only, to show Sectaries how Scripture may be
abused.
sole Scripture is, with These men to end their Differences, yea, and what
monsters are produced out of it, by those that pretend most to Gods written
Word. And what is the reason think ye? That these Sole-Scripturists, These
Arians, These Protestants, These Anabaptists etc. are so various, so opposite
in their Tenants, begot, as they think, out of the true written Word From
whence the abuse proceeds.
of God? Is it for want of wit, learning, or languages, They thus Differ? No.
Is it for the want of Study and conferring one place of Scripture Clear as they
think, with others Obscure? No, Both Arians, and Protestants have done this
long ago. Is it that all these Sectaries go against their Conscience, or,
wilfully draw Gods Word to a pervers sense He never spoke? (let the Innocent
cast the first stone at the Guilty) Truly I suspect it in Some, yet cannot
judge that All are Conscious of so hideous an Impiety.

6. The true Reason therefore is. These Sectaries, The true reason is given.
after the Rejecting of Gods infallible Church, the Oracle of Truth, will, by
no more then half an Ey of Human Reason, dive into the deep Secrets of Gods
Eternal Wisdom Obscurely revealed in Scripture (and herein they neither show
Judgment nor Learning:) With this pur-blind Eye of weak Reason They go to
work, They steer on their course, they judge, They Determine, They Define, They
Pronounce their fallible Sentiments on these High Mysteries, which never the
less Reason alone is incapable to comprehend, or Master. Hence, Why Sectaries
vary as they do.
They vary as they do. Hence it is, they weary themselves out with opposite
frivolous Interpretations of Gods Word (which is but one, whilst they are so
divided in their Tenants.) Hence it is, That almost every year we have a new
Religion broached in England. Such a jumbling we must expect, such endless
Dissentions amongst them; And, it is a just Judgment of God for their Pride, who
truly are no more but poor Scholars, yet Disdain to learn of a good Master,
that is willing to teach them all Truth.

7. I call it a Iumbling; for, from Scripture (by Reason of its les clear
speaking) arise these Dissentions, and though it be quoted a Thousand times,
says no Endless Confusion about the sense of Scripture.
more now, Then it did sixteen hundred years agon, And therefore cannot end
them, They next fall upon a doubtful conferring one Passage of the Bible with
another: Several Versions and Languages are examined, much Ado they make, And
all is to know what God speaks in such Texts, but without fruit; For their
Differences are as High as ever, And neither Party gains or looses the
Victory, Since Scripture alone, nor, the Comparing of Texts together, is able
to draw either side, from their Preconceived Opinion. After the Conferring of
places, They are hard at it, with Fallible Explications, when behold, express
Scripture is cast away by these two Combatants; And now either the One must
learn of the Other, what God speaks in Scripture by a human fallible
Explication (which is no Scripture) or nothing is concluded. Arians and
Protestants equally uncertain.
Who is then to be held the Master Interpreter, the Arian, or Protestant?
Neither. And they have both Reason for it; For, neither ought to yield in their
own Principles: The quarrel Therefore goes on, and is endless. If after Their
fallible Explications of Scripture they proceed to Inferences: This follows,
That follows etc. All is plain Sophistry, for Upon what unsteedy Foundations
Haresy stands.
Scripture Vitiated with a falls Explication, can never Support a true Illation.
And upon such unsteedy Foundations all Haeresy stand's. Scripture not
understood is the Ground; doubtful Collations of places, fallible Explications,
falls Illations are the Superstructure: They have no more. And thus you se how
useles a Book Why Scripture is useles in the hands of an Haeretick. A question
propose, and answered.
of Scripture is in the hands of an Haeretick, who neither can tell me so much
as Truly, much les Infallibly, what God speak's in These High controverted
Points of our Christian Faith.

8. But you will ask how then happens it, that Mr. Poole and Protestants hit right
in yiedling an Assent to some Catholic Verities; for Example to a Trinity of
Persons in one Divine Essence, and Contrary to Arianism Protestants acknowledge
a Trinity by Oversight.
Profess the Son to be consubstantial with his Eternal Father in one Divine
Nature? I answer. They light upon these Verities by an Oversight, or, as I may
say, merely by Chance. By Oversight; For believe it, had Luter thought well
On It, He might with more ease have denied These High Mysteries of our Faith,
then the Real change of bread in the Holy Eucharist. By Chance: For, as by
chance, They Stole Or by Chance.
a Bible from the old Catholic Church, so casually They took from her, Here
and There (as it pleased Fancy) somewhat of her Ancient Tradition also. And
upon This ground of Tradition, or, the infallible Doctrine of the Catholic
Church, They Believe (as Unawares engaged in a Belief They labor in vain to
find Scripture for it.
well as they can) These Sublime mysteries. Being thus unawares engaged in a
Belief, They weary their Heads, and wear out their Bible to find expres
Scripture for it, (which cannot be found) Because, forsooth, they will Believe
nothing upon Tradition, or the Churches infallible Doctrine. I say Expres
Scripture cannot be found, that Assert's Three distinct Persons in one Divine
Essence, or, the Word to be Consubstantial with his Eternal Father; Therefore if
they Believe these Verities, They must Ground their Faith, not upon sole
Scripture, But on Scripture explicated by that never erring Oracle of Truth the
Catholic Church: Or, on the Word of God not written, which we call Tradition.
You se Sectaries must own the Churches Interpretation, or become Arians.
therefore, how our Protestants, though in Actu signato, they seemingly Reject
Tradition, and the Churches Interpretation upon Scripture, yet in Actu exercito
They own both, and must necessarily do so, or become plain Arians. Yet here
they are pinched again: For, if they Believe these Mysteries upon Tradition, or
on Scripture interpreted by the Church, They are neither Papists, In doing so
They are neither Papists nor Protestants.
nor Protestants. No Papists; for Papists hold Tradition and the Churches
Interpretation infallible. No Protestants; For They profess to Believe no more
then God has expressed in his written Word, Though now they must leave that
Hold, and believe upon the Catholic Motive, or renounce the Faith of these
Articles.

9. If Mr. Poole pretend expres Scripture for these High Verities of Christian
Faith, The surest way will be to produce it, without Remitting me to other
Authors, or, Adding his fallible Glosses to Gods Word; For every Arian knows
well to Distinguish between express Scripture, and the superadditions of Men's
Glosses, fallible Explications, Interpretations etc. Now, if When Sectaries
interpret Scripture truly They borrow light from Church Doctrine.
in this particular Mystery of the Trinity, Mr. Poole Interpret's Scripture
truly, it is not, God knows, His skill that does it; No. The Reason is, Because
be borrows the Truth from the Churches Interpretation of Scripture, and so
fights against an Arian with another Weapon. Where, by the way observe a
strange proceeding of Protestants, who, when They dispute A strange proceeding
of Protestants.
out of Scripture against an Arian, They Will have the Churches Interpretation
good against him, and His naught against them: And, when they Dispute by
Scripture against Catholics, They will have the Churches Interpretation
forceles against themselves, and Their own wretched Glosses powerfully strong
against the Church. Were there ever such Doings in the world before these days?

10. But we have not yet said all concerning Scripture, Interpretations of
Scripture, Inferences out of Scripture etc. Wherefore Because we are gone so far,
Pardon a further trouble, of giving you a few more Notes on this Subject. They
will show you, if I mistake not, upon what rottering Principles the Grand Cheat
of Protestant Religion stand's, for want of Infallible Teachers.

CHAP. II.
The Fallacy of Protestants concerning Scripture, and the Interpretation of
Scripture, is discovered.
1. WE have almost seen enough how Sectaries, either through Malice, Ignorance,
or both, make Holy Scripture a Book that proves all Religions, Like Wittingtons
bells, It ring's out what Fancy will: For in Scripture, is Arianism, if we
believe the Arians: Here is Protestanism, if we believe Protestants: Here is
Quakerism, if we believe Quakers: Here is what you will, and All Haereticks lay
alike claim to Scripture, and the sense of it.
what you will not; And it must be so, whilst These men have a Bible in their
hands, and Construe all as they pleas, Gloss as they pleas, Interpret as they
pleas, without Limit or Restraint. It had been much better, Methinks, if such
Sole-Scripturists had never read Scripture in these debated Points of Religion,
then after their reading, to se it made a Book that only begets Dissentions; so
grossly wronged and abused it is. Yet no Body is in fault: Pure Scripture cries
the Arian, pure Scripture says the Protestant, nothing but Scripture says the
Puritan, And there is no Redress for these Evils. All run on in their wilful
misunderstanding Scripture, not one of them will yield to another, nor (which
is worst of all, and plain Perverseness) Seek after a means (which is yet offered
them) to come to a right understanding of it.

2. Truly, I have often wondered at our Protestants, (men, as they say, of a
more Sober Temper then your Quakers and Puritans are) How it is possible
Protestants Plea for Sole Scripture.
(after they know right well, with innumerable Holy Fathers, this Plea, or
pleading sole Scripture, to be nothing else but an old Trick of all condemned
Haereticks) That, they can lessen themselves so much (had they no other motive
to retard them) as to tread the Footsteps of such unworthy Sectaries, and
patronize a Doctrine which cannot but breed Dissentions to the Worlds end. This
it is: Sole Scripture is the Rule of Faith. Sole Scripture speaks plainly in
all things necessary to Their false Doctrine.
Salvation. On these two Hinges chiefly Protestant Religion turns about, and
will do so, until God at his good pleasure, judge it time to turn it out of the
World. Two Cheats they are, and great Ones, as I shall Demonstrate.

3. Mr. Poole to mend the matter, having supposed, Mr. Pool's three Positions.
that sole Scripture is the Rule of Faith; withal, That there is enough said
in Scripture to end all Controversies, were men humble and Studious etc. Seems
in the 7. Chap. of his Nullity page 226. to ground Protestant Religion on these
three Positions. The first is. That the Books of Scripture are and may be
proved to be the Word of God. 2. That in the Substantials of Faith, those Books
are uncorrupted. 3. That the Sense of Scripture may be sufficiently understood
in necessary Points. There is no Arian, but will most easily admit of these
three Propositions; How then (were they all True) can they more establish
Protestant Religion then Arianism? For, a Principle common to two Advers
parties cannot (considered merely as a Principle agreed on by both) more
Advantage the cause of One, then the Other. If therefore an Arian Assent to
these Propositions, they ground no more Protestant Religion, then they do
Arianism. Mr. Poole wants a fourth Proposition.
The Truth is, Mr. Poole is highly wanting in a fourth Proposition, which, if
proved, would have done him more service then the other Three. And it should
have been to this Sense: Seeing Scripture speak's plainly all Doctrine necessary
to Salvation, Certainly it ought to teach Protestancy plainly. I mean the
particular Tenants of Protestants, as these stand in Opposition to Catholic
Doctrine: For if these be necessary to Salvation, Scripture has delivered them
plainly; or if it have not done so, We must Conclude, They are not necessary to
Salvation. Thus much premised, we will show you in the ensuing Discourse how
slippery and fallacious Protestant Doctrine is, as it Relates to Scripture, and
Interpretation of Scripture.

4. The first proposition. No infallible Church, no No Infallible Church no
certainty of true Scripture.
Assurance of True and incorrupt Scripture. To makes my Assertion good against
Protestants, I will only propose this plain Question. From what men of Credit
and Integrity, had the first Protestants Their Bible? It From whom had
Protestants their Bible?
was not dropped down from Heaven into their Pulpits, with Assurance of its
Purity, or Certainty, that no Change was made in it contrary to Truth since the
Apostles Times. Were they Jews, Infidels, Turks, Arians, or Grecian Haeretiks
that gave them Scripture? Too perfidious to be trusted in a matter of such
Consequence. Too unfaithsul either to preserve true Scripture by them, till
Luther quit his Cell, or, then to put into his hands a Bible Vncorrupt in every
Point. Were they Catholics? Let our Adversaries shame the Devil, and speak
Truth, 'Twas from them They had their Bible, together with the Originals. But
these Papists, These very Catholics (if we may credit Catholics in
Protestants Principles cannot be relied on for Scripture.
Protestants) had not only Corrupted the Writings of the Ancient Fathers; But
also through Malice, or Ignorance, Had grossly erred a thousand years together,
and Changed the Ancient Doctrine of the Primitive Church. They had Secretly
wrought into men's hearts a falls Belief of the Chutches Infallibility, of an
unbloody Sacrifice, of Transubstantiation, Invocation of Saints, and such like
errors. Admit of this Supposition, who is there amongst Protestants, that shall
dare to look on his Bible with good Assurance of its If Papists erred in
Doctrine, They might more easily have erred in corrupting Scripture.
Purity, or say, it is the Word of God, and not corrupted by These erring
Papists? For, These men who erred in Doctrine, might as well have insinuated
errors into the Book of Scripture: They had time enough to do it. These men,
who changed the Ancient Primitive Faith of Christianity, might as perfidioufly
have Altered the Bible. They wrought secretly a falls Belief into men's hearts
concerning an unbloody Sacrifice, Transubstantiation etc. And why might they
not as cunningly have foisted into Scripture Words and Sentences suitable to
such supposed errors? Believe It is easier to corrupt ^ dead book, then to
pervart innumerable living* men.
it, it is much easier to corrupt a dead Book, then to pervert so many living
Christians, and bring them to a Belief of so palpable, hideous, and erroneous
Novelties.

5. Here then is my Dilemma. Either, the Catholic A Dilemma.
Church had erred when Luther and Protestants took the Book of Scripture from
it, or was pure in Doctrine. If pure, Most wicked were They for deserting it. If
the Church had then erred, or was corrupted in Doctrine, Neither Luther, nor any
Protestant can have Affurance, that they read yet True Scripture; For all the
Certainty They can have of this Book, is miserably uncertain, and at last Comes
to this doubtful Judgment: It may be we have true Scripture: It may be, and
more likely, not. God only An unanswerable Argument.
knows; All depend's on an Erroneous Church, that gave us Scripture, which
might as well (in the vast compass of a thousand years) have guilfully changed
this our Book from its Ancient Truth, as cheated Christianity into a falls
Belief.

6. Some may yet say. All now Agree, as well Catholics as Protestants, upon
the Verity and Integrity of Scripture; Therefore its needles (for many Books at
least) to Question this point farther. I answer. Protestants destroy the very
Ground of Certainty.
Catholics agree well, Because they take this Book upon the Warrant of Christ's
never erring Church, which cannot Deceive them. But Protestants, who Ruin this
Ground of Infallibility, destroy with it all Certainty of scripture in order to
themselves. Their Agreement therefore is no more but Verbal, whilst the
Principle which supports a Real one, is shaken a pieces by them. Hence you se
How Mr. Poole speaks at Catholics Confession no Proof of the Truth of
Scripture to Mr. Poole.
random, when he Tell's us, He knows Scripture to be the Word of God, Because
Catholics confess and acknowledge so much. I answer first, Their Testimony
with him is worth nothing: For They had, before he was born, lost all Credit by
introducing falls Doctrine into the Christian World (and why not, say I, as well
a falls Bible?) Such Doctrins He dares not admit of upon the Testimony of
Catholics, yet With no color of reason do Protestants Admit of a Bible upon
the Churches Testimony, and reject her Testimony in other matters.
He will Kiss their Hands, and Take from them such a Bible, as They are pleased
to give him. 2. The Testimony of Catholics in this particular, is with him
Fallible, and may be Falls; But a Testimony that may be falls, can never give any
Assurance of True Scripture, which of necessity must be had, or none can ground
Faith upon it. 3. Mr. Poole is pitifully out in all he says; For, he neither
Does nor can Admit of Scripture upon the Confession or Testimony of Catholics.
Why? Catholics hold Scripture to be The Church holds her own Testimony
Infallible. Mr. Poole rejects this, therefore he makes null the Churches
Testimony to himself.
the Word of God, Because the Infallible Church of Christ Assures them it is
Gods Word. This infallible Testimony of the Church Mr. Poole utterly Disown's,
and Therefore he must of necessity by his own Principles, Reject the Catholic
Testimony.

7. Other perhaps will say, That God by Special Providence ever preserved
Scripture pure in all Essentials, Though He permitted the Church to deceive
Souls, and lead them into Error. What an Antiscriptural Assertion have we Here?
How is God Affronted? What a lame and half Providence is granted him? Sectaries
affront God by allowing him no more Then a half Providence.
What, no more but only to have care of a Book, to secure That from falsehood,
and in the interim to Permit his own immaculate Spouse, his Church (which
Scripture should instruct) to play the Harlot, to Deceive the World, and err
Damnably? O, but what er'e becom's of the Church, we must (say our Protestants)
have True and incorrupt Scripture, or, no man can know what he is to Believe. I
answer. And we must either have a True and incorrupt Church, or none can be
Assured of True and incorrupt Scripture. It avail's little to have Verities
shut up in a Bible, if the Church erred in delivering them to Christians.
Say, I beseech you, what does it avail Christianity, to have the Pure letter
of Scripture closed up in a Bible, and preserved from Error, if Christians
Universally had been, as it were Deserted by Almighty God, and permitted
(before Protestants appeared in the World) to Err in the very Substantials of
Faith delivered in Scripture? Yet it was so. For confessedly, not only those
Ancient condemned Haereticks, as Arians, Protestants say all Christians erred
for a thousand years.
Pelagians, Donatists, and the Later Graecians, but also that great moral body
of Catholics (if our Protestants say true) Erred in the very Fundamentals of
Faith, Since they Taught, as they do still, their Church to be Infallible, an
unbloody Sacrifice etc. Gross errors therefore Reigned amongst them, whether we
suppose the Scripture Pure, or corrupted. Imagine then (which is utterly Falls,
Though Haereticks cannot prove it falls) That our Scripture had been corrupted,
They had then Erred because the Book was falsified. Suppose again (which is
True) that Scripture is not corrupted, you have still the same Effect, which is
Error in Doctrine drawn out of the very Words of pure Scripture. The Reason
surely is, Because the Church did not rightly understand Scripture; if so, you
se, how Scripture not understood, as easily begett's Errors, as Error equally
prejudicial whether it be caused by a false Church or falsified Scripture.
if it were corrupted. What then matters it in Reference to poor beguiled
Souls, whether these great supposed Errors arise from Scripture misunderstood,
or Scripture corrupted? Error is Error, and alike Prejudicial in both cases. I
say therefore: It is as great an Evil to have a Church (that should teach Truth)
to deceive the world, in bringing in a Deluge of Errors to the Ruin of the
Ancient Primitive Faith, as to have a Bible corrupted. For, it is Error, and
falls Doctrine wrought in men's Hearts, That undoes them. Now whether That be
caused by a falls Church, or falsified What Sectaries ought to fear.
Scripture, it imports little. Our Protestants Affirm the first, and may justly
Fear the second. God (say they) permitted the Church to Err, and he may (say I)
as well have permitted it to Vitiat Scripture. They say, Errors Insensibly grew
up in the Church; And, I say, they might as Insensibly have crept into
Scripture. Be it how you will, from this Old erring Church, Our New men
suppose, They received pure, sincere, and uncorrupted Scripture, just as the
Holy Ghost writ it. A mere Impossibility; For, never greater Chimaera was
fancied, then to couple a Falls Church and True Scripture together, ^^, True
Scripture and a Universal falls erring Church.

8. Some perhaps may say: The Arians, Donatists and other Haereticks, had and
have still True Scripture, though they erred in Doctrine. I answer, No God a
mercy to them; For, if They have True Scripture, They may thank an unerring
Church that preserved it incorrupt, before Heresy began, and after. But grant
me No assurance of true Scripture if all Erred universally.
once, as our Protestants do, that both Haereticks, and Catholics likewise
universally erred in Doctrine most Fundamental, no man can now have Assurance of
True Scripture. O, but the Unanimous Voice of all Christians, Affirming
Scripture to be the Word of God, and pure without corruption, is a Weighty
moral Proof for its Integrity. I answer none at all: For, if no Society of
Christians unerrable and sound in Doctrine had that book in Custody, The old
Papists might (for ought Protestants know) have either by Chance or Fraud
changed words in Scripture. For example, Those words, Matt. 26. This is my
body, from what they once were, This is a sign of my body, and the Cheat was to
maintain their Doctrine of the Real Presence. But you will ask how could this be
done? I have told you, By Malice, or Inadvertency. But when could it be done? I
answer in that Could Sectaries say when Papists first became Idolaters, They
might be informed concerning these Corruptions?
very Age, Year, or Month, when these Papists first began to be Idolaters, and
worship a piece of Bread for God. Then it might well be don. Name that age
Exactly, and you have all. Our new men Answer, This Idolatry was brought in
amongst us; But they knew not When; it began with such Secrecy and Silence.
This Text of Scripture therefore, I say, might have been corrupted with like
Secrecy, Though no man knows when. And here by the way observe a strange
Paradox of our Protestants. So notorious a known A Strange Paradox of
Protestants
Novelty, as this supposed Idolatry is, which might most justly have Struck
Terror into all men's Hearts, Visibly entered a Church diffused the whole World
over, yet none, neither Friend nor Foe saw it, cried out against it, or Has
left it upon Record. And one single Particle of Scripture cannot be changed,
but all must know it. How can these two Consist together? You will say, The
Primitive Church was Pure, and so preserved true Scripture. How do our
Protestants know so much, if it was Fallible? Thus much of an Argument ad
hominem, which I desire Mr. Poole to Answer, not to mistake, As he may do, if
he think my endeavor is to prove Scripture corrupted in any Substantial Point
(no! 'Twere Blasphemy to say it.) The Argument therefore proceeds from the
Protestants falls Supposition (yet true with them) that the Church is fallible,
and has erred; Then, I say, None of them can have Assurance of their Bible, or,
of True incorrupt Scripture.

CHAP. III.
All substantials of Faith are not plain in Scripture without an infallible
Teacher.
1. HEre is my second Proposition, And nothing can be more evident, might he
Evidence of a known Truth prevail with Wilful men. Arians, we see, are against
Protestants in the Essentials of Faith, Protestants against Catholics, and
They against Both. All of them Acknowledge Scripture to be Gods Word, Sectaries
deny the Plainess of Scripture.
yet every one in practice Denies the Perspecuity and Plainess of it: For if
plain, Why stand they at Variance with one another about this Plainess?
Protestants Doctrine is plainly delivered in the 39. Articles: The Arians
Doctrine is plainly in Their Writings: The Catholic Doctrine most plainly in
every Catechism. No Advers party Impugn's these Doctrins for want of a plain
Expression, but for want of Truth. It is quite contrary in Scripture; for He
were a Devil that should mention the want of Truth in Gods Word; yet you see
most Learned men vary about this Clearnes, seek for it and cannot find it.
Though I have partly given the Reason Hereof, yet, Because the matter requires
it, I shall now add a word more for a further Explication.

2. All know that the Objective Verities writ in Holy Objective Verities, and
the belief of them different.
Scripture, and the Belief of those Verities in a Christians Heart, are to be
distinguished. By the first God speak's to us. By the second we yield Belief to
his Word. All know likewise, That if my Belief be true Faith, it must say
Exactly, and expres that in mente, which God speak's in Scripture, neither more
nor les. And this is Saving Faith, not the Objective Verities not saving Faith.
Objective Verity as it lies in Scripture; For if that could save us, it would
be enough to put a Bible in ones Pocket, And say here is the Faith that saves
me, Though I know not what is in it, or Believe Amiss. Thus much is clear
without Dispute in an Orthodox, and an Arian, whilst they turn to that passage
of Scripture and Read, I and my Father are one. Both of them have the same
Objective Verity before their eyes, But the One only has the True Belief of it
in his Heart. Observe now, How darkly Scripture speak's in this one great
Fundamental Article, And how easily we may swerve from One Instance of
Scriptures Obscurity.
this Revealed Truth, without an Infallible Interpreter: For, the words
precisely considered, may either signify unity in Affection, as appears John
17. v. 21. 22. or a Consubstantial unity, and in this Indifferency to several
Sectaries gloss; The Church Interpret's.
senses lies their Obscurity. To Clear all, and make them speak a Full sense,
the Arian superadds his Gloss, and draws out of the Text (as also from that
other John 1. 5. 7.) no more but a Unity in Affection only, which is Haeresy.
The Catholic Interpretation teaches a Consubstantial Unity, or One-nes in
Essence, and It Is true Faith, yet is no more formal expres Scripture, then that
of the Arian; For, Consubstantiality is no where Formally read in Scripture:
However, it is believed and ground's our Faith, whilst the Arians Gloss is
rejected. And why has it this Preference think ye? Why is it better then the
Arians? No other Reason can be rendered but a most True one, Viz. That the
Church does not only fully Express the Objective Verity darkly couched in
Scripture, But also Delivers this Full and clearer sense Infallibly: For I say,
If the Churches Interpretation If the Churches Interpretation were as fallible
as the Arians, Christians might follow either as they please.
were as fallible as the Arians, Christians might indifferently Adhere to
Either, yea, and changeably now take one, then the other as they please. A
greater Probability can balance nothing in this or the like particulars, as I
shall largely prove hereafter. In the mean while, by what is now said, we may
learn first. Though Scripture in this and other Mysteries has its Darkness, yet
by the good Providence of Almighty God we are provided of a Sure Interpreter,
which is absolutely Necessary: For if Every one interpret according to fancy,
Haeresy is easily Drawn out of Gods Word; And if none interpret Faithfully, the
Scripture still lies hid in Obscurity, which makes it (for that part) a Useles
Book to Christians. The necssity of an infallible Interpreter.
Learn farther, That None can ever know exactly by Human Industry, or his Sole
pondering the Bible (let him be another Solomon for Wisdom) what God has
Revealed in these difficil Mysteries of our Faith, without an Infallible
Interpreter. To prove my Assertion I Will give you one Instance.

3. Suppose that two or three most learned Heathen Philosopher, well versed in
Languages, and all Human Literature, had this Book of Scripture put into their
Hands, and were persuaded by the extrinsecal An instance of Philosoohers
reading the Bible.
Authority of all Christians, that God here speak's his Eternal Verities:
Withal, That if they read the Book, and by their Sole reading (without Recours
to any Interpreter) possess the True sense of it, They have True Saving Faith.
Well: They read it, and with as much Humility as any Protestant can do, yet If
They ask of none but Their own Judgment, error follows.
Ask of none, But their own judgment what it means, in the more difficil
Passages. Tell me, I beseech you, (And here I appeal to the moderate Judgment
of every Christian, whether Catholic, Arian, or Protestant) What Faith or
Religion would these Philosophers produce out of Sole Scripture, Solely Read,
and pondered by them? My Thought is ('It Is no more but a Thought) That the
Result of their Reading would end in Coining a Religion different from all
Others now in Christendom. I am very confident, They would never pitch upon
Protestancy, no, nor Their doubts would be Endless.
upon any Sect now extant. Alas, they would Doubt and Stagger at every hard
passage in Scripture, yea, and by the very Instinct of Nature (if they owned
Scripture for Gods Book) would humbly Supplicate Those, who gave them the Book,
to lay open the Mysteries therein, and Assure them of its meaning in a hundred
Places; yet none can do this good office for them, But One only Society of
Christians that lays claim to Infallibility, and proves it Demonstratively, if
Faith be in the World.

4. Be it how you will: thus much I conclude. Our Protestants are in the very
same Case without an infallible Interpreter, as the Philosophers are with
Sectaries are in the very same case without an Infallible Interpreter.
no Interpreter: These make Scripture speak what They think it speaks, right,
or wrong, And Protestants do the like, whilst They give their sentiment on
Mysteries above their Reach without an Infallible Teacher. Pray you Reflect.
Had Christ Jesus, and his Apostles never Taught any thing by Word of Mouth, But
only thrown the Book of Scripture amongst Christians Strange Confusions Had
Christ and his Apostles given to Christians a Bible without an Interpreter.
when They left the World, and commanded them to make that use of it, which
every Private Judgment thought best, what a Religion, think ye, should we have
had at this day in Christianity, any or none, or a thousand different ones as
good as none? God only knows, I do not; Yet will say, This is out very present
Condition, if an infallible Interpreter of Scripture be Rejected. We may
wrangle to the Dissentions would have followed without hope of union.
Worlds end, but agree in nothing; Dispute, but conclude nothing; we may raise
Difficulties one against another, But allay none. And thus the contest must run
on, without Redres or Remedy. All Appellation here to Antiquity, to Councils,
Fathers Appellation to Antiquity remedies nothing being fallible with
Protestants.
and Tradition help's nothing, Because they are Fallible, And were they
otherwise, we vary as highly about the Sentiments of Fathers in every debated
point of Controversy, as we do about Scripture it self.

5. We se thirdly: How utterly impossible it is for a Protestant to draw, from
the Objective Verities revealed in Scripture, the True Sense and meaning of
Gods Word in any controverted point of Religion. The Reason is. Scripture never
speak's plainly and expressly the Protestants Sense in these debated
Controversies, (observe it in All, and you will find it so.) What do they
therefore to help themselves? They first Reject an Infallible Interpreter, and
next (as the Arians do) superadd their own Fallible glosses to make Sectaries
make Scripture to speak what They would have it say, not what God speak's.
Scripture speak, not what it Truly says, But what They would have it say, And
thus they think Scripture cleared, and Their Work don. Take here one Instance
for many. Catholics and Protestants have been at Variance a hundred years and
more about these Sacred Words Matt. 26. This is my Body. The different Senses
drawn from them are Contradictory, And therefore cannot be True. This is my
Body, Really, says the Catholic, and here is my internal Faith. No, says the
Protestant: This is my Body figuratively, or a Sign of my Body, And this is my
Belief. Arians and Protestants vitiate Scripture after the same manner.
Mark I beseech. Just as the Arian says: I and my Father are one, and
superadds his Gloss, of one in Affection, so the Protestant here vitiates the
Text by his Gloss, and adds to Scripture (what God never spoke) a Trope, a
Figure, a Sign, and I know not what. And after This Injury don to the Words, He
Believes not for Gods Express Word, But, for his own far-fetcht and dear bought
Interpretations, which are no more Scripture then if he should tell me, That,
An Example.
That text of St. Matthew cap. 3. verse 17. This is my beloved Son, were to be
forcibly stripped of its Verity, and, misinterpreted Thus: This is only a Sign or
Figure of my Beloved Son. No more does Scripture, through the whole Gospel,
warrant in the least, an Improperty of speech in the one Text now cited, then
in the other. I little Regard The Protestant dscourses and glosses contrary to
this Mystery of Faith, (let us have plain Scripture) much les their Inferences,
which are all Human and Fallible. O, but to say, that Christ Body is Really
Present under the Species of Bread, yea and in a thousand places at Once, is an
Unintelligible Mystery! Why more Unintelligible then a Trinity of Persons in
one Essence, or the unchangeable Divine Word seemingly Changed when he took
Flesh upon him, and became an Infant? These are Higher Mysteries and greater
Difficulties, If Human Reason might be judge, and give a final Sentence. But
I Will tell you once for all. That man shall never be a Proficient in Christ's
School, that will undertake to conquer, High Mysteries no to be pried into by
our weak discourses.
as I may say, the great Difficulties of Faith, by Examining the High Mysteries
of it; If he go so to work, he is cast into a Labyrinth, and can find no Exit.
All therefore he is to do, is, to Learn and Examine whether God, the Infallible
Truth, has Revealed and taught us these Mysteries by any unerring Oracle: Next
How we are to submit in matters of Faith.
He is to Captivate his understanding, And humbly Submit to him (without
further search) who neither can be Deceived, nor will Deceive us. But enough of
this Digression.

6. We se thirdly: Though Protestants Anathematize The whole Religion of
Protestants is nothing else but addition to Scripture, or subtraction from it.
all that Add to Gods Word, or Take from it, yet I Will tell you, Their whole
Religion (as Protestancy) is either made up of no Scripture at all, or, is
nothing else but a mere Addition of their own Glosses to Scripture, or, finally
a wilful Subtraction from it. To the Words now cited, they add a sign, a
figure, and God knows what more. Is this Scripture? When St. James 2. cap. 24.
Dogmatically teaches, that a man is Justified by Works and not by Faith only,
our New men tell us, the Apostle speak's not of Justification before God but
before Men. Is this Scripture? When St. Paul Romans 2. 6. plainly Affirm's, That
God will render to every one according to his Works. Calvin and Beza Assure us,
He will do so indeed, if there were any such, But the Mischief is: None can do
a Good Work before God. Is this Scripture? No. These, and such like
Interpretations Our Adversaries do not own for Scripture, yet They must own
them as Tenants Essential to their Religion: Ergo I say: Mere Fallible Glosses,
which are no Scripture, make up Protestant Religion as Protestancy. And hence
Doctrine of the 39 Articles as Protestancy not Scripture.
it is that their Doctrine delivered in the 39. Articles stand's there with all
Clearnes (that is, you know what they say) But when it is Brought to the Test,
and is examined by Scripture, you may seek long, before ye find a word like it,
as it is Protestancy.

7. You see lastly: That the Interpretations which Protestants give to those
Texts of Scripture cited by How Sectaries abuse Scripture cited for Catholic
Doctrine.
Catholics (for their Doctrine) are mere Human Extra-scriptural and
Anti-scriptural Glosses of their own Fancy. We cite the Apostle 2 Thessalonians. 2.
15. For Tradition beside the Written Word: For the Real Presence, This is my
Body Matt. 26. For Justification by Good Works, that of St. James 2. 14. For a
Sacrifice to be continued to the Worlds End, Malac. 1. 11. For Extream-Vnction,
James the 5. 14. For the Verity and Infallibility of the Church, that of St.
Paul 1. Timot. 3. 15. And what, for Gods sake, have we from our New Men to
these plain Passages speaking Popery, But a Return of mere Mock-fool Glosses,
Hatched in their own Heads, which have so little Shadow of Scripture in them,
That with force they drive the very life and sense out of Gods Word? And They
proceed so unluckily, Sectaries make Scripture clear where it is obscure, and
obscure where it is clear.
That where Scripture is clear, They make it obscure, and where it is obscure;
They will seem to make it Clear by superaded glosses. What can be more clear
for our Catholic Doctrine of the Real Presence then those words of St. Luke 22.
v. 19. Hoc est corpus meum quod pro vobis datur: This is my body which is given
for you? Yet with their Glosses they so Torture the Text, That every Particle
in it suffers Violence. In so much that Iacobus Scripture tortured by Sectaries.
Gordonus observes, in his first Tome of Controversies, printed anno 1612.
Controversia prima de Verbo Dei cap. 26. n. 11. page 121. No fewer then two
hundred different Glosses, have been added by Protestants to Obscure the plain
sense of Christ's own Words. Some, as this Author notes, abuse and misinterpret
the Pronoun Hoc, Others the Verb Est, Others Corpus, Others meum, Others the
Relative quod, Others the Proposition pro, Others the Pronoune, Vobis, Others
finally the Verb Datur. Yet after all this perverting and woeful mangling of
Gods Word, we must Believe that our Protestants speak (forsooth) Scripture, and
nothing but clear Scripture. On the contrary side, we have seen more then
enough in the Beginning of this Chapter, how Vainly They cry up the Clarity of
Scripture in Mysteries most difficil, not fully expressed in Gods Word. What
man in his Wits can say, That any Scripture* through the whole Testament
Speak's half so clearly of the Consubstantiality of the Eternal Son with his
Eternal Father, as the Text now quoted is for the Real Presence? Yet those
Scriptures must be Clear, for that Christian Verity, and this Obscure, for the
Real Presence.

8. To conclude this point, Methinks it highly imports, when we deal with our
Adversaries concerning How to proceed with Sectaries when They Explicate
Scripture.
Their Explications of Scripture, That we do not so much (at least in the first
place) make it our Work Positively to Disprove them by other Texts, and
Authorities (which our Writers usually do, and laudably) as to put them to the
Proof of their wild Glosses, which seems most Reasonable: For Asserenti
incumbit probatio. When therefore They go about to Obscure Scripture where it is
plain, with new Interpretations (the world never heard of) bid them not only
Interpret, but Prove Their Interpretations: For example, That the words of our
Savior now cited must be alienated from their genuin Sense, and tortured as
they are by Protestants. Proceed thus with them, put them to the Proof, and
you will soon see them at a Nonplus.

CHAP. IV.
Sole Scripture without an infallible Interpreter can be no Rule of Faith.
Protestants have no Scripture for their Religion, as it is Protestancy.
1. MY first proposition Draw's Proof enough from the precedent Chapter; For if
Scripture be Obscure, and speak not clearly all Verities revealed in the book,
it cannot Regulate Faith without an Interpreter. But it is more then evident,
that it speaks not clearly many Verities Concerning the Highest Mysteries of
Religion; Therefore it cannot Regulate Faith relating to These Mysteries,
without an Interpreter. I prove the Minor. Scripture which solely considered
according to the Exterior Letter, both may, The bare letter of Scripture may
and does easily beget error.
and Does, as easily beget Error as Truth in the Intellectual Power of man,
Speak's not clearly. (Whence it is that St. Austin Tom. 10. Sermon. 70. de
Tempore, styles Haereticks Infelices, Unhappy, Who only look on the Sound of
words in Scripture, which is, says he, like a Body without a Soul.) But it is
as clear, That the bare Letter of Scripture (without a sure Interpreter)
beget's Errors, And therefore an Arian Because He Regulates his Belief by the
mere Sound of that Text John 14. My Father is greater then I, Err's damnably.
And the like All other condemned Haereticks have done in their respective
Errors, drawn as they thought, from Scripture. Ergo it is evident, that the
Letter of Scripture speak's not Clearly in this one most High Mystery, And
therefore cannot Regulate Faith, without an Interpreter. Now further. If this
Interpreter A fallible Interpreter as useles as no Interpreter in points of
Faith.
be fallible, He is as Vseles to Christians for the Regulating of Faith, as if
he were no Interpreter, For He may Deceive them, And if we be deceived, it much
imports not, whether the Error proceed from Obscure Scripture misunderstood, or
misinterpreted by an other. An infallible Interpreter therefore is necessary in
this Weighty matter, that Assures us of what God has spoken, of such and such
Particular Mysteries. And here we Rest securely, and have a most certain Rule
which Sectaries want.

2. Again I argue. If Sole Scripture be a clear Rule of Faith, it can Regulate
without Glosses, yea, and without a Preacher too. Why therefore do our
Protestants charge that one Text above cited, This is my body (the like we may
say of many others) with so unnecessary a burden of their Interpretations? Are
Are Sectaries afraid that Christ spoke too plainly?
They afraid that Christ spoke too Plainly, and therefore Add their Glosses to
Obscure his Words? None will own such an Impiety. Then I say: They are Added to
Clear an Obscure Passage, consequently, They They gloss to make Scripture clear.
must acknowledge an Obscurity in this Scripture, before their tampering with
the Text, and glossing it. Well. But when They have glossed all they can, I ask
what is it that Regulates their Faith in this particular? Their glosses
regulate their Faith, not the words of Christ.
Do Christ's Words as he spoke them, or, as They interpret, Regulate here? Not
the first: For 't is most evident, that Christ's own Words without the
Protestant Glosses, can never beget in any Understanding that determinate
Belief, which these men have of the Blessed Sacrament; For, the words of Christ
say plainly, This is my Body that is given for you; Which pondered to the day
of Judgment, can never yield this forced, repugnant, and far-fetch't Sense,
This is a Sign, or a Figure of my Body. Yet such is the Belief of Protestants
drawn from this Sentence, by their Interpretations. Wherefore, we must conclude
that They Believe not for Christ's Sole Words, But for their Additional Glosses,
which is to say in plain English, Their Overplus of Glosses Regulates Faith,
not Gods Express and most significant Word. Some will say this Passage now
cited, must be interpreted as They will have it, Because Scripture in other
places seems to favor their Interpretation. I answer heartily. Let them They
cannot cite one Text out of Scripture in favor of their Glosses.
but produce so much as one plain Text out of the whole Bible, for the
Alienating of this Sentence from its proper Sense, without Glosses (which are
no Scripture) and I Will proclaim them Conquerours. Here is plain dealing, but
Remember well, I call for Scripture only.

3. I told you just now, That as these Glosses are useles, if sole Scripture be
a clear Rule of Faith, so are Preachers also, yea and all the large
Commentaries which Luther and Calvin have writ on Scripture. Why? Gods Word
speak's clearly without a Preacher: If Scripture be Clear, there is no need of
Teachers.
Away therefore with Preaching, and Commentaries. 'T is enough to thrust a Bible
into men's Hands, And bid them read it, For there is True Doctrine, and plain
Doctrine, but more is not required to Regulate Faith, then The Reason.
Truth and Clarity; Ergo, Ministers may hereafter well spare their labor of
Preaching, and it is better they did so, Then to be in danger of perverting Gods
true Word, by their fallible Talking.

4. To conclude this matter, we have already amply proved, That it is not the
Bare Letter of Scripture which Regulates Faith, Buth the exact and true Sense
of it ( Ne putemus, says St. Hierom in cap. 1. ad Galat. v. 11. Let us not
think, that the Gospel lies in the Words of Scripture, but in their sense. Non
in superficie, sed in medulla, not in the Outside, but in the inward Pith and
Marrow of it, non in sermonum foliis etc.) But, no Protestant, with so much as
any color of Reason, can lay a more just claim to the true Sense of Scripture,
when He and the Church stand at Variance, Protestants as uncertain of the true
Sense of Scripture, as Arians are.
Then an Arian, a Pelagian, or a Donatist can do, when They draw Scripture to
Their Sense. All of them are alike, guided by mere Guesses, and first Read,
next Think, then Judge, and lastly Believe. Believe what? What Their Private
Judgment Tell's them, and here is the last Rule of their Faith, All of them
guided by guesses. Three parts of Protestant Religion.
whereof more in the next Chapter. In the interim, you may Resolve a Protestants
Belief into these three broken Shreds, or Fragments. The first part is that,
wherein They hold with Catholics: And here they have the true Sense of
Scripture interpreted, yet no True Faith, for want of Submission in other
Points. The other part is that, wherein They agree with Ancient condemned
Haereticks: And herein, They have neither the True sense of Scripture, nor true
Faith. The last part is proper to Themselves as Protestant; And here they have
not so much as the Letter, or a Word of Scripture for them: much les any true
Sense, or Faith grounded on Scripture. And

5. Upon this occasion I come to mind Mr. Poole, The want of Mr. Pooles fourth
Proposition.
of the Want of his fourth Proposition, viz. That Scripture speak's plainly the
particular Tenants of Protestant Religion, as Protestanism. And must Tell him:
He shall never find in the whole Bible, so much as one Article of Protestant
Religion (as it stands in Opposition to Catholic Doctrine) grounded on
Scripture. And, Because The man may not perhaps like of too great a burden, I Will
only urge him to Prove these three Protestant Assertions. 1. That there are two
Sacraments Three Protestant Assertions for Mr. Poole to Prove.
and no more; But let him not think to turn me of, as he does the Captain, with
mere empty and insignificant Words, Appendix page 34. Scripture is plain enough
in describing the nature of two Sacraments. He should have added; And it is
plain in describing the number also, and given good Scripture for both, which
cannot be don. 2. That Faith only Iustifies. 3. That, after he has better
pondered the Text of St. Peter 2. 3. 16. He prove by Scripture, the Plainess of
it in all necessary Points to Salvation. A fourth proof, concerning the Canon
and Certainty of Scripture, would choke Mr. Poole: But I Will not give him so
undigestible a pill, may He pleas to satisfy the three former Demands by
Scripture only, without Glosses and ungrounded Inferences drawn from what he
thinks to be Gods Word, But is not.

6. Some perhaps may ask why all this time, whilst we have Discoursed of
Scripture, of its Certainty, of its Sense, and Regulating Faith etc. None of
Mr. Pooles Arguments against us are taken notice of? Has he none, or do I
Dissemble them? I answer. The man has nothing like an Objection. To prove
Scripture to be the Word of God, He Relyes on the Confession and Testimony of
Catholics. This Mr. Poole has nothing like: Arguments.
we have Refuted above. To prove it incorrupt in the Essentials of Faith, He
Tell's us, that by looking into the Nature and quality of those Various
Lections, which are pleaded as Evidences of Corruption, we shall quickly find
them to be in Matters of les Moment. It seems They are little, Because Mr.
Poole without Proof will have them so. I could show him great ones in the
Protestant Bible, But let them pas, And be pleased to note how poorly he shifts
of the Difficulty That Presses. The Difficulty is concerning the best
Originals, which Protestants have hitherto met with (none of them I believe
ever yet saw the Autograph, or Handwriting of either an Evangelist or Apostle)
These Originals, I say, cannot be proved Incorrupt, if that Church which had
them in Custody for a thousand years, brought in a Deluge of Errors into the
Christian World. Finally to prove, that a Protestant has a Sufficient
Assurance of Understanding the Sense of Scripture in things Necessary to
Salvation, He allegeth Gods Promise, John 7. If any man will do his will, he
shall know of the Doctrine whether it be of God: But Protestants do Gods will
(thus much must be added, or the Proof stands on one Leg) and Papist Do not
Gods will; Ergo Those have Assurance of the true Sense of Scripture, and These
have not. Here is the doughty Argument, and that which follows is as weightles.
Protestants, says He, have the Assurance of Reason (Papists have no more) and
if that will not do, They have the Assurance of the Spirit which God promises*
Luk 11. Here is work enough for another Chapter: Yet in passing I cannot but
reflect on a mistaken quotation Mr. Poole misquotes Sixtus Senensis,
in Mr. Poole page 230. where he cites Sixtus Senensis, And both err's in the
Annotation and Doctrine of Sixtus, concerning the Clarity of Scripture. Sixtus
Therefore libre 6. Annotat. 152. (not 151. as Mr. Poole Quotes,. Quod autem,
Answering an Objection of St. Chrysostom, plainly Afferts, that when Scripture
is said to be clear, it is not to be referred to the Whole Bible, but to a Part
of it only, wherefore, says He St. Chrysostom divides Scripture into two
Classes; The One contains the hidden and abstruse Mysteries of Gods deep
Wisdom, And this part is not clear at all (thus much Mr. Poole conceil's.)
Altera sectio. The other Section, or Part of it, compriseth the First and
chiefest Principles of all things to be Believed, and Chief Precepts of living,
And so much is clear. Observe well. The first and Chiefest Principles of things
to be Believed, infer no Clarity in every Particular revealed Mystery: For He
that believes this one Principle of Faith, That the Church is Holy and the
Pillar of Truth, Has a First great Principle, and may learn by it all Truth.
If you please to se how Mr. Poole abuses Sixtus, read him in the page now
cited. It were most easy to Take him tripping in other Citations, But that is
not my task at present. This only came in by Chance.

CHAP. V.
The Reason of private men, and their private Spirit, cannot interpret
Scripture.
1. MR. Poole told us above, That Protestants have the Assurance of Reason for
the Sense of Scripture. Happy They, if they were the only Reasonable men in the
World. But why are not Papists as Reasonable? Why should the Pelagians, the
Arians, or Honest Quakers be left out of the list of Rational men? Or, if These
would Monopolize the Assurance of Reason to Themselves for their Sense of
Scripture, Why are They not to be Credited upon their Parole, as well as
Protestants? For their proof is to say, They have it ( creed quod habes and
habes) and so will an Arian or Quaker say too. Admit Were Reason allowed of to
sentence the Sense of Scripture, we must know whose reason hitt's right.
therefore (which is false) that Reason be allowed of as Judge, or an Iustrument
to sentence the Sense of Scripture, where it speaks obscurely, We are nothing
Advanced, nor one whit the Wiser, unles we know whose Reason it is, that hitt's
right on the Sense. Now, all of them, most evidently do not so (unles we
impiously say, that God has revealed Contradictions in* Scripture) Because
these men's Reason draws contradictory Senses out of Scripture, and in All do
not Interpret Scripture truly.
High Points of Faith also. Say then, good Mr. Poole, whose Reason must yield,
and to whom? Must an Arians submit to yours, or yours to an Arian? Whose Reason
must yield, and to whom whilst we vary about the sense?
Must mine bend to yours, or yours to Mine? Or may we all hold on to the day of
Doom, as Divided in Faith, as we are in Judgments concerning the Sense of
Scripture? Allow once of these Endless and Eternal jarrs in Religion here on
Earth (which this one Principle of Following private Reason establishes) and
you may seek for another Heaven then Christ has promised to the Children of
Peace Hereafter, That is, for none at all. God forgive these late Tumultuous
Spirits, the True cause of our woeful Dissentions. But let us go on. And

2. Pray you tell me, when Protestants say They have the Assurance of Reason
for the Sense of Scripture in controverted Points of Faith, E. G. The Trinity;
what signifies this word Reason with them? Does it import a Formal Discourse,
much of that nature as Schoolmen use, when they establish their Tenants in
Divinity? Sectaries are to say what this word Reason signifies.
If so; the Principle of this Discourse must be admitted of, and owned by the
two Advers parties, when by Reason only They plead for the True sense of
Scripture, And the Conclusion of the Discourse must If a formal Discourse, two
Advers parties must agree on a Principle.
be drawn from Premises founded on This received Principle. Thus much supposed,
I might here ask first: Upon what known and admitted Principle Do our
Protestants ground a lawful Syllogism, whereby They prove, That Their Reason
has ever the good luck, the singular Privilege to fall right on the True
sense, whilst No Princiciple to prove that Protestants reason hitt's right.
Others as learned as They swerve from it? If here They talk of the Unction
teaching Truth, of the Spirit etc. They will be urged again for a Principle to
prove, That these Favors singularly belong to Them, and not to Others who
Dissent from them. But we will wave this Argument, And only note, how in all
those Disputes which our Protestants hold either with Catholics or Sectaries
(take for an Instance the Arians) the True sense of Scripture is so far of from
being a The sense of Scripture when Two Sectaries dispute is Ever the thing in
Question.
received Principle by both these Litigious Parties, That it is ever the Thing
in Question, and must be proved by another owned and admitted Principle, if the
Discourse stand upon solid ground.

3. One example will give you more Light. Mr. Poole Assaults an Arian (a far
weaker Adversary then a It Is proved by an Instance.
Catholic) with a Scriptural Proof, for that High Mystery of our Faith, the
Sacred Trinity, and argues thus* Scripture says John 1. c. 5. 7. There are
Three, that bear record in Heaven, the Father, Word, and Holy Ghost, and these
three are one; But the Sense of this Scripture, says Mr. Poole, is, That God
is one in Essence^, and Three Distinct Persons: The Father Vnproduced, the Son
Produced, and the Holy Ghost Proceeding from Both. Ergo we must admit a
Trinity. Observe well. The Arian Admit's the first Proposition, or the Words of
Scripture, And here is the only Principle agreed on by these two Disputants;
But utterly denies the second, Viz. The Sense drawn out of these Words, And
tell's The Arian admit's of the words of Scripture, but denies Mr. Pooles sense.
his Adversary, that this Sense is the very Thing in question; but no received
Principle, And therefore must be proved, not supposed against him: Proved I say,
and by Sole Scripture, which yet cannot be done, Though we turn to all the
Texts in the Bible. Most justly therefore may the Arian tell Mr. Poole: If his
Faith fall upon such a Determinate Sense now given, He Believes it, either
Because His private Judgment molds Scripture to that Meaning, or, Because He
takes it upon the Authority of a Church, which he professedly Disowns, and will
not Believe.

4. In reference to what is here said, note first. That as the True sense of
Scripture is supposed, and not proved against an Arian by force of Scripture in
this particular Mystery, so much more, it is ever supposed and not proved, when
Protestants dispute against Catholics. The reason is. Their private Judgment
Protestants first frame to themselves a Sense of Scripture, and then triumph.
first makes what sense they please (which is no received Principle) and
afterward They vapor like Conquerours, as if sole Scripture did the deed, and
defeated us. Upon the great Assurance I have of This my Assertion, I challenge
Mr. Poole (or any Protestant) They have not one Text of Scripture against the
Roman Catholic Faith without the mixture of Their private Judgments.
to produce one Text against the Roman Catholic Faith, which, without the
Mixture of Their private Judgments, or unadmitted Glosses, speak's so much as
Probably against it. The more plausible place they insist on, is That of St.
John cap. 6. Unless you eat the Flesh of the Son of Man and drink his Blood etc.
For communion under both kinds, which nevertheles must have twenty Glosses, and
as many self Judgments upon it, before it can put on a likelihood of a proof
against us.

5. Note 2. That whilst the Sense of Scripture lies under dispute, and is not
agreed on by the two Parties Why Protestants loose labor when They argue by
Scripture.
at Difference, For example a Catholic and Protestant, It is but Labor lost
in the Protestant, to Assault his Adversary with Texts of Scripture: For, the
Catholic Answers, Olim possideo prior possideo, I have ever believed the sense
of Gods Word to be such as you know we Catholics own, And can you my
Antagonist, What the Catholic answer's.
persuade your self to drive me out of the Possession of my Ancient Belief, by
your Sole private Judgment, or, Those new Glosses you father on Scripture? If
so: A worthy Gentleman, who by right of his Ancestors for a thousand years and
upward now quietly possesses his lands, May be turned out of House and Harbor,
upon the private Judgment of some New upstart Fellow, That Tell's him, He
verily thinks the Ancient Writings for his Lands, are not well Understood;
Therefore he will first do him the favor to explicate them according to his
private Opinion (though contrary to the Sense hitherto received) which done, he
will drive him out a doors, and make him a Beggar. This is our very Case.

6. Contrariwise, when the Sense of Scripture is How we may argue from
Scripture.
agreed on, we may Argue as Schoolmen do, and draw from it Theological
Conclusions; which though often Various amongst Divines, yet the Principle
admitted (I mean the Sense of Scripture) remain's unquestioned, and is
maintained without Contradiction. Without Such an agreed on sense, which either
Scripture (as it often does) Deliver's plainly enough, or, The common consent
of Learned men makes Highly probable, or, The Church of Christ declares
certain. It Is to no more purpose to Dispute out of Scripture, then to speak
Arabic to an Illiterate Peasant. Yet, the loose Behavior of our Protestants is
such, that it lead's them (without the guidance of these Lights) first to Fancy
The Fancy of Sectaries
a Sense of their own, and then draw strange Conclusions from it. So Mr. Poole.
After he had by his own Interpretation, perverted that Text of St. Paul, The
Church is the Pillar and Ground of Truth; might well say, The Church is not
proved Infallible. Thus much is noted, if the word Reason signify a formal
Discourse.

7. Perhaps Protestants may reply (For in Truth it Another Acception of the
word Reason, refuted.
is the hardest thing in the world where to have them in their Answers) That
Reason here imports not any Discourse at all, But an immediate clear Light
Transfused into their Mind, when they read. Scripture (like a Beam shot from
the Sun) whereby their Eyes as perspicuously discern the most Abstruse Sense in
it, as men do the Sun by its Light, or the first known Principles of nature by
Their own Indisputable Evidences. Is this Reply think you rational, that draws
not so much as a Dram of Reason after it? For, if their new Faith has set new
Eyes in their head, It has not, surely, plucked out their Neighbors Eyes, who
yet, I hope, may see what is discernable by All. None then ever questioned the
Suns-shining at Noonday, or Writ Commentaries on the first natural Principles;
Yet we se These new Sectaries not only highly at Variance about the Sense of
Scripture; but also Gods Church (which has Eyes as well as They) as highly
opposite opposite to them. However, the Church must be Counted Pur-blind, and
They only sharpsighted, though the Light they fancy may license any Haeretick
to say what he pleases: For, as They Set Light set up against Light.
up their Light, so an Arian may set up his against it, And swear it is the
Clearer of the two for his sense. And who can gainsay him?

8. From this Discourse it follows, that the Assurance of Reason, whereof our
Protestants talk so much, is a most insipid Word; For it does not signify a
Formal Discourse for want of a known and received Principle, Nor, That quicker
immediate Light (^f all Fooleries the worst) now refuted. I Will go farther, and
say, No Christian by Reason only can dive into the Mysteries of Scripture.
That no Christian by the force of Reason only, when he reads These difficil
Mysteries in Scripture, can so much as once fasten a prudent certain Judgment,
either upon the Thing revealed, or the Ratio credendi: Not upon the Thing
revealed, For that Transcends the Capacity of Reason; nor upon the Motive, why
he Believes, For by the force of Reason only, he cannot know exactly (Guess he
may and miss) that God speak's expressly in such a sense. Therefore, if upon his
own Half-sighted and too daring Conceit, He will proceed to a settled Judgment,
and say positively what God speak's, He tells the Story before he knows it, And
consequently highly offends against Reason: For Reason dictates, that we must
first Learn, Before we undertake to Teach, or, rashly enter into the deep
Secrets of Gods Divine Wisdom, without a certain and infallible Doctor.

9. Therefore before we come to the Assent of Divine Faith, A master, an
infallible Proponent is necessary, who without Ambiguity assures us that God
Speak's, and in such a determinate Sense. This once admitted, Reason has no
place at all in the very Elicite Act of Faith, or, if it enter, it spoils
Faith, as I shall presently declare.

10. I Will therefore Explicate my self further, and The Different Operation of
Reason in a Catholic, and in a Protestant.
withal show how Reason goes to Work in a Protestant, And how differently it
Proceeds in Catholics. The Protestant has no more but the bare Letter of a
Bible before his eyes, And toyl*s hard with that one weak Instrument, his own
Reason, to find out Gods Sense Therein. He Read's, he Humm's, He Pausses, He
Expound's, He interpret's, and afterward, Believes what he thinks is True.
Marck well. He Sectaries know what they think, but know not why They belive.
knows what He Thinks, but yet knows not, upon any Rational Inducement, or,
solid Motive Extrinsecal to his Thought, that God speaks as He Thinks. Question
him in any Particular, and you will find, what I say, most True. For example.
Why, when He reads Those Words, This is my Body, he believes Christ's Sense to
be: This is a Sign or Figure of my Body. Ask him where is the Rational
Inducement that lead's him to own this sense? If Rational, He is able to give
an Account of it to others? If herein he show himself unacountable, He does not
only expose his Belief to the contempt of Unbelievers, but to Those thousands
of believing Christians that oppose it. Nevertheles It Is so. For he can render
no other Reason for this The proof is given.
new coined Sense, But that after the reading of Scripture, pondering the
Words, examining the Difficulties, and conferring places together, He is
wrought into a Persuasion, That God Speak's just as he Thinks, and no
otherwise; where you first se, That all the Reason he has, walk's, round in
the compass The Reason of Sectaries laid forth.
of his own weak Head, without Showing so much as a Resemblance of any suitable
Evidence of it to others, who notwithstanding know Reason as well as He. You se
secondly, That such a man Acts How They proceed.
more the Part of a Pope, then ever any did that Sat in Peter's Chair; For he
positively Defines what Scripture says, without the Extrinsecal Help either of
Ancient Tradition, or the Continued Sense of the Church. Never Pope defined so
at Random.

11. And upon this Occasion I say more. When Of the sentiments of Fathers
expounding Scripture.
the very best of Fathers, whether a St. Austin, a St. Hierom (or who you will)
differently (as it often happens) expound and Interpret Scripture by their
Private Judgment, grounded upon Vnevidenced Principles, or upon mere
conjectural Probabilities; Their private Sentiments can Advance us no further,
But to an Opinion only (which therefore I may, without offense, Reject) and
never bring us to a settled Act of Faith. Yet, a far more Vnevidenced private
Judgment in a Protestant does all, And (as the only Light he see's by) serves
him both to apprehend that God Speak's, and in what Sense he. Speaks. Upon so
great a want of Evidence his whole Faith depends. Hence we se thirdly. If Faith
be a discoursive Act, as some of our New men hold, That is, an Act founded on a
Rational objective Inducement, which inclines the Mind to Judge as they do, and
Believe as They Judge, it No Protestant can say why he Believes as he does.
is impossible for any Protestant to Answer the question why he believes (that
God speak's and in such a Sense) by the Strength and Light of his own
Judgment: For stead of the Rational Objective Inducement, which ought to He
only return's you the subjective Light of his own Judgment for Answer.
incline him, and we inquire after; He returns only the Subjective Light of his
own Internal Judgment, which being only a fallible Act, Clear's nothing
without some kind of further Evidence, nor Answers the Question, why he
Believes? Unles this be the WHY, That, because he thinks his own Thought true,
He is pleased to believe as he think's. Where you find the reason most
unreasonable, Because it is Vnresolvable into either Rational Motive, or any
known and received Principle.

12. We se 4. Though we Allow to Protestants as much of the private Spirit as
their Hearts can wish for, whereby They are, as it were, pushed on to Judge The
private Spirit supposes, but proposes no new Motive of Faith.
and Believe: Yet this Spirit being only (As They say) The Operation of Grace,
chiefly fortifies the Power that Believes; But proposes no new, or further
Rational Motive of Belief: For it must suppose the total motive, Antecedently
proposed, discernable by more then one only, Before it can either push, or work
to any purpose. Protestants say it.
And this is what some Protestants Assert, Viz. That the Operation of the
Spirit is more by way of Efficiency (ex part subjecti credentis) in order to
the begetting Faith, then suppletory of the Rational Inducement, That
objectively moves, and draws men to Believe. Be it how you will Protestants
cannot prove that the Operation of Grace is their peculiar inheritance.
(though indeed our Protestants have an odd Spirit) They cannot show probably,
That the Operation of Gods Divine Grace is more their peculiar Inheritance,
then others, who Believe contrary to them. But of this hereafter. In the
Interim note, That in the Discourse hitherto, we inquire not so much after the
Reason of Protestants for the Canon of Scripture, as for its Sense in Points of
Controversy. Whereof you will se more in the next Chapter.

CHAP. VI.
The new mode of Protestants Misinterpreting Scripture, which proves the
Churches Infallibility, is more Amply Refuted.
1. WE noted above, That it much Avail's, when Sectaries take a liberty of
glossing Scripture as they please, to urge them to a Proof of their
Interpretations. By this close Dealing, we shall learn much of their Fallacious
Spirit, and se, How they both abuse their Readers, and (which is worse) the
Sacred Word of God.

2. In the former Discourse we Handled that Controversy Scripture most
significant for Infallible Teachers.
concerning the Infallibility of Pastors and Teachers in the Catholic Church.
To prove the Verity, we allege such Express Scripture, That I dare affirm, the
whole Bible speak's no where any Truth of our Christian Faith then This, in
more plain, Catagorical and significant Terms, Might The words without patches
of vain glosses, have their open and obvious Sense.

3. For the infallibility then of Living Teachers we cite what Christ said,
Luke 10. 16. He that Hears you, hears me, etc. (or, as the Greek read's, and
perhaps more significantly, Hearing you, he Hears me) and Argue thus. He who
hears Christ speak, Hear's a Teacher Arguments for Infallible Teachers.
subjectively Infallible in Doctrine and Teaching, But He who Hear's those, who
are pointed at by that particle, You, Hear's Christ speak (for hearing you, he
hears me:) Ergo, he Hear's Teachers subjectively Infallible, in their Doctrine
and Teaching.

4. To this a Grandy amongst our Sectaries Answer's. The gloss of Sectaries
That Saying of Christ, He that hears you etc. was Absolutely true in the
Apostles, who kept themselves to that which was revealed by Christ; But it was
only conditionally true (mark the Gloss) in their Successors, id est, So long
and so far, as you speak my words, and not your own. Observe, I say, the injury
done the Text by a Self-conceited Glosser, And he speak's peremptorily ( it was
but conditionally true in their Successors) Who says so Good Sr? Christ? Or
you? Prove your Gloss, which Overreaches the Text, and All the Words which God
ever spoke. Must I therefore be fooled into a How desperately fallible men go
about to persuade that all Pastors are fallible.
falls Belief, And hold all the Pastors in Christ's Church Fallible, Because you a
mere fallible Man, are pleased to tell me They were fallible, or, that All they
had was only the Small allowance of a Conditional, but of no Absolute
Infallibility? Evangelical Sincerity requires a proof of an Assertion so newly
coined. Produce it A new Sectary may say that the Apostles were only
conditionally infallible, but Their Suecessors absolutely infallible.
then and let it be plain Scripture. Unles this be done, Any New Haeretick may
give the quite contrary Gloss to Christ's Words, And say, That the Apostles were
only conditionally infallible, whilst living with Christ, They might be rightly
instructed, in case they erred; But that the following Pastors of the Church
were made Absolutely Infallible, Because they had not the Personal Presence of
so good a Master to reclaim them, in case they swerved from his Doctrine. Thus
much is said, and only said without Proof; And your Gloss, good Sr, has no
better Proof to enhaunse it, But your own Saying, which is not worth a rush. O,
But they are strange kind of Sectaries, say you, who deny the Apostles
Infallibility. They are so indeed. And as strange They are, who deny to the
true Church Infallible Teachers. But this is not what I aim at. All I now say,
is, That, if such Sectaries appear (perhaps amongst you in England) They prove
Their Assertion as well by venting their Fancies vented without proof by both
these Sectaries.
Glosses upon Christ's Words, as you do yours. You say, Those words were only
conditionally True in the Apostles Successors, But prove nothing. They say, The
Words were conditional in the Apostles Themselves, But absolute in their
Successors, And prove nothing. You are here both alike, unles Luthers proof
help you out. Doctor Martinus Lutherus vult sic habere, sic volo sic jubeo. You
have not more. You reply, Where the Command is for preaching, Matthew. 28. the
Restraint is added. What Restraint? None at all. When sent as lawful Missioners
to preach Christ's Doctrine Then They could deliver no Other Doctrine sent by Him,
and as Members of the Church then founded. Herein they could neither go beyond,
How far the Apostles and true Pastors are Infallible.
nor fall short of their Commission. I say as sent; For no man, God knows,
says that the Apostles or 70. Disciples, or the Pastors of the Catholic
Church were, or are Infallible in every Ordinary matter, whereof they casually
discoursed.

5. Well. But the Message, These 70. Disciples were sent upon, required no
Infallible Assistance; For they were not to deliver fully Christ's Doctrine, But
only to prepare for it, By telling their Hearers, That the Kingdom of God is at
hand. Here is also more then is probable, or, can be proved: For, is it
probable, think ye, That these 70. sent to preach, reiterated nothing but these
few words The Kingdom of God is at hand? Is it probable that They were so
Toung-tyed, as to say nothing at all of this Kingdom, of Christ's Sacred
Virtues, or of his Miracles, whereby He founded this Kingdom etc. Be it how you
will, They were Infallible at least in the delivery of that Message: For had
Christ (sent by his Eternal Father) Personally delivered the Message, He had
spoken Infallibly; But, says the Text, He who Hear's you hear's me; Ergo these
70. were Infallible in the Message they delivered. You reply again. Though the
Apostles and those 70. Disciples were supposed infallible Before Christ
Ascension, yet nothing can be drawn from Hence for the Churches continual
Infallibility. First, Because were Sent abroad by Christ, when there were no
Infallible Writings, containing Christ's Doctrine. 2. They had sufficient
Evidences of Miracles, in curing diseases and casting out Devils, to attest
that Infallibility. To this second Miracles, Casting of Devils etc. The first
Objection is Proofles, Because Infallible writings alone, make no man
Infallible, as is evident in all known Haereticks, who have Gods Infallible
Word, yet most certainly pervert it. There is therefore as much need of an
Infallible Teacher to learn us now infallibly, what that Written Word speaks in
a hundred As great necessity now to learn us what Scripture speak's, as what
Christ tought.
controverted Points, as then was necessary to declare the Substance of Christ's
Doctrine, which he delivered by Word of mouth. I say the substance, for without
all doubt, the Apostles and the 70. said explicitly, much more in their
Preaching, then merely what Christ had implicitly, and in fewer words
commanded them to Preach, yet They neither did nor could swerve in any
Doctrinal Point. Therefore in the publishing his Doctrine, They had the
Assistance of the Holy Ghost before his Ascension, Though it was then more
amply confirmed, and promised anew, not only to the Apostles then living, But
also to their Successors for ever.

6. And this is what our Savior Dogmatically Gods Spirit with his Church for
ever.
Teaches John 14. 16. of a Comforter the Holy Ghost, who shall abide with you
for ever; which words (implying a continual abode) cannot bu^ be understood in
an Absolute sense. Yes, say They, He shall be with them for ever, But how? Mark
the gloss, in regard of Consolation and Grace. A mere Guess. Not only for
Consolation and Grace.
The only question is whether it hitt's right or no? For, who tell's you, Sr,
That this and no other is the Absolute sense of Christ's Words? Why may They not
as well import the Assistance of Infallibility, as that of Consolation and
Grace. Prove your Gloss, and by Scripture; This we urge for. We Catholics say,
without drawing further Proof from either Councils or Fathers, which you hold
Fallible, That Christ's following words John 16. 13. When that Spirit of Truth
shall come, he will teach you all Truth, taken in their obvious sense, warrants
this Infallible Assistance for ever. Can your Fallible Spirit assure me of the
contrary? You say, Yes: For these last Words are Restrained to the Apostles
only. Here is another Gloss or Guess, as unlucky as the former: For who
Restrains here, Christ or You? If you do it, you may as well restrain the
Consolation of Grace to all the Apostles Successors, as Infallible Assistance.

7. We prove both the One and the Other Blessing granted to the Church by our
Saviors own Words, Matt. 28. 20. I am with you always to the end of the world;
and moreover Affirm, that the Consol^tion of Grace granted the Church (whose
duty is to Teach us Truth) Benefit's little in order to that Consolation of
grace nothing in a whole Church without Infallibility.
End, unles it be accompanied with the further Privilege of infallibility.
For, what comfort has Any (whether Learned or Illiterate) to Hear, that the
Pastors of Christ's Church, have m^^h interior Consolation and Grace, if this
sorrowful Thought afflict his heart? All and every one of th^se Pastors,
notwithstanding the plenty of their Grace, may cheat him into damnable Error,
and teach, There is neither God, Heaven, nor Hell.

8. I might further show, How utterly inconsistent this supposed, and yet
Vnexplicated Consolation of Grace The Consolation of Grace and want of Divine
Assistance uncompossible in the whole Church.
is, with the Spirit of a whole Church which may Deceive us. But the thing
need's no Proof, for it is evident, That God, who has promised to direct us by
his Pastors, cannot comfort them so plentifully with Celestial Inspirations,
and Permit all to delude and cosen us with Pernicious Errors. Will he give them
grace, Think ye, to Talk only, and not to teach his Verities certainly? To live
holily (for his grace serves for some end) and Leave them to a Possibility of
Corrupting his Spouse, his own Sanctified God Courts not his Church with
comfort, and permitt's it to betray his Truths.
Church with falls Doctrine? This in a word is to tell God, That he court's the
watchmen of his Church with Heavenly Consolation, who nevertheles may Betray
his Cause, and give up his City to the Devil when they please; For here in
They are left to their own wills and Fancies. God you know is Truth, and He
loves Truth. Truth is that which he first established in his Church, And it
Answers to that first Operation of Christian, which is Divine Faith, the ground
of all Sanctity. To tell me therefore, That He comforts a whole Church by A
Paradox of Sectaries.
Grace, and yet leaves it so tottering upon Uncertainties, That none can with
absolute Assurance say, He either teaches, or hear's Truth delivered in any
Article of Christian Faith, is worse then a mere Chimaera, And makes our
Bountiful Lord not only a very Niggard of his Graces, But also gives him a
most high Affront. The Grace therefore of Consolation, The comfort of Grace
supposes the favor of Infallibility.
which he allows his Church, as a Church, ever implies, or supposes that
Arcb-favour of Infallible Assistance. Rob it of this Privilege, and other
Graces, avail little.

9. And here by the way, I must needs propose one question to our Protestants.
It is, whether God, Supposing his Promises already made, can A question
proposed, whether the Church can withstand an loose all grace?
according to their Principles, permit that the whole Church (Vnassisted by his
infallible Spirit) loose, withstand, and reject what ever Grace he gives or
has given it? If they say, Yes, It is Possible. Then I Infer: God can permit
that the Whole Church may turn Traitor, and become Impious; For a Church which
withstands, loses, or rejects all Grace, is traitorous and impious. If they
say no, it is against his Goodness to permit such a Universal Impiety. They must
acknowledge, That he cannot but preserve a Church for ever (whether consisting
of Elect or no, we dispute not) in his Grace and favor, Truth as necessary to
the Church as Grace.
and this infallibly. Ergo I say, He cannot buth Infallibly also (supposing his
Promises) Preserve it in Truth by the special Assistance of his own Unerring
Spirit, Truth being, as all know, as necessary to the Church as Grace is. And
thus we se in notorious great Sinners, who, although they have a thousand
Incitements of Grace to amend their lives* yea, better themselves by it in some
particulars, yet as long as Divine Truth necessary to Christians is wanting,
Their state is Deplorable. To conclude then, Here is my Dilemma. Either it is
possible, That the whole Church, That is, All the Teachers, and Hearers in it,
may aband^n all Gods Revealed Verities, and neither Teach nor Hear one Word of
his Truth or it is impossible. If the first be granted: It Is not only possible,
that the whole Church may revolt from God and Truth, But may loose all Grace
likewise. Grant this, and say next what will become of our Protestants Elect
people, who Because Predestined to Eternal life, cannot but have Grace?
Observe well A Paradox of Sectaries
the Paradox. They cannot Loose grace, yet it is possible never to hear a Word
of Truth; For all their Ministers are fallible. What kind of Elect are these
who have Certainty of Grace, but no certainty of Truth with it? Now, if on the
other side they hold it impossible, That the whole Church may desert Gods
Truths, They grant what we ask, And must say it has the infallible Assistance
we plead for. The Reason hereof I have amply delivered in the former Discourse
Chap. 3. Because all the Human Science, Wit, or Learning in Nature alone, can no
more Secure a Church God preserves his Church a^ Sound in Truth as Sanctified
by Grace.
from Error, Then give it Grace. God therefore does, and will ever graciously
prevent it with both these Blessings, And as Infallibly keep it Sound in Truth,
as Holy and Sanctified.

CHAP. VII.
More of this Subject.
1. BY what is said in this short Digression, you se how pitifully our new men
mangle the Text now Cited: I am with you Always to the End of the World. Hear
their Gloss. Yes say They. This Promise was made to the Apostles and their
Successors, But in a different degree: For it was of continual and infallible
Assistance to the Apostles; but to their Successors of continual and fitting
assistance, but not infallible. The like is repeated afterward, Protestants
trivial Distinction of Fitting and infallible Assistance.
when They ask, What we say to this? Marry, Sr, I say, it is nothing to the
Purpose. For you neither declare what this fitting continual assistance granted
these Successors (as distinct from the other, allowed the Apostles) is, nor can
you declare these different Degrees. And though you did so, contrary to the
They still run on in Generals.
Churches sense, you only vent your own feeble and fallible Sentiments without
Proof, which I neither ought, nor can in Prudence Believe. To be plain
Therefore, be pleased to Answer. Has God Revealed to you what this fitting and
continual Assistance granted the Apostles Successors is? No. Does any Ancient
Council or Unanimous consent of Fathers Mince These Words, and Dogmatize here
as you do, or, only mention a Presence of the Spirit of consolation and Grace,
excluding infallible Assistance? No. All is contrary, as I could demonstrate,
were it here my task to prove Truth against you (but this is done by others) as
it is to force you to prove what your Fancy only vents against it. And mark how
Fancy goe's to work. Christ says, I am with you always to the end of the
World: That is, says your Fancy, He is present by his Spirit by a fitting
Assistance, But not by an Assistance Infallible. This gloss, Not by infallible
Assistance is your own; For neither Gods Word, nor Universal Church, nor
General Council, nor the Consent of Fathers, nor Antiquity ever uttered any
Thing like it. Grant therefore it be Unreasonable, as you say, to put your Party
to prove a Negative, Viz. That any of the Fathers denied this place to extend
to infallibility, I am sure, it is most Reasonable to force you to a Proof of
your own Affirmative: For you doctrinally Teach, That Christ in this place
Allows no certain Infallibility to his Church. This, because positively
asserted, is positively to be made good, by a more strenuous Proof then Fancy
only. You say again. Those of your Party only delivered what they Conceived to
be the Meaning of this, and other Places of Fathers, which do no more, then
prove the Perpetuity of the Church. What They conceived weak fallible Men?
Pray, Sectaries Conceits instead of Proofs.
what am I the better for their Conceits? Must I change my Ancient Faith, for
the Rolling, and never agreeing Fancies of a few Ministers? Why may not an
Arian or Pelagian (if sole conceiving can do it) as well gain me to his party,
as a Protestant to His, who Thinks that the Church is Fallible? To that of the
Fathers I Answer, Their indubitable owning a Church Perpetual, Evidently (could
we say no more) supposes a Church constantly True and Holy, And the Constant
Truth of it implies infallible Assistance, as is already proved.

2. Protestants may yet reply. They deliver what An Objection.
they conceive to be the Sense of Christ's Words: I am with you always etc.
Catholics can do no more, and Mark well. As the words do not explicitly
exclude Infallible Assistance from the Church always, so neither do They
explicitly include it: For Christ says not explicitly, I will be always with
you to the End of the World by my Infallible Assistance. This then the case
stands. They Restrain Christ's Promise, and we see to Extend it too far. They
(we say) come to short of the Sense, by cutting of Infallible Assistance. We
Catholics (They say) go beyond the Bounds, and add more to the Text than
Christ Spoke. Both of us therefore are Glossers, and why is not Their Gloss as
Orthodox as Ours? Here is a better Objection then any hitherto proposed; The
Solution of it Ends all Controversies.
And, the Solution might easily end all Controversies, would Sectaries pleas to
wave a few Self-conceipts, and prudently Acquiesce to Reason, whilst Truth
plead's againsts their Errors.

3. First then (though I press not much this Point) Sectaries have no Reason to
prefer their Interpretations.
it is evident, That we Catholics are the Elder Brothers, as Numerous at least
as They, and (to speak modestly) as Learned. Why therefore when both They and We
interpret Scripture, and stand as it were equally balanced, because it is yet
supposed uncertain, who guesseth better, why is not, I say, Our Interpretation
(could we prove no more) as good as Theirs, contrary to us? If They prefer
Their Gloss before Ours, something of Weight, beside mere Fancy, must turn the
Scales, and Balance more for them then us? We always ask for this greater
Poyse in controverted To these of Catholics.
matters, and can get no answer.

4. Secondly: I must necessarily here Note an unworthy An unworthy proceeding
of Sectaries.
proceeding of Sectaries with us, when we Produce Scripture, Fathers, or
Councils for Catholic Doctrine. Their humor (and it is a a strange one) run's on
thus. First They begin with their Glosses, and labor to pervert that Sense
which the Catholic owns. And if after much Trifling they can Disguise this
Sense, or Twine it of ^^om the Catholic Meaning, They hold the Work done, and
cry Victory. Mark in our present matter Their Frigid way of Arguing (and it is
alike in all other Controversies) That Text say They; The Holy Ghost will teach
you all Truth, may be Restrained to the Apostles only. That other, The Church
is the Pillar and ground of Faith, may have the Sense They allow, of, and no
more. This Promise of our Savior, I will be with you always etc. May exclude
Infallibility* And when They bring the Close of a Point debated, to their own
Self-seeming, it may be; They think all safe. Whereas it is most evident, that
nothing is yet so much as probably concluded: For, as They say, The Sense of
these Places now cited, May be as Protestants understand; The bare Saying of
Sectaries stand's for no proof.
so, I say, The contradictory Proposition is every whit as good. The Sense May
be as Catholics* understand Who must Therefore, whilst we are Both yet supposed
to stand, as it were, on equal Terms, Determine what God has absolutely
Revealed in these Scriptures? I say absolutely; For the question here is not
what a Particular man may Imagine God to have Spoken, But what He has de facto
Spoken. The Reason hereof is clear. Because God Speak's not in so weighty a
Matter as this is to Try men's Wits, or to Hear Them tell him. Lord such may be
the Sense of your words; Faith relies not on what private men think God has
revealed.
Though I cannot say what it is; Nor can our Faith Rely on what we only Think
He may have Spoken, But on what He has actually Revealed, And we have means
(thanks be to God) To know this Absolute Sense, as I shall declare in the 9.
Chapter where the Objection is fully solved.

5. In the mean time be pleased to reflect first: That Protestants Glosses as
injurious to Gods Word as Those of the Arians.
when mere Fallible men Peremptorily put upon Scripture a Sense, which They
cannot so much as probably prove (But by their own Erring guesses only) to be
the true meaning of the Holy Ghost (and this in a matter which Highly concerns
Salvation) They plainly Injure Gods Sacred Word. Protestants are these fallible
men, and do so; Ergo, they injure Gods Word. The first Proposition is clear in
the Case of Arians, who, Because They peremptorily give a Sense to those
Scriptures which relate to the Real Unity of Three Persons in one Divine
Essence (the matter is of High importance) and cannot prove it, But by the
force of Their Erring Guesses only, They wrong both God and his Word. The
second Proposition is as Evident; For The Proof.
Protestants absolutely say, The Scriptures now cited, include not (yea,
positively exclude a perpetual infallibility allowed the Church) This sense
(and it is a Point of highest Importance, For the clearing of it End's all
Controversies) they cannot prove, But by their own Erring guesses only, And
therefore injure Scripture, in saying God has spoken that, which cannot be so
much as probably proved, was Spoken.

6. Reflect 2. It is not enough, that Sectaries tell us upon their own fallible
Parole, That our Places of Sectaries come not home to the difficulty.
Scripture May be interpreted as they please, or, come not home to prove the
Churches Infallibility; For Admit thus much Gratis, They yet convince nothing:
Because it is one thing to say (and God knows only to say it) our alleged
Scriptures (for example that of St. Paul, The Church is the pillar and ground
of Truth) prove To say we prove not our Doctrine is not to say They prove the
contrary.
not a Church Infallible, and a quite other, positively to Teach and prove it,
to be Fallible. The most they can infer out of thi^ Negative: Such places prove
not, were all granted they desire, is that They give the slip to so many Texts
of Scripture, or infringe so much force of our Proofs. Alas, This only is to
pull, as it Their weak endeavor is to pull down, not to build up the Machin of
their new Doctrine.
were, so much of a House down; But it does not therefore follow, that They
positively give in as good Texts to the contrary Sense, or, Build up the
Structure of their new Doctrine concerning the Churches Fallibility. To pull
down one Proof, is not to destroy all we can say (we have more Strings to our
Bow then one) much les is it to build up an opposite Doctrine. The Machin these
Sectaries would fain build, lies in this one positive Assertion. The whole
Church is Fallible. This, say I, Fancy only Erect's; For it stands unprop't,
Fancy does all with them.
That is, it neither is, nor can, nor shall ever be positively proved. And hence

7. Reflect 3. If Protestants, who rely totally on Scripture Proof, Positively
Assert, as They do, That the whole Church is Fallible, They are obliged both in
Conscience and all Law of Disputation, to prove what They say: For Asserenti
incumbit probatio. Observe my reason. When Luther and Sectaries came amongst
us, and troubled the world, They heard the voice of a whole Ancient Church
against them, owning the infallible Assistance of Gods Directing Spirit, for
which we now argue. The Church pleaded thus: Olim possideo, prior possideo.
This Spirit of infallibility I long since have had, and yet, upon Scripture
proof do Believe. Well. Now enter these Sectaries, They first reject Church
Authority and then make Scripture speak as Fancy pleases.
and first Reject the Authority of this Ancient Church; next They fall abord
with our Scriptures, And because they are good at Guessing, They tell us:
Verily, These Scriptures seem not to prove a Church Infallible, Because They are
able to interpret all to a contrary Sense. To this we have Answered. Their
seeming is no proof. Withal, That Catholics as Many and Learned as They, both
can and do interpret them otherwise. Hitherto therefore, their cause is nothing
Advanced. More then is necessary, And it is, That whilst They positively
establish a new coined Doctrine of a whole Christian Church fallible, contrary
to what Antiquity ever owned, I say, it is necessary, That they bring some
Positive proof, and make good Their unheard of Assertion.

8. And here we may have plain dealing if Sectaries Protestant have no Text of
Scripture against an Infallible Church.
please. Turn then to your Bible, Gentlemen, and show me any Text like this.
The whole Church of Christ, is not the Pillar and ground of Truth. The Holy
Ghost will not ever Teach it all Truth. God has placed Pastors and Doctors in
his Church, But such as may suffer us to be carried away with every wind of
falls Doctrine etc. Such Expressions we read in our Bible for the contrary
Verity, Have you any thing like them in yours, to prove your opposite Asserted
Doctrine? I say any like them; For I Press not to have from you the same Formal
Words, But will be content with one plain significant Text (and we will stand
to Scripture, Or if Scripture please you not, we will accompany you to Councils
and Fathers) which so much as Meanly makes the whole Church of Christ Fallible?
Such a Scripture, I tell you once more, you cannot produce. Ergo, you only vent
your Fancies, you talk and prove not; you believe a Doctrine which you cannot
show was ever Revealed in Gods Word. You may perhaps trifle it out, and Tell
us, as you are wont to do, of our errors de facto. It is nothing to the
purpose: For What we desire of Sectaries.
we enquire not here after your proofles Assertions (They are Answered a
hundred times over) nor ask, what you fallible Teachers say, but what God has
said in Scripture concerning the fallibility of a whole Christian Church. This
we wish to hear of, before we credit your Talk, or Believe, for your saying, It
has erred de facto.

CHAP. VIII.
The new Mode of Sectaries misinterpreting Scripture destroys Protestant
Religion.
1. HEre we give you a fourth Reflection consequent to the former Discourse,
which follows upon our Sectaries misinterpretation of Scripture. It Is worth the
Readers knowledge, and if I mistake not, totally Ruin's Protestant Religion.
Thus it is. The whole Machin of Protestancy, as Protestancy, stands Protestancy
stands topling on negatives.
topling upon supposed Objective Negatives, built up by Fancy only, without so
much as one positive proof of Scripture to support it. If I evidence not this
Truth (and consequently do not convince) That our Sectaries have no Faith, Deny
me credit Hereafter.

2. Observe well. No sooner do these Sectaries persuade Themselves, That they
can Abate the force of our Scripture-proofs for Catholic Doctrine; But They How
They proceed farther an Negatives*
presently lay hold on the quite contrary Doctrine, And make that an Article of
their new Faith. They say, we prove not a Church infallible; Therefore the
contrary Position. The Church is fallible, is with them a certain Truth. They
say, we prove not a third place of Purgatory; Therefore the Belief of no Mark
Th^se Inferences.
Purgatory is an Article of Protestants Faith. We prove not Christ's Real
Presence in the Holy Eucharist; Therefore the Belief of his Not-presence
constitutes part of Protestants Doctrine. We prove not the Popes Supremacy;
Ergo, They Believe the Contrary etc. To show their Nullity of Faith, shall we
here condescend to what They say, And contrary both to Conscience and manifest
Truth, suppose with them, the Proofs for our Doctrins to be proofles? Be it so
supposed at present. Pray you say next, What are They able to infer upon such a
falls Concession? Marry thus much. If we prove no Purgatory, There is surely no
such Place. If we prove not the Church Infallible, it is certainly Fallible,
and so of the rest. I answer. This These Sequels are deeply Nonsense.
Sequel is Nonsense, and a pure Non sequitur. We prove not; Ergo, The
contrary Doctrine is true. For how many Things are there both Actual and
Possible, which men prove not, and yet are so? A young student in Mathematics
cannot perhaps prove, that the Sun is greater then a Sieve; Is it therefore
consequent That, that luminous body is not Greater? The Proof is naught, And
here is all that follows. One thing then it is in our present Case, To say our
Proofs Proofs may fall short, and yet not fall upon falsities.
for Catholic Doctrine fall short, or, are forceles; And a quite Other to say
they fall upon falsities. Ergo no absolute Denial of these Catholic Verities
is deducible from our not proving them. Yet upon this false supposed negative
foundation, We prove not, All Protestant Religion stands tottering as it does.

3. Be pleased to hear more of this Stuff. Let us also falsely suppose, as our
Sectaries will have it, that These may be objective Truths and Verities: No
Church is infallible: There is no Purgatory etc. Does it follow, think ye, That
they can believe These Negatives Every Truth is not a material Object of Faith.
with Divine and steadfast Faith, upon the Concession That they are now supposed
Truths? No. It is a lame Consequence, and a wors Non sequitur Then the other.
Observe my Reason. No Objective Verity, Although supposed True in it self, can
be believed by A lame Consequence.
Divine Faith, Unless God has positively Revealed it, or, is at least clearly
Deducible from Scripture; So Sectaries Assert, and upon this ground, That
Divine Faith besides Truths revealed by God are Objects of Faith.
a Material Object Believable, requires also (and this essentially) the weight
of a Formal Object, which is Gods Veracity to reveal that which is believed by
Faith. Seclude this Veracity from the Motive and Formal object of our Assent,
Though we yield to a thousand Verities, not one of them can be believed by
Faith.

4. Now I Assume: But the fallibility of Christ's whole Church, The not being of
Purgatory, The not Existency That there is no Purgatory, no Real Presence etc.
is no where Revealed by God.
of Christ Body in the Sacred Eucharist, and so of the rest, Are no where
positively revealed by God; no, nor clearly deduced from any Text in Scripture.
Ergo, Although these were Truths in themselves, yet they are not revealed
Truths, or Truths spoken by Almighty God. Therefore they are insufficient to
found Divine Faith. The Major is granted by Protestants. The Minor, viz, That
these supposed Truths were Ergo, Cannot be Articles of Protestant Faith.
never spoken by Almighty God in Scripture, is so undeniably evident, That here
I am forced to challenge Sectaries to produce so much as one Text, wherein God
has Positively said: There is no Purgatory, No real Presence etc. This they
cannot do by so much as by a probable Deduction from Scripture, much les by
plain Scripture it self. The Conclusion An Evident Conclusion against Sectaries.
therefore follows evidently. They Believe not what God has Revealed, and
consequently want Faith in the Articles they Assent to as Protestants. Nay, I
say more. They cannot Assent to These Articles as evident Truths; For no
received Principle either in Nature or Grace can evidence so much as the
supposed objective Verity of These Doctrins. Shall I yet add a word, and say,
That no Proof grounded upon weighty moral Reason, can evidence, these negative
Assertions to be Truths morally known? Therefore though hitherto we have
supposed them to pass for Verities, yet in real earnest They are unproved and
no other, But the weak Thoughts of our Adversaries strong Fancy? Now here, If I
mistake not, You se Ruin enough of Protestant Religion, And the Ruin of
Protestant Religion, as Protestancy.
which stand's upon a Fancied Opinion only, and not upon what God has Revealed
in his Sacred Word. No, nor can probably be made known by any received
Principle.

5. To conclude this point, I Argue thus. These Negative Articles, No
purgatory, No Church infallible etc. Are either essential Pieces of Protestant
Religion, or not. If not: There is no such thing as Protestant Religion in the
world; For the Reformed part of it, is wholly An unanswerable Dilemma.
made up of such Negatives, No Purgatory, No Transubstantiation, No unbloody
Sacrifice, No Praying to Saints, No Church infallible etc. Cast then these, and
the like away, Protestancy dwingles to nothing. Now, if on the other side, They
hold these as Articles of Protestancy, And say, They ought to be believed by
Divine Faith, They are obliged to show (which is utterly impossible) that God
has Positively revealed them in Scripture. Therefore I say: Though we Admit of
such Negatives as Objective Truths in Themselves, yet, so long as they are not
proved to be positive revealed Truths, or, Spoken by Almighty God, Protestancy
stands like a Starveling, void and empty of all revealed Truths, Protestancy as
so, has no one part of its Doctrine warranted by God.
And consequently, as it is, this New Religion, has no one part of its Doctrine
warranted by him, who upholds all Christian Verities, I mean Gods certain
Revelation.

6. To se this Assertion more clearly Evidenced, Hear a little what our
Sectaries Answer. Some tell us: They know right well, there is no Purgatory,
Because God has not revealed it in Scripture. There is no real Presence for the
same Reason, and so they Argue for the rest of their Negatives. To this and
whatever else can be proposed, we have answered. Though, These Suppositions are
very Falls, yet Admit of them as True. Viz. Tha^ a Purgatory, or Real Presence
are not mentioned in Scripture: All that follows from hence, is, That God has
been, as it were, Silent, and omitted to speak of such Objects. That
Protestants inferences, Still proved improbable.
is, as we now falsely suppose, He has neither said there is a Purgatory nor
Denied it. Now this Negative, God has said nothing of such a matter, as it
cannot Ground a positive Belief of a Purgatory, so it cannot Ground a positive
Belief of the Contrary, or, No Purgatory. Whilst What both Catholics and
Protestants are obliged to prove.
therefore the Catholic Believes a Purgatory, He is obliged to show that God
has Positively Revealed it: And if the Protestant Believe no Purgatory, He is
also Obliged to show that God has spoken Positively this Objective Truth,
There is no such place. To say then: God has made no mention at all of a
Purgatory in Scripture, and to infer from Thence a Belief of no Purgatory, is
in plain Language to Say: I may Actually Believe that by Divine Faith, which
God never Spoke. The most therefore, That can be Deduced from this Negative,
were it True, God has Omitted to Reveal a Purgatory, is, That no man yet
knows, nor can know upon Revelation, whether there be such a Place or no. But
to draw from it an Absolute Faith of no Purgatory, is (and I can term it no
better) then the last of Nonsense. For, how many Things are there known to God,
Which He has omitted to Reveal? Can I Therefore, upon that Non-Revelation, Rush
on them with my Faith, and Believe them for his not Speaking at all? Yet thus
Sectaries Proceed. They have Protestants Believe Negatives because God has not
Revealed them.
good store of Negatives, But not revealed Negatives, And They will Believe
them, Because God has not Revealed them. Here briefly is my Discourse, if it
Faulter, or seem Faulty to our Adversaries; my humble Petition is, That they
will Vouchsafe to unbeguil' me, and Friendly show me where the Fallacy lies. If
this Discourse be faulty, my wish is to hear of the fallacy.


7. Some perhaps will say. We have Fought all this while with Shadows, And
supposed These Negatives, No Purgatory, No Transubstantiation etc. To be
Objects of Protestants Faith. But we err, not knowing Their Doctrine; For, They
are only Held Inferior Truths, One Reply refuted.
Approved by the English Church to mantain Union amongst Protestants, And not
owned as Articles of Faith. Thus Two later Men, whom you may se largely Refuted
Discourse 3. c. 6. n. 7. All I Will say at present is: Because Sectaries seldom
Agree in Doctrine, it is impossible to Confute them all at Once. To my Sectaries
agree not in Doctrine.
purpose then. There have been Certainly, And are yet Protestants (I think
These the more Numerous) That Hold the now named Negatives, Articles of
Protestants Some own these Negatives Articles of Faith.
Faith, And Against such our Proofs have Force: Others, that Deny the Doctrine,
And exclude them from being Articles are in a worse Condition; Because upon the
Supposition, They are Forced to grant, That Protestancy has no Articles of
Faith.
Protestancy, as Protestancy, contain's not so much as One Article of Divine
Faith in it; For, the whole Reformed part of it is made up of pure Negatives.
Consequently, if Any should utterly Abjure that Religion, He would not Abjure
one Truth Revealed by Almighty God. Se more of this subject in the place now
cited, And Both are Confuted.
know, That our Adversaries will have Much to do, To come of Hansomly, whether
They Grant These Negatives To be Articles of their Faith, or Disown them as
Articles. This is fairly spoken, without Clamours, And Mr. Stillingfleet in his
Preface to the Reader.
Believe it. Some who tell us, They have not Leisure Enough to kill flies, may
sweat at it (take whether part They please) before the Difficulty be solved.

8. They may Reply secondly, And Endeavor to A second Reply of Sectaries worth
Nothing.
Prove at least one of their Negatives Thus. There is no Purgatory; Because God
has Revealed in Scripture two Places only, Heaven, and Hell, which seems
Exclusive of a third Place. I answer, That word Only is neither Scripture, nor
Revelation. Cast therefore that Particle away, and Propose the Argument as we
ought to do, And it falls to nothing. Thus it is. God has Revealed two Places,
and these Eternal, it is most True. Ergo he has Revealed the not Being of a
Purgatory is False, and a mere Non-sequitur.

9. They may Reply thirdly. Catholics Believe A Third at bad.
many things upon as pure Negatives; for Example: A Trinity of Three Distinct
Persons in one Divine Essence, and no Quaternity, or, no more Persons then
Three; yet this Negative is not Revealed in Scripture. To Help on this worthles
Argument I Grant more: That not so much as a Trinity, of Distinct Persons, is
plainly Revealed in Scripture; Does it Therefore Catholics believe not upon
Negative grounds.
follow, that Catholics Believe that Mystery and Deny a Quaternity upon
Negative Grounds? No such matter. They Believe a Trinity and no Quaternity,
upon the solid Positive Grounds of their Church Interpreting Scripture, upon a
Universal Perpetuated Tradition, And the Infallible Word of God not Written.
Protestants are destitute of such Proofs in the Articles they Hold. For, They
neither have an Infallible Church, nor Tradition, Nor Written, nor Unwritten
Word to Rely on. Therefore They Believe upon Fancy o^^y.

10. To End This Matter, I will here Briefly (Because An Objection answered
concei^^ing Novelties introduced i(...) the Church.
it is Consequent) Answer to an old Trivial Objection made by Sectaries against
our Present Roman Church, which They Accuse of Novelties introduced since the
First Primitive Ages, And weakly, as They are wont; Argue after this manner.
Your Doctrins of Transubstantiation* of Praying to Saints, of an Unbloody
Sacrifice* etc. Were not Taught for Three, or Four Ages after Christ. Therefore,
say They, We may now well hold the Contrary, And Believe no Transubstantiation,
no Sacrifice etc. I answer. Admit of this most falls Supposition, These Doctrins
were not Taught. Sectaries found Faith on a Negative.
No Faith at all can be founded on this Negative, Before (which will never be)
They Prove their contrary Doctrine Positively Revealed by Almighty God in
Scripture. For, this Principle stands irrefragably Sure, No Revelation, No
Faith; Although the Object Assented to be True. All the pains Therefore, These
men take to reduce Their Reformed Gospel to the Model of the Primitive Church,
is upon several Respects mere labor lost; But upon this Account Chiefly it They
cannot show one of Their Negatives Revealed to any Ancient Orthodox Church.
faulters most, That They cannot show one Negative believed by them to be a
Revealed Truth to any Christian Society in the world. It is pitiful to hear
how they fumble in this Discourse. We Ask how they prove, that the Primitive
Church held no Unbloody Sacrifice (put this for one example, it serves for
all.) Some Answer. They find no such thing as a Sacrifice registered in those
Ancient Writings. Mark the Proof. They find it not, Ergo it is not to be found.
Catholics as The Inferences of Sectaries unconcluding.
clear Sighted as others, find that Doctrine expressly Asserted; But, because
Protestants are pleased to Deny all, They must, and, upon their Own word, be
Thought the Men of more Credit. Well. But Suppose the Doctrine was not Registered
in those Ancient Records; Is this Consequence good? It was not writ, Ergo it
was not Taught. No certainly; Unless They show, all Taught Doctrine was then
Writ, or Registered. But, let us falsely Suppose, that the Doctrine was neither
Writ nor Taught; Does it follow, that the Contrary of no Sacrifice, now
believed by Protestants, was a Truth Revealed to that Church, or taught by it?
No. Therefore they are here driven again upon the old Negative, And thus it is.
That Church said nothing of an Unbloody Sacrifice, Which is Hideously Untrue;
Ergo Protestants can now Believe no Sacrifice, which is Hideously falls, and as
unlucky a Sequel as This: That Church said not, whether the Moon be a watery*
Body full of Rocks, Ergo, Protestants can Believe the contrary with Divine
Faith. You will Say we Trifle now; For, that Church was Perfect in Faith, and
either held a Sacrific(...) Denied it. I answer in Real Truth, it Plainly and
undeniably Held a Sacrifice, yet must withal Affirm, Though we Falsely suppose
(And this false Supposition must be vigilantly regarded) that it only Negatively
abstracted from such Doctrine; yet, Protestants are far of from Proving it held
Positively the Contrary, That is, no Sacrifice; which yet is Necessary to be
Proved, if They believe no Sacrifice with Divine Faith.

11. They may yet Reply. They are Able at least to Produce some Ancient Fathers
Clearly Enough Asserting no Unbloody Sacrifice; Therefore they prove this
Negative, and so they can do Others. I utterly Deny that clearly Enough, and
say, They have not one Ancient Fathe(...) nor Council, nor any Approved
Authority No Ancient Father against an Unbloody Sacrifice.
that positively Denies a Sacrifice, (All unanimously Taught the contrary as
Luther himself confesses) Much less have They Any, that makes this their
Doctrine a Truth Revealed by Almighty God, or, ever taught by any Universal
Church. Were therefore these supposed Authorities of Sectaries (which are none)
and Reasons also for no Sacrifice, more Numerous and Strong then what the World
has Heard of hitherto; They cannot in Conscience suppose them Proofs, weighty
enough to Beat down the contrary Asserted, And Undeniable Doctrine not only of
Fathers* But, of a Whole* Church. They cannot Suppose Them powerful enough to
Build up such a new Negative of Protestant Religion, especially whilst They see
before their eyes the Torrent of Antiquity against them, and our Answers
returned to every Trivial Objection they make? O, But they can Solve all we
Object. And, we must Take their Word, Because They say so. We also tell them, We
Solve what they Object, and yet are not Believed. Do you not se here most
pitiful Doings, and Controversies made Endless by this Proceeding, when each
Party says what it pleases, and Gain's no Credit from the Other? A Judge, my
good Friends, and an Infallible Judge is here Necessary to Decide Matters
between us: But, thus far evident Reason judges, And Tell's you; Though you
could Solve all we say for the Affirmative of a Sacrifice, you are to Seek for
a Positive Proof of your Vnproved, yet Believed Negative. There is no
Sacrifice. And the like I say of your other Negatives.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Means left by Almighty God to Interpret Scripture Truly. One Passage
More of Scripture, Proving Infallible Teachers, is Quoted.
1. WE come now to Solve more fully the Objection Proposed Chap. 7. n. 2. It
was to this Sense. A Protestant Delivers what he Conceives to be the Meaning of
Scripture. So the Catholic does also, and can do no more. Both of Them
therefore are Glossers, The difficulty proposed again, Concerning the
Interpretation of Scripture.
the only Difficulty is, to know who Glosses better. Here is the state of the
Question.

2. To go on Groundedly. We may with our Adversaries leave Suppose, That God
has not put a Bible into the Hands of Christians, to cause Eternal Debates
concerning the Doctrine delivered in it. And if this be a Truth, We may secondly
Suppose, God, desirous of Unity in Faith, gave us not Scripture to cause
eternal Debates.
That his Wise Providence (so earnestly desirous of Unity in Faith amongst
Christians) has Afforded some Means whereby we may rightly Attain to the True
Sense of his Sacred Word. For, no man can imagine that Gods Intention is, That
we only Read, without Arriving to the Sense of what we Read, or, which is wors,
that we fall into Error by our Reading. Providence has afforded means, whereby
we may understand Scripture.
This therefore, Providence has Prevented by one Means or other, if carelessly
we do not reject it. We may thirdly Suppose, That God, regularly speaking,
Reveal's to no Private man the deep Sense of Scripture (when He Reads and
perhaps understands it not) By private Illustrations, new Enthusiasm's, or the
Ministry of Angels, Therefore Private Illustrations no usual means.
some other way is Appointed by Providence to come to the True Sense of what He
Reads. The Reason is. True Religion requires a True Interpreter of the Book
which founds Religion. Otherwise, God would have only carelessly, as it were,
Thrown Scripture amongst Christians, And bid them Guess as well as they can at
the Sense of it; They having no other means to know his Meaning. These Things
Premised.

3. I say first. The Holy Book of Scripture, neither does, Scripture cannot
interpret its self.
nor can so Interpret* it self as to bring Men Dissgnting in Faith, to an
Accord, or Acquiescency in High Points of Controversy. The Assertion is
Evident. For, could the Book clearly interpret its own Meaning, Catholics,
Arians, Protestants and all Sectaries would as well Agree in one harmony of
Doctrine, By force of that clear Interpretation (none of Them Denies The clear
Sense of Scripture interpreted by Scripture it Self) If all agreed in the Sense
of Scripture, There would be no dissenting.
as they now agree in owning Scripture to be Divine. They accord not in the
first, therefore Scripture is not its own Interpreter. Or, if any yet, without
Proof, strongly Assert so much, Most Evidently in order to these Dissenting
men, it is as useles an Interpreter, as if it were none at all; For, it
Composeth no Differences. Take here one Instance. Sectaries, to prove Scripture
conspicuous and clear without an Interpreter, quote these and the like Places.
Thy word is a Lantern to my feet. A Lante^ shining in a dark place etc. We
answer. Scriptures are truly a Light, when that outward cover of Ambiguous
Words, wherein the Sense often lies Enclosed, is broken open by a Faithful
Interpreter, And withal we add, It Is vainly frivolous to make Them such
shining Lamps, as to silence all Preaching and Interpretation: yet, this
follows if Sectaries Gloss right* For it is ridiculous to interpret, or teach,
that a Lantern shines, which I se bright before my Eyes. Observe well. The
Protestant makes Scripture clear without a Teacher. The Catholic
Interpretation absolutely necessary to Scripture.
says, Interpretation is Absolutely Necessary. Scripture it self Delivers not
in Formal Words, either the One or Other Gloss: Therefore it does not ever
Interpret it self Home, or declare its own Meaning. Nay, it cannot do so: For,
all Interpretation ( Properly taken) is a New, More Clear, and Distinct Light
Superadded to the Formal Words of Scripture; But, no Hagiographer says, This
Sacred Book makes any such new Addition of Glosses; Therefore it cannot
Interpret it self. And this is what the Apostle 2. Petri 1. 20. Seems to
teach, Scripture is not (...) of its own Explication.

4. I say 2. No Private man whether Catholic, Arian, Protestant or Other, can
(upon his own Discourse or Judgment only) so Interpret a Difficil Scripture
with Certainty, as, to Assure any that God Speaks as He Interpret's. The Reason
is. Every Private Judgment is Fallible and liable to Error, which Truth, that
of the Apostle Romans 3. Omnis homo mendax Teaches: But a Judgment A Judgment
liable to Error cannot give certainty of the Scriptures sense.
Fallible and liable to error can with no Certainty give me that Sense which
God Reveals in a Difficil Place of Scripture; Therefore I cannot Trust to it,
nor, assuredly Ground my Faith on such an Interpretation. And thus much
Protestants Acknowledge; for, They say, Neither Church nor Ancient Fathers are
to be Relied on, as Infallible, in their Interpretation of Scripture; Therefore
much less can a Minister, or Lay Man, Assume to Himself the Infallible Spirit
of Interpreting, or Resolve, what a whole Universal Church is to Believe. Alas,
such a man want's Certitude in what He says, he want's a Perfect knowledge of
both Scripture and Antiquity (never perhaps exactly perused) He want's a
Constant Stability; for what He Judges this Hour, He may upon after Thoughts
change the next; For, as He is Fallible, so is he also Changeable in his
Judgment.

5. Yet More. What Private Man Dare, when he See's the Learned of contrary
Religion at debate Concerning the Sense of Scripture step in amongst Them, and
say: My Masters, you are to Believe me, and Acquiesce to what I judge of the
Sense etc. It Is I, And not You, That know Gods Meaning. Would not such a Thing
be cast out of all Company? Yet, This is our very Case, when a new Vpstart,
Puffed up with his own Sentiments; Tell's either Catholic or Protestant, what
the Sense of Scripture is in Controverted Points of Faith. And Hence, I say,
The Catholic cannot Assure a Protestant, without a better Proof then His own
Opinion, That the Sectary Err's in his Interpretation, nor can the Protestant,
upon his own Assertion, Remove the Catholic from the Judgment He makes of the
Scriptures Sense. Both As private men, Catholics and Protestants are both
Fallible.
of them are alike Fallible, if no other Certain Principle be laid hold on.
Here then is the Difference. The Catholic for his Interpretation of such
Places, prudently Relyes on a firmer Ground then his variable Judgment. The
Protestant has nothing to uphold the Sense He Defends, But his own wavering,
and unsteedy Thoughts, which are as changeable, as Were moral certainty
sufficient, why is it to be more granted the Sectary, then the Catholic*
the Man is fallible. Here is the best Support for his interpretation, and
Faith also. If he tell you, he has moral assurance, or Interpret's as the
Primitive Church did. I answered above; He only thinks so, But Proves nothing.
Let him show that the Primitive Church ever Interpred those words: The Church
is the Pillar and ground of Truth, as he now Interprets them. If he say, He
Believes as his own Judgment Interpret's, I grant this is too Pitifully True;
But what am I the better on that Account? Can we Rely on a Protestants easy,
fallible, and erroneous Judgment in so Weighty a matter? At last surely, he
will hit On It, And say, he Interprets as the Holy Ghost Suggesteth. Happy man
did He so: But we shall find it otherwise Presently. However, because the Word
is of comfort, let him hear it on Gods name, For it is the Resolution of our
whole Question. The Holy Ghost only interprets Scripture Certainly.


6. I say therefore 3. No other, But the Spirit of Truth, the Holy Ghost
Interpret's Scripture certainly. John 16. 23. When that Spirit of Truth shall
come, he will Teach all Truth. But one and a most necessary Truth is, to have
Scripture faithfully Interpreted; Therefore this, the holy Ghost Teaches, if he
Teach all Truth. Again, John 14. 16. He is called a Paraclete, or Comforter
abiding with us for ever; But he is not a permanent Comforter, unles he Solace
as well by his Spirit of Truth mentioned John 17. 19. as with other Interior
Consolation. To allege more Texts, obvious to all, is needles: The Assertion
delivered in These general Terms is undoubtedly True, and Protestaents, I
think, who endlesly talk of their Interior Spirit, will not Deny it. The
difficulty, by whom the Spirit interpret's.


7. The only Difficulty which will trouble Them, is: Seeing this Al-teaching
Spirit usually Interpret's not by Private Illustrations, nor Assumes every
Private man to be the Oracle whereby he speak's and interpret's: Seeing also, He
leaves Scripture still as Speechles in order to its own further Explication, as
it was 16. hundred years agon. The Difficulty, I say, is to find out that
Oracle (And a Christian Society it must be, for Angels are not Interpreters)
wherein He Presides as Master, and by it interpret's Scripture. Find this
Speaking Oracle out, and we have enough. Hear it, and we hear Truth. To our
purpose then.

8. Does this Spirit of Truth Reside in the late, and hardly yet well known
Congregation of Protestants? Does he Teach and Interpret Scripture by this
Society The Spirit resides no^ in Protestants.
of men? No, Most certainly, no: For, that Society wherein This All-knowing
Spirit Presides as Master, is Taught infallibly. Those, He instructs to
Interpret Scripture, Both Teach and Interpret Infallibly (For Truth it self can
make none his Instruments, and Interpret by them either falsely or fallibly:)
But Protestants Because They profess to be Fallible.
profess themselves to be Fallible in what ever they Teach and interpret;
Therefore they jointly own themselves to be No Teaching or interpreting
Instruments of the Holy Ghost. Observe well the Reason. This blessed Spirit
when it learn's a whole Church what it is to Believe, cannot but Interpret
Infallibly by those He Teaches to interpret. Our Sectaries deny this Grace of
Interpreting infallibly to All Societies of Christians; The Reason is
convincing.
Therefore they deny it to Themselves, For, they are amongst These All; And in
doing so, They Divorce their little Company from the Infallible interpreting
Spirit of the Holy Ghost. Consequently, This Spirit leaves them; For it is most
evident He Interprets not by such, or for such, as deny and Abjure his
Infallible Interpretation. God forbid (may Sectaries Reply) we Abjure it not,
But only modestly say, We cannot Teach infallibly as he Interprets in our
Hearts. No. To what purpose then, does this Divine Spirit lay up his infallible
learning in your Hearts, if you can never utter it, or Teach others (after your
Instructions secretly received) as this Spirit speak's in you, infallibly? Here
is Light indeed closely hid under a Bushel, unseen by All, Beneficial to None.
This short Discourse (can Protestants discover Sophistry in it, let them speak)
totally Evert's their private Spirit, And evidences, That their Interpretation
of Scripture finally comes to no more But to a Fallacy, or a self-imagined
Fancy. All I would say here, is summoned up in these few words* Protestants
confess that they neither Teach, nor can Interpret Scripture infallibly;
Therefore by their own Confession, They aro neither Oracles, nor Instruments,
nor Interpreters of the Holy Ghost, who Teaches and Interprets by none, when ^e
delivers Doctrine for a whole Church, But by such as do it Infallibly. Hence

9. I say 4. One only Society of Christians There is (Hell One only Siciety
that Teaches Infallibly.
gates shall not prevail against it, or seduce it by Error) which Teaches and
interprets the Word of God Infallibly. This one Dove is Chaste, This one Spouse
is Loyal, This one Oracle is Infallible. He that Hear's it, hear's Christ, He
wh^ slight's it, slight's Christ, and draw's upon him the Malediction of a
Separated Heathen and Publican, Matt. 18. 17. Si Ecclesiam non audierit etc.
You do, I know, prevent my meaning; For, by this Spouse and Oracle, I
understand no other, But that long standing, Ancient, Holy, and Catholic Roman
Church, which Which is the Roman Church.
ever taught the World in foregoing Ages, before our Sectaries se^ footing in
it. Beside this faithful Oracle (I do demonstrate in the 1. Chap. of the next
Discourse) There never was, is, or shall be any thing like a Catholic Holy
Church. Now, as it is Ecclesia Docens, a Church Teaching, and consists of
Prelates united with one Head, Directed by the Holy Ghost, it Teaches and
interprett Scripture infallibly. As it is Ecclesia Discens, or the Church
Learning, it receives, and by virtue of the same blessed Spirit, both
Instruction and Interpretation infallibly.

10. The Truth of my Assertion stand's firm upon the undeniable Grounds already
laid, no less well proved, then presupposed. Here is the sum of All. A
summary of the precedent proofs.
The wise Providence of God has left Sufficient means whereby we may know
exactly the Sense of his Scripture, in matters concerning Salvation, whilst
Learned men of different Sects are at endless Debates about this Sense, and
persist most obstinatly in what they have once laid hold on. God therefore, most
assuredly, will not have us run on thus in jarr's to the worlds end, and
conclude nothing. There is means then of a Reconciliation afforded, if we
please; But that is not Scripture alone, which cannot interpret it self, but
lies still in that ancient darkness, as it was first writ; nor can it be man's
Private Judgment, for that is both Various and Fallible. Certainly it is not
the Protestants Spirit, For this we se changes every year, And, confessedly, is
Destitute of the Holy Ghosts Infallible directing Spirit. It is no condemned
Sect of Ancient Haereicks, acknowledged for such both by Catholics and
Protestants. Enthusiasm's no man believes, Angels interpret not Scripture. What
then Remains, but that we have recours to that One, Ancient, Holy, and
Universal Roman Church, as well for Instruction, as Interpretation. By this sole
Oracle the Holy Ghost interpret's and teaches, or we must grant (which is
lamentable) that we are turned loos into an inexplicable Labyrinth of Gods deep
Secrets revealed in his Word, without hope of finding any Exit.

11. To prove my Assertion further positively by Scripture, and the Authority
of Fathers, would be both tedious to a Reader, and little avail with Sectaries
(And I wave as much as may be the useles Repetition of so often quoted
Authorities) who turn of Scripture by far-fetcht Glosses* and undervalue
Fathers as being fallible: Yet while they do so, know well enough their own
misery at home, within their breasts, which is nothing but a Spirit of
Fallibility. You find Proofs amply alleged out of Scripture, Councils, and
Fathers to our present matter, in our Polemical writers, chiefly when they
treat of the Judge of Controversies. However one Text, though often quoted, I
will here give you. Sectaries may tamper long enough with it, before they
return a probable Answer.

12. The great Apostle of the Gentiles writing to A solid proof from Scripture.
the Ephesians Cap. 4. after he had warned them of keeping unity in Spirit, and
Faith also, verse 11. Add's: And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and
other some Evangelists, and other Pastors, and Doctors etc. And why gave he
these Teachers? The following words Answer, For the consummation of the Saints,
unto the work of the Ministry, unto the edifying of the Body of Christ. How
long are these to continue? To the Worlds end, until, says Scripture, we meet
into the unity of Faith, and knowledge of the Son of God etc. What intention
had God in establishing These Apostles, Evangelists, and Pastors in his Church?
That now, we be not Children fluctuating, and carried away (...), that is,
turned about with every wind of Doctrine, in the wickedness of men, in craftines
to the circumvention of error. Thus the Hierarchy The Hierarchy of the Church
that Teaches.
of Christ's Teaching Church is constituted, And by no other then Truth it self.
Now I say: No Society of Christians, since St. Paul writ These words, can so
much as probably show it self permanently blessed with an Apostolical Teacher,
but our Ancient Roman Church only, where the Prince of the Apostles, St. Peter
yet lives in every lawful succeeding Pope. No Society of Christians can lay
claim to such continued The Roman Catholic Church only shows through every
Age.
Prophets as this Church has had in it Age after Age, whether by Prophets we
understand with Scripture 1. Cor. 14. 1. Holy Men praying and Prop^^cying, or
such as Foretell Future things, our Church has had abundance of these, if
undoubted History may gain credit. No Prophets laborious Evangelists.
Society of Christians can show so many laborious Evangelists as this one
Church alone; and St. Paul points at, 2. Timot. 4. 5. They are Those who have
indefatigably, through every Age without Cessation, Preached, and carried
Christ's Sacred Gospel to Unconverted, and most remote Nations. Thus St. Austin
sent by St. Gregory Pope, Anciently was an Evangelist to our English, St.
Boniface to the Germans, Blessed St. Francis Xavier and many other Evangelical
men, were so also to the furthest part of the world. No Society of Christians
But our Ancient Roman Church only can reckon up so long a perpetuated Hierarchy
of lawful commissioned Pastors and profound Learned Doctors.
Pastors, so many profound and learned Doctors, who labored unto Death in
Christ's Sacred Vineyard, and innumerable shed their Blood in Defense of it.
These being undeniable Truths,

13. I Argue thus. This known, visible, and never interrupted Society of
Evangelists, Pastors, and Doctors, This Ecclesia Docens, or Teaching Church,
constituted The Argument.
by Christ himself, was ever, and is still Infallible, and, Because Directed by
the Holy Ghost, Teaches and Interpret's Scripture infallibly: or, It can err,
And cheat that ample Flock of Christians, committed to its charge, into
damnable Falsities. If the first be granted, we have all we wish, Viz. An
infallible Hierarchy of living Pastors, who shall Successively instruct us
infallibly to the worlds end. If contrariwise, this whole Hierarchy can Deceive
and lead us into damnable Error, These two woeful Sequels Undeniably Follow.
Fearful Sequels from Sectartes falls Doctrine.
The first. That the Holy Ghost Directs not, Teach's not that living Hierarchy
of Pastors, which Christ appointed to Teach us here on Earth; For, both This
and every other Society of Christian Teachers, may Beguile us with falls
Doctrine, and misinterpret Scripture? Grant so much, and it follows, 2. That
our Learned St. Paul Mistook himself, and Uttered not one word of Truth in the
place now cited. For, if these Pastors and Teachers appointed by Christ to
Teach, and so specifically here noted, can Delude us (yea, and have de facto
erred as Protestant Assert) It Is possible. That They neither comply with the
Work of their Ministry, nor Edify the moral Body of Christ (but destroy it)
nor persever in teaching Truth, until we all meet together in a Unity of Faith
(that happy day is not yet seen) nor, finally, after all Their Endeavors,
Afford means to persever steadfast in Christ's Sacred Doctrine. They find yet a
great Part of People called Christians, like wilful Children resting on
Self-opinion only: They see them tossed and turned about with every wind of new
Learning. Such is the Fault and unlucky fate of Novellists, who will be so
wantonly Childish, as to slight an Oracle Undeceivable. Here then is the
Conclusion. The Apostles Words are True, Therefore Sectaries vent a hideous The
Conclusion.
Untruth, whilst they say, these now named Evangelists, Pastors, and Doctors
may Deceive, and lead us into Error.

CHAP. X.
Objections are answered.
1. PErhaps they will reply: We mistake St. Paul's meaning; For, the Apostles,
Evangelists, Prophets, and Doctors etc. Whereof he speaks, are long since dead
an gone; They were those, who Preached whilst Christ lived on Earth, or soon
after, and Teach us still by the written Word now in our Hands. Since those
days we have had no Other Evangelists and Pastors continued in any Christian
Society, that either taught, or interpreted Infallibly. Roundly spoken; But
without book, and as Falsely as fallibly. Let Sectaries prove this gloss
contrary to the express words, and bring their proof to a received Principle.
For, who see's not the Obvious Sense of St. Paul's Testimony plainly perverted,
whilst He points at Teachers Successively abiding in the Church to the
Consummation (...), That is, to the coagmentation of Saints, or, until they be
joined together in one Faith, and all meet in a Unity of Belief, and knowledge
of the Son of God? The Deceased Apostles now in Heaven will ('it is true) se this
last Day; But are not now with us, nor, Teach until that Consummation be.
Therefore Others Succeed and teach in their Place (so God has ordered) to the
End of all things. I have Answered to what is added of their present
Instruction by the Written Word. The Bible, The written Word insufficient to
reconcile differences.
I said, cannot (Because it interpret's not if self) Reconcile our Differences,
And no deceased Evangelist appears now, either to Arian or Protestant, to
instruct them when they Fail, or mistake Gods True Sense. This very Scripture
therefore requires an Interpreter, in whom all must Acquiesce, or we may run on
in endless Dissentions to the day of Judgment. But yo will ask, Who is in
fault, Seeing no man blames himself nor the Bible He read's? Christ Answer's* He
who hears not the Church, is both the accused and faulty Person. And upon this
Occasion I answer to a second Objection.

2. Our adversaries may say. All Appellation from a Lower Tribunal to a Higher
is lawful. And they do so: For, they Appeal from the Church (which only
consists of men) to God and his Word, the Highest Sectaries by appealign from
the Church to Scripture,
Tribunal imaginable; therefore their Procedure is blameles. I answer, It were
most blameles, could They know Infallibly what God certainly says in his Word;
But this they cannot know in controverted Points, But by the Infallible Oracle
of his Church. To this Tribunal Christ sends us for Satisfaction in all In real
Truth appeal not to Scripture, but to Fancy only.
our Difficulties; If we reject or forsake this Oracle in real Truth, we appeal
not to the undoubted Sense of Gods Word, But to our own unsteedy Sentiments;
which are Fancies only, and nothing like Gods Word. Will you se this clearly?
Imagine only a new sort of Sectaries, who will both Appeal from Church and
Scripture to Gods interior and eternal infallible This instance proves the
Assertion.
knowledge of Truth: They Appeal from the Church, Because it is made up of men;
from Scripture, because They understand it not in a hundred Passages. Therefore
they will rely on what God knows to be True, and guess at it as well as they
can. Would you not esteem such Men mad, and upon this Account, That they cannot
certainly know without a Teacher, what this Infinite Wisdom judges of the
Truth they seek Observe the proof.
after? This is the very case of Sectaries. No more do they certainly know in
their Principles, what God has already Revealed in that one Text: This is my
body (and the like is of innumerable others) then if he had never Registered
those Words in Scripture. They may guess at the Sense and miss, more they
cannot do. Now if they tell me of no man knows what Moral Certainty, or of
Fundamentals clearly enough made known in Scripture, we Answer fully to both in
the next Discourse.

3. They may thirdly object. If a Protestant cannot depose his Judgment, nor,
think that the Church and Scripture say one thing, Because his Reason finds them
Opposite to one another, He may stand for Gods Word, against the Church. To
confirm this, He may tell us also, that the Church, which An Objection
containing the ground of all Haresy,
seems to engross all Judicature and right of Interpreting Scripture, is no
more but a Party, and a Party cannot in Reason be Judge for it Self, when the
Protestant stands out, and is in Controversy with the Church. Here briefly is
the Ground of all Haeresy, and the old Plea of all Condemned Sectaries.

4. To Answer the first. I Ask what is this Protestant Is answered.
that cannot Submit his Judgment? Is he an Angel from Heaven, or one
immediately Taught by the Holy Ghost? No. He is a poor, simple, fallible, and
erring Man. Why then may not he yield to the Church, as well as his Ancestors
have done before him, and the Wisest part of Christianity does now? The true
Reason is, Because he perversely will not submit, And, though he palliat's his
Pertinacy with a Specious Pretense of Gods Word, yet he has not one Syllable
in Scripture for him: The most He can know (if yet so much) is, that what he
reads is Scripture, but what God says in that Scripture he cannot know at all
but by Fancy only, when he judges contrary to the Church. O, but God
Illuminates him about A paradox of Protestants illuminated.
the Sense. Why you, my Friend, more then an Arian, as Strong in Fancy as you
are? But, why you more then a whole Ancient Church? Does God tender you so
dearly, and not his Church? Will he And of a whole Church left in Darkness.
Illuminate you, and leave his Church in Darkness? Will he give you the Spirit
of Infallibility, and take it from his Church? Away with these Trifles, not
worth Refuting, neither God, nor Scripture, nor Church is here stood for, But a
Self-conceipt only. The Church no Party, but Judge.


5. Now to what is Added of the Church being a Part, and therefore no Judge,
I Will say one Word, and first ask what is the Sectary that opposes himself to
the Church? Is not he a Party also? Will He then take upon him to Judge and
censure the Church. And cry out against it (as partial) if it meddle with him?
The Church is already empowered by Christ to Judge in Spiritual Causes, as I
have proved; But no Particular man is more It Is proved.
Authorized to Judge the Church, then a Vassal is to Judge his Sovereign after
Treason committed. And the Instance is fit, as you may se; If some in a Kingdom
tumultuously rise up against both King and Country, as Sectaries have done
against the Pope and Church. They are accused and brought to a Trial, before
their lawful Sovereign; the Fact is examined, whether Treasonable or no. Will
these impeached Men, think ye, fly from the Judgment of their Sovereign, or
plead He is a Party, and therefore seek for Justice to a Foreign Prince? No
most certainly. The King The Church the high Tribunal from which there is no
appeal.
and Country where they offend have Power to Judge them; And so has the Church
in Spiritual matters, from which there can be no Appeal. And the Case is most
Evident for the Church: Because, whilst Sectaries by their Schism or new Doctrine
contrary to it, become Rebels, They have no Tribunal imaginable left them to
Appeal to, secluding this Judge, But their own Selfjudgement, which is the
Delinquent. The Church thus Sectaries make the Delinquent Judge.
rejected; Neither God Immediately, nor Scripture more explicitly, nor Angels
Ministerially judges for them; Therefore their last Appellation is to a very
Friendly and too partial a Judge, Too partial a Judge.
Their own what they Please. And this is most evident in every debated
Controversy, where no other Judge is allowed of by them but Scripture (and it
were well would they stand to it) But it is Scripture, as They are pleased to
Interpret.

6. They may Object fourthly. Those Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors,
and Doctors mentioned in the Text, Though granted Infallible, are against all
Reason supposed to be the Teachers of the Roman The pretense of other Lawful
Pastors, beside those of the Roman Catholic Church,
Church: For most surely, There were other Orthodox Teachers beside these,
continued Age after Age in the world. Why therefore does the Church of Rome draw
all that is good to it self, and Allow no other Christian Society at least a
share of these Doctors and Teachers etc? Mark the Objection which acknowledges
a Succession of other Orthodox Pastors and Teachers in the Christian World, Age
after Age, Showed Null.
And take with it my plain Answer. If Sectaries lay claim to such, They are
obliged plainly to point them out, And say where, or when they lived, who they
taught etc. But they are not designable, Because, from Luthers days upward There
were none (except the Roman Pastors) in the Christian world, But known
confessed and condemned Haereticks, And They were no Orthodox Teachers, as I
largely prove in the first Chap. of the next Discourse. Be pleased to read it.
They may Reply fifthly. This Argument: Such Pastors are not A Reply answered.
designable, therefore were not, is purely negative and proves nothing. Well.
But I hope this Proposition Asserted by Protestants. Such Pastors and Doctors
distinct from the Roman Clergy, were Successively found to have been in the
World, is Positive, And therefore must be proved. However, Negative Arguments in
such matters, and of the like nature with this (That is, when things are of
themselves Perceptible, and yet not Seen) Are both strong and Convincing. For
Example: When negative Arguments have force.
If a company of quick sighted men stand up in a tower set before a plain, and
look round about them, yet se nothing within the compass of the eye like a high
Mountain; They may well conclude, There is no such Mountain within their sight.
Now I say: A Church consisting of such Supposed Orthodox Pastors, as
Protestants imagine, Distinct from the Roman, is as visible, and discernable as
a Mountain in this present Case, Yet, were never seen by Protestants nor
others. Therefore it follows They were not at all, unles we recurr to an
Invisible Society of such men, now as well exploded by later Protestants, as
Catholics.

7. A fifth Objection flow's from the pen of a Late Mr. Stillingfleet.
Writer after this manner. Cannot you conceive that there should be a Number of
men professing Christianity, without Infallibility? If not (says he) I Will help
your Understanding a little. Suppose (And it is only a Supposition) That all the
members of the Roman Church should be destroyed in one Age, do not you think
that there would be still a number remaining, who profess Christianity of the
Greek and Protestant Churches, sound at least in the Belief of Fundamentals,
without Infallibility? I have answered already, No. And given my Reason: Because
a Church A Church separated from Divine Assistance, cannot persist stable.
divorced from the Infallible Assistance of the Holy Ghost, is pulled from the
Center of Truth, which supports it; and consequently the Doctrine of it must
needs reel and totter (now as is supposed) to rely on no firmer a Hold then on
man's unsteedy, fallible Reason, or on a Testimony merely Humane, and therefore
Uncertain. Neither have we without this Assistance, more Security Without
Infallible Assistance no security of fundamentals.
of true Belief in Matters called Fundamental then others, As is clear in
condemned Arians, who no sooner left the Church directed by this Spirit of
Truth, But Errors followed them in points most Fundamental. And yet, like
black Ghosts do, and will haunt them without Repentance, to the Worlds End.

8. Before we end this matter, I have one Question to propose. It is. Whether,
If all the Ancient Fathers A Question proposed to Sectaries.
that ever lived, Had plainly interpreted Scriptures as the Roman Catholic
Church now interpret's them contrary to Protestants; They would then Disavow
Their own Glosses* And submit to the undeniable Authority of so many worthy
Fathers? Might Reason or Religion (set one unlucky Adversary aside called
Prejudice) make the Answer, Sectaries would say, Yes, And do so, were The
unanimous consent of Fathers against them. Grant thus much, And say boldly: The
Authority of The whole Antecedent The Authority of a whole Church, more weighty
then that of Fathers.
and this present Roman Catholic Church, is in true prudence of greater Force
to withdraw Sectaries from their new invented Glosses, contrary to it, Then if
all the Fathers Together Had plainly interpreted Scripture as the Church
interpret's. Why? Nothing on earth can Parallel this Churches Authority, much
les make it Inferior to The Fathers only part of the Church.
the universal consent of Fathers. The Reason is. These Fathers were only a
part of it, particular men, and Singly considered, Fallible. But a whole Church
Embraces a greater number, and cannot be misled into Error. Nay I say: Though
we Impiously suppose, Were the Church supposed Fallible the Authority of it is
as great as the Fathers.
That this whole Church might swerve from Truth, yet the Testimony of it is as
great as that of the Fathers, who, as Protestants say, may all err, and swerve
more easily. This Reason is Reinforced, if we reflect on one undeniable Truth,
which is: In all controversies now between us, Sectaries can pretend no more,
But thus much only: That the sense of some few Fathers only (They never
pretended all) whilst they interpret Scripture, is, (though often obscure) more
against the Churches interpretation, then for it. Here is the most they can say
with any Conscience, Though we grant not so much, when the whole Doctrine of a
Father is well examined. However Gratis Admit of the Supposition at present,
And se what follows. A clear Testimony, Though Fallible, has more weight then
another that is Obscure and Fallible.
Thus much only: The Sense of such and such Fathers is doubtful, and Sectaries
say, Fallible; The Churches Sense is clear (That is, you know what it Teaches)
and Though falsely supposed fallible, is yet far more firm then the other
Testimony, That Is confessedly both obscure and Fallible.

9. This Discourse convinces that Sectaries cannot If Sectaries say the more
clear Church Doctrine is, the more manifest is its Error, They speak without
Principles, and suppose what is to be proved.
impugn the Churches sense given of Scripture by any thing that has the look
of a probable Principle. For, the Church Defend's it self upon two undeniable
Grounds. The first, Positive; And It Is The Churches own Authority (nothing can
be greater) The other Negative. Viz. Never any of known credit, neither Fathers
generally, nor Ecumenical Councils, much less, Scripture Probably, clearly
contradicted that sense which the Roman Catholic Church Gives of Scripture.
And here by the way, You may se to what an Exigency our new None of undoubted
credit Ever clearly contradicted the Churches sense of Scripture.
men are Driven for want of Principles. They say, The Roman Catholic Church is
Fallible, The Fathers are fallible, All condemned Haereticks are fallible. They
themselves are fallible. Thus much supposed, Tell me, I beseech you, by what
probable Principle, can They so much as seemingly show, That either They
interpret Scripture better then we, or, That Any of us all ever yet arrived to
the True sense of it in controverted If all are Fallible, by what Principle can
Sectaries prove their Interpretation to be the best?
matters? Which yet is absolutely necessary; For, we can have no true Faith
without the true sense of Scripture. You know, if the blind lead the blind,
There is no safe conduct; And if the Fallible man Guides the Fallible, both may
mistake Their way, and err grossly. You will have no Answer returned to this
Difficulty, But Sectaries Fancy, and Fancy only. Or show that Any had the true
sense of Scripture?


10. Some may Reply. Protestants have the words of Scripture as clear as the
Holy Ghost was pleased to Write them in Fundamentals; As also the consent of
Fathers, at least for those Fundamentals: They wave other By-Passages of
Scripture, and care not much A Reply of Sectaries.
whether their Interpretations be right or wrong. I Answer first, (To say
nothing of many Others) They They cannot wave all Difficulties.
cannot wave one Difficulty concerning the Real presence of Christ in the
Sacred Eucharist, which is either a Fundamental Doctrine, or none is. Both
Scripture and Fathers are in this particular most expressly against them, as is
proved Hereafter.

11. But let this pass. I Answer 2. We have as good Scripture as Sectaries can
lay claim to in every Point, which they call Fundamental, And with it the In
Fundamentals we are at least equal, and in controverted matter far superior.
consent of Fathers also. In other controverted matters we own the same
Scripture they own, And moreover have the sense of it Declared by this long
standing Church, wherein we infinitely surpass them. Speak therefore of matters
out of controversy, or, wherein all Agree, we are at least equal with them, And,
for others in controversy, Because the Church stand's for us, there No
Authority Allegeable contrary to the Church, can be comparable to it.
can be no Competition, Unles They render our Churches Testimony of no Force by
substituting a greater in its place, For their sense, which is impossible.
Alas, They want Principles to go about such a work, And Therefore must Reduce
all they talk against us to Fancy only.

12. What I would say here, may perhaps be more clearly Expressed Thus. If
Sectaries have plain Scripture for Fundamentals, we have it also, and take
along with it Those Fathers They Admit of. If in Judgment against Judgment;
Spirit against Spirit.
other Matters now in Controversy, They rely on their private judgment when
they interpret Scripture, our judgment That Is opposite, is (to say no more) as
good as Theirs. If they plead by the Spirit of Truth, working in them, we might
set our Spirit against Theirs, And Ask whether's better? Thus far we stand most
evidently upon equal Terms with them. Now be pleased to observe what I say.
They have not one plain text of Scripture, nor one plain Testimony of any
Council or Ancient Father, whereby they can so much as Probably offer to Prove,
That Protestants have Nothing for Their sense of Scripture but Fancy.
the sense of Scripture owned by Catholics is Erroneous in points debated
between us, And Beside the judgment of innumerable Fathers, We have also The
Authority of a whole learned Church that Approves our sense; They have neither
Church, nor Scripture, nor Councils, nor Fathers for Theirs. Let therefore the
world Judge, How far they are from convincing our sense of Scripture, to be
erroneous by any known or received Principle, unles their Fancy enter in, and
pass for a Proof, which we utterly Reject. You will say: If in all controverted
matters we make so much of Church Why Church Authority is to be highly esteemed.
Authority, There is no Disputing Against us; For, the Church will ever stand
for its own Doctrine: I answer: And, if we Value not of it so Highly, But Admit
of our Sectaries Glosses upon Their bare Word, We are worse then mad; when It Is
evident, They cannot prove that sense to be erroneous by a stronger Principle
Then our Church Authority is, that denies the Error. The Church Therefore
fortified with most solid proofs, drawn from Scripture, Councils, Fathers, and
Tradition, most justly stand's for it^s own Interpretation. And hence I say:
Whatever Sectaries can allege against it, will show it self an impertinency.
Though Cavils may be raised, There is no Rational Disputing against it. You
have the Reason hereof already: Because what ever Sectaries can lay hold on
like a Principle, or, That, whereby They may Attempt to prove the Catholic
Interpretations falls, will Appear more then feeble to stand against The long
standing Authority of this one Holy and Catholic Church. But of this subject
more afterward in the following Discourse.

13. And thus much of our Protestants strange unsettled Religion, And Undeniable
Apostasy, both from Church and Scripture. We shall se in the next Discourse, How
They recede from Reason also. In passing, be pleased to take these few
Considerations along with you.

14. A Religion destitute of all Appearance of any Ancient A Recapitulation of
the enormities of Protestant Religion.
Church to side and symbolize with, As Protestants most evidently are: (Their
Recours to the third of fourth first Ages, is Ignotum per ignotius, and no less
and Vnproved, then a Supposed whimsy) A Religion which has not one syllable of
Scripture for it, as it is evident men of this Profession have not, And because
they ever glory in Scripture Proof, I am forced to tell them, They cannot
produce one text for Protestancy without Their fallible Glosses (if I wrong
their cause let them speak out, and shame me, I Will suffer the Affront, yet fear
it not: But Remember I call for plain Scripture.) A Religion which never yet
had one General Council to Confirm it, no Universal Tradition to Warrant it,
not one Professor before Luther to Own it. A Religion which holds the Belief
of all Christians to have been Falls for a thousand years together, And the
Prelates misled by Error, who taught Christians for so vast a time. A
Religion, whose Professors take upon them to Reform others, Before They find
Their own pretended Reformation arrived to any Shadow of Perfection; who espy
errors in a Church never Discovered Erroneous, By Thousands more Ancient and
Learned then They. A Religion which has the very look of Haeresy (turn it
which way you will) which opposes all men, And is opposed by the Rest of
Christians; which is settled on no other Ground, But the bare Vnproved Word of
those Vncommissioned Men that Teach it; which Changes every year, and has no
seeming Principle for a Ground of Constancy; not one Motive to make it
Rationally credible. Such a Religion, I say, Dishonors God, Injures Jesus
Christ, seduceth poor Souls, and as unworthily, as weakly, stands out against
that Ancient Roman Catholic Church, which is every way Blamles, unless faulty
in This, that it made Protestants Their Progenitors, And the Rest of the world
Christians. If I here overlash in Asserting too much, let our Adversaries come
closely to any one Particular, and vouchsafe fairly, and rationally, to make my
Error known.

THE THIRD DISCOURSE OF The Unreasonable Proceeding of Protestants in some chief
Handled Points of Controversy.
Be pleased to observe what I shall Note Hereafter. You shall ever find our
Sectaries either sculking in Generalities, or supposing what is to be proved,
or wording it by Scripture misinterpreted, or finally making Controversies
endless, without Appealing to any other Judge, but Themselves.

THE FIRST CHAPTER.
Protestants are Unreasonable, whilst They seemingly hold a Catholic Church
Distinct from the Roman, neither known nor Designable by any.
1. THis is an Article of the Apostles Creed: I believe the Holy Catholic
Church, And was Sectaries are required to point at a Catholic Church before
Luther.
so three days before Luther deserted the Roman Faith. My humble suit is, That
our New Men will pleas by a plain Designation (I ask not for a Definition of
the Church) to point me out the True Church, which then was (or now is) Holy,
and Catholic. Protestants, as I here suppose, were not then visible in the
world. There were ('It Is true) Arians, Pelagians, Abyssins, Graecians, And
perhaps some Remainder of Donatists with other Haereticks (whether more or
fewer Known Haereticks constituted not the Catholic Church, yet the Article of
our Creed was then true.
it import's not to our present Question.) Notwithstanding it is Evident, That
some Christians then living, unanimously Professed Their Belief in a Holy
Catholic Church. My demand therefore is, whether, That Believed Article was
then True or Falls? If falls, for want of a true Catholic Church, Speak out
plainly, And say that Christians Believed a Church, which then Really was not
in Being. If True. The then Holy Catholic Church; which Verified the Belief of
that Article, can be plainly and without fumbling Designed. Say then, on Gods
name, what Christians had we, who constituted the Holy Catholic Church Nor
Papists according to Protestants, nor the later Graecians.
in Those Days? Papists, you say, were all in a Deluge of Error, which made
Luther to leave them. Our later Graecians held, and hold still, a True Mass,
Sacrifice, the Real Presence, Praying to Saints, Prayers for the Dead etc. They
therefore, contrary to our Sectaries, were neither the Holy nor Universal
Church; None, say Sectaries, but gross erring men were in the world before
Luther.
Much les were Arians, Abyssins, Pelagians, Monotbelits, or all of them
together. Now besides such erring men, There were no other in the World. If
Therefore the Universal Church be Essentially made up of Particular Churches, as
truly it is (For there is no Universal a part rei) And all Particular
Churches Nameable in those days, grossly Erred; it follows evidently, That then
no Holy Catholic Church could be Believed. Since Those times Our Protestants
came in, Protestants only are not the Holy Universal Church.
And will They, (if That Article of our Creed was Falls in the last Age) verify
it now, and style Themselves the only Universal Church? I am Confident They
will not Donatize so far, or dare to do so. The Question Therefore Proposed
deserves an exact Answer. Viz. Where, or amongst what Christians shall we find
the The Question proposed deserves a clear Answer.
Holy Universal Church, Then free from notable Error?

2. Can our Novellists Rationally say, That All those who rightly Believed in
Christ constituted the Holy Universal Church? If so, The Reply is too general;
An abstract belief in Christ insufficient to constitute true Catholic Faith.
and we ask again, Who Those were, and urge to have the Particular Communities
Specified, That Catholickly Believed in Christ? We demand moreover, what they
mean by that Belief in Christ, Was it enough to Confess Him to be the True
Messus, Our Redeemer, our Master, or, to acknowledge his Death, his
Resurrection, without Believing more of his Doctrine? Surely More is required
and necessary to Salvation.
no. For, first God never spoke those other Excellent Verities registered in
Scripture (whether Dogmatical or relating to manners) in vain, But to good
Purpose, And with Intention That They should (besides that abstracted Faith in
Christ) both be harken'd to, and Believed, after a Sufficient Proposal. Again:
Were the later Graecians, who firmly Believed in Christ, and held never the les
Almost all the Tenants of the Roman Catholic Church, Catholic Believers also?
If so. Papists can in no Justice be excluded from that Communion. Perhaps you
will say, you do not exclude them. No. Why then have you hanged them upon
Gibbets, merely for being Papists? If you Answer, you do so upon the Account of
their Particular Errors, then hang up a number of your own Ministers, who
confessedly have more Errors among them; Or, if petty Differences in Points of
Faith, may be pardoned in the One, why are they so severely punished in the
Other? But ad rem,

3. Say plainly, And Answer Categorically without Arians and Pelagians believed
in Christ,
Shuffling. Were Arians, Pelagians, Nestorians, Monothelits, Parts and Members
of the Holy Catholic Church; For they believed in Christ, and owned him for
their Redeemer, Master and Doctor, yea, and admitted of Scripture also? If you
Affirm it; Then there never were, nor can be Haeresies in the Christian Yet
were cast out of the Church as Hareticks.
world, whilst Christ is acknowledged in this General Way, and consequently,
the Ancient Councils Dealt most unjustly with these men in casting them out of
the Churches Communion, And proclaiming them Haereticks. Beside observe, I pray
you, what a pretty Church is here, made up of men irreconciliable in their
Disputes. Is this think ye, that Holy, Universal, A Church compounded of
hideous dissenting Members is not Christ's Church.
and United Society of Christians, which Christ Jesus cimented together in one
Faith, who do nothing but clash one with another? And will he own this for his
Spouse, when he comes to Judge the World? Yet farther. No Doctrine proper to
Particular Sectaries, as Arianism is to Arians, Pelagianism to Pelagians,
Protestanism to Protestants, can (Because bound up within the narrow compass of
these Communities) deserve No Doctrine peculiar to Sectaries can be Catholic.
the Name, or Notion of either Holy, Universal, or Catholic Doctrine. Prescind
therefore from these particular Doctrins, or lay them aside (which, as
Protestants must say, did not Unchurch them) my Demand is (and it shall never
be Answered) wherein Consists the Protestants cannot answer the Question.
Remainder of that Doctrine, which implies the pure Essentials of Christian
Religion; joins men together in one Faith, and makes them true members of the
Holy and Universal Church?

4. Will You hear, as I think, the best Answer of some newer Protestants? They
may say: Who ever Believes in Christ and Scripture, and ioyns in that Belief,
which was Universally owned by the whole Christian World before Luther, is
right in Faith, and a Member of the Holy Universal Church, Though, perhaps, He
Believes, with his tainted Church, some Errors. A most wretched The first
Answer refuted.
and unproved Assertion. For, who, ever yet maintained, That a Society of
Christians, owning some Doctrine True (as all have don) and more perhaps Falls,
is a part of the True Holy Catholic Church? We say, Bonum ex integra causa,
malum ex quolibet defectu: A Faith Therefore Truly good, is Intierly good, Any
Falsity Spoil's it, And then most, when It Is vitiated with notable Errors.
Tell me, if Scripture A Church vitiated with gross errors is no more a Church
Then the Bible notably corrupted is Gods word.
were Corrupted in some Points of Consequence, would you own the whole Bible
for Gods Word? No certainly. How then can we own That for Christ's True Church,
which is corrupted with Falls Doctrine? You will say: We must take the Good
without the Bad, And Believe as much as is necessary to the Essential Being of
a Church, And that makes us Catholics, Though we jointly Believe some errors
with it. Answer. This is wors then before, And more confused stuff. Who are
those WE, that can choose thus; None can separate Truth from falsehood, if I live
in an Erring Church.
Or, Tell me, if I live in an Erring Church, where Falls Doctrine is Secretly
mingled with Truth, what I am to choose, or, what is Good or Bad? If a poor
simple man, Deceived by his Pastor* fall into an Error, There are others ready
to unbeguile him, But Because He who endeavors to unbeguile me, may then most
err himself.
here are none to do this Service, Because none can certainly Judge of the right
or wrong. Will you say, That Scripture is to decide in such Doubts? Pray you
Tell me, if (by a supposed Impossibility) Scripture it self were Corrupted in
certain great matters, And no Body knew where, on whose Judgment should we
Rely to single out those Corruptions? This Case only supposed, is a Real one in
the Churches Before Luther (if the Roman fail us;) For all other were
corrupted, Neither Scripture nor man's own private Judgment can help in such an
Exigency.
and no Protestant can certainly say in what. However, Take Scripture, as it is
most pure, And plead with it against an Arian, He laughs at you, and says he
has more clear Scripture for his Particular Tenants, then Protestants have for
Theirs. What then is next? Every Private man must in such Exigencies Judge for
himself. The Arian Answers He does so, And thinks his Judgment as good as
yours, yet still remain's in his Error. Well, at last you shall hear the right
Solution.

CHAP. II.
Of a late VVriters Doctrine.
1. WHen all Christian Societies (says he) consent to such Mr. Stillingfleet.
things, as by the Judgment of all those Societies, are necessary to the Being
of the Catholic Church, Then we are Right in Faith: And this Judgment is best
made, A second Answer refuted.
when we regulate our Belief by the Catholic Doctrine of the first Ages. Here
is, no man knows what, and not only a Generality, But Impossibility upon
Impossibility. Say therefore. Shall we ever se that day, when all Christian
Societies will stand thus United in one Judgment concerning the Being, or the
Essentials These men propose impossibilities.
of a Church? Never. Unles every Particular Society first lay down its own
supposed Error, and say: So much is not essentially necessary. 2. Do you
think, That Catholics will ever come in, And acknowledge either Their Belief
of an Unbloody Sacrifice or Transubstantiation to be errors? No. They hold
these Doctrins as Essential, as to Believe a Trinity. Do you Think that Arians,
Pelagians, and other Haereticks, will so far Disown their Particular Tenants,
as to lay them down, or grant They make not up a Church? No certainly. This
Confent of Judgments Therefore, in all Christians Societies, for the The
supposed consent of Judgments for owning so much precise Doctrine Essential is
a Chim^ra. Sectaries cannot propound that precise Doctrine whereof God requires
explicit Belief.
owning of so much precisely as is Necessary to the Essential Being of a
Church, is a most unlearned Speculation. Neither do we mend the matter, in
saying as some do, That nothing is Essential to a Church, But what may be
Evidently propounded to all Persons, as a Thing whereof God requires Explicit
Belief. For, upon whose Proposition made evident to us, may we Assuredly rest,
and Hold That God requires an Explicit Belief of so many Articles, and no more?
If you answer, It Is so much as The Catholic Church in all Ages received, you
still lurck in Darkness, And prove ignotum per ignotius; For you never yet told
us, nor can tell us, where this Catholic Church is, or what it Taught. You
will say it is That Church, or the agreed-on Doctrine, which all, who went under
the Notion of Christians, owned as Holy and Catholic. Answ. There never was
any such Church, nor such Doctrine owned by all in the World: For Christ's True
Doctrine always met with opposition, and had Falls Doctrine against it. You will
say the Primitive Arians opposed as much the Ancient.
Church and Doctrine was pure, let us stick to That, And all is well. I answer
first: It was most pure, yet both Arians and others opposed it; They therefore
will not Agree to it. And here by the way I might Ask, Why their Authority was
not then every whit as good, to Vncatholick that first Church, as Sectaries As
Protetants do the Present Church.
is now to Uncatholick the Roman? 2. It is a mere Subterfuge, Thus to run up to
the Primitive Church, whilst you and we Agree not (though it is your Fault) what
that Ancient Church Taught in many Particulars. If you say, We must read, and
judge. Alas! We have All been Reading these hundred years, And yet are at
Variance about that Doctrine. You se then how Controversies are made Endless, by
this Proceeding. But what will ye? It is an old Fallacy of our New men, who
first Suppose, And then go on to Prove. They suppose the Primitive Doctrine to
be known and agreed on by Themselves and Us, and then Appeal to it. There Why
Sectaries recur to the primitive Church.
is no such thing. The Real Truth therefore is, They take up shelter here,
Because Controversies that are now most handled, were in Those days the least
examined.

2. Some of our Later men may perhaps pretend, That we have not been able
hitherto to understand their meaning, or to dive into the Speculative Conceits
A third Answer resuted.
of the Church Catholic, And therefore teach us thus. That Doctrine wherein all
Churches have Agreed on, ever since Christ's time, can be no matter of Discord;
for where all Agree, there can be no Disagreement. Take therefore that Precise
and Uniform Doctrine which all Christians have (Antecedently to particular
errors) Universally owned, as unquestioned Christian Doctrine, Therein consists
the Essentials of Saving Faith, or the very Quintessence of the Catholic
Church, and in no more.

3. Mark well a strong Speculation about nothing. You must Prescind one
Uniform, Univocal, True Religion, from The abstracting true Doctrine from falls,
is a speculation worth Nothing.
all Falls Religions in the World, And then you have the True Religion. That is,
you must cut of from Arianism, from Pelagianism, from Donatism, from
Protestanism, from Popery (For here is also some thing supposed Amiss) what is
Error, And the Remainder of Doctrine, wherein all Agree, constitutes the Essence
of Saving Faith. Believe it, it will prove a mighty Diffic(...)ty, to cut and
carue right in so Weighty a matte^. Pray you, who must Go above this work?
Protestants? Protestants ought first to lay down their own Errors.
Toys. Let them on Gods name, who are so much upon Reformation, first lead the
way, and lay down their own Errors, next we shall se who follows them. I am
sure Catholics will not Disown the Catholics will abute Nothing of their
Belief.
least Article of their Belief; For they, as I told you just now, Assent with
equal Assurance, to all Points of Faith. And so do also, I think, The Arians
and other Sectaries to their Particular Errors. But suppose, Admit of the
supposition nothing is concluded.
That we mentally conceive one agreed-on Harmonious Doctrine, Universally held
by all Christians, who can Assure me, that so much precisely is enough for
Saving Faith? You may say, that, That Doctrine wherein all Christians Agree,
cannot but be True, Because all own it: But, you shall never so much as
probably show, That saving Faith requires no more, or, stand's safe upon such a
Generality. The Arians believed in Christ, that is General Doctrine, But denied
his Godhead. Cerinthus and Ebion Believed in Christ, But held that he was Man
only. The Monothelits Believed That which all Christians agree in, though true,
is not enough for saving Faith.
in Christ, But denied his two Natures, his two Wills Humane, and Divine. The
Apollinarians Believed in Christ, and held that the Word assumed True Flesh,
But without a Created Soul. Tell me now, can you Abstract a Belief from these
Erring Christians, Common to all other, That is, safe, sufficient, and enough
to constitute Saving and Catholich Faith? Is it enough to say, I do Believe in
Christ, without descending with my Faith, to an explicit Belief of his Divinity
also? Has one that says, I believe in Christ; But I will abstract from a
Belief of his two Natures, from his having a Rational Soul, from His Being God
and Man? And Because others have positively Disbelieved these Articles, I will
only Prescind from the Verity of them (to prescind is les, then expressly to
deny them) has such an one, I say, Saving Faith enough to make him a Plain
Haresy follow^ from these Sectaries Doctrine.
Member of the Holy Catholic Church? No. For if so, He needs not to believe at
all the Divinity of Christ, or his two Natures; after Scripture is Red, and
Proposed unto him, which obliges him, if He own it for Gods Word, not to
Abstract from the Belief of these Articles, But positively to yield an Assent
to them with True Faith, as most Fundamental Verities of Christian Religion.
You se Therefore, how Impossible it is to draw one true Uniform, Universal
Doctrine, From all erring Christians, And to hold that, on the one side
sufficient for Catholic Faith; And on the other, to comply with that strict
Obligation which express Scripture (clearly proposed) forces us to Believe.

4. This Point I insist on, Because I know, Protestants cannot so much as
probably Name any Thing like a Holy united Catholic Church before Luther;
unles, They first Answer (as some of them seem to do) by the Abstract Doctrine
of all Christians, now evidenced no Faith, And say, That particular Errors did
Vncatholick none. Or, Secondly run to an invisible Church, not at all
Designable. Or, thirdly (as They Protestants ought to acknowledge the Roman
Catholic Church as True etc.
ought to do) Acknowledge that the Roman Catholic Church was then, and now is,
not only a Church, But the Sole, Holy, and Catholic Church of Christ through
the whole World. With this Catholic Society, I could show (were it not amply
don by others) How all, who Age after Age merited the Name of Catholics, have
joined in Faith, And all, who parted from it, Have been Branded with the
ignominious Note of Or can find none.
Haereticks. If I speak not Truth, Name any Society of Christians before
Luther, That ever gained the None ever had the Name of Catholic but those of
the Roman Faith.
Repute of Catholic, But such only as were United in Faith with the Roman
Church? Name any one Society That Divorced it Self from this Church which
Forthwith lost not that Ancient Title of Catholic, Or, was not upon That
Separation, Styled Haeretical, Schismatical, or Both. If you say first, the
Roman Church wronged them; I Ask. Quis te constituit judicem? Who made you
judge in this Case? Name the injured Parties. Were the Arians, Pelagians,
Nestorians, Donatists wronged, when they left Communion with this Church? The
Gracians, Waldenses etc. No more wronged then Arians.
No. But the Waldenses, the Albigenses, the Hussits, And most of all, The later
Graecians had Injury Don them. And why so more Then Pelagians? Is your bare
Assertion Proof enough to Declare Those Guilty, and These Innocent? When you,
your selves, as much condemn them as Catholics Do, For You utterly Disavow
Their Doctrine. Was ever General Council Convened, That did more Patronize the
Error of these Waldenses, Then those other of the Arians, or, That blamed the
Roman Church, for casting them out of Her Communion? No. Why therefore do you
Plead ^o much, for a Bad cause, when you have no more ^o Defend it, Then your
own Proofles Talk; which Had you spent in an Apology For any Old Condemned
Haeretick, would have Helped as much (That Is nothing at all) as now you
Advantage These later Men? And Observe, I Beseech you, How weakly you, Go to
work. You say, the Hussits, Waldenses, Sectaries plead for condemned Heretics*
without any Principle but their own Talk.
and Others were good Catholics. We deny it, And Demonstrate their Vncatholick
Doctrine. To what Tribunal shall we Appeal for a just Sentence to your Saying,
I; or to our, No. To None? And Thus you Proceed with us in all your
Controversies. We must either take your Word for your Assertion, or Dispute
without end upon nothing that has the Appearance And make Controversies Endless.
of a received Principle.

5. You Say Again. The Later Graecians were Catholics, Before they Recanted
their Errors in the Council of Florence. How Prove you That? By a glorious
Empty Title: A Defense of the Greek Church, By Far fetched, Uncertain
Conjectures, And mere Negative Arguments, which are so slight, That if all were
put together in a Just Balance, They would not weigh one Straw, much ^es
Outweigh the Definition of a most Learned General Council against the Greeks.
Yet such Talk, and Talk only lengthen's these new Books, And makes them so
Voluminous as They are. And They Defend Doctrine denied by the English Church.
by the way Note here a Pretty Humor. The Greeks must be Defended in that
Point of the Holy Ghosts Procession from the Father Only, whilst the Church of
England Anathematizeth the Doctrine. Is not this Right, think ye, And well done
by a Protestant?

6. Well. You shall se my plain Dealing with Graecians, Hussits, and Waldenses
could not make the Catholic Church.
you. I License you to take These Graecians, Those Hussits, Those Waldenses
etc. to make up a Church before Luther, yet must Tell you, They Do not the deed
without more Company, which cannot be found. That These we have named, make not
the Church Catholic, is Evident: For, first they were never Universal, either
in Time or Place. Their late Beginnings, and little Extent, are known and upon
Record. 2. They were never United in one Doctrine, But more at variance with One
another, Then you and Catholics are, This they only Agreed in to Oppose the
Catholic Faith; And if so much made them Protestants, or good Catholics, You
may call in Turks and Jews to bear them Company. 3. They were most contrary to
Protestant Religion, and not in Trifles only. Why therefore have you recours to
a People so Blasted, Scattered, and almost now Forgotten? Alas, Protestants
Every way Churchles.
The Reason is clear: Because without them you have nothing to make a Church of,
And yet with them you are Churchles. I say therefore. No Roman Catholic Church,
no Church No Roman Catholic Church, no Church at all.
at all. If no Church at all, There was then no Truth in that Article of Our
Creed. I Believe the Holy Catholic Church. To Evidence further what I now
Asser^. Do no more, But Forget, as it were, or, cast out of your mind all
Thought of Roman Catholics, from Luther upward to the fourth Age. Then Look
About you, And Consider Exclude the Roman Catholic Church, Haereticks only
remain.
well the Remainder of other Christians For that Vast Interval of Time; You
will find none but Professed Haereticks, Schismatics, or Both, as Arians,
Nestorians, Pelagians, and such a like Rabble of men. Again: Forget these, as
much as if They had never Been, And only Think of the Roman Catholic Church,
Diffused the whole World over, continued Age after Age; Will you not have a
Holy, and Universal Church Presented Exclude Haereticks, you yet have a
glorious Church.
to your Thoughts? Yea most assuredly, And a Glorious Church too. It is
therefore Evident, That the Roman Catholic Society, was not only Necessary to
make Up the Church* But was Moreover the Sole, and only Essential Church of
Christ, as I have already Proved.

CHAP. III.
The Pretended Reformation of Protestants is Unreasonable, if Faith in Christ
Only Suffice for Salvation. A more Explicit Faith is proved Necessary.
1. I Must Needs have a Word more with our Adversaries upon this Subject, and
Note: That if a General Belief in Christ's Sacred Person, Office, and Dignity,
be Saving Faith enough for a Christian, which some endeavor to Prove by that
Text of St. John 20. 31. And these Things are written, That ye might Believe
that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, And that believing ye might have life
in his Name. If such a General Faith, I say, makes us all, as well Catholics,
as Christians, without more; Our Protestants need not to storm at us as They
do, for want of True Faith; For we Catholics Agree and Believe in Christ, God,
and Man, as firmly as They do; And in this one Article only (may we credit
them) All Necessary Essentials of Christian Faith are included. It is true,
Catholics say, a more Explicit Faith is required, as I shall presently
Declare; But Protestants, who do not, May rest Protestants slight work about
things not Essentials,
contented; And withal confess, That the great Coil They have kept in
Reforming Catholic Doctrine comes to no more, But to a slight Pidling about
Non-Essentials, which, for ought is yet known, Has done more hurt then good,
And made Things wors then They May have don more hurt then Good*
were Before.

2. To Drive the Difficulty home; I Ask seriously, Whether any one Article
Peculiar to this Religion, as If Protestants hold their particular Doctrine
necessary to Salvation, other Hareticks will pretend the like.
Protestancy (That is beside the General Belief in Christ, and owning Scripture
etc.) Be necessary to Salvation? If yes; Then will Arians, Pelagians,
Donatists, and other Sectaries say also; what they hold Particular is also
Necessary. And Therefore Doctrine Above, or Beyond the Belief in Christ, or, not
Universal, is of like Necessity. If Protestants answer, No; or, Assert that
nothing Particularly held by them (because not Universal Catholic Doctrine)
implies this And if not, two strange S^qu^ls undeniably follow.
Necessity, But a Belief in Christ only. Two rhings follow. The One is, as I
have now Noted, That, without Fruit at all, They have made a shamfull stir with
their Schism in Blustering all this while about non-Essentials and petty
Differences, which may be Believed or Not, without Danger of loosing Salvation.
2. It follows, That, as Protestants here Acknowledge, a Church so Universal,
wherein all may be Saved that Believe in Christ, in like manner, Any one, and
upon as good Reason, May make it Wider, and allow Salvation A large Church must
be allowed of by Protestants*
to all, whether Jews or Turks, that Believe in God only, without Explicit
Faith in Christ, Vnus Deus, Vna Fides. Therefore, in Place of Christ's Church we
may have a Gods Church, more large and ample erected in the world.

3. You will say, Scripture is most Evident for a Belief in Christ; Might a
Defender of the now large Imagined Church (which affords Salvation to all that
Believe in God) Answer, He would tell you, That the Explicit Belief in God
implies some kind of Implicit Belief in Christ, And that is enough, which He
is ready to Make good, when you have proved your Abstract Faith in Christ's
Sacred Person to be Sufficient to Salvation. A better Answer is. Scripture most
Certainly Obliges us to Believe in Christ Explicitly; But does it leave of
there, and not jointly oblige us to More necessary to Salvation then Belief in
Christ only.
Believe other Articles also Explicitly, when they are plain in Scripture, And
sufficiently proposed? Such are the Sacraments of Baptism and the Holy
Eucharist etc. Can we therefore, after we Own these Truths Delivered in Gods
Word, hope for Salvation without an explicit Belief of them? If so, St. John c.
6. 53. says not True: Unless ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his
Blood, you have no Life in you. Surely we cannot do this like Christians, Unles
we believe it. The Belief of Sacraments necessary.
If no; The Belief of these Sacraments constitute the Essentials of Saving
Faith, and so does also the Belief of much Moral Doctrine set down in Scripture.
Read what St. Paul Writes Cor. 1. 6. 9. concerning the Unrighteous, Idolaters,
and Fornicators etc. And tell me, if you Own Gods Word, whether the Apostle
does And of other Moral Doctrine.
not Disinherit all Unbelievers of his Doctrine? Therefore something more is
Necessary for Christians, united in one Faith, to Assent to, Then only to
Believe in Christ.

4. The true Fundamental Ground of my Assertion is This. What ever God Speaks
in Scripture (who never spoke Idle word) whether the Matter may seem to our
weak Capacities little or great, is, after a Sufficient Proposal, of the same
Weight and Authority. To Believe rherfore in Christ's is a Fundamental Article,
and (in one Sense Known to every One) most Fundamental; But to Reject, or
Abstract from His other Verities Revealed in Scripture, or to make les
Reckoning of them, Because they Appear little to us, is to Affront God, And Tell
him, That we will Believe him so far as we pleas, But no farther, Whereas on the
contrary side he Assures us, That his Word is equally engaged in all He Says,
And All Truths in Scripture are of equal Authority.
that his Eternal Truths, whether little or great, are not to be Valued of by
what is spoken, But by the certain Authority of him that Speak's them. Hence
Divins Assert, and most Truly, That no man can Believe so much as one Article
of Christian Faith upon the Motive of Gods Revealed Testimony, unles He readily
Embrace All other alike, as equally Proposed, upon the same Authority. For
where we have the Same Motive, we must yield the Same Assent, and with like The
Center of Faith.
Reverence. Upon this Motive of Gods Revealing Word, True Christian Faith
Relies, Mill Clypei pendent ex ea, omnis armatura fortium, Here they meet
together, Concentred, as it were, in This One Vndeceived, and Vndeceiving
Verity. Do I therefore Believe Christ to be We Believe all ^like upon Gods Word.
the True Messiah, Because God says it? I must also Believe Baptism, the
Eucharist, and other Revealed Truths, when after a sufficient Proposal, I know,
That the same God Speak's Them. For if his Word Prevail with me to Credit him
in the one, It is as Powerful and pressing to force, as I may say, Faith from
me in the Other. A further Reason is: Because a Another Reason*
right Act of Faith, settled on this Motive, is a Virtual and Implicit Belief,
not of one Article, But of all other which the Motive Own's, or Vphold's. You
se therefore, none can truly Believe in Christ, who Denies the least Verity
(Sufficiently proposed) that God Reveals: For, as the True Belief of one
Article implies a Belief of All, so Believe all, ^^ none at ^^ll.
the Denial of One, implies a Denial of all Other. And thus Christian Faith
consists in INDIVISIBILI, And is either Wholly had, or Wholly lost, which is the
True Cause why Protestants have no Faith, And must Iumble as They do Why
Protestants have no Faith and stagger in their Doctrine concerning fundamental's.
in Their Doctrine concerning the Essentials of it; And finally have never yet
discovered, nor shall hereafter (if we seclude the Roman) Any Thing like a
Catholic Church before Luther.

5. For These Reasons now alleged, Perhaps Some will say, That, After a Belief
in Christ, and a General owning of Scripture, we must Descend to more
Particulars, A Reply to little purpose.
And explicitly Assent to all that Express Scripture plainly Delivers (And we
will Adhere to the very Words) without Dispute. If we do so* We Admit of all
That God clearly Reveal's, and Take it upon his Authority without
Interpretation. Answer. Here is a fair Promise of Nothing; For Who can tell
when Scripture speaks plainly?
who can Assure us, without Dispute, when Scripture speak*s plainly? Both
Catholics and Protestants Dissent in this very Principle. Those say it Speak's
plainly for the Real Presence of Christ's Sacred Body in the Eucharist, For
Remission of Sins by a Priest, The matter still in Dispute.
For Justification by Good Works, For Extream-Vnction, For the Infallibility of
the Church etc. These Deny all, And (do what we can to hinder them) will upon
their own Fancies Force into Gods Word certain violent Glosses, which God never
Spoke. You se Therefore, That, when we Descend to the Particular Expressions of
Scripture Concerning the Particular Doctrins of it, we are at a stand, and
cannot go forward; For Sectaries will have no Judge on Earth to Appeal to in
These Doubts. If they say the Ancient A Judge necessary to determine etc.
Church shall Judge. We are, as I told you, as Far from Home as Before, And as
much Differ about the Sentiments of that Church, as we do about the Sense of
Scripture. And thus it ever falls out; Otherwise Controversies are Endless.
Either we must Drive Controversies Between us to Endless Quarrels, or, yield to
what our Protestants say, or Finally Commiserate their sad Condition, Because
they will not Acquiesce in a Judge upon Earth, that as well Ascertain's us of
the Meaning, as it does of the very Books of Scripture. Without this Judge we
may contract to the Worlds End, and never be Wiser.

6. You se this plainly in that Instance Proposed above out of St. Hierom. For,
according to plain Scripture, if one strike us on the right cheek, we must Turn
to him the other also. We are to Abstain from eating of Blood and Things
strangled: We are not to have two Coats nor carry Money with us etc. None can
Deny But that God Speaks These Verities, Although they seem light to us; Buthow
to understand them, is to be learned from some Infallible Interpreter of
Scripture (which Scripture obscure when Seemingly Clear in Words.
Protestants Reject) when all know that very often, where Scripture seems
Clear in Words, There it is more deep in Sense, and most Obscure.

CHAP. IV.
The Ambiguous Discourses of Protestants, concerning Fundamentals in Faith, are
Proved Unreasonable.
1. WE need not here to Discuss too largely This Point of Fundamentals (most
Learnedly examined by Catholic Writers) For if we Reflect well on what is
Proved in the precedent Chapter, There is enough said to Silence All
Adversaries, and to satisfy every Rational Man's doubts in This Question.

2. We Catholics Speak plainly, and Assert. Although an Explicit Belief in
God, as a Rewarder of Good and a Punisher of Evil (yea, as some Divines hold of
The Catholic Doctrine.
Christ also, After the Promulgation of the Gospel) Be Primary Fundamental
Points of Faith, Because (Necessitate medij) Every one is obliged to Believe
Them Explicitly; Yet withal we say, That the Least Article Revealed by
Almighty God, when it is Sufficiently Proposed, grows to be so far Fundamental,
That none can Deny or Doubt of it, without Damnable Sin. And in this Sense
there is no Distinction between Points Fundamental, and not Fundamental. The
reason hereof (Already given) Relies upon this Certain Principle. What ever God
Reveal's, is equally to be believed.
What God Speak's, whether the Material Object be little or great, After the
Charge laid on us to Believe, is to be Admitted of with equal Certitude and
Reverence: For, it is not The less or more Weight of Things Revealed, That
distinguishes Submission to Gods Veracity gives true value to Faith.
our Faith, or makes it less or more Valuable; But, that which set's the true
Price upon it, is the Submission we yield by it to Gods Veracity. Now because
this Veracity is one and equally the same in what ever is Revealed, By
consequence we Say, That Faith upon the Account of that Submission is equally
Good, Solid, and Valuable. This I Note in Opposition to Sectaries, Faith not to
be measured by the Diversity of Things revealed.
Who, For ought I can yet learn, Measure their Faith, not so much By the
Excellency of the FORMAL OBJECT, as by the different Nature of Things Revealed:
Which, Because considered in themselves, They often vary in worth; Protestants
Think, that the Degrees of their Faith may answerably be less or more various,
according as the Object requires. It is an Error. The Reason.
For, as it is certain, That when God Speak's to us, The Highest Truth
imaginable Speak's; so it is as certain, That He is to be Heard by us with
Highest Respect and Reverence, whether the Matter be great or Small.

3. What is here said, supposes a Sufficient Proposition of Revealed Verities,
which without doubt are not equally Clear to all Capacities, if we Descend to
the Explicit Belief of particular Mysteries; But this is no hindrance to
Catholic Faith in the most How the unlearned believe all that is revealed.
unlearned man in the World; For such an one Believes Explicitly as much as he
knows is Proposed, And is not only in Praeparatione animi ready to embrace
more, when more is Proposed, But even now in every Act of Faith He Elicit's (as
I noted above) Implicitly, and Virtually Submits to All That God has
explicitly Revealed. That Distinction therefore which some of our New men here
Introduce, Viz. A Distinction of Sectaries, unnecessary.
Of Things Necessary to Salvation, respectively to such as are of weaker
Capacities, and of Things Necessary to be owned in order to Salvation by
Christian Societies, as Bonds of Ecclesiastical Communion, is to no Purpose
(unles we Speak of a less or more Explicit Belief, which may be Various
according to a Dark, or Clearer Proposition.) The Reason is; Because All that
God Reveals (and neither more nor less) is One, and the same Respectively to
All, to the Learned, to the Unlearned, to weak and Strong Capacities; Yea, And
to the whole Church also, and this All Acknowedge in every Act of Faith They
have, Though, perhaps, it be less extended to particular Articles. But know, as
is The worth of Faith not in the Extension but in Submission.
now noted, That the true Worth of Faith Consists not so much in the Extensive
Reach of it to more Material Objects, As in an Intensive and Equal Submission
to Gods Veracity in the things He Speaks, which now I yield to by the explicit
Faith I have, And am ready to do more when a Clearer Proposition, and Gods
Command Require it. Whence you se, Though a How far the Faith of the unlearned
is extended.
Rustic has less of the Explicit Belief Then a Learned Clerk; Yet, He want's
not therefore One Grain of Supernatural Faith that Saves all Christians: For His
Faith is, Virtually, as far Extended as any Doctors, And his Infused Habit,
Every whit as Good. If any one cavil at the Distinction of Explicit and
Implicit Faith, He may Correct his Error by this one Example. Give me One that
has read over Holy Scripture, and Descend's by Explicit Faith to every Verity
in it* He Believes well* Another far from That Extensive knowledge, knows some
Verities Revealed There, and Believes them: nevertheless, He Owns All and every
Iota in the Book for Gods Sacred Word. Tell Saving Faith as well found in an
implicit as in an Explicit Belief.
me, I Beseech you; Has not this more Ignorant Man with his less Explicit
Assent, As true Saving Faith as the Other? Yes, most Assuredly, And in the
Sense now Declared, as Far Extended. This is our very Case. Could we Therefore
once Agree about the Proponent of Faith, most Difficulties were ended. These
few Considerations Premised.

4. My first Assertion is. The Distinction usually made Protestants Distinction
of Points more or less Fundamental is false.
by Protestants of Points more or less Fundamental in order to Christians, is
not only Unreasonable, but also very Falls, if we consider the Articles of Faith
subsisting, as it were, or, Essentially Depending upon Gods Eternal Revealing
Verity: For as They are Here, All stand firm alike, And equally sure upon this
Verity. If therefore I Answer All Faith stand's firm upon Divine Revelation.
with my Faith to what this Motive firmly requires, And as undoubtedly Believe,
as God Speak's, I must Assent to all with equal Assurance; nor, can I Believe
some and Disbelieve others, when all are Proposed alike: No, nor make Less, or
more Degrees of Certitude in my Faith. From whence I Infer, That no man, by any
Means or Search whatever, can find out what Articles are Fundamental, what not,
Because There is no Means possible to find that which There is Nothing of the
less or more certitude when God Speak's.
is not to be Found, But Fundamentals and not Fundamentals are not to be found,
And I prove the Minor. Every Revealed Article, is Asserted by an Infinite
Verity; But an Infinite Verity Deliver's all it Speak's with one and the same
Infinite Certainty (where no Degrees of more or less Certitude can have Place)
Ergo, All Articles All revealed Truths therefore are equally certain.
of Faith have one and the same like Infinite Assurance, as They are Spoken by
an Infinite Verity. Consequently one is as Ponderous as another, And Equally
Fundamental, if We (which is only to be Regarded) do Respect the Motive. Again.
If some Articles be Fundamental and others not, it is either Because the
Fundamentals Rely on a Greater Verity, and the Non* Fundamentals on a Less
(which is utterly Falls, for the same Infinite Truth Speak's them all;) Or,
Because, though He delivers all, yet His Pleasure is, That we Esteem of some
more Fundamental Then others, And this is Impossible, Viz. That an Infinite
Verity takes, as it were, the pains to Speak to us and for our Eternal
Salvation, And yet does not Oblige us to Believe Him in what He says, with the
whole It dishonours God not to Believe All He speaks equally,
forces of our Soul. It is, as I have showed, Highly against the Dignity of
God, To engage his Eternal Truth in Speaking to us, And yet have Those He
speak's to, Talk, as if it Mattered not, whether He be Heard or no.

5. You may Reply. Some Things Revealed to us seem light in regard of the
Material Object: For who can Own it as Fundamental an Article of Faith to
Believe that St. Paul left his cloak at Troas, as to Believe the Procession of
the Holy Ghost from the Father and Son also? I Answer. God (as we We cannot
believe the greater Matter, and Disbelieve the lesser without Forfeiture of
Faith.
now Suppose) Speak's both these Verities, Therefore both are Equally True; And
if equally True, I cannot Believe the one upon the Motive of Gods Veracity, and
Disbelieve The other (when Propounded) without a Forfeiture of all Faith. The
Disparity therefore, which Arises here From the Matter Revealed, Imports
nothing to the present Question.

6. You may say Again. The Necessity of Things, which ly in Gods great Design,
and are Absolutely to be Believed, must be taken from the Reference They have
to our last End, which is Eternal Salvation. Answ. I say so too. But General
Talk.
This is only general Talk, and comes not Home to the Question; For, the
Question rightly stated Drives at Particulars, and Ask's how many of those
Precisely have Reference to this last End, or, are Necessary to Salvation
Respectively to All, after a Sufficient Proposition. No Article Revealed can be
Disbelieved.
Catholics Say, the Belief of all is so far Necessary, That not one of All
those revealed Articles can be Disbelieved. Protestants make their Exceptions,
Yet hitherto Sectaries cannot say what Articles are to be excluded as
unnecessary to Salvation.
never Dared to give in a Catalogue of what They except, nor can say, That the
Belief of such and such Articles, are to be excluded as Unnecessary to
Salvation.

7. Nay I Affirm more. It is Impossible for Them by their own Principles to
Exclude any. To prove my Assertion. Observe First. They can no more say by a
true general Proposition: This whole Bible, I have now Sectaries cannot by
their Principles distinguish between Fundamentals and others.
in my Hands, is Gods own Word, and exclude the least Verity in it from being
Gods true Word; Then, They can say by a true general Proposition: All men are
by nature Mortal, and exclude any particular Man from being Mortal. For, as the
Mortality of every particular man makes so far forth This Proposition True,
That if One be by nature Immortal, it is False; so the Truth of every particular
Article in Scripture Verifies so far the other Proposition, To believe
Scripture in a general way, that implies the Covenant of Grace, is necessary to
Salvation.
That if one Article be not Gods true Word, the General Proposition is False
also. Now I Assume. But Protestants say, to Believe Scripture to be the true
Word of God, at least in a General way (which implies the Covenant of Grace and
Faith in Christ) is Indispensably necessary to Salvation; Therefore They must
also Say, To believe every particular Article contained in Scripture, as being
truly Gods Word, is in like manner Indispensably Necessary to Salvation,
Because this General Belief carries as well in The Reason.
it an Owning of every particular Truth in Scripture, as the General Assertion
of All mortal Ascrib's Mortality to every particular man. The Reason is clear.
For as Scripture is not made up of Generalities, But Essentially Scripture
Cansist's of particular Verities.
is constituted of the particular Verities contained Therein; so, if my Faith
truly and intierly Own Scripture for Gods Word, it is Extended to no
Generality in the Object (For there is none) But to particular Verities, Though
the Mode or Tendency of the Act be Faith must be of Particulars.
nos always perfectly Explicit.

8. If you Say. The Argument Here proposed seems Fallacious, Because it Proves
at most, That every little Matter in Scripture may be an Object of Faith, But
no way Inferr's the Belief of them Necessary to Salvation (For it is very
different To Affirm, Such a Thing I may Believe, And another to own the Belief
of The Belief of Every particular in Scripture relates to Eternal Happiness.
it Necessary to Salvation) if this, I say, be the Reply, my Answer is: That,
as well the Belief of every particular Verity in Scripture, has the same
Relation to man's Eternal Happiness, as the general Belief of owning Scripture
for Gods Word has, not only Because the Particular is included in the General,
But chiefly on this other Account, That being a Supernatural Elicit Act of
Faith, it can aim at no other End But man's Supernatural Happiness; For under
this Notion of Supernaturality it Leaves; as it were, the Limits of Nature, and
raises a Soul to Eternal Bliss. Where you se, That, Both the Means and End
Vnivocally Agree in being Supernatural, and are alike suitable To one another.
Permit me to Evidence this Truth further, and Ask, Whether the Denial or
Disbelief of the least Truth The Disbelief of the least matter in Scripture
makes one an Haeretick.
That God Speaks in Scripture (once Owned for his Word, and Sufficiently
Propounded) makes not a Man an Haeretick? Yes most assuredly. For by Denying
That to be True, which He knows God Says is True, He pertinaciously Opposes
himself to an Infinite Veracity. Ergo, The True Act of Faith contrary That which
makes one a Faithful Believer has reference to Salvation.
to this Infidelity of Necessity makes him a Faithful Believer. But that which
necessarily makes him a Faithful Believer has not only Reference to his last
End, But is also necessary to Salvation (for as Infidelity loses Heaven, so
True Faith is Necessary to gain it) Therefore the Belief of every little Article
is not of little, But, in this Sense, of as main Consequence, as the Greatest.
The Belief of Every little matter in the sense now explicated is not Little
And here by The way you may well Reflect upon the Desperate Talk of some Later
Men, who Tell us: That All things contained in Scripture, are not so Necessary
in order to our End, some being at so great a Remove from this End, That the
only Reason of Believing them, is Because they are Contained in Scripture. A
most unworthy saying, Mr. Stilling fleet's Doctrine refuted.
which makes God to have Spoken a Thousand idle Words in Scripture; For, there
They stand uselesly in the Book, without Benefit, without Subserviency or
Relation to any further good, But only to be looked on. You may Read them, and
pass by them as Things wholly Unnecessary to our Final End. A strange Conceit
They frame of Scripture, that make it up (as Ill Apothecaries do sometimes
Physic) of Unnecessary Ingredients.

9. You may Reply. Some Catholics seem to The sense of Divines Concerning
Matters Necessary. per se, and secundarily Necessary.
Divide the Object of Faith into that which is Per se, By it Self Necessary,
And By Accident or, Secondarily Necessary. Ergo, They Acknowledge Fundamental,
and not Fundamental Doctrins in the Sense of the Question now Proposed. I Deny
the Consequence: For, They only hold some Verities to be so Principally
Necessary to the Essence of Christian Faith, That if They had not been Revealed
at All, or, Now were unknown, Christian Religion would absolutely Perish; But it
is not so in Others. For example: Had God never Revealed any thing Touching
Christ our Lord, the Sacred Mystery of the Incarnation, or a Trinity etc. The
very Essence Why called Primacy Objects of Faith.
of our Religion would not have been, And therefore These are called Primary
Objects (Ratione materiae) Because if we have no knowledge or Faith in Christ,
we have no Christian Religion. Contrariwise. Had the Holy Ghost not at all
Inspired the Hagiographers to write much of the Historical part in Scripture
(which is writ) or never Told us that Abraham had two Sons, yet we might have
Known Christ, and perfectly Believed in Him: Such Somethings in regard of the
Matter are not necessary. Though being writ become Necessary.
Verities then, Because of the Matter, are not Per se so Necessary. However,
Being now writ, They are True Objects of Faith, Because God Speak's Them. It is
Therefore one thing to say: These lesser matters (if not writ at all) had not
been necessary to constitute Religion; And another thing to say, Now when They
are writ, and spoken by Almighty God, They do not integrate the total Object of
Faith, But They least matter in Scripture is an Object of Faith.
may be looked on as Parergons, or, as Things void of all Reference to our
Eternal Happiness. It is, I say, Impossible to own them with so poor a Belief,
which, if it be Resolved, Proves No Faith at all. And therefore it is
Impossible, Because, when I say by a General Proposition, I am bound to Believe
firmly All that God Speak's, I cannot but Believe also every Particular
comprised under that General at least implicitly as is Already both Declared
and Proved.

10. My second Proposition is: Although contrary to Sectaries, though we Admit
of the Distinction between Fundamentals and others, cannot make their Doctrine
Good.
Truth, we gratis Permit Protestants to Distinguish between Points Fundamental,
and not-Fundamental, yet They are so unprovided of all means to make good the
Distinction, or to Sever the Fundamentals from the Other, That They shall never
Speak so much as one Word probably on this Subject.

11. Some fraudulently shuffling all of with Generalities, Think They say much,
when nothing is touched on to the Purpose, and Define, First, What ever
Appears to me upon sufficient Enquiry to be Revealed by God, Mr. Stilling
fleets shuffling.
I am bound to Believe it by Virtue of Gods Veracity. First Why am I bound to
Believe twenty Verities in Scripture, when the Belief of them has, as you Say,
no Reference to Eternal Salvation? Why should God oblige me to Believe that
now, which will do me no good Hereafter? Yet farther. You Talk of Enquiry. Tell
He send's us to enquire and says not of whom.
me of whom must we Enquire; of our own Fancies? These lead us, as we se in the
Quakers, to a Thousand Fooleries. Of an Unerring Church? You own, none to
Enquire of. Of Scripture? This Occasion's Error upon Error, And, as Appears
by the Endless Dissentions of Haereticks, may as well lead us to Deny
Fundamentals, as rightly to acknowledge them. They define Pope-like. Secondly:
All things, not equally appearing to all Persons to be revealed by God, the
same measure of necessity cannot be extended to all Persons. The All have not
alike the same Explicit Faith.
Assertion only show's what is Evident, That all Persons cannot have alike the
same Explicit Faith; But it is far of from Proving, That all Gods Verities, when
propounded, have not Relation to Belief, and Salvation Also. Yet this is the
true State of the Question concerning Fundamentals, as Appears by These men,
who put a Difference between some Revealed Points and Others. True Faith
believes all Implicitly.
Those, upon the General Account of Divine Revelation are Necessary; These, of
lesser Reckoning, stand at a great distance from absolute Necessity, We say all
are Necessary when Proposed, yea, and all are Implicitly Believed in every True
Act of Supernatural Faith. 3. They say: An universal Assent to the Will of God,
and Universal Obedience to it, are absolutely and indispensably Necessary to
all Persons, Perfect Obedience is resolved into particular Compliances with
Gods will*
to whom Gods Word is Revealed. The Assertion (though most true) run's on in
Terms too Universal, And must, if it speak of an Efficacious Obedience, be
Resolved into particular Compliances with Gods Will, Otherwise it Destroys it
self: For no Man can say: I now Purpose to yield Obedience to Gods Will, And,
in Sensu Composito of this Volition, Resist his Will in any particular.
Otherwise it destroys it self.
Therefore if it be his Will (as most certain it is) That I Hear Him and Obey
Him in every Particular He Speak's; my Purpose also of Compliance with his
Will, cannot but jointly Embrace, and Extend it self to those Particulars,
either Implicitly, which is don in every due Submission to God, Or, more
Explicitly, when I Hear his Will Propounded in such and such particular Matters.

12. I have already given the Reason hereof. Because, No Generality in Objects.
The Object therefore of Faith includes so many Particulars.
there is no Generality in Objects, The total Object Therefore of my Faith, as
condistinguished from my Act of Believing, includes a part rei, nothing else,
But so many Particulars as God has Revealed. In like manner the Object of my
Obedience, implies a Submission to so many Particular Commands. He Therefore,
who says by a General Act, I Believe all that God And a datiful Obedience
extend's to so many Commands
Speak's, I Obey him in all He Command's, Fasten's upon nothing a part rei,
But on Particular Revealed Verities, and Particular Intimated Commands, nor can
He, by a General Act, more Believe All, and exclude Some, then exclude All and
believe Some. For want of well Pondering this Truth, our Protestants (whilst
they own an Universal Belief of Scripture necessary to He that Believe's
Scripture in General, Believe's every Particular.
Salvation) shall fumble as long as they live in Their Specifying Particular
Fundamentals, Because the Universal owning of Scripture, owns likewise all
Particulars in it. Exclude Particulars, And you make Null the Universal
Proposition.

13. Others Lay this charge on us, to Believe All that God Reveal's in
Scripture, and there we shall surely meet with the Fundamentals of Faith. Answ.
Though we Gratis admit, That all Necessary Points are contained in Scripture,
yet it is too great a Task, Yea, and impossible also, for every Simple Man to
read the Book over. But Suppose this be don, He may not only fall into twenty
Errors concerning Scripture. But also most easily judge that to be Fundamental
which is not, and that not to be Fundamental which is; And if He do so, He has
neither Doctor, nor Prompter at hand, to Vnbeguile him.

CHAP. V.
An Answer to one Reply. More of this Subject.
1. HEre briefly I Answer to a trivial Objection of our Adversaries, who esteem
us Catholics, Though we own an Infallible Church, as far of from An Objection
grounded on a mistake.
knowing the Fundamentals of it (or giving in a Distinct Catalogue of them) as
They are after their Reading Scripture. The Objection (grounded on a Mistake)
is Forceles: For, with one Unanimous and equal Submission We Believe all That
the Church The Church can Declare it self farther, when doubts occurr,
Scripture cannot.
Proposes, which, when Doubts occurr, is Ready, Able, and Sufficient to
Declare it self. Scripture can not do so, As is Manifest by the endless
Dissentions of Protestants in this very Question of Fundamentals. Now, He That
believes All that the Church Propofeth as Points of Faith, Admits likewise of
every Particular, and with the same Certitude, Though, Perhaps, He clearly
Distinguishes not: between Matters of Faith, and Others; But this
Distinguishing (when exactly don) only Perfect's Explicit Faith, And therefore,
as it Gives no Addition of more Faith absolutely Necessary to Salvation, so the
Want of it Deprives us not of any thing necessary to that End of Happiness. The
Reason hereof is clear out of the Precedent Discourse: For, He who by an
Universal Assent Admits of all that the Church Teaches as Faith, cannot but
Implicitly Believe This Particular, if it he of Faith, One may doubt whether
the Church proposes such a matter as Faith, and yet believe it implicitly if
it be of Faith.
Though He yet know's not so much, yea, and may sometimes rationally Doubt,
whether the Church Proposes it or no, as a Matter of Faith. So Schoolmen, of
different Judgments, often Dispute whether such and such Points are de Fide,
And because They are contrary in their Positions, either These or Those
Contendents (light where it will) err Materially; yet, I say, The Erring Party,
who Admits of All that the Church Proposes, as Faith, to be de Fide, Believes
Implicitly (upon his Universal Assent to All) The very A man may believe
Implicitly what by Error he denies Explicitly.
Matter, which He by Error Explicitly Denies, yea, and has as True Faith as
the Other That Hitt's on Truth. Neither is there so much as a seeming
Contradiction between These two Judgments, of True Implicit Faith, and an
Untrue Material Explicit Error: For the one is No Contradiction between true
implicit Faith and untrue material Explicit Error.
so far from Opposing the other, That the Erroneous Judgment in Actu exercito
yields to Truth, and resolved into all the strength it Has, says no more but
This, by a Conditional Tendency. If what I Affirm be not contrary to the
Churches Doctrine. And hence it is, that Catholics (God be ever Blessed) do not
only easily lay down their material Errors, when the The Reason.
Church Declares against them, But most usually also, in Their learned Volumes,
submit All They write to Learned Catholics submit to the Churches Censure.
Sectaries submit to nothing but Fancy.
the Judgment of the Church, which Implies a tacit Retractation, or an
unsaying of whatever shall be Censured, or, Sentenced to be Amiss. O, would our
Protestants Acknowledge such a Living Judge of Controversies, They might make
excellent good Use of Their Bible; But to snatch that Pure Book from Catholics
(as they have Don) And afterward to Debase it, to Prostitute it to every Wild
Fancy, That shall pleas to meddle with it, is plainly to Abjure and Renounce
all Possibility of either knowing what Fundamentals are; Or, of ever Arriving
to better Settlement in Faith, then now we se, which indeed is none at all.
Therefore though they Protest a Thousand times, That they Believe every Thing in
Scripture with the like Implicit Faith, as we do the Church, it Avail's
nothing, whilst every Private man makes that Book to speak what he would have
it, That is, what his Fancy Pleases.

2. Others finally have Recours to the Apostles Creed, and say All things there
(as They Relate to The Belief of the Apostles Creed not Sufficient for
Salvation.
Scripture) and no more, are Fundamental Points of Faith. First: Admit of the
Assertion, without any likelihood of Proof, Protestants have little to glory
in; For, There is not so much as One Article of their Religion, as Protestancy
(Observe it well) contained in the Apostles Nothing of Protestancy in the
Apostles Creed.
Creed, Therefore nothing of their Religian, as Protestancy, can be Accounted
Fundamentally Necessary to Salvation. 2. One may Admit of All those Express
Words in the Creed. I Believe in Jesus Christ His only Son, and be an
Haeretick; For the Arians grant this, and yet are Haereticks; Because They Deny
the High Godhead of Christ, and Consubstantiality likewise with his Father,
which are not evidently deduced out of those Words. And Here, I would gladly
know of Protestants, when either Arian Let it please Sectaries to answer this
Question plainly.
or any Sectary That does not only Abstract from Christ's supreme Divinity, But
Positively also Abjures it, yet in some manner frigidly own's Christ for the
only Son of his Father, whether, I fay, such an One may be Reckoned of as a
True Believer in Fundamentals?

3. Though the Creed Compriseth much in that One Article, I believe the Holy
Catholic Church (And therefore some Ancient Fathers most Deservedly Magnify the
Protestants cannot plainly point at the Church which the Creed Call's Catholic.
compleatnes of it, as an Excellent Summary of Christian Faith) yet Protestants
for their lives, cannot say, what or where this Catholic Church is, And it is
very hard to oblige me to the Belief of a Church, which is neither known nor
can be Pointed out. Now were it known, a great Difficulty yet remain's to be
Examined, Viz. Whether God will ever Preserve this Church Infallible in the
Delivery of Fundamental Doctrine, or (supposing His present Decree) Whether He
can so leave it to a Possibility of Erring in Fundamentals, That Christians may
absolutely loos all Faith, both of Christ and Creed? If This Second be
Sectaries are pressed whether They grant or Deny a Church infallible in
Fundamentals.
Granted, We have no Assurance, after all Christ's Promises to the contrary, But
that Christianity may totally Perish before the Worlds End. If they Say, God
will ever Preserve a Church Infallible in Fundamentals, They must jointly
Acknowledge a Continued Vnextinguished Society of Christians, whereof some are
Pastors, and Teach Infallibly these Fundamentals, and some Sectaries must solve
their own Difficulties.
Hear them also Infallibly. I would have these plainly Marked out, And withal
have Sectaries know, That All their Difficulties Proposed against an Infallible
Church must be solved by them, if they grant such Infallible Teachers of
Fundamentals, as is largely Baptism and the Eucharist not in the Creed.
Proved Above. 4. To Omit, that the Creed Delivers no Explicit Doctrine
concerning Baptism and the Eucharist (Though the Belief of these are also
Necessary to Salvation) Thus much I observe, That Catholics, Catholics Admit
of the Creed without Glosses.
without Glosses and Interpretations, own the candid and plain Obvious
Expressions of the Creed in All, and Every particular Article of it: Therefore
They are at least (if not more) as good Believers of the Creeds Fundamentals as
Sectaries, And, if (which we Deny) They Err by Ignorance in lesser Matters, as
Protestants May, and Do Err in Greater, They must yet grant, that the Belief of
Fundamentals is Faith enough to save both Parties. This Supposed,

3. I must Needs have a word with my long forgotten Friend Mr. Poole, and Ask
why He Deem's it such A word with Mr. Poole.
a Strict piece of Justice, to chafe, as He Does, at a converted Captain, upon
the Account of his changing Religion, as if he were a Lost and Perished Soul?
An Instrument (forsooth) He will Prove ( Append. p. 2.) if not of Gods Mercy to
reduce him to the Truth, from which he is revolted, At least of Gods Justice,
And a Witness on Gods Behalf, to leave him without Excuse. What needed, I say,
so much Ado about Nothing? For both the Captain and all Catholics, whilst they
Believe the Creed Relating to Scripture, are very secure, and Confessedly right
in Fundamentals; Which being Supposed, It is more then Impertinent in the
Protestant, to Keep such a Coyl about lesser Matters, Protestants keep a Coyl
to no Purpose about matters not Essential.
or, to Reduce the main Controversy between us, to a Trial of That which least
Concern's us, and cannot, as they think, be Decided by any Received Principle.
Viz. Whether They or we, are better settled in non-Fundamentals, which imports
so little (if our Protestants say true) That the Knowing of them is scarce
worth our Knowledge, Because They are wholly Unnecessary to Salvation, and Make
us neither more, nor les, Essential Members of Christ's mystical Body, The
Catholic Church.

4. From this Concession of our Adversaries I infer, That no Protestant can
probably go about to Draw any If the Belief of the Creed be Sufficient,
Protestants cannot draw Catholics from their Religion. Superfluities, though
granted, hinder not Salvation.
Intelligent Catholic from his Religion. First: Because He is as Firm in the
Belief of Fundamentals as Any Sectary whoever, And that will save his Soul.
Now, If they say we Want no Fundamentals, but abound in Superfluities, It is
only said, and not Proved: However grant all, though contrary to Truth, These
Redundancies Hinder not Salvation, and may well be Listed amongst
Non-Necessaries. 2. No Catholic voluntarily Opposes Himself to so much as to
one Iota of Gods Word Sufficiently Proposed, nor, can He, and Remain Catholic.
3. He cannot Thwart his Judgment of Discerning, or, go Against his Conscience
in Believing Catholic Religion; For by Doing either, He loses Faith. 4. As
long as He is A Cordial and Sincere Believer of the Roman Catholic Faith, He
can have no Evident Demonstrations against it, Or Tax this Church of Error,
or, if in Conscience He Do so, eo ipso, He cease's to be a Member of This
Church, And is no longer Orthodox.

5. Yet I say More. It is impossible for a Prudent A Prudent man cannot but se
the great Evidence of Catholic Religion.
Man (secluding Gross And most culpable Ignorance, which makes him Imprudent)
to Shut his Eyes, or, not to Se Those clear Evidences, Those visible Notes,
Those glorious Marks and Characters of Truth, whereby the Church of Christ is
made manifest to the View of All. The wise Providence of God will have this
Discernibility or Perspicuity of it both Apparent, and obvious To Ordinary
Prudence. Otherwise (which is impious) We might blame His Goodness, and Tell
Almighty God. You, O Lord, Assure us in Scripture of our Final Beatitude, But
you have (with it) left us in Darkness concerning the Way and Means to Find How
one of Prudence may plead.
it out, And to Attain this Happiness. What Avail's it to know the End, And to
be Invincibly Ignorant of the Means? All, who profess Christianity are not True
Believers. How shall we Discern the Haeretical Societies from Other? Christ
Answers: Your Way, By the Light and What Answer Satisfies.
Guidance of Those Marks of Truth which manifested me, when I first Taught
Christianity, and yet Beautify my only Church, is so Clear, and Evident without
Dispute. Vt nec stulti errent per ^am, That is hard For the most Ignorant To
miss of it, much more For the Prudent.

6. No Conviction therefore, No evident Demonstration can so forcibly Press upon
a Catholic, As to make him to Desert His Faith, And if He stand not evidently
Catholics cannot, unles Evidently convicted of Error, which is impossible,
Desert Their Faith.
convicted of manifest Error, it were wors then Madness in him, yea, and
Damnable also to Change his Religion. Let Sectaries therefore Stentor-like Cry
out, Till They grow Hoars again ( Mr. Poole all along smooth's his Discourse
with such Harsh Eloquence) O ye blind Papists, O ye Seduced Men, when will ye
open your Eyes etc? The Solid Catholic Answers. Railing is no Reason: Your
Ancestors and mine were Papists Before You, or, Your Haeresy were in Being. I
believe my Creed as Their solid Answer to All Opponents.
well as you, I Admit of every Word in Scripture as well as you, I go no more
against my Judgment, or Conscience (nor perhaps so much) as you Do. Wherein
then am I faulty? Nay, I must yet Tell you More. Though (by a Supposed
Impossibility) The Church whereof I am a Member should err, and I jointly be in
Error with it, Yet as long as the Error is unavoydable And invincible in me
(whereof my Conscience Reproves me not) it is, in your own Principles, no matter
of Damnation, Because Ignorance excuses me. Therefore, as The Catholic Every way
without blame.
I am every way without blame in my Belief, so I cannot be reclaimed from it by
you.

7. But, says the Catholic: Give me a Company of men who Admit of Christ, and
so far Deny His Church, That He Evidently Convinces Sectaries of Their Errors
and most unhappy forsaking the Ancient Church.
They cannot say where it is; That will Reform Their Elder Brethren, Before
They have Certainty of Their own Half well made Reformation; That think
Themselves wiser then all the now Living, And the Ancient deceased Defenders of
the Roman Catholic Church; That have causlesly Separated Themselves from an
Ancient Church, And Yet are not joined to Any Society of Christians, which
Bears the Resemblance of a Catholic Community: Who, never yet had so much as
one General Council to Direct Them, no Infallible Oracle to Teach them,
Protestancy described, as it is.
No Motives, No Miracles, to Evidence their new Faith: Who make every private
Person a Church, Every man's Reason Judge of High Mysteries, that transcend
Reason: Who Take and Leave what They list in Matters of Faith upon no other
Warrant, But their own wilful Choice: Who seemingly own an Universal Church,
But yield Obedience to None: Who are Always seeking for Truth, without Hope of
finding it; Always Teaching more Learned Then Themselves, And yet to this day,
Know not what they Teach: Who Too unluckily spend the few Days of Their Life in
Scribbling Controversies, Though they se it is to no Purpose (For besides a high
Offense given to God) All The Credit They gain in the Christian World Abroad,
(And their Repute at home, amongst intelligent Persons is no better) Amounts to
This Ignominy, That unfortunatly They Patronize a late invented Haeresy. which
at last They must quit, or quite Despair of Salvation. Give me, I say, such a
sort of Men, They are not only battered and Bafled, But Also by most Pressing
Arguments (Drawn both from Authority and Reason) May be evidently convinced;
yea, And (if Gods Grace want not) easily Reclaimed from Their Errors, If
Perverseness in some, and Ignorance in others (I mean the Ignorance of Pride)
Hinder not Their Conversion. But to Withdraw a Knowing Catholic, upon Rational
Inducements From How They have gained some Prosylits.
his Religion, is Impossible. It is true, They have Gained some Prosylits
(Unnatural Children to Their Ancient Mother Church) But how? Alas Too indulgent
to Flesh and Blood, they were allured by Sensual, not Rational Motives. The
Truth is Evident. I say no more.

8. To End this Chapter of Fundamentals, Be Three things to be noted in this
Question of Fundamentals.
Pleased to Observe these Three Things. 1. If we Consider the Motive of Faith,
which is Gods Veracity; what ever He Speaks little or great, is with one and
the same Respect and Profound Reverence to be Assented to, And here is no
Difference between Fundamentals, and Others. 2. If we speak of the Proposition
One concerns the formal Object of Faith.
of Faith; Herein also There is no Difference: For, no man can Believe a
Fundamental, Doctrine Sooner Then Not Fundamental, unles the one as well as the
Other be Sufficiently Proposed. 3. If we The other relates to its proposal.
Speak of the Matter Revealed, I have showed Above, That some Points in
Themselves, or Per se, More Essentially Constitute, Yea, And more Conduce to
Piety Then others: But, This makes no Distinction between The Third to the
matter believed.
Fundamentals, and not Fundamentals in the true sense of our Question, Because
the lesser as well as the greater, Are upon Gods Testimony Equally Believed, in
every true Universal Act of Supernatural Faith, whereby we say, All is to be
Assented to, That God Reveal's.

CHAP. VI.
Some Few Propositions of A late Writer are Briefly Examined. His Discourse of
Fundamentals Destroy's Protestant Religion.
1. I Say Briefly: For, I leave much to be Answered Mr. Stillingfleets
Propositions refuted.
by more Learned Adversaries. One Proposition is. The very Being of a Church*
does suppose the Necessity of what is required to be Believed in order to
Salvation. Very good, but what then? Marry This follows. If It was a Church, it
Believed all Things Necessary before it Defined; How comes it Therefore to make
more Things Necessary by its Definition? First, A word ad Hominem. Protestants
Add to what They conceive Essential to a Church, a company of new unproved
Negative Articles. They proceed not consequently to their Principles.
Protestants, Have now a Church Essentially Constituted, or Have not: If not,
Protestancy is no Christian Religion. If They have such a Church, why do They
Add to that which They Conceive to be the Essentials of it, A Cluster of new
Articles never owned by any Orthodox Society? For example: No Sacrifice, no
Purgatory, no Transubstantiation etc. Could they proceed Consequently to their
Principles, they should neither Deny a Sacrifice, a Purgatory etc. nor Assert
them, But hold them mere Parergons, Because They have a Church Essentially
founded without them. Why therefore, Do They either Deny or Affirm? Why meddle
They at all with these Articles? Why load They Protestancy with the Unnecessary
Burden of so many unproved Negatives, when their Church has its whole Being,
before these Negatives can be thought of?

2. In Catholic Principles, both the Proposition and Question are most Simple:
For, we own more Essentials In Catholic Principles The Proposition and
Question are more then simple.
then Sectaries Do, and Therefore say: As there was a Church in Being before any
Word of Scripture was writ, and consequently the Writing of Scripture Added no
new Being to it, Though it declared Things more Explicitly; so in like manner,
The present Definitions of the Church Alter nothing of the Ancient Foundations
of Faith, But only declare more As Scripture when first writ, altered not the
Antecedent Churches Doctrine, So the Church now Alters nothing of the Ancient
Faith.
explicitly Christ's Verities contained in Scripture and Tradition. And this
Power the Church ever Had in all Ages. Mark well what is said here; For it
Clear's All the following Fallacies of our Adversaries Discourse.

3. A Second Proposition. What ever Church own's, those things which are
Antecedently Necessary to the Being of a Church, cannot so long cease to be a
true Church. And here, They say, we must Distinguish those Things in the
Catholic Church which give it Being, from those Things which are the Proper
Acts of it, as the Catholic Church. Very true. But the only Question They wave
the Difficulty.
is, How much precise Doctrine That is, which gives Being to the Catholic
Church? This our Adversaries (Content with a general Word of a Churches Being)
wave, whilst Catholics Catholics say, All that God Reveal's is Necessary to
the Being of the Church.
say plainly, All that God Reveal's, and is taught by the Church as Revealed,
is so Essentially necessary to the very Being of it, That not one Article can
be rejected after a Sufficient Proposal. Dare Protestants say thus much of
Their Negative Articles? No Purgatory, no Real Presence, no Sacrifice etc. Or,
own these as Essentials of Their Church of Protestancy? To that Distinction of
the proper Acts of the Church (And One is the due Administration of Sacraments)
from the Faith connaturally precedes the use of Sacraments.
Being of it, I answer the Faith of Sacraments, which Connaturally Preced's the
use or exercise of them, is most Essential to the Being of a Church, and This
Belief every true Christian Has.

4. A third Proposition. The Union of the Catholic Unity of the Church, and
the Agreement are the same.
Church depend's upon the Agreement of it in making the Foundations of its
Being to be the Grounds of its Communion. For, the Unity being intended to
preserve the Being, there can be no reason given, why the bonds of union should
extend beyond the Foundation of its BEING, which is, the owning the Things
necessary to Salvation. It is not worth the while to catch at these improper
Expressions. The Union of the Church Depend's upon the Agreement of it: For,
Nothing certainly Depend's on it Self* now, the Union of the Church whether we
speak of the Objective Doctrine, or of Faith tending into that Doctrine, is
Essentially its Agreement. Therefore Properly it Depend's not on Agreement, But
really is Agreement, As truly as Vnum, Verum, and Bonum Are Ens, a Part rei.
Whence I Say: Unity is not intended to Preserve the Being of the Church, as a
Cause preserves its Effect; For Unity essential to the Being, is The very Thing
Preserved Unity essential to the Being of a Church is the Thing preserved by
Almighty God.
by Almighty God, And therefore cannot Preserve an Antecedent conceived Being
without Unity. But let this pass. Consider what follows. They say: The Bonds of
Union should not extend beyond the Foundation of the Churches Being etc. Very
good. What is next? This it is: Whatsoever Church imposes the Belief of other
Things necessary to Salvation, which were not so Antecedently necessary to the
Being of the Catholic Mere Talk without proof.
Church, Break's the Unity of it; and those Churches, who desire to Preserve
Unity, are bound thereby not to have Communion with it, so long as it does so.
Here is little said, less explicated, and least of all Proved. First, they say
not: How much Doctrine precisely makes up the Catholics extend not the unity of
the Church beyond its Foundations, for They Believe so much as God has
revealed, and no more.
Churches Being, nor shall ever tell us by their Principles. 2. They name not
the guilty Persons that Extend the Union of the Church beyond its Foundations.
Are they Catholics who Believe all that God Reveal's, and is declared by the
Church to be Revealed? Or Sectaries, That have neither Church, nor Scripture
for any Article of their Protestancy? 3. If they Hold themselves to be the
Preservers of the Churches Unity, They must prove it by strong Principles, And
first show Positively by Scripture, That they have just so much as is Necessary
and sufficient to Salvation, Before Sectaries who have neither Church nor
Scripture for one word of Protestancy, Most unreasonably pretend to be the
Preservers of the Churches Unity.
they make us Guilty of any Breach of the Churches Unity. This will be a hard
Task: For if they say, We Break the Churches Unity in believing a Sacrifice, a
Purgatory etc. They are obliged to prove, and by plain Scripture, That either
their contrary Negatives are to be Believed, or, That neither our Positives,
nor their Negatives merit an Act of Faith, which is Impossible. For, What
Scripture says we are neither to Believe a Sacrifice, nor the Contrary.

5. In the next place they come to Solve the Enigma, to explicate the main
Subject of the present Dispute, And it is to Tell us what those Things are,
Their own saying is the only Proof.
which ought to be Owned by all Christian Societies as Necessary to Salvation,
on which the Being of the Catholic Church Depend's. Happy were they could they
Unridle the Mystery, Protestants cannot Show what things are Necessary.
And say what Things are thus Necessary; But our Author still run's on in
Generals, and Determin's nothing. Be pleased to hear his Resolution.

6. Nothing ought to be owned as necessary to Salvation by Christian Societies,
But such things which by the Judgment of all those Societies, are Antecedently
necessary to the Being of the Catholic Church. No man, I think, knows to what
that word, Antecedently, relates, nor can this Author make sense of it. One may
Guess what he would be at. He will Perhaps Say: When all Christian They fall
upon impossibilities.
Societies stand firmly united in one Judgment concerning the Being and the
Essentials of a Church, then we are right in These Essentials. Answ. But this
was never yet seen, nor will be seen as is more largely declared Chap. 2. n. 1.
whither I remit the Reader for further Satisfaction. He Adds two Things more.
One is, There cannot be any Reason given, why any Thing else should be judged
Necessary to the Churches Communion (He means Who is to Judge him that says He
Dissents not?
in Necessary Articles of Faith) But what all those Churches, who do not
manifestly Dissent from the Catholic Church of the first Ages are agreed in,
as Necessary to be Believed by all. My God! What Confusion Have we here? Where
is the Protestant that can Assure us, without Protestants cannot show what the
Primitive Church believed.
Dispute, what the Catholic Church of the first Ages positively Believed and
positively Rejected? Could this one Point be cleared without Endless Debate, A
better Union might be Hoped for; But herein both We and Sectaries Dissent, as
is Proved above. Therefore by No Appealing to the primitive Church without the
Tradition of the present Church.
their Appealing to the Ancient Church, (whilst They Abstract from the
Tradition of a present Catholic Church) They go about to Prove, Ignotum per
ignotius, And convince nothing.

7. They Add a second Consideration which may be reflected on. Ad perpetuam rei
memoriam, And it is to Memorable Doctrine.
this Sense. After Their Telling us, That in Case of great Divisions in the
Christian World, any National Church may Reform it self (as is Supposed,
England Men uncertain in all They say, take on to Teach, wherein Faith is abused.
Has don) and Declare its Sense of those Abuses in Articles of Religion; yea,
and Require of Men a Subscription against those Abuses etc. They go on: We are
to consider that there is a great Difference between the Owning some
Propositions in order to Peace, and the Believing of them as Necessary to
Salvation. Now Mark what Follows. No Orthodox Church Ever excepted against our
Church Doctrine.
The Church of Rome Imposes new Articles of Faith to be believed (A most
unproved Assertion) which Articles are excepted against by other Churches (name
the Orthodox Church that ever excepted against them, it cannot be don) But the
Church of England makes no Articles of Faith, Mark the Doctrine.
But such as have the Testimony and Approbation of the whole Christian World of
all Ages, and are acknowledged to be such by Rome it self, and in other things
she requires Subscription to Protestant Religion reduced to Inferior Truths.
them, Not as ARTICLES of Faith, but as inferior Truths, which she expects
Submission to in order to Her peace and tranquillity. And thus much the late
Primate of Ireland expresses to be the Sense of the Church of England as to
her thirtynine Articles.

8. Be it known to all men by These Presents, That the Church of England, so
far, as it maintains these The English Church consisting of Negatives is no
Church.
Negative Protestant Articles of No Sacrifice, No Real Presence, No Purgatory,
is here confessedly owned to have no Articles of Faith Revealed by Almighty
God, And therefore so far, It Is neither any Christian or Catholic Church,
Because these Negatives (the very marrow of Protestancy) are now Degraded, And
Thrown down from their Ancient Height of Articles, to the low Rank of a few
Humble, and inferior Truths.

9. But let us go on. Who Assures you, Sir, of Inferior Truths are none of
Gods Truths.
Their being Truths at all? God, you say, that Reveal's nothing but most
Supreme Truths, Own's none of Them. No Orthodox Church, no Ancient Council, no
Unanimous Consent of Fathers, no, nor your own Synods in England, (Though
without Proof They Suppose them to be Truths) ever yet Defined them, as you Two
young Popes do (Doctor Bramhal and your Self) to be Truths of an Inferior Rank
and Order. Be it how you will, I am sure, the Declaration before these Articles
says, they are Articles of Religion, These Authors clash with the 39. Articles.
and contain the true Doctrine of the Church of England Agreeable to Gods Word.
If so, Gods, Word is Agreeable to these Articles, and Proves them. Again. Some
of your own Coat, and perhaps as Learned as you, Call them Articles of Faith.
Certainly they These Negatives of the 39. Articles are neither Articles of
Faith, nor Inferior Truths.
are none of our Faith, Ergo they are yours, or no Bodies. Upon whom then shall
we Rely for the last Definition? I Will tell you. Both the Assertions of their
being either Articles of Faith, or Inferior Truths, stand tottering without
Proof or Principle, upon the sole Fancy of those who say so.

10. 3. If these Dull Negatives be only Voted for Peace among you, without
Reference to your Faith, your Church is Essentially Hypocritical, which may
Believe The English Church is essentially Hypocritical.
one Thing, And must Profess an Other. I now say no more, having Told you
enough to this Sense in another place. Though all the Protestants in England do
not only Dissent in Judgment from the owning of These Protestants may curse
These Negative Articles, and yet besound in Faith.
Negatives; Though they are plain Papists in Heart, yea, and Interiourly curse
and Anathematize all your new Articles (if the exterior Demeanor be fairly
good, All is Fine) They may be still looked on, as Blessed Children of your new
Negative Church. The sequel is undeniable; For, They may Believe all that
Scripture says (And this is Faith enough to Salvation.) And yet Anathematize
your Negatives, not at all contained in Scripture, And wholly unnecessary to
Salvation.

11. Yet farther. You Protestants Endlesly Talk A hard Question proposed to
Sectaries.
of Reforming us Papists by Scripture. Speak once plainly and Tell us. How can
you go about such a work as to reclaim us by Scripture, To a Belief of your
Negatives, when you have not one Syllable of Gods Word for Them? For, if you
have Scripture, They are Superior Truths Revealed by God, and consequently
Articles of Faith: If you have no Scripture, why Preach you falls Doctrine, why
Teach you that you can draw Us from our old Faith to your New Negative
Religion, by plain Scripture? No Protestant shall Answer to It cannot be
Answered.
this short Demand. 4. You cheat the World when you Offer to Resolve
Protestants Faith, which is no more Resolvable into Divine Revelation then
Arianism Protestants resolving Faith, a mere Cheat.
is, Because you must now confess that God never spoke Word of Protestancy, as
Protestancy, in the whole Bible. Let therefore the world Judge, whether it be
not a pure Cheat to give a Title of the Protestants way of Resolving Faith, and
then leave that, which the Title Promises, To talk of Resolving a Faith in
Communi, which stand's in no need of your Resolution.

12. To see this more Evidenced, And to end with these mere Nothings of
Sectaries. Our now Author Tell's us, That the English Church, makes no Articles
of Faith, But such as have the Testimony and Approbation of the whole Christian
world of all Ages, yes, And are Acknowledged by Rome Protestant Church no more
a Church then an Arian etc.
it self. If this be so, it is no more an English, then a Church of Arians, of
Pelagians, And of all condemned Haereticks. For, this man would say, That a
Faith common to All called Christians, without Believing more, is the English
Faith, and Sufficient to acquire Heaven. Mark the Proposition; And ask first,
what is now become of the The Arian and English Faith agree in Doctrine common
to all Christians.
Protestants way of Resolving Protestants Faith? Next, (and most justly) call
it a mere Fancy, A new coined Haeresy contrary to the whole Christian World;
For, neither Scripture, nor Councils, nor Fathers, nor any particular Orthodox
or Haeretical Church, much less the consent of the whole Christian World, Owned
the Belief of that Abstract Doctrine, wherein all Haereticks Agree to be
sufficient to Salvation. A new coined Haeresy, contrary to All.
The whole Christian World never yet said to Believe in Christ, Abstracting
from His Godhead, and Two Natures, is Sufficient. Catholics hold the Belief of
a Sacrifice and Transubstantiation etc. Necessary to Salvation; And all
condemned Haereticks as Arians, Monothelits No Haereticks much less Catholics
Ever yet defended, what our Sectaries here vent upon Fancy only.
and Others, as firmly Adhere to their Particular Haeresies, as to the Abstract
Doctrine of all Christians. Otherwise, they had been wors then mad, to have
Abandoned an Ancient Church for a few supposed Inferior Truths, which, neither
can Vncatholick any (if the common Doctrine of all Christians be enough) nor
make Them in Reaelity wors, or better Christians. And here by the way, you se
the Hideous sin of Sectaries, who merely for a Company of Inferior Truths (if
yet They were Truths) have shamefully Deserted The true Mother Church that made
Their Progenitors The sin of Sectaries, who have troubled ^ the world for a
company of supposed Inferior Truths.
to be Christians. I say, If They were Truths: For, I utterly Deny the False
Supposition, And therefore press our Adversaries to speak to the Cause: That is,
to come to Proofs and Principles whereby it may Appear That These Negative
Doctrins, No Sacrifice, no Praying for the Dead etc. Merit so much as the very
name of Inferior Truths. These Negatives cannot be proved even by Their wonted
weak way of Arguing Negatively. We Read not of a Sacrifice, or praying for the
Dead. For there is no man that Reads Antiquity, But he Find's these Doctrins
positively Asserted.

13. From what is now said, These Sequels undeniably follow. First, that
Protestants cannot Resolve Protestants Faith but Fancy. The Reason.
their Faith But into Fancy only; For, if they make the common Doctrine of all
Christians only to be Their sufficient Faith for Salvation, and Resolve that
into its Principles, both Fancy and Haeresy lie at the very Bottom of the
Resolution. And if they Go about to Resolve Their Negative Articles, The whole
Analysis, the Regress, the Reduction of Them, will come at last to no other
Principle, But to the sole Fancy of Sectaries, who call them Articles of Faith,
or Inferior Truths. It follows 2. If the English Church makes The English
Church contradicts the whole Christian World.
no Articles of Faith, But such as have the Approbation of the whole Christian
World of all Ages (Excluding others) It does not only Contradict the whole
Christian World, whose particular Communities owned the Belief of more Doctrine
necessary; But has neither And Therefore has no Faith at all.
Faith of those Abstract Articles now Believed, nor any Faith at all Sufficient
to Salvation, as is largely proved in the 2. Chap. If Finally, to Assoil These
Difficulties, Sectaries will Restrain that Ample Term of the whole Christian
World to their imagined Catholic Church in the Air, They are to specify the
Particular Societies of this vast Church, And when that is Don, They will find
no Abstract Doctrine common to There never had been Haeresy in the world, might
Faith common to all be sufficient to Salvation.
all Christians Admitted of By any, Sufficient to gain Heaven: For, were this
true, There had never been Haereticks or Schismatics in the World, whilst
Christ only (Though his Divinity be denied) is owned in a general Way. Whereof
more in the 3. Chap.

14. Here I Will only propose one Question to our Adversaries. When they
positively Teach, That, that which our Savior gave his Apostles in his last
Supper, and Priests now consecrate Daily, was, and is no more But a Sign, a
Figure only of Christ's Body, My Question, I say, is. Whether, Their Positive
owning of a Sign, or Figure only, Be an Article of their Faith, or no more, But
One of their Inferior supposed Truths? If this later; They never Had nor can
have any determinate A Dilemma that cannot be answered.
Faith of this Sacred Mystery, which yet God has most certainly Revealed unto
us in Holy Scripture; And consequently They believe nothing of the Blessed
Sacrament by Divine Faith, For, Inferior Truths are no Articles Inferior
Truths are not Articles of Faith.
of Belief with Them. Contrariwise, if They say the Belief of a Sign, or Figure
only, is one of their Articles of Faith, And the Thing Believed an Object of
Faith: They must certainly eat their own Words, and confess, That the English
Church makes new Articles of Faith, And such, as never Had the Approbation of
the whole Christian World, much less of Rome it Self; For the whole Christian
World of all Ages never Believed so. Some perhaps will Answer: They Believe in
General Christ's own Words Some Sectaries believe they know not what.
to be true, Though They know not well what he meant, when he said. This is my
Body. Answer. If they know not what he spoke, why do They charge Idolatry on
us. By the force of their Inferior supposed Their inconsequences.
Truths, for Adoring Christ in the Sacrament? I am sure Arius of old was an
Haeretick, For Denying the High Godhead of our Savior, upon the Uncertainty of
his supposed Superior Truths; And Sectaries are now in a wors They are in a
wors Condition Then Arians.
Case, whilst they contradict all Orthodox Churches in the Belief of this
Sacrament, And make us Idolaters, Merely upon the Uncertainty of their imagined
Inferior Truths.

15. Another Proposition is Thus. Nothing ought to be imposed as a necessarij
Article of Faith to be believed by all, but what may be evidently propounded to
all Persons, as a Thing which God did require the explicit belief of. Observe
the Vnexplicated words, Evidently Propounded to all Persons. Who must propound
these Articles of Faith? Must God, Angels, or men's private Fancies Do it? No.
The Oracle of Truth Christ's own Christ Church Can only propose Faith unto us.
Church (find it where you can) is both to Propose Faith to us, and to Decide
all Difficulties when they Arise among us, as is Already Proved. Submit to
This, and all Controversies are Ended. Here is also another loos Proposition.
Nothing ought to be required as a necessary Article of Faith, but what has
been believed and received for such by the Catholic Church of Another
Proposition too General and insignificant.
all Ages. Sr, say you plainly where this Catholic Church was in all Ages, and
tell us exactly How many Articles it Held Necessary, and sufficient to
Salvation, And we shall Drive you out of your Generalities, which Prove just
nothing, To a more open and Plain They run on in General's.
Doctrine, whereof you are as much afraid, as the Devil of Holy water. We know
not what you mean by the Catholic Church.

16. Well. But the next Assertion will clear all It is sufficient Evidence,
that was not looked on as a necessary Article of Faith, which was not admitted
into the Ancient Creeds. Pray you, prove This sufficient Evidence, by a clear
Principle. Upon what Ground does the The Belief of the Creed not Sufficient etc.
Assertion stand, Distinct from your own Fancy? The Baptizing of Infants, The
Admitting of so many Books for the exact Canon of Scripture, The Belief, all
ought to have of the Holy Eucharist, Are not Explicitly set down in Necessary
Particulars, not Expresses in the Creed.
the Ancient Creeds; Therefore we must have Recours to the Catholic Church both
for the Faith of these, And many other Articles. But we have said enough of
this Subject.

17. You go on. Nothing ought to be judged a necessary Article of Faith, but
what was universally believed by the Catholic Church to be delivered as such
by Christ and his Apostles. Sr, Before this Proposition be cleared you These
Authors say not what is meant by These dark Terms, Believed by the Catholic
Church.
are to Declare, what you Mean by those Terms, Believed by the Catholic
Church. For, if Rightly Suppose, There was never any True Church, But the Roman
Catholic only continued Age after Age, And upon This Supposition Reply (which
is easy) to your Assertion, and the Ten following Points. You Will say, I mistake
your Meaning concerning the very Notion of that Church, which your Fancy makes
Catholic. And, if I license you to Enlarge The Catholic Church as far as you
Pleas, or, To comprise in it All who have had the Name of Christians, Though
otherwise known Haereticks, your, Proposition to us, is de Subjecto non
supponente, of a Subject not Supposable, And the annexed Points are highly
Impertinent. They are to specify what and where This Catholic Church is.
Name Therefore Exactly The Catholic Church upon grounded Principles, and all
is don.

18. After the ending these Negatives, They inquire what we ought Positively to
Believe as Necessary to Salvation, And remit us (without any further Proof but
their own saying) to the Articles of the Ancient A question proposed.
Creeds. This is largely refuted already. Next they propose a question, Whether
any thing, which was not Necessary to Salvation, may by any Means whatsoever
afterward become Necessary, so that the not Believing it Whether The Church
Can Define any Thing anew necessary to Salvation, so that the not believing of
it becomes Damnable?
becomes Damnable. The Question, If I mistake not, Drives at This, To show that
the Church can make no new Definitions of Faith Necessary to Salvation, Because
all Faith Necessary is Antecedently supposed, as it were, laid in The very
Churches Foundation before it Defines, Which Foundations were both Fully and
Solidly laid, when Christ and his Apostles Taught the World; For, the Earth was
full of his Knowledge. He taught his Disciples all things he had heard of his
Father. The Messiah when he came would tell them all things etc. Therefore a
Church solidly Founded, and, before it Defines, The reason of the Doubt.
full of Truth, can make nothing so Necessary to Salvation by a new superadded
Definition, that the not Believing of it, Becomes Damnable. The grounds of
Sectaries showed Null, though the Church made new Definitions


19. Before we Answer the Question, it will be good to show you the Nullity of
our Adversaries Grounds* and the Inconsequences of them. Herein lies the chief
strength of all That Is said. A Church must be a Church before it can Define,
and Consequently There must be a Union in Belief by which The Church is
Constituted in Being, Antecedently to its new Definitions. Very Good. All this
in True, but makes The Reason.
Nothing Against the Church, though it Define anew. I Will prove it, and
Explicate my self by one Instance. In a Kingdom, or Commonwealth, There is
always an Agreement, or Settlement in some great Matters before it Proceed to
make new Laws; yet, It Is not Commonwealths though antecedently settled may make
new Laws.
consequent to say, That the Agreement ought to be so Explicit in all Things,
in all Points, in all particular Matters, that nothing afterward can be Decreed
anew. It is Therefore sufficient, That these new Laws Arise from some first
solid Principles of that Commonwealth, Antecedently settled in Being, And if
this be so, They oblige as Much as the former Conventions Did, when it was
first settled: Though they were not at all mentioned, at the first Founding of
the Commonwealth.

20. Answerably Hereunto, One may say. Christ founded a Church Assisted, as is
here Supposed, by a Spirit of Truth, the Holy Ghost, and first settled it upon
some fewer Principles, from which All other after-Definitions might Proceed, or
be Derived. The The Church assisted by the Holy Ghost Derives new Definitions
from its first Setlement.
Church thus Assisted, Defines anew upon the former Setlement, just as the
Commonwealth makes new Laws, upon its first Agreement. Such Definitions
Therefore, because they Proceed from an Infallible Oracle (call them yet new, or
old as you pleas) Are as certain, and of as great necessity to be Believed, As
those new Laws are Obligatory, and of necessity to be Obeyed. Here is one
Disparity which is not to the Purpose, Viz. That the Commonwealths Laws proceed
from Human Authority, The Churches Definitions from Divine Assistance. Those
oblige under a temporal The parity holds exactly.
Punishment, These under Eternal. But the Parity exactly Hold's thus far. Those
Laws were implicitly and virtually contained in the first grounded setlement of
the Commonwealth, These of the Church in the first setlement of Christianity.
Those may be called New; These may be also called so. Those become Necessary to
be Obeyed; These become Necessary New Laws are to be obeyed, and new
Definitions, if any were, are to be believed.
to be Believed. Now further. As no man Doubt's, But, That the Church may make
new Laws in order to Obedience; so none can but most Unreasonably Doubt of its
Power in Setting forth new Definitions. It is very True: Here may be much of a
Quaestio de Nomine, Whether They are to be called Old or New, Because of their
different Respects. Relating to the first settled Upon different respects these
Definitions may be called either new or old.
Foundations of Christian Doctrine, from whence They Proceed, They may take a
Denomination and be called Old, Because Radicated in Those old certain
Principles. But, if we consider them as more Ample, Express, and significant
Declarations of Gods Eternal Truths, They may, without Offense, or Clashing, in
the least with Church-Doctrin, be called New Definitions. Thus much is Briefly
said, to show how groundles our Adversaries Grounds are.

21. But we will not leave the Difficulty Thus. To Answer therefore with more
satisfaction, Be pleased to note. It is one Thing to own a Church perfectly
Founded, Two things to be noted.
and fully Instructed in all things Necessary to Salvation: And an Other, to
suppose that all know explicitly what That Perfect founded Doctrine is, which
God will have to be believed, as Necessary to Salvation. This later Requires a
clear Proposition made by some Oracle of Truth of the necessary Doctrine, As is
evident in Scripture it self: For, though I own all that Scripture says to be
True in the Sense intended by the Holy Ghost, yet, I must learn by a sure
Teacher, what it says in a hundred difficil Passages.

22. Now to Question, Whether any thing which was not Necssary to Salvation,
may Afterward become so Necessary, that the not Believing it is Damnable etc.
I Answer. The Question answered.
Nothing is now Necessary to Salvation, After the Churches Definition, which
was not Necessary Before, yea, and Believed by the Apostles Themselves. The
ground of my Assertion is: Because the Apostles immediately Illuminated The
Apostles the first and best knowing Masters of Divine Mysteries.
by Christ our Lord, were made Partakers of His Divine Mysteries; They had
Primitias Spiritus, the First Fruits of the Spirit; Believed as we believe,
Taught as we Teach, and never Delivered Doctrine contrary to the Church in
After-Ages. Hence Divines commonly Hold, That the Church properly speaking The
Church makes no new Articles of Faith, but only declares more explicitly, what
was Anciently of Faith.
makes no new Articles of Faith, But only Declares more Significantly and
Expressly what Those well Instructed Masters of the Church ( Christ's own
Disciples) Both Believed, and upon several Occasions Taught others. And here,
one Grand Cheat is to be taken Notice of. Sectaries Think that All those
Christian Truths which the Apostles Believed Explicitly, are now Explicitly
enough upon Record in Holy Writ. It is an Error. Our Savior, as St. John
Testifies All that the Apostles believed is not explicitly in Scripture.
Cap. 21. v. 25. Did many Things, which if written in particular, the whole
World would not contain. Might not then the Apostles also Believe many Things,
As a Sacrifice of Mass, Transubstantiation, Purgatory etc. yea, and Teach those
Verities, Though they were not so plainly Delivered in Holy Writ (yet expressly
enough) But, that Haereticks might Cavil at them.

23. Here then is my Resolution which is most Catholic The Resolution.
Doctrine. Christ our Lord Established a Church, that is to Tell us Truth to the
end of Ages. This Oracle which Relies not on Gods written Word only, But on the
Unwritten also, (undoubted Tradition) answerable to Necessary Ocsions of new
Haereticks rising up, Or, of Schism made in Christian Societies etc. Often
Proposes more The Church uses clearer Terms in her Definitions.
Explicitly what the Primive Faith was, And the Apostles Believed, Not that it
makes new Articles, if we speak rigourously, But proposes the old ones again,
in more Clear and Significant Terms. And how can Sectaries blame this
Procedure, when They, without the Warrant of Gods Word (written or unwritten)
Propose and Declare, as They think, the Ancient Sense of Scripture it self to
their Hearers, in a Hundred Passages? Sectaries without Gods Word written or
unwritten make new Definitions
For example Christ said. This is my Body. They, by A new Proposition Define:
This is a Sign of my Body. Will they license Themselves to Propose what they
please out of Gods Word Already writ, and Storm at a whole Church if it do so:
or, Further Declare what was not Writ, yet ever Believed; Though perhaps not by
all so explicitly, as It Is after the Churches clearer Definition? The Church in
this Proceeds upon a certain Principle (indubitable Tradition) Sectaries Have
neither Tradition, nor Scripture, For what they Propose anew. You se therefore,
whoever Pertinaciously Whoever Denies the Churches Definitions Denies the old
believed Articles.
Denies the Definitions of the Church, Denies not only the new Declared, But
the old Believed Articles, And consequently is liable to Damnation.

24. You se moreover. It is not only suitable to Reason, But necessary also for
the very Preservation of Christian Religion, That the Church to whom the
Mysteries Necessary For Christian Religion.
of our Faith were committed, Though it makes no new Articles, nor Supposes
any other Foundation then what was laid by Christ and his Apostles, May yet as
That the Church declare more explicitly.
Necessity requires, Declare more Explicitly the Primitive Doctrine of
Christianity: For, by what better Means can we possibly arrive to the Knowledge
of Primitive Doctrine.
those Necessary Truths which the Apostles either Believed or Taught, Then by
their Heirs and Successors? The Successors of the Apostles Teach in the place
of Those deceased Masters.
I mean The vigilant Watchmen, who were, and Still are substituted in the Place
of those First Infallible Deceased Masters. They, Blessed Men, ran up and down
the World from Country to Country, from House to House, Testifying the Faith of
our Lord Jesus Christ, yet neither committed all the Truths Delivered by them,
to Holy Writ, nor supposed The Apostles writ not all They taught.
the Ignorant and Vulearned fit Instruments to Teach, as They had Taught. The
Legacies Therefore of our Christian Truths were left in surer Hands, I mean,
Chiefly in the Custody of the Successors of those first great Masters. Whence
it is, That the Deposited Doctrine commended to Timothy.
Apostle commend's to Timothy more then once the Keeping of a Depositum of
mighty Value. which the Fathers, and none more expressly then Vincentius
Lirinensis call, the Common Catholic Doctrine: Or, to speak Talentum Catholicum
says Vinc. Lir.
in this worthy Authors words upon the Text 1. Tim. 6. 20. lib. contr. prof.
Hae. Novit. Biblioth. Patrum, Tom. 4. cap. 27. Talentum Catholicum Fidei, The
Catholic Talent of our Faith. Aurum accepistis, Add's Vincentius aurum read.
Thou O Bishop, Pastor, and Doctor, have received Gold, render as pure Gold
again etc. What things thou has learned, so Teach, Adorn, and Illustrate (and
mark Here a further Declaration of the Deposited A further Declaration of
Deposited Doctrine allowed of.
Doctrine Allowed of) ut cum dicas Nove non dicas Nova, That when Thou proposest
Things anew, Thou Teach not new Things, but the old Doctrine. And hence it also
is, That the Church of Christ is styled by most Ancient Fathers Depositorium
Dives, a Rich Treasury, The Church called by most Ancient Fathers Depositorium
Dives.
wherein the Depositum of Apostolical Doctrine is Kept, And not only once Kept*
and then lost, But (as a Depositum ought to be) its Handed down from Age to
Age, from Church to Church, Successively continued to the Worlds End. If
therefore you look for the Apostolical Depositum, Leap not, I Beseech you, over
the Heads of all those Christians, who have been betwixt Us and the first 3. or
The Apostolical Depositum is in the Churches hands.
4. Ages, As if it were to be found There, and no where else. But Demand of this
present Church now in Being, It Is She that Knows better, And Inform's us more
exactly of Apostolical Doctrine, Then all the lost Writings of the The present
Church best inform's us of Apostolical Doctrine
Ancient Church could have done, or, those that are hitherto preserved can do;
Because they are all liable to endless Disputes, and Consequently can absolutely
Decide no controversy. Now if any one Boggles at this Assertion, as if we could
not have sufficient Certitude of The most Ancient writings are liable to
Dispute.
what the Ancient Church Delivered, by the Testimony, or Tradition of the
Present Church, But further Requir's Express Records to be Produced of all that
was ever Taught; Let him correct his Error and know, That, what is Carved in
Brass, or Writ in Velume cannot be more securely Kept, then Apostolical
Doctrine, Deposited in the Hands and writ in the Apostolical Doctrine better
preserved in the hands of Christ's Pastors, thenif't had been carved in Brass.
Hearts of Christ's faithful Pastors, is now Preserved. For, what is in Brass or
Partchment, Time may wear out and blemish; But that which God has committed to
his Church and Chief Pastors thereof, who are to Teach Christians Age after Age,
shall never Perish, never Pass, or be put out of Remembrance. And this Doctrine
the Church Deliver's more Explicitly in her Definitions, chiefly when she
Declares Truth against Haereticks.

CHAP. VII.
More of this Subject. Objections are Answered.
1. TO go on with our Discourse, I would willingly Know, when the Apostle
Exhort's the Galatians cap. 1. verse. 8. 9. Not to Believe an Angel, Preaching
contrary to what He had Preached, and They had formerly Received; As also the
Thessalonians 2. c. 2. 14. to Hold the Traditions learned by Word or Epistle.
Whether All that the Apostles Orally taught was neither writ, nor can be
supposed lost.
we can Imagine, that, all the Apostles Orally Delivered was Either Expressly
Registered in Scripture, or the whole Substance of that Divine Doctrine (of equal
Certitude with Gods written Word) is now Totally lost? Neither is Probable. The
Essentials therefore of that Doctrine, laid up sure in the rich Treasury of the
The Essentials of it remain in the Churches Treasury.
Church, still Remain with Christ's own Faithful Pastors. And this is the
Depositum mentioned in Scripture, whereby the Church (Assisted by the Holy
Ghost) Regulates Her self when She Defines. Therefore great Divines Assert, That
the Church, never Teaches, or, will Teach any new Verity that was unknown to
the Apostles. The Doctrine of Divines.
Se Greg. de Valentia, De Fide Disp. 1. Quaest. 1. Puncto 6.. Illud vero. And.
Hinc quoque. Suarez Disp. 2. De Fide Sect. 6. n. 18. Tanner. Disp. 1. de Fide
Quaest. 1. Dub. 7. n. 211.

2. St. Paul Methinks confirm's this Doctrine, Roman. 12. 6. According to the
Rule of Faith; Whereupon our What is meant by the Analogy of Faith.
Sectaries, Because the Greek reads (...), Endlesly talk of the Analogy of
Faith. Let us bring Words to Sense, and Sense to Principles. What is This
Analogy, This Measure, or Proportion of Faith? Is that, which every Man's
private Fancy falls upon to be Faith, the Measure and Analogy of it? God
forbid. If so; Faith would be as Various, as Fancy is Changeable in Haereticks.
We must therefore find out a better Analogy. And if you say it is Scripture. I
Answer. Before the writing of Scripture, A perfect Rule of Faith, before
Scripture was writ.
There was a true and perfect Rule of Faith, Otherwise These words of St. Paul,
Presupposing the Rule He mentions before he writ This Epistle, are
insignificant. Again. When He Tell's the Thessalonians Epist. 1. c. 1. of Their
being a Pattern to all that Believed in Macedonia and Achaia: Of the Word of
our Lord sounded out by them Scripture proves it.
in every place: Of their Faith Spread abroad etc. What Think ye, was this not
yet written Word of our Lord, or the true Analogy of the Thessalonians Faith,
As well Dilated as Approved of? What Finally was that Form of Doctrine commended
in the Romans cap. 6. 17? Why Did the Apostle blame the unsettled Galatians for
Being so soon Transferred into another Gospel, and Denounce Anathema, cap. 1.
6. if they believed an Angel Preaching contrary to his former Doctrine? All
these and many other Passages of Holy Writ manifestly Declare, Before the
writing of Scripture there was a platform of Christian Religion.
That there was Divine Doctrine Taught by the very Founders of Christianity
before the Writing of Scripture. There was a Platform of Christian Religion
made by the very Apostles before they Separated Themselves, and began their
Preaching to several Nations. And to comply with this Rule or Form of Faith,
Blessed St. Paul, Though full of the Holy Ghost, went to confer with St. Peter
and the rest Gal. 2. 2. Act. 15. 36. Upon it, The Apostles Held Councils, yea,
Councils held upon that platform, and Scripture writ.
and as some Grave and Learned Doctors Affirm by the Measure thereof, the Holy
Scriptures were written. Se the notes on the Rhems Testament, Romans cap. 12. v.
6.

3. Be it how Sectaries will: There was Faith in the World before written
Scripture. The Apostles who taught it, Had their Rule of Doctrine prescribed by
a The Apostles had their Rule of Doctrine from a certain Master.
good Master the Holy Ghost, for they Taught not Christian Doctrine upon their
own frail Judgments (considered as Men.) No, they had ever the Guidance and
Direction of this Blessed Spirit with them, and as His Instruments Delivered so
much as this Master (according to Christ's Promise) gave Assistance to, and
neither more nor less. Now, those Pious Christians The first pious Christians
had their Rule from the Apostles.
who heard this Apostolical Learning, made it most certainly Their Rule, Their
Measure of Faith; Their Analogy, and Form of Doctrine. Whence I argue This Form
or Rule of Oral Doctrine First laid up in the Breasts of the Apostles, and
afterward Delivered to different Nations, was neither All set down in Holy
Scripture (for Volumes would not contain it) nor All intierly lost, It Is pity
such a rich Depositum should Perish, Therefore it yet Remains somewhere in safe
Custody, That Doctrine is yet preserved in the Church.
But no Place is fitter for it, then that which the Fathers call Thesaurarium
dives, the Rich Treasury of the Church: where It Is still Preserved, and Those
Timothies (I mean those Evangelists, Those Pastors, Those Doctors mentioned
Ephesians. 4. 11.) Appointed by Providence to Edify the Mystical Body of Christ,
The Chief Preservers of this Legacy and Noble Depositum, are as Necessity
Requires, to impart it and make it known to the World by their Definitions,
Least like Children we be carried away with every Wind of falls Doctrine. And The
Ground of Tradition.
herein lies the very Ground of all Apostolical Tradition. This is not mine,
but the Great Vincentius Lirinensis own Doctrine now cited. Where pondering that
of the Apostle: O Timothy Keep thy Depositum; He Asks, Quis Est body
Timotheus, nisi vel universa Ecclesia, vel specialiter totum corpus
Praepositorum etc.? Who is now, or, at this The whole Church, or Rulers of it
preserve this Depositum.
Day our Timothy, But either the Universal Church, or more, specially the Whole
Body of those Guides and Rulers set over it, that are Themselves to have the
entire knowledge of Divine Worship, or, to infuse it into others etc?
Afterward: Quid est hoc Depositum? What is this Deposited Doctrine? He Answers:
Id quod tibi creditum est: It Is that which is committed to Thee, not that Thou
Invent's, that which thou have Received, not what Thou has Fancied of thy own
Head. It is a thing not of Wit, but of Doctrine. Non usurpationis propriae, not
of thy Private Use, Fashion, or Practice; Sed The Church no Author but Keeper
of Divine Doctrine.
publicae Traditionis, But of public and known Tradition, brought to Thee,
handed to Thee, whereof thou art not to be Author, sed Custos, But a Keeper and
Preserver. Then he goes on: Depositum Custodi Catholicae Fidei Talentum etc.

4. And thus you Se, we have a Church, a Catholic Principles whereon the Church
proceed's.
Talent of Faith committed to it. A Depositum of Apostolical Doctrine laid up in
its Treasury. We have a Moral body of Timothies of Teachers, united with one
Supreme Head and Pastor, That Assures us more Explicitly by its Definitions
what the Ancient Deposited Doctrine is, And Reclaim's us if we swerve from it.
We have Express Scripture, that both A Mystical body of Teachers. Gods written
and unwritten word. Sectaries want all.
Proves and Approves the Churches Proceeding in Doing so, And this Sacred
written Word faithfully Interpreted, And the unwritten Deposited Word also most
Infallibly Proposed, is our Form, our Rule and perfect Analogy of Faith. O, Had
Sectaries but Half as much For what They boldly Assert contrary to us. (And
because every Man is a Chutch with them, They Define more then our Church
Defines.) The Consecrated Host is Bread only, a Figure of Christ's Body only.
There are two Sacraments only. Works Justify not, but Faith only etc. Had, I
say, These men but half Protestants have no Authority for their Definitions.
so much Authority for their Definitions, How would they warble out the Notes
of their Novelties? But God has Silenced them; For they have neither Church,
nor Scripture, nor Ancient Depositum, nor Tradition, nor Analogy, nor Rule of
Faith, nor Motives to Make Talk only of a Nullity, and an unproved Negative
Religion.
what They Define probable, nor Any other Thing to talk of, But of a mere
Nothing, I mean the Nullity of Their unproved Negative Religion.

5. What hitherto is said of Catholic Definitions made by Pope and Councils,
Chiefly Relates to such Matters as have been Anciently without Dispute
Revealed, yea, And believed also, Though not perhaps in order One way of
Defining.
to all so Explicitly. And this way of Defining, some Divines call
Propositionem: That is, a Reproposing of Mysteries formerly Believed, whether
clearly Deduced Gods unwritten word of equal Authority with his written word.
out of Gods Word, or drawn from undoubted Tradition, It Is the very same: For,
as the Oral Taught Doctrine of the Apostles was, and is certain as Doctrine
Registered in Scripture; so all that really is Gods Unwritten Word, when
proposed to us by the Church as such, is in Substance of equal Authority and
Credit with the Written; For, it is not the setting down of Truths in Velume or
Partchment that Add's more Weight to them, or makes them higher Verities. And
here by the way, I cannot but Reflect on the inconsequent Proceeding of
Protestants, who must Trust our Church for the Handing down to them Gods
written Word, Sectaries ill Consequences.
whilst most Unreasonably They Reject Her Authority, when she Declares what the
unwritten Word is. I say, most Unreasonable, For if it can Deceive in this
later, it may as well have deceived Christians in the first, and given them
falls Scripture. Whereof se more in the second Discourse.

6. It Is true, There is Another way of Defining Another way called by Divines
Asseveration.
called by some Divines Asseveratio, or, The Asserting of a Truth, not so
Explicitly at least Believed before (as when the Church Defines against open
Haereticks what was Antecedently of Faith.) And Herein the Church Proceeds, not
so much upon a Previous Known Act of Faith, as upon the General Owned
Principles of Catholic Belief, whereunto Theological Discourses drawn from
sound Divinity, And other Principles, partly Evident, and partly in a high
Measure Morally Certain, have Access, And are most Prudently Joined, Not That
the Definition in it self, Relies on those lower Principles, But on Gods
Gracious Assistance ever with his Church in the Delivery of Truth. However,
Providence will have this way followed, as a Usual and Necessary Condition,
Because men of Reason, in so weighty Matters are not (as Sectaries do) to
Define at random, but industriously to use Reason, And Proceed on rational
Principles. But This belongs more to Divinity, then to Controversy: For I think
the Church never yet Defined any thing against Haereticks, that was not
Antecedently a known and owned Truth of Faith, Though not so fully expressed,
as it often is, by the Churches clearer Proposition. Thus we say: The Real
Doctrine of Transubstantiation The Real Doctrine of Transubstantiaton as old as
that of the Trinity etc.
is as old as the Doctrine of The Trinity, or the Consubstantiality of the Son
with His Eternal Father, Though the Words Expressing these Mysteries more
significantly and clearly, are of a later Date.

7. Now to the Objections. And one Hinted at above is. The Church was solidly
Founded in the An Objection.
Apostles time in all Things necessary to Salvation. Therefore These Post-nate
Definitions of it are to no Purpose. To confirm This, Our young Antagonist
Ask's; Whether the Apostolical Declarations of the Ancient Primitive Of
Apostolical Declarations lost.
Faith were lost in the intermediate Ages, or no? If not lost, Show them, says
He, And There is no Need of new Definitions, If they were lost in their Passage
down, the Church now wants them, And therefore can Define nothing. Were the Play
worth the candle, I might here Demand of Protestants whether Their Declared
Sense, This is a Sign of my Body Added Is retorted.
to Christ's Words, This is my Body, which Sense They suppose to be Apostolical,
was lost in the intermediate Ages, or no? If not lost, show us that Apostolical
Declaration, and It Is enough. (But this is impossible.) If It was lost (or
rather never in Being) How dare Sectaries make such a Declaration on their own
Heads without Producing the Apostles Warrant? I Answer The Answer. The Church
was solidly founded as It Is now. That which is sufficient in one Age Serves not
always.
briefly to the Objection. The Church then was solidly Founded just as It Is
now, the Doctrine is one and the Same, And every Article of it was ever, and is
now still either explicitly, or implicitly Believed; Yet, These new
Declarations are Necessary, Because the Proposition of a Doctrine sufficient in
one Time, or Age, Serves not for all Times and Ages, when New Difficulties
occurr, And Haeresies rise up against it. The Church therefore ever vigilant,
and Desirous to quiet all, speak's Again more clearly the old Received
Verities, Causlesly too often Bogled at by Sectaries. I say, more clearly, For,
it is one thing to Assert: Such a Verity is not at all contained in Scripture,
or in the Ancient Deposited Different Circumstances require clearer and more
ample Declarations.
Doctrine of the Church: And another, To say it is so clearly There, That in
order to us and different Circumstances, it needs not at all a further
Declaration. Sectaries continually Declare Their Sense of Scripture (For They
have no other Deposited Apostolical Doctrine to Talk of) And why may not the
Church, Authorized by Christ, with Better Reason do so too? To what is Added to
Help on the Objection, I have answered. Deposited Doctrine, following the Church
through all Ages, is securely preserved.
The Deposited Doctrine Orally Delivered without writing is not lost, But still
remain's in the Churches Treasury: It Is, as it were, Handed down from Age to
Age, and Inseparably accompanies the Church through all Ages. Yea, and is kept
there (Though not in Chists or Coffers) as securely as if it Had been engraven
in Brass or Marble. And Sectaries must say thus much, Sectaries must grant This.
if They own Scripture for Gods Word. For, are not They now as well Assured
upon the Churches Testimony, or Unwritten Tradition, That St. John's Gospel was
Indicted by the Holy Ghost, As if the Church produced a Handwriting to Evidence
that Verity? Yes most Assuredly. Whoever therefore Dare call into Their urging
for a hand writing of Apostolical Doctrine is proved frivolous.
Question the Churches Authority Asserting a Doctrine, Though it Produce no
Manual Writing For it, May as easily Doubt (if it show you One) Whether that
very Exhibited Evidence be Authentical, or no. Let us only Imagine that the
Apostle, that writ the last Part of the New Testament, had exactly set down the
whole Canon of Scripture, which the Church now Receives. Let us Suppose again,
That very copy to be left in the Hands of some Pious Christians Living in those
Days, No handvvriting distinct from Scripture is comparable to the Churches
own Authority.
and so long Preserved, Until After Haereticks excluded from the Canon such and
such Books of Holy Scripture, as Luther lately Did St. James Epistle. Both
they, and Luther might more Rationally have doubted of that very written
Instrument, then any can now Doubt of a whole Churches Authority, owning the
Canon of Scripture to be as it is. No Charter Therefore, no written Instrument,
Though once truly made, when the Author is gone, can Parallel the Churches
Testimony in what it Asserts. The The Reason.
Reason is: Because a Manuscript only Tell's you what it Contains, but, not
Whose it is, and though it did so, Men might yet question the Forgery of it,
unles an Authority beyond Exception (extrinsecal to the writing) take away all
Fear of Cozenage, and make it Undoubted. Tradition surer then any Manuscript.
This Reason proves Tradition Necessary in the Church as well for the owning of
Scripture, as other Verities.

8. I have said thus much to show How near to a Piece of Nonsense our
Adversaries Draw, when, To Cancel the later Definitions of the Church, They
urge us to produce the old Apostolical Declarations, whereby these later
Definitions are proved Authentic. Can you Imagine what They would be at? Would
These men would have They know not what.
they have an Authentic Attestation, to prove what the Church has Defined
ever since the Apostles Time, is the Ancient Apostolical Doctrine? The Church
Tell's Them it is so, but That Is not enough. Would they have a Register
Distinct from the Churches Declaration containing the Sum of all Apostolical
Doctrine? Yes sure this They seek for, if their Demand of having the Apostles
Declarations showed them carry Sense with it. For example, we must show them by
some written Record more Ancient then all the Definitions of the Church are,
That the Apostles held a Purgatory, Transubstantiation, a Sacrifice etc. Or, at
least Prove these Doctrins to be grounded on ^ndoubted Received Tradition. I
have answered. Suppose the Roman Catholic They are clearly confuted.
Church (And here we speak of no other, For I hope Sectaries will not urge us
to show Them writings Received from Ancient Haereticks) should Produce a Record
containing a Summary of Apostolical Doctrine, Our Adversaries might more justly
except against that as an old unproved Legend, then They are now able
Rationally to except against the Churches Definitions: Because such an Imagined
Record must either be Approved by as great an Authority as the Churches is to
gain it Credit, or by a Greater. There cannot be a greater in this present
State of Things, then the Churches own Authority; But Sectaries Reject this
Authority when the Churck Defines, Therefore they would much more easily Reject
that supposed written Instrument, though it told them exactly what She now
Defines is Apostolical Doctrine. As much Therefore The Church can do as much
without the Imagined Handwriting as with it.
as the Church can be supposed to do by the Help of such an Imagined Writing,
it can do without it: For if it have Authority to Legitimate, as it were, such
a Writing, its own Authority is as worthy of Credit, when it Defines without
the Writing. You se Therefore how Unreasonably these men require a Codicil
containing the old Apostolical Doctrine, which ought, Forsooth, to be Exhibited
and showed them, Before they can be persuaded that the Church fairhfully
Proposes, or Defines a Doctrine to be Apostolical.

9. Now if They be convinced, that, to Require such a Manuscript from us is as
Unreasonable, as if we should Press them to produce one for Their late
Novelties, And therefore urge the Church to prove her Defined Doctrine by
undoubted Tradition. I answer, The Church does So, whilst They, God knows,
Allege nothing like Tradition, for so much as one of their New Articles. A
Fallacy of Sectaries about Tradition.
And here because we have a fit Occasion, I Will Discover in a Word the Fallacy
of Sectaries in this matter of Tradition. I say in a Word, For it is not my Task
now to Handle that Question largely. Thus it is. Sectaries ever suppose, when
the Church Defines a Doctrine upon the Tradition of former Ages, it is obliged
to show them, the very Doctrine, in express Terms (Antecedently to the
Definitions) owned, and writ down in the Volumes of some one or more Learned
Fathers. Whence it is They Argue: How Sectaries argue.
No man heard of a Purgatory before St. Austins Time, and He only hints at it
slightly; nor of Transubstantiation before the Lateran Council etc. Therefore
those Doctrins are Novelties lately introduced. I Answer. Were all this True,
The Argument is an unconcluding Negative, and run's By uncluding Negatives.
limping thus: Antiquity, or the Ancient Fathers have not Expressed every
Defined Doctrine of the Church in the like Explicit Terms as the Church uses,
Therefore such Doctrins were not really Received by the Church. Observe well.
From the want of an Expression suitable to Sectaries Fancy, They Infer The
Fathers expres Things sometimes one way, and the Church another.
the Doctrine was never Taught by Antiquity. Alas, the Fathers had their
Expressions one way, and the Church, after mature Deliberation, another (often
more significant) Yet, Both Aimed at the same Verity, though differently set
forth in Words, as is clear in the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, called by the
Fathers a Real Change of Bread into Christ's Body, By the Lateran Council, as
you here se, otherwise. I say yet Farther. Had the Fathers not at all so much
as Hinted at a Doctrine Defined by the Church, the Argument is yet Purely
Negative, and worth nothing. Sectaries Discourse highly improbable.
But is here all? No. Their Discourse upon another Account is highly Improbable.
To prove what I say, Do no more, but only Imagine, That Three or Four of the
most Ancient and Learned Fathers, Had in express Terms Owned and Registered in
Their Writings the Lateran Councils Definition concerning Transubstantiation,
as received, Orthodox, and Catholic Doctrine, just as that Council Defines it;
would Sectaries then have owned it as Ancient, and Orthodox, upon those The
Definition of a General Council gives Security.
Fathers Testimony? If they say, Yes, They are Evidently convinced: For the
sole Authority of a most Ample Learned Council, is in true Prudence a Firmer
Principle, and a better Proof to Rely on, If we enquire after known and
received Orthodox Doctrine ever held in the Church, Then the very best
Assurance, That one or more Fathers can give Us of it. For, who see's not, But
that the very Definitions of the Nicene, of the Council of Ephesus, or
Chalcedon etc. Are more weighty to beget in us a Belief, That, what Those
Councils Defined (to be received Truths) were so indeed, Then if twenty other
Fathers had Antecedently writ them in their Councils Representing a whole
Church know more then particular Fathers.
learned Volumes? The Reason is: Because General Councils Representing a whole
Church, Spread all the World over, cannot but know more Exactly what Tradition,
and the Received Doctrine of Christianity is, Then Private Men can be Supposed
to know, who lived in several Parts of the World, And bad no Obligation to
Register intierly the Churches Doctrine in every Particular. Thus much is said,
if the Church at any time Defines upon Tradition only: For It Is most certain,
that beside Tradition, it Relyes on Scripture also; and Hitherto never wanted
the Authority of most Worthy Fathers that undubitably Taught as it Defined,
Though not always perhaps in such Express and significant Words. If Sectaries
Reject both Church and Fathers, when they have not a word of Scripture for them,


10. Now on the other side, If Sectaries will neither Allow of the Fathers
Doctrine, Susiposing it were Express for our Catholic Verities (as most
evidently it is in twenty Controversies) nor, of the Churches Definitions
Already Declared in Eighteen General Councils, We are out of the Reach of all
Principles, And must leave them to their unsteedy Fancies, or wilful Obstinacy,
And pity Their Deplorable Condition. They are more to be pitied then Disputed
against.


11. One word now to a Tedious Harange of Ieers, It Is a mile long at least, and
Wearies one out, before He run's it half Over. After our Adversary had Answer
to our Adversaries Ieers of Milstones.
Talked of Milstones hung about our Necks, of the Popes Supremacy,
Transubstantiation etc. He Tell's us: When the Apostles were sent to Preach all
that Christ Commanded, This must be Understood, that the Church had Power to
Teach more if She pleased. -- Alas, the Apostles were only Tutors to the Church
in its Minority, But the great Divine Mysteries of the Seven Sacraments,
Indulgences, Sacrifice of the Mass, were not fit to be Declared till the Church
was at Age -- What not one Word of Necessary Points all this while? --
Nothing of the Church of Rome, nor Christ's Vicar on Earth etc? Thus our young
Tully Tattles. To Retort his Argument, I might here load him with the lesser
Milstones of his Inferior Negative Truths; For these hang about his Submissive
Neck, if He be a Child of the Church of England, And are as numerous as our
contrary Positives. But he will say, they weigh little, Because They are light
Negatives. Be it so. Were the Apostles, Think Ye, so Tonguetyed, so Sparing of
their Words as not once to Hint at one of these Inferior Truths? What not a
Syllable The Apostles strangely sparing of Protestants Doctrine.
Through the whole Bible of two Sacraments only, of no Purgatory, of no
Sacrifice, Nor, of a Sort of New Men that were to Peep out sixteen Ages after,
and Reform the World? O, were They alive Again, how would Sectaries storm at
their Silence, And utter Forgetfulness of These New Nothings, which yet are the
very best Essentials of Protestancy, or it has no Essence. Thus men might
Talk. But, Ad Rem.

12. This whole wordy Argument, is just like Protestant Religion, purely
Negative, And brought to its best Sense Draws apace toward Nonsense Thus:
Christ and his Apostles Declared not to the World These Doctrins of the Popes
Supremacy, of the Sacrifice of the Mass, of Purgatory etc. Therefore they are no
Foundations of Faith. I first Deny the Antecedent. How will Scripture Speak's
more expressly of the Popes Supremacy, then of a Trinity.
you prove it? Marry Thus. Scripture says nothing of them. I Deny that also:
It speaks more Expressly of the Popes Supremacy, And of a Sacrifice, Then of a
Trinity of Persons in One Divine Essence, or of Infant Baptism. But let us
Gratis suppose, it do not so. Here lies the Strength of your Objection, which
is Improbably Negative. Scripture says not, that the Apostles The Objection
Improbably Negative.
Believed, and Taught a Sacrifice, the Popes Supremacy etc. Ergo, They neither
Believed, nor Taught them. Observe well your Negative. From the not Registring
of all in Scripture that the Apostles knew, Believed, and Taught, you infer:
They knew no More, or, at least Believed, and Taught no More. Which is as
Unlucky a Sequel as this. You, Sir, have not Writ Down in your Rational Account
of Protestancy All that your Learned Head has in it, All you Believe, and
Teach Others. Therefore you Know Nothing, Believe Nothing, Teach Nothing, But
what is Expressed in that Book. In a Word I have Answered The Successors of the
Apostles Teach what is Apostolical Doctrine.
above n. 22. The Church of Christ, that is. The Heirs and Successors of the
Apostles with whom the Mysteries of Faith were Deposited, Teach us what
Apostolical Doctrine is, and This Positive, Approved by Scripture, And all
Antiquity, has more Weight in it, Then twenty of your weak Negative Discourses.

13. But we must not Part thus. I said just now. Your Objection Against us is
an Improbable Negative; And I Appeal to your own Conscience, whether it be not
so? For, can You or any Prudent Man Imagine, that all the exact Words, or
Express Doctrine Delivered by It is improbable to say, all that the Apostles
taught, is registered in Scripture.
the Apostles in their laborious Sermons, when They Preached to Jews and
Gentiles, are Recorded in Holy Scripture? No. I may well say in St. John's Sense,
speaking of our Saviors Works, the whole World, or whole Volumes would not
contain them. Therefore All They taught cannot be Supposed to be either lost, or
Shut up in Scripture. Take here your own Instance of St. Paul, it Undoes you.
He Blessed Man Act. 20. 20. 21. Kept nothing back that was profitable to them,
But showed them and taught them publicly from House to House, Testifying to
the Jews and Gentiles Penance toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ.
You, upon this Testimony too simply Demand. What not one Word all this while of
the Necessary Points, nothing of the Church of Rome, nor Christ Vicar on Earth?
I might Ask you, Nothing all this whole of Infant Baptism, of the Eternal
Consubstantiality of the Son with God His Father? Good, Sir, Reflect, whilst
the Apostle spak of Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, He might well have Declared
both these now named and many other Particular Christian Verities: I do not say
He did so at that Present, But This I Will Defend Against you. Because Scripture
only relates in a General Way what St. Paul Preached, A weak Inference of This
Adversary.
You can neither Probably nor Positively Infer, That he omitted to speak of
These, and other Necessary Doctrins. I say in a General Way. For, Do you think
that St. Luke Recounts in Particular all the Doctrinal Points, that the Apostle
Delivered, when he went Preaching From House to House? Or, can You Persuade
your Self that All the Hagiographers put together, have Recounted all the
Doctrinal Matters (not one omitted) That Christ our Lord ever Spoke, and the
Apostles Taught upon several Occasions? Pray you ask your Conscience, whether
you can Judge this Probable? If It does not follow that what Scripture relates
not, is not to be Believed.
not; The Argument. Scripture Relates not those particular Doctrins, whereat you
Cavil, (which is yet untrue) Ergo They were neither Believed nor Taught, is not
only a Negative, But an improbable Negative.

14. To conclude, Let me Friendly ask you, whether this your Positive
Assertion. The Apostles never Believed nor taught a Sacrifice, or the Popes
Supremacy, Be an Article of your new Faith, or only one of your Inferior
Truths? If you Affirm the first; You are Obliged to produce Positive Scripture
for it, And then it will be a A Dilemma that cannot be Answered.
Superior Truth Revealed by God, Though, perhaps in your Principles, not
Necessary to Salvation. Grant thus much, And you too Clearly own Revealed
Articles over and above Those, which the whole Christian World, and Rome it
Self Believes. Now if it be only an Inferior Truth, And not in Gods written
Word: With what Sectaries offer to reclaim us by Scripture, and have not one
Text to that purpose.
Conscience, or Countenance can you Protestants, who Always Pretend to Reclaim
us from our Errors by pure Scripture, Venture probably on such a Work, when
you bave not so much as one Word of Scripture that inables you to Advance a
Proof against us? Relying on these Grounds, and firm Principles,

15. We easily Solve another trivial Objection of Another objection solved of
Scripture containing all Things Necessary.
Sectaries; which is. Scripture contains all Things Necessary to Salvation,
Therefore we need no new Definitions made by the Church. I might say, much less
do we Stand in need of Protestants new Declarations, forced on Scripture,
without a Church. But y'le Answer in a Word. Though Scripture contained all the
Oral taught, Apostolical Doctrine, and, what ever else is Necessary to Salvation
(which is False) yet, when we se with our Eyes, that Sacred Book pitifully
Abused by Haereticks, not only Haereticks make Scripture useles
in lesser Matters (as They account of Them) But in the very Highest Mysteries
of our Christian Faith; it must needs be a useles Book in Their Hands without
an Infallible Interpreter, And therefore cannot Decide Controversies, nor Tell
us what is Necessary to Salvation, as I have largely proved, Disc. 2. Nay
farther. Some may justly Question, It may be doubted whether an Angel could
write a Book so plain of other High Mysteries, which the vulgar would not
misunderstand.
Whether, if a very Angel writ a Book as full of other High Mysteries, yet
unknown to the World, as the Bible now Contains, And used his best Skill to
Express Those Vertties in the most Clear and significant Language Imaginable;
Some, I say, may Doubt, whether such a Written Book, left only to the Private
judgments of Those whole Multitudes, who now read Scripture, would not be
misunderstood in a hundred Passages, if no After* Teacher Regulated the weak
Readers of it in Their Difficulties, or did not comply with the Duty of an
Infallible Interpreter. Therefore the Bible which is now Extant, And contains
the High Mysteries of our Faith (often less clearly expressed) much more need's
an Interpreter. And, perhaps, the wise Providence of God would have it writ so
on set Purpose, that Christians should have Recours to a Living Oracle of
Truth, and Learn of it, what They cannot Reach to by their own simple Reading.
You Church Doctrine is repeated again and Again, None can be ignorant of it.
will say an Angel can write a Book as clear to all Capacities, as the Churches
Definitions are. Very True. What then? That Book only once writ, is left, as we
now Suppose, to the Sentiments of private Ignorant Men ( as the Bible now is in
Their Hands) But God has provided that the Churches Doctrine be not only once
Delivered, No. It is Laid forth anew, it is implanted anew; it is repeated and
cast, like good seed, Again and Again into men's Hearts and Memories by Faithful
Pastors and Teachers, who shall never fail the Church to the End of the World.

16. A third objection. The Churches Definitions, Because Men declare them (and
all Men are Liars) cannot be Infallible, and Therefore Ground no Faith. Contra
1. Ergo, Neither Sectaries Novelties, Nor the General Doctrine A cleur
Conviction of Sectaries.
owned by all Christians ( of one God and one Christ, Because men Teach them,
And all are Liars) may yet be Fallible, and Falls also. Grant, or Deny the
Sequel, you are Silenced. Contra 2. If All are Fallible, and consequently may
be Liars in what they Teach, why Vent you, my good Friends, So many Negative
Doctrins, which may all be falls? Truly* if There be no Infallibility in the
World, you neither ought to Vapor, as you do, with your Inferior Negatives,
not Blame our They Condemn Themselves whilst their Censure is Fallible.
Contrary Positives; For in Doing so, You condemn your own Judgment, and
Advance no Proof against us. Your Fallible Censure (were our Church Fallible)
Goes not one Step above a tottering Fallibility, And therefore is too faint to
Oppose the Churches contrary Doctrine, Though falfly Supposed Fallible. Mark
well. I Our Churches Doctrine, Though supposed fallible, is as Good as Sectaries
Confessed Fatli^^e Doctrine.
must say it once more. You Fallible men tell me That my Churches Doctrine is
Fallible. Admit of the False Supposition, it is yet, upon all Accounts as Good
as yours, or as This very fallible Affirmation is, That says it is Fallible,
And, if in real Truth it be Infallible, it is much Better.

17. One word more. If Any People on Earth ought to stand for the Infallibility
of a new Invented Religion, The Abetters of Protestancy (could they Proceed
consequently) should Do it. Why? They Deprive Men of their Estates, cast them
into Prison, Bannish some, Hang up Why Sectaries persecute Catholics, while
Jews are tolerated.
others, And All this is Don, Because poor Catholics cannot in Conscience
conform to a Religion that is Professedly Fallible, and Uncertain. Now, if such
Crueltly can be practiced on Christians (whilst Jews, And the worst of
Haereticks are Tolerated to live quietly) For a Thing, that is only Fallible,
and may as well be Falls as True, we are The Reason is, because we* cannot
believe a Religion, That may be as likely Falsas True.
surely at an End of all good Discourse, grounded on Christian Principles. What?
To Bannish us, to Confiscate Men's Estates, To Shed our Blood, For a Religion
That may be Falls, when we Believe our Creed, And Profess as much as these newer
Sectaries make Essential to any Religion of Christians, is, to speak
moderately, an unheard of Severity. Yet so it is. They Do not Harrass us as
they do, Because we Believe in one God, and one Christ, or own a Doctrine common
to all Christians; For themselves Believe so much. But Here is our supposed
Mark well our supposed Crime.
Crime. We cannot Assent to a Religion that may be Falls, we cannot Subscribe to
a Company of new Negative Nothings, And Therefore we are lashed and Persecuted.
Nay (and I Will tell you a Wonder) our Guilt goes not so High: A wonder never
enough to be admired.
For, though we were in our very Hearts Arians, or, As we are Catholics, yet,
if in the Exterior we do as Sectaries do, we are still lovely Children of the
Church of England. Learn Therefore this Truth; it is Undeniable. All the Storms
of Persecution Raised against us, Are not upon any In real Truth we are
persecuted because we will not be plain Hypocrites.
Account of want of True Faith; But, for this Sole Reason, That we will not
Believe one Thing, and Force our Consciences to Profess an Other, Which is to
say: We are Handled thus roughly, Because we will not Dissemble with God and
Man, and become plain Hypocrites. Herein only Lies our Trespass. Iustus es
Domine, and recta Iudicia tua. Judge you, my God, whether that no-offence
Merit's These Scourges.

18. By what is now said, You may easily Perceive, That, when Sectaries
seemingly Bemoan our Blindness (God knows how much of The Grief lies at their
Hearts) And Tell us, They have Done what is possible to Convert us, to Drive us
from Superstition, Sectaries cannot say, to what they would convert us.
And Draw us to the Purity of Their New Gospel, They only give Words without
Substance: For, to What would they Convert us? Will They have us Believe the
General Received Doctrine of all Christians? We were Converted to this before
Protestants Appeared in the World. Do they desire to Convert us to a Belief of
their New Negatives? These are, at most, uncertain Inferior Truths, no way
Essential to Christian Religion. Put Our positive Doctrine weighed with
Sectaries Negatives.
the case, by a supposed Impossibility, that our Contrary Positives, were only
Inferior Truths like Protestants Negatives, They might notwithstanding most
justly hang in the Balance with Them, and would certainly outweigh Them,
Because a more Ample and Universal Church own's Them. All therefore They can
Drive at, when They Pretend to convert us, is, That We carry They only careser
the exterior form of Protestancy
about Us, The Exterior form of Protestancy in our Demeanor, Though we still
remain Catholics in Heart, They care not. That is, as I said now, They would
Convert us to be plain Hypocrites.

19. From this and the precedent Discourse it follows, A Fallible Religion
cannot defend it self.
That whosoever Embraces a Fallible Religion, which may be Falls, can neither
Defend his own, nor impugn another upon any grounded Principle, much less can
He Persecute his Adversary to Death or Imprisonment, Though He Nor the
Professors of it persecute others.
mantain's a contrary Religion, in like manner Fallible. The Reason hereof is
Clear. Because, The Defense of a Religion That Is Fallible, And the opposition
made against another Answerably weak, and Fallible, cannot go beyond the
Strength The Reason is Evident.
of that last Ground whereon the Defense, or Impugnation (ultimatly resolved)
have their Footing. But, if the Religion be Fallible and uncertain, The last
Ground whereon the whole Machin ( either of Proof, or Opposition) stand's, must
needs be A Distastful, opinative Conjecture, Which, without Certitude, or
Satisfaction, is as A Defender of a Fallible Religion, cannot preserve himself
from Scorn.
unfit and forceles to Convince another of a contrary Belief, as to preserve it
self from the Scorn and Contempt of him, though he profess no more but a Faith
that is Fallible. Put the Case, That a Pelagian and a Protestant are hard at a
hot Dispute: The Question proposed is, Whether of these two Religions (we
suppose them both Fallible) is the better? With what Proof, or Principle can
this Fallible Protestant Assault his Fallible Adversary, when He knows he
cannot go one Step further then to what is purely Fallible? If he interpret
Scripture, that is Fallible, if he Quote Fathers, both They and He are Fallible,
if He cite Councils, the Definitions (with him) are Fallible, if He cry up his
own Religion as having the Vpperhand in Probability, He only throws his single
vote into the Vr^, which when it is examined, comes to no more But his Own Sic
videtur, or Self Fallible He can neither convince his Adversary, nor persecute
him, but most unjustly.
Conceit. And Hence it follows, That, as He cannot Prove his Religion against
his Adversary, so He cannot, but must unjustly Persecute him, if he Refuse to
Embrace that which cannot be Proved. But most certainly his Proofs go not
beyond the Bounds of Uncertainty, and Therefore cannot oblige his Adversary to
Believe him. And Thus these two Combatants may wink, and fight to the day of
Judgment, without ending one Controversy, or falling on any Thing like a
certain Principle.

20. I Will say here a strange Word, And think it very True. Would A Learned
Atheist write a large Volume An Atheist might say as much against God as.
against the Existency of God, or, A Learned Jew against Jesus Christ; They
might prove as much, by a Roving, fallible Talk, Grounded on no Principles,
against These great Verities of Christian Faith, as ever Protestant has yet
Proved against the Roman Catholic Church. Protestants can say against the
Roman Catholic Church.
For, Their new Mode of writing is a long, loos, wearisom Discourse, without
Reducing either Proof for their own Religion, or Opposition made against
Catholic Doctrine, to Any Thing like a received Principle. Mark this in all
particular Controversies, you will find mere uncertain Conjectures to be the
last ground, whereon, either Their Proofs or Arguments Against us stand, most
unsettled. Yet it should be Otherwise: For, whoever will venture to impugn a
Religion That Is Held by the greatest part of Christians Infallible, must strike
Home, and Reach to sound Principles Before He Touch it, much less break it a
Pieces. Sectaries may say, They are able at least to Defend Christian Religion
in General, owned Their Defense of Christian Religion in in general is to no
purpose.
by all the World; For the rest of Protestancy it may go whether you will, Nec
seritur nec metitur, They are not solicitous. My God are we come to this Pass
now? What must all the Disturbance of Sectaries, their Schism and Rebellion
made Against a Church, their Glosses on Scripture, And the whole Machin of
Protestancy End thus in a Non Probatur, it cannot be proved? Is that only, now
asserted Defensible (to wit the common Doctrine of all Christians) That
precisely taken is no man's Religion, And Needs no Defense?

21. Some other Objections yet remain, But are all Solved upon the Principles
now established. One is. If every Doctrine Defined by the Church be Fundamental,
the Church lays its own Foundations. Contra: There was Fundamental Faith in
the Church before Scripture was writ: Did Scripture Therefore lay New
Foundations of Scripture Declared anew the Antecedent believed Doctrine of the
Church
Faith, Because it Declared anew that Antecedent owned Doctrine? Thus we Say,
the Church Declares the Ancient objective Faith of foregoing Christians, ever
implicitly at least Believed, And not otherwise. A second Objection less to the
Purpose. The Teaching Church either Believes in that Instant Sht Defines a
thing Necessary to Salvation, or does not. If She does, It was Necessary before
the Definition newly made; If not, She Defines something Necessary to Salvation
which was not before Necessary. To answer the Objection, I might ask whether
St. John when he writ this Proposition. The Word is made Flesh, Believed that
Article of Christian Faith before he writ it, or no? If yes, it was of
Necessity to be Believed before. If not, He delivered something Necessary to
Salvation which was not so before. In one short Word, Here is the solution to
No Real Difficulty. The Church at least Implicitly Believed before, what The
Church Believ's Implicitly before She Defines, but more Explicitly after for
her own Definition.
it Defines, yet may and does more Explicitly Believe the same Mystery in that
very Instant She Defines, Because God Speak's that Truth more clearly by Her
Definition. So St. John Believed the Incarnation of the Divine Word for His
Definition. Verbum Caro factum est. The Word is made Flesh, Though without
Doubt He Assented to the Mystery, (and by Divine Faith also) Before He writ His
Gospel. But enough of these Forceles Arguments, long since Proposed and solved,
which only give a Testimony of Sectaries ready will (to offer at something) and
weakness with it (to do nothing.) For, you se clearly, They cannot press us with
a real Difficulty.

CHAP. VIII.
Protestants are Unreasonable in the Defense of Their late Manifest and
Undoubted Schism.
1. SEctaries Are no where more unluckily out of the Compass of Reason, Then in
Their Discourses of Schism. I shall endeavor to make The Assertion good in the
ensuing Chapters.

2. To Proceed clearly. First, it is most certain, Martin Luthers first
Separation.
That Martin Luther, And His Associats, once Roman Catholics, Separated
Themselves from the Communion of that Ancient Church, which gave rhem Baptism
About the Year 1517. 2. It is as Evident, that our following Sectaries Uphold
still, And Stiffly Defend that Actual Separation made by Luther, as a Necessary
Sectaries Defense of it.
lawful Fact, And well Don. 3. It is no less clear, That as Luther, when He
first began his Revolt from the Church, stood all Alone, without joining
Himself to any visible Society of Christians then extant in the Christian
World; So, it is now as Manifest, That our Protestants to This very Day, stand
Sectaries yet stand solitarily Alone, not united with Any Christian Society.
also a solitary Society alone, owning no Fellowship, Union, or Communication
of Lyturgies, Rites, or Sacraments with any Church Through the Universal World.
They forsake Catholics, They forsake Graecians, Arians, Abyssins, Nestorians,
Socinians, and All the rest of Christians.

3. My first Proposition. If ever Schism was in the World, or, can Possibly be
conceived, Protestants are most The first Proposition.
Evidently guilty of a Formal Separation from all other Christian Churches,
which Denominates them Formal Separatists, or, in plain English; Schismatics.
The Assertion is so clear that it needs no Proof: For, say, I beseech You; If
any man in England (now Starting up with a few Followers at his heels) should
utterly Deny our Gracious Sovereign to be Supreme Head of that Kingdom, as also
Abjure the Salutary Laws there in Course; Or Finally, should So make Himself and
Associats a Body a part, That all Obedience and Submission were The case of
Rebels in a Kingdom compared with Protestants Schism.
shaken of, Respectively, to both King and Gouvernment etc. Would not this Man,
Think ye, Highly Merit the Title of a Rebel, or (in Civil Affairs) of a most
Uncivil and ungracious Schismatic? Yes, most undoubtedly. This is our very
Case. England, All the World Know's, Once owned The Pope of Rome, not only For
the first Patriarch, But Supreme What England anciently was.
Head of the Universal Church: It Admitted of this Churches Discipline and Laws,
And yielded Obedience to Them: It communicated with the Roman Church, As* well
in Points of Faith, as in the use of Rites, Liturgies, and Sacraments. Yet All
These, And, in a short Time, were Shaken of. Luther And our Late men to How it
Revoked from the Church,
this Day, make Themselves a Body a Part; And, to Add more to the bargain, as
yet, join with no other Society of Christians, either in Faith Discipline, or,
And yet is joined to no other Society of Christians.
The like Communion of Rites, and Sacraments. Therefore, if a Schism can be
conceived (Define Schism how you Will) This both was, And is still the highest
Degree of a plain Formal Schism, and Separation from an Ancient Church, that
Ever yet appeared in the World.

4. To Solve this unanswerable Difficulty, Our Later men are pleased to Play,
in a Matter most serious, Sectaries play in a serious Matter with an ungrounded
Distinction.
with a Pretty Distinction, which Intricates Them more, Then they are aware of.
First then, Distinguish, Say They, between an Actual and Causal Separation,
next Apply it thus, And you have the Truth. We Protestants made an Actual
Separation from the Church of Rome ('It Is granted) And so are (Though the word
is Harsh) the Formal Schismatics: But you Papists, are the Causal Separatists,
That is, Ye gave the true Cause of our Parting from you, And Therefore are the
Schismatics before God; For Schism is Theirs, who give the first Cause of it,
And not Theirs, who make the Actual Breach upon a Grounded And most just Cause,
as We have Don. Thus our new Doctors Discourse, But how Unreasonably, We shall
Declare presently. In the mean while, You Intolerable Boldness in Luther and*
His Followers, to accuse and condemn an Ancient Church without Power o^
Jurisdiction.
se one wretched Luther, And a mean Handful of Followers so pertly Bold, so
Audacioufly Impertinent, As not only to Accuse a whole Ample, Ancient, and
Learned Church, But more, without Power, Authority, or any Jurisdiction over
it: You Se Them also sit as Judges in a Cause They Had nothing to Do with; And
Then, Inaudita causa, Proceed to a Sentence, And condemn it of Errors And
Causal Schism. And can Reason, Think ye, Enter here, or ever Countenance such a
Proceeding? It is Impossible. Had But a spark of Reason lived in These
Novellists, They Ought to have Such suspected Accusers could not be Judges.
known, that Accusers (so Invaluable, so few, and so Rationally Suspected of
Malice) Could be no fit Judges in so Grave and Weighty a Matter: They ought to
have owned this very Fact a most Desperate one, First, Openly to Rebel, And
then without any Other A most Desperate Fact first to Rebel, and then to
suppose without Proof, They had Reason for their Rebellion.
Proof, But Their own Proofles Word, Tacitly to Suppose They had great Reason
For their Rebellion. Had reason Regulated Here, They should have Laid forth the
supposed Evidences of their Charge against our Church to a Third Impartial
Judge (They Talk of an Universal Church Distinct from the Roman) why did They
not Appeal to This, And then Acquiesce in some other Sentence and Judgment
Better then Their own? But to Accuse so vast a Society of Ancient Christians as
we are, And know not WHY; To Condemn it of Error, and know not WHEREFORE; And,
This before no other Tribunal but Themselves, who were the Rebels, Savor's so
strongly of Sawcin^s The very Method held in our Protestants condemnation, was
Illegal and contemptible.
and Selfconceipted Pride, That the very Method Held in the Condemnation, Makes
all to look upon it as Naught, Foul, Illegal, and Contemptible.

5. To Prosecute further this most Necessary Point, Thus much I will Say, and
wish All may well Consider it. It is most Evident, That This Actual Breach with
Rome, This Rupture, This Rent, This Rebellion, This The Formal Separation of
Sectaries from an Ancient Church is Evident.
Divorce from an Ancient Church, This Formal Schism (Cover all as much as is
possible under the smoother Term of an Actual Separation) is as clear on our
Protestants Side, As the Suns Shining at Noon* day, like Dirt it lies at their
Doors, and They will never be Able to Sweep it away. But to Say, That
Catholics laid such Nastines There, But to say that Rome was cause of it, is a
mere unproved Calumny.
or, That Rome caused This Sehism, neither is, nor shall be any more, then a
mere Supposed Whimsy, An Vnproved Calumny, As long as Truth is in the World.

6. Say therefore, I Beseech you, Good Dear Countrymen, Why was the Roman
Catholic Church the Cause of your Schism; Why Separated you your Selves from
it? You Answer. A multitude of Corruptions, What Sectaries allege, as cause of
their breach.
of Superstitions, of new Forged Articles in Faith, of Innovations, and I know
not what more, made you leave this Church, so Far as it had receded from its
Ancient Purity. Very good: The Charge Drawn up, goes High, And is evidently
Heinous. But Say on: Are your The Question is whether Proofs answer to the
Charge?
Proofs Answerably as Strong, or Equally Evident To make the Charge good
Against this Church, Both Accused, and Condemned by you? Or, which Comes much
to one, Are these Proofs as Manifest To justify your Formal Schism, as It Is
evident, that you Made it? Such an Evident charge Or are as manifest to justify
that Formal Rupture as It Is Evident, it was made?
against a Church, and so Tragical a Separation* from it, Acted by you, Must
both in Law and Conscience Be Supported and Born up by Evidence. The Weightines
of the Matter Requires it. Weak feeming Probabilities, mere crazy and
Conjectural Arguments (Atheists Vent such against God and Jews against Christ
are Here too Slight, and Forceles, Either to Acquit you of your Weak crazy
Conjectures prove Nothing.
most sinful Formal* Schism, or, To make us Guilty of the Causal.

7. Come therefore, Let us not word it Longer, But go closely to Work. We Appeal
to Reason and undoubted Principles in this Controversy. These (and not Talk,
nor mere Conjectures) must Uphold your Proofs, if you have any Against our
Ancient Church. To Proceed Therefore clearly,

8. Note first, That the Supposed Errors, charged on Errors charged on our
Church are not Evident ex Terminis.
the Roman Catholic Church by Protestants, are not like the first Principles
in Nature, Evident ex Terminis, By their own Light. Their Evidence Therefore, if
any be, must be laid forth in a Solid and Convincing Discourse, And This
Discourse, if Convincing, is to be Driven on by a Medium, which either by it
self is, or does at last Rest on some Therefore must be proved by Discourse
reduced to owned Principles.
Known and Owned Principle; Owned, I say, and Admitted of, not by the One or
Other Dissenting Party, But Common to them Both. If such Principles Fail, or
the Discourse, which is carried on, Derives not Strength and Certitude from
Them, The Force of Arguing (turned either into a Roving Talk, or Clamours) is
Lost, Becomes Lame, Deficient, and Vnconcluding.

9. Note 2. Whilst Sectaries, by Imputing Error to the Roman Catholic Church,
make it the Cause The Selfsaying of Sectaries is excluded from being a Proof.
of Their Formal Schism, They are not to Suppose, That Their own bare
Assertion, or, Saying, We have Erred, can be either Proof strong enough, Or any
Thing like a satisfactory Reason in This matter: For their Saying is no*
Received Principle. I Note thus much on set Purpose, Because I really Perceive a
strange Humor in our Protestant Writers. You have in their Books Protestants
Humor In Writing Controversies.
('It Is true) Difficulties now and then hinted at, Words multiplied, Much Talk
in General, Intricate Discourses carried on in Darkness (And This to Amuse a
vulgar Reader) weak Conjectures Enough, now Drawn from This, now from That
Vnevidenced Authority, Margents charged with Greek and Latin, And Learned
Margents They are, or must be Thought so. But after All, you se the main
Difficulties waved, you Find Nothing Proved, Nothing clearly Reduced to They
bring nothing to undoubted Principles.
any other Owned Principle, But Their own Proofles word, and Bare Assertion: In
so much, that I am Apt to Believe (if I think Amiss God forgive me) All that
Protestants Aim at in their Polemical Writings, is only to Keep up Talk in the
World, And Glory when They have the last Word in a Controversy, whether a
Proved Word, or no, it Imports not, so it can be said, They have Answered.

10. Note 3. If, As we Both must and will exclude The Principles They are to
Rely on, whilst They condemn our Church of Error.
the Self-saying and Own-voting of Protestants from the Nature of a Rational
Proof, whilst They Accuse and Condemn our Church of Errors, They are
Necessitated to have Recours to other Principles, And, I think, There can be
none better, nor more Free from all Exception, Then These I now Name. 1. Plain
speaking Scripture. 2. The Unanimous Consent of Fathers, Add to These, if you
Pleas, the Indubitable Definitions of Ancient Councils. 3. Universal Tradition.
Proofs, which run on in good Form, and Finally Rest on These, or the like
Foundations, are Solid, Undeniable, and concluding. If They swerve from such
Grounds, They Become both Faint, and Forceles, And cannot But Participate much
of Fancy, which we utterly Reject.

11. By the Recours to Plain Scripture, We Exclude All weak and unproved
Glosses of Sectaries. By Recurring Exceptions justly made Against Protestants.
to the Unanimous Consent of Fathers, we Highly Except Against an Unworthy
Proceeding of Protestants, who, if by Chance They meet with a Patch, or maimed
Sentence of a Father, which, because Dubious, seemingly Makes for Them, They
Triumph, as if the Victory were Theirs. Soft and fair, Say I, There is no such
matter: For no Doctrine Doubtfully Delivered by a Father (and It Is then
doubtful, when it justly may Admit of Different Interpretations) Can Pass For a
Received Principle (Principles are clear) Much less has it force to Blemish
the Purity of an Ancient learned Church, whose sole Authority is greater Then
The Dubious sentiment of a Fatherless, then the clear Judgment of the Church
can be the Dubious Sentiment of any one Father. And Thus much our Adversaries
must Acknowledge; For, Though a whole Torrent of Fathers undeniably Comes
against Them (As is most evident in Twenty Controversies, Take for Example that
one of an Unbloody Sacrifice Daily Offered up in the Church, Or the Real
Presence) They Answer (Forsooth) the Fathers were Sectaries Reject the Evident
Testimony of Fathers. when most clear against them, and fight with a dubious
Testimony of one or two Fathers against the Church.
men and Had Their Errors etc. Why then, I Beseech you, when One or Two of
Them Speak only Doubtfully in a Controversy (I Grant no more) should Their
Authority have force to weaken our Churches Doctrine? Nothing Therefore less,
Then The Clear and Unanimous Consent of These Ancient Worthies, truly Pillars
of our Church, can be Admitted of as a Received Principle. We stand to this,
and the other now named Principles. Thus much Premised, we pass on to the Trial
of Protestants Proofs.

CHAP. IX.
Protestants Cannot make Good Their Charge Against the Roman Catholic Church,
Concerning Causal Schism.
1. THe Assertion says thus Much. There neither is, nor can be Proof against
the Roman Catholic Church, whereby it is made Guilty of Error, And Therefore
none can Rationally Say, That this Church was, or is, The cause of Schism in
Protestants. The Reason Hereof is best laid forth in these Few Words Proofs
against Proofs fail when Principles are wanting.
this Church cannot But Fail, when Received Principles are wanting to Support
Them: But Received Principles are Here evidently wanting To Sectaries in Their
Charge Against our Church. Therefore Their Proofs must Fail, and Consequently,
when they are Resolved, can come to no more, but to mere Proofles Calumnies.

2. To Show you, That all Principles Fail them in This Matter, You shall Se how
Ingeniously we Proceed. We License our Adversaries to make Use of all the One
plain Dealing with Sectaries.
Principles, which the whole Christian World Own's, as Undoubted. Will They
Please to have Recours to well Grounded Reason, to plain speaking-Scripture
without Glosses, to the Unanimous consent of Fathers, or Definitions of
Councils, and Universal Tradition? We are contented, And will Acquiesce. All we
seek For, is to Exclude Their own Proofles Word from entering in, as a Received
Principle. You Se here is Liberty Enough, And The Liberty given Them,
we Allow it, withal Petition Them for Almighty Gods sake, That they will
Vouchsafe to Deal heartily with us, And take to any One, or More of These now
named Principles, and Dispute closely in Form, Either Provided, they will
Dispute in Form.
by Syllogisms, or, That known shorter way of Enthymems. By this Procedure we
shall se the Rise, and Progress of their Discourse, the Validity of Their
Arguing, whether it be Convincing, and Finally rest on a Received Principle, or
contrariwise Lame, and Deficient. Reason is reason to all sorts of men, and
Though we are Papists, we yet know well what Reason and Evidence is. May it
therefore Pleas our new Doctors to Begin with that Common Principle to us both,
of Holy Scripture: Their Argument (if to the Purpose) cannot But be much to
this Sense. What Scripture says is true; But Scripture says, The Roman
Catholic Church is at least, liable to Error: Ergo, it may Their Argument
from Scripture Ends after the First Syllogism.
err. We deny the Minor, And Expect a Second Syllogism to Prove it, which Shall
be more Fumbling, and Proofles Then this very Minor, that is False. I am so
confident of this my Assertion, That I in treat our Adversaries to Go on in
Form, And Prove Their Minor, (if Their Cause be good the Labor is not great)
And let us have the Honor to Answer Them. Again. They may Argue: What Ancient
Councils Define, And And will be as Forceles if drawn from Fathers.
Holy Fathers unanimously Teach is True; But These Say the Catholic Church of
Rome Has Erred, or can err: Ergo. We here Deny The Minor Also, which shall
never be Proved by a second Syllogism either Evidently, or Probably. In the
mean while (And let Them Remember so much) Their Formal Schism is not only
probable, But Evident, Though the Proofs fall short to Evidence the Pretended
Cause of it.

3. Some Perhaps will Say: This way of Arguing does not the Deed. No. They will
go Otherwise If they will come to particular Controversies,
to work, and Descend to Particular Controversies, And show us how Council has
Contradicted Council, How Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Praying to Saints,
worshipping of Images etc. are late Novelties Introduced into our Church. Here,
They Hope to have us upon an Advantage, And With such Doughty Doings, They are
able to make our Church Guilty of Causal Schism, And Acquit Themselves of the
Formal Crime. Observe a Shuffling, And Know; Before we Catholics are like to
get a Sight of our Evidenced Errors, We must Travel far, And run over All
those long Worn-out Controversies which have Troubled the world, And to no
Purpose, For a Hundred years and More. However we are Content, We are willing,
may it pleas them to Dispute in Form, and bring Arguments to Principles.
May it Pleas our Adversaries first to begin with one particular Controversy,
And so closely to follow the Matter by a continued Arguing in Form, That at
last, They bring their Discourse to a sure Owned Principle. But, I well Foresee
(Because Conscious of their want of Principles to ground a Convincing Discourse
on) They Will not Hear to this Proposition. Therefore to leave Them without Excuse,
I Will Propose another way, Another way proposed.
Which every man shall judge most Reasonable, Let them vouchsafe at least, to
Set down Plainly one of Their Protestant Tenants conrrary to our Catholic
Doctrine, For Example. Transubstantiation is a New Invented Opinion lately
brought into the Roman Church. And then So closely to Give us the last and
strongest Grounds They have for the Assertion, without long tedious, Discourses
that nothing Appear superfluous, (Much may be said in a little compass.) Their
Undoubted Scriptures, if any be a^ Hand, Their Ancient Councils, Their consent
of Fathers, Their Ancient Tradition, And, which I highly Value of, some Ancient
Orthodox Church Authority. Must of Necessity enter here, to Uphold their
Assertion if 't be Defensible. This Don. I Will Engage to The Authors Engagement.
Place against what ever Sectaries Allege, The contrary Proofs of our Catholic
Religion, for Transubstantiation; And Add to them, the Testimony of our Learned
Church, And, if These put in just Balance, or, compared with the Other, Do not
(in the Judgment of every Disinteressed Scholar) Quite Outweigh all that
Protestants can say Against us, I Will here Promise, never to Trouble them more
with Controversies. But, if on the Otherside you evidently find These men,
after all their Noise of introduced Novelties, so cut of from Proofs, so
profoundly silenced, That, They cannot What will appear by this way of trial.
bring to light so much as one Passage of Scripture, nor one Ancient Council,
nor, the Vnanimons consent of Fathers (no, nor one clear Sentence of a Father)
And, least of All, Any Ancient Orthodox Church contrary to our Doctrine, or,
that Plainly and Positively Defends Theirs, You will, I Hope, Bear with me, if
I say once more. Their new Opinion Relies on Fancy, And, that I Mistook not
when I called this Treatise. Protestancy without Principles. I say that
Positively Defends their Doctrine: For, I would have Them Know, Their Negative
way of Arguing We Read not (forsooth) of the Word Transubstantiation, will, if
it Appear once more on Paper, look Sectaries Negative way of Arguing, out of
Fashion.
like an old cast Garment, no less out of Fashion, Then quite worn out to
nothing. When this Controversy is Ended by Close Proofs and Principles, without
wandering into long dark Discourses, We, on our part, are Ready to Engage in Any
Other, as shall best like our Adversaries, And will Endeavor, to make this
Great Truth known to the world. That Sectaries, are as Unfortunate in Proving
their Own, As unlucky, in Opposing our Catholic Doctrine.

4. Beside what is said, Here is another Proof, that A further proof, of
Sectaries not proving.
shows They can convince nothing unles Hereafter, They manage Their Cause
better then is Don Hitherto. In All Debated Controversies, We Have no more But
our Adversaries Objections, And the Catholic Answers. The evidence of our
Errors cannot Appear in our Answers, For These All along, g^^on in Clearing us
from Their Cavils. Neither can the Evidence Arise, like a Beam of light, out of
the Objections of Protestants, Unless They lustily Vainquish us with a
Demonstration in good Form, Supported by an owned Principle, and Force us, and
other Intelligent Persons to Acknowledge, That these Objections are plain
Convictions of our Errors; whereof there is no great Danger, for We Catholics
Profess, And say it with all candor, That we look on These Objections against
us as Slight, Trivial, While we return a Rational Answer, Their Arguments
Recede from all likelihood of Evidence.
Defeated and worn-out to Nothing. Be it how you will; They cannot be Supposed
owned Principles Between us, Unless we are mad, And Grant, That, what our
Protestants Vent and Vote against us, is Unanswerable. As long Therefore, as we
give a Rational Reply to Their Arguments (And let us have an Indifferent Judge
to Decide the Controversy, whether our Answers be Rational or no) so long Their
Objections will Recede From Evidence, And Loos the Force of clear
Demonstrations Against us. Yet Their Schism is Evident. That cannot be Denied.

5. They may say first. This Recours to a Judge is only a Put Of, And makes
Controversies endless, Because If a Judge be rejected, Controversies are Endless.
They Acknowledge none But Themselves. And, I Answer, This want of a Judge,
makes Controversies endless; For seclude a Judge, we may wrangle to the Worlds
end, and Stand still at as great a Remove from composing Strifs, as we were
when we began Them. Pray you, what do They think, That without a Judge, or
clear Evidence, which needs no Judge, we must submit to their wordy Objections,
as if Oracles Pronounced Them, when They Acknowledge Themselves both Fallible
and Erring men in all they say? No certainly. Hitherto Therefore We have no
Evidence, yet Their Schism is Evident, Remember That.

6. They may Reply Again. It is Plain Perverseness in us, not to se the Evidence
of Their Arguments Against our Errors. Pitiful. I Retort the Argument, And
Tell them: It is wors then Perverseness in Them to Sectaries suppose what is to
be proved.
make That Evident, which Has not so much as Probability in it. Alas! To Talk
thus, is Scholding, no Schollership, a Clamor, no Close Disputing. Be pleased
to Put your Arguments in Form, Unles This be don, it is but Vain to Suppose
Evidences which cannot be Proved. Yet your Schism is Evident.

7. They may thirdly Reply, Their Objections against The selfseeming of
Sectaries no Proof.
our Errors seem at least Evident to Them. Observe a Strenuous Proof. We urge
to have Arguments against our Errors Reduced to Vndubitable Principles, And
here They give in Their own Self-seeming, which is Fancy, and True Evidence
has force with all.
Nothing like a Received Principle. I say therefore They have No Evidence; For,
This Works upon all men's intellectual Faculties alike, And equally Necessitat's
Them to Assent. It is true, The Perverseness of man's will, may either make him to
cry up That For evident, which is not, Or, To Deny That to be Evident which is;
But it never makes him not to se what is clearly Discernable by its own
manifest Light. Thus then it is. Neither we Catholics, Neither Catholics nor
Others Ever saw any thing like Evidence in the Arguments of Protestants.
nor the rest of the Christian World, ever yet saw any Thing like Evidence in
those Arguments of Protestants: Why Therefore should we take Their word For it,
Or Believe, that They have better Intellectual Eyes then Their Neighbors?
Alas, if an Arian would lay Claim to such an Evidence For his Heresy, He might
do it upon Fancy, and every whit as Groundedly as Protestants. No Evidence is
yet seen, But the Schism is Evident.

8. They may fourthly Reply. Though they have no expres Definitions of
Councils, or Unanimous consent of Fathers Assertive of our Churches Errors
(Because all of them Sided with Rome, and were no little Flatterers of that Sea)
Yet, They Cite Scripture Against us, which is a Principle owned by all. Answ.
So do Arians Also, and to as little Purpose. But ad rem. Produce plain
Scripture without your own unevidentced Their Arguing from Scripture is
Forceles Against us.
Glosses (which we Reject as Extra-scriptural) And put your Arguments grounded
on Scripture in good Form, You Shall se All, in the First, or Second Syllogism
Decayed, Faint, Forceles, And out of all Fashion of an Argument. For Example,
you have not one Syllable in Scripture Against our Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, or Purgatory, or any other controverted Point; Therefore
Arguments built on Scripture, must needs fail you. All you can Allege is, That
the Word Purgatory, or Transubstantiation is not in Scripture, And you know, no
more is the Word Trinity and Consubstantial. O, But the Reality is not in Gods
Word. How prove Their Negative way of Arguing Proofles.
you that in Form? We Deny it: But Admit it be not, your Proof is Poorly
Negative, and without legs runn's Thus: What Scripture Expressly contains not,
is an Error; Scripture Expressly contains not Transubstantiation, Ergo it is an
Error. We Deny the Major, and give you Twenty Instances to blunt and Dead the
Force of it. Go on Therefore to prove That, yet Vnproved Major. It is
Impossible. Here, you will have Them Sectaries are urged to Dispute in Form.
at a Stand, They cannot Advance. However, Grant They Offer at it; Our Answers
still closely Follow Them, And Enervate Their Proofs, as They are Driven on in
the Course of Arguing. Believe it, They Shall be sooner out in Arguing, Then we
in Answering: And to Show you, That I do not vainly Vaunt in Saying Thus much,
Let it Pleas our Adversaries And to bring Their Proofs to an Undeniable
Principle.
to come to a just Trial of Disputing in Form upon this particular Matter of
Transubstantiation, or, of any other where They Think to have most Advantage,
And Press on us Proof after Proof, Till at last They bring us to a Propositio
quiescens, That is, to an Intellectual Light, which by its own Clarity
Evidenceth it self Solid (not To you, or to me, Mr. Poole) But to All Rational
men, who know what Evidence is, An now we need not go to School and learn That,
For nature with a little Logic, Teaches sufficiently what Evidence is. This
Evidence Therefore, drawn out in a close continued Arguing in Form will Do the
Deed, and Show whether we are Foiled, or you Fight Unluckily. Unless This way be
taken to The loos and uncluding way of Arguing in Sectaries, is most insipid
and Blamable.
(whilst you run on in a loos Vnconcluding Talk, And Own No Infallible Judge to
Decide between us) We may stay till Dooms day (which is pitiful) And End our
Lives Before we end so much as one Controversy. Study Therefore well For this
Propositio quiescens, which by the Evidence of its own Light, Apparent to all,
makes us to Yield up the Cause. If you can do this, you are Gallant men; if
not, Know That your Shism is Evident (This is the burden of the Song) But the
Pretended cause of it laid on us, lies yet in Darkness Vnevidenced, And Therefore
is Vnjustifiable.

9. What will you say, if a new Zelote of Our English Schism Argues Thus? Most
surely, Protestants wise and learned men, cannot All (so numerous as They are)
Be Supposed to have made a Bustle in the World about Nothing. They cannot be
Supposed to have left an Ancient Church, But, upon the Sight of great
Difficulties, which frighted many, and Finally withdrew Them from Holding
Communion with it longer. I shall Answer the Objection largely Hereafter; Now I
only Say: When a Rebellion is manifest, and Decryed A known Rebellion in
Kingdom, Or a clear Schism in the Church, Cannot be Justified by The Authors,
or Abbettors.
by all Indifferent and Vnconcerned men, The sole Authority of Those who Began
it, can never make it Justifiable. The Case is clear in Civil Affairs: For
example, In that ungodly Rebellion raised in England Against our lawful
Sovereign; as also in Ecclesiastical, Witness, the Arians Schism Against the
Church. These Partisans Authority alone, it is well known was Too Weak, and
Insufficient to Justify either of these impious Facts.

10. To that Talk of a Sight of difficulties, I Answer: He, who for seeming
Difficulties will leave an Ancient Church, Whoever leaves an Ancient Church for
seeming difficulties, may as Easily Relinquish all Christian Religion.
Shall at last be forced to Abandon all Christian Religion, which certainly
has its Difficulties: (And, are there none, Think you, against our Protestants
Novelties?) I say therefore, supposing we once Digest the hard Mysteries of
Christian Faith common to us all: So Few, So Slight, so Invaluable are the
Difficulties Against our Church, That when One seriously Reflects on this
Churches long Continuance, on the several Councils convened in it, on the
different Judgments of learned men, on the various Dispositions of People and
Nations, which make it up etc. (All apt enough according to nature to breed
Endless Dissensions) He must say, if a spark of It is a special Providence That
Difficulties are no Greater in the Church.
Reason live in him: Digitus Dei est hic. The work of God and a Special
Providence over his Church Appears in this alone, That Difficulties are no
more, nor greater in so long standing a Moral Body, Than those slight ones are,
which causelessly Affright our Adversaries. Do not then, I say, Desert Christian
Religion Totally, upon the Account of those difficil Mysteries, it Teaches: You
can never in prudence Relinquish this Ancient Church, For Pretended
Contradictions in Councils, for supposed Superstructurs, Innovations and such
like Trifles, which (Though stumbling Blocks to Sectaries) are no sooner looked
on, then removed, And put away By Most Satisfactory Answers.

CHAP. X.
The Roman Catholic Church, whilst Evidence comes not Against it, Stands Firm
Upon Its Ancient Possessed Right. This long Possession Proves the Church
Orthodox.
1. SOme perhaps may Object against the former Discourse. We Catholics do not
so clearly An Objection.
Acquit our selves of Error, Nor consequently of the Charge in being Cause of
Protestants Scbism, as we Rigourously Exact of them to have these Errors laid
evidently Forth against us. For, if One should Ask: How we Prove our Church to
be free from Error, and this clearly? Or, That by our Errors we Occasioned
not Protestants Separation from us, what shall we say? I Answer. Though we have
Demonstrations for the Truth of our Religion (supposing Christ once Established
a Church in the World) And Can show This Truth, by a close Order of Arguing in
Right Form, Yea, And we will Do it, when Sectaries have Satisfied our
Difficulties* Yet, to Solve This present Argument, We are not Obliged by the
Law of Disputation to Prove any Thing, Nor To do more Then only to Stand upon
our Guard and Defense. The Reason is. Our Protestants are here the Actours, the
Aggressors; Protestants because Aggressors are obliged to prove their charge.
It Is Therefore Their Task to Prove, ours only to Defend, which is Easy; if you
Mark How strangely in Vain They make Their Attempts Against us. Observe it.
After our Church, had stood a Thousand years and more in the quiet Possession
of Truth, They Accuse it of Their weak Attempts.
Error: After, so many Thousands of Learned and Virtuous men, that lived
Holily, And Dyed Happily in it; Yes, And Had Eyes as Quick, Judgments as Deep,
and Wills as good to Find out These Errors (Had any been) As the best of
Sectaries, yet found none; They, forsooth, Espy Them: After The Churches Purity
and Innocence,
This Church had its Purity and Innocence Signed and Sealed by the blood of
innumerable Martyrs, Evidenced by undoubted Miracles, Manifested by so many
Glorious Conversions wrought on Aliens, Drawn to Christ, And Finally
Demonstratively Proved by All Those Illustrious Marks of Truth, whereof we
Treated Above* Our Protestants Rise up, And Calumniate This great Society of
Christians, Lay a foul Aspersion of Heresy on it. Are not They, Think ye, as
Actors, Obliged in Justice to make Their Charge good Against us By Evident
Proofs? And, are not We Proved by a long Possession,
Exempted from all Further Obligation of Pleading, Then only to stand upon our
Ancient, Blamles, And Quiet Possession? Believe it. This OLIM POSSIDEO, PRIOR
POSSIDEO, is Warrant sufficient, And our Wall of Defense against such weak
Aggressors: And yet we Strengthen our Hold with Canon Proof (it is Evident
Reason also) Nemo praesumitur malus nisi probetur, No Man, upon vain And
Evident Reason also.
Presumption, ought to be accounted Naught, unles Reason Prove him a Delinquent.

2. For Example. Give me a Loyal Subject That has Don wonders and great
Service for his Prince; An Instance.
That has Enlarged His Kingdom, Gained Him Friends, Defeated His Enemies, And
yet is Struggling, to Do him More Service, Whose Repute was never Stained, nor
Fame Blemished etc. Suppose now, That a little Knot of unknown Men should Offer
at some Small or Vnconsiderable Proofs, And with These Endeavor to Impeach him
of Treason, would not the Prince, Think ye, Either Require Evidences to be
brought in against so worthy a Subject, or Reject These Accusers as unworthy of
Credit? Yes most Assuredly. This is our Case (Though no Instance, taken from
Private men, can The Church Evidently has proved her Fidelity to Christ.
Parallel the Fidelity of the Church Toward Christ) The Roman Catholic Church
(I speak of no other, For there is none) Has Faithfully Don Great Service For
the King of Kings Christ Jesus, It Has Dilated His Empire Far and Near, It
has Defeated His Enemies (Perfidious Heathens) Gained him Friends, and
Innumerable Servants. It yet Struggles (Maugre all Attempts Against it) to
Promote Hitherto of unspotted Fame before Sectaries impeachment.
his Honor, and Gain him More. So long it was of an Unspotted Fame, and
Accounted Pure without Blemish, Till now at last a Little Inconsiderable Knot
of Protestants Impeach it of Treason, and Makes it a Rebel Against that King,
For whom it has Served so long and Faithfully. What then, does our Lord Jesus,
And All Justice Too, Require of These Accusers But Evidence? Yes, And (if
possible) More then Evidence is necessary, to make Their charge good against
This Church. It Has Evident Proof enough of its Fidelity, Justice in this
charge requires Evidence, not unproved Cavils,
by its Faithful long Service, By its hitherto Irreprehensible Purity, Allowed
for a Thousand years and upward, And Therefore cannot be Supposed a Delinquent
upon mere Cavils, or For Things which look like Proofs, But when Examined, are
no Sooner seen then Slighted, no Sooner Weighed, then cast away as Weightles.

3. Take one instance more (Though none of the Another Instance Ad Hominem.
Best, it may yet best serve for Protestants.) Suppose, That another Kind of
Luther with a few Followers, once Protestants, as These were Anciently
Catholics, should now Separate from the Church of England, and Openly Accuse
all the Ministers within that Island of Error in Doctrine, of Injustice, of
Schism, of Their Forcing Scripture by Vnproved Glosses, to say what God never
Spoke, etc. The Accusation certainly would be looked on by Ministers As a
Heinous Calumny. What is to be Done? Would not they, After a satisfactory
Answer returned to the Objections of these Supposed Calumniators, Hold
Themselves Unblemished, upon the Account of their supposed Ancient good Fame,
Thus much is only supposed to give force to the Instance.
And (we must now Imagine it) of Their Unquestioned Integrity both in life and
Doctrine, whereof They have had Possession in men's Opinion for a hundred years
Together? Would they not All Unanimously say, That, by this very Maxim grounded
in Nature: Nemo praesumitur malus, nisi probetur, None, who had the Repute of
an Honest man is to Loos it, Unless Evidence com's against Him, And Blemish his
Honesty? Yes, All of them would swear it. They need not Therefore to Preach to
These Accusers, or, To show By Positive Arguments, How This is also only
supposed in their behalf, though not True.
Purely They Teach Christ's Doctrine, How Innocently They have lived, How free
from all Injustice, How Their Hearers have hithertho Reverenced them as Saints,
And Laborious Workmen in Christ's Vineyard. No. This (were it so) Proves it
Self. The very having Don Well in the Eyes of All, And so long, Carries with it
its own Evidence, And is Argument Enough. Wash They are not in Real Truth
Calumnies, but Verities.
then Away the Objected Calumnies (if yet Calumnies) And the Work is don, They
are Sound in Doctrine, Clear, Innocent, And Blamles, upon this False Supposition.

4. The Application of this Instance to our Present The Application of the
Instance.
Case, is easy. The first Luther accompanied with a handful of Men Accused not
only A Few Ilanders of Error, But a Church of a far larger Extent, Renowned
the whole World over. We have Answered to all Their Calumnies, not one
Objection is Omitted; If there be Any new Ones, For Gods sake, let us Hear
them. This Don, we stand still upon our Ancient Possession of Truth, and
Prepossessed good Fame in Teaching it. These What Evidenceth it self needs no
Farther Evidence.
Evidence Themselves, And need no further Proof; For This Argument is Good.
Once we were Honest men, And therefore are so now, Once Right in Faith, and we
are Right still, Unless Evidence Drive us out of our Ancient No less then
Evident Proofs can Drive us out of our Ancient possession.
Right, and Honesty. Solve then a few Objected Calumnies, The Work is don, we
stand upon Clear Ground, which is, The yet Unshaken Hold of our long Olim
Possideo, prior Possideo.

5. You will say. The whole force of this Instance comes to one Trial. Viz.
Whether we Catholics What Sectaries may Reply.
Have Already Solved, or can Solve as well the Objections of Protestants
Against our Church, As They are able to Vainquish what ever This now Supposed
Sect Proposes Against their new Doctrine. If The Parity Hold here, the Instance
Presses; If no, It is Forceles. Answer. Here, were it worth the While, We might
have Sport, and se How our Adversaries Either Pitifully Beg the Question in
what They say, Or License Every Man to be His own Judge, Though he Vent Plain
Haeresy, or Finally Draw Controversies into endless Cavilling. Observe it. They
say, They can better Solve the Arguments of These new Sectaries against
Themselves, Then we are Able to solve Theirs against us. Is not They beg the
Question.
this a mere Proofles Petitio Principi? Most Assuredly, Yes. And Mark how It
Goes on. Just as Protestants Tell us Catholics, That we solve not their
Arguments, These new supposed Sectaries Argue strongly against Protestants
so these New men stand stiffly to it, And Tell Protestants They Solve not
Theirs: And They Instance strongly Thus. You Think your Selves safe, And all
clear For you, when you say, Papists Answer not to what you Object Against
Them, And our Reply is the Same. We are as safe in saying Boldly, you Answer
not Our Objections Against you.. You say, you Solve our Arguments, We say, No.
Will you be Judges in your own Cause for the Affirmative? Permit us then to be
Judges in Ours, for the Negative. If you Say Again, you give a Probable
solution to our Objections; So Catholics Answer you. If you say, our
Objections do not so Evidently conclude Against you, But, That still you are
Able to Solve Them Negatively, That is to show, They do not force your
Understanding to yield to Them; So Catholics Answer you, with this Advantage,
That They can Enervate All you Object Positively by contrary valid Proofs, And
when This is don, Have Twenty for one as learned against you (Besides the
Infallible Church They Pretend to) That Vote and Voice for Them, and Pity your
Folly in Objecting. Now, if After all (Say These new Sectaries) you Protestants
Blame us for our late Separation made from the English Church, And therefore
Charge Schism on us, know, That Clodius accusat moechos, You Led the Danse, And
first Schismatiz'd from a more Ancient Church then we have don. You yet, Though
Formal Separatists, were not the Schismatics, But Rome that Gave you Cause,)
And just so we say. We are indeed the Formal Separatists from you, But your
Errors gave us just Cause to Part from you, And therefore the sin of Schism is
on your side. And thus, These Two Dissenting Parties Their Dispute is Endless,
because Neither own's a Lawful Judge, nor can come to certain Principlet.
may Dispute until They both are Breathles, And stand gazing on One an Other
without further Progress, Unless They bring Their Discourse to Vndubitable
Principles, or have Recours to some Third Equal Judge between them, or, Finally
Grant, which Evidently follows, That without a Judge, or Certain Principles,
The worst of Haeresies may be Defended, if every one may first Accuse his
Adversary, And then give sentence for himself: For there is no Arian, no
Nestorian, But Every one Thinks well of his Heresy, and will pretend as
Protestants do, that his Arguments are not solved.
Thinks well of his Errors, And will, at least, Pretend (as our Protestants
do) that his Arguments for them Are not solved.

CHAP. XI.
Of a late VVriters Exceptions Against our Pleading Possession.
1. IT is very True, Did not I se the Strain of Sectaries Mr. Stillingfleet.
Arguing to be Every where like it self, weak, and deficient, I should scarsly
have thought, that a man of parts could Have missed so enormously, as one does
in this Controversy, whilst He gives you hints, of hitting the nail on the
Head, and saying much to the Purpose. Thus it is.

2. We Plead a lawful Succession from the Apostles times, And a quiet
Possession of Truth with it, by virtue of an Immemorial Tradition. Our
Adversary Tell's us. The Obligation of Proving lies upon us. Of proving what
for Gods sake? Marry that, which We are urged to prove, what is by it self, an
Evident proof.
Immemorial Tradition most Evidently Proves; in so much that we are now urged
to prove that Proof, which is alone its Own most clear Light, and undeniable
Evidence. They Proceed here, just as if One should bid me Prove, that All
Mankind Descended From Adam If Scripture were not, undoubted Tradition, would
prove, we all came from Adam.
(Had we no other Argument to Convince the Truth but immemorial Tradition)
Because, some (forsooth) may Imagine, without proof, that God in One Age or
other (though they cannot say when) broke of this lineal Descent, By creating a
new sort of men from whom we come, and not from Adam, which is Sensles. For the
Very Tradition alone has more weight in it to convince the Affirmative. We all
came from Adam, then, A pure Imagination without proof, to persuade the
contrary Negative. Take one Instance, perhaps more pressing, and significant. A
Kingdom, or, Commonwealth Proves the Succession of its Monarchs, or Princes,
for so long a time, by a Constant Tradition, never called into Doubt, or
questioned by Any. Suppose, some Zelots should begin to Quarrel with the states
of the Kingdom, And Tell them. Gentlemen, you are all Mistaken. Believe us. In
An Instance.
one Age or other, (though we know not when it happened) The lineal Race of
your supposed Kings, Failed. A Usurper Got to the Throne, by force, fraud, or
both, And it was He (it is true we cannot name the man) that brought in
Novelties, strange Opinions, Dangerous Maxims, contrary to your Ancient Laws
and Customs. Imagine, I say, thus much, would not these Novellists, think ye,
after no Small contempt, be put to their Proof, or be scornfully laughed at,
should they urge the Kingdom to Prove what is proved by certain Tradition? This
is our very case. We prove We prove as clearly the lawful succession of Popes,
and Catholic Pastors, as Any Kingdom the succession of their Monarchs.
the lawful succession of our Popes, of our Prelates, of our Pastors, and
People, by Undeniable Tradition from St. Peter to this present Age, And we are
now called on, To prove that, which the very strength and Efficacy of Tradition
Proves by it self, without more Ado. A most impertinent Demand. For, if He
that Denies the lawful lineal succession of Monarchs in a Kingdom, warranted by
undubitable Tradition, must, if He stand to it, be put to His Proof (the
Kingdom Proves enough by its immemorial Tradition) Much more are these men
forced to Prove in our Case, if they Oppugn the Tradition of a whole Universal
The Churches clear Evidence.
Church: For the Church gives in Her last and clearest Evidence, when she
Pleads undeniable Tradition, No man can require more.

3. You May say First. Beside Tradition, whereby the lawful Descent of Monarchs
is Proved, There are also Records at hand, to Confirm the Truth of the
Tradition. I Answer. The Church has as Good The Churches Records, as Ample, as
any in a Kingdom.
Records, whereby she manifests the lawful succession of Her Popes, Prelates,
and Pastors, as any Kingdom on Earth produces for the lineal Descent of its
Monarchs. Therefore it is you, that must show (And by sound Principles) as well
these Records to be forged, or Vnauthentick, as Oral Tradition (which is a
Distinct Proof) to be Falls, and Fallible. Both are above your Power, Skill, and
Learning. Be it otherwise, the Proof Certainly lies on your side. And It Is all
I Intend at present.

4. You may Reply secondly. The Instance of Records contrary to the Church
cannot be produced.
Monarchs succeeding in a Kingdom, Vpheld by Tradition is Forceles, if Contrary
Records be produced, and Prove that a Usurper Got in, and interrupted the right
line of Succession. The like, may have been in the Church, when Her Popes and
Prelates became Usurpers, and changed the Primitive Doctrine of it. Mark a
Supposition For a Proof, and, withal Observe How you cast the Obligation of
Proving on your Self. For, The Obligation of Proving is incumbent in our
Adversaries.
Now it is your Task to Produce These supposed Records Contrary to the lawful
Succession we Plead for. Show them therefore, And Argue by them, or, if you fail
in this, as you must Fail, The Tradition from our Ancestors stand*s still in
its Ancient vigor unshaken, against mere unproved Cavils, and Calumnies.

5. You may Thirdly Reply. That Instance of Monarchs lawful Succession in Their
respective Kingdoms, when warranted by undoubted Tradition, seems good and
convincing, because no Man Questions the Right, no Man within the Kingdom
Doubts of the Acknowledged Succession. But all is contrary in our present
Controversy; For, innumerable called Christians, do not only Doubt, But,
expressly Deny that Right, and lawfulnes of Succession which we Attribute to our
Church, to our Popes, and Catholic Pastors; Therefore, because the party
Fail's, The instance is forceles. First a Word Ad Hominem. Let it Pleas our
Adversaries to Declare plainly the Succession of Their Church, of Their
Bishops, of Their Pastors, by virtue of any Immemorial Tradition. Let Sectaries
must solve Their own Argument.
them also Vouchsafe to give in that Title, whereby They lay claim to a
Possession of Truth. What ever is Allegeable for the One, or Other, whether it
be Tradition, Scripture, or Fathers, will suffer more Contradiction from
innumerable Called Christians, then the least Article (if any were little) of
our Catholic Faith, Therefore they must Solve their own Argument. The Reason
is. If they plead Traditioin for a continued Succession of a Protestant Church
ever since Christ, the whole Christian World, yea, even Protestants themselves,
Oppose the Paradox. If Their Plea for Pure Protestancy, be Scripture, They Will
meet with as many Adversaries, Having not one Syllable for it in Gods Word. If
finally They make a Belief Common to all Christians to be Their Essential
Faith, None likes the Doctrine. Both Friends and Enemies, Catholics and
Haereticks, stand against them. Therefore I say once more, They must solve Their
own Objection. The Argument is solved.


6. Now you shall have my Answer, And I say, An Argument, That Draws all the
Force it has from the Opposition of Enemies, (And They were all known
Opposition of Heretics no proof against it.
Haereticks, that Opposed our Catholic Tradition) Destroys not only Evident
Truths, but also Impugn's Christ, and Christian Religion. Atheists make
Objections Against God, Jews Against Christ, yea, And the very Instance now
allowed of, supposes some wilful Zelots contrary to the common received
Tradition, of so many Monarchs undoubted Succession. You Christian Truths meet
with Adversaries. He that will side with such Opponents, shall at last desert
Christianity.
se Therefore, How weak this way of Arguing is. Believe it, There is no one
Christian Verity, but has its Adversaries, Therefore, the Man that will Side
with such Opponents, and Cavil also, Because a Company of Dismembered, and
jarring Sectaries Do so, must look how He striks, lest he cut to deep, and
Wound those, He would not hurt. For at last, He shall be forced to shake of the
very name an Notion of a Christian. I Will say in a word, what is more amply laid
forth Disc. 1. Chap. 7. n. 4. 5. We have an Ancient Church against these
Scattered Companies of Novellists, A Church united in Doctrine, Against their
Iarrs and Endless Dissentions. A Glorious Church manifested by such Marks and
Motives, as made the world Christian, And these plead against Their Vnevidenced
Opinions. Finally we have most certain Tradition, against their uncertain
Guesses. Upon such Proofs, which cannot be shaken, we stand; Therefore, unles
our Adversaries, beside the Multitude of Opponents, bring rational Proofs
against our Possession, which Rest at last upon undeniable Principles, We are
safe, and cannot be Danted. Alas, The mere Number of known Enemies, without
Evidence Clamours of known Enemies, without a rational Trial. Proofles.
to warrant what is Pretended, Seems much like unjust Clamours in a Disordered
Commonwealth, Loud It Is true, but as Sensles as Loud, when Reason ought to
have place, and plead the Cause, by Proofs and Principles. Therefore, we Appeal
to Principles; may They bear Sway, we are content, if not, We told you Above,
Though as many Heretics rise up against us, As there are Atheists opposite to
God, And Jews to Christ, We Regard them not, if they come Unarmed, and only
Fight by the Votes of their own Scattered and Divided Companies. But enough is
said of this Subject, in the Discourse now Cited.

7. Here, I Will only Add one Consideration more, And it is to Assure our
Adversaries Though, They run to passed Ages, that is, the whole world Over, and
Gather all the Votes of Enemies, either against the Possession, or, the Ancient
Tradition of our Church, They only give us a Number of jarring Suffrages, which
bound up together, cannot Amount to a weak Probability. A weak probability,
though granted, cannot clear Sectaries from Schism.
However, Let Truth suffer: Suppose them weakly Probable, is this enough, think
you, to warrant Sectaries Foul Schism? Is here Ground enough to Justify an
Evident Divorce made from an Ancient Church, wherein Their Ancestors Lived
peaceably time out of mind, Age after Age, without Trouble, and Disturbance?
No. All is improbable, For, what ever is less, then Evidence Grounded on sure
Principles, will show it self to be, as it is, a Proofles Cavil Against so long
prescription, and immemorial Possession of our Ancient Faith.

8. Some may yet Reply. All that is Said hitherto, An Objection.
Shows only a Personal Succession of Popes, Prelates, Pastors, and People in
foregoing Ages, But is far from Proving the main point in Controversy, (They
mean) a full and quiet Possession of Truth, which we make so Hereditary to
These Popes, and Bishops Descending from St. Peter, That it was never lost.
This, They say, is to be Proved. I Answer, We are yet obliged to prove nothing:
For, the very Testimony, the Unanimous When the Church gives in Her Evidence.
Sectaries are to Disprove it.
Consent, the Constant Tradition of our united and learned Church without more,
are most pregnant Arguments, as well for the Possession of Apostolical Truth
laid claim to, as, For the Personal Succession of our Catholic Pastors.
Therefore, unles Sectaries can weaken this Plea by a Contrary Evidence, more
strong then our Churches Tradition is (and then the Proving is incumbent on
them) we stand firm upon our Olim Possideo, which cannot be shaken. I say by a
contrary Evidence, Stronger then our Churches Testimony and Tradition. Speak
now, it is your time of Proving. What have you to Allege against This sole Want
of Principles makes Sectaries Cavils improbable.
Consent and Tradition? Is it Scripture? Produce it, And we are silenced, if
not, Vouchsafe to Hold your Peace Hereafter. Have you the Consent of Fathers,
or Ancient Councils to make your cause Good against our Pleading Tradition, and
the Ancient Possession, of Truth with it? No. Examen These learned Volums you will
not find one clear sentence, favoring your unjust Process Against a Church,
That made your Progenitors Christians. What then Remains Sectaries own Votes as
weightles, as the Arians
to Scare us with, But your own-self Simple Votes; and if these Cast, as it
were, in A balance Against our Ancient Possession, can out weigh it, and so
Deprive us of our Right, The Arians long since had Destroyed us all; for, Their
Votes were as weighty, as united as yours, Yes, and more numerous.

9. Well. Though we are not Obliged to prove, A Few Proofs briefly hinted at,
though we are not obliged to prove.
what both Tradition and our Ancient Possession Convince, I Will yet Hint, most
briefly, at a few Proofs in Behalf of our just Possession. First, it is an
undeniable Verity, that Christ founded a Catholic Church, And It Is as Evident
(Sectaries Confess it) that He invested the Roman Catholic Church in an
Ancient Possession of Truth. 2. It is an undoubted Verity, that Christ Christ
Abandoned not the Church He Founded.
never abandoned the Church He founded, For He told us: Hell gates should not
Prevail against it. He gave Assurance of his being with us to the end of the
world. The Church is the Pillar and ground of Truth etc. If therefore Christ
stood to his Word, and once established the Roman Catholic Church in Truth, it
is Orthodox still, and Preserved in Truth by His special Assistance. 3. It is
an Evident Verity, that God, whose Providence never Failed his Church, could
not permit this Ample, and Ancient Moral Body of Catholics to Cheat the world
by its pleading a Possession of Truth; if 't had none, for a thousand years
together, when, (which is deeply to be Pondered) there was not any A Truth well
to be Pondered.
other sound Church on Earth, for so vast a time, to Teach Christians the
Orthodox Faith of Jesus Christ. 4. We have our quiet Possession Acknowledged by
innumerable Votes of most learned Fathers. 5. And It Is a Greater Proof (For
nothing, Scripture excepted, can Parallel it.) The Testimony and warrant of
this Ample Catholic Society carries with it our Evidence, no less, for an
actual Prescription, Then for the Right, and Title of our long pleaded, and
enjoyed Possession. And who can suppose that all those Innumerable Professors
of this learned Church, by whom this Evidence was conveyed Age after Age, were
all besotted or deluded with Error? 6. And It Is an Evident Demonstration. No
Ancient or modern. Church reputed Orthodox by the Christian World, ever so much
as Quarrelled with the Roman Catholic Church, or once No Orthodox Church Ever
censured us for the want of a just Possession.
Questioned the Right of Her Possessing Ancient Truths, delivered by Christ and
his Apostles, none Censured it, none Condemned it, upon any supposed want of a
most just Possession, but only Known, and Professed Heretics, And to these our
English Schismatics Adhere; An Inference grounded on these Proofs.
with these, And no other, They side. If therefore The Foundations of our Church
were once laid firm by Christ. If He stand to his Promise Expressed in
Scripture. If his Assistance Fail not the Church, Once Established by him. If
God could not (...) this great Moral Body to Deceive Christians, by Pleading a
Possession of Truth when it had none, And when there was no other Orthodox
Church to deliver Christian Verities to the world. If Finally, The Authority of
our Church, And the Testimonies of most Ancient Fathers may speak in our Cause,
And this Convincing Proof also have place. None (Ever Gainsaid our Ancient
Possession But know and condemned Heretics. We may well Hope to silence our
Adversaries at present, or, if these Persuasive Reasons, with many other,
Insisted on Hereafter, Become insignificant to Their Obdurate Hearts, when They
can not speak a Reasonable word Against our Evidences, what shall we Do, But
Commiserate Their Condition? You se, How roundly I deal with Sectaries cannot
Answer our Proofs.
Them, And say, They cannot speak a probable Word Against These Positive
Proofs, Though, (whilst we plead Possession) it is their Task to Prove, who are
the Accusers, And Charge Heresy on us.

10. Observe therefore. If they say, our Savior What They are to Prove.
once settled not the Roman Catholic Church in Truth, They are to Prove it. If
they say, He violated His Promise, And preserved not the Church, He founded in
Perpetual Truth, They are to prove it. If They say, We misunderstand the
Scriptures now cited, They are to Prove. If They say our Catholic Church
cheated the world for ten whole Ages together by pretending Possession of
Apostolical Verities when it had none, They are to Prove. If they say our
Church was once Sound in Faith, but failed Afterward, They are to Prove, And
withal, Distinctly to point at some other Orthodox Christian Society, that
Succeeded in the place of the Roman Church, now (falsely) Supposed Fallen into
Error, And This will give Sectaries work enough. Again: If They Slight The
Authority, and Testimony of our Church, Evidenced by most glorious Miracles,
And other Illustrious Marks of Truth, They are to give, in Lieu of that, a more
Valid Testimony, a stronger Authority For Their Pretenses, which is impossible.
If Finally, They Talk of any Orthodox Church. That plainly Censured, or,
Condemned the Roman of Error and Heresy, (And Herein we Urge Them to speak to
the Cause) the Proof lies still on their side: or, if they Prove not. Believe
it, our OLIM POSSIDEO, is impregnable; The Presciption, and clear Evidence of a
long quiet Possession, are our wall of Defense, not to be battered, or Beaten
down by Calumnies.

11. Thus much premised. You shall se in Brief, How The Objections of our
Adversary, showed forceles.
all comes to Nothing, Wherewith This late Writer too weakly Oppugn's our
Ancient Possession, who, After His Telling us Part 3. c. 5. Page 627. That the
Proof lies upon us, He gives this Reason, And let it be His first Objection.

12. They who Challenge full and quiet Possession, by virtue of immemorial
Tradition, and succession from Their Ancestors, ought to produce the
CONVEYANCE of that Tradition from him, who alone could invest them in that
Possession. Mark these Mysterious Words. Ought to produce the Conveyance of
that Tradition from him etc. What signifies This? Had He said. They ought to
Produce a Conveyance, warranting the Possession of Truth to be in their Church,
we would have sent Him back to the Proofs Already Alleged, And Here only
Insisted on our Tradition: But to Demand for a Conveyance of our very The
Efficacy and force of Tradition.
Tradition, which is either by it self, its own most manifest and clear
Conveyance, or must be proved by another clearer Tradition, (And so in
Infinitum) Tend's, Methinks, a little toward Nonsense. Truly I know not what
the man would be at. Would He Have us, Think ye, to Produce a Letter written by
Christ Jesus (for, Conueyance Here must Signify, Charta, or, No Charter or writ
stronger then Tradition.
Instrumentum) whereby it may Appear, that the Tradition of our Church is Sound
and Orthodox? This would signify just Nothing. Because Sectaries might more
justly Cavil at such a writing, And say it is Forged, Then they can now Except,
against the greatest Testimony Imaginable of a whole Learned Church that must
Give Credit to this Writing, if 't have Any. Therefore, He who can Doubt of this
Attestation of a The Reason.
far Extended Church, May more Rationally Doubt of the Writing it self, Though
it were now actually laid before our Eyes to Read. Se more of This Subject
Above Chap. 7. n. 7. 8. Perhaps, our Adversary will say we are to produce
Scripture, if not for The Conveyance of our Tradition, at least for the
Possession of Truth we pretend to. I Answer, This is now Don, Our Proofs are
Already given.
n. 9. 10. where I Tell you that Christ founded the Roman Catholic Church in
Truth, And promised to be with the Church He Founded to the End of the World:
Withal, that no Orthodox Church Ever opposed this just Possession etc. It
therefore lies on our Adversaries to Disprove These Scriptures, And to Weaken
those Reasons by sound Principles, or, at least to Offer at an Answer, which, I
Think, will be Difficil to Do by Any Proof. That Is weakly Probable.

13. In the Interim you se the Strain of Sectaries Writing The Strain of
Sectaries writing Controversies.
Controversies. It is Ever to be Cavilling at our Tradition, at our Possession,
and Prescription. And Thus they run on as if their Cause were not at all
Concerned, Though it should be otherwise; For, do not Protestants Protestants
pretend to a Possession of Truth.
as well pretend to a Possession of Truth, as Those They call blind Papists?
Yes. And will They not say, that the Truth they Lay claim to, is either a
Belief Common to all Heretics, or, the Particular Doctrins of the English
Church? Yes, For they will have no Mixture of Popery with it. Well. Now we Urge
them to produce a Conveyance From Him alone But can produce no Conveyance from
him that could invest them in it.
who could invest them in the Possession of Either the One, or other Doctrine.
Here You Will have them Silent, For, not so much as a Syllable of Scripture, nor
one clear Sentence of a Father, least of All, Any Ancient Tradition, Ever
Favored such Extravagancies. However, you must have patience, And Hear
Sectaries Loud in Their Complaints Against our Tradition and Ancient
Possession, And It Is no wonder; For, It Is easier to Cavil at Truth, Then to
speak sense For Falsehood.

14. A second Objection. It is Plain in this Case ( viz. Of Prescription, or
Possession) The full Right depend's not upon mere Occupancy, But, a Title must
be pleaded, to Show that the Possession is Bonae fidei; so that the Question
Comes from The Possession, to the Goodness of the Title. Answ. By This Word,
Right, or, Title, I understand a just and meet Reason, Allegeable For What Is
meant in this place by Right and Title*
that, whereunto a man lays Claim, And, whereof He had Possession for long a
Time. As if One should Ask an Ancient Gentleman by what Right He Hold's His
lands, And How long He has Had Them? He Answers. They were settled on Him by
His Ancestors, (And here is His Title.) Both they And He, have quietly
Possessed Them, without Cavils, Cavils Against known Right Proofles.
for a thousand years etc. Suppose now, A wrangling Lawer should Tell the
Gentleman. Sir, whatever becomes of your long Possession, I Question your
Right, or Title, And therefore say, your Possession is not Bonae fidei, But a
mere Occupancy. Would not This busy Fellow, think ye, if He said no more, be
put to His Proof, when the Gentleman shows His Right, and justly plead's his
long Possession? Yes, most Assuredly. Here is Our very Case. It is more The
Right and Churches Title.
certain, that the Roman Catholic Church was Once most lawfully invested in
the possession of Truth by the Gracious Goodness of Him that founded it, (Then
ever Any was lawfully settled in Right of His lands) For so much ^he whole
World, and Sectaries also Acknowledge, as undoubted: And Here is The Churches
First Right, or Title. It is Again most Evident, That Innumerable of unspotted
Fame, of Great Learning, Sanctity, and Virtue Have not only Avouched This
Blessing to be once Conferred on the Church, But Moreover, have professed
Themselves, to be The Heirs and Professors of it.
Heirs of this Ancient Right, And so Far, the Professors of Those Primitive
Verities, That They ^onveyed them Age after Age to posterity (I say No more
yet, but only what they Professed.) Now Starts up a Minister, And Tell's the
Church (just as the Lawer It Is Tacitly supposed by our Adversary an Occupancy,
but not Proved.
Does the Gentleman) She has no Right nor Title, But a mere Occupancy, That Is
no Possession. The Church proves this Right first to have been Conserted by one
that could give it. Then She shows it, to have Remained with Her in Every Age
By sure Witnesses of Virtue and Integrity. Must not therefore this Minister,
Think you, that Contrast's with such Witnesses, And Encounters such an Army of
old Tried Soldiers be put to His Proof, and Fight lustily by Evidence, And, if
possible, with Stronger Proofs? Is All manfully Don (Pray you Judge) when He
wholly supposes, what Should be proved, And is pleased to Miscal our Ancient
undoubted Right, our just Title, and Unquestioned Possession by a new Coined
word of Occupancy; Let him Keep the Occupancy to Himself, and Apply it to His
Protestant Religion, That Has neither Right to plead by, nor Title, nor any
Ancient Possession.

15. A Third Objection. If we plead Possession by immemorial Tradition from
Ancestors many things are to be Contested, and this is one, That no Antecedent
Law has determined Contrary to what we challenge by virtue of Possession. Very
Good. When you, Sir, Show us this Antecedent Law, Contrary to what Our
Adversary is to Show an Antecedent Law contrary to our Possession.
we Challenge by virtue of our Possession, we will yield. But you are to make
this Evident, And, Consequently the Proof Lies on you, which will be a hard
Task, For we Know, There is no such Law against us.

16. A fourth Objection. Christ's Law has Determined Matters of Difference
between us one way or other: For Example, Whether the present Church be
Infallible, or no. If the Law has Determined Against us; Possession, And
Prescription signify Nothing, If for us, The Question must be wholly Removed
from the Plea of Possession, And be tried on This Issue, whether Christ by his
Law has determined on The Legislators Determination.
your side or Ours. I Answer. The Legislator has most plainly Determined for
the Infallibility of that Church which He founded, And though you slight those
Sacred Texts, Super hanc Petram. Pasce Oves. E^o Vobiscum, or what Else you
pleas, They are yet Vigorous Proofs Against your mere Cavils. Therefore, Because
you Offer to be Tried upon this Issue. Whether Christ We like our Adversaries
Offer.
has Determined for you or us, we Accept of the Challenge, And are ready to
Dispute by Scripture only. Produce then your Texts, as plain and significant
for the Fallibility of the Roman Catholic Church, Once Confessedly True, As
these now Hinted at, and many more Cited Above, are for Her Infallibility. This
don you may Vapor as much as you Pleas, And Offer to be tried by Law, etc. But
we know your Want; you have not, after All this Talk, a Syllable of Scripture
Sectaries Have no Scripture Against the Churches Infallibility.
Against our Churches Infallibility. Now, to the other Horn of the Dilemma
where you Say, (if Christ's Law has Determined on our side, the Question must be
removed from the Plea of Possession, and be tried by the Law.) I Answer, It Is a
strange Piece of an Argument, The Question ought not to be removed from the
Plea of Possession.
And say, it must not be removed, Unless you can Show by your Logic, That, when
A Man has two Good Proofs for a Verity. He ought not to make use of both, but,
is to Content Himself with the one only. Thus it is. We prove the Churches
Infallibility by significant Scripture, as a Possessor Bonae Fidei proves the
Right to His Lands by his Ancient Writings. And, An Instance.
as He Add's to His Writings, a just Possession: So we plead Also Possession in
our Case, Why therefore should we throw Away this second proof taken from
Possession, unles An Evident Law Come Against it, which we expect from you, but
Fear it not. Sir, you Possess a Benefice, And can, if need be, show How you
came by it; whether it be a Writing, or, some Thing equivalent, it Imports not;
You have beside, the Possession of it. Suppose now, Any One would Endeavor to
Disturb you, or Doubt of your supposed Right, You would Plead both These
Titles, Would you not? Answer This and, your Objection is solved.

17. A Fifth Objection page 628. Lies I know not How, wrapped up in twenty
Obscurities. It is much to This sense. We must prove, that there is no other
way to Interpret the Law of Christ, but by our Church. Withal, That the Church
cannot come into a Possession of Any Thing, but what was Originally Given Her
by the Legislator. Mark upon what Duties we are Sectaries put us on Duties
which they cannot Comply with.
Put. We must prove, And by the ^aw (For Here is the last Trial with These men)
that our Church Interpret's faithfully, whilst They sit Down speechles, as it
were, in their own Cause, And must not prove, That their Church Interpret's
better. Moreover; Note also by the way, How the whole Question is The Question
is removed from the Law to Interpretations.
now removed from the Law, and comes to This Issue, whether Our Interpretation
or Theirs, be more Conformable to Gods Word. Most certainly, Their
Interpretation is worth little, because confessedly fallible, And Therefore,
Proceed's not from the Infallible Assistance of the Holy Ghost, As is Amply
Declared The proof lies on our Adversaries.
Disc. 2. c. 9. n. 7. 8. 9. where we propose the Difficulty, And Prove, That
One Only Oracle, Christ's own Spouse, which is Assisted by the Holy Ghost,
Interpret's Scripture Infallibily. Now, if our Adversary Except's Against our
Scriptures And Reasons there Alleged, The Task of Proving will ly on Him; For
He must either Prove, That our Proofs are Proofles, or That His, Far surpass
them in worth, And a clearer Evidence, And He will find an Insuperable
Difficulty in Both. All I say now, is. Though the Interpretation of our Church
were Fallible, it is as good as yours; And if we respect its Age, which gives
some Pre-eminence, it may be Accounted much better. We have largely Answered to
the other part of the Objection, in the whole first Discourse, And Proved, that
the Church cannot Come into the Possession of Any Doctrine, but what is Allowed
of by the Legislator. It Is otherwise, A fallible Church may boldly Err.
I am sure, with your Church, which, because Fallible, may Alter, when, and as
often As Sectaries Pleas. To end, Our Adversary Should have known that the
Matter now Debated, Depend's not Immediately on the Churches Infallibility, for
Here is our Immediate Plea. The Church was Once true, And ever since its first
Foundation, Pleaded Constantly this quiet Possession of Truth. Ergo unles that
first ground be shaken, And this Pleading Possession be Evidently Disproved, it
ought to be supposed true still: And thus You se how the obligation of Proving,
lies irremovably on our Adversaries.

19. There yet Remain some other wordy Objections, but I wave them, because They
are solved, And in real Truth, are mere Suppositions, and no Proofs. Sometimes,
They will Have Tradition to be Proved, which is its Own manifest Proof.
Sometimes They tell us, that a bare Possession in matters of Religion is a
sensles Plea (They suppose we have no more.) Sometimes, that we are plainly the
Imposers, And They Not Aggressors, And both are supposed. I pass these, and now
hasten to one Objection more, solved in a Third Proposition.

CHAP. XII.
An other Objection. And whether Protestants can Acquit themselves of Schism.
1. SOme may Argue further, And say, we have A simple Objection.
hitherto Supposed a Wrong Principle, Viz. That our Errors are to be showed us
Evidently, which is not so. For, it is Enough to make them known by strong
Moral Proofs, These sufficiently Convince us as Guiltly, And Clear Them of the
crime of Schism. Neither can we have stronger Arguments Then moral in this
Matter, Because Principles of Faith are not Evident in Themselves; All Discourse
Therefore built on Them, must Fall short of Metaphysical Evidence. Observe in
Passing. If our Protestants (As They think) Bring strong moral Arguments
Against our Supposed Errors, We give Them As Good as They Bring, And clear our
Cause by as strong good moral Solutions to those Arguments (They say the one,
and we the other) Who must be Believed? Or, Who must Judge here? And, if Again,
They hold themselves, by Force of such moral Proofs, Acquit of Schism (which
all Sectaries Pretend to) we Charge it again on them, By far more valid
Arguments. Who Judges now? Who is to be Believed? Neither of us yet, For
Hitherto we only Talk without Principles. Yet the Catholic has his Principle
in Readiness: A LONG ANCIENT POSSESSION now insisted on The Catholic Answer
founded on a certain Principle.
(which is eleven Points of the Law.) But By what good Law do our Protestants
take this Right from him, or Turn him out of Possession? By what strong moral
Proof, grounded on an undubitable moral Principle, can They convince us of
Errors, and clear Themselves of Schism? I Will Tell you (and it is a Truth) They
have neither We would Gladly Hear of Protestants Proofs against us, reduced to
sound Principles.
Proof nor Principle to rely on, But their own Proofles word. If I wrong them,
They can Right Themselselves, and convince me by good Arguments in Form. To
what is Added of the Vnevidence of Faith, I Answer: Though the Principles
Thereof, For example, the Words of Scripture, or the Definitions of Councils
want Metaphysical Evidence in themselves (Because only revealed Principles of
Faith once admitted of may ground a certain Conclusion.
Truths) Yet They are certain, And, once Admitted of as Certain, can Ground a
Discourse, which (if well Deduced) need's no more to Faulter, or Deviate from
good Form, then if we Argued out of Euclid's Principles. Thus much per
transennam. Now to answer the Argumen Home, Here is

2. My Third Proposition. Protestants Cannot so much as Probably Acquit
Themselves of Schism, nor Probably impeach the Roman Catholic Church of Error
Causal of Their Schism. I prove the first part of my Assertion. No Probability
can Acquit them of Schism, when Evidence lays That crime on them, But this is
True; And to prove the Assumption, I will not Here Tell Them, Evidence lays
the Crime of Schism on Protestants.
How Improbable it is, That This Schism, which took its Rise from one
Discontented Luther, and a Disgusted Prince, can have any Good in it; The cause
from whence it came look's like naught, And the Doleful Effect which Followed,
wors. Nor, will I urge Again How Improbable it is, That this one Prince, and
one Friar (of lives confessedly Vicious) can be Supposed to have gone About any
Work of God or Piety, when mere Passion Hurried them on to struggle Against
Their own Consciences, Against a whole Church, And the Faith of their Deceased
Ancestors. These Considerations I Will wave.

3. Yet, I cannot But Note how improbable it is, To Suppose, That All those
learned Councils which Anciently Taught Christianity; All those Learned
Bishops, Those Doctors, Those Religious, who like Stars Beautified the
Terrestrial Heaven of the Roman Catholic It is improbable to say that
Sectaries Discovered Errors in the Church unseen by Thousands more learned and
numerous then They.
Church for a Thousand years Together, Had, notwithstanding Their Vigilance,
such a Mist cast before Their Eyes, as not to Discover Those Palpable Gross
Errors which our Protestants have now so lately Espied. Say Therefore (the
Question is worth Answering) How came it to pass, That our Protestants first
saw these Errors, And upon that Monstrous Sight Quitted Rome, whilst Others
As Sharp-sighted, as Numerous, And learned as They, Saw none of them for many
Ages Before? Speak probably. Why, for example, Did not so Eminent a Saint and
Doctor, as St. Gregory the Great was, or his Clergy, so many following
Innocents, so many Clements, so many Vrbans se these Errors, and upon the
Discovery, Separate themselves long since from this supposed Erring Church? I
would hear their Answer. If they except Against These, Because They were Popes,
I Ask, Why at least Did not so many Bernards, so many Malachies, so many
Bennets, so many Anselms, so many Kings, so many Princes (whose Temporal
interest, God knows, lay not in Adoring Rome) with innumerable Others long Ago
Desert This Supposed Erring Church, and Revolt from it as Luther did? Is it not
a Degree of Madness to Suppose. That All These Learned and innumerable
Professors must either be supposed stupidly blind or wickedly Hypocritical.
These Worthy, Powerful, and Learned Professors of the Catholic Faith, were
either so Stupidly Blind, as not to have seen Such Errors, or so Wickedly
Hypocritical as, to Have Winked at them, After a clear Discovery? I say more.
The Professors of this Church were so far of from not Seeing those Doctrins
which Protestants now call Errors: For example, The offering up of Sacrifice
For the Dead, Praying to Saints etc. That the Denial of them was Positively
condemned as Heretical, in Foregoing Sectaries. None shall ever Probably Answer
this Question no more, then give Satisfaction to an Other, Viz.

4. When this Schism was first made by a few Disgusted men in England, Why did
so many, not only in that Island, Though temporally Undone for their The
Opposition made so Universally against this Schism proves it monstrous.
pains, But innumerable more in the Christian World abroad Stand up Against it,
and Oppose it on its first Appearance, as a most Pernicious Novelty? All these
condemned it as Heretical, and Held the Broachers of it for Heretics. Now, had
either Goodness, Reason, or Religion accompanied this Schism, it should have
rather Gained an Universal Applaus from Others, more numerous and learned then
those were, who Began it. But all was contrary, it Appeared like another
Ismael. Manus eius contra omnes, and manus omnium contra eum, as Opposite to
All, so Universally Opposed by All; And how could these few Abberters of it,
When The intolerable Pride of Sectaries
this foul Work first Began, without intolerable Pride, Think Themselves Wiser
in Patronizing it, Then the Rest of the Christian World in Condemning it?

5. Here then is my first Argument Against this Schism. A new Sect, Schism, or
Heresy (call it what A new Doctrine never heard of before, and so Universally
Opposed, cannot be sound and Catholic.
you will) which was never Heard of before in the World, And on its first
Appearance, met with an Universal Opposition made by All other Christians, who
then Lived, Cannot be from God, or Sound and Approved Doctrine. But thus the
Schism of Protestants was, at its first Rise, Universally Opposed, And is so
yet: Ergo, it cannot be from God, or sound Doctrine. The Major is Evident in the
cases of Arius, Pelagius, and other Heretics: For the universal Dislike As is
clear in the cases of former Heretics.
and Opposition Raised Against These Schisms and Heresies were, even
Antecedently to Their Condemnation in Councils, Proof enough against them. And
if our Adversaries Require more; to wit a Council condemnation, We have it
Also. They cannot in Justice make Any more Exception Against the Council of
Trent, Then Arius made against the Nicene Council. The Minor is as clear; for
all Christians, who then were in being, Condemned the English Heresy and
Schism. Graecians Disliked it, and do so to this Day: Arians, Abyssins,
Nestorians etc. And, most of all Catholics oppose it so far, That not one will
Believe as Protestants Do. So True it is: Manus omnium contra eum, All banded
against this Novelty; Therefore it cannot be from God or approved Doctrine. Now.
That our Protestants since their first Rise, have Gained the company of some
few Iarring and Dissenting Brethren, Proves Nothing; For Arius in time Got
more, and I believe, had them better united in Doctrine, Then These ever will be.

CHAP. XIII.
A Second Argument Against this Schism. Of Sectaries Cavils Concerning Errors,
Entering the Church Insensibly.
1. I Argue 2. Protestants, seemingly at least, Own An Argument ad Hominem
against Sectaries.
a Holy Universal Catholic Church before Luther of a very large Extent, which
comprised a Generality of Christians Over and Above the number of Roman
Catholics. This Church was surely that Jerusalem (mentioned by the Prophet)
upon whose Wales Watchmen were placed, And were by Duty to Speak in Gods Cause,
when his Honor was Concerned. In this Church we shall Certainly find Those
Vigilant Pastors, Doctors, and Teachers, Ephesians. 4. Who Perfect Saints, and
still Edify the Mystical Body of Christ, to the end, That we be Protestants
highly Disgrace that large Catholic Church which They own,
not carried Away by every wind of Doctrine etc. Now I Assume. But, with our
Protestants leave, All the Watchmen, all the Pastors, all the Teachers of this
Ample and far Extended Church, were so Carelessly asleep, so Negligent and
Forgetful of their Duty,

For the vast interval of a Thousand years Together, That they took no notice
of These (now Imagined) Roman Errors by any Public Censure, or Condemnation;
But contrariwise Permitted Rome to Revel, to Countenance Error, Yea, and to be
quite carried Away with the Slight Doctrine (as They suppose) of an Unbloody
Sacrifice of the Real Presence, of Purgatory etc. Only, Forsooth, one Martin
Luther, and our Protestants, had such quick eyes as to Se Them, and upon the
sight to Hold themselves Obliged in conscience, to make an eternal Divorce from
this Church, wherein they were Baptized. Observe here not only Paradox upon
Paradox, But also a whole Heap of Impossibilities pack't together. Our New men
saw These too plain and visible Errors; But this large Vigilant Church saw
Them Protestants make Themselves more wise, vigilant, and zealous then then
their large Catholic Church.
not. They were so Sensible of the Honor of Christian Faith as to Condemn
Them; But this great Church was so Sensles as to Dissemble All. They now
Separate, Spurn, and Kik at this Church As Antichristian, But That Ample
Catholic Society did never so much as put a Mark of Dishonor on Rome, For
want of true Doctrine. If ever such a Mark, Note, Censure, Private or Public
Act, Issued out from an Universal Church Against the Church of Rome, Let them
speak, And I Will be silent Hereafter: If not, it is A Strange Boldness To make
Themselves more Wise, Zealous, and Vigilant, then that Universal Church was
(which Here to their Prejudice They own) Because, forsooth, Rome must loos the
Title of the Church Universal.

2. Our Protestants therefore must grant (there is no Denying it) That, Either
This Universal Church had lost Her Eyes, or was more then Impiously. Negligent
over the Charge committed to Her, which was to Teach, to Instruct, to
Reprehend, and Crush Heresies as They Appeared; Or (which is the Real Truth)
That They find Fault with Errors which never were. Now Here Observe, an Other
great Advantage given against Themselves, And How They Honor Rome, and Disgrace
Their own imagined and more Universal Church. The Diligence of the Roman Church
compared with the Negligence of Their great Imagined Catholic Church.
The Church of Rome was Vigilant, And (as the World knows) Ever Ready, Age
after Age, to Suppress Heresies as they Rose up, and Declare Against Them
(Witness the Condemned Arians, Nestorians, Monothelits etc.) But this imagined
Universal Church was so Sleepy and Vnconcerned, as to Permit one Particular
Church (For Rome, They say, was no more) To Own, and strongly to Foment Those
very Errors (And this without so much as a word of Reproof) which Caused our
Conscionable, and tender Hearted Protestants to Schismatize as they did, and
Bid Adieu to Rome For ever. A strange Tenderness of Conscience The tender
Conscience of Protestants.
Indeed, which (to take of the Guilt of Schism from Themselves) does not only
cast an Eternal Ignominy upon this Vast Imagined Church, But makes it also
Sinful and Damnable, For Dissembling so long with Errors, which caused at last
our Protestants Schism.

3. What can they reply to this Argument? Will they say, This Great Society of
Christians had not power to contrast with the Roman Church? The whole is
greater then a Part, and Rome, They say (If Yet so much) Was only Part of that
Universal Society. However, If Power was wanting, where was A vast
improbability, That one Luther can be supposed to have had more knowledge and
Zeal then this whole Church.
the zeal of this Church? Can one Luther, and His few Associats Be Supposed to
have had more zeal, Then flamed in the Hearts of so many Pastors and Doctors For
ten Ages Together? They may Reply. The Church of Rome was ever Held sound in
Fundamentals, Though not every way Right in Faith, Therefore this great Church
Thought it better patiently to wink at these lesser Faults, then to raise a
Tempest in the Christian World, not A Reply.
easily calmed. Observe first: How These men, when They have said much, and
Proved nothing, know every Thing without new Revelations. First, They know
where this vast Church was, Though no body ever yet Heard of it. 2. What it
Thought. 3. Upon what Motives it Dissembled so long etc. But let all this Pass.
My Answer is. Ex ore tuo te judico. Did this Church Prudently wink at these
less Protestants ought to have proceeded as Their Imagined Church Did.
Supposed Errors, Because not Fundamental, nor Destructive of Salvation? Why
did not our good Protestants do so also? Did it Hold it safer to sit down
Quietly, Then to raise a Tempest amongst Christians? Why did not our
Protestants take to the far^e Course also? In Doing so, They had made Themselves
as well Inheritors of their Forefathers Peace and Wisdom, as They now are of
their Lands. But to Disown the better Inheritance, to Condemn their Ancestors,
and a whole Church beside of Error, To make a violent Bustle, a hideous Tumult
in the Christian World, upon Little Causes, is in a Their open Injustice and
plain Rebellion is undeniable.
word open Injustice, And flat Rebellion. I say upon Little Causes: For in
Kingdoms and Commonwealths, where the Laws are without Exception good, it is
hard to find the Practical Government so free from all Misdemeanors, But that
you will have Eyes enough to Espy Them, and Hearts ready, upon very Little
Feeling, to Clamor against Them: Yet Licencence once these Malcontents to
Rebel when they feel a little Smart, and Adieu, say I, to all Loyalty: Civil
Government License Malcontents to rebel upon little Agrievances, and all
Government is destroyed
is Destroyed, both Regal, and Other. Admit therefore, That, there Had been
Abuses in the Church of Rome, as also (which is False) it had Failed in
Non-fundamentals of Faith, Yet Evident Reason shows the Schism made by
Protestants to be Inexcusable. For, as that man Commit's an Inexcusable Crime,
who for little Agrievances in a Kingdom wherein He is born, Openly Rebels
against it, So He Commits a higher Offense, if for petty Faults, He Rebell's
against an Ancient Church, wherein he was Baptized. Now it was as Clear to the
First Schismatizing Protestants, That the Church of Rome was the Mother Church
that gave them Baptism, as it is clear to any Subject in the World, That such a
Kingdom first gave him Life. Unpardonable Therefore is the Crime of Schism i^
cannot suppose a just Cause.
Schism in Every one, which can never Suppose a just Cause. And thus much not
only the Holy Fathers do, but our Protestants also, Must Confess: For, to Tell
me on the one side, That the Church of Rome has All A Paradox. The Church of
Rome want's Nothing Necessary to Salvation, yet it is Necessary to Salvation to
leave it.
Things Necessary to Salvation, And yet on the Other, to Assert, It is
Necessary to Salvation to leave it (when it want's nothing Necessary) is
Implicatory in Terms, Yea, and Gives Liberty to Protestants to Leave their own
Church when they list; where there is Danger enough of more then little
Errors, which Prejudice Salvation.

4. And here is Proof enough of the other Part of my Assertion, which was:
Protestants cannot probably Impeach the Roman Catholic Church of Errors,
Causal of their Schism. You have already the Reason. For if Faults, less or
more Usually seen, even in well ordered Commonwealths, can not give just Cause
of public Rebellion, much less could These Supposed Faults And unproved
Sectaries must either Convince us of Errors highly Fundamental, or They are
plain Schismatics.
Errors, not Fundamental in the Church of Rome, give just Cause to our
Protestants of Their shameful Schism against it. Therefore They ought to
convince us of Errors highly Fundamental, And so make us no True Christian
Church, or, They must sit Down Branded with the black Note of both Causal and
Formal Schismatics. There is no avoiding it.

5. Again I Argue. If Errors Causal of Protestants Schism Invaded the Church
of Rome, They entered After the first 4. or 5. Hundred years; For so long (say
They) That Church was Orthodox: But it is more then Improbable, That such a
Deluge of them, as our Adversaries Charge on us, Invaded that Church, and
Diffused Themselves all Over. I prove the Minor. The high improbability of
Errors, Entering the Church, laid forth.
They could not Enter this Church without Public Defense, and Public
Resistance. Defense, in Those who first Heretically Vented Them: Resistance in
others, who Catholickly Opposed Them. But there was never since Christ's Time,
Any such first Public Heretical Defense, nor first Public Catholic
Opposition of These Supposed Errors. The Real Presence; The Sacrifice of the
Mass, Prayers for the Dead, Prayer to Saints etc. Only Heretics Condemned for
their Pains Opposed them, But no others. Let us therefore Appeal to Reason, and
Ask. How it A clear Conviction of Sectaries.
was Possible, That such loud Clamorous Novelties could so silently, And as it
were by night, Creep into a Church, and no Body Discover Them on their first
Appearance? How was it Possible, That they could become Public Owned Objects
of men's Fairh, and Gain an Universal Belief through a whole Ample Church, And
no Body yet know when this new Belief (or, Unheard of Professed Faith) first
began? Nothing can be more Improbable, Paradoxal, and morally Dr^wn from the
Moral Impossibility of the Entrance of these supposed Errors.
more Impossible. And

6. To show you further the Impossibility of this Clandestine Entrance of
public Errors into a Church, without Public Notice or Clamours against Them,
Be pleased to Reflect here upon one Instance. Suppose, That a new sort of men
should now begin to Broach an Impious Doctrine, And openly Teach An Instance
confirm's all that is said.
that the water in Baptism, which washes away sin, is ^s Really the True Blood
of Christ, And Therefore worthy of Adoration, as Catholics Hold a consecrated
Host to be his Sacred Body, and upon that Acount Adorable. Would not such a
Novelty (Think ye) where it Publicly Begins, be Publicly also Clamor'd
against by Sound and Orthodox Christians? Yes. And if it Gradually got ground,
or more Followers in Time (not easily Suppressed) Would it not, as well As all
other Heresies, which have troubled the World, Remain upon Clear and Undoubted
Record for Posterity to read? Certainly yes. Yet more: Can this Persuasion live
in any rational Man, That such a Novelty might in time be so Held an Article of
Faith by a Most Ample and Learned Church, That The Professors Thereof would Die
for it? The Seven Wonders of the world are not Comparable to this one. Observe
the Application. There was a time (say The Application of the Instance.
Protestants) to wit For the 4. or 5. first Ages after Christ, When the whole
pure Primitive Church, no more Believed Christ Sacred Body to be Really and
Substantially under the Species of Bread, Then now we Believe His Sacred Blood
to be under the Species of water in Baptism. There was a Time when the One as
little Deserved Worship, or Adoration as the Other. For, both were only Holy
Signs, and no More. There was a Time when this whole Church grew Mad, and
Brought in the most Palpable and Erroneous Novelty that ever the World Heard
of, or Record Preserved, What? A piece of bread before not Christ's Body, was
then (O Strange Time!) Believed to be his Body; A whole Ample Learned Church
was then Cheated into that Belief; And whereas, it once Deserved no Worship (say
our Protestants) All at last fell down and Adored it in the Open View of the
World; And to Testify that They did so in Earnest* Innumerable have shed their
blood in Defense of what they Believed. Yet (and here is the Wonder of Wonders)
Evidences Against Sectaries.
no man can say: Who those were that first introduced this supposed Monster of
Novelties. No man can say in what Age, under what Pope This Error First got
Growth, and Patrons for it. No man can Tell me, what Orthodox Christians first
stood up in Gods cause, and Opposed it. No man can Tell me, when this Visible
and Public Adoration of an Host Began. No man can Tell me, How, or when this
new supposed Coined Doctrine (Serpent like) first crep't into men's hearts, And at
last Poisoned A whole Universal Church. Hideous were these Novelties,
Prodigious these Visible No Author ever mentioned these Notorious, visible,
supposed Changes. Sectaries trifle whilst They oppose the Strength of our
Argument.
supposed Changes, Yet Hush! All passed in silence, no Body saw them, No body
mention's them, Not one Author (neither Friend nor Enemy) Writ them, or left
them upon Record. Is not this, Think ye, (whilst all other Heresies are most
exactly Registered) more then a Pythagorean and Prodigious Silence?

7. It is Pitiful to se with what petty Trifles, our Adversaries Oppugn the
Strength of this most Convincing Argument. Some tell us of a Beard growing gray
Imperceptibly, of the Index of a Clock moving Insensibly, of Tares peeping up
in a Field when men are asleep. And who can Question (says one very
Profoundly) the birth of an Infant, Because He knows not the time of its
Conception? Errors Therefore might grow up with like silence in a Church, and
as Insensibly. Observe this Trifling. We speak in the Instance now given of a
Visible Mountain, and our Adversaries Send us to seek for Invisible Moaths in
an old wasted Garment. Say, I Beseech you: Can they suppose That all Objects
are alike Discernable by our Senses? Or, is it as easy to find a needle in a
Bundle of straw, As to se Towers and Castles before our eyes in a fair Sun shin
day? The Supposed Novelty now Sectaries Parallel Things of their own nature not
perceptible, with Others most Visible and Manifest.
mentioned, the Supposed Change of a whole Church into another Belief, the
Imagined New Public Adoration of A Sacrament, were more Discernable and
Visible then Mountains and Castles, And cannot be Paralleled with the
Imperceptible Graynes of a beard, with Tares peeping up etc. However This we
can say. Certainly so many years since, the beard was not gray, now it is, So
many Months since, Tares were not, now they are. Let our Adversaries Proceed
with like Evidence against us, and say Certainly (not doubtfully) such Supposed
Errors Then were not in the Church, but afterward Began, and within the
precise Compass of so many years. But This They cannot probably Hint at. The
last Instance of a child's Conception is the worst of All; For if you know its
Birth, you know the conception was nine Months before, according to the
ordinary course of nature; Though if both were hid from us, it is a Forceles
instance, Unless we suppose that all Trivial Matters must as well be known, and
stand upon Record, as Things of greatest Concernment. The late woeful Burning of
London, will (I Will warrant it) be Exactly Recorded, when the birth of twenty
Infants is never thought on, and so should the General Ruin of Faith in a whole
Church, have stood Registered.

8. One word more. Though These Examples were Could Sectaries show how such
changes might enter the Church that proves not they entered.
to the Purpose (as indeed They are not) at most they would only show, and
Pitifully enough, How such supposed changes might perhaps be made: But are far
from Proving, They were made so De facto: For this carries no likelihood of an
Argument with it. I Will Show you how These Errors might Enter the Church
insensibly, How these Changes might get in with Silence. Ergo it was so, Thus
they were made, De facto. A Potentia ad actum non valet Consequentia. No man
can Argue from a An Inference from a mere Possibility to The Act is Null.
mere Possibility of their Clancular Entrance, that in real Truth They entered
in Such a manner. Sectaries may say, They Suppose these changes made upon other
Principles, And now only show by Insta^^es, How They might get in without
Noise, and public Notice. Here, we may have plain Dealing, if it please our
Adversaries. Show you Therefore, My Good Friends, by any Thing like a Solid
Proof or Principle, That the change we now speak of was Actually made in the
Church: Say plainly, This Supposed Novelty was not in such an Age, but
afterward, And let a solid Proof make good both Their examples neither Prove
these pretended novelties introduced, nor suppose them proved by any known
Principle.
Assertions; And then Your Instances of Tares and Beards growing gray will be
to no purpose, Because the Changes which you say were made, are now upon your
Supposition strongly proved Aliunde, That is, By other solid Grounds, and this
without the help of these weak instances. Here therefore is an Unanswerable
Dilemma for you. You either endeavor to show that the Supposed Novelty of the
Real Presence entered the Church, Because your Examples of Tares, and a clock
index convinces the Actual Entrance of it, And This Inference, as I said now,
is Nonsense, Thus it might Enter, Ergo thus it did Enter. Or, Contrariwise,
You can clearly Prove that the Church began such a Novelty by undeniable
Grounds, without Protestants make their own Instances impertinent and forceles.
depending of these Instances. If you do this solidly, your instances are worth
nothing. For, if you Convince by an undeniable Principle, that the Church
brought in this new Doctrine in any Age, you need not at all to talk of a gray
beard, or, of Tares peeping up insensibly, Because you must now suppose the
pretended innovation clearly Proved, by other far better and undeniable
Grounds. Do this, and you make your own Instances, Eo ipso, Null, and as
impertinent, as Forceles. For, Most An Instance against Them.
surely, No man in his wits will go about to prove that Protestancy, for
Example, came into the world insensibly as a board grows Gray, when he can
evidently Demonstrate by other undeniable Principles the Palpable Beginning of
it. And thus it is in the present Controversy.

9. One may yet say. They cannot, It Is true, Demonstratively Evidence the
supposed change now in Controversy, yet are able, upon strong Moral Their
pretense to make Novelties in the Church to be highly probable, is more then
improbable.
Proofs, to make it highly Probable. Contra 1. If you make it highly Probable,
Talk no more of Tares and Beards; For one Proof of this nature will be of more
Advantage to your cause, then the secret peeping up of a Thousand weeds in a
garden. Contra 2. If this your Assertion be made probable, it must stand upon a
strong Moral certain Principle, whereof none can but most imprudently Doubt.
Deal Heartily, Give us in plain language this High Moral certain Principle,
whereon your Assertion has Footing, and you will Gain much. But if after the
Offer, you Turn us of with words, or lead us by a loos Discourse to what you may
say is Morally Certain, Though thousands more learned vow the Contrary, you will
only First Discredit your self, and next your Cause much more. Speak plainly on
Gods Name, Here is place for it. Make your undoubted Principle known, whereby
your Assertion is proved, And you will do more then Ever Protestant did yet,
or, shall do Hereafter. Contra 3. It is a mere whimsy, to suppose Proofs highly
probable against This ever Taught and unchangeable Doctrine of the Catholic
Church, which stand's Firm, First, upon Christ's own Express words, No proof can
be probable that stands against undeniable Principles*
This is my Body. 2. On the Irrefragable Authority of so many most Ancient
Fathers, that speak not only Dubiously of the Mystery, But as clearly Defend
it, as the Council of Trent Defines it, whereof more largely Hereafter. To These
Principles, We Add the Testimony and Express Belief of our whole Learned, both
passed and present Roman Catholic Church, Too strong a Proof, to be Battered
or shaken by Empty words. Wherefore Every one may Consider what a hard Task
Sectaries have in hand, if They go about to make Their Contrary Assertion
highly Probable. First. They are Obliged It will be hard to find an Orthodox
Christian Society of greater Authority then the Roman Catholic Church.
to Prove, and by a sure Principle, That Christ spoke improperly, or, according
to Their sense. 2. That all, or at least most of the Fathers Erred in their
Doctrine of the Blessed Sacrament. 3. That They quite Overthrow the Roman
Catholic Doctrine by the Authority of some other Church, that was ever Held by
Christians more Orthodox, and Apostolical then our Roman Church is. All this is
to be don not by Talk, But by Sober, Solid, and Undeniable moral Principles,
which, both Friends and Enemies ought, if They be Rational, to acknowledge as
Principles Morally Certain. When Sectaries shall pleas to do what is here
plainly required (And it must be performed if they speak pertinently) Then I
shall begin to think, That, They mere Fallible men may speak more boldly and
Say. Our Church is Fallible, and has brought in, both this new mentioned, and
many other Innovations. Therefore, I deeply Charge their Consciences, The
Consciences of Sectaries are press^d to prove what They teach of Errors in the
Church,
as They will Answer it at the day of Judgment, not to Trifle in a most
serious matter; But, without Ambiguity, plainly to touch the Difficulty, And to
make known to the whole World, what that owned Principle is, whereon this Their
Proposition stand's: The whole Church is Fallible, and has introduced This
Novelty of Christ's Real Presence in the Blessed Sacrament. I speak Not by Empty
words, but certain Principles.
boldly. And dare say: It is a Flat Heresy, And, therefore Sectaries have
nothing like a Principle Morally certain, whereby the strength of the contrary
Verity, mantained by Scripture, Church, and Fathers, can be meanly Quarrelled
with, much les solidly Reproved, unles the too simple talk of a Few Novellists
be able to Evert, and Overturn what God has Revealed, And a whole ample Church
Defends upon Revelation.

10. Perhaps it will be said first. The Fathers that Defend the Real presence
were fallible and might Err. what Sectaries may plead, but It Is more then
highly improbable.
I answer. Our Protestants who Deny it, are Fallible also, and may Err more. By
what undoubted Principle Therefore, can They Convince, that Their fallible
rejecting the Fathers Has weight enough, to make Null the Testimony of so many
Blessed Saints, against Their Doctrine? We call here for Principles, and are not
content with Empty words. They may Reply 2. They can Explicate both Scripture
and Fathers contrary to the Churches Sense, And so ridd themselves of that
Burden. I answer, This Riddance is none, Unles, when they have explicated, They
prove by a more sure Principle, Then the Express Words of these Fathers are,
That Their Glosses hit right, and that the Fathers were Deceived, which shall
never be so much as Probably Convinced. If They lastly talk of Citing Fathers
for their Heresy: I answer, They have not one, As will be amply Proved
hereafter. In the mean while let them know, it will be the safest Course to talk
no more of Changes ad Novelties introduced into our Church without proof and
Principles, to uphold Their ill Supposed, and wors Proved Calumnies. But enough
of this Digression. We return now to other Objections.

11. Some again Tell us. The corruptions of our Church came in, in time of
greatest ignorance, when little notice was Still Empty Talk without proofs or
Principles.
taken, and few Records were Preserved of them. Here is more Talk without
Principles. For, where Read They of so great Ignorance in the Church that
Disinabled all Writers to Register such vast Changes? Or, where find they
Records of those lost and Vnpreserved Records? This is only Proofles talk; if
They have Records, let them be produced; if they have none, let them Sectaries
Guesses rejected.
Hereafter Wave such blind Guesses, whilst Proofs are Expected. It would anger
our Protestants, if I should tell them without Proof or unquestioned Records,
that the Beard of Their Religion is Insensibly Grown gray since their new Faith
came in, Or, that Tares were cast into Their Church, whilst They Slept etc. Yet
They, it seems, Are licensed to run on with such poor Guesses, And no body must
Check Them.

12. Next they Argue. We cannot show, when the Were these Things unkown, it
follows not that other of greater monent are unknown also.
Necessity of Communicating Infants, and the Rebaptizing of Heretics, or, That
Doctrine of Souls not seeing God before the Day of Judgment First entered the
Church: Yet These were Errors, And their Beginning is unknown. Here I answer
briefly. The Communicating Infants was only Tolerated for a time, But never was
held a necessary Doctrine of the Church; Much less were those Two other These
Examples touch not the Difficulty.
Points (condemned by the Church) ever Owned as Her Doctrine. Such Examples
therefore (no Church-Doctrin) are to no Purpose, in this place.

13. Lastly they Tell us. Scotus thought Transubstantiation to be of no elder
Date, then the Council of Lateran, And Bishop Fisher says the Doctrine of
Purgatory was not much heard of in the Primitive Church. I would willingly se
in Scotus his own works the Distin. and Quest. Where He Asserts what these men
Say: Some Protestants cite him in 4. Distin. 11. q. 3. where He only says (in
different Editions) that Transubstantiation was more explicitly Defined in the
Lateran Council, which is far from making it no older a Doctrine, Then that
Councils Definition is. But, Admit Scotus said so, and Bishop Fisher (unquoted)
wors then they pretend, The Church of Christ Teaches no such Thing; Yet, from
this Oracle of Truth, we must Learn, and not from particular Doctors (who may
err) what Church Doctrine is. And, for this Reason I told you above, of much
foul Play in Protestants, Who (Because they want Antiquity) take no little Pains
to run up and down our Authors, and if by chance a Word be found less warily
spoken, They trifle with it, and presently make that Popish Doctrine: It is an
Error. Catholic Doctrine is not one Man's singular Opinion, Catholic Doctrine
is no Man's singular Opinion.
But the Universal received Doctrine of the Church. And thus much our
Adversaries must assert for Themselves; Otherwise (when one of great Renown
amongst them Tell's Protestants Plainly) It is but labor in vain to talk of
union with One Another, Unless They ioyn again to that moral Body, from which
they once Separated, that is to those, who are in union with the Sea
Apostolic; The whole English Church must here Subscribe, and say it is
Protestant Doctrine. Will they Do so? The Voice therefore of One, is not the
voice of All, nor one man's Opinion more men's Opinion, Much less the Sentiment
of a whole Church.

14. It is but time lost to follow these Men, whilst Blind Guesses no Proof of
Novelties, brought into the Church.
They Blindly run on Guessing at the Rise and Origin of our Supposed Errors,
and Tell us. All our Corruptions came not in on a sudden. They were first
practiced freely, and then urged as Necessary. Persons of great esteem first
held them, and Others soon followed their Example. If one would take the Pains
and trace it, He might find the Head of these Corruptions at last etc. Pitiful
slight Talk, unworthy a Scholar, And vented at random against the Primitive
Church, would even Blemish that as much as any Other, yea, And Protestancy
more. I wave such stuff, Because nothing like a proof follows it.

15. My last Proposition is. Though Protestants should convince Though Errors
were falsely supposed to have entered the Church, yet Protestants cannot Prove
that They have set Faith right again on its old Foundations.
(which is impossible) That the Roman Catholic Church has Swerved from the
Primitive Doctrine, yet, They cannot so much as Probably show, That They have
mended the Matter; or set Christian Faith right again on its old Foundations,
as it once stood pure. It is therefore a most Discomfortable Reformation, which
only Tell's us of our being Out of the high Rode of Truth, Unless the Reformers
lead us (and this with Assurance) into the unerring way, from whence we
Strayed. If This be not Don, it follows (upon the Supposition) That both They,
and Their pretended Reformation most discomfortable.
We are yet pitifully Out, and Therefore both of us, must look after some third
Guide to Reduce us.

16. Now, that Protestants are utterly unable to persuade any Rational man,
That they have exactly brought Christian Faith to its Ancient Purity, is more
then Evident: Sectaries have nothing like a Principle whereby their Reformation
is proved Probable. It is one thing to say we have Erred, and an Other to
prove, that they are Right.
For, beside Their own bare Word (which is worth little) They have nothing like
a Principle (neither Scripture, Councils, nor Fathers) to Ground a probable
Discourse Pertinent to that Purpose; For None of These ever Knew what a
Protestant was. It is True, They Pretend (Though God knows to little Purpose)
That Scripture, Councils, and Fathers are against our Errors; But it is one
Thing, slightly to tell us we have Erred, and an Other solidly to Prove, that
They are Right, and have broughr Christian Faith, hitherto much Tainted to its
Ancient Purity. This last is the only Difficulty. And I Conjure Them, as They
will give an Account of their Religion to Almighty God, without Tergiversation,
or Far-fetch't Discourses, Directly and Clearly to Solve it. The Proposition to
be Proved, and Positively What They are obliged to prove.
is Thus. Protestants (Because they will be Reformers) are every way Right in
Their Faith, from which Faith, Catholics have Swerved. Observe it. You shall
never have They can give no direct Answer to the Difficulty.
a direct Answer to chis Difficulty. They may tell you, Catholics have Erred:
They follow Scripture: Their Rule of Faith is what was Delivered in the first
Primitive Ages, and They know that better then Papists Do. They Hope all is
well with Them etc. And thus They I put you of, with Empty Words: But to Prove
Solidly that Proposition is impossible. Believe it, Those Bonzies of Iapan had
more Plausible Proofs to defend their Pagods, and Impugn Christianity, Then our
Adversaries have to Evidence Protestancy to be the Primitive Faith, and impugn,
the Now-standing Catholic Roman Religion.

CHAP. XIV.
A Word to a Few Supposed and Vnproved Assertions, VVherby Some Endeavor to
clear Protestants of Schism.
1. THeir first Proposition. There is no Society of Mr. Stillingfleet.
Christians of any one Communion, but may impose some things to be believed or
practiced, which may be repugnant to The Assertion is False in Protestants
Principles, unles it be granted that their ample Catholic Church can destroy
Christianity.
the general Foundations of Christian Society. I Answer. If the Assertion fall
on That Imagined Universal Catholic Church, more Ample then the Roman (which
must be a Society of Christians of one Communion) it is False in Protestant
Principles, Unless they say, That this great Catholic Church can Impose Things
to be Believed, or repugnant to the general Foundations of Christianity. Again,
if it Relate to the Roman Catholic Church, it is a mere unproved Fancy of
their own; For This Church, as is largely showed, Defends its Infallibility by
Proofs as Certain, as the Common Grounds of Christianity are. Be it how you
will; You have here our Adversaries Acknowledgement, That their particular
Church of Protestants may impose Things Contrary to the Grounds of Christianity.
Protestancy (because Fallible) may Impose Things repugnant to the Grounds of
Christianity, And this I easily Believe without further Proof.

2. The 2. Proposition. There being a Possibillity acknowledged, that
particular Churches may require Unreasonable conditions of communion; the
Obligation to communion cannot be absolute and indispensable, But only so far
as nothing is required Destructive to the ends of Christian Society. The The
Author of the proposition, sure enough, supposes himself fit to judge what is
Destructive. No Protestant can avouch so much as probably wherein the Church
has imposed Unreasonable Conditions. Protestants Profess them selves Fallible
in all They Teach.
Assertion, if I mistake not, Supposes the Roman Catholic Church to be only a
particular Church, Deficient, and liable to Errors, which is not yet so much
as probably Proved, and Therefore I say, the Obligation to Communicate with it
is Absolute, and Indispensable. But let us wave this at Present, and contrary
to Truth Imagine, That this Church has imposed Unreasonable conditions,
Destructive of Christian communion etc. We Ask Again, and very seriously, who
are They that can Mend the matter, in case it has Don so? Or, who dare Avouch
by the Force of any received Principle, that Such and Such particular
Conditions imposed on Christians, are Unreasonable? Where are the Equitable and
infallible Judges appointed by Almighty God to Decide in so weighty a Matter?
Are they Protestants? No. It is impossible. Hear my Reason. If the Church has
Erred by imposing such Unreasonable Conditions, Protestants, who Profess
themselves Fallible in All They say, may Err More, Yea, And spoil all, whilst
They go about to set Things Straight. However, if They dare Venture* on so
difficile a Work, And therefore may more likely spoil Then mend what they
Conceive Amiss.
They are First obliged to Prove (And this not by Talk) But by undeniable
Principles, That just so Far our Church Err's, so Far it requires Unreasonable
Conditions of Communion, And next, That They, the Illuminated men of the World,
have don no more, But exactly Cancelled the Errors of our Church, leaving all
untouched, that is, not Destructive to the ends of Christian Society; For, we
must believe, They are the skilful Masters that always hit Right, Though
confessedly Fallible. You shall sooner draw pure Gold out of mere dross, Then
get any Thing like a Tolerable Proof from these men, to countenance One of
these Desperate Assertions. Alas, They only Word it without Proof, As Arians
and Nestorians Do. And here is All you Have from Them.

3. The 3. Proposition. Nothing can be more unreasonable, The proposition
supposes what is to be proved.
then that the Society imposing such conditions of Communion, should be judge,
whether those conditions be just and equitable, or no. I Answer. And nothing
can be more Unreasonable, then to make a Receding Party from an Rebell's are
not to be Judges in Their own Cause,
Ancient Church, a few Rebellious People against it, Judges in their own Cause.
The Arians judged thus for Themselves, and so do Protestants. All rebellion in
Kingdoms and Commonwealths is Patronized, if those who Revolt may Clear
Themselves from Guilt, upon their own Votes and saying: Such conditions imposed
Nor Protestants of Their Schism.
on us are Vnequitable and Grievous; We therefore, who Rebel, will sit upon the
Bench and Judge so. The Kingdom (Believe it) is to Decide in such Cases, and
not the The Church is to Judge in this Cause of Schism.
Rebel's, And so the Church is to Judge you, As it did the Arians, And not you
The Church. Your Complaint of unequitable Conditions imposed on you. is only an
Unproved Fancy, begot in your Nonage, when you never Heard good Word of Rome;
Passion still foment's it, Sophistry Advances it, but All will not Do. Most
truly, That Talk of unjust Conditions The Plea of unjust Conditions only a
Mask of an injustifiable Schism.
is Merely a mask to Cover an Unjustifiable Schism, a Pretense to Defend what
cannot be Defended. Pull the Visard of, which is don by putting you to the
Proof of your Talk, and the Proposition Appears in its own Likeness, Ugly, and
Deformed.

4. The fourth Proposition. Where there is sufficient evidence from Scripture,
Reason, and Tradition, That such things, which are imposed, are unreasonable
conditions of Christian Communion; The not communicating with that Society,
which requires those things, cannot incurr the guilt of Schism. Here wants a
Minor, which I shall supply with a contradictory Proposition thus. But there is
no sufficient Evidence from Scripture, Reason and Tradition, That such Things
Imposed on Protestants by the Church of Rome, are Unreasonable Conditions of
Christian Communion; Therefore Protestants not A General task of unreasonable
conditions, Proofles.
Communicating with that Ancient Society, which justly requires those Things,
cannot but make them Guilty of Schism. Who must now judge between us? Or,
Finally say, whether that Major, or, This contrary Minor carries the greater
weight of Truth with it? The first is What Sectaries say in this Proposition,
Any Heretic may Assert and as probably
only a Supposed and an unproved Assertion, That both Arians and all condemned
Heretics may vent against us. The Minor is Grounded upon the acknowledged
Ancient Purity of our Church, Which, Unless clear Evidence Overtrow it, cannot
but Defend it self as strongly Against such Calumnies (upon its own
Prepossessed Right and Innocence) As the best of Kingdoms does against a
company of known Rebels. When Therefore These Novellists Pretend to have
sufficient Evidence from Scripture, Reason, and Tradition What Sectaries are
Obliged to do, by more then Talk only.
for* Unreasonable Conditions imposed, They are Obliged, to Descend to
Particulars, And make the Charge Good by valid Proofs, reducible at last to
Owned, and allowed of Principles amongst Christians. If this be not Don, They
may Vapor against our Church, as the Jews Do against Christ, But shall never
Advance so far, They make Controversies Endless.
as to a vveak Probability, or make an End of one sole Controversy. And mark
what Doings we have Here. They will have no Judge on Earth; Clear Principles
Fail Them in every Controversy, And yet we must Hear (and only in a General
way) Of sufficient Evidence Drawn from Scripture, Reason, and Tradition,
Against our Unreasonable Conditions. If there be such Evidence, Show it, And
let us se the Owned Principles, whereon it lastly Relies. But truly, So much
Ill luck Fallows them, That Their want of Principles, only Causes Proofles
Talk.
you never find a Controversy solidly handled, or brought (when They go about
to Prove their own Doctrine Positively) to any thing like a Proof, or Principle,
And They are as unfortunate, when They Oppugn Ours.

5. The fifth Proposition. By how much the Societies are greater, which are
agreed in not Communicating with a Church imposing such conditions, By how much
the power of those who rule those Societies so agreeing is larger; By so much
Suppositions without Proofs. What are these Abuses? Who is to reform?
the more justifiable is the Reformation of any Church from those Abuses, and
the settling the bonds of Christian Communion without them. Here is the Thesis,
And a Thing, like an Hypothesis, comes limping After, as well as it can, Thus.
On these grounds, the Church of Rome Imposing unlawful conditions of Communion,
it was Necessary not to communicate with her, and on the Church of Englands
power to reform it self by assistance of the supreme power, it was lawful and
justifiable not only to redress those Abuses, but to settle the Church upon its
proper and true Foundations. So that the Church of Rome's imposing unlawful
conditions of communion, is the reason why we They pretend to settle, and have
no Ground to build on.
do not communicate with Her; and the Church of Englands power to govern and
take care of her self, is the Reason of our joining together in the service of
God, upon the Principles of our Reformation. Did you ever Hear men Vapor much,
What are these Principles? Name one.
Talk much, Suppose much, and Prove just nothing? Here you have them. Observe
it. We Hear a Noise of Unlawful imposed Conditions, of great Abuses in our
Church, of the English Churches Power to Redress these Abuses, Yet, no man
Knows, nor shall ever know by any solid Proof, what these Conditions and Abuses
are* Much less, That a few Protestants have power to Redress Were there Abuses
in the Church, Protestants have not Principles to redress them.
them, were there any such in the Church, whereof more Hereafter.

6. At present, to Answer the Difficulty, I will say two Things. The first. If
the Power, Number, or Largenes of these pretended Reformers justify Their
Reformation, it is more then evident, That a Far greater Power, Number, and
Largenes of those who Oppose it, makes More Oppose these Sectaries Reformation,
then approve it.
it Vnjustifiable. Now not only Catholics, But all the Christians in the World
(Altogether more Powerful, Larger, and Learneder then a few Protestants)
Stiffly Oppose this late Reformation, as an Heretical and Schismatical Novelty.
Therefore, that little Justification, which their own Power and Largenes Gain's
to Protestancy, is not only much weakened, But made Null, by a greater Power,
that withstands it. I say 2. This Proposition is utterly Falls, and Because Falls,
cannot be Proved: Viz. That, by how much Societies are greater, It is not true,
that by how much Sectaries are more Numerous and greater, by so much more Their
Schism is Justifiable.
and their Power larger in Agreeing, not to Communicate with an Ancient Church,
wherein They were Baptized; By so much more Justifiable, is their Pretented
Reformation. For, the Society of Arians, which Agreed in not Communicating with
the Church of Rome, was more Numerous, Greater, and Powerful then ever
Ptotestants were in England; They had their Emperors, Their Bishops, Their
Councils, Their Churches, and a World of Followers. Say therefore, I Beseech
you, did their This Truth is clear in the Arians.
Number, Power, or Greatness Justify either their Heresy or Schism? Or, does the
greater Power, and Number, of Agreeing Rebels in a Kingdom against Their lawful
Sovereign, Justify that Treason? You And in Rebels also of a Commonwealth.
will Say. The Arians Erred, But Protestants hit right on the Roman Abuses, and
this makes their Reformation Justifiable. Mere Proofles, empty Words; The
Proofles Talk of Sectaries.
For, do you not se (and evidently) That all you Speak to this sense, is a
wretched Supposition, and a pure Begging of the Question? And Because it is so,
can either We, or any third Indifferent Judge Believe you sooner, speaking in
your own Cause, then credit an Arian that will say the very same For his
Heresy? O, But Confessedly both Catholics and Protestants acknowledge the
Arians to be Heretics. And as Confessedly both Catholics and Arians, yes, And
all other Sectaries Say also, you are Heretics. What Therefore get you by this
Reply? Will you Tell us next, That you are Better at your Proofs against us,
then the Arians are? The Arians laugh at you, And say, with Truth, This very
Assertion is Proofles. Believe it. Though the Arguments of Arians against our
Ancient Church, whereof they were once Members, The Arguments of Arians are more
difficile Then ever Protestants yet Proposed against our Church Doctrine.
are both Deficient and Strengthles; yet They go far deeper into Difficulties,
which look more manly On It, then vv^at hitherto any Protestant has Proposed
against us. If you say: This is my own unproved Assertion, I will first Appeal
to the Judgment of any Indifferent and Vnconcerned Scholar for sentence in
the case: Next (if this like you not) Be you first Pleased, to Propose one of
the strongest Arguments you have, Against any particular The Grounds of the
Assertion are declared.
Doctrine of the Roman Catholic Church ( One I say, and in Form) which may at
last be Driven to an owned Principle, And then (Though I do Anathematize The
Heresy) I shall Advance an Other in Behalf of the Arians; And if this, in the
Judgment of every good Scholar, do not more Puzzle you in your own
Principles, then yours me, against the Church, I Will Sectaries cannot solve the
Arians Arguments without recurring to our Churches infallible Interpretation of
Scripture.
yield up the cause. Here is fair Play offered. The ground of my Assertion is
first. Because Protestants cannot so much as Probably solve the Arians
Difficulties, without Recurring to the Churches infallible Interpretation of
Scripture, which they Reject. 2. Neither Catholics nor any, can solve them
Otherwise (then only Negatively) That is by showing they do not Convince, But
to Infringe their Force Positively, Or, To Evidence them falls, Abstracting from
Tradition and The Reason why Arians Difficulties are harder then those of
Protestants. Negatively and Positively Protestants Arguments are Solved.
the Authority of the Church (which is more the Proof of Catholic Doctrine,
then a Direct Solution to difficulties) is Impossible. Now, on the Other side,
Protestants can Propose no Difficulty Against us for Protestancy; But we will
first Show it Negatively Vnconcluding, And next by Positive Proofs break in
pieces the Seeming Force of it. For example. They Argue against the Real
Presence: A body cannot be in One Example Hereof.
two places at Once. We Show first Negatively, that their Argument concludes
not, and then Introduce Positive Proofs, partly drawn from Gods Omnipotency,
partly from other Undeniable Grounds, Which both weaken and Dead the Argument.
And thus we Proceed with them in Other Controversies, Concerning the Popes
Supremacy, Praying to Saints, Purgatory etc.

7. I have Complained all along, of our Adversaries Asserting much, and Proving
Nothing, You will yet se more of this Proceeding in some, who Think They
strongly Vindicate the Church of England from the Guilt of Schism.

CHAP. XV.
More of These Authors Confused Doctrine, is Refuted.
1. IN a Chapter Entitled: Protestants not Guilty of Mr. Stillingfleet.
Schism. The Catholic Opponent Argues. If the Roman Church was corrupted in
Doctrine, it Fallows, That for many Ages before Luther, there was not one
Visible and Orthodox Church throughout the whole World. And consequently,
during that Time, Every good Christian was obliged in some point or other to
Contradict the Doctrine, and Desert the Communion of all Visible Churches in the
World. Which If all particular Churches were corrupted in Doctrine, the whole
Catholic Church was also corrupted.
I say cannot but Imply a Leaving of, And also a strong Opposition Against the
Church Catholic, What ever this Catholic Church be; For, this Catholic
Society is not a Chimaera in the Air, But is Essentially Constituted of either
Pure, or Particular tainted Churches. Now our Adversaries say, All particular
Churches throughout the whole World, were tainted; Ergo, what ever is meant by
the Catholic Church, was also corrupt and Therefore upon the Supposition men
are obliged to desert the Communion of the Catholic Church. He Grant's no
particular Church was free from Error. They say* all Churches had erred. It is
necessary to separate from all erring Churches, therefore as necessary to
separate from the whole Catholic Church. What Sectaries Reply.
Tainted. Yet more. I am Obliged to Desert all Corrupted Churches, Therefore I
am obliged to Abandon the Communion of the Church Catholic. After much Talk
and Quibling about the Meaning of one Visible Church, and the Errors of
particular Churches, whether Several, or the same in particular Societies of
Christians, etc. These men Grant, That there was not One Church, of any
Distinct Communion from others, free from Errors. The Arians, the Nestorians,
the Eutychians, the Greeks, the Abyssins, Hussits, And finally Catholics Had
Erred. Therefore all the Churches in the World, consequently the Catholic
Church, had erred before Luther: But it is Necessary to Separate from the
Communion of all Erring Churches, Therefore, It Is as Necessary to Separate from
the Communion of the whole Catholic Church.

2. To This Argument They Answer. There can be no Separation from the whole
Church, But in such Things, vvherin the Unity of the whole Church lies etc.
Now, when men Separate from the Errors of all particular Churches, They do
not Separate from the whole, Because those Things, which one Separates from
those particular Churches for, are not such as make them, all put together, to
be the whole, or Catholic Church. For a further Explanation They tell us: Two
Things may be Considered in all particular Churches; One, that Belongs to them
as a Church, The other, that belongs to them as a particular Church. What
belongs to them as a Church, Implies the Common Ligaments or grounds of Union
betvveen all particular Churches, which taken all Together make up the
Catholic Church: Now these which belong to it as a particular Church, are
such, as it may retain the Essence of a Church without them. And therefore
supposing, That I should Separate from all particular Churches, I do not
Separate from the communion of the whole Church, Unless it be for something,
without Which, those could be no Churches.

3. Here in brief is their Confused, Vnproved, and This Doctrine of Sectaries
confused, unproved, and falls.
Falls Doctrine. I call it confused, Because, when They Tell us: There can be no
Separation from the whole Church, But in such Things wherein the Unity of the
whole Church lies, They should Declare Expressly, and Particularly, Wherein that
Unity of the whole Church Consists: But to leave us in Darkness Concerning no
man knows They speak confusedly of unknown Ligaments, and of as unknown Unity.
what Ligaments, and Pretended Unity of a Strange Imagined Catholic Church,
without Saying How far these Ligaments reach, or, Wherein Precisely This exact
Unity lies, is only to Turn us of with Talk, and Teach just nothing. If They
Answer: The Unity of this Doctrine is found in the Fundamentals of Faith, we are
yet as No man can Imagine what They will make Fundamental.
far to seek as Before; For, who Knows what these new Protestants will make
Fundamental, and Vnfundamental Doctrine? They may say one thing to day is
Fundamental, and change it to morrow. However, Admit that They Declare
Themselves, and Tell us Punctually, so much and no More is the Fundamental And
if we could it would only be their own unproved Fancy.
and Necessary Doctrine of the Catholic Church, it will be only their Own
Supposed, and Vnproved Assertion, and Occasion anew as hot a Dispute, as Any
other Controversy between us. Unfortunate are These Men in every Thing they Say
(and it cannot be otherwise) for wanting Ground to Build on, and a Church to
regulate Their Faith, Whatever They Vent against our Catholic Doctrine, must of
Necessity be as Much Their own Supposed and Vnproved Fancy, As if an Arian
Disputed Against us.

4. Observe Yet, How They Still run on with these unproved Suppositions. When
men, Say They, separate Themselves from the Errors of all Particular Churches*
They do not Separate from the whole etc. Blessed are such Protestants Separated
and Poorly suppose, that they run away with Truth only, and left all the
Errors behind Them.
Men, But who are They for Gods sake? Protestants? Yes. And I must take their
Word for it, we have no other proof. Pray you Tell me, When that first
Protestant Giant, Martin Luther, stood up, and Separated from all the Societies
of Christians Throughout the whole World, from Catholics, from Arians,
Abyssins, Graecians etc. Who Assured him (and here we urge for a Satisfactory
Principle) or, Who can yet Assure our Protestants, That both He and Who
Assur's them so much? or, that they are not more deeply in Error by their own
wilful Separation?
They are not More Plunged into Gross Errors, by this wilful Divorce, Then if
They had remained, as once They were, Honest Catholics? Can, in Reason,
Suppose That All, and every One of these Societies that Quitted Rome were
Corrupted in Doctrine, And without so much as a seeming Probability, Hold Luther
and his Followers, the only Pure and Untainted Christians of the World? These
are Paradoxes, and vast improbabilities; For if All These Erred, when They left
the Roman Catholic Church (As evidently They did) what God, or Angel, was it,
That Directed Protestants to hit right every way, and to Avoid all Error?
These Heretics, when They Separated, were Fallible men, and actually Erred;
our Protestants are as Fallible, and may have don wors. These Protestants
Separation parallelled with that of other Heretics. Protestants proof is their
own word, and nothing Else. Whether Protestants dare assert that Their reformed
Protestancy is so Right that it can not be made better? If They Affirm, we urge
for Principles to prove it. All that formerly deserted the Roman Catholic
Church erred, upon what proof are Protestants Exempted from the like Error?
followed their own self Judgment in making that Divorce, Yet Missed of Truth;
Protestants can only Say so much, And therefore very likely may have Missed
more. How then shall we know (and by a satisfactory Proof) That this rare
Reformation, which Opposed all Religions, is Untainted, and Orthodox? I Will tell
you. Protestants (after an Infamy cast on all the Churches in the world) Say
so, And what They say ( Though whole Armies of Christians, more learned and
numerous Stand against them) must be thought True. Is not this a Jolly Proof?
In a word, Here is my Dilemma. Either They must Assert, that Their whole
Protestant Doctrine now Established, is without Blemish, Pure, and Orthodox; or,
yet Has its Errors: if this last, it needs another Reformation: If they make
it so Pure that it cannot be made better, They only say without proof, what All
the Condemned Heretics in Christendom Assert for Themselves, and Moreover will
have Christians Believe The greatest Paradox ever Heard of, viz. That They Only
had the good Luck to hit Right, whilst All Foregoing Sectaries, who Abandoned
the Roman Church, Were, and, yet Are tainted with gross Corruptions. The Reason
why both They, and All other Heretics that left the Mother Church, are in
Error, is drawn from the Impossibility of doing the Work They have gone about:
For, it is not in man's power to change or Reform Religion. No. Only one High
Priest (God and man) Once made a change, who was Holy, Innocent, Undefiled,
Separated from sinners, and made Higher then the Heavens. Men Therefore wicked,
as Luther was, Guilty One Only High Priest had Power to Reform Religion.
of high Crimes, Born and Brought up in sin, and now buried in Contempt, Are
unfit Instruments for such a work: They may mar Religion, but to mend it, is
Impossible.

5. Again. That Distinction (made Above) between the Common Ligaments of a
Church, and particular Errors in all Churches, Which yet do not Unchurch Them,
is Frivolous, Vnproved, and most Falls. For, first there neither are, nor can be
any Common Ties, or Grounds of Union amongst all Christians now in Being, which
considered by an Abstract Notion, sufficiently Conslitute the Necessary Doctrine
of the True Catholic Church. My Reason is: No Doctrine Common Doctrine Common to
all Christians is not Sufficient to Salvation.
to Arians, Nestorians, Catholics, and Protestants, or Universally held by all
Christians, can be more Proved to be saving Faith enough for Christians, Then
if we Gratis Assert, That a belief in one God only, common to Turks, Jews and
Christians, is full Faith enough for us all. Scripture, as I have largely
proved in a foregoing Chapter, Requires yet more Explicit Faith of many
Particulars. 2. It is utterly Falls, That the True Catholic The True Catholic
Church is not found amongst Christians That Err in Faith;
Church may be found amongst all Particular Erring Churches. The Primitive
Christians were a Body apart, and as Distinct from the Arians in those Days, as
We are now from Protestants. And therefore no Doctrine Common to that Church and
Arians, was ever Thought sufficient Catholic Doctrine. Otherwise, Arius might
have Told the Nicene Otherwise Arius would not have Erred in matters of Faith.
Fathers: (yes, And These should have Assented to him) You unjustly Condemn me,
For Admit, That I have my Particular Errors, you may have Yours Also, We are
all yet of One Church, and Need not to break of any Catholic Unity, Because,
though both you, and I, err, We may yet retain the Essence of a Catholic
Churck. Heretics hitherto Never Pleaded thus for their Cause, But as
Pertinaciously Defended Heretics as strongly defend their particular Errors
as the Common Doctrine of Christianity.
their Private Opinions, as They did the Common Doctrine of all Christians. Only
our Protestants, now Pressed with Unanswerable Arguments, concerning the plain
Naming of a Catholic Church before Luther (like men living by shifting) Seek
out a woeful Subterfuge, and make all Erring Churches partly good, and
Catholic, in the Common Ligaments of Christianity; And partly Naught and
Heretical, in Their particular Errors, Whereas the Spouse of Christ, is but One
Immaculate moral Body, and can be no More Tainted with Error, then the pure
Primitive Church was; No, nor more Corrupted then the whole Bible The entire
purity of the Church Necessary.
now is, and yet remain Purely Gods Word. 3. Grant (which is the greatest
Chimaera Imaginable) That the Common Ligaments and Grounds of Catholic Faith,
are to be found amongst all the erring Societies of Christians, Protestants
have yet an endless Task in hand, Which is to Persuade All men Opposite to them,
That They, by their Discerning Spirit, Have just Protestants cannot prove that
they have taken so much Doctrine to themselves as is purely Catholic.
hit the nail on the Head* And taken so much to Themselves as is Purely
Catholic Doctrine, without Mixture of Error with it. Believe me, it will be
hard to prove so much done; And if They Prove it not by Undeniable Principles,
Farewell Protestants say I: For They may be more in Error by Their late
Reformation, Then all those Erring Churches together, Which They have gone about
to Reform.

6. In another Chapter Entitled the Reformation of the Church of England
justified. These very men (after they had made the Catholic Church like a
Common field laid open to all those Inhabitants (who own the Fundamentals of
Christian Faith) Tell us, That the Roman Church stand's Guilty of the violation
of Public Right, and Add's Neither Proof nor Inference Good.
many Particular Doctrins, many Superstitious Practices which have no
Foundation in Scripture, or Consent of the Primitive Church; Therefore this
Roman Church is Separated from the Communion of the Catholic Church, And so is
become Schismatical. But their Church of England has hit Right, and is only so
far Separated from Rome, as Rome has Divided Her self from the Belief of the
Universal Church. What have we here? A Cluster of mere superfluous Words. I am
Astonished to Se men run on, with such proofles Generalities. However, We will
have Patience, and friendly Ask: How far is that large field of the Catholic
Church to be extended? Point out the Limits of it? Name those Christians and
Them only, Not one of These particulars can be proved by certain Principles.
who Inhabit that large field? What are those Fundamentals of Faith? How many
are there of Them, ninty nine, or a Hundred? Specify, with a Proof at the end
of it (but Proofs are now out of fashion with Protestants) Those particular
Falls Doctrins of the Roman Church so contrary to Scripture. Say once Plainly,
what that Catholic Church is, From which Rome Separated, and something is Don?
But above all, make good your wild Assertion, That just so far you are Divided
from Rome, (not one Inch more or less) as Rome is Separated from the Universal
Catholic Church. To do this, justice Requir's an exact Proof of these three
Things. First, That you particularly Show us, Three Propositions to be proved.
What, or how much the Precise Doctrine of that imagined Catholic Church is,
which dwell's in your Fancy. 2. Wherein the Roman Church has Swerved from that
true Doctrine. 3. And this will cost you some pains, make good upon any Received
Christian Principle, That you are right in your Faith, And have just Divided
your selves so far from the Roman Church, as this is from Another Church, more
Universal and Catholic. Could these men live to Mathusalem's Age, They would
never come near to the likelihood of a rational Proof for any one of these
Particulars. I say of a Proof; For, I would have Them know, That to talk at
random, and vent their own fancies as They do here, will weigh but little, when
Reason comes to Balance all with a close Arguing in good Form.

7. When again They are Told in the same Chapter, That the Separation of
Protestants was not only from the Church of Rome, But, as Calvin Confesses,
from the whole Christian World, which necessarily Implies a Separation from the
True Catholic Church. They Answer. We have not separated from the whole
Christian World in any thing, wherein the whole Christian World is Agreed* Is
this so great No Heretic Separated from the Universal Doctrine believed by all
Christians.
a matter to be Praised for? Not to Separate from what men cannot Separate, if
they Own Christ, and Deserve the name of Christians? Mark well, I beseech you.
Neither the Arians, nor Nestorians, nor Donatists, Nor any other condemned
Heretics Separated from any Thing, wherein the whole Christian World Agreed in;
For They Believed in Christ a Savior and Redeemer, and Thus much all
Christians Hold: But is This Faith enough to save us without Believing more?
Pray you Answer. Again. These Heretics Added something what got Them the Name
of Separatists or Heretics.
to that General owned Belief of All, And this got them the name of
Separatists, or Heretics, not Because they Deserted the Common Doctrine of the
whole Christian World, But, because They Abandoned that Ancient Church, wherein
they were Baptized. Protestants have Don the like in leaving the same Ancient
Church, And have Added That to Their Specifical Religion, which was neither the
Common Doctrine of All Christians, no, nor Held by any Christian Society in the
World. Upon this Account Therefore, They as justly Deserve the Name of Heretics
and Separatists, as either Arian or Nestorian. And thus much I Prove by their
own Concession; Protestants proved Schismatichs by Their own Doctrine.
For They grant, that the Donatists were Separatists and Schismatics, Because
they confined the Catholic Church within their own Bounds of Africa; Yet, by
Their good leave, These very Donatists Dissented in nothing that was held all
over Common Christian Doctrine; For, they Acknowledged the same Christ as we Do,
yet were Heretics Upon the Account of their particular The Donatists no
Schismatics in Protestants Principles.
Doctrine, Though They clashed with nothing held Universally. You will say, But
They did Clash; For without all Proof They Confined the Church to one place
Only. Contra. And you, my good Friends, without all Likelihood of Proof, make
the Church a mighty wide One; You give it Arms which embrace all called
Christians, Though Heretics in their particular Tenants. Did therefore the
particular Doctrine of the Donatists (confining the Church to one place)
Unchurch Them; Believe it, your The Donatists were Schismatichs for making the
Church too strait, and so are Protestants for making it to wide.
Particular Doctrine in making it too Large, will Unchurch you also. I call both
these Doctrins Particular, and Heretical. For, as never men before the
Donatists, made the Catholic Church so strait as They did, so never Christians
before these later Protestants, made it so large as to hold in it all the
Heretckis in the World. I say expressly: This Doctrine of the Donatists was only
their particular Error, and not Then Universal, or, Common to all Christians;
For, Their very Denying the Church to be Spread the whole world over, made that
Doctrine not Vnuniversal, or, not Held by All. And thus much Protestants must
Say; For, whilst They (or any other Sectaries) Maintain Tenants particular to
themselves (for example two Sacraments only) A Doctrine In the Principles of
Protestants the Arians and Nestorians were not Heretics.
so limitated, cannot be called Universal. Out of what is hitherto Said, we
must conclude: If no Doctrine can make a man an Heretic, but the Denial of
That, which the whole Christian World Own's, The Arians, and Nestorians were
not Heretics.

8. These Novellists go on Trifling in a most serious Matter, And first Tell
us. Though a man Differ's A frivolous Instance. Every one knows what is
essential to a Man; But Protestants know not, how much Doctrine is Essential to
Christian Faith, and how much is merely Accidental.
from all other in Accidents, for Example in Feature, yet he leaves not of to
be Essentially a man; Therefore, though Protestants Differ from all other
Christians in Doctrine Accidental, or, wherein these Dissenting Societies
Disagree from one another, Yet, as long as They stick to the Common owned Faith
of all Christians, so long they are Safe, and Members of the Church Catholic.
A miserable Put of. It Seems, a very Universal Doctrine suffiseth Protestants
to be good Catholics. All we Desire, is, That they will exactly say* How much
Precisely of this Doctrine will Serve the turn ( as both Necessary and
Sufficient) to make us all Catholics? Or, whether the Arians, Nestorians or
Donatists Had enough of it, to be good Catholics? If Yes. They were both Good
Catholics and Heretics at once; Catholics, upon the Arians and Protestants
Symbolize.
Account of Common Christian Doctrine owned by them; and Heretics, for their
particular Erroneous Tenants. And it is more then probable, that Protestants are
like Them: Secundum quid, Catholics; Because of Their Common Doctrine; But,
Simpliciter, Heretics, by Reason of Their late introduced Novelties.

9. They tell us Again. The Communion of the Church Catholic, is not to be
measured by the particular Opinions either of All, or any particular Church,
But by such things, which are the proper Foundations of the Catholic Church;
For there can be no Separation from the true Catholic Church, but in such
things, wherein it is Catholic; And it is not Catholic in any thing, But in
what Properly relates to its Being, and Constitution. Let the World Judge,
whether this be not mere Confused Talk? For the only Difficulty Sectaries wave
that only Difficulty, which requires Explication.
in this Matter is, to know of these new Doctors, How much Precise Doctrine is
Necessary and Sufficient to be believed, How much of it Constitut's The Being
and Foundation of the Catholic Church, And what is Accidental, or Unnecessary?
You se They wave This, And content Themselves with telling us of no man knows
what Being, of no man knows what Foundation of a Church, without Descending to
Particulars, or Proving what these Essentials are; Or, Finally who Those
Christians were, that were Right in the Essentials of Faith before Luther, or,
had the Being of a Church amongst them. They Proceed here, as if Protestants
inioyn us to learn that Doctrine which is Essential to a Church, and allow us
neither Master, nor Rules to learn it by.
a Master should tell a young Beginner with Grammar: You must learn your Rules
well, and understand them perfectly; But you shall have neither Book, nor
Precepts from any, whereby to Learn them. I Profess before Almighty God (and I
think Thousands not only Catholics, But others, are of my opinion) I am yet as
wholly Ignorant of what These Newer Protestants will make the Essentials of
Faith, the Necessary and sufficient Foundations and Being of a Church, as ever
Boy was of Grammar Rules, when he first went to School. I may perhaps Guess
better at their Doctrine, And my Thought is: They Hold All the Heretics in the
The world would Cry Shame if they Explicated their sense.
world, whether Arians or Others, to be good Catholic Christians; Yet, dare
not Publish so much in Writing. And this is the true Reason why they Schulk in
Generalities, And hide Themselves under these universal Vnexplicated Terms of
the Essentials of Faith, of the Being of a Church, the Foundations of it etc.
Well, I will say it once more. If the Doctrine common to all Christians, be the
Essential, Necessary, No Heretics ever were, if Doctrine Common to all be
sufficient to Salvation.
and Sufficient Doctrine of the Church truly Catholic, it Follows evidently,
That no Heretic was ever yet Vnchurched by His particular Heresy. But,

10. Woe be to Catholics, what ever becomes of Others, They must be
Vnchurched. For, These men Assert (and very wisely, as they Think) Although
nothing Separates a Church properly from the Catholic, But what is contrary to
the Being of it; yet a Church (And this is the Roman) may Separate Her self
from the Communion of the Catholic Society, By taking upon Her, to make such
things Necessary Conditions of Communion, which never were the Conditions of
Communion of the Catholic Church. Observe first. A Supposition for a Proof, of
strange imposed Conditions. Observe 2. A Supposition Mere Suppositions pass for
Proofs with Sectaries.
for a Proof, of no man knows what Catholic Church, Wider and larger, then the
Roman. But above all,

11. Observe 3. Their unlearned Discourse. The Roman Church (say They) Draws the
Bounds of Catholic Communion within Her self, and so Divides from the true
Catholic Church. I Ask, From what true Catholic Church did They cannot name
the Orthodox Church, from which the Roman Church Separated.
she Divide Her self? Speak out, And name that Church, Design it Plainly, which
was Actually Orthodox, and in Being when Luther Apostated, and something is
said to the Purpose. If you fail to Show us that Imagined Church, from which
you Suppose the Roman Separated, All you Assert is a mere Calumny. We say, and
can Justify it, There was no such True Church in the whole World to Separate
from, Unless Arians, Nestorians, Eutychians, Graecians etc. constituted that
great Imagined moral Body. But These, as is Evident, (once Catholics)
Separated from the Roman Church, not She from them; Therefore this supposed
Separation, is only an unproved Fancy.

12. Yet more: And this is to Show you the strange Grant, what Sectaries would
have, Nothing is Proved.
weakness of our Adversaries whole Discourse. Let us suppose, this falsity of a
true Catholic Church in Luthers Days much wider Then the Roman; withal, that
the Roman was only a corrupted Part of that more Ample Church. Believe it,
These men are yet far enough from Proving their Intent: For Admit, upon the
Supposition, That the Church of Rome Draws the bounds of Catholic Communion
within Her self, and Confin's all Truth within Her own Community: This is only
Her own particular Opinion, which Draws no more, Confines no more, Then
Protestants do now. For, do Protestants pretend as much, to have Christ's
verities taught by Them, as Catholics Do;
not They Prosess, that the Doctrine of Christ is more Purely, and less
Erroneously taught in England at this Day, Then in any other Society of
Christians, That Dissent's from Them? Yes. Here then is as much Drawing of
Truth to Themselves, and this Drawing consequently implies a great Division
from that Fancied And consequently They Divide Themselves from their Catholic
Church.
Catholic Church, Which, I am sure, Never Taught, that the Gospel of Christ is
Preached most purely and without Error, amongst a few English Protestants.
Mere Opinions Therefore of particular Churches (as long as the General Doctrine
of all Christians Stand's unshaken) Cannot, in these men's Principles, Unchurch
any Christian Society; or, if They can, both They (I mean our Protestants) And
all other Sectaries are Vnchurched, Because all of them Believe more, then the
General Essentials of Faith Exact of any Christian.

13. It may be Answered. Though they believe more, Yea, And particularly hold,
That Christ's Doctrine is more purely Taught and believed in England, Then in
other places, Yet this is not a Necessary Condition of Communion with them. No?
I hope it is a To have Communion with Protestants is, without Doubt, necessary
to Believe something of pure Protestancy.
Necessary condition of Communion with Protestants, Though Unnecessary for
Communion* with that other Fancied Universal Church, and the General Doctrine
Thereof. The Reason is. No man can be more a Protestant, unles He Believe All
particular owned Articles of that Religion as Pure, and Orthodox, Then a good
Papist, and, not Believe what that Church particularly Teaches.

14. Now, Because we are got thus far into a Matter, wherein I Hold our
Adversaries much Overseen; I would A Question proposed not to be Answered by
Sectaries.
gladly have a clear Answer to this one Question, Viz. Whether (after a due
Proposal) it be absolutely Necessary to Salvation to Communicate with
Protestants, That is, Firmly to Believe any one Article of our Protestants
Reformed Faith, as it is Protestancy? For example: Two Sacraments only, no Real
Presence, no Sacrifice, or, what else you will? If they Answer, Yes. Then I
Infer: The Belief of that Doctrine Universal and If Doctrine Common ^^ all be not
sufficient, something of Protestancy must be owned necessary.
Common to all Christians, is not Enough to Salvation; For now They require
more, Viz, a Belief of some Doctrine peculiar to Protestancy, as it is reformed.
Contrariwise, if they Grant, nothing within the Bounds of pure Protestancy to
be a Doctrine of such absolute Necessity to Salvation, it follows Evidently:
Though a Protestant, after a perfect knowledge had of his Religion, as
Reformed, does both Abjure, and Anathematize that particular If Nothing of
Protestancy be accounted of as Necessary, one may abjure all that Religion, and
yet be a Faithful Believer.
Doctrine, And Believ's only with a General Faith, Common to Arians and all
other Heretics, He may yet be saved, Because the Belief of no one Article
within the Compass of Protestancy, Avail's him one whit to Salvation. If so:
Tell me, I beseech you, what a Religion have we Here? Shall we say, That the
Authors and Professors of Protestancy have made a shameful Bustle to bring in a
Novelty, which must be called the true Reformed Religion, And now Hear the^
Teach, That is Teaches nothing Necessary to Salvation? Grant thus much, and
Throw Protestancy A shameful Schism about Protestancy, that Teaches nothing
necessary to Salvation.
out of the World, Men may be saved without it.

15. Some, Perhaps, will Reply. Protestants, at least, judge, That amongst the
many Religions, which now swarm in the World, Their reformed Novelty is one of
the best, and the Securest way to Heaven. Alas, We We Ask not what Protestants
Judge, but demand for a Proof of that Judgment.
enquire not what They, Mere fallible Men, Judge (Every Heretic speak's
favorably in his own Cause) But we go further, and Ask into what Undoubted
Principle that Judgment is finally Resolved, or, Whether These men, withal
the Judgment and Learning They have, are able, Solidly, and Rationally to
Prove, that Their particular Articles of Protestancy rest firmly, and Rely upon
the Object of all Faith, Which is Gods certain and If Protestants can resolve
the Belief of their particular Articles into Divine Revelation, it will be
Necessary to Salvation.
Divine Revelation? If this can be Don, the particular Tenants of Protestancy
are as Certain, and consequently the Belief of Them as Necessary to Salvation,
As is the belief of that General Doctrine, which all Christians Own. The Reason
is clear: Because, the Testimony, the Authority of the same God and the same
Eternal Verity (as now we must Suppose) Warrant's as well the One, as the
Other. Again. If They say (And They must say it.) God has not revealed in the
whole Bible one Article of Protestancy, and therefore the Belief of not one
reformed Article is Necessary to Salvation; It follows, That this Religion,
Thus Separated If not, Protestancy is no part of Christian Religion.
from the true center of Divine Faith (Gods infallible Revelation) is no
Christian Religion at all, But stands tottering on Fancy, and fancy only; which
is a great Verity.

16. Occasionally, I here Answer to a Trivial Objection of others, that much
Extol the Clemency of Protestants, who (like Papists) do not Excommunicate all
that believe not as They Believe. Good Reason (say I;) For why should they
Excommunicate any, for not Believing a Religion, which is built on Fancy? Could
they judge in Conscience, or Assure us, That, what they hold, as Sectaries,
were Revealed by The want of Zeal in Sectaries for Protestancy.
God, Necessary to Salvation, or worth Believing; They should so far stand for
Gods Cause, and set so great a Value on it, as to Induce all, even by spiritual
Menaces (it is a Sweeter way Then to Deprive Men of their Lives and Fortunes)
to embrace Their Novelties. But Alas, The real Guilt of Schism, which lies like
lead at their Hearts, makes them most frigid in Advancing a Religion, laid hold
on by mere chance, and a most unfortunate Casuality. Almighty God soften these
concealed Hearts by sorrowful Repentance, and Forgive all Sectaries Their double
great sin, both of Schism and Heresy.

THE FOVRTH DISCOURSE THE CHVRCHES EVIDENCE. OF THE IMPROBABILITY OF PROTESTANT
RELIGION.
THE FIRST CHAPTER.
Christ's Church is Proved to be no Other, But the Roman Catholic. Sectaries
are Convinced.
1. WE have often made a just Exception against Sectaries in the foregoing
Discourses, A just Exception against Sectaries mare fully laid forth.
And you Shall have it here Again in plain Language. Protestants, as They Prove
not their own Religion of Protestancy, so, They never Impugn the Roman
Catholic Faith by Rational Arguments, at last reducible to Undoubted
Principles. Catholics Contrariwise, Make good Their Churches Doctrine by
undeniable Principles, And, by manifest Proofs Evidence the Nullity of
Protestants Faith. Though both these Assertions are already Demonstrated in the
precedent Treatise, Yet, Because of the Weightines of the Matter, it will be
necessary to Epitomize some Points, largely Declared above, And bring much to a
Clearer view, and a more Compendious Form.

2. To do this we may Suppose. If True Religion God established Religion with
intention to have it known, not to hide it from us.
be in the World, the wise Providence of God has made it so Manifest to Reason
by force of Rational Motives, That All may know it; For certainly God never
established Religion amongst Christians with Intention to Hide it from Them, or
to put it out of their Sight, if men will follow Reason. Proofs therefore for
it, can no more Fail, Then Religion it self, Unless Proofs therefore, for it
cannot fail.
an Infinite Goodness (which is impossible) obliges us Under pain of Damnation
to Embrace a Religion, which no man, after a diligent Search made by all the
reason He has, can find out.

3. Upon this Principle let me tell our Protestants, Wordy Cavils end no
Controversy.
That They and We, are not (in so important a matter) to mispend our time, or
to wrangle it out with Words. No. Proofs must enter, if They Hold their
Religion True and ours Falls; And so They must also, if We say the Contrary.
Again: Neither of us can here proceed as Schoolmen Do, when They Oppugn One an
Other, Solid proofs must sway here, and not weak Conjectures.
and Defend their Different Opinions upon weak and Doubtful Grounds* For, if
the Proofs for Christ's Religion be not stronger then Schoolmens often are for
mere Uncertain Opinions, We may as well, and without Offense, Reject a weak
Proved Religion, as we do a weak proved Opinion. The Arguments therefore for
Religion, whereon Salvation Depend's, Are to Stand firm upon Undeniable
Principles, Or, This follows: That, though God has most clearly evidenced
Religion, yet proofs are wanting to make it known, And this, whilst He will
have it Known, And manifest to All. Thus much Supposed,

4. We will First briefly Touch on a few Arguments for the Roman Catholic
Faith, which are amply laid forth upon several occasions in this Treatise (I
cannot A brief Repetition of some few Arguments
Repeat All in a short Compendium, yet, you Shall have Enough to silence
Sectaries) And Remember, We speak now of the Antecedent Evidence, which
clearly shows us Christ's True Church, and makes it indubitably Credible; For no
Religion, As I noted above, is, Ex Terminis, without convincing Proofs, either
Evidently Credible, True, or Falls.

5. I Say then, First. A Church* or Religion, which Manifests it Self, and
Proves the Doctrine it Professes by the same Signs, Notes, and Characters of
Truth, whereby the The Roman Catholic Church is Evidenced as The Apostolical or
Primitive Church was.
Apostolical and Primitive Church was Marked and Evidenced, is Undoubtedly
True: Or, if this Proof be not valid, we may easily Deny Truth to that
Apostolical and Primitive Church. Now, the only Church in the World thus
Marked and Evidenced, is no Other, but the Roman Catholic Throughout all Ages.
This Principle is undeniable. Deny these Marks and Signs to the Roman Catholic
Church, you Deny what is Evident, Grant them, And you Admit of Popery. Se Disc.
1. c. 9. 10.

6. 2. A Church, or Religion, which in every Age after Miracles, Christ's own
Marks Evidence the Roman Catholic Church.
Christ, Has had a most clear, Assured, and Vndubitable Evidence of Truth,
which is the Glory of Miracles (Christ's own Marks and cognisances) makes known
the Absolute Power of God Cooperating with it, And therefore cannot but be True,
Unless we Think that his power Alone Divorced, as it were, from Goodness, Did set
his Hand and Seal to mere Forged Signs, and wrought these Wonders to Deceive
the World. But the Roman Catholic Church, And She only, Clearly Demonstrat's
Vnparallelled Miracles, not in One, But in every Age, As is without Controversy
Proved by undoubted Records, They are undeniable.
(which Truth I engage to make Good, if any Doubt of it) Therefore, either This
Church, or None, is Christ's True Church. I call Miracles the most Forceable,
and Persuasive, Arguments of Truth, that can be Proposed. All other And above
all other Proofs most Convincing.
Proofs, Though clear and Convincing to Disinteressed Judgments, being liable
to Cavils: For, cite Scripture* against Sectaries, wilful Misinterpretations
Abuse it. Produce Fathers and Councils, They are either Rejected Other Proofs
more liable to Cavils.
by these men, as Fallible, or Drawn to a Sinister Sense, as Fancy will have
it. Tell Them of the Sanctity of our Church; They Answer, Much of it may be
Hypocrisy. Insist upon that great Work of Conversions, some reply, Policy and
Humane Industry had a strong hand in Them. But, when we Come to the Proof of
Proofs, And plead our Cause by Known and most Evidenced Miracles, all Mouths
are stopped, Envy it self is Silenced, And cannot speak a Probable word against
us: Unless None can require, that All and Every one of this Church work Miracles.
Perhaps some require (and most unreasonably) That every One within this Moral
body should work Miracles, which is merely to cavil; For, in the Primitive
times, All had no such Privilege. It is Therefore sufficient, That there be
some Chois and Selected Persons, United in Faith with this Church, to whom God
Communicat's the Grace, and Do These Wonders. Se more of this Subject, Disc. 1.
c. 10. n. 15. 16. 17.

7. 3. A Church, which has Converted whole Kingdoms and Nations from
Infidelity to Christ, And Drawn Innumerable Admirable Conversions wrought by
the Roman Catholic Church, as well prove it Orthodox as the Primitive Church.
Souls from a Tepid life to Penance and Austerity, From the Contents of the
World to a Contempt of it, From Self-love to a Perfect Self-Abnegation, Must
either be deservedly named the True Church of Christ, Or, the Apostolical
Church Proved not its Truth, by such Admirable and Miraculous Conversions. The
Church of Rome only, Has, by the Assistance of God Don these Wonders;
Therefore, it is the True Church, or, there was never any true upon Earth. Deny
these Conversions made by our Catholic Society, you Deny what is most*
Evident; Grant Them, You subscribe to Popery. Se The Roman Catholic Church
Opposed all known Sectaries. And us Orthodox Society ever opposed it. A
manifest Proof of Truth. The Marks of Truth more manifest in the Roman
Catholic Church, then in any other Society, Could not be permitted by God to
cheat the world.
Discourse 1. c. 7. and chap. 9. n. 10.

8. 4. A Church which Opposed All the Sectaries in the World since Christianity
Began, And was never Opposed by any Author of credit, or, Orthodox Society of
Christians, But only by Known Condemned Heretics, most Evidently Professes
True Religion: The Roman Church only has* Age after Age made this Opposition
against Sectaries, and never was Opposed by any, But known Heretics. This is
an Undeniable Proof, for the Truth it Mantains. Disc. 1. c. 7. n. 5.

9. 5. A Religion, which has Had in all Ages, most Indubitably, more
Illustrious marks and signs of Truth Accompanying it, Then all the other Sects
in the World put Together, Either ought to be Owned for Christ's Sole and Pure
Religion, or, We must say, That God can make a Falls Heretical Sect more
Credible, Clear, and Evident to Reason, by Signs of Truth and Sanctity, Then
his True Orthodox Religion is. Reflect seriously. Can We Think that Miracles,
Conversions of souls, Casting out of Devils, Great Austerity of life, Efficacy
of Doctrine etc. Once convincing Arguments of Truth in the first Ages, are now*
Showed us in the Roman Catholic Church to favor such Errors as Sectaries
impute to it, or, to Countenance any thing like Antichristian Doctrine? To judge
so, is an Improbable Paradox, And here you have an Other most evident Proof,
and Principle, For the Truth of Catholic Religion. Disc. 1. c. 7. n. 8.

10. 6. A Church, which has manifestly Don great Service The Evident Service
don for God by the Roman Catholic Church, Without Note of Dishonor put on it
by any Orthodox Society, Proves it Pure and Holy. A Church Once True is still
True.
for God, by defeating his Enemies, And gaining him Friends, And yet Labors to
Do him more Service: A Church, which never had Note or Mark of Dishonor put on
it, Censure, Private or Public, Issuing from any Universal Church, is
Blameles, Pure, Holy, and Vncorrupt in Doctrine. In all, The Roman Catholic
Society justly Glories, which, No other Sect called Christian can Do. And, It Is
an Undeniable Proof For its Integrity. Disc. 3. c. 8. n. 2. 3.

11. 7. A Catholic Church Established by Almighty God, And therefore Once True,
must (upon the same Grounds which then Proved it Orthodox) ever after be
Acknowledged as True. Hear my Reasons, 1. That infinite wisdom which Founded
this Once True Church, made it a School, not to Teach a Few first Christians,
Or For a Time only, But to Instruct All, And for ever. The Word of our Lord
Remains for ever, And It taught not Christians for a time only, (...) then left
of to be true. Reasons of the Assertion laid forth.
this is the Word, that is Evangelized among you, 1. Pet. 1. v. 25. That Word
then, which Those Primitive Christians learned yet Remains, And is now Taught
by the same true, and Indeficient Church, Founded by Christ. 2. The Gifts of
God, Romans 11. 29. are without Repentance (That is unchangeable;) What ever
Therefore Moved an Infinite Wisdom to make a Church once True, or, for a time,
Evidently Shows that Mercy farther Extended, and Continued to the end of the
World. 3. The Necessity of Having Christians Instructed in Truth, (Souls are
now as Dear to God, and as well Provided of means to Attain Salvation, as the
Primitive Christians were) Requires the Continuance of Truth in that Church,
which Christ first Founded. He VVill's All to be saved, and come to the
knowledge of Truth, 1. Tim. 2. 3. If All; None at this very Day, are Excluded
from the Means of learning Christ's Verities, Taught only in that Church, which
He established. Grace Remained with this Church, Therefore Truth also.
4. The consolation of Grace (Sectaries say it) Permanently Remain's with
Christ's Church For Ever; Therefore, Truth also is as Permanent, And as
Inseparable from it; Truth being as Necessary to a Church as Grace is. 5. The
Rock which is Christ, Stand's Immovable and Unshaken; Therefore the true Church
Built upon this Rock and Cornerstone, 1. Cor. 10. Can no more Fail, or fall
from Truth, Then Christ can leave of to be an Indeficient Verity. To say then,
That God once Founded his true Church upon the Rock Jesus Christ, And grant,
That afterward He Permitted either Men or Devils to Pull it down, to Deface it
with Error and falls Doctrine, is so Desperate a Paradox, That, I think, no
Christian dare Avouch it in such Terms.

12. Now mark my Inferences, upon These premised Inferences upon the premised
Considerations.
Considerations, The Roman Catholic Church was Once the True Church (Sectaries
Consess it) Once it was Built on Christ, Once it Taught Christian Verities
without Error, Once it was Owned by Christians for Christ's School, Once it
Euangelized the Word of God Purely. Therefore if God be yet as favorable unto
Souls as He was Anciently, If He Subtract not Means from us Necessary to
Salvation, if his Gifts be unchangeable, If his Intention of settling Truth for
ever amongst Christians Alter not, If He Bless his own Society as well with
Truth, as with the Consolation of Grace; This Catholic Roman Church, And no
Other, Once True, Was, Is, and Shall ever be so, for the Future. Ecclesia
invicta res est, They are known words of a great Doctor, etsi infernus ipse
commoveatur. The Church is invincible And continues the same, Although Hell it
self be moved, and Struggle Against it. We may Thank Eternally our Blessed Lord
for that great Verity registered in the Gospel: Portae inferni non praevalebunt
adversus eam. Upon No other Church but the Roman Catholic.
this, we Ground our Faith, And Therefore you Have here Undeniable Principles.
Disc. 1. c. 3. n. 2. 3. and Disc. 2. c. 9. n. 8. Now, if to Weaken these
Arguments, Sectaries will pretend to another Catholic Church more Ample then
the Roman, Se them clearly Sectaries cannot probably say when Our Church
brought in the Novelties laid to its charge.
Confuthed. Disc. 3. c. 1. Per totum.

13. 8. A Church or Religion, which was once confessedly Orthodox, And no man
can probably say, when it ceased to be so, Or, When it brought in such Visible
and Perceptible Novelties, as Sectaries charge on it by mere Vnproved
Calumnies, is Evidently a True Church still. The sole Voice of this Ample,
learned, Roman Society (Had The Ancient Possession of Truth allowed this
Church, is a stronger Proof, Then Sectaries contrary Cavils. Antiquity Owns the
Doctrine of the Roman Catholic Church.
we no more) which cries out against These Fancied Cavils, And the Ancient
Possession of Truth Allowed it in Foregoing Ages, will be Judged in any
Tribunal of the World, a more convincing Proof, An incomparable greater
Testimony For its Perseverance in Christ's Doctrine, Then a few blind Guesses of
Sectaries can be to the Contrary, Which when they are Resolved, come to no
more, but to Calumnies, or Strong Fancies. Disc 3. c. 9. n. 5.

14. 9. A Church whose Doctrine, when you read Antiquity, whether Councils,
Fathers, or History, you find so undeniably Owned and Universally Professed,
That the man is blind, who See's not Popery maintained all along Those learned
Volums: For example; Who see's not, But, That a Sacrifice Daily Offered upon
the Altar, Praying to Saints, Prayers for the Dead, The Real Presence And the
like, are Doctrins plainly Delivered by Antiquity? Now, Such a Church, which
upon its own Authority also, Defend's These Verities ('It Is the greatest on
Earth) cannot be Vainquished by a few weak Cavils of our lately Unknown, and
Vnauthorized Sectaries. The Principle is Undeniable. Disc. 1. c. 6.

15. 10. A Church, That has had, Age after Age, The both passed and present
Witnesses most Learned and Holy, a most strong Proof for the Doctrine of the
Roman Catholic Church.
whole multitudes of Wise, Learned, and most Holy Professors (the Number of
them is numberles) That, without Fright or Fear of any Delusion, lived joyfully
and dyed Happily in their Ancient Professed Faith, Cannot, But upon the very
Testimony of these Witnesses, so many (And so rarely Qualified) be Judged
Evidently Credible, True, Pure, and Holy. Otherwise we must Say, That, all
These learned men for a thousand years and more were Mad, Besotted, and Seduced
with Fooleries, which is so Desperate a Proposition, That None shall Dare to
Vent it, and speak Probably. The Roman Catholic Church Alone, Produces such
Chois, Learned, and Continued Witnesses for its Truth, No other Sect comes near
it, Our Roman Catholic Church shows that all other Called Christians, from
Luther to the fourth or fifth Age, were both Schismatics and Heretics: The
Roman Church only Demonstrat's with Antiquity a lawful Mission of Pastors,
Unity of Doctrine, and a continued Succession of Popes, Prelates, and
innumerable Professors. Cavils cannot overturn an Evident Verity. One Verity
is, that God could not permit so Learned a Church, as the Roman is, to be
beguiled with fooleries for so vast a time. Another Verity. If the Roman Cath.
Church be falsely supposed to have Erred. Protestants cannot probably say how
far or wherein in erred. What They are to prove and by solid Principles. A Third
Verity. Christ promised to be with the Church he founded to the End of the
world. Yet Protestants must say, He Stood not to his Word.
None can Parallel it. A most convincing Proof, An undeniable Principle. Disc.
1. c. 6. n. 12.

16. 11. A Church, That Evidently Demonstrat's all Other called Christians From
Luther Upward, to Have been Schismatics, Heretics, or both, is either to be
Owned for the true Orthodox Church of Christ, or we must Grant, That Christ had
no True Church on Earth for so long a time of a Thousand Years. The Roman
Catholic Church Demonstrat's this clearly, And it is an Undeniable Principle.
Disc. 3. c. 1.

17. 12. A Church, which Confessedly Demonstrat's its Antiquity, Proves its
Mission, Evidenceth its Unity in Doctrine, And Shows a continued Succession of
Popes, Prelates, Pastors, and Innumerable Professors, ever since Christianity
began without Interruption, Has so great Evidence for the Truth it Teaches,
That, all the Cavils of Sectaries, Pretending a change of Doctrine made in this
Society, are Weak, Proofles, and Highly improbable. The Roman Catholic Church
Proves these Particulars. Disc. 1. c. 9. n. 8. 14.

18. To end, I say three Things. 1. No Cavils can Evert an Evident Verity, But
it is an Evident Verity, That God (essentially Goodness it self) could not
Permit so Learned, so Numerous, so Excellent, and Precious a part of
Christians, as the Roman Pastors, and Doctors were, from the fifth Age to
Luther to be All Beguiled with Falls Doctrine: Neither could He Suffer Those
Innumerable Christians, who were Taught by such Wise and Learned Pastors for a
Thousand years, to be all Misled by means of Their falls Doctrine, or Cheated
into Error. This is impossible, Unless we grant (which is a Blasphemy) That an
infinite Goodness utterly Deserted his Church, and Preserved None True on Earth,
for so long a time.

19. 2. This is an undeniable Verity. If the Roman Catholic Church erred, as
Sectaries Assert, These men cannot by Their own Discerning Spirit, much less by
an owned Principle probably say, How far, or wherein it Erred, For example (And
I urge them to Answer the Difficulty) why say They, That our Church more Erred
in believing the Real Presence of Christ in the Sacrament, Then in Believing a
Trinity of Persons in one Essence? They cannot by any Proof but Fancy only,
more Espy Error in the One, Then in the Other. Therefore, whilst They believe a
Trinity, and other Doctrins Common with This supposed Erring Church (and
indeed, They must hold them on this Churches Authority only, or cannot Believe
Them) They may be as well Plunged into Error by owning a Trinity, as They
think this Church is Deceived, in Holding the other Mystery of the Sacrament.
Se these two Points surther explicated Disc. 1. c. 6. n. 12. 13.

20. 3. It is an Undeniable Verity, that Christ once Promised to be with the
Church He Founded to the end of the World, which was the Roman Catholic
Church. Now Protestants must say that Christ Stood not to his Word; For
certainly when He made this Promise, He well Foresaw, That, the Roman Catholic
Church would (if Protestants speak Truth) at last, about the fifth or sixth
Age, Become Erroneous, and consequently forsake the Good Master that founded
it. With this Church then, Which Abandoned Truth, Christ, who is Truth,
Remained not; nor, with any other Society of Christians for Ten whole Ages,
Because All these were Professed Heretics, and Christ never Taught Heresy, Or
assisted Heretics in their Doctrine. Therefore, He did not only Promise what he
Never Intended to Perform, But more; even now Glorious, as He is, in Heaven, He
Wink's at Yea and now winks at all the supposed errors of his once own Founded
Catholic Church. Vast Improbabilities.
these Hideous supposed Errors of his (once) own founded Catholic Church, And
Remedies none, Poor souls are Beguiled to this Day, with the false Doctrine of
that Church which He Established in Truth, And Promised to Assist for ever. Are
These* Think ye, Probabilities? No. They are the most Pernicious Doctrins That
ever entered into a Christians Heart, or Tongue Expressed.

21. If Protestants shall Pleas to make any Exception against these Proofs,
Give me leave to Assure them first. I will not take their bare Word for any
Thing They say against us. 2. To Fore warn Them of a usual Fallacy, And it is,
That They run not here into tedious Generalities and Talk in the Air, which
only confound's a Reader, and leaves him at last as much Dissatisfied, as when
He first Began to Read. And hence I Tell them, 3. They are obliged to Answer
directly without Ambages, I, or, No. Let them say Plainly, These Proofs are
Good, or, show them to be Fallacious; and if they Hold them Fallacies, Let this
be Evidenced by Contrary clear Proofs, grounded on Received Principles. Thus We
Proceed. Proofs and Principles Parallelled.


22. For Example we say: This is an Undoubted Principle (we are here forced
Again to Parallel Proof with Proof and Principle with Principle) that the
Apostolical Church Evidenced by Miracles, great Sanctity of life, Efficacy of
Doctrine, Admirable Conversions etc. Proved it self by these very Marks and
Signs, to be no Counterfeit, But a True Orthodox Church. And Here is an Other
sure Principle Laid by it. The Roman Catholic Church (And no other Society of
Christians) Has Age, after Age, Evidenced it Self by the very like Signs of
undoubted Miracles, of Admirable Conversions, of Efficacy in Doctrine, of
Dispossessing Devils etc. This whole learned Society Own's these Wonders, They
have been, and yet are Manifest to men's eyes and senses. The Ancient Miracles
and Conversions Proofs for Miracles and Conversions wrought by the Roman
Catholic Church.
Stand upon certain Record: Authors of unquestionable Fidelity Recount the
later, Not only Friends, but Enemies also Allow them so much credit, That they
justly Deem the Man near a Degree of Madness, That shall Offer to Deny All That
are on Record. Therefore The Church, which Has Ever Manifested, And yet Does
Manifest These Wonders, Proves its Doctrine in that Manner As the Apostles and
Primitive Church Proved Theirs. Observe now well. If Sectaries go about to
Infringe the Validity of this One Proof, or will What Sectaries are obliged to
^o if they Deny These Proofs.
yet Deny these Miracles and Conversions wrought by our Church, They are
obliged to Ground that Denial on a Proof as Strong (if not Stronger) as is This
Cloud of Witnesses produced by Catholics, For the Contrary Affirmative: And
this is not only Improbable, But wholy Impossible. It is therefore mere Talk at
Random, to Tell us, As They are wont: Many Miracles have been Fained: Senses
may be Deceived: Papists are too Credulous: Historians sometimes Recount Things
upon too slight Credit. All are weightles Words, unproved Guesses, Toughts of
Fancy, and Fancy only, As Vnproved Guesses no Proof.
wide from Proofs and Principles, as Truth is from Heresy. Disc. 1. c. 9.

23. Again it is an Evident Truth, That the Roman Catholic Sectaries without
proof censure the Roman Catholic Church, never censured by any Universal
Church.
Church has Don God Great Service, And never was Censured by any Universal
Church. Say Therefore, upon what Owned Principle can Protestants Deny this Good
service Don for God? Upon what undoubted Proof Dare they so freely Censure and
condemn it? I Will tell you, their own Saying Does All. They have no Better Proof.

24. 3. It is a most Evident Truth, That all those Wise and Learned Doctors,
That Taught Christians Popery for a Thousand years and more, Were neither Fools
nor mad men, nor Two other most certain Truths.
Universally blinded with Error. If this be not Evident, thus Much certainly
is. The wise Providence of God never suffered those whole Millions of
Christians Instructed by these Teachers to be cheated so long, and Abused with
Fooleries. Now my hearty Wish is, That our Adversaries will Once plainly Tell us
by what Proof or Received Principle they are An Unanswerable Difficulty
proposed to Sectaries.
able to convince, That all These Learned Doctors (no less wise then They) were
Besotted so long; or, that God for so vast a time, Owed so much ill will to
Innumerable poor Christians, as not only to Se them cheated and Misled; But
They are to prove, not by Talk, but sure Principles. First, That all the
Learned Doctors of the Roman Catholic Church, were besotted with Fooleries for
ten Ages. Secondly, That God permitted Innumerable Christians to be cheated for
so long a time. Thirdly, That Protestants have Exactly settled Christianity
Right on its Ancient Foundations.
more, utterly to withdraw his Providence, And suffer them to Grown under so
lasting a Misery of Falsehood; And this (which is ever to be Noted) whilst There
was no Other Christian Society in the world to afford them true Instruction in
the Pure Christian Faith. May it please Sectaries heartily, To clear this one
Difficulty upon a Rational Principle, They will much Oblige me. This Don: Let
Them also Vouchsafe to Add a Word more, for my Satisfaction: It is: If They
Digest These Harsh Propositions: All those Doctors were Fooled: God Deserted
his Church for so long a time, That, They next come to a Solid Principle and
Prove, That Protestants among so many other Sectaries, were the Only Elect
people appointed by Providence to Mend what They conceived Amiss in an old
Decayed Church; And They must Show this Don without mixture of Error in
their Reformation, Yea, and without Danger of Marring more Then they went
about to Mend. They tell us, of their settling Christianity Right Again on its
Ancient Foundations, Here is place to make that Talk good, let us have a
Strenuous Proof for it. If they say, they do it by Scripture; not one clear
Text can be quoted without Twenty Glosses and Fancies added to it, And yet all
will not Do. If again they will need's shake Hands with us, And say, We, and
They, are all One and right in Fundamentals, It is an unproved Assertion: But,
might it Pass; No Assurance can be given That they have settled all straight in
Non-fundamentals. Se Disc. 3. c. 10. n. 2. and C. 9. n. 3. 2.

25. 4. Amongst the many other Evidences of our A fourth Evidence of Catholic
Religion drawn from Gods special Providence.
our Roman Catholic Religion, This is none of the least; That God, by special
Providence, has Preserved it both in Being and Honor, for 16. whole Ages. This
Church has Stood so long Invincible and Glorious in the heat of all
Persecutions. It Resisted the Violence of Jews and Heathen Princes: It
Encountered known Heretics and Defeated Them: No Counsel, or Wit of Man, nor
Power of Devils have been hitherto Able to Dissolve it, whilst Whole Kingdoms,
and Commonwealths lost their Ancient Glory, And were Subverted. Whence I
Argue, as the Learned Gamaliel once did, Act. 5. 39. If this Counsel and work
be of men, it will be Dissolved, But if it be of God, you (Sectaries who so
vigorously Oppose it) cannot Dissolve it. Now here is A Convincing Argument.
my Dilemma. Either this Church Subsisted for so vast a time by mere cheats and
Humane Policy, or was, and is Protected by Gods special Providence. If the
first be granted, It would have Perished long Ago, and come to nothing: And if
God by Special Providence Preserved it in Being, It is Vndubitably the Orthodox
Church of Christ, And cannot be Argued of Disloyalty. To confirm this Truth, I
ask. Whether the Reasons now Alleged Whatever Argument Proves Christian
Religion in General to have been preserved by God, Proves also the Roman
Christian Religion Graciously preserved. The Reason.
Prove True Christian Religion (taken under that General Notion) to have been
Preserved in so many Storms of Persecution by Gods special Assistance? If
Sectaries Answer, Yes; The very same Arguments applied to the Roman Catholic
Church, Prove that also Graciously upheld by Providence. The Reason is: Because,
as I have largely Proved, True Christian Religion (Though never so Generally
taken) And the Roman Catholic Religion are Synonima's, and the very Same,
There is no Difference between Them. Now, if Sectaries say, That as well the
Christian, as the Roman Catholic Religion, have subsisted so long without
special Assistance by Man's mere Industry, and Humane Policy, They do not only
Enervate Old Gamaliels Argument, But more, Vent a Paradox which can If
Sectaries Say Religion has been so long preserved by Humane Policy, They vent
an unproved Paradox.
never be Proved, Or Brought to any known Principle, But to Fancy only.

26. And thus much briefly of some Few Arguments for the Roman Catholic
Religion, which if reduced to Form (And it is easy to do it) are Unanswerable,
You have more in the Treatise. Let us now se in the next place, what Sectaries
can Say for their Novelties, or, upon what Proofs Antecedent to their Faith,
They are able so far to Evidence the Credibility of Protestancy, As to make it,
in a Poor Measure, Probable.

CHAP. II.
Protestancy is an Vnevidenced, And a most Improbable Religion; Or, rather no
Religion, but a mere Fancied Opinion.
1. IT is Vnevidenced, For, the Professors of it, can (by no Rational Arguments
Previous to Belief) more Prove, That Their Owned Novelties ought to be Admitted
of, as prudently Credible, Then the worst Protestancy as much Vnevidenced as
Arianism.
of Heresies, Take for an Instance, Arianism. Hear my reason. The very Grounds
whereon Rational Proofs ought to stand, Fail them. They have no Antiquity, no
Universality, no Succession of Protestant Bishops and Pastors. They want lawful
Mission, Miracles, and all other prudential Signs of Truth, as is largely
Declared in the first Discourse c. 9. Yet from These and the like Motives,
Previous rational Proofs manifesting the Credibility of Religion must be Drawn,
Or, The Religion which is Asserted Rational Motives must Evidente the
Credibility of Religion, or, It Is upheld by his bare word that says, it is
True.
to be True, or Credible, will Appear Naked and Vnevidenced, having nothing to
Uphold it, But the bare Word of Him. who Says it is True, And Therefore is no
Religion. I need not to Urge this Point further, Because Sectaries tacitly
Suppose the Credibility of their Religion to be Vndemonstrable by outward
Signs, and Marks of Truth. For, Inquire of Them, Why They rather Embrace
Protestancy then Popery, or any other Doctrine of Heretics? You never Hear a
word of the long Continuance Sectaries seem to make no Account of these
Antecedent Motives.
of Their Church, of their lawful Mission, of the Succession of Their
Protestant Bishops from Christ's time, Nor of Undoubted Miracles etc. No. But
they presently run to Scripture, and Tell you, That both their Faith and the
Motives of it (internal to the Book) Stand there sufficiently Evidenced. Shall
we se a little the Vanity of this Assertion?

2. Methinks, I enter into a Study where a learned Protestant Sit's with a
Bible before Him, And much Dissatisfied with his Novelties; I Assure him, The
The Bible Alone proves Nothing for Protestancy.
very want of rational Proofs Grounded on Objective Motives Draws me from His
Religion, which is neither evidently, nor So much as Probably, made Credible to
Any. The man Points at his Bible, And says; This Book both Proves Protestant
Religion, and Gives you Motives for it. Make, Sir, say I, this your Assertion
Good, Viz. The Bible Delivers Protestant Religion. He Argues: The Bible Teaches
that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal Son of God, the Redeemer of the World,
And thus much Protestancy Teaches also. Ergo Scripture Proves Protestancy. To
prove Doctrine by Scripture Common to all Christians, is not to prove
Protestancy.
I Answer: The Argument a Genere ad speciem, Proves just nothing; For, these
Doctrins Common both to Catholics and other Sectaries, are no specifical
Articles of Protestancy, as it is Reformed. Now, These, Sir, you must Show
Contained in Scripture. For Example: As a Protestant, you Believe no Sacrifice
Offered upon the Altar, No Purgatory, No Transubstantiation, etc. Pray you
Warrant these Negative believed Articles by Scripture Proof. He Replies: After
his long Reading Scripture, He Find's no Mention made at all of a Sacrifice, of
Transubstantiation, And the like. I Answer: Others, as learned as He, find
Them, And Prove all by Scripture. Here, Therefore is no Owned Principle to
Ground his Denial on. But let this Pass.

3. I Argue against my Doctor. Though you find not a Sacrifice, or Purgatory in
Scripture, nay more; Though, we falsely Suppose, both to be unrevealed Sectaries
Negative way of Arguing, Demonstrated Proofles.
Mysteries, Yet, you cannot Positively say, by an Act of faith: A Sacrifice is
not: Purgatory is not. I prove it. Nothing can be Believed by Divine Faith, But
what God Positively Reveal's: But God has not said any where Positively. There
is no Purgatory, no Sacrifice, no Transubstantiation; Ergo These Negatives
cannot be Believed by Divine Faith. Sectaries Grant the Major. The Minor is as
Evident, For They shall as soon Prove, That God now Positively Reveal's who
shall be the last man alive in the World, as Prove that Scripture Positively
Teaches, Purgatory is not, a Sacrifice is not etc. Whence I Infer: If
Protestants Believe no Purgatory (For Example) It is not enough to say We Read
of no such Place in Scripture; For (were this True) It is Only a bare Negative,
And at most Shows, That God What Protestants are to prove, if The believe any
of Their Negatives.
has Omitted to Speak at all of Purgatory, Which silence, can Ground no Act of
Faith, Unless this Consequence be good. Because an infinite Verity, neither
Affirm's nor Denies That Third Place, Therefore I will Believe no Purgatory. To
Believe then no Purgatory, or No Sacrifice, It is Necessary not only to Say,
God says nothing in Scripture of these Mysteries, But more is required, Viz.
to Prove, That His infallible Revelation Positively Denies Them: For, Before
Sectaries positively Deny Catholic Doctrine, They are to prove, that God has
positively Denied it in his Word.
Before I Positively Deny a Purgatory by my Faith, I must prove it Positively
Denied by an Infinite Verity, Which is utterly Impossible. Se this Point more
amply Declared, Disc. 2. c. 8. n. 4. 5.

4. Perhaps the Doctor will Tell me. These Negatives of No Sacrifice, No
Purgatory, etc. Are no Essentials of Protestant Religion, But certain
By-articles, which may as well be Rejected as maintained, whilst the Common,
and Allover Owned Doctrine of Christianity is firmly Believed. If He Answer
Thus: First, Protestant Religion comes to Nothing; for all, or the most pare of
it is made up of these Negatives. 2. This Reformed Part is no Christian
Religion: If Sectaries make Their Negatives not Essential to Protestancy, Their
Reformed Religion is no Christian Religion.
For, Christian Religion (at last Resolvable into Gods certain Revelation)
cannot be Yielded to, and Denied as men Pleas, Unless we grant, That, that may
be Denied, which God says is True. 3. It follows, Though a Protestant Curse,
and Anathematize the specifical Articles of his Reformed Religion, as Reformed,
He may yet be a good Protestant, and gain Salvation, by the General Faith
Common to Arians and other Heteredox Christians. I would gladly hear of a good
Solution to these Difficulties, more largely laid Forth, Disc. 3. c. 11. n. 13.
14. In the mean while, you se, How Vnevidenced a Thing Protestant Religion is,
which has Neither rational Motives to make it Credible, nor Protestancy has
Neither Motives to make it Credible, nor, a word of Scripture to make it
probable.
so much as one Favorable Word of Scripture to make it probable. You se
moreover, How Scripture Alone without a Church, and a naked Church, not
manifested by Prudent Motives Leaves us in Darkness, Lead's into Labyrinths,
Yea, And utterly Impossibilitat's no less the Search, Then the Finding out of
true Religion.

5. From the Evident Vnevidence of this new Religion, the From the unevidence
of Protestancy, the improbability of it follows.
Improbability of it follows as a Property does to its Essence: For, an
Vnproved Religion, is Improbable, And, an Improbable Religion is no Christian
Religion. Pray you Tell me: If one Pretend to be a Wise man, and never Gives
Sign or Proof of his Wisdom; to be Learned, and shows Himself a Dunse in all
Company; to be Liberal, And An Instance.
Relieves none in Necessity; Will you Admit of all without Proof upon the bare
Word of him, who Says, He is Wise, Learned, and Liberal? No, you will Slight
such Talk as Vnworthly of Credit, and Hold it Improbable. This is the real Case
of Protestants, who Vapor much, Talk much of the Truth of their Pure Reformed
Gospel, But, When Things come to the Test, and Proofs are justly Called No
Principles, whereby to prove Protestancy probable.
for to make Words good, They can neither Say, by force of any Received
Principle, why They Believe Protestancy in General to be Christ's True Religion,
Nor, why They give Assent by Divine Faith to so much, As to one Article within
the compass of Protestancy, as it is Reformed. The Doctrine Asserted, the proofs
of it, The Opposition made against Catholics and the Method held in
Arguin(...)g, improbable.


6. You will Say this Charge goes High; And Therefore justly Require of me to
Declare further, wherein Chiefly Our Adversaries Speak so Improbably? I Answer:
They do it not in One Particular only, But in every Thing they Say. The Doctrine
Asserted by them is Improbable: The Proofs of Their new Religion are
Improbable. The Oppositi made against our Roman Catholic Faith, is Improbable:
The Very Method Held in Arguing against us is Improbable. All Falls All is
Deficient, And it Cannot be Otherwise: For, who is able to Persuade Himself
without Assenting to a most Desperate Improbability, That in this Old Age of
the World, when all rather Expect the Day of Judgment Then a Settlement of a
new Religion, a Little Knot of men wholly Unknown a Hundred Years Agon Should
now Start up And Speak to the Purpose, when They go about not only to Cast Down
a long Standing Church, But More, To make a Novelty Credible, Whereof the World
had no Knowledge at all, For fiften Ages Before? This I say is Highly
Improbable But Ad Rem,

7. I say First, Their Doctrine is Improbable, And Prove it. Protestancy not
resolvable into Gods Revelation, stand's on Fancy, and therefore Improbable.
Protestants Glosses, as improbable as the Arians.
No Doctrine Fallibly Taught can be Vltimatly Resolved into Gods Infallible
Revelation, But, into Fallible Guesses Or Fancy Only: The professed Doctrine of
Protestancy, as Reformed, is Fallibly Taught, And cannot be Resolved into Gods
infallible Revelation; Therefore, it Finally Rests on mere Guesses or Fancy,
And Consequently is Improbable. Se Disc. 1. c. 1. n. 6.

8. 2. It is Improbable to say, That Scripture Alone, without an Infallible
Interpreter makes any man Certain in what he Glosses, or at all Infallible; For
both Arians, And Pelagians Read it, and Gloss it Yet Err Grossly in Points most
Essential. Protestants, who Own No infallible Interpreter, both Read and Gloss
As These Do by their own uncertain Guesses, And therefore Gloss as Improbably.
Disc. 1. c. 4. n. 7. 8. Universal Opposition makes Protestancy Improbable.


9. 3. A Doctrine which at Its first Rise And after Also, was, and is still as
much Opposed by Other Christians the whole World over, As Ever Arianism was,
and is Improbable. Protestancy Had, and has still This Universal Opposition
made against it, And therefore upon that sole Acount is Improbable. Disc. 1. c.
6. n. 3.

10. 4. To Say on the one side That Protestancy is the true Protestancy
Dishonors Christ, and Therefore is Improbable.
Orthodox Religion; And, on the Other to Grant, That the Roman Catholic Church
(which Sectaries Condemn of Error) Has Infinitely Obscured Protestancy with
the Splendour of most Glorious Marks of Truth manifestly known to the World, as
Miracles, Conversions etc. is Highly Improbable, Because Dishonorable to Christ
and Injurious to God, who cannot make a Falls Religion more clear to Reason or
more Prudently Credible then his own Truths and Verities are. Disc. 1. c. 12.
n. 1. 2. A new coined Heresy may be better Defended then Protestancy.


11. 5. A new Coined Heresy without Motives of Credibility may as well be
Invented and better Defended by the bare Words of Scripture, Then Protestancy
Can be Defended. But such an Heresy is Improbable; Therefore Protestancy upon
that Account is Much more Improbable. Disc. 1. c. 12. n. 3. 4. 5. Sectaries
improbably allow God no more but a Lame and half Providence.


12. 6. To say, That God had only care of a Bible, and Preserved that free from
Corruption, But withal, Permitted His own Immaculate Spouse the Church (which
He Founded Pure) To play the Harlot, And afterward to Deceive Christians with
Damnable Errors, Is not only to Allow him a Lame and Half Providence, But also
to Vent a Doctrine more then improbable They must say that a Church Essentially
errable may as easily lose the Consolation of Grace at Truth Both are
Improbable.
(That is) Enormously Impious. Sectaries say so, And therefore Speak improbably.
Disc. 2. c. 2. n. 7.

13. 7. A Church essentially Errable may loose All Truth, And consequently as
easily All Consolation of Grace, And so Become wholy Divorced from Christ: The
first Protestants Assert And Therefore must maintain the Other, Which is
Heretical, And more then Improbable Doctrine. Disc. 2. c. 6. n. 7. 8.

14. 8. Though contrary to both Truth and Conscience it were Supposed, That We
Prove not our Catholic They Improbably found Their Doctrine upon Falls supposed
Negatives. Being fallible, and therefore not Assisted by the Holy Ghost, They
pretend Improbably to Teach Christ's Doctrine with Certainty.
Verities, Yet no Absolute Denial of these Verities follows from our not
Proving Them: But Protestants upon this False Supposed Negative, We Prove Not,
without the least Appearance of any infallible Revelation for them Ground
their Faith, Which is a most Desperate Improbability, Disc. 2. c. 8. n. 2. 3.

15. 9. It is Improbable to Say, That Protestants whilst they Teach their
Novelties or Interpret Scripture, Do either the One, or Other as Faithful
Oracles or Instruments Assisted by the Holy Ghost: For These men, whether They
Teach or Interpret Profess Themselves Fallible in All They Say; Therefore are
not assisted Instruments of this Blessed Spirit who Teaches by none The
Necessary Doctrine of a Universal Church, Interpret's by None but such as do it
Infallibly. Disc. 2. c. 9. n. 8.

16. 10. To say, That that Article of our Creed: I Believe the Holy Catholic
Church, was not True in all Ages before Luther, is more Then Improbable.
Protestants, who They make Improbably an Article of our Creed Falls.
can name no other Catholic Church, but the Roman, which They Hold Erroneous,
must both Vow and Vote the Creed Falls for so vast a time. Disc. 3. c. 1. n. 1.
To Teach that a Doctrine common to Heretics is enough for Salvation, is
Improbable. A Religion essentially Hypocritical, Improbable.


17. 11. It is highly improbable to Say, That either the true Church of Christ
can be corrupted in Doctrine, or, that a Doctrine common to All Heretics is
enough for Saving Faith. Protestants Affirm both. Disc. 3. c. 2.

18. 12. A Church Essentially Hypocritical That may Believe One thing And must
Profess an other, is unworthy of Credit, and cannot be judged to Hold probable
Doctrine. Protestants own such a Church. Disc. 3. c. 6. n. 10.

19. 13. A Church, or Religion, that has not one Article of Faith Grounded on
Scripture (as it is Reformed) yet So is a Church without a word of Scripture
for it. Another Improbability of Sectaries.
Pretend's to Draw all to it By Force of Scripture, Delivers most improbable
Doctrine, Protestancy is such a Religion. Ibidem n. 11.

20. 14. Protestants that Pretend to submit to the Authority of one, two or
three of the Ancient Fathers, And Scornfully Reject the Authority of the Roman
Church, Proceed Improbably. Disc. 3. c. 7. n. 9. And thus much Briefly of a few
Doctrinal Improbabilities Taught by Protestants, The Treatise afford's you
more, Touching the Liberty, The Inconstancy, The Endless Dissentions of
Sectaries, with other sad Effects that follow This new Gospel. These I wave in
this place. And

21. Say 2. The proofs of Sectaries for Their new Religion Sectaries Proofs of
their own Religion are Improbable. The Reason.
are Improbable. The Assertion is consequential, and Stand's Firm, Upon what is
said already, For a Doctrine Proved Improbable by undoubted Principles cannot be
made Evidently Credible by any rational Arguments, Unless Truth be contrary to
Truth: But, The Doctrine of Protestancy is Demonstrated Improbable; Therefore no
Rational Proofs can make it Evidently credible; nor so much as weakly Probable.
To confirm this. Do no More, but Demand of any Sectary (the Question has been
often Proposed) Upon what Rational Proof A Protestant cannot say upon a
rational Principle why He judges his Religion true or the best of all other.
or received Principle Antecedent to his Faith, He Believes Protestancy (I do
not say Christian Religion) taken in what General way you will To be the Best
and Purest Religion, now Professed? He cannot Pretend that this Novelty is ex
Terminis Evidently True, or Credible (for no Religion is so) Much less, That He
Believes without Reason, or, Because He will Believe; Therefore after he has
Declared what He Believes, He must also Satisfy the Doubt, And Tell us. Why He
Believes And, Ground his Answer upon a Rational Principle. But it is as
impossible to Satisfy This one Demand, as to Remove the Pyraenean Mountains
from the place they Stand in. The Reason is. It is It is highly Against Reason
to Embrace a Religion without Prudent Motives. Protestancy has no Prudent
Motives. If they have any in store They can be laid forth to Reason.
Highly Against all Reason to Embrace any Religion, whether new or old without
Rational Proofs Grounded on sure Motives, Which Plead as it were in Gods behalf
and make Religion Evidently Credible Before we Yield Assent to it. But,
Protestants have no rational Motives Antecedent to their Belief of Protestancy,
which Hold a strict Analogy with Those of Christ and his Apostles, as is Amply
Proved Disc. 1. c. 9. 10. 11. 12. therefore their Religion, as Protestancy, is
without Proof Vnevidenced. If they can Gainsay my Assertion let them Speak, And
Bring their Motives to Light. We would gladly hear what can be Answered plainly
to this one plain Demand.

22. After a General View Taken of Protestancy, We may Descend to Particulars,
and enquire in the next Place Why the Professors of it Believe so much as one
Article of this Novelty? For example: Two Sacraments only, no Sacrifice, no
Church Infallible. Why They Believe (And It Is the Worst of all, Yea, and a
Paradox Astrange Paradon of Protestants.
beyond Expression) That Christ Abandoned the very Church he Founded in the
greatest Need and Danger that can concern a Church, Which was and is to Defend
it from Heresy. Here we may justly stand astonished and Ask, How it came to
Pass that ou^ Careful Lord Jesus, (like one Drowsy, or Forgetful of his Charge)
Withdrew his Providence From that Church He Founded? What? Has He been asleep
so long? It Is True, when He Entered a little Boat, Matt. 8. (It was a Type of
the Church) a great Tempest arising, He seemed regardles of his Disciples
fears And Slept a while; But to Say, He has now Slept on For a Thousand
Christ founded the Roman Catholich Church, yet Protestants say, he suffered it
to perish.
Years, and like one Retchles, Suffered that Arc He Built not only to be
Tossed with the worst of Tempests, But to be overturned with a Deluge of
Errors and Falls Doctrine, is a Novelty fitter for Protestants to Broach then
Any Christian in the World to Hear or Think of. Ask therefore what Scripture,
what Unanimous Consent of Fathers, or Councils, have They for this long
Supposed Negligence of our Vigilant Lord? I Will tell you. They can Allege just
so much proof for this Unheard of Paradox as They Do For Their other Novelties,
which is purely Nothing. Protestancy therefore, whether we consider Protestancy
Every way unproved.
it in a General Way, or Descend to the particular Tenants Thereof is merely
Fancy, An Vnproved and Consequently, An Improbable Religion.

23. And Hence it is (Mark it, you will find what I say* Sectaries Thoughtles
of Proving Protestancy make it Their chief work to cavil at our Religion.
most True) That Sectaries chiefly Busy Themselves in finding Fault and Carping
at Catholic Religion (As if, Forsooth, Theirs were made good Because They Cavil
at Ours) But think not of An Other Task, which most of all Concern's Them, And
It Is Positively* to Prove, That Protestancy ought to be Owned as Christ's only
True and Orthodox Religion, This they wholly wave, and the Reason is, Because an
Improbability cannot be Proved.

24. Pray you Tell me. Did you ever yet Hear Protestants prove not their own
Religion.
from Protestant Any Thing like a convincing Principle, when He goes about to
Prove two Sacraments and no more, or, That Faith only justifies without
Charity? Or (to be brief) That Protestancy ought to be Valued of as the only
pure and Orthodox Religion of Christianity? No. I have Perused some of Their
Authors, and find These and Their other Novelties, either passed over in
silence* or, so slightly Handled, That they seem afraid to meddle with such
Difficulties. What do They Therefore? But think it enough to Cavil at ours.
Their whole strain is to find fault. This in our Religion is not Right. That Is
not well proved. A Third Thing Pleases not. Here we have a Novelty introduced.
There is a Ceremony blamable etc. Then a Ieer follows in Handsome Language, And
Their Work is Don. In the mean time, The Main point in Controversy (which is to
Prove by undeniable Grounds Their Right settlement in Faith without Novelties)
is no more touched on Then if it were not in Being.

25. In case they Reply. To prove our Religion Falls, An inconsequence of
Sectaries.
in some particulars is sufficient to prove theirs True in all. I have
Answered, could this be don, The Inference is yet wors then Nonsense: For
suppose, An Arian Did Convince Protestants of much Falsity, Does it Therefore
follow that all he says, is true? No. What then does the Protestant speak here
to the Purpose? 2. It is more then Improbable to prove any one Doctrine of the
Roman Catholic Religion Falls. The Reason I give in It is impossible to prove
the Roman Catholic Doctrine Falls.
this place (to omit Others) is, Because an undubitable Principle which cannot
be shaken, Stand's Firmly against These supposed Proofs, And is thus Hinted at
Already. Christ Jesus Founded a Catholic Church which should never Fail, and
Therefore Could never be deserted by him. For, No Monarch that lays the
Foundations of a Kingdom and obliges The Reason.
himself to take care of it, can without injustice Abandon it, unles a Contrary
power, or great Negligence Deprive him of his Right. Now, none can be more
powerful then Christ, And I hope our Adversaries will not make him Guilty of
Negligence or Injustice. Therefore He still Defends the Militant Church (a most
Dear Kingdom) which he Established. Perhaps some less Considerate will say. We
here Tacitly suppose, Christ to have founded the Roman Catholic Church We
suppose Nothing, but a most certain Verity.
only. I Answer first. If this were Supposed we suppose no more but Truth,
when it is clear That for a Thousand years before Luther, There was no other
Orthodox Church in the world But the Roman Catholic, as is proved in the
second Discourse. I Answer 2. We Suppose Nothing but an Evident Verity. Viz.
That Christ founded a Church which That Christ Jesus Founded a Church which He
never Deserted.
was permanently to continue to the worlds End. But this Church (find it
where you will) Protestants say, Christ Abandoned, Because before Luthers
Days, There was no True Church on Earth for ten whole Ages. Or if they Admit
of such a Church, Let them please to name it, But This will be impossible if
They Exclude the Roman. You se Therefore, How pitifully weightles Protestants
Proofs must needs be, when They Talk of a Universal Deluge of Errors
Overrunning the Roman Church, yea, and all other Churches What Sentence Reason
gives upon these Considerations.
before Luther. You se also (may Reason have place) Whether it is not much more
prudent to Hold All those petty Cavils of Sectaries, to be, as They Really are,
most prodigiously Forceles; Then to be wrought in this perverse Persuasion,
That Christ Jesus Deserted the Church He founded, and Permitted not only the
Roman But all other Churches with it, to be Misled Nothing less then an Evident
Demonstration. can prove our Church Guilty of Error.
into Hideous Error. Could Sectaries give Demonstrations of our Errors in
good Form, (And believe it Nothing less then a Demonstration will Do the Deed)
They might look Big On It, And Hope to Fright us, But when we Evidently See
Their Proofs so Drooping and Faint, that not one of Them stand's upon A sure
Principle, We may well Say, It will be best For them Hereafter, either to Hold
Their peace, of our Churches Errors, or Learn to speak more to the Purpose.

26. I Told you in the beginning How these men What Sectaries ought to Prove.
should Handle us, Had They a Likelihood of Truth on their Side, They should
silence us with undeniable Proofs drawn from Scripture, from Councils and the
Unanimous Consent of Fathers. They should show us Precisely, When our Errors
first Began, whereof they talk but Prove Nothing. They should plainly Point out
That Orthodox and Universal Church, which as Strenuously Defended pure
Protestancy six Hundred Years agon, As We now, and the rest of the world do
Oppose it. They should also tell us, what Orthodox Church six or seven Ages
since (There was then most surely a True Church in the World) Condemned Those
very Doctrins of our Church that Sectaries now Condemn and Cavil at. Such
Arguments, could they be Heard of, were to the Purpose; But, To have nothing
from these ^risk Antagonists but Trifles And mere slight stuff, is Lamentable.
Now we are Told Scripture may be Interpreted this Way, now an Other. Now, our
Modern Authors say This, now That. Now Council seems to Contradict Council.
Now mere Patches, and Fragments of Fathers, Pitifully Abused and Weighed out
of their Circumstances, are Produced against us. Now they Their way of
Arguing, insipid and weightles. The Roman Catholic Church has withstood
stronger Heretics then Protestants are.
Ieer at our Popes, now at our Prelates, Now at our Ceremonies, And Thus They
Hold on in a slighter Way of skirmishing Unable, God knovvs, to do more Against
a Church which Divine Providence Vphold's, And therefore It Has not only
withstood Harder Shocks from former Heretics (Then now are in Being) But also
Defeated Them. So it is. Ecclesia in victa res est etc. This Ancient Church is,
And will be conquerant, Though Hell and Heresy Band against it.

CHAP. III.
A Word more of Sectaries new Mode of Arguing best Laid Forth, By Touching
briefly on one Controversy.
1. WHat I would say now of this Subject, As also of the just Exceptions one
might make against our Sectaries writing Controversies, Cannot be Expressed in
few words: Their Faults and Failings being as they are, no less numerous then
looking different Faults of Sectaries.
ways at once. In a word: Besides Their Corruptions, and self-conceipted
Glosses whereof there is no end, you have first Gross Mistakes. 2. Pretty
Peevish jeers (harmles things) for they hurt no body, and give the Printer
work. 3. No little ignorance. 4. Mere Suppositions for Proofs. 5. Much
unsincere Dealing, when They slightly handle Controversies and slily dissemble
such Proofs, as make for our Catholic Verities. The last Defect (but this is
both remediles, and Transcendent) They never bring Assertions to Principles,
nor give us weight for weight, I mean Authority Answerable to our Authorities
in any one debated Question.

2. These faults, and many more I have Discovered Mr. Stillingfleet.
in a short Chapter of a late Writer, part. 3. chap. 6. page 638. Where he
treat's of Purgatory. The shortness made me read it; for where you have length
and little substance with it, one is soon wearied. To be brief therefore.

3. Our Adversary in that 6. Chapter, were he would Ieers begin the work.
say something of the sense of Fathers Concerning Purgatory, first Begin's with
his Ieers, and call's Purgatory the great Diana of our Church. And why Diana
pray you? What has that Dea Sylvarum, or Hunting-Goddess to do with Purgatory,
or Purgatory with Her? Well, but this Diana, He says, besides Casualities and
Deodands, brings great Revenues into the Church, in so much that she is grown
fat by the sins of the People, And (which Kill's all) Spalatensis (whose
Authority is as good as Luthers) Confirms the Doctrine. Is not this think ye a
piece of Profound Divinity, with the rest that follows of Hell's Suburbs, and
bidding Adieu to Indulgences and years of Iubil^? But, It Is The jest is ended.
enough: you se how little the jest is worth, I leave it. Surely, You Will have
him more in earnest now.

4. He tell's us therefore, After his quoting the Council Mistakes follow.
of Trent, that the Guilt of Mortal sin being remitted by the merits of Christ,
The Punishment is supposed still to remain. Here is either a Mistake,
ignorance, or both. For, All know, when the guilt of a mortal God cannot de
potentia ordinaria punish a sin eternally which is not, and some Deny it
possible de potentia absoluta.
Sin is remitted, which is an exigency or an intrinsic condignity to Eternal
punishment, that punishment, eo ipso, is remitted with the guilt, unles you
say, that God can punish a sin which is not, and this for ever. It is true, an
exchange from the eternal, to a temporal punishment is made by Almighty God
through the merits of Christ Jesus, when the due means prescribed for Remission
is used by the Penitent, And this temporal punishment is to be satisfied For
here, or in Purgatory.

5. He states next the Controversy between the Greeks and Latin Church upon
this subject, and says, The main thing objected by the Greeks against the
Latins was this temporary punishment for sin in a future state. Sir, I must
now speak to you, and say your Assertion is an unproved supposition, And very
untrue as will presently Mistakes, in Stating the Question.
appear. Neither does the Apology you so blindly quote Ed. Salm. so much as
Probably favor it. Mark your own Translation. We own no Purgatory fire, nor
any temporal punishment by fire. The contest therefore was not concerning a
temporal punishment precisely Considered, For The Greek Church never denied a
punishment, but about the particular Pain by fire, And this purgation by fire,
some of them perhaps might think (though most weakly) slackned the Obscurity.
endeavors of the Diligent if your quotation be true, for I wonder why you run
to Ed. Salmas when you No man here knows what Ed. Salmas signifies.
have at hand the Parisian, the Venetian, the Cullen Editions, with others.
Now, that which I Assert is without Dispute most certain, as Appears by the
very Definition of the Council of Florence under Eugenius the Fourth, where the
Greeks with their Emperor, and Patriarch of Constantinople met, and Consenting
to the Latins Defined thus. Item definimus si vere The Councils Definition,
Poenitentes in Dei charitate decesserint etc. Also we Define, if those who are
truly Penitent and depart this life in the love of God, and yet have omitted
the worthy fruits of penance for their sins committed, eorum animas poenis
Purgatoriis purgari, that such souls are purged by the pains of Purgatory.
Thus much you might have read in Alfonsus a Castro, whom you cite lib. 12. Tit.
Purgat. at the end of the Title. And therefore when Alfonsus at the Beginning
thereof, attributes Alfonsus a Castro explicated.
the Denial of Purgatory to the Greeks, He must either mean (if he contradict
not himself) that some of them only denied it, or that most denied a place of
torment by Fire: For, How can He say, that the Greeks Denied all future
punishment in Purgatory, when He expressly Grants they Defined the contrary.
Nay, He says more, that the Greeks then assembled in that Council, published a
book Ad probandum Purgatorij locum to prove the place of Purgatory, which book
was printed at Basil both in Greek and Latin. And here by the way you may
Observe another fraud of Sectaries, who if they find a piece of a sentence
seemingly favorable for them, that is laid hold on, and whatever clear's the
Expression or makes against their Dissembling of Difficulties proper to
Sectaries.
mistaking it, That Is waved and dissembled. But let us go on. You Oppose
against the Councils Definition Marcus Eugenius utterly refusing to subscribe
it. What is it to the purpose whether He did or no? Was his sole vote Enough to
unvote, or make null the sentiment of a whole Council? O, say you, He would
never have don so, Had all the Controversy The authority of Marcus Eugenius
weightles.
been whether the Fire was real or Metaphorical. How know you that but by your
proosles Guesses only? Besides, that was not the Controversy.

6. You still go on a Guessing. The Greeks indeed, say you, Do not Believe that
any Souls enjoy the Beatifical vision before the Day of Judgment, And on that
account they Allow of prayer for the Dead, not with any respect to a
Deliverance of Souls out of Purgatory, but to the participation of their
happiness at the great Day. Answer. More Mistakes and Errors.
You have here as many foul mistakes and Errors as there are words. And, First
tell me, who Those Greeks were that Denied souls the Beatifical Vision before
the Day of Judgment? Your Indefinite Proposition, The Greeks do not Believe
etc. Seems to include all, And this you must intend, if you speak to the
purpose; for to say, that some few, here and there, were of that Opinion is no
Advantage to your Cause. Now to show you how untrue this part of your Assertion
A few of that Opinion is no Advantage.
is, as also the rest that follows; withal, to confirm what is alleged out of
the Council of Florence, Ill give you the Testimony of a most Erudite Author
Leo Alatius a Grecian born, and one better versed in Leo Alatius a most
Learned Author.
the knowledge of the Greek Church, then we Ilanders can be, so remote from it.
Sir, Believe it, had you red one only book of this Author (I Will now quote it)
to say nothing of his other works, Chiefly Contra Hottingerum, you would never
have writ this 6. Chapter against Purgatory; For, He does not only ridd out of
the way those vulgar Objections you Propose (not one I am sure is omitted) but
also acquit's himself of far Greater, And, (as behooves a Scholar) so strongly
maintains our Catholic Verity by undeniable Principles, that none shall
Hereafter speak probably against it.

7. To the matter therefore now in hand, Leo Alatius in his Book entitled: De
utriusque Ecclesiae Occidentalis and Orientalis perpetua in Dogmate de
Purgatorio, Consensione Printed at Rome Anno 1655. and Dedicated to Pope
Alexander the VII. page 243. n. 34. which begin's, Hic vero paululum
immorandum, Declares out of the Acts of the Council of Florence what the Greeks
thought of Purgatory The Dispute Concerning Purgatory fire between the Greeks
and the Latins.
fire, what persuasion they were wrought into after much Dispute had with the
Latins, And finally with what judgment they returned into Greece. Cum Ferrarae
(says He) adhuc Synodus esset etc. when the Synod was yet at Ferrara the 4. of
June, The Question of Purgatory fire, was propounded. The Latins showed first,
that such souls as have venial Sins are purged by a Purgatory fire, receive
help, And are freed from those pains by the prayers of Priests, by the
Sacrifice What the Latins Asserted.
of the Mass, Alms giving, and other pious works. 2. That the souls of Saints
are in Heaven present to the blessed Trinity, and there enjoy all Happiness.
Therefore They distinguished three different places. Of the just in Heaven, of
the Damned in Hell, and of a third sort, suffering in Purgatory till all be
satisfied for. The Greeks, says Alatius, Hearing what was alleged by the
Latins out of the Holy Scripture and Fathers, said they would return an Answer
to every particular. Therefore on the 14. of June, Bessario the Nicene
Metropolitan gave in writing the Greeks What the Greeks Answered.
Opinion, and expounded that Passage of the Apostle contrary to the sentiment
of the Latins, yet, Confessed, The Greeks held a temporal punishment, due to
souls not perfectly purged, And, that these go in locum tenebricosum, The
Greeks acknowledge a place of punishment though not by fire.
locum moeroris, into a dark place of Grief, of Sorrow, and Pain, yea, and are
freed from that torment by the Sacrifices of Priests and Charitable Alms deeds,
But, still, He said the torment is not by fire. The Difference therefore between
the Greeks and Latins was, that those Confess a place of Pain and Sorrow, sed
non per ignem, not by fire: The Latins contrary stood for a Purgatory by Fire.
All this passed before the Definition of the Council, And therefore you se how
untrue your Assertion, is viz. That the Greeks Allow not of prayer for the Dead
with any respect to a Deliverance of souls out of Purgatory pains; For, here
the contrary is professed by them. Again, whereas you say, the Greeks believe
not, that any More Mistakes concerning the Greeks.
souls enjoy the beatifical vision in Heaven before the Day of Judgment,
Alatius, page 245. fine, plainly contradict's you, Affirming, that the Greek
Church believes the contrary; Although He Adds, nonnulles esse There are some
The Opinion of some is not the Judgment of a whole Church.
of that Opinion, but the voice of some few, I hope, gives us not the sentiment
of their whole Church. At last, says my Author, page 246. After much
contention and Delay made by the Greeks a whole day long from morning till Six
at night, They met again the 27. of Iulij, and debates being ended, Firmarunt,
they established this Truth. Sanctorum animas, ut animas, The Greeks granted
the beatifical vision to souls before the day of Judgment.
ad perfectam pervenisse beatitudinem, in resurrectione tamen perfectiorem
consecuturas, cum propriis corporibus fulgebunt ut Sol etc. That the Souls of
Saints come to perfect happiness, yet in the Resurrection they are to enjoy a
more perfect felicity because of their bodies, when these shall shine like the
Sun etc. Finally, in the 25. and last Session, Three things were concluded. The
first, that the souls of Saints are perfectly happy quoad Animas. The second:
Souls of great sinners are Endlesly miserable. Now for the third state of
souls, which they called Medias, They voted, The last Decision of Both
Difficulties.
such to be in a place of Torment, but contended not, whether it was fire,
Darkness, or any like grievous torment, and These They said (after a perfect
purgation) were to enter in the Society of the Blessed, and se the very
essence of God, sine ullo medio, that is, immediately. To confirm both these
Verities He produces the last profession of Faith which Joseph the Patriarch
of Constantinople The Profession of Faith made by the Patriarch of
Constantinople.
made of this subject in these Few, but pithy words. (...). I confess a a
Purgatory of souls. And He Added, that the Greek and Latin Church were not
Divided upon any account of Purgatory. Finally, page 249. Alatius recounts with
what judgment the Greeks returned concerning With what Judgment the Greeks
returned Home.
Purgatory, which appears, says He, by their Rituals. It was, that souls not
perfectly cleansed, are purged in a place of Torment, and receive benefit by
the prayers of the living, as is now Declared.

8. It would be a long work, to prosecute All that our Learned Author has of
this Subject. Whoever desires more, may read him chiefly from the first page to
the 42. where He shows first the mistakes of some Writers, that thought the
Greeks absolutely Denied Purgatory, And with these, Sir, you may rank How some
Latins were beguiled that say, the Greeks absolutely Deny Purgatory.
your unquoted Authors, page 640. But Alatius Disrank's them all, Declares the
ground of their Error, And shows how they were* deceived by the vvritings of
some Schismatical Graecians, whose Authority, says He, Avail's as little to
prove that the Greek Church Denied Purgatory, As if one should now cite Luther,
Calvin, or Ochinus, and believe them, when they go about to recount the
supposed Errors of the Roman Church. Stulte enim argumentaremur (They are his
words page 3.) The man would Discourse foolishly, that should conclude, the
Greek Church Held no place of Purgatory, Because Marcus Ephesius, Barlaam
Monachus, Nilus Thessalonicensis, Josephus Bryennius, And other Schismatics
have Falsely related matters so, which way of Arguing is as weak, as if one
should say, That, that whole Church is now infected The Errors of some, are
not to be imputed to a whole Church.
with Arianism, Macedonianism, Eutychianism, or Nestorianism, Because some
among them Profess these Heresies. Alas, The Errors of some that receded from
that Church as Nicetas Bizantius cited page 4. well observes, cannot in Justice
be imputed to their whole Church, which ever defended a place of Purgatory, And
therefore He Tell's the Chief of the Armenians of his unhandsom Plea, when
Bizantius adversus Principem Armeniorum.
He pretended, that the Church left the Schismatical Opinion of some few. No
such matter, says Nicetas, (...). But the contrary is true, it is you the far
less number, that deserted us. Page the 12. Alatius cites Manuel Caleca lib. 4.
adversus Graecos, who does not only Admit of a place of Purgatory for Souls not
perfectly Cleansed, but moreover Deliver's Three Truths established by Manuel
Caleca.
these three particular Truths according to the Sentiment of that Church. The
first. It is not Necessary to pray for those who now enjoy Beatitude, For
although, says He, we offer Sacrifice for the Saints, it is not don that they
may Obtain mercy Having it already, But it is offered up for this End, that by
Honoring Saints we may make them, through the mercy of God, to be Mediators
for us. The second Verity is. The Church never Prays for the Damned. The last.
There is therefore a third place of Punishment called Purgatory, where souls,
not perfectly Cleansed, must by the just judgment of God, suffer for less
Offenses, and so pass into glory. This learned Author has much more to this
Purpose, But, it is impossible to touch on all.

9. Let us return to Alatius, that in every page refutes your Doctrine. Page 74.
He Tell's us, that the The whole Greek Church taught by Apostolical Tradition,
prayed for Souls in Purgatory.
whole Greek Church, taught by Apostolical Tradition, ever prayed for the
departed who were neither cast in to Hell, nor are Glorious in Heaven. And He
proves this even by the Confession of innumerable that are of the Schism, Here
he gives us the judgment of Gabriel Severus Philadelphiensis in the book He
writ against the Latins of Purgatory, where He shows how far the Greek Church
agrees with the Latin, and wherein it Differs. We Agree, says He, that souls
piously departed this life receive (...), benefit and relaxation Those of the
Schism Confess it.
in those places they are, and this, by the Almsdeeds and good prayers of
others, as Dionyfius Areopagita teachers. And besides Dyonisius, Severus
Alleges also the Testimonies of S. Athanasius, S. Chrysostom, Basil and
Theophilact for this great Verity, that such souls departed have help, comfort,
and relaxation by the Sacrifice of the Mass, by Alms, and pious Prayer of the
Living. Thus a Grecian Schismatic speak's. And it is not He Alone that
produces these Fathers for a proof of Purgatory, but other Greek Authors also,
even those of the Schism, as Alatius Demonstrat's in several places. The
Interpretation of the Greek and Latin Church make the sense of Fathers clear
for Purgatory.
And most surely, so unanimous a Consent of many (whith whom the Latins agree
also) cannot but make the sense of these Fathers indubitable For our Catholic
Verity.

10. Now, Sir, if other Adversaries say as you Do, that the Greeks indeed
Prayed for the Dead, but without any respect of Delivering souls out of
Purgatory, or a place of torment, Turn once more to Alatius page 87. where He
gives you not only one, or two witnesses, But, as He speak's, Vniversam ipsam
Graeciam, The Testimony of the whole Greek Church, palam and aperte, openly A
clear refutation of our Adversaries.
Avowing these torments of Purgatory, And, to this Purpose He quotes their
Rituals, their Office of the Dead, and other Prayers. In the Office you have
this Orison. (...) etc. O Christ give rest with thy Saints to the soul of thy
servant, (...), where grief, sadness, The Greek Rituals and office of the Dead,
significant for Purgatory.
and Mourning may cease, give them a life of perpetual happiness etc. Another
Prayer is. (...) etc. Our Lord Himself, Give rest to your Servant, N, in a
place of refreshment, from whence grief, misery, and deep sighing may pass.
This is also repeated in their Paracletica. From Tears and bitter Crying out,
Deliver, O Savior, thy servants. Again they beg they may be freed from all
punishment, from a Prison of Sufferance, and soon be settled in a place of joy,
where the just inhabit with perfect forgivenes of all their transgressions. Yet
more. Alatius page 93. Says, This is the Doctrine of S. Dionysius, of the great
S. Basil Precatione 3. in Pentecosten, where He prays, that these souls Some
Fathers quoted by Alatius.
may not only be quit of Torments and sufferances, but moreover, be placed in
the Tabernacles of the Just, and enjoy happiness for ever. Finally, page 95. He
quotes S. Cyril of Jerusalem Catech. Mystag. 5. who does not only acknowledge
Assistance afforded the Dead by our Prayers (for such an Assertion is easily
misinterpreted) But, besides Affirms, They receive remission and relaxation of
their punishment. The like Severus Philadelphiensis, though a Schismatic,
Confesses That the Greek Priests The Confession of a Schismatic.
pray every Saturday, that, these departed Souls may find God Merciful, gain
remission of their sins, and be freed from the punishment, which torments them.

11. I am forced to wave a world of other Testimonies most pertinently produced
by this learned Author for our Catholic Verity* Page 56. He shows, that as
well the Ancient as Modern Greeks acknowledge Prayer for the Dead an
Apostolical Tradition.
the continued practice of praying for the Dead to have come from the Apostles,
And in confirmation of it cites Gennadius the Patriarch; S. Chrysostom Hom. 69.
ad populum expressly Approving the Doctrine, who also says much help is afforded
the Dead by Prayer. This is again confirmed page 63. by the Ancient Testimony
of S. Dionysius (sive quis alius) Ecclesiast. Hier. c. 3. by Holy Ephrems last
will and Testament, and others. Page 93. and 94. He proves more amply (...)at
these Prayers were made for a Delivery of souls (...)om pain, from Grief,
Mourning, Affliction, and Torment, as is now declared. Page 104. He shows, the
sufferance The pain of Purgatory is really great, not slight, or Imaginary.
of these Departed in Purgatory not to ^ a slight (...), as some Sectaries
would have it, but a hideous penal torment, true, real, and not Imaginary. And
to this purpose Nicolaus Cabasila in Exposit. Missae cap. 45. and Ioannes
Eugenicus are quoted page 147. and 149. The first Affirm's: Souls are purged
and receive remission of Their sins by the Prayers of Priests, The other: The
whole Greek Church acknowledges this (...)ation of souls after Death, and that
releasment of (...) sufferance is obtained by the Sacrifice of the Mass, by
pious Prayer, and other good works acceptable to God. The Thing granted, It Is
Sensles to trifle about the name.
Alatius therefore most justly deplores the pertinacy of some, who read so often
(...), and (...) in Greek Authors, and yet causlesly doubt of Purgatory. Rem
habent, and de nomine contendunt, They have the Thing and yet boggle at the
Name. Confess then, says He, which is undeniable, that souls have relief in a
place of punishment by the Prayers of the faithful, And call it Purgatory, or
what else you please, it imports nothing.

12. Sir, by these Testimonies alone (besides innumerable others omitted) which
none can either except against, or, probably explicate, you se, how wide both
parts of your Assertion are from Truth. The one is. The Greeks do not believe
(you must mean the Both parts of our Adversaries Assertion proved untrue.
Greek Church) any souls to enjoy the beatifical vision before the Day of
judgment, which is now proved absolutely untrue. The other. They allow indeed
of prayer for the Dead, but without any r(...) to a Deliverance of Souls out of
a place of punishment: ^^d this second, if there be a latitude in Falsity,
Prayer for the Dead, tormented with a temporal punishment, Evidently proves a
Purgatory.
is more untrue. You se moreover How forceable that usual Argument is for
Purgatory. The Greek and (...)in Church (yes and the Ancient Church of the
Jews also, as I shall presently Declare) Prayed for the Dead, Ergo there is a
Purgatory, or, which is the same, Purgatory is as certain, as it is certain
that these Churches pray for the Dead tormented with a Temporal punishment.
Now, if after all, you Answer. They only prayed for a joyful Resurrection, or,
merely for a solace of Prayer not made for a joyful Resurrection only etc.
souls (...)lling, as you seem to suppose, in dark Recepta(...) or finally,
that they may Escape the flames of fire which shall be at the Day of Judgment,
you do not only Vent your own Fancy without Proof, but moreover Contradict the
Authorities now cited, whereby it is Evident, that Prayers were made to free
souls from a temporal punishment, during this our time of Exile, to acquit them
of Debts Contracted in this life (so S. Austin prayed for His Mother lib. 9.
Confess. c. 13.) and Finally to Transferr Them from a present doleful State, to
Bliss and Happiness before the Day of Doom. And, Hence it is, that the Greeks in
Their Paracletica cited by Alatius page 144. Petition Almighty God, when the
soul is departed, for its speedy passage into Paradise without let or
impediment. Hence also S. Chrysostom S. Chrysostoms prudent Counsel.
(quoted page 145.) Orat. 5. de Poenitentia, Exhort's all to make the Judge
Gracious and favorable before They come to the Tribunal; For, says He, when
the Judge Sits, there is no appeasing no mitigating of his sentence, neither
power, Eloquence, or Dignity will Do it; And the reason is, as Alatius well
observes, For, in this General Sins not released in the general Judgment, but
sentenced.
Tribunal, Non dimittuntur peccata, sed judicantur, sins are not forgiven but
judged only, Expectanda est sententia and retributio. A just sentence and a
Recompense due to every Ones desert's are Here Heard of without further Pardon.
Ponder therefore well the Argument now proposed with all its Circumstances. The
The Argument with its Circumstances convinces.
Church Prays for the Dead, And, not for a joyful Resurrection only, not for
their sole solace, in no man knows what Dark receptacles, etc. But, She prays
for souls now actually in grievous torments etc. Ponder, I say, These
particulars well, and you will find the Argument most pressing; and unanswerably
Convincing.

13. You se thirdly, How weakly some of your Brethren Cavil, whilst they
pretend, That our Doctrine of Purgatory Comes much to the same with Origens
Opinion Concerning a Vicissitude of Misery and Origens error.
Happiness belonging to souls Hereafter. It is a pure Fiction, For Origin
thought this Expiation don by the Fire that will burn the world at the Day of
judgment. Catholics say Contrary, It is made presently after Death. It is
true, if, by reason of the Straitnes of Quite different from the Doctrine of
Purgatory.
time, some be found near that day who have not fully satisfied, God can in a
very moment Augment the Torment and supply that by an jntension of pain which
the length of time would have satisfied For. Again, Origin said, this Purgation
will be made in Hell fire, and for a determinate time. Catholics own no such
Doctrine. Finally, He held that not only Great sinners And the Damned, but the
Devils also were to be Purged in Hell, which Expiation Ended, all of them are
to return to a state of Happiness. Catholics Abjure the Error, and Hold no
redemption possible for either the Damned or Devils. Thus much of a mere
Calumny.

14. You se fourthly, no little swerving from Truth, when you, Sir, Tell us in
your Preface to the Reader, That you have been so far from dissembling the
force of any of the Cathalick Arguments, that if you Could add Greater weight
to them you would have Done it, being as Unwilling to abuse your self, as the
world. All is Contrary in the present Controversy (and you miss as much in
others) For, you have neither stated the Question rightly between the Latins
Our Adversary dissembles Difficulties.
and the Greeks (And Herein lies no little fraud) nor have so much as slightly
touched on any one Material thing now spoken of, And judge you, whether this be
not a Dissembling of Difficulties. If you say, you never read Alatius, you have
certainly in your Excellent His too much Forwardnes in declaring what He know
not.
Libraries more then one of those Authors He Quotes, and why were not they
better Searched into before you writ of Purgatory? The Truth is (There is no
Denying it) you were too forward in Declaring your Judgment concerning the
Greek Church, before you well knew what it Teaches. Would one take the pains
(and perhaps it may be don) to Translate your whole sixth Chapter into a known
language, and send it to Alatius (He is yet alive, and can Answer to the Cause)
with what Disdain think ye, would He look on it? How undigested a piece would he
judge it to be? Leo Alatius highly esteemed for his Learning.
How far from Expressing what the Greeks Teach? And, Do not slight the man,
for, He has the repute of a most learned Scholar the whole world Over.
However, if you Set light by his Person, answer his Arguments, His Reasons, and
most Convincing Authorities.

14. If any one desire to know more of what the Greek Church hold's concerning
the Fire of Purgatory, He may read Alatius page 200. where He cites S. Basil
and others for a purgation by fire. You have much also Purgation by sire.
of this whole subject in His Book against Hottinger, where He proves, page
130. Chap. 10. that the Greeks pray for the releasment of Souls, from their
tears and Torments, And, that after the Ending of such punishments And passing
into Happiness after punishment.
they may pass to eternal Happiness. In Ecclesia Graecorum, says He, pagina
155. cap. 11. Vnus fere est consensus omnium Graecorum etc. Almost all the
Greeks, even those who are against the Pope agree so far with The blessed after
this life enjoy the beatifical vision.
him, that the Blessed, after This life, enjoy the beatifical vision with the
Angels, and se God facie ad faciem. Now, Sir, if you would have an Answer
(Though it merits none) to the pretty jeer you begin with, Concerning the vast
Incomes of the Church by Indulgences ( Rivet call's them Pontificias
emulgentias) Read Alatius page 223. Chap. 12. where He washes away the Calumny,
and shows how severely the Church proceeds in this particular charging All
Officers of the Court not to take No Salary for Indulgences.
so much as the least Salary for the very Parchment, for the writings or any
other labor belonging to the Indulgence, And to avoid all Deceit, this
Superscription goes with the Indulgence. Gratis etiam quoad Scripturam. All is
frankly don, without reward or recompense.

15. You may return once more to His Book de Vtriusque Ecclesiae Consensione,
and page 272. find the Doctrine of Purgatory Professed and believed as well by
the Syrians, Armenians and other Fastern Nations that Profess Christianity, as
by the Greeks themselves. Abraham Ecchelensis a Maronit (says Alatius) And one
no less skilful The Eastern Churches beside the Greeks believe a Purgatory.
in Ecclesiastical Affairs then in the Oriental Languages in His Notes upon
Hebedieusu Bishop of Sobae expressly mantains the Doctrine of Purgatory, and
says, The Roman Church Innovates Nothing in this particular, Teaches Nothing,
but what is read in S. Ephrems S. Ephrems Office accord's with the Roman Church.
Office, Sive spec^et id ad Purgatorium ignem, sive ad remissionem delictorum,
whether that relates to the fire of Purgatory, or to the remission of sins
after Death. Much more is there Alleged to this purpose, but the work would be
Endless, should we transcribe the half of his Quotations. Yet one Thing is not
to be omitted which He as largely as learnedly proves Chiefly from page 268. to
page 300. And It Is that the Ancient Church The Ancient Church of the Jews
believed Purgatory.
of the Jews believed a Purgatory. He first urges that known Passage of
Scripture Machab. lib. 2. c. 12. which though it were not Scripture, as
Sectaries pretend, yet the book is of great Authority, and was never taxed of
Error by Christ and His Apostles or any Orthodox Writer since Christ, and
therefore cannot but be reckoned of as an undoubted History. Next He Produces
the Testimonies of no few learned Rabbis from page 278. whereby we have
assurance that the Hebrew And the fire of it also.
Church indubitably believed not only a Purgatory, but the Fire of Purgatory
also: And here, were it worth the labor, I could charge my margents with
Hebrew enough (borrowed, from Alatius) as Sectaries usually Do Theirs with
Greek and Latin, (I know a Little, and It Is little enough of that language,)
but I Slight such Paedantry, too manifest a bragging of Nothing. Good
Ostentation ever Displeasing.
Apparel needs no Ribands, nor a solid Discourse so much Margent-Bravery of
Hebrew, Greek and Latin. If any particular Emphasis lie in a Greek or Hebrew
word, it is worth the while to Search into it, but too much of the flourishing
(when every Boy Can transcribe a Greek or Latin sentence, if He have a book
before him) relisheth not, For it only serves to show how vainly Affectation
creep's in under a color of Learning. Yet if this be the new Mode of Sectaries
Let it pass, it is one of their least Transgressions.

16. Well, Not to forget: Alatius page 277. cites you R. Menachem Calomiti,
whose Writings are yet preserved in the Vatican Library, And This Rabbi
Testimonies of the Rabbis.
tell's us what the Judgment of the Hebrew Church was, much to this sense:
That if any soul be infected with pride or Error, it was necessary before its
entrance into Paradise to be washed, and cleansed by fire in a place above
Hell. You have yet a clearer Testimony taken out The Jews distinguished a
triple State of Souls.
of the Thalmud Massecher quoted page 292. where a triple State of Souls is
distinguished: Of perfectly just, of impiously wicked, and of a third sort who
are first to descend to a place of Torment, to be tried by Fire as Gold is: And
for the relief of such imprisoned Captives, Judas Macchabaeus sent twelve
thousand Drachmas of silver to Jerusalem as an Oblation. The Conclusion
therefore is, Sancta and Salutaris etc. It is a Holy and wholesome cogitation to
pray for the Dead, that they may be freed from their sins. But enough of this
subject, if you desire further Instructions from the Rabbis concerning
Purgatory, read Alatius now cited.

CHAP. IV.
A Parallel of Proofs for, and Against the Doctrine of Purgatory. A solution to
our Adversaries late Objections.
1. WE come now to a just ttial of the eause, to Proofs and Principles. Pray
you observe. We will balance all without partiality, and make the Parallel as
it truly is. The Question rightly The Question truly Stated.
Stated is. Whether there be a third place (distinct from Heaven and Hell)
wherein Souls departed this life suffer a temporal punishment, From which
punishment they are freed No dispute de nomine.
by the Prayers of the Living, Call it Purgatory, or otherwise, it matter's
nothing, we dispute de re, not de Nomine. Sectaries hold the Negative,
Catholics the Affirmative. And here is our first Principle.

2. What Christ's true Church, and all other Churches The first, and most
convincing Proof.
in the world denominated Christians Profess and believe, cannot but be an
undoubted verity. But Christ's true Church and all other Churches with it
Profess and Believe that third place of torment, as also a Deliverance of souls
from it by the Prayers of the Living. Ergo that Doctrine is an undoubted Verity.
The Major is Evidently proved in the Precedent Chapter, For the true Roman
Catholic Church, the Greek Church, and those more Eastern Churches, with the
Ancient Orthodox Church of the Jews, undeniably Profess and believe this
Doctrine, none can gainsay the Proposition. The consent of act Churches a strong
Principle.
The Minor is as certain, for no Authority under Heaven (plain Scripture
excepted) can be greater then the Unanimous Consent of all Curches. No contrary
judgment is able to struggle with so much strength. Therefore, put the case
first (you will The supposition hold's not de facto, for no Fathers teach so.
have what I would say better Evidenced upon a supposition) That more then one
of the ancient Fathers should expressly Deny a Purgatory, whilst all Churches
teach the contrary. Suppose secondly, that God should command me to believe the
One or Other, And that, which prudence evidently Tell's me is the most What we
are obliged to upon the supposition.
Credible, I am obliged, if I proceed rationally, to Adhere to the Church,
because it is evidently the stronger Proof, and to deny the Fathers Authority.
Therefore I am bound much more, to yield my Assent now when all Churches Affirm
the Doctrine, and not one Father Denies it. And our very Adversaries must say as
much as I prove. For, do not they own the Holy Book of Scripture to be Gods
Word (how consequently Sect(...)es must grant what is now asserted.
they proced I Dispute not) because all Christian Churches in the world do so?
If therefore that Authority be warrant enough for a Bible, it is as weighty for
the Doctrine we stand for. And this was my Conclusion. Perhaps you will say.
Very An Objection.
many among the Schismatical Churches Deny a Purgatory. Contra. And very many
also Deny the Canon of Scripture you Admit of. Does this make the Bible of less
esteem among you? Know therefore, We speak Here of Church Authority, and not of
Schismatics receding from a Church weaken not the Churches Doctrine.
Schismatical Parties receding from those Respective Churches whereof they were
once members; Know also, that the self-Opinion of such Partisans is not to be
compared with the Sentiment of a whole Church against them. You may Reply
Again. We are now forced to make use of Schismatical Churches to Defend our
Doctrine of Purgatory. Answer. No such matter, We need not their Help, but say,
Salutem ex inimicis nostris, when Adversaries agree with us in a Truth it is an
Advantage to our cause, witnesses upon this account are multiplied, Et vox
populi vox Dei, if The number of withnesses for a Truth, gives some Advantage.
All teach as we do, it is certain we profess no Erroneous Doctrine. At least
the Argument ( Ad hominem) Against Sectaries has place, who value so much of
the Greeks and other Heterodox Christians, We care not for more. Besides, the
Greek Church, when it was most Orthodox, prayed for the Dead in a state of
sufferance, as is already proved.

3. Weigh now well the Reasons Pro, and, Con. Reasons. pro, and con, are
weighed.
All the Churches in the world Defend a Purgatory, that is a place wherein souls
are temporally punished: No Church reputed Orthodox ever denied it. I say more:
No Schismatical Church, under the Notion of a Church contradicted that Doctrine,
Therefore our professed Faith is undoubtedly certain upon this very ground, or
if it be not, one may call the primary Articles of our Faith into Question. And
The Parallel, All and none. A clear Conviction. The second Principle.
thus you have the first Parallel. All Churches stand for our Affirmative: No
Church Defend's the contrary Negative of Sectaries. A most Evident Conviction:
A powerful Proof against this Heresy.

4. The second Principle is S. Austins known Doctrine De Baptismo contra
Donatistas lib. 4. c. 24. Quod universa tenet Ecclesia, nec Consiliis etc. What
the whole universal Church hold's and was not first instituted by Councils,
What all believe is Apostolical Tradition.
but ever in use and retained, Recte Creditur, is rightly believed to be no
other but an Apostolical Tradition. But it is most certain, that the whole
Universal Church prayed for souls departed, with intention to free them from a
temporal Punishment: The Greeks, the Latins, and the Ancient Hebrews Prayed so,
as is already proved, And this had no first Rise from any Decree No Sectary can
say, when the Church first began to pray for the Dead, suffering terment.
of Councils, therefore it is an Apostolical Tradition, which Truth Alatius
further demonstrat's upon several Occasions. Ponder therefore things
impartially, And ask now what Tradition have Sectaries for their Negative? The
Dead are not Assisted by Prayer. They have none, they are here put to silence,
for, neither the Tradition of the whole Church, nor of any part of it reputed
Orthodox, ever favored Their Opinion or delivered what they teach. Make then
the Comparison. All Tradition is for our Catholic Verity, The Parallel.
and Nothing like Tradition for the contrary Heresy. All, and nothing, make a
strange Parallel. And so it is at present.

5. The third Principle. Many Ancient and learned Fathers so interpret those
known passages of Holy Scripture interprrted by Fathers a third Principle.
Scripture usually alleged for a proof of Purgatory, that Scripture it self
Speak's what the Church Teaches. Not one Father gives such a sense to
Scripture as may Ground a positive or absolute Denial of Purgatory. I cannot
insist upon all. Take for an instance that one passage of the Apostle 1. Cor.
3. He shall so yet be saved as by fire, And know that besides those learned
Notes of Bellarmin upon the Text Lib. 1. De Purg. Cap. 5. and the Bellarmin.
Fathers there quoted most significantly expressing the Catholic sense, Leo
Alatius produces others, and Page Leo Alatius.
311. Cites Manuel Caleca a more Modern Author Lib. 4. Contra Graecos, who
Says the place cannot be understood of Hell fire, for the Apostle speak's of a
fire whereby souls are saved, which is not the fire of Hell, but a Purging
Manuel Caleca his reason.
fire, and by this They are to pass to happiness. And so much the particle (...)
or Per, which insinuates a Passing, strongly signifies. Thus Caleca, who has
much more to our Purpose. It is true some Authors think the Apostle speak's of
the fire of Tribulation, Others (though less probably) of the last burning of
the No Fathers makes Scripture to Deny a Purgatory.
world, but no Father makes the Text or any other of Scripture positively
exclusive of Purgatory, for This is no Consequence. We are to pass through
Tribulation, and the fire also at the judgment Day. Ergo, there is no penalty
to be endured in a third place. Here you have an other Parallel. Most learned
Fathers interpret The Paralled.
Scripture Conformably to the Churches Doctrine, not one positively favors the
Contrary Opinion of Sectaries. Judge you therefore, and cast as it were into a
balance the express Sentiment of Many against None, and see where the greatest
weight lies.

6. The fourth Principle is the Express Doctrine of The fourth Principle.
Fathers Themselves* as well Greek as Latin, whether it be grounded on
Scripture, on Tradition, or both, matters not at present: Here we only Appeal
to the Their Positive Doctrine. To transcribe all they have said on this
subject, would be a long work. Bellarmin now cited cap. 10. has many, Leo
Alatius adds other Greek Authors favor the Church Doctrine.
Greek Authors as well Orthodox as of Schismatical from his 57. page. There you
have Gennadius the Patriarch, St. Epiphanius express to our purpose, S.
Chrysostom Hom. 69. ad populum, and S. Damascen both approving and praising S.
Chrysostoms Doctrine, Eustrati^s Priest of Constantinople, Michael Glycas a
Schismatic, Eugenicus Nomophilax adversus Synodum Florentinam, Meletius
Alexandrinus Epistola ad Chios, who says Expressly, it is an Apostolical
Tradition, and grounded also in Scripture, To Hold that the Dead have great
Assistance by the good works of the Living. But let us return to the more known
Authority of Fathers. S. Denis (or some other Grave Author) Eccles. Hierarch.
cap 7. part 3. says, that Dionysius, S. Cyril of Hi^r. S. Chrysostom.
the venerable Prelate prays over the Dead, to the End that all his sinn's
committed through humain frailty may be forgiven him. Say I beseech you, what
signifies this remission of sin's obtainable by the Prayers of the Prelate? S.
Cyril of Jerusalem Mystag. 5. We make Prayers and offer up the dreadful
Sacrifice on the Altar for the Dead, believing it to be a mighty Help for their
souls. What can be more plain Popery? S. Chrysostom Hom. 21. in Acta, Alatius
quotes the words in his own language, which begin thus: (...) etc. God, says
He, has laid open to us many ways to salvation. Oblations, Oblations and
Prayers for the Dead.
Prayers and Alms for the Dead are not things vainly don in their behalf, No,
They were instituted by the Holy Ghost, who will's that we endeavor to help
one an other. Be most assured the Dead have much profit by our Orizons. The
Saint has more to this purpose in his 41. Hom. upon the first of the Corr.
Theodoret (cited by Alatius page 71.) lib. 5. Histor. cap. 36. Tell's us, that
Theodosius the younger, lay prostrate at the Relics of S. Chrysostom, praing
for the Souls of his deceased Parents Arcadius and Eudoxi^, that God would
grant them pardon for their Offenses etc. Alatius besides These, cites
Theophylact, S. Cyril of Alexandria, Metaphrastes and other Greek Authors. You
have the Latin Fathers Largely quoted by Bellarmin supra cap. 10. And their
words are so plain for our Doctrine The Latin Fathers accord also.
(Specially S. Austins) that none without violence can draw them to any other
sense then what the Church Teaches. Most surely, you will now expect that
Sectaries Answer us with like measure, And give in lieu of these Testimonies
(briefly hinted at) others as clear and significant for their Opinion. And this
They are obliged to, when besides the alleged Authorities, we have an Ample,
ancient, and learned Church that speaks in the language of the Fathers, and
Teaches the very Doctrine They Deliver. But all is Contrary.

7. I Will tell you a great Truth, and it is worth a serious reflection. Sectaries
have not so much as one Ancient Father Greek or Latin, not one Ancient Writer
Sectaries want of Authors.
reputed Orthodox, not one Council new or old, not one word of Scripture that
either Positively and Expressly Denies a Purgatory, or Prayers for the Dead, or
the relief we now plead for, afforded them in a place of Punishment. What not
one? No. Parallel The Parallel.
therefore many with None and you will se what foundations Our Adversaries
Novelties Stand on. I say Expressly and Positively, being well acquainted with
Sectaries Proceeding, as well in this as in other Controversies. Sectaries way
of Arguing.
Here They will first be upon you with their Negative way of Arguing. We read
no such word as Purgatory in the Ancient Fathers. 2. You may have a Company of
blind inferences drawn from Scripture and Fathers before the sense of either be
Agreed They make Deductions from Scripture before the sense of Scripture is
known.
on. 3. As far as Conjectures can reach, they will set Glosses enough upon the
best Testimonies allegeable out of Scripture or Fathers etc. But mark it, all
this while you have Nothing Express, nothing Positive and significant against
us. And Do they think that a mere Negative Argument has force enough to
overthrow a Doctrine Positively Professed by a whole Church, and so many Learned
Fathers? Can they persuade Themselves that Their Inferences Forced from
Scripture or Fathers, are of any validity, whilst the very sense of both lie
under Dispute? Take for an instance An Instance.
that of S. John Apocal. 14. Blessed are the Dead that Dye in our Lord, Amodo,
from hence forth they rest from Their labors. The Question is, what Amodo
relates to, whether to the day of every man's Death, or to the last Judgment
Day? whether the Scripture speak's there of perfect Souls only, or of others?
what is meant by that word labors; For if it signify the sufferances and
persecutions of this present life, the Text Proves nothing for our Adversaries.
Notwithstanding all these Doubts undecided, Their Inference goes on. And it is,
that S. John here Excludes all sufferance in Purgatory. Alas, such Deductions
are too weak to Oppose Weak Deductions.
an Express owned Doctrine all over the world, as is now proved. Yet you have no
better from these men. Nothing Express, nothing openly significant Against us.

8. I touched in the last place on Sectaries Glosses and interpretations,
forced on such Testimonies, as are usually cited for our Catholic Faith. And
here How differently Catholics and Sectaries proceed.
I will briefly Discover not only their Cheat, but moreover show you how
differently we and They proceed as well in this present Controversy, as in all
other Disputes between us. Observe well, The Truth is thus. When we Produce
Scripture, Councils, or Fathers against their Novelties, They make their own
Interpretation to be the last and surest Ground whereon The Sectary makes the
last ground of his Opinion to be his own Explication. The Catholic has his
Religion proved before He Explicates.
Their maintained Opinion ultimatly relies. Contrariwise, the Catholic never
interpret's Scripture or Fathers alleged by Sectaries, but He ground his Gloss
on a surer Principle then his sole Explication reaches to. I will explicate my
self more clearly by one Instance. Besides the Authority of our Church, and all
other Societies called Christian, we allege (for example) St. Denis his
Testimony, St. Chrysostoms, or any other to prove that Prayer for the Dead
Avail's much for their comfort and remission of sins, that is, for the
lessening of the pain due to sin. The Sectary interpret's These and the like
passages as his own Fancy suggesteth, And if this Fancy hit not right, He is
undon, for He has no surer Principle to rely on, either in this or any other
Controversy, but His own self conceipted Gloss. The Reason is: He has no
infallible All sure Principles fail Sectaries.
Church, no clear Scripture, no undoubted consent of Fathers, no Universal
Tradition distinct from his Gloss that can so much as make it probable.
Therefore his own unproved interpretation Does all; it is his last Principle and
Strongest Hold, He never goes Higher, nor can advance one step further. I am so
confident of this Assertion, that I challenge our Adversary to come to a just
trial in this one Controversy; A fair Offer.
And if He can Answer to our Authorities now quoted, upon the Assurance of
plain Scripture, undoubted Tradition, or the plain Consent of Fathers, I Will cry
Peccavi, and Ask forgivenes of my rashness. Thus they proceed.

9. On the Other side, when the Catholic interprets Scripture or Fathers
alleged by Sectaries against his Faith, He never makes his interpretation to be
the The last Proof of a Catholic is not his Interpretation.
greatest light or surest Proof of His Doctrine: but most prudently Answers, I
am bound to interpret your less clear Authority brought Against me, because, I
am Assured Aliunde by the strongest Principles Imaginable (whether my Gloss hit
right or no) that my Faith is most certain. Christ's Church tell's me so,
Fathers Confirm it, None ever Opposed it but known Heretics. Here, says the
Catholic, are my last He has assured Principles to rely on.
Principles, Upon these I rest, And can you, my Adversary, Imagine that I being
so well grounded, Ought to leave my certain Principles for a Dark sentence, or
your unproved Conjectures? It is impossible. You will se this more clearly by
one Example. The An Instance.
Catholic Believes a Purgatory. The Sectary says His belief is against
Scripture. ( Wisdom 3. The souls of the righteous are in the hands of God, and
no torment shall touch them.) No such matter, Answers the Catholic, for if the
word Righteous point at such as are perfectly just and need no Purgatory, your
proof is proofles, or if the word Torments particularly signifies (as it does)
a racking or torturing forced on Malefactors, to confess the Truth before a
Judge, the Text is wide enough from your purpose; For no such punishment shall
touch the just departed. Now mark, The Catholics just Demand.
says the Catholic: Will you, Sir, have me to part from clear and certain
Principles whereon my Faith relies for a Scripture, whilst the very sense of
that Scripture is at least doubtful and obscure, and therefore may be well
explicated without violence no way Contrary to the Doctrine of my Church? It
would be a sin (and a great one) against prudence to yield upon so slight a
ground. I should make (says He) an ill bargain, should I (as it were) exchange
the sure Principles A woeful Exchange of sure Principles for uncertain Glosses.
of my Faith for your uncertain Glosses and you have no more, Though you read
the Text now cited till your eyes be weary.

10. Upon the Occasion now offered, give me leave to Tell you one great Truth,
Viz. All of us must (Vnavoidibly) either firmly Adhere to the Doctrine of our
Catholic A great Verity worthy of Reflection.
Church, in these points of Controversy, Or (may Sectaries Glosses sway with
us) we shall be sure to Assent to that which is not only an Heresy, but
according to Ordinary Prudence and clear Principles a thousand times more
improbable and Difficil. Observe it in our present Controversy* Sectaries hold
it no improbability to say, That the Souls of good men do not enjoy complete
Happiness till the Day of Judgment (Any thing may pass but Popery) yet this
very Assertion, if we respect Authority The Improbable proceeding of Sectaries.
and reason also (abstracting from Faith) is less probable then our Church
Doctrine is. Those quoted Scriptures prove Nothing to this purpose, as we shall
show presently; for to find mercy at that great Day, inferr's not, that all
Souls must stay out of Heaven till the second Coming of Christ to judgment.
Note the like strain in other Controversies. They will have me to Deny the
Infallibility of my Church, and will give me in Place of it their own fallible
word, which I am sure cannot Stand in Competition with the sole Humane
Authority of my Church. They will have us to deny the Popes Supremacy, And what
Do they enforce on us in lieu of that? Nothing, but Their own jarring heads
that agree in Nothing, And these must Teach and Govern us in place of a Pope.
They will have me to Disbelieve my Scripture interpreted by the Church, and to
believe their Interpretations, who are both Churchles and Scriptureles. Mark
well, and judge you, whether that which Sectaries They would drive us upon
greater Improbabilities.
would Drive us upon, be not in a high measure more improbable and difficile,
then what we now believe, and it must needs be so, for, as I told you, the only
support of their whole Religion, as Protestancy, is neither Scripture nor the
Consent of Fathers, but their own Glosses forced on both, without further
warrant. Follow them closely through all Controversies, you will find I speak
Truth. Contrariwise. The Catholics Security when He interpret's.
when the Catholic Interpret's, He has ever at hand a certain Principle
distinct from his Interpretation, which is his security; For, says He, I must
either Interpret an Authority when it is Dubious, or desert those Convincing
Principles whereon my Faith is grounded, which are without Controversy most
certain: But to do so is madness, and a notorious sin against Prudence Thus much
by way of a Notandum. Our Adversaries Objections.


11. We come now to Combat a little with our Adversaries Objections, but the
Quarrel will not be long; For besides what is refuted Already, and some other
Parergons, not much (as I think) to the Purpose, the remainder may be easily
dispatched.

12. He says first: Nothing ought to be looked on as an Article of Faith among
the Fathers, but what They declare, that they believe on the account of Divine
Revelation. Mark the word Declare, and se, Sir, what a law you lay on A hard
Rule given the Fathers.
the Fathers, they must tell their Readers when they write: My Masters, so much
you are to believe on the account of Divine Revelation, and so much not: or if
They fail in this Declaration, they may, as you seem to say afterward, speak
only their own fancies and Imaginations. Contra. St. Austins writes of
Purgatory and holds it, as we shall se presently, But Declares not Explicitly
that the Doctrine is of Divine Revelation, nor Explicitly that it is his own
fancy. If therefore He Declares neither Explicitly, upon what Principle The
Argument is retorted.
can you Assert, that he rather makes it a thought of his own fancy, then an
Article of Faith. All you say, is: He declares it not to be of Divine
Revelation. And I Answer, He Declares it not to be a thought of His own fancy.
If then you suppose it to be his Fancy, because He declares it not to be of
Divine Revelation, I may as lawfully suppose it to be of Divine Revelation, The
Mistake.
because He declares it not to be his own fancy. In a word your Principle is a
Mistake. For, the Fathers in their Learned Volumes often speak of matters of
Faith, yet ever say not expressly it is so, and they often also touch on
Opinative Doctrine, yet Cry not always out, This is opinion only. No, but
suppose both known by other Principles without their express Declaration. You
cite St. Austin in the next page, Asserting in Several places, That all things
necessary to be believed are clearly revealed in Scripture. I doubt much of
that word clearly, and of the several places too; but this is not St. Austin
says expressly there are many things very difficil to be understood in
Scripture. de Fide and oper. c. 15. The doubt it of St. Austins Assertion, not
of Scripture it self. A better Rule. A second Objection.
what I aim at. My Question is, whether St. Austin declares himself plainly in
those several places, that His Assertion is of Divine Revelation? If He do not
according to your Rule, it is a Thought of his Fancy only, and therefore makes
nothing for your purpose. Well after All, here is a better Rule. When the
Fathers Deliver a Doctrine Conformable to the Belief of the Universal Church,
you may rightly suppose it to be of Divine Revelation, though They Expressly
declare not so much in their writings.

13. You say 2. That cannot be looked on as an Article of Faith to such
persons, who express Their Doubts Concerning the Truth of it. But upon our
enquiry into the Fathers we shall find (say you) the first Person who seemed to
Assert that any Faithful souls passed through a fire of Purgation before the
Day of Judgment, was St. Austin: But He Delivers his Judgment with so much
fear and hesitancy, that any one may se He was far from making it an Article of
Faith. To prove this hesitancy you quote two Places, de Fide and operibus c.
16. St. Austin was not the first that held Purgatory.
And Enchir. c. 69. I Answer first. You have not made a Diligent enquiry into
the Fathers, if you think St. Austin was the first that held a fire of
Purgation before the day of Judgment. The contrary is manifest by the
Authorities cited above. I say 2. This Learned He delivers no doubtful Doctrine
of Purgatory.
Father Delivers no doubtful Judgment of Purgatory; but plainly Asserts it. I
say 3. Your two Places prove not that He doubts of it. And to make this clear,
you know the whole Drift of St. Austin, both in this 16. Chapter and the
precedent, was only to deliver his opinion concerning the sense of the Apostles
dark St. Austins Drift Explicated.
words 1. Cor. 3. And not to Define whether there be a Purgatory or no. This
therefore being his main intent, He first reject's the Opinion of others, and
Inclines much to the Affirmative, Viz. That the place Proves Purgatory, but not
certainly. Hereupon follows what you cite: Sive ergo in hac vita tantum homines
His words.
ista patiuntur etc. Whether therefore men suffer these things in this life, or
such Judgments follow them after this life, non abhorret, quantum arbitror, a
ratione veritatis iste Intellectus hujus sententiae. That is in plain English.
Such an understanding of this passage is no way, He thinks such a punishment is
proved by the Text.
as I conceive, contrary to the true meaning of S. Paul's words, which is to
say: I think a punishment is proved by this Scripture, either now or hereafter,
yet am not certain. And therefore those next words follow; Verumt amen etiamsi
est alius qui mihi non occurrit. Yet there may perhaps be another sense of
them, which now occurr's not to me To doubt of Purgatory and to doubt whether
such a Scripture proves it, are different.
etc. Now, Sir, be pleased to reflect. It is one thing to doubt of a Purgatory
in it self, and another to Doubt whether it can be well proved out of this
place of Scripture. St. Austins: Quantum arbitror, or hesitancy, as is manifest
by the words, Iste Intellectus hujus Sententiae, And, Etiamsi sit alius etc.
makes only His Proof Doubtful, without giving the least hint of any doubt
relating to the Doctrine of Purgatory it self. It often falls out in Philosophy
and Divinity that a Doctrine is certain, yet some Arguments whereby it is proved
are excepted against as proofles, or less valid.

14. To solve the other place, Enchir c. 69. Note first A Principle of St.
Austin to be noted.
a Principle of St. Austin, who, as we read Tom. 10. sermon. 41. de Sanctis
thought that some lesser sins, as too much love of the world and such like, are
so usually purged by Tribulation in this world, Vt in futuro ille ignis
Purgatorius, aut non inveniat, aut certe parum inveniat quod exurat, That in
the next life the fire of Purgatory will find either Nothing, or very little to
punish, But says the Saint, Si nec in tribulatione etc. If in our Tribulation
we neither give God thanks, nor redeem our sins by Good works, Ipsi tamdiu in
illo igne Purgatorio moras habebimus. We shall stay in Purgatory till those
lesser sins be consumed like Hay and stubble. And by the way note here also
what Judgment St. Austin had of Purgatory. The Connection of St. Austins words,
In the second place consider well the Connection of St. Austins words in the
precedent chap. 68. Quia urit eum rerum dolor etc. Because the Grief he has
for the things he loved, torments him; And what follows cap. 69. Tale aliquid
etiam fieri post hanc vitam incredibile non est. It is not incredible that such
alike punishment be after this life. What is not incredible? Thus much. Solves
the Difficulty.
That as some are punished in this life by a present Grief for their too much
affection to worldly commodities, so it is not incredible, that some also
suffer a torment in the future purging flames upon that account. Et utrum ita
sit quaeri potest. And we may enquire, says He, whether such a particular
punishment be found in Purgatory, Viz. That by how much more or less men loved
these transitory Goods of the world; Tanto tardius citiusque saluari; So much
sooner or later they come to Heaven. Which last words plainly give us St.
Austins meaning, and prove that He doubted not of Purgatory (for He supposes
St. Austin only doubted of one particular punishment
it here) but only calls such a particular pain into Question as is expiatory
of lesser faults, because, as I told you, He held These lesser transgressions
usually taken away by sufferances endured in this life. Conclude therefore,
unles this Inference be Good, St. Austin doubted whether some faults were
punished in Purgatory; The Testimony showed forceles against us.
Ergo He thought none were Expiated there, which is not probable, The alleged
Testimony is of no force against us, yet proves that you read not St. Austin
too well. Now if you say my Gloss upon this Authority is not certain: I answer,
No more will yours be, when you have Interpreted all you can. Therefore neither
of us yet come to a certain Principle, And consequently, you must produce a far
clearer Authority before you Ask again, whether any man in his wits can think
that St. Austin spoke this of a matter of Faith, Supposing all sure for your
Interpretation, which to me, And I think to others also that know Latin and
sense, will not appear probable. It is not my Task to quote A parallel of clear
and doubtful passages.
here at large those most clear Testimonies of St. Austin for our Catholic
Verity, yet I Will give you one, And wish you to parallel that with all your
dubious places, lib. 2. de Genesi contra Manichaeos cap* 20. fine. Those books
are of undoubted Authority. Qui forte agrum suum non coluerit etc. He that
Cultivates not his Sectaries ever suppose mere dubious Testimonies to have more
force, then most clear ones, and the judgment of a whole Church.
Field, but suffers it to be overgrown with thorns* has a Curs on him in all
He does in this life. Et post hanc vitam habebit, vel ignem Purgati^nis, vel
poena^ aeternam. And after this life shall either have a Purgatory, or suffer
pain for ever. Thus the Doctor. And every man in his wits (it is your own
phrase) cannot but think he spoke of a matter of Faith, when his Doctrine agrees
with the Belief of a whole Church. See more lib. 21. de Civit. c. 16. Where He
speaks of a Purging torment after Death, as also in Psalm. 37. But enough of
this point.

15. You say 3. Where Any of the Fathers build any Doctrine upon the sense of
doubtful places of Scripture, we have no further reason to believe that
Doctrine, then we have to Two Propositions more unproved.
believe, that it is the meaning of those places. So that in this case the
enquiry is taken off from the judgment of the Fathers, and fixed upon the
sense of Scriptures, which They and we both rely on. And you give this reason.
For since the Fathers pretend to no greater Evidence of the Truth of the
Doctrine, then such places do afford: it is the greatest reason, that the
argument to persuade us be not the testimony of the Father, but the Evidence of
the place it self. Answ. If here be not a piece of most Confused Doctrine.
confused Learning, I never read any. Observe well your own propositions as
they lie in order. First the Fathers are supposed to build a Doctrine upon the
sense of doubtful Scripture; and then you say, you have no further reason to
believe that Doctrine, then you have to believe that it is the meaning of those
places. Very Good. But I ask, by what light can you better come to the true
meaning of a doubtful place of Scripture, then the Fathers Did? If the meaning
was How Sectaries may wrong both Scripture and Fathers.
doubtful to them, it is as doubtful to you; And if that sense which you draw
out of a doubtful place be contrary to the Fathers, you wrong both Them and the
Text; Them, because you Oppose their judgment upon a mere uncertainty; The
Text, because you will make it speak your sense which it does not certainly, for
it is doubtful to you. Perhaps you will say, When the sense is doubtful, Neither
you nor the Fathers can tell what to make of it, and Therefore without further
enquiry it will be best to let it alone, and remain in its obscurity. May this
Doctrine pass: you need not to believe a great part of Scripture, for it is very
obscure. They cannot contradict the Fathers explicating a doubtful place.
2. You are bound in Conscience never to contradict the Fathers interpreting a
doubtful passage, For (and it is very good reason) if you will have the Fathers
silent in such a case, you are to hold your Peace, and to say nothing against
them. Your second Proposition. In this case, the enquiry is taken off from the
judgment of the Fathers, and fixed upon the sense of Scripture, which they and
we both rely on, Seems not to be too full of sense: For most assuredly, when
the Fathers explicate a dubious passage, Their judgment tend's to declare the
hidden sense of it. Why therefore will No sure fixing on a doubtful sense.
you take their judgment off from such a^sense, and put yours in room of it?
Or to what purpose do you talk here of Fixing upon the sense, when a place is
dubious, and neither Church nor Fathers must be believed? What is your Fixing
good for, when you suppose the thing you Fix on to be doubtful, and your felves
Fallible? If you say you must come to a certainty of the sense by Tradition or
some other way, know that the Church and Fathers had better reason to be
acquainted with such lights, then any Sectary can have. In a word. A doubtful
place remaining still doubtful, or dubioufly explicated can never beget a
certain belief in you or any: Yet we say, when the Church of Christ and Fathers
also agree in an Explication When the Church and Fathers interpret, all doubt
cease.
the doubt cease, and the delivered sense is most certain. In your reason,
For since. They etc. you leap from the sense of a Doubtful passage to the
Evidence of the place it self, which seems not pertinent: For what has
Evidence to do here, when your Discourse is only of a doubtful sense? When a
place is evident we se that as well as you, And have with it the sentiment of a
whole Church, and Consent of Fathers also.

16. You say 4. (After some Talk of two Reverend Primates which I much heed
not) That St. Ambrose and others prayed for the Blessed in Heaven, Ergo Orizons
Old Objections renewed to no purpose.
for the Dead prove not a Purgatory. I wonder you weary men's Ears again, with
such old worn-out Objections. You, or your Brethren have been told many and
many a time, that no Father, no Church The Church prays not for the Saints in
Heaven to be released from temporal pain, or to have sins remitted.
Greek or Latin ever prayed that the Saints in Heaven may be freed from any
temporal pain, or for the Remission of sins; yet not only the Fathers, but
these Churches also pray for both, and such a prayer Evidently proves a
Purgatory. Bellarmin cited cap. 9. n. Neque videtur, tell's you, St. Ambrose
hoped well of Theodosius, and Therefore rejoiced in his behalf; yet because He
was not certain of his possessing happiness, He prayed for him. And the like
practice is yet in the Church, when men of great virtue depart this life. We
pray for them if they stand in need, though we verily think they need no
prayer. You know what distinction St. Austin makes Sermon. 17. de verbis Apost.
between Martyrs and others. Pro caeteris defunctis, says He, Oratur, We pray
for the faithful souls departed, but not for Martyrs. Injuria est enim etc. For
it is a wrong to pray for a Martyr Cujus nos debemus orationibus commendari, to
whose prayers St. Austins Distinction between Martyrs and others.
we are to commend our selves. This had not been well spoken, had St. Austin
thought that the Blessed in Heaven need our prayers as much as others do. If
you desire more of this subject, or would know, how the Greek Church prays for
Saints, read Leo Alatius de Consens. page 105. n. 15. where He taxes his
Adversary Alatius.
of more then Childish ignorance in the Greek Affairs, because he thought the
Ancient Church interceded for How the Greek Church prays for Saints.
Saints just as it Did for others. No such matter, says Alatius. Tormentorum
ac poenarum nulla est mentio etc. That Church in her Orizons for Saints makes
no mention of any releasment from pain and torment, but prays that the
Sacrifice offered up to God may be to his glory in the name of those Blessed
for the celestial gifts of Grace bestowed on them: Or, that God may receive
most large and ample thanks from them for the great glory they enjoy, Wherefore
St. Austin in Enchir. c. 110. speak's St. Austin is conformable.
properly. Pro valde Sanctis gratiarum actiones sunt, Thanksgiving is for great
Saints. Alatius moreover cites not only the Orthodox Greek Fathers, St.
Dionysius, St. Epiphanius, The Sentiment of the Greek Fathers. An Objection.
St. Chrysostom; but also later Authors as Manuel Caleca, yea and those of the
Schism very pertinently to this purpose. Some perhaps will say: We may pray as
well for our Savior as for Saints, if the supplications for them to be nothing
else but a giving of thanks and offering up of such a Sacrifice as is now
explicated. If any one, I say, cavil thus. St. Epiphanius contra Aerium,
presently after those words St. Epiphanius answers the Difficulty.
(...) etc. We make a commemoratiom of the just, craving the mercy of God for
sinners etc. Answers the Difficulty, And says we are to separate our Lord
Jesus Christ from the order of other men, because of the special honor and
worship due to him, knowing that he is both God and man, and therefore cannot be
rancked with other mortals, though most high in glory. Whence it is, we No
prayer made for Christ, but to him.
pray not for Christ no more then for God, because of his supreme Excellency
and Dignity above all other whether Saints or Angels, but offer up to him a
Sacrifice of thanksgiving as also to his eternal Father and the Holy Ghost, as
Bellarmin now cited well observes n. Separamus.

17. You say 5. The supplications of the Church for the Dead respected mercy
and forgivenes to be showed the just at the day of Judgment, and consequently
were intended for Gods final Justification of them by his sentence at that
great Assembly. To prove this you cite many places of Holy Scripture, 2. Tim.
1. 16. 1. Cor. 1. 8. etc. Answer. The Church in the Mass for the Dead, whilst
she represent's the terror of that The Church speak's conformably to Scripture.
dreadful Judgment, speak's most Conformably to the sense of these Scriptures;
And, as if that Day were to be the first Trial, does not only make her Children
Solicitous ( Quid sum miser etc. What then miserable men shall I say? What
Patron shall I ask for? When the just will hardly be secure;) But moreover
teaches them to petition for mercy. Ne me perdas. Destroy me not in that Day,
call me with the Blessed etc. Yet, this Inference is not Good. The Church and
Scripture speak of mercy and forgivenes to be found at the day of Judgment.
Ergo there How the Supplications of the Church respect the Judgment Day.
is no third place of punishment wherein mercy is showed before Judgment. I say
therefore the Supplications of the Church for mercy at the day of Judgment
respect the Mercies Don us before hand, when we are released from the pains of
Purgatory, and supra Condignum, receive a crown of glory above our Deserts. And
in this sense I understand St. Austin lib. 9. Conf. c. 11. Ve etiam laudabili
vitae etc. Woe be to the worthy commendable life of man, if you, O God, remove
pity and discuss it too severely. On the other side. The Supplications for
these intermedial mercies have a necessary reference to the Judgment Day
really obtained before; but when the Judge Mercy showed the just will be
publicly declared at the day of Judgment.
sits, They will be publicly Declared, and made known before God and the whole
world, to the confusion of the wicked, and the Eternal comfort of the Just, Who
may say with joyful hearts: Misericordias Domini etc. We will sing the Mercies
of our Lord for Ever. And Sectaries cannot Deny this Doctrine, For do not they
hold that God, through the merits of Christ, Sectaries cannot Deny this Doctrine.
pardons the guilt of sin, and takes off all punishment from the Elect before
they Die? What Forgivenes is there then anew to be Expected for them at the Day
of Judgment, when both sin and punishment are antecedently remitted? Yet more.
Suppose that the souls of just men do not enjoy a complete felicity before the
great Day, I ask whether They sit in that state with their sins on their
Consciences, or without them? If They remain in sin, all sins being mortal with
Sectaries, No pardon can be expected at the Judgment day for mortal sins.
they shall never be pardoned for the future: if without all sin, They need
neither forgivenes nor pardon at the general Day, But only a publication, a
confirmation of that mercy as is now explicated.

18. You say 6. Since we Confess that many of the Fathers held erroneous
opinions concerning the State of the Dead, We ought not to press you with their
Testimonies. Answer. We go not about it, but Sectaries are to look to their own
Errors.
urge you to prove your erroneous Opinion Contrary to the greatest part of
Fathers, and all Church Doctrine. And you are to do this not by talk, but by
solid proofs and Principles. To what you add on your own head, that none of the
Fathers hit upon a State of Purgation till S. Austins time, I have answered,
and proved it to be a flat Calumny. Again, whereas you say, the Apparitions and
Visions of souls departed are only pretended, and not real, Contrary to
received History, Apparitions of souls too slightly rejected.
we expect a stronger proof for the Assertion then your Word is, which is
worthles, and most unmeet to make all null that has been writ of these
Apparitions.

19. In the last place you come to examine the Testimonies of Some Fathers made
to speak as you would have them. But Bellarmin before you were born, Bellarmin,
Leo Alatius.
and Leo Alatius more lately have Answered, and proved all you say to be
Proofles. I Will here only take Notice of your less can did proceeding, where S.
Cyprian Ad Antonianum de Cornelio and Novatiano is quoted for Purgatory: Aliud
est ad veniam etc. Aliud missum in carcerem etc. It is one thing to stay for
pardon, and another to S. Cyprian^ words.
come presently to Glory. It is one thing to be cast into prison, and not to
come out thence till you have paid the last farthing etc. The Words, you know,
are the same with those of Scripture, whereby Catholics, following the
Interpretation of Fathers, endeavor to prove Purgatory. Now you Tell us, S.
Cyprian speak's here of the Severities of Penance, which the lapsed Persons
underwent in order to Pardon, and no doubt, as is easily gathered by the
Context, His Epistle treat's mainly on that subject; But, that occasionally He
spoke not of Purgatory, or That this matter was wholly unthought of in this
place, is more then either you or any can make probable. You say Rigaltius and
Gabriel Albaspinaeus Rigalt, and Albasp. deny not the obvious sense of S.
Cyprians words.
understand the Passage of Pennances suffered in this life. Be it so. Neither
of them excludes the other sense which the words bear and most properly. The
intent of these Authors was to Declare that whereof St. Cyprian Chiefly
Discourses, and not to meddle whith every point of Doctrine occasionally touched
on. Be it how you will, your Argument barely Negative: ( Rigaltius and
Albaspinaeus apply not this place to Purgatory, Ergo they thought it proved not
Purgatory) is forceles, whilst others Positively judge the contrary. And here I
must complain a little. Sir, why Do you, who pretend to Dissemble nothing that
makes for our Advantage, slipped over so silently Iacobus Pamelius his notes upon
these words. Aliud missum Proofs Dissembled.
etc. where He says. Mire facit hic locus ad Confirmandam Ecclesiae
Traditionem de Purgatorio etc. The place of S. Cyprian makes Marvellously well
for Purgatory: And so the most Reverend Bishop Martinus Peresius Ayala before
me observed very rightly. Thus Pamelius, whose Positive and Express Authority
quite Outweighs your bare Negative, And argues you of some little
Dissimulation. But,

20. I must end, and tell you a great Truth. What ever you can Allege in this
matter is either purely Negative, or worth Nothing. We have the Authority of a
Learned Church for our Doctrine. You have Proofs Compared.
none for yours. We have the express Testimonies of Innumerable Ancient
Fathers, you have not one that expressly Denies Purgatory. Admit (which is
untrue) St. Austin to have been the first that asserted our Doctrine, you have
none so Ancient and learned as He that positively Contradicts it, No, nor one
less learned. What then have you for your Novelty? bare Conjectures, uncertain
Authorities, unproved interpretations of certain ones aginst you which are ever
more obscure and weaker then the Text is which you Interpret. In a word you
have Fancy and (Though you take it ill, I must speak truth) it is the sole
foundation of your whole Religion. And because I say so much, I shall endeavor
to prove it further, which will be best don by examining One other Controversy.

CHAP. V.
An Objection Proposed, and Solved in A Discourse of Another Controversy.
1. SOme Perhaps may Think We Slight our Adversaries too much, And Tell them
too often of Fancy, of their Unreasonableness, and Grounding nothing on certain
Principles. For who can doubt, but that in most Controversies now on Foot, They
s^em to say Some thing Which Tend's as well to the Establishment of their Own,
as To the weakening of our Catholic Doctrine; Therefore, we do ill in Treating
them so Uncivilly As if all They said were Fancy, Weightles, and insignificant.
To answer this Difficulty home it If Sectaries think Their cause rationally
Defended.
would be Necessary, To run over All the Disputed Controversies between us, And
to show their weak Ground in every particular matter of Difference. But this is
not Suitable now, nor can be Complied with, when you se a Treatise Grown to
long Already.

2. Yet to satisfy the Reader, I will briefly Touch The Decision of one
Difficulty will show Their error.
on one Controversy more (it may serve as an Instance for Many) which has been
matter of Contention these last Hundred Years. In a word: It is, That too long
Debated Question concerning the Real Presence of Christ our Lord in the holy
Eucharist. And to Gain what time we can, it will be best to Wave a Needles
Stating of the Question; For, all know what Catholics Believe of this Mystery,
and Sectaries Do not, what Those Affirm, and These Deny.

3. Now in Handling this Matter, We might Proceed Two ways in handling this
Question of the Blessed Sacrament.
two Different Ways, And first, not only Bring to Light again the large
Testimonies of Scripture, Councils, and Fathers in Behalf of our Catholic
Verity; But also draw Arguments at length from their clear Expressions, for a
greater Evidence of Truth: But This would be Actum agere, to Do what Has been
often Don by Others and very completely. The other way is Shorter, which
Supposes these Authorities We follow the Shorter way.
Faithfully Quoted by our Catholic Writers: You Have them largely in
Bellarmin, Through every Age since Christ, lib. 2. de Euchar. cap. 1. usque ad
29. Exclusive; And if the Reader know not Latin, He may find most of them, in
that Excellent English book called, A Disputation of the Church, by E. S. F.
Printed at Doway 1640. Chiefly in His 5. Book c. 6. Sectaries Acknowledge these
Authorities, whereat I shall briefly Sectaries cannot doubt of the Authorities
here supposed.
hint Herafter. So far Therefore, There can be no Difficulty; The only Strife
will be How They Will come off in their Answers, And, Whether They are able to
Satisfy Two or Three Arguments, Which I shall Propose upon most grounded
Suppositions. If I be not much Deceived, We shall se how Fancy all along, or
something wors, Vphold's Their new Opinion. You must here Expect plain
Language, For Truth is never better seen, Then when plain Words set it forth.

4. To proceed clearly. We may first Suppose, Two necessary Suppositions.
That as God has Certainly Revealed the Truth of this Mystery of the Blessed
Sacrament in Holy Scripture, so He has also Taught us, What we are Truly to
Believe concerning it. We Suppose 2. That his real Intention, was, and is, That
we stand to his Word, and Believe Him as he Speak's, Unless, we can Learn by
some clear and Undoubted Principle, That he spak Reservedly, or, That his words
bear another Sense then what they plainly Signify. Upon these Suppositions I
Argue. When God Reveals a Truth in Holy A clear Argument Proposed against
Sectaries.
Scripture, which concerns the General Belief of all, And really Intends to
Teach Christians what* They are to Believe of that Revealed Truth: He cannot
Deliver more significantly, clearly, and expressly, that Doctrine which He would
not have Christians to Believe, Then He Does the Doctrine which He Would have
them to Believe: For, if He did so, (whilst We cannot Learn by any known
Principle, That He speak's otherwise then He Thinks) He would not only
Equivocate, and Deal reservedly with us in a Weighty matter of Faith (And this
as Ill beseem's his Goodness as to Speak an Untruth) God in a weighty Matter of
Faith cannot deliver more clearly that Doctrine, which He would not have
Christians to Believe. Then he Does the other which He would have them to
believe. If God cannot make a falls Religion more credible to Reason by outward
Motives, Then his true Religion is, He cannot deliver an error not to be
Believed in more plain and significant words, then he uses when he speaks a
Truth, to be believed by All.
But more; if we Rely on Scripture only, He would Induce the whole world to
Believe a Falsity. Now I Subsume. But, it is most Evident, (if Sectaries Say
right) That God, in speaking of this Mystery, Delivers that Doctrine more
clearly, And significantly, Which He would not have Christians to Believe, Then
He does the other, which He would Have them to Believe, And, there is no
Imaginable Principle, whereby we can learn that he Spoke otherwise then He
Thought, or his plain Words Signify, Therefore he speak's not only Equivocally,
and Reservedly in a weighty matter of Faith ( which is Always to be Reflected
on) But, He Induces also the whole Christian World, if Scripture guide us, to
Believe a Falsity by His too plain Speaking.

5. Before I prove the Minor, And give you this Clearer Language of Almighty
God, For what He will not Have us to Believe etc. Be pleased to call to mind,
one Truth Explicated more largely Disc. 1. cap. 8. For it is the Ground of my
Present Discourse. Upon that Principle therefore, I say now Again. As God cannot
(if True Faith be in the world) make a Falls Religion more Prudently Credible to
Reason by the force of rational Motives, Then His True Religion is Evidenced
and made Credible ( For, if he did so, He would oblige Reason to Embrace a
Falsity, and Desert Truth) So also, when He Delivers a Doctrine Concerning
Christian Faith (And, in the most serious Circumstances imaginable) He cannot
Deliver an Error in more Emphatical and Plainer words Then He speak's a Truth,
which yet, You Shall se, is Don, if Sectaries be Believed. The Parity Holds
Exactly, For, As those more Persuasive Motives, Antecedent to Belief, whereby we
are, as it were, summoned The parity hold's exactly.
to settle our Faith right, Would, If They Countenanced a Falls Religion
Prudently Induce Rational men to embrace that, and Leave the Discountenanced
true Religion, so, This very clearer Language of God Whereon our Faith
immediately Relies, Would Also, if it be more Express and Significant For
Error, then Truth, Force All to Embrace the Error and Abandon Truth, Because
the Error is most significantly Expressed in Holy Writ, And the Truth not at
All: And This is Don, when there is no excogitable Grounded Principle to Fancy,
or the bare words of Sectaries cannot work out of a Christians Heart the open
sense of Christ's words. How Christ speak's, and what Catholics Believe.
Draw us of the supposed Error, if we be Beguiled, or, to work this supposed
Falsity out of our Hearts, But the mere Fancy, And the bare Word of a few
Sectaries, who say we are Deceived.

6. Now to prove the Minor, And Demonstrate that God delivers more Fully, and
significantly the Doctrine, Which He would not have Christian^ to Believe, then
he does the other: Ponder these two things. First, what Eternal Truth Speak's
in this Matter, And we Catholics Believe. 2. What Sectaries say He speak's,
And They Believe. These are Christ's words. This is my Body. This is my Body,
Which is Given for you. This is my Blood of the new Testament that shall be
Shed for many. Take heed, say Sectaries, Read warily, These words Sectaries
must say, That Christ's words taken in their plain literal sense are falls.
Taken in Their Plain, literal, and most Obvious sense are Falls, and Therefore
Express not the Doctrine we are to Believe. Again Christ Speak's Thus. This is
the Chalice of the new Testament in my blood, which (Chalice (...)) is, or
shall be Shed for you. Unless you eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his
blood, you shall not have life in you. My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is
drink indeed. No such Matter, say Sectaries, This is not the Doctrine we are to
Believe, For, these words Understood in Their Plain Obvious sense are Falls.
That Chalice Shed For us, was not his blood, But wine of the grape. We eat
not the flesh of the Son of man, nor drink his Blood, But, only eat Bakers
Bread, and Drink Natural wine. Sectaries make the contrary Proposition to
Christ's words, True.
His flesh is not really meat, nor His blood Drink. Observe I pray you:
Sectaries so Abhor The plain and Proper Sense of Christ's own Words, that they
make the contradictory Proposition to Him, Absolutely True in Every Particular,
And his False; Therefore they must at least confess, that he Speak's too clearly
and expressly that Doctrine, which They say we ought not to Believe; Otherwise,
Why do They not Admit of his Words in Their open, and most candid Signification?

7. Shall we next Consider, what Sectaries Believe of this Mystery, and withal
Learn, whether Christ Delivers as plainly Their Doctrine in Scripture, As ours?
Sectaries Faith* of this Mystery.
Hear Their Profession of Faith: We Believe, Say They, That, that which Christ
gave to his Disciples was Natural Bread, Deputed to a Holy Use, And no More:
We Believe it to be a Sign Only, a Figure Only, a Seal, a Token, a Type Only of
Christ's Body, That is, We Believe, it to be His Body by Resemblance,
Symbolically, Tropically, Metonymically and Significantly, Which is to Say, it
Has the Scripture, no where call's that which Christ gave his Disciples
Natural Bread, or a Sign only of his Body.
name of Christ's Body, But Really is no such Thing. And is This your Belief?
Yes. Out with your Bible Therefore, And Show me as Many clear Texts of Holy
Writ, where, That which Christ gave to His Disciples in his last Supper, is
called Natural Bread, a Sign Only, a Figure, Token or Type only of his Body,
(For, This is the Doctrine, you say, we ought to Believe) As I have now Quoted
for the Contrary, where it is called Christ Body and Blood: Though you Suppose
This to be the Doctrine We must not Believe. Believe it. These expressions. This
is my Body which is given for you. This The words of our Savior are plain and
most Significant.
is the Chalice in my Blood, which shall be shed for you, are most Open And
Significant Language. Answer Me with Other Texts as Significant For your Faith,
or to this Sense. This is not my Body, But a Sign Only of my Body, which is
given For you. Speak Plainly, was it a Sign, or a Figure Only of Christ, That
He, blessed Lord, Sacrificed on the Cross? Was it a Sign or Figure only of Him,
That Judas Betrayed, or that Suffered For our sins? No. It was his Judas
betrayed not a sign of Christ Body, but Christ himself.
very real Body, and this Body Truth that cannot Err, says He gave to his
Disciples. Once more, (I have right to Demand) Give me Text for Text, or Cast
your Scriptures in a Pair of Scales for a Trope, Figure, and Sign Only, and Lay
mine now Quoted By Them, for the Reality of Christ's Body Present, And Let that
Side of the Balance Fall, where you find most Weight of Gods Word, You will
soon Perceive, Nothing in Scripture of signs and figures only.
How Light your Heresy is, Compared with Truth; And that without further
Dispute, it Flies up to Fancy: For, There is not in the whole Bible, so much as
one Syllable of these Signs Only, of these Figures, of these Metonymies, or
any such Language.

8. We se Moreover. If Sectaries Speak Truth, The Conclusion Falls on Them
with a greater Weight, then They Imagined. For it Follows. That Christ our
Lord Has not only Spoken more Significantly and Expressly the Doctrine He would
not have to be Believed, Then the other, which, They say, is to be Believed;
But also, That He obliges us to Believe a Sectaries would have us to believe a
Docttin contrary to express Scripture.
Doctrine, And by force of Scripture, Which Clear Scripture is so far from
Expressing, That it Expressly Teaches the Contrary to what They Say, All Ought
to Believe. I might yet Propose this Argument in other Terms, and Perhaps with
greater Force after this Manner. If Christ Delivered that Doctrine more Plainly
The Argument is proposed in other Terms.
which Sectaries Suppose to be Falls, and Less clearly, Yea, not at All; The
contrary Doctrine, which They Suppose to be True, They, who ground All Their
Belief on Scripture, must either Interpret the plainer Scripture by the more
Obscure, yes (and I say) by no Scripture at All, And this is pure Fancy; Or,
will be forced, not so much to Misinterpret, as plainly to Deny the Obvious and
Open Sense of Christ's own Words, And This is wors then Fancy. And here by If by
a supposed impossibility Catholics were deceived in Their Faith.
the way you may gather. 3. If Catholics, who Believe the Real Presence of
Christ in the Holy Eucharist, Be Deceived in their Faith, They may, without
Blame, Impute the Error to no other cause But to the plain Speaking of our
Savior, and most Justly say: Si error est quem credimus, a te decepti sumus.
If we are Deceived, It Is you, Blessed Lord, who have don it. You Tell They
might justly blame Christ's plain words.
us. This is my Body, which is given for you. This is my Blood shed for many
etc. You never uttered the least syllable in your Scripture of a Sign Only, of
a Trope, Figure or symbol Only. Say therefore, most imparrial Judge, Wherein are
we guilty, whilst We Expressly Believe what you To say that Christ beguil's us,
or that we are beguiled by him, is Blasphemy.
Expressly Teach, And Reject a Novelty, which None But Heretics Brought into
the World? To Affirm, that Christ intended to Beguile us by his too Plain
Speaking of this Mystery, is open Blasphemy: And to Say we are beguiled by him,
is no Less An Impiety. The Answer, if Sectaries pretend, we do not anderstand
Christ's words.


9. All that Sectaries can Pretend for Their Cause Against this Discourse, is,
That we yet Arrive not to the True meaning of Christ's sacred Words And Therefore
They are ready to Teach us. Very Good. We are content to learn what is Truth.
But Before they Begin Their Teaching, it will be best for Them To Reflect, that
we have here a Proposition: This is my Body etc. And because Christ Delivered
It, It Is most True. Therefore, we have a Subject also, This, (school terms are
necessary in the present occasion) we have a copula EST, IS, And a Predicate,
or Attribute, My Body. Now, If our Adversaries will Vouchsafe to Teach, Let
Them first Please to Give us Plainly, the Total Object of Christ's Proposition,
And Say what that The total Object of Christ's Proposition it to be declared.
Predicate was, which He then Connected with the Subject HOC, or THIS. Did He
say natural Bread, remaining bread, was his Body? No, It Is most Falls. Did he
say by an Identical Enunciation. His Body was his Body? No. Did He Say, that
what He pointed at, was, By the Energy of his Words, made Really his Body? No,
it is too plain Popery, and Christ, Say they, never Spoke it. How then shall we
Learn what he truly Asserted, or find a Subject, Copula, Sectaries can find no
Truth in the proposition, unles they first abuse his sacred words.
and Predicate in this Proposition? They Answer (And here is their best
Instruction) it is Impossible to find either Truth, or these three Things in
it, Unles They first Abuse the Words And Say, Hoc est: Here Sitts Christ's Body,
or, That this Bread, Per commumunicationem Idiomatum, is Christ's Body, or, That
this Bread was made a natural Body by the Omnipotent Word of Christ, or,
Finally Say, (To Omit other Glosses, And This sense best Pleases Modern
Sectaries) That the Word, Est, Imports not, Is, or any Identity between Hoc,
and Corpus, But Renders an other Sense, and only Availes as much, As if you
said, Significat, This Signifies Christ's Body. Read therefore the Gospel thus.
This is my Body; id est: This Natural bread Signifies, or, is a Sign, a Figure
of my Body, And we are Right, We have the Genuine Sense of his Proposition.
Thus they Teach us.

10. Here you shall se a Powerful work of Fancy, A work of Fancy, And a mighty
injury don to Christ.
And the Greatest Wrong Don, I think, to Christ, that ever entered into a
Christians Heart. To lay open This sin of Sectaries, I will not Insist much on
their High Contempt of These sacred Words, Which, in a vulgar and Obvious Sense
are as Falls, as if I should now say, Holding a Paper in my Hands, This is my
Body: But This I must urge to their Confusion, And wish All to tak^ Notice of
it. If the Interpretation now made of the Proposition be true Doctrine, it
Evidently Follows, That Christ spoke so contrary to his Sectaries must say,
that Christ beguiled the whole Orthodox Christian world by the most Serious
words he ever spok.
mind, That He Has beguiled the whole Orthodox Christian World By the most
serious Words He ever uttered in this Mortal Life. I Will show you how, Christ,
say Sectaries, Before He spoke those words. This is my Body etc. Had only this
internal Act or Judgment in his mind. That which I will now give to my
Disciples, Shall be nothing but Bread only, or a bare Sign and Figure of my
Body (for Sectaries Suppose He never intended to make bread his Body) yet hear
how They make Christ to speak. As it were, contrary to his Thought, I will,
Says Eternal Truth, Though I know That, that shall be Bread only which I am to
give my Disciples, Mark the injury. They make Christ to say, That was his Body
which really was not. Three Things Evident in the Principles of Sectaries. The
first that Christ spoke improperly. The second that in the Moment He spak He
Foresaw a universal pretended Error would follow in all Orthodox Churches. The
Third, that this universal pretended Error would proceed from no other Cause
but from his improper speaking. All Churches Orthodox believed the Real
presence.
So Unluckily Express my self by Outward Words, as to Miscal the Sign by the
name of the Thing Signified and Avouch that to be my Body, which Really shall
not be my Body. But is here all? No. Christ intended more in these men's
Opinion, and Said in Effect thus much. Though I now Foresee, That an universal
Error will Follow Through all the reputed Orthodox Churches of Christendom,
upon my Dark and Improper Language, yet I will speak, as I do Obscurely, And
Beguile Them (I know all will be Beguiled) Because all will Mistake my Meaning
And Believe That to be my Body, which Really is not. Thus I foresee They will
err, And the very Emphasis of my words will Cause this (now pretended)
Universal Error among Them. Therefore They cannot But leave off to be Orthodox;
For, a Church Erring in so Weighty a Matter, Or, That Adores a Piece of bread
for God, is Absolutely Vnorthodox, and Hideously Falls. Sectaries, you se,
grant, that Christ spak thus Darkly, And, that by Doing so, He has Drawn all
the Reputed true Churches on earth into This Persuasion, is a most Evident
Truth; For, there was never Any Church Acknowledged True in the world, But such
as literally Understood his Proposition in its Plain and obvious Sense, And,
consequently All Churches Believed the Real Presence of his sacred Body, in the
holy Eucharist, Though Sectaries say all Erred in that Belief. I Say All, for
so Lanfrancus Speaks in his last book against Berengarius. Omnes qui
Christianos se and esse and dici laetantur. All, who are Glad of the Reality
and Name of Christians, Glory in this, That they Receive in the Sacrament the
True Flesh and Blood of Christ, which was born of the Virgin. Ask of all,
whether Graecians, Armenians or of what other Nation soever, Vno ore hanc fidem
se testantur babere. All of Them, with Unanimous consent, openly Witness, That
they have this Faith. Now, if our Adversaries Slight so Worthy an Author, let
them produce but one as Ancient and learned as Lanfrancus was, That says as
much for the owning of Their novelty of a Trope, Sign, Figure only etc. And I
will be Satisfied.

11. And Here we come to the last Trial of our Sectaries Cause, Which is to
show you the High Improbability of their new Fancied Opinion. And therefore we
are in the next Place, to Drive Them of All possible Ground to stand on, And
Demonstrate That The last Trial of our Sectaries cause, which is to lay Forth
the improbability of their new Opinion.
They have not so much as a likelihood of any undoubted Principle, whereby, we
may Learn, That Christ our Lord Spoke improperly in the Passages now Quoted,
or, That his Words have any other Sense then what they Expressly Signify, Which
is our Catholic Doctrine.

CHAP. VI.
Sectaries without either Proofs or Principles, Wrest Christ's Words to an
Improper Sense, And vent an Heresy upon mere Fancy.
1. NOte first, when Christ our Lord said: This is my body etc. And used the
like, or more significant Expressions (Registered by the other Evangelists) He
did not only Institute the Noblest of Sacraments, But made also his Will and
Testament, He Published a Law, The Nature of a noble Sacrament, Christ's own
will, a Dogmatical Verity.
gave a Command: Hoc facite, Do this. At least, all Acknowledge, That He
Delivered a Dogmatical Verity Concerning our Christian Faith, And did This in
such grave Circumstances, And to such Persons (His own Dear Disciples) That the
Time, Place, and Persons to whom He Spak, Required no Dark, But most Plain and
Proper Language. As therefore no Man makes his last And other grave
circumstances require plain and proper Language.
Will, Publishes a Law, Lays an Express Command on any, or Delivers a Truth
which All are to Learn Under Tropes, Figures, Metonymies, or such Obscurities
(Thief have place in the Dark Speaking of Prophets, and serve well to set forth
an Oration) But contrariwise, in obvious Vulgar, and Intelligible Words: So
much Less can it be Supposed (when Christ our Lord spak of these Serious
Matters) That He Delivered his Mind in Obscure Metaphors, Tropes, or any such
Expressions: Unless, as I noted above, We certainly Knew by more Christ could
not speak so obscurely of this Mystery without clearing all in other passages
of Holy writ.
plain Scripture, Then our Saviors words are now cited, That, Though He
beguile us Here, with Tropes, and Metaphors, Yet in other Passages of Holy
Writ, He clear's all These dark Expressions by a contrary language, And Speak's
more Significantly for these Signs of Sectaries Then He does for our Catholic
Doctrine. Unless, I say, such Texts be at Hand Nothing can Force us from that
Express Sense, which the Gospel most Significantly Deliver's, concerning this
Mystery.

2. Note 2. Sectaries Advance their Cause nothing at all, when They tell us
that the word, EST, sometimes Though the particle Est in some Propositions may
be Interpreted, it Signifies.
Imports as much as if We said ( Signifies) As when you se a Picture of Caesar
on a wall, and Say: This is Caesar. The seed is ( Signifies) the Word of God
etc. Could this be proved, it is not enough, More is required; for They are
Obliged to Show, And by an Undeniable Principle (if my Faith Rely on their
Gloss) That Is not enough, Sectaries are to Prove it Bears that Sense here An
Instance.
That the Word EST in our Saviors Proposition has determinatly that Sense,
and no Other. You know Scripture says. Hic est filius meus dilectus. This is
my beloved son etc. Now, no Man can Infer Because EST, sometimes is Rendered (
Signifies) That Here, it looses its Proper sense, And only Avail's as much, as
if you Said: Christ only Signifies, or, is not otherwise the Son of his Father,
Then a material Picture Hanged on a Wall is a Sign, or Figure of the
Prototypon, This cannot be admitted of, Unless, I say, a Stronger Principle
(which is Impossible) Force us to Approve of such an Heretical sense. And thus
We Discourse in our Present Matter.

3. Note 3. All the Principles which can be Thought on, to Force Catholics
from the Received Sense of Christ's Own Words, or, to Favor our Adversaries
Cause, must be Reduced to one of these Heads. To No known Principle upholds the
Doctrine of Sectaries.
Plain speaking Scripture. To Universal Tradition. To the Catholic sense of
Christ's Orthodox Church in former Ages, or, Finally to the General Consent of
Fathers. If none of these Principles Uphold Protestants Doctrine, it Falls of
it self, And wholly Relies on Fancy. Thus much supposed.

4. Here is my Proposition, and an Inference also. A Proposition against
Sectaries.
Sectaries cannot by virtue of any one of these now Named Principles, Withdraw
Catholics from the Plain Received Sense of Christ's Words. They cannot Prove
that EST, in our Saviors Affirmation, Imports only as much, as if you said, it
Signifies. Therefore the Doctrine which Denies the real Presence of Christ's Body
in the Sacrament, is wholly Unwarrantable, and Built on Fancy Only.

5. The Proofs of my Assertion are as Undeniably The Proofs of it, are no less
clear, Then the Proposition it self.
Evident as the very Assertion it self; For it is Manifest, No Scripture
plainly Teaches (I say no More now) That the Verb EST, in Christ's Proposition
Bears only this sense, it Signifies: And it is as Clear, no Universal
Tradition Approves of this new Fancied Sense. What then Remains, But that our
Adversaries take Recours to some Ancient Orthodox Church, or, To the General
Consent of Fathers? I say therefore. If they A Fair offer made to Sectaries.
can Name any Universal Church, Nay any particular Church Reputed Orthodox the
whole world Over, That Interpreted these Words as They do, or, Clearly Denied
Christ's true Body and Blood To be under the Forms of Bread and Wine after
Consecration, or, Believed that Natural bread only has the Name of Christ's
Body, Though it be Really no more But a Sign only, a Figure only, a Resemblance
only of his Body; If, I say, Protestants you shall se, will never Answer
Directly, to what is here proposed.
any one of these things can be proved. They Will Come of Gloriously, And Gain
Thousands to their Opinion. But I know, all is in a high Measure Impossible. I
say, a Sign only, a Figure only; For, We Catholics both speak with the
Fathers, and Truly Believe The Eucharist to be a Sacrament, And consequently a
Sign of Invisible Grace, Yea, and a Figure also, a Memorial of Christ Himself
and his Sacred Passion; But this is not the Controversy between us, The sole
Question therefore is, Whether it be so purely a Sign or Figure, that What They
are to Answer To.
the Thing Signified is not in the Sign, And the Verity in the Figure, That is.
Whether Christ's Sacred Body and Blood, be not Truly and Substantially within
the outward Sign, and really Present There? This We Affirm, and Sectaries
Deny, Though never Orthodox Church Denied it with Them.

6. To clear this Point, And Add, If Possible, more Weight to our Assertion: We
Have an Ample, Holy, and Learned Catholic Roman Church (whose sole Authority,
set Scripture aside, is the Greatest on Earth) The sole Authority of our Roman
Church, is Sufficient to Convince Sectaries of Error.
Which confessedly has believed and taught this Doctrine of the Real Presence
for at least a Thousand Years (I say Ever since Christianity began) And, can
any one prudently Persuade Himself, That so Chois, and Learned a Society, That
yet Speak's in Christ's own Language, And Literally believes his words as They
are in the Gospel, Has, for so long a time lived in a Cheat, and taught
Millions of Souls a most Damnable Error? Admit of this Vast Improbability, We
have yet a Demonstration No Other Orthodox Society Ever opposed our Catholic
Doctrine.
against Sectaries: And it is: No Orthodox Church can be named that ever
Opposed, Found fault, or Blamed the Belief of the Roman Church Concerning this
Mystery. Therefore the Doctrine of this Learned Society is undoubtedly Certain,
upon a double Account, that Christ Taught it, And no Universal Church ever
Condemned it.

7. In the last Place we are to Say a Word of the other The last Principle
which is the consent of Fathers.
Principle, Which is the Unanimous consent, not of a small Number, but of Many
most Ancient, Learned, and Holy Fathers, These can well Declare what Scripture
Teaches of This Mystery, And what Christ's Orthodox Church ever Believed. If All
Readers Have not the Originals at hand, They may see them in the Authors Cited
above, I shall only Hint at a few, For to Transcribe All, or Half of them, And
Quote the Places Exactly, Would Needlessly lengthen a Digression, which I
Intended to make short. In passing I Will only say thus much. If Sectaries, with
all the Skill Fathers express for Catholic Doctrine.
They have, can Interpret These few Testimonies, Which I shall briefly Glance
at, They may with the same Ease, Yea, And far less labor, Explicate the Words
of the Council of Trent, and make that to speak Protestancy, Or to Deny the
Real Presence.

8. Some Fathers therefore Dogmatically Teach: What we take into our mouths, is
not that which nature These Fathers are Faithfully cited, Though to avoid
Tediousnes in a short Digression, I thought it best, not to give the Reader
more Trouble then is necessary, by quoting Exactly the places.
made, But what the Blessing has Consecrated, And that by Consecration the
very Nature of bread is changed. Thou have learned that of bread, is made the
Body of Christ, and the wine and water is put into the Chalice, But by the
consecration of the Heavenly Word, it is made Blood. The Bread and Wine of the
Eucharist, before the Sacred Invocation of the Adored Trinity, were simple
bread and wine, But the Invocation being once don, the Bread indeed is made the
Flesh of Christ, and the Wine his Blood. The Bread which our Lord gave to his
Disciples, being changed not in shape, but in Nature, by the omnipotency of the
Word, is made Flesh, Christ, by his own Will, once changed water into wine, and
is He not worthy to be Believed, that He changed Wine into Blood? Mark a
substantial change. Wherefore, with all Certainty let us take this Body and
Blood of Christ: For his Body is given thee under the Form of Bread, And his
Blood is given thee under the Form of wine, Although sense tell thee Otherwise,
yet let Faith confirm thee in this Truth. You have the most of them in
Bellarmin, and the other Author named above.
That which appears Bread is not Bread, Though it seem so to the Taste, But it
is the Body of Christ: And that which appears wine is not wine, as the taste
Judges it to be, But the Blood of Christ. The Consecrated Bread, is not a
figure only (...) of the Body of Christ, But the very Deified Body of our
Savior. The bread and wine are Supernaturally changed, or Transmade into the
Body and Blood of Christ. Christ was Carried in his own Hands. To the exterior
Sense it seems to be Bread, But know, by the sense of your Understanding, That
it is my Body, not an Other, But the same in substance, which shall be
Delivered to Death for you. Other Fathers say. The same body is on the Altar,
If Any Doubt of These Authorities, I oblige my self to quot^ the places
exactly, Now only omitted because they are vulgarly known.
which is in Heaven, The same Blood is in the Chalice which Issued out of our
Saviors side. He gave us that very flesh vvherin he walked here, to be eaten
to Salvation. It is the same flesh of our Savior, which suffered for our Sins,
which was on the Cross, which was Born of the Virgin, This Body we Receive
and Eat with our mouths* and have it Mingled with our Bodies.

9. Thus the worthiest Fathers of our Christian Faith Speak, And as I said just
now, Neither the Council of Trent, nor, Any Modern Catholic can speak more
significantly in Behalf of the Doctrine, We All Profess. I Say also. No Ancient
Fathers ever Expressed The expressions of Fathers, as significant for This
Mystery, as for a Trinity.
Themselves with Greater Energy, when They treat of that High Mystery of our
Faith, The Sacred Trinity, which Sectaries jointly Believe with us, Then These
have Don in the present Mystery of the Blessed Sacrament. I Appeal to our
Adversaries own Consciences, And ask whether They can Contradict me? If they
Do, I must Tell them, they cannot Think it, or, if They Seriously Judge so,
Their Judgment, Because Contrary to the greatest Part of the Christian world,
is Weightles, And (finally resolved) comes to no Sectaries may with greater
Ease Deny Any Christian Verity, then this Mystery. They are at least obliged to
Match us with equal Proofs. The Catholic Principles, Briefly Declared.
more but Fancy. I have told them often in this Treatis, That, any Heterodox
May with greater Ease, and lesser Violence Offered, either to Scripture or the
most Primitive Fathers, Turn off all that can be Said for the Proof of any
Christian Verity Then They are able to Enervate the plain Words of Christ and
Fathers, now alleged for this Mystery.

10. Be it How you will, Our Adversaries, if They Will yet Wilfully run on in an
Heresy, Are at least Obliged to stand on Equal Term's with us, To give us Proof
for Proof, Weight for Weight, Measure for Measure. Here are our Principles. We
have Plain and Express Scripture for our Catholic Verity, They have not a
Word. We Plead our Cause by a Constant and never Interrupted Tradition, They
have None. We have a Renowned, Ample, and most Learned Catholic Church, which
both Believed and taught this Catholic Doctrine, They have neither Orthodox
Church nor Chapel, that Taught or Talked, seven hundred years agon, of Their
Tropes, and Figures only. We have the General Consent of Fathers, They have
only Patches and Fragments weighed out of their Circumstances, for Their
Condemned Opinion. We have Miracles, Clear and Undeniable Miracles, which
confirm our Doctrine: Sectaries want all these Proofs and Principles*
Both Ancient Fathers and Modern Doctors Recount Them, who cannot be Supposed,
to have wilfully Damned Their Souls by Obliging Posterity to Believe
Impostures upon Misinformation. They have neither Miracle nor Sign, But the
Empty Sign of a Piece of Bread, For their too long known, And as long since
Decryed Heresy. Finally (And here is a sad Thought for Sectaries) If ever
Heresy was in the A sad Thought f^r Sectaries.
World, This of Theirs is, or never any Deserved That Name. At least, All the
Marks, All the Signs, All the Characters of Heresy follow it, That can be
Imagined. It is a late Found out and a new Invented What Marks and Signs
accompany This Heresy.
Opinion. The Chief Author of it, Berengarius (no Saint I Will promis you) is
Known. The time When, And the Place Where it Began, The few Followers it then
Had, the Trouble it Caused among Orthodox Believers, the Opposition made
Against it, The Trial, The Examination, the Sentence and Condemnation of it,
Are Known, And All upon Record. Almost every Catholic Author that Handles this
Subject, Assert's and Proves what I say, by Undeniable History. Could our new
Men Allege But half as Much Against our Catholic Could Sectaries Say but half
as much against our Catholic Doctrine, could They weaken it by one of These
Proofs.
Doctrine; Could They Point out The First Broachers of this Popery; Could They
name the Place, the Time of its first Rise, Or, Tell us what Orthodox Church,
After a Severe Examination Condemned it, They might take courage, Speak Boldly,
And well Hope to Drive us of our Principles. But, when we find them
Unaccountable in These Particulars, and see Evidently They cannot look one of
these Difficulties in the face, nor Hint Probably at the least Sign of any
Novelty in our Doctrine. When Again we Reflect, How easy They might Cavil more
justly.
Their Tenent is to Sense, and Ours contrary very Difficil, (And therefore could
not hiddenly Creep into the world without Clamours Against it.) When we
seriously Consider, That both the Latin and Greek Church, though now at
Variance in other Points, yet well Agree But nothing is spoken probably.
in one Profession of Faith concerning this Mystery. Finally, When we know,
that the Greatest part of the Christian world (Whereof many were, and are, no
less Profoundly Learned, then Eminent in Sanctity*) Has notwithstanding the
Opposition made by Sectaries, believed as We Do to this Day, and Dyed in Other
Confirmations of our Catholic Verity.
that Belief. We may Hope to Silence these Men Hereafter, and Well Conclude:
That our Doctrine, which Stand's sure on Christ's plain Words, Which the
strongest Pillars of the Ancient Church Uphold, which the Roman Catholic
Church yet Defends, And no Orthodox Church ever Opposed, Which Indubitable
Miracles have Confirmed, and none Denied, But Known and Professed Enemies of
Truth; We may, I say, rightly Conclude, That our Faith is Anciently Catholic,
And therefore True; And That the contrary Opinion of Sectaries is a mere Fancied
Novelty, And Therefore Falls, and Heretical.

11. We might yet Go on (And to clear all) Answer now to a few Falls Supposed
Grounds of Sectaries, But the Learned Bellarmin Has done the work to our
Hands, and Contributed more then Enough to Their Not one word of Scripture in
the whole Bible for Sectaries.
utter Overthrow. Truly, is very pitiful to Se, How, after all their Braggs of
Scripture, Scripture is Here so Scarce with them, That they cannot Find a Word
through the whole Bible, so much as remotely Favorable for this Heresy.
Observe well what Straits They are put to.

12. First, the Particle, EST, in our Saviors Proposition, must either Sound
as much as Significat, How they Trifle in a most weighty matter.
(Signisies) or Sectaries are undon. And who Tell's Them so but Fancy? O, It
often Has that sense. I answer no such matter. For, EST, ever retains its own
simple and p^^per Signification in every true Proposition, and does no more but
joyn's the Predicate with the Subject, what ever it be. The reason is. If any
Trope, or, Metaphor, lie hidden in the Copula EST, it may certainly be Resolved
into an other Word They Err in their Interpretations of Christ's Words.
or Diction of a more Simple, Clear, and Open Signification Then, EST, by its
own force Expresses. But this is Impossible, For, no Word can be clearer then
the Clearest, more Open, then what is most openly significant: This Copula is
Always so, and therefore cannot No Trope or Figure found in the verb Substantive
though often in the Attribute or subject.
be Resolved into any clearer Diction. And hence it is, That when your
Rhetoricians Treat of Figurative Speeches, or Locutions, They never Place the
Trope or Figure on the Verb Substantive, But either on the Attribute or
Subject. It Is true, the Predicate, or Subject in many Propositions, known (
Aliunde) or by other clear Grounds, to be Metaphors, must be Explicated by
clearer Terms, whilst yet the Copula EST, Holds its most Simple, and Proper
Signification. Take one Instance. Semen An Instance.
est verbum Dei, The seed is the word of God. The Word Seed, as it is a Sign,
made by Institution essentially to Signify; so, in this place, it is a Trop, or
Metaphor also, (For certainly Christ said not That material Seed cast into the
Earth is really his Word:) if Therefore it be here both a Sign, and Metaphor,
you must ultimatly Resolve the Proposition into a clearer Sense Thus. The very
Essence of a Sign is to Signify, This Word How Figurative Propositions are to
be Resolved.
Seed, is a Sign Ad placitum, Metaphorically Representing the Word of God,
Therefore, as well as a Metaphor can Do, it Signifies this Divine Word where you
se, EST, keeps its proper Signification: And Therefore, The whole Proposition
finally Resolved, Renders this Sense. This Metaphor Seed, is a Sign signifying
Gods Word. Now if you say We Grant at last, That the Copula May here be
Expounded, Significat; I Answer, most True, Yet without any Trope in EST, For,
in such Enunciations, Praedicatur Signum de Signo, (as Bellarmin notes) The
Sign is Predicated on the Sign; As in this Proposition. Amare, Est, diligere.
That is: Amare, is a synonimal Sign, or signifies the same as Diligere, And
therefore is Explicated by Significat, Because Sectaries explicate Christ's
proposition, without placing the Trope on the verb Substantive.
the essence of a Sign is to signify. But it is not so in other Propositions,
where that which is predicated is neither formally a Sign Only, nor any
Metaphor at all.

13. You shall se what I say now Evidenced in our Sectaries Opinion: For,
whilst they Explicate Christ's Proposition. This is my Body, the Copula, EST,
Retain's purely its own proper Signification, without any Trope. I prove it.
When we find a Trope in a Proposition, it must lie There, or in that Part of
it, into whose place, when the whole Proposition is Resolved, We put an other
more plain and Significant Word to explicate the Trope clearly (by this
Resolving of a whole Proposition into its Parcels we easily judge where the
Trope is.) Now Observe. Our Sectaries resolve Christ's Proposition Thus. This is
my Body. Hoc est signum corporis mei. This is a Sign of my Body. Mark well. The
words Subrogated to Explicate the The words subrogated to explicate the Trope
with Sectaries be long to the Attribute.
Trope, are these Two, Signum Corporis; But these two Words, which belong to
the Attribute or Predicate are not, as is most evident, Substituted in the
place of the Copula, EST, Therefore the Trope lies not in the Copula, which
Keep's still its proper Significaiton, But according to this Resolution in the
word Corpus, or Body. Now How Falls it is, That any Trope lies in the word Body,
And consequently no where in the whole Proposition, is Evidently Convinced by
our Saviors true Assertion. This is my Body, which shall be given for you.
Believe it. No sign of his Body was given for us, But his Real Body. Be it how
you will. Thus much is Clear, That the Verb Substantive, even here Retain's its
Simple, Proper, and most Common signification.

14. You may se more of this subject in Bellarmin lib. 1. de Euchar. c. 10..
secundo, and cap. 11. per totum Where He Learnedly Explicates other
Propositions Alleged by Sectaries, as Petra erat Christus, Agnus est Pascha
etc. All I Will now say, And It Is what I noted Above. Although it were granted
that the Copula, EST, sometimes sound's as much as, significat, Yet, unles this
sense Hold in All other Locutions of Scripture (which is absolutely Falls) our
Adversaries are far enough from Proving their Intent, Because they cannor
Convince by any probable Principle, That, EST, in this place Sectaries are far
from proving their intent, were all granted they pretend to. A second Objection.
Has that Determinate meaning, which They would give it. Therefore Fancy or
something Worst, must Help them to Mantain this Improbable Gloss.

15. They Object 2. Those Words of Scripture. Do this in Remembrance of me: And
then Discourse. We Commemorate no Body, nor Celebrate any Ones Memory, unles He
be Absent; But Christ, As we Teach, is Always Present in the Holy Eucharist,
Therefore we cannot make a Commemoration of Him, as of One Absent. If is one
thing to say. Do this Action you se me Do in Remembrrance of me. And another to
say, the Sacrament is only a Remembrance of Christ.
The Apostle 1. Corrinth. 11. Answer's the Difficulty, For After He Had said:
Do this in Remembrance of me. He add's. Quotiescumque enim etc. As often as you
Eat this Bread and drink this Chalice, You shall show the Death of our Lord
until He Come, But the Death of our Savior is long since Pas't and not
Present, Therefore we may well Commemorate his Death and Passion, as Priests do
in every Mass they say. In Rigor therefore, These Words Precisely force not on
us any Memory of his sacred Body, or Blood Present, But only Mind us of his
Action of Sacrificing in his last Supper. However, to Satisfy our Adverfaries,
be pleased A Disguised Prince may be Remembered, though present with his Nobles.
only to put this supposition: That a Prince were with his Nobles in a
Disguised weed, And Would not appear to their Senses but Disguised; Might they
not well, Although they knew otherwise He were their Conceiled Prince, and
Present, not Only Reverence and Adore him, But also make a Commemoration of
Him? Most certainly yes. This is our Case. As therefore that which we call a
Sign, requires not A Sign requires not the absence of the thing signified*
the Absence of the thing signified, For, the Ark of the Covenant was a Sign of
God Present, and the Dove Descending on Christ, was a Sign of the Holy Ghost
Present: So, likewise a Remembrance or Commemoration Implies no Necessity of
his Absence, that is Remembered. Finally, We may Remember our Lord and Savior,
as He is in Heaven absent, whilst He Feed's and feast's us here on Earth with
his precious Body and Blood on the Altar. The Objection therefore is Forceles
every way.

16. They Object 3. This Sacrament is called Bread. Answ. But, never Bakers
Bread after the The Sacrament is not called Bakers bread.
Words of Consecration, Fancy only says so, and no Proof. Again. It Is called
Bread because it is made of Bread, as Man is called Dust because made of Dust.
Such Objections are Trivial.

17. They Object 4. The Breaking of Bread strongly Calvin says, Breaking of
Bread, is Sacrificing.
argues, It Is plain Bread, Though Deputed to a Holy Use. Answ. The Breaking
here is Sacrificing, as Calvin Himself confesses. The Argument, though it
Proves just nothing, is seemingly more for Luthers Opinion of Bread, and Flesh
together, then for our Sectaries.

18. They Object 5. Christ is called a Vine* a Rock, and a Door. Answ. What
then? Put a Minor Proposition to these Words, and Se How weak a Conclusion A
weak Inference of Sectaries.
Follows. Is it any Consequence, that because figurative Speeches are in
Scripture sometimes, Therefore all we Read there, must be Tropes, and Metaphors?
We know, and the whole world knows also by other Principles, that These are
Tropes, And we evidently know by as assured Principles, that, Mr BODY GIVEN FOR
YOU. MY BLOOD SHED FOR MANY. Are no figurative Locutions.

19. They Object. 6. The Cup is called the Fruit The legal, and Sacramental
Cup, Distinguished.
of the Vine, therefore it is not Blood. Answ. 1. It may be called Heavenly
Wine, as Christ called himself Heavenly Bread etc. But the true Solution is.
There were two Cupps on the Table that night before our Savior suffered, the
Legal, and the Eucharistical, or Sacramental Cup, That Is called the Fruit of
the Vine, This not.

20. They Object 7. Some places of Scripture. The words which I have spoken to
you are Spirit and Life. The flesh Profits nothing. All did eat the same
Spiritual Food, and all drank the same Spiritual Drink. Answ. Nothing But mere
Fancy, or something Wors, can Draw these Texts to the sense of Sectaries. The
open and plain Meaning of Christ's words without Violence offered to them,
(easily Gathered By the whole Context) is The sense of Christ's own words is
clear, by the whole context of the Gospel
Thus. I have spoken to you of Divine and Spiritual Matters, conducing to
Eternal Happiness, But your Thoughts are still on Earth, As, if I were to cut
off certain Pieces of my Body, and give them you to Eat (so S. Austin
explicates this Place) it is not so, says our Savior, I spak of that more
Hidden Mystery of the Sacrament, If Sectaries can prove the contrary, let the^
them do by a sure Principle.
which Being Believed and Spiritually Understood* will Quicken you and Give you
Eternal life: The Flesh therefore, That is, a Carnal Understanding of my words
Profit's Nothing etc. This is the Genuin and candid sense of Christ's
Expression. For, it were a Blasphemy to say, that his sacred Body Profit's
none. I Answer To The other Passage of S. Paul, Its, an Error to judge, That
the Jews Received no less the Substance The Apostles words misonderstood by
Sectaries.
and Benefits of Christ's Graces in Their Figures, Then We do in our Sacraments.
The Apostle Intimates no such Thing, But only Says. They all (the Hebrews)
among Themselves, good and bad, Eat the same Meat, and Drank of the same Rock,
which was a Figure of Christ. Now, Pray you Tell me, Do all Calvinists, Good
and Bad, when They Receive Christ by the Mouth of their Faith, Equally
participate of his Graces? Or, were There any such Ample Promises Annexed to
the Eating of Manna in the Desert, and Drinking the Wather Issuing out of that
Rock, as are now made to the Sacraments of the New Law? No. They were Egena
elementa, Barren Elements for so Scripture speak's. You Will Ask, Why Then does
the Apostle call the Manna, and Water, Spiritual Food Why the Apostle call's
Manna Spiritual Food.
and Drink? I Answer, They are called so, not Because they Produced Grace as our
Sacraments Do, But because They had a Spiritual Signification, And were caused
by a Special supernatural Providence, contrary to the Ordinary Course of nature.

21. They Object 8. Such ought to be the Way of Receiving this Food of the
blessed Sacrament, as is An Objection concerning the way and manner of
Receiving showed null.
Answerable to the Quality of the Food and End, for which we take it. But, both
the Food it self (to wit Divine Grace) and the Final end of it, which is a
Union of the soul with Christ, are purely Spiritual; Therefore the Way, or Mode
of Receiving it, must be Proportionably Spiritual: But, no Mode or Way of
Taking it, can be more Fit, or Spiritual then Faith; Therefore we are to Receive
it by Faith Only as the meetest Instrument. Answ. The Objection (no less
improper in Speech then simply Fallacious) Distinguishes not rightly Between
the Immediate Cause of Grace, the effect of Sectaries distinguish not rightly
between the cause of Grace, the effect it self, and the Disposition necessary
to receiving.
Grace, and the Disposition necessary to Receive this Effect Fruitfully. The
immediate cause of grace, is Christ's sacred Body under the Forms of Bread and
Wine. Now to say, That his Body is the Way or Manner of Receiving our Spiritual
Nutriment, is an Impropriety in Speech. And to say Again, That, this Body ought
to be Ejusdem plane rationis, of the self same Nature with the Spiritual Food
it Causes, or, That a Corporal thing cannot be Ordained to Produce a Spiritual
Effect, is most untrue, For, the water in Baptism A material thing can cause
Spiritual Grace.
produces grace in the Baptized, yet is Corporeal; the Corporeal visible
Effusion of Christ's sacred Blood in his Passion, Freed us from a Spiritual
Death, and brought us to a Spiritual Life. And do not Sectaries Hold, that the
very Material Hearing of the Word of God is a fit Means to Beget Faith both
Spiritual, and Supernatural in the Hearers Soul? The Difficulty therefore
Proposed comes to nothing but Fancy. Finally, if we speak of the Disposition
requisite to Receive the Effect of this Sacrament (you may call it, if you
please, the Mode, Way, or Manner necessary to a due Receiving) What Disposition
is necessary.
All Catholics Profess, that not only Faith, at least Habitual, but Charity
Also, per se loquendo, Are Prerequired as necessary Dispositions to the Effect
thereof, Because it is Sacramentum Vivorum the Sacrament of Those, who now Live
by Faith, Hope, and Charity.

CHAP. VII.
How differently We and Sectaries proceed in this Controversy. What they are
to Prove.
1. SOme other Slight Objections yet remain Drawn from Fathers Misinterpreted,
and the weak Reason Other Objections briefly touched on.
of Sectaries. It is not worth the while, to Bring all to Light Again, They are
Solved, and Undeniably Solved, by our Catholic Writers. A few shall here
suffice. Some Fathers seem to say, That this Sacrament is a Sign, a Figure, an
Image, a Type of Christ's The Fathers say no where, that the Sacrament is a Sign
or Figure only of Christ.
Body. Very true. But not one says it is a Sign Only, a Figure Only, a
Memorial Only etc. Now know. It is one Thing to call it a Sign, and an Other a
Sign Only. Exclusive of Christ's Real Presence, As it is One Thing to say, Faith
Justifies, And Faith only Justifies, excluding Charity. Read therefore Those
words of St. Austin Lib. contra Adimantum cap. 12. Till your Eyes be Weary. Non
dubitavit dicere etc. Our Lord Doubted not to say. This is my Body, Cum daret
signum Corporis sui, When He gave a Sign of his Body. All you S. Austin
affirm's it not.
can Force out of Them, is this Obvious and Genuine Sense. Our Lord, When He
gave His Disciples the Consecrated Species, Accidents, or Forms of Bread, which
were a Sign, and Figure of his Body There contained; Doubted not to Say, That,
that which He then gave them under those Species, was Really His Body. If
Sectaries can Enforce more out of the Words, let them do it without Fancy, And
prove their Gloss, by a Clearer Principle then St. Austins Words are.

2. Again. When some Fathers Say, There is not, What the Fathers mean, when
They say it is not altogether the same Body.
Plane idem corpus, The same Body Altogether in the Eucharist, which was
Fastened to the Cross, But after a Manner the Same; To which Sense St. Austin
Commenting in Psalmum 98. Introduces our Savior speaking thus. Non hoc corpus
quod videtis, manducaturi estis etc. You are not to eat this Body you se
(Grossly He Means, as the Capharnaits Understood) And to Drink that Blood, which
my Enemies will Pour Out: I have The Fathers endeavor, to remove from us all
gross Conceptions of this Mystery. The two states of a Body, Natural, and
Spiritual, change not the substance of the Body. We say usually when one is
changed by Age or Sickness, he is not the same men.
Commended to you a Sacrament, which Spiritually Understood, will Give you Life
etc. When, I say, The Fathers Express Themselves by such Terms, And Did so, As
well to Remove from us all Thick and Carnal Conceptions of this sublime
Mystery, as to Beget in us (so far as we can reach to) a Right understanding of
the Spiritual Manner, of Christ Existing in the Sacrament We must Distinguish,
with the Apostle 1. Cor. 15. Two States of a Body, Natural, and Spiritual,
Whose Dotes and Qualities, Though Different, Change not the Body Substantially.
Distinguish I say Thus, And then Speak boldly with the Fathers. It is not
Altogether the same Body, But after a Manner; For, so we Speak in a Usual
Language, When we se one Notably Altered from Himself by Age or Sickness, And
say, He is not the Same He was, But quite an Other Man, Yet the Difference Here
is not so Great as between a Glorified Body in Heaven, and a Mortal Body on
Earth, or, Betwixt Christ Body Situally Extended with its just Dimensions, And
not at all Extended. The Fathers Therefore, By placing all the Variety on the
Mode or Manner of Existing, Deny not Christ's real Being in this Sacrament, But
as Learnedly, as Literally Express the very Mystery, The Fathers Learnedly and
Literally Express the Mystery.
as it ought to be Expressed. And We Stand to Their plain Words without
Violence offered to the Obvious Sense, by any Superaddition of Far-fetcht
Glosses, Yet Say it is Substantially the same Body.

3. And here by the way, if you will Parallel a little the Procedure of
Sectaries with ours, And Ours with Theirs, As well in this as in Other
Controversies, You may see How Faintly Fancy plead's against Reason, and Heresy
Opposes Truth. Observe it. What Catholics stand to the plain obvious sense of
their words, and Scripture also.
ever They Allege out of Gods Word for their Error, We Stand to the Plain,
Obvious, and Literal Sense of the Text, And yet Deny Their Heresy Drawn from
it, Which therefore must of Necessity be an Additional Gloss of Fancy. For
Example. Does Scripture say, Do this in Remembrance of me? We admit of the Open
Sense of the Words, without further Commentaries, or Glosses. Does it say The
Flesh Profit's Nothing? We say so too, But must learn, by other Principles,
what Flesh Signifies in that Place. Does it say, That Examples Hereof.
All the Ancient Hebrews eat of the same Bread, Drank of the same water? We,
without Wresting the Text say so too. Dot it say, that God Inhabits not Temples
made by Hands? So say We, And Give this Reason, Because Gods Divinity infinitely
Immense, Circumscribed in no Particular Place (as if he wanted Lodging) is
Every Where. Does it say that Christ Risen from the Dead, was not Therefore in
the Sepulcher? We Answer, the Illation is good in those Circumstances, whilst
Those virtuous Women Sought the Living Among the Dead. Do the No Fathers make
the Sacrament a Sign, a Figure on(...) ^luding Christ's presence.
Fathers say that the Holy Sacrament of the Altar is a Sign, a Figure, a Type
of Christ even There Present? We Acquiesce, and speak also as They Do, But
withal Add, That no Father makes it a Sign, a Figure, a Memorial Only, as if
the Reality of his Body were Excluded from the Outward Species of Bread and
Wine. Thus we Proceed with all Candor.

4. Now let us cast a few Thoughts upon our Sectaries Sectaries contrariwise
proceed with Catholics, and violently force both Scripture and Fathers.
Examples Hereof.
Dealing with us Catholics, And Se how Fancy only Vphold's every Thing they
Assert. We Allege our Saviors own Words. This is my Body which is Given for
you. They Answer, No. It was not his Body, but a Sign Only of His Body Given
for us. Observe well. This Interpretation of a Sign Only, is a Gloss of Fancy,
For, neither the Word, Sign, is in Scripture, Nor a Sign Only is any Ancient
Father. We Cite Again that Unanswerable Text of St. Luke. This is the Chalice,
the new Testament in my Blood, which Chalice is shed for you. And mark the word
(...), that Relates to (...) of the same Case, and not to (...) of a Different
Case. What Answer our Sectaries. Marry Beza Tell's us St. Luke Here, either
spak a Solacism, or a Marginal Note Cre'pt by chance into the Text; Here is His
best Solution, And who Tell's Mr. Beza so, But his own Fancy? We Produce
moreover Those Testimonies of Ancient Fathers, Briefly Hinted at Above, And say
no Wit of Man can solve Them, Chiefly That Authority of St. Cyril, Of Wine
changed into Blood, as water was Once changed into Wine. They Answer. The
Change was only Moral of Wine Deputed to a Holy Use, which is Against the very
Nature of the Instance, And consequently a Strong Thought of Fancy. We say No
Universal Tradition, No Ancient Church, ever Opposed the Doctrine of the Roman
Catholic Church concerning this Mystery. Herein, our Ad(...)rsaries are
Silenced, And cannot Design the Orthodox Church that opposed our Doctrine, as
both We, and the whole world beside, now oppose their Novelty. Parallel
therefore the Proceedings of Sectaries Against us, A Parallel between their
Proceeding and ours. Sectaries mangle and pervert most clear Authorities.
with ours Against them, And you will find them to stand upon Quicksand,
without Principles: The very Straits They are put to, Demonstrat this
Evidently, whilst, as you have seen, They Mangle, Pervert, Misconstrue, and
Gloss Every clear Authority cited against Them, And We on the other side,
heartily Admit both of Scripture and Fathers Quoted by Them, without Any other
Gloss but what the very Text, and Context of the Testimonies Allow of.

5. And Hence it is, that you Always have our Adversaries Sectaries bold in
asserting, but weak at their Proofs.
bold in Asserting, But Cold, Unmanly, and Weak at their Proofs. Besides what
is now said, the true Reason is. No Proof can touch, much less Vainquish a
Verity, that Stands firm upon undeniable Principles. Plain Scripture, the
Unanimous Consent of Fathers, undeniable What our Catholic Proofs are.
Tradition, the Authority of a Holy and Universal Church, and this Negative, No
Church ever blamed our Doctrine are Strong Supports for the Faith we Profess.
And can our Sectaries, who are as Scriptureles as Fatherles, as Fatherles as
Churchles, and Finally Destitute of All other Principles, Think to Dant us with
a few Gleancings, Gathered Sectaries cannot deny Them.
now out of This, now out of that Ancient Writter, when They Evidently se with
their Eyes the whole Torrent of Antiquity contrary to Them? Can they Persuade
Themselves, that Because one Theodoret For example Of Theodorets Authority.
Says, the Mystical Signs after the Sanctification, Recede not from Their
Nature, but Remain in their first Substance, Figure, and Form, are Seen, and
Touched as Before (which words are literally True, if we Speak, as We Admit of
his Words.
this Author Does, of the visible Accidents of Bread and Wine) Can we, I say,
Think that this one Authority, Though it were a Hundred times more Difficil,
Has Weight enough to turn the Scales, Force Enough to Drive us from the Faith,
which Scripture, Church, and Fathers most manifestly Deliver? It is impossible.
The obscurer places of Scripture, and Fathers, are to be Interpreted by the
clearer.
All know, when Divines Explicate Scripture or Fathers, They Interpret the
obscurer Passage by the Clearer, And never make the Darker Place to give Light
to the more Evident. Observe Now. Theodoret says the Mystical Signs Recede not
from their Nature, But Remain as before. I say so too. The only Difficulty is
what he Means by the Word Signs, and Sectaries Glosses without Proof.
Theodoret cannot be supposed to contradict other most Learned Fathers. He is to
be Explicated, were he obscure, by the sense of other Fathers.
Nature? Sectaries Tell us: The Sense is. Bread and wine Recede not from Their
True Substance. First, This is their Gloss without Proof; For, the Visible
Signs of bread and wine, are not the Invisible Substance of Bread and Wine. 2.
Theodoret in all law of Arguing, when His plain Words Force not on us this
sense of Sectaries, ought to be Catholickly Interpreted: And Had we no other
Reason but this, That it cannot be Reason, To make so Learned a Father (Though
once he strayed a little) to Clash with all Antiquity, it were Enough. At most
His Words are Doubtful, And, upon that Account capable of Explication, is it
not Therefore more Just, to Explicate Them by the Clear and Undeniable Doctrine
of a Whole Church, And other Fathers, then to Draw these Fathers from their
Open and Manifest Sense to His, if it be supposed Obscure, as in Truth, well
Pondered, it is not. Let Reason Judge Here.

6. By what is said Already, We may well pity the desperate Condition of
Sectaries, who Pertinaciously Defend an Heresy, without so much as a color of
Sectaries want Principles.
Scripture, Church, or the General Consent of Fathers; For, these Principles
(and none can Parallel them) Most evidently Fail our Adversaries. Urge them
Again and Again to speak more Pertinently to their Cause, then is Don hitherto:
You get nothing but the Old Story told over again, And it will never be Better,
for I se too Plainly Their Humor. It is, God knows, Sectaries Tristing, and
wherein it Appears.
To spend, or rather to Mispend their whole Life and Labor in Trifles. They
Think, to Cavil at the Proofs of our Doctrine Establishes Theirs, As if it were
sufficient, to make their Novelty good, Because they can Talk against our
Ancient Faith, Just as if One, to Prove Himself an Honest Man, might do it
Pithily, by calling his Neighbor a Knave.

7. I must yet Add one Significant Word more, And It Is very Necessary to lay
forth our Adversaries Weakness, as well in This as in All other Controversies.
Observe Solid Proofs for a Doctrine stand firm and unshaken against all
Opponents.
it. When Proofs of a Doctrine Stand on solid Grounds, and Principles, the
Objections Against it are like Fathers cast Against the Wind, forceles, And
return upon the Opponents to their Confusion, whereof, I think, you Have Already
seen Enough in this Present Controversy. But contrariwise. When the Proofs are
Meagre, Barren, and Void of Strength (They are ever so with Sectaries) The Very
Opposite Principles for Truth, Dash All, Discountenance All: and Evidently Show
those Arguments to be Feeble. And Truly, would our Did Sectaries Proceed
Heartily, They would se Themselves Convinced.
Adversaries once Deal Ingeniously, Candor would Force them to Acknowledge what
I say to be most True; when they can all^ge nothing probably for their Novelty
against our Plain Scripture, Against the Ancient Doctrine of a Universal Learned
Church, And the Authority of so many Fathers now Cited.

8. We might yet entertain you with One or Two Difficult ^ drawn from the weak
Reason of Sectaries, solved.
Difficulties more Drawn from Reason, Whereat our Adversaries, Measuring Gods
Power by their own Wit or Fancy Stumble not a Little. One is: A Body cannot be
in two Places at Once. Just so the Peasant Thinks the sun cannot be bigger then
a Broad Sieve, Because (never learning Mathematiks) He Measures All by his
silly Imagination; And so the Sectary Does Here, Because He is no Scholar in
Christ's School. But ad Rem. Who Tell's Him that a Body cannot be in two Places
at once? Has God Revealed this in Scripture? Nit^her Faith nor Philosophy,
against th being of a Body in two places.
No, But Philosophy Teaches it: What Philosophy? Aristotle's? No, For the
Received Doctrine of his School is, That a Body (to say nothing of a Soul That
is in two places, Head and Feet at Once) Individually Considered by it Self, is
no more Actually Its own Local Presence or Place Then the Organ of the Eye is
of it Self its own Actual Vision, Or Fire A Body is not by it self, its own
local presence. An other Argument of Sectaries ungrounded.
by it self Actually Heat. This is common Philosophy, if That of Sectaries be
Better, let them Vouchsafe to Learn us Otherwise, Not by Saying it is Better,
But by some Clear and Undeniable Principle.

9. An other Argument is Drawn from the Great Indignities, whereunto Christ's
Sacred Body is liable, if it be in the Holy Sacrament: As That a Mouse, or Wors
Creature may Eat it Up etc. Here we may Justly Exclame with St. Austin upon
another Occasion lib. 22. de Civit. c. 11. Ecce qualibus argumentis
Omnipotentiae Dei humana contradicit infirmitas etc. Se, with what Slight
Arguments Man's weak Wit Opposes Gods Omnipotency. Speak therefore. Truth. Is it
not a greater The pretended Indignities of Sectaries showed ^rivolous.
Indignity, that Christ Permitt's a Sinner to Receive him with a filthy
conscience, Then That He lics in the Stomach of a Rat or Mouse? Say yet. Had a
worm Suk't his Precious Blood when it was shed on the Ground in his Passion,
or, a Spider bit his Sacred flesh in the Crib of Bethlem, Would that Indignity,
think ye, Have Forced men from a Belief of his Real true Body? These are
childish Arguments, not worth the Answering. And here you have almost an End of
a Digression which I Think cannot be well Answered.

10. I Exceed not in saying: It cannot be Answered. Some points Briefly touched
on, whereunto Sectaries are desired to Answer,
And therefore Tell our Adversaries, if it shall please them to Reply They are
first to Prove, and by certain Principle, that Christ's Sacred Words now Alleged
for our Catholic Verity are Misunderstood by us, And ought to have Their
Determinate sense of a Sign, Figure, Metonymy, and no Other. What we here
Require is most Reasonable; For, if my Faith fall upon Their sense They are
obliged to Prove it Revealed by Almighty God, Otherwise Upon sound Principles.
Contrary to all Reason They Will Urge me to Believe what an infinite Verity never
Spak. 2. They are to Prove And by a clear Principle also, That in such an Age
after Christ, There was an Orthodox Church that Believed their Doctrine of a
Sign, Figure. Metonymy Only etc. And Publikly Opposed ours of Christ's Real
Presence in the Eucharist. To do this, More is required then to cite a few
broken Sentences of Fathers, half Abused and wholly Maimed Sentences of Fathers,
Proofles.
weighed out of Their Circumstances. All which put together Come not near to a
Probable, much less, to a Certain Principle That Is able to Evert the undeniable
clear Catholic Doctrine of other Fathers, And the Authority of our whole
learned Church with Them. 3. They are not only to Interpret the Fathers now
Alleged (For, Fancy without Proof may pervert the clearest Words God ever Spak)
But, when Their Interpretation When Sectaries Interpret the Fathers, They are
obliged to prove their Interpretation.
is made They must Show it grounded upon a contrary Received Principle as
Strong, as the Express Words of those Fathers are. 4. They are to Show, That
Christ our Lord when He uttered those sacred words to His Disciples. This is my
Body, And then foresaw the universal supposed Error of Believing his Real
Presence in the Eucharist would follow in all Orthodox Churches, And from no
other Cause but His own Express and significant Speaking, They are, I say,
Obliged to Prove And by an undeniable Principle, that He shut up in the
clearest Proposition He ever uttered, that Dark sense which. They draw from it,
And, that He did so to Deceive the World. Sectaries grant Christians to have
been universally Deceived What Sectaries Grant.
in their Belief of the Real Presence: And that the supposed Error Arose from
Christ's plain words, is Evident. For, the whole Catholic Church that Believes
this Mystery does so, Because Truth it self said plainly without Reserve: This
is my Body. Finally, That Christ our Lord would speak as He did is Manifest by
the Gospel; And that He then foresaw the Supposed Universal Error, would be
also Believed by force of His words in the greatest part of Christendom is most
Vndubitable, Because of the perfect Knowledge He had of Future Things. 5. May
it please Sectaries to Proceed heartily, They are to cast a serious Reflection
on passed Ages and Ponder well, who those were that Patronized Their Doctrine,
and Opposed ours. They are to compare and justly to Balance their Obscure
Scripture with our clear Texts: The vveak Testimonies of Their misconstrued
Fathers, with our contrary now Quoted Authorities; Their Novelty with our
Ancient Believed Faith, The sentiment of their little late Congregation
concerning this Mystery with the Judgment and Belief of our long standing
Roman Church etc. And, if when All is Don, They can come to a sound Principle
Whereby it may Appear to every Rational man, That their Scripture, Fathers, and
Church Authority Outweigh as it were Ours Or have more force to establish their
Novelty, then what is now Alleged to make our Catholic Doctrine most stably
sure; We will begin to Think They may more laudably write Controversies
Hereafter. But if contrariwise, you find Them Gravelled at every Difficulty now
Proposed, and hear nothing distinctly Replied to ( upon undoubted Principles)
or Further confuted, then a loos wandering Discourse will carry on a Weak Cause,
I Will once more crave Their Pardon, and Plainly Say: Our Arguments and Reasons
cannot be Ansvvered.

CHAP. VIII.
The Conclusion. The Churches Evidence.
1. WE have seen Enough in the Precedent Discourses That True Religion is not
(as Sectaries make Protestancy) Like a Dark Lanthorn, But One of the most
Morally Manifested and Evidenced Things in the World: And Reason Teaches it
should be so. For, if True Worth ever Shows it self by Real True worth is
Known by real Effects.
Signs and Known Effects: (So Faith is Discovered by good Works, Life by its
Vital Operations, The Existency of a Deity by the Emanations of Creatures) None
can Doubt; But That God who Desires all to be Saved, Has Made That Religion
wherein Salvation is Had, Proofs cannot be wanting to manifest the Church;
wherein Salvation is to be had. St. Austin confirm's this Doctrine.
most Known and Discernable by Outward Signs and Vndubitable Marks of Truth.
Therefore, as we said above, clear Proofs cannot be Wanting Whereby That is
Manifested which God will have Known. Audistis ejus vocem manifestissimam. They
are Words of St. Austin de Unit. Ecclesiae cap. 25. You have Heard the Most
Manifest Voice of God, Not only by the Law, Prophets and Psalms, But by His Own
Sacred Mouth Commendantis Ecclesiam suam futuram. Commending his Future Church
to us All. This Church you have Diffused Every where: You see it like a City,
whereof He who Built it, Says: A City upon a Mountain, cannot be Hid. This is
the Church, which is not in one Part of the World, as the Donatists were in the
South, And* our Sectaries now are in These Northen Climates, sed ubique est
notissima, But it is Manifest every where. And, if you Ask by what Signs And
shows, by what Marks Christ's Church is Evidenced.
it is Known? The Saint Answers, lib. de Vtilit. Cred. c. 17. Hoc factum est
Divina Providentia. This is Don by Providence, By the Oracles, and Fore telling
of Prophets, by the Humanity and Doctrine of Christ, by the wearisome Travails
of his Apostles, by the Reproaches and Contumelies of Martyrs, by their Gibbets
Blood Shedding and Blessed Deaths, By the Famous* St. Austins Motives of
Credibility.
Known Lives of Saints, and Among These so Universal great Virtues, By most
Worthy Miracles, Meetly and upon fit Occasion Showed us. Mark the Signs. He
Goes on. Cum igitur tantum Auxilium etc. When Therefore we se so great Aid and
Help Afforded by Almighty God, so much Fruit and Increase. Dubitamus nos ejus
Ecclesiae gremio They force Reason to profess the Faith of that Church, which
shows them. It is pride and impiety, not to give Preeminence to such a Church
before others. St. Austin Defends not a Religion common to all Christians.
condere etc. Shall we Doubt to Hide our Selves in the Lap of That Church Which
from the Apostolical Sea, Even to this Public Confession of Mankind, Has got
to such a Height of Authority, by a Continual Succession of Bishops; condemned
Heretics vainly snarling at it. Partly also by the Judgment of the People,
Partly by the Gravity and Weight of Councils, Partly by the Glory and Majesty
of Miracles. Cui nolle primas dare, vel summae profecto impietatis est, vel
praecipitis arrogantiae. And not to Give to this Church the Chiefest.
Preeminence is in Good Earnest either a Mighty Wickedness, or a Stubborn and
Headstrong Pride. Ponder these Words well with the Following Also, and Ask your
Own Consciences, what Church that was For Which St. Austin Pleaded so Strongly?
Did He Speak For All who Go under the Name of Christians? No: The Impugned
Manichies were Such, And so were also the Arians, Pelagians, and Others: But
These Because of Their Vnevidenced Religion (utterly Destitute of Marks and
Motives) He Rejects as Schismatics Much less, the Then unknown Novelties of
Protestants.
and Heretics. Did He Argue, Think ye, For our little late Risen Congregation
of Protestants? No God Knows, They have less of this Evidence Then the very
Arians Had; And, Besides were never Thought of in St. Austins Days.

2. The Church Therefore, For which our Profound The Saint plead's for no other,
then for the Ever Visible, Holy, and Catholic Roman Church,
Doctor Speak's and Plead's, is an Other Society Known to the World before
Heresy Began. I Mean the Ever Visible, Holy, Continued and Catholic Roman
Church wherinto Heresy, justly condemned, never Entered. (August. Tract. 18. in
Ioannem) And, whereof the Prophets Spak more fignificantly then of Christ
Himself ( Aug. in Psalm. 30.) This Church, And This Only, Has been Manifested
Age after Age by Eminent Sanctity, By Glorious Miracles, Made Evidently
Credible, by undoubted Marks and Signs.
By the Bloodsheding of Martyrs, By a never Interrupted Succession of Prelates,
Pastors, and People from St. Peter's Days to Ours, And finally By most Learned
and Approved Councils. This, and This Only is the Church Diffused the Whole
World Over, which Keeps perfect Unity in Faith with one Supreme Head, And so
Demonstratively Evidenceth its Antiquity, That the Worst of Sectaries are
silenced When They offer to Cavil at it.

3. If you Ponder well These Undeniable Truths, You A Conclusion against
Sectaries.
must needs Conclude Against Sectaries, as Blessed St. Austin Once did Against
the Manicheans. Read him lib. de util. creden. cap. 14. VOS AUTEM TAM PAUCI, ET
TAM TURBULENTI, ET TAM NOVI, NEMINI DUBIUM EST, QUIN NIHIL DIGNUM AUTHORITATE
PRAEFERATIS. There is no Doubt, Says the Saint, But that You Sectaries so St.
Austins pithy Expression, justly agrees to Sectaries. They are few in number.
Fearfully Divided. And of a new Faith. St* Austins words pondered with
Reflection on Sectaries. Innumerable witnesses against a few.
meanly Few, who Evidence nothing Credible in your Religion, You so Turbulent
and Consused in your Opinions concerning Faith; You so newly Strangers to the
Christian World; There is, I say, no Doubt But That You of so Small Authority
can Allege Nothing worth the Hearing, or Worthy of Credit when you Oppugn our
Ancient Church, or Defend Your Own so late invented Novelties. Consider every
Word Seriously. VOS TAM PAUCI. What? You so Few. You, Who Se, to Your Eternal
Discomfort, so Many Nations, so many People, so Many Worthy Prelates, so Many
Glorious Martyrs, so Many Penitent Sinners Believing Our Ancient Faith Dying in
it, and for it: You, who se so Many Miracles Confirm it, so Many Conversions
Wrought by it, so Many Churches Erected, so many Universities Founded, so Many
Prisons Sanctified, so Many Dangers run Through, so Many Works of Piety Don by
the Professors of this Ancient Church: All is Evident to Your Eyes and Senses:
VOS AVTEM TAM PAVCI. And what can You so Inconsiderably Few, not the Hundred
part in Number, who Have Don Nothing like these Zealous Christians Say for a
Novelty, or Probably Plead Against so Learned, so Holy and so Diffused a
Christian Society? Moreover. VOS TAM TVRBVLENTI. You so Turbulent, Se in This
Ample Moral Catholic Body Innumerable Seculars, Though of Different Nations,
of Different Tempers and Education, Knit Together in One Ancient Belief: You Se
Innumerable Unity stands against Division.
Profound Doctors, All over Christianity, Innumerable Learned Religious,
(Though Various in Matters merely Opinative) Yet so Highly Tender of the
Churches Unity, That They would rather Die then Break or Blemish it. All these
well Agreeing Hearts in one Faith, Evidence, That This Church, is Made up of
Members who Glory in Union amongst Themselves, and Testify it By a due
Submission to one Supreme Head set over this Blessed Society: VOS AVTEM TAM
TURBULENTI. And what can You, late Troublesome People, Who Yield Submission to
None, But to your own Fancies, You, Who within the Compass of one Narrow
Kingdom, are so turbulently Divided in Faith, so Horridly Rent and Torn a
Pieces with Schism; What can You, I say, Allege For Your Breach of Union, or
Rationally Pretend Against this long Standing and Ancient Agreeing Body of
Catholics?

4. Finally. You So NEW MEN Behold (And it may lay Sorrow at your Hearts)
Innumerable of your own long since Deceased Ancestors, Professed Children of
this Mother Church, Their Monuments, Even in Antiquity against Novelty.
England (Sad Spectacles It Is true, But) Visible Enough to Your Eyes, Plead
Strongly for the Ancient Faith, which You now Unfortunately Reject: You Se, The
Very Churches built by Those your Forefathers, Though in part Defaced, Are not
yet so much Spoiled, But, That still a memory is preserved of Catholic
Religion in the very Altars half Pulled Down, In the Crosses, And other
Remembrances of their Ancient Renowned Piety: You Se withal, Whole Volumes
writ in Defense of our Catholic Doctrine, the very Velume and Characters whereof
(much elder then your Faith) lament your late Change, And tell many a sad Story
of your new risen Gospel. VOS ERGO TAM NOVI, And How Dare you so late Masters,
without Confusion and Torment of Conscience, reflect on These Ancestors, Look
on These Monuments, Read these Writings, And after all, Speak, as you do
Irreverently of an Ancient Faith, merely to Countenance a Novelty Whereof the
World never Heard, before you Preached it. Say once Plainly, It Is High time to
Speak, what Have you for This Protestancy? Any Prudent Motives That make it
Credible? Not One. Have you Scripture? Not a Word. Do Ancient Councils, or, the
Unanimous Consent Nothing can defend Protestancy but Fancy
of Fathers Favor it? No. All Band against it, And leave both you, and the
Novelty professed by you To no better a Ground, then what Vphold's all Heresy,
which is Fancy, or some Thing wors then Fancy. Therefore Nemini dubium est quin
nihil dignum auctoritate praeferatis.

5. Some Perhaps will say. If Protestancy be thus Highly Improbable, And the
Roman Catholic Religion so Manifestly Credible As is now Declared, From Why
Sectaries stay so long in Heresy, whilst the Church is so manifest to all.
Whence is it That Sectaries Stay so long in Heresy, And Embrace not a Faith,
which is without Dispute undoubtedly Clear to All? To Answer the Question, it
would be enough to Propose an Other, And It Is not to Ask, Why All Embrace not
Protestancy That has Nothing to induce men to it, But Why, after It is
Answered first, by an Instance of Christ and his Apostles not converting all. A
further Reason is Given.
All those most Signal Manifest Miracles, and Conversions wrought by Christ our
Lord and His Apostles the whole world, Both Jews and Gentiles came not Then in,
Upon such Evident Motives, Why Did they not Forthwith Profess Christianity?
Most Certainly the Attraction was Forceable: They wanted no Inducements. But
Education And a contrary custom of Living Hindered much, and Sense too strong
with the Most of men, Perhaps More. For as Sense and Sensual Pleasures, Ever
Make Virtue Insipid to the will, So They often Dull the Eye of Reason also in
Order to Truth, And Either Withdraw the Attention from a Serious Contrary on
Educati* s^n^iberty se and sensual pleasure Hinder.
Consideration of what most Concern's our Good, or, which is VVors, totally
averts the mind from it. We Se this misery Daily, For the More that men are
Lulled a Sleep in sense and worldly Delights, The Less they Listen to what God
speak's, Though He Call's loud on Them, And Uses a Language, as He does by His
Church, most Clear, Audible, and Significant.

6. Add hereunto an Other Verity Delivered by One That could not but Speak
Truth, 1. Cor. 15. 19. Oportet Heresies must be.
Haereses esse. There must be Heresies, and the Reason Follows in the Text.
That Those who are Approved may be made Manifest Among you. Manifest, How? I Will
Tell you. It is Heresy that has brought Thousands The Reason.
of Martyrs (and this in the open View of the world) to Their Gibbets and
Torments, without it Much Good follows the permission of Heresy.
They Had not Dyed for Christ, nor Manifested so clearly their Renowned
Constancy. It is Heresy that has Evidenced the suffering Patience of
Innumerable Confessors, who Though shut up in Prisons and Dungeons for their
Faith, Have yet Their Memory Living, and it will Remain upon Record to future
Ages. It is Heresy, That both Proves and Shows you where True Faith (much more
precious then Gold tried by the Fire) is Found, unto Showed in particular.
Praise and Glory. It is Heresy, That Brings to Light Gods pure Revealed
Verities, never more spread abroad, nor, better Known then when Novellists
endeavon to Suppress Them. It is Heresy, that has set Forth so many learned
Volums of Ancient Fathers, Sent Innumerable Missioners Up and Down the World,
And yet Gives you Plenty of painful Preachers in the Church, who Cease not to
Speak in Gods Cause, It omne os obstruatur, that the Mouths of Sectaries being
Stopped, All may love Truth and Yield a Due Submission to Christ and His
Church. You se Therefore How Heresy, Though it Poisons Him That Feed's on it, Yet
it causes More Good Among Christians, Then our Vulgar And more, then is
Vulgarly conceived.
Thoughts easily reach to. Se^ Tertullian lib de Praesc. c. 1. And S. Austin de
Verd Relig. c. 8.

7. Grow not Therefore Angry with God ( It Is Tertullians advise) for Permitting
Sin and Heresy. An God That permitt's sin and Heresy, knows best for what use
they serve.
Infinite Wisdom Knows best for what Use they Serve. You Remember, When Those
Servants in the Gospel Matthew. 13. 26. Saw Cockle Appearing among the Wheat,
They readily Offered their Service to Pluck it Up, But the wise Householder Said,
No. Sinite utraque crescere usque ad messem. Suffer Both to Grow until the
Harvest, And in the time of Harvest, I will say to the Reapers, Gather up first
the Cockle etc. They Pressed not further, but Remained well Satisfied with
Christ's Answer. Christ's Answer.
Least whilst you Gather up the Tares you Root up also the wheat with Them.
Now, if you Understand not the Deep Sense of these sacred Words: Exclaim with
the Apostle Romans 11. 33. O Altitudo. O Depth of the Riches, of The Apostles
pious exclamation. The Prophets Lesson, and the wise Counsel, of the son of
Syrach.
the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! Quis cognovit sensum Domini, Who has known
the mind of our Lord, or, who has been his Counselor? Learn well that good
Lesson: Esaias 55. 9. My Thoughts are not your Thoughts, for as the Heavens are
Exalted above the Earth, s^ are my Ways Exalted above Yours, and my
Cogitations above your Cogitations. Learn more of JESU, the Wise son of Syrach
Eccles. 33. 15. And Look with Him, upon all Teach ^^ to Reverence Gods
permission of Evil.
the Works of the Highest. You se Two against Two, and One Against One, Against
Evil is Good, Against Death is Life, Against a Just man is a Sinner, And I Add,
Against Truth you have Heresy. S. Austin lib. 11. de Civitate c. 18. Call's S.
Austins Discourse, of Contrarieties in Gods works.
these Things, R^rum Antitheta. Contrarities in the works of God, And moreover
Assures us, That His Goodness would never have Created either Men or Angels in
whom Evil was Foreseen, Nisi pariter nosset, quibus eos Bonorum usibus
accommodaret, unles He had also Known how Useful, Subservient, and Beneficial,
I Will would Prove at last, to Virtuous Good Men. Atque ita in ordinem seculorum
tanquam pulcherrimum Carmen, etiam ex quibusdam quasi Antithetis honestaret,
And How that in the Course of Ages, He might Commend and set Forth all We Se,
like a well made Verse with certain Contrarieties. Evil graceth virt^^ and
Error gives a luster to Truth.
Evil Therefore Has its Good, and Gives a Grace to Virtue. Error Add's a
Comeliness to Truth, And the more Ugly Heresy is, the More it Sett's forth the
Luster of Christ's Orthodox Church, And makes it glorious. S. Austin confirm's
the Doctrine,
Pictor novit (They are Words of S. Austin Sermon. De Diversis c. 5. fine) ubi
ponat nigrum colorem ut sit decora pictura, and nescit Deus ubi ponat
peccatores, ut sit ordinata creatura. A* Painter Knows well where to lay
Darker Colors, That his Piece may be Fair to the eye, And Shall not God Know
where to Place Sinners (the like is of Heretics) That His Creatures may Thereby
Appear And sh^w^s of what use erring men are to the Church.
Seemly, and in Order? Yes most Assuredly. This great Doctor Says yet More
lib. de Vera Beligione c. 6. Haec enim Catholica Ecclesia, per totum orbem
valide lateque diffusa, omnibus errantibus ad profectus suos, and ad eorum
Correctionem cum Evigilare voluerint etc. This Catholic Church so far and near
Diffused, makes Benefit of all Poor erring Souls, Yea, and Does so for their
Amendment, when They Shall Please to Awake out of their Drowsines. It makes Use
of Gentiles to let them Se the Wonders it Works* of Heretics to Prove its Holy
Doctrine, of Schismatics to give them a Lesson of better Stability, of Jews to
Show them the Beauty of Christian Religion etc. So it is. All the Blindness in
the world, says S. Austin, else Were, Ad aliquem usum Sanctorum ordinatur, is
Ordained for some Heresy serviceable to the Church.
Profit and Service, of Gods Elect and Chosen People.

8. Conclude therefore. As there will be Deluded Souls, whether Jews or
Gentiles: As There will be Sin, Oppression, and Open Injustice to the End of
Ages. Sic oportet Haereses esse. So there will be Heresies also, No wonder that
some wilfully Shut their Eyes to the Evidence of the Church,
And Those who Wilfully Shut their Eyes to the Evidence of a Glorious Mother
Church. And wonder not at it. For you Know, That the Son of God Himself, came
into the World, Et mundus cum non cognovit, And the World would not know Him,
His sacred Doctrine was Preached All over, But Seemed, Iudaeis Scandalum,
Gentibus Stultitia, A Scandal to the Jews, and a Foolery When the Son of God
was not known to All.
to the Gentiles. What Marvel is it then, that His Own Holy Church, Be less
Regarded by Dispirited Souls, and the Doctrine thereof set Light by? Have
Patience. Wait on Gods Good Leisure. No Heart is so Hard but Grace can Soften
it. These Dimm Eyes of Deceived Men Will at last be Opened. Et videbit omnis
caro Salutare Dei. And all shall Se and Know, That, as There is no Other
Savior but One, Christ our Lord, So There is no other Church but No other
Christ but one. No other Church but the one only Roman Catholic Church*
One, Wherein Salvation (long Sought for) can be Found, But in the One only
Ancient, Apostolical, Catholic, and Holy Roman Church. CREDO SANCTAM ECCLESIAM
CATHOLICAM.

FINIS.
THE CHAPTERS IN ORDER.
THE FIRST DISCOURSE.
Of an Infallible Church and Infallible Teachers.
CHAP. I. There are Infallible Teachers of true Christian Religion. Page 16.
CHAP. II. The Infallible Doctrine of Christ Necessarily requires Infallible
Teachers. 20 CHAP. III. Other Proofs for Teachers, and a Church infallible. 29
CHAP. IV. Replies to these Arguments are Answered. 36 CHAP. V. A Controversy
with some later Sectaries concerning Moral certainty. 49 CHAP. VI. Faith only
morally certain, is no Faith. Protestants have no Moral certainty of Protestant
Religion. 63 CHAP. VII. How Sectaries err in the search made after Religion. Of
their weak and improbable Opposition. The Objection is more fully Answered. 70
CHAP. VIII. A few Reflections made upon these Motives of Credibility. No
Religion has Motives founding moral certainty but One only, which is (...)
Roman Catholic Religion. 78 CHAP. IX. A short Digression concerning the
shufling of Protestants in this matter. 88 CHAP. X. Protestants have no
rational Motives, whereby their new Faith is evidenced to be so much as
Probable. 96 CHAP. XI. Arguments drawn from Reason against Protestants, upon
the consideration of These declared Motives. 114 CHAP. XII. Protestants, for
want of rational Motives cannot convert an Infidel to Christian Faith. 119 CHAP
XIII. Protestancy for want of Rational Motives dishonor's Christ, and makes way
for any new coined Heresy. 128
THE SECOND DISCOURSE.
Of Scripture.
CHAP. I. Scripture is useles, if none declare infallibly the sense of it. 135
CHAP. II. The Fallacy of Protestants concerning Scripture, and the
Interpretation of Scripture, is discovered. 144 CHAP. III. All substantials of
Faith are not plain in Scripture without an infallible Teacher. 153 CHAP. IV.
Sole Scripture without an infallible Interpreter can be no Rule of Faith.
Protestants have no Scripture for their Religion, as it is Protestancy. 162
CHAP. V. The Reason of private men, and their private spirit, cannot interpret
Scripture. 169 CHAP. VI. The new mode of Protestants Misinterpreting Scripture,
which proves the Churches Infallibility, is more Amply Refuted. 179 CHAP. VII.
More of this subject. 187 CHAP. VIII. The new Mode of Sectaries misinterpreting
Scripture destroys Protestant Religion. 195 CHAP. IX. Of the Means left by
Almighty God to interpret Scripture Truly. One Passage more of Scripture
Proving Infallible Teachers, is quoted. 203 CHAP. X. Objections are Answered.
217
THE THIRD DISCOURSE.
Of Sectaries Unreasonable Proceeding.
CHAP. I. Protestants are Unreasonable, whilst They seemingly hold a Catholic
Church Distinct from the Roman, neither known nor Designable by any. 231 CHAP.
II. Of a late Writers Doctrine. 236 CHAP. III. The Pretended Reformation of
Protestants is unreasonable, if Faith in Christ Only suffice for Salvation. A
more Explicit Faith is proved Necessary. 244 CHAP. IV. The Ambiguous Discourses
of Protestants, concerning Fundamentals in Faith, are Proved unreasonable. 250
CHAP. V. An Answer to one Reply. More of this subject. 262 CHAP. VI. Some Few
Propositions of a late Writer are briefly Examined. His Discourse of
Fundamentals Destroy's Protestant Religion. 271 CHAP. VII. More of this
subject. Objections are Ansvvered. 291 CHAP. VIII. Protestants are unreasonable
in the Defense of Their late Manifest and undoubted Schism. 315 CHAP. IX.
Protestants cannot make Good Their Charge Against the Roman Catholic Church,
concerning causal Schism. 323 CHAP. X. The Roman Catholic Church, whilst
Evidence comes not Against it, stands Firm upon its Ancient Possessed Right.
This long Possession Proves the Church Orthodox. 333 CHAP. XI. Of a late
Writers Exceptions Against our Pleading Possession. 339 CHAP. XII. Another
Objection. And whether Protestants can Acquit themselves of Schism. 357 CHAP.
XIII. A second Argument Against this Schism. Of Sectaries Cavils concerning
Errors, Entering the Church insensibly. 362 CHAP. XIV. A Word to a Few supposed
and unproved Assertions. Whereby some Endeavor to clear Protestants of Schism.
379 CHAP. XV. More of These Authors confused Doctrine, is Refuted. 387
THE FOVRTH DISCOURSE.
Of the Churches Evident Credibility. Of the Improbability of Protestancy.
CHAP. I. Christ's Church is Proved to be no Other, But the Roman Catholic.
Sectaries are convinced of error. 405 CHAP. II. Protestancy is an unevidenced,
And a most improbable Religion, or, rather no Religion, but a mere Fancied
Opinion. 420 CHAP. III. A Word more of Sectaries new Mode of Arguing laid
forth, by Touching on one Controversy concerning the Doctrine of Purgatory. 434
CHAP. IV. A Parallel of Proofs for, and Against the Doctrine of Purgatory. A
solution to a late Adversaries Objections. 452 CHAP. V. An objection proposed,
and solved in a Discourse of another Controversy. Which is the Real Presence.
477 CHAP. VI. Sectaries without either Proof or Principles, wrest Christ's Words
to an improper sense, and vent an Heresy upon mere Fancy. 489 CHAP. VII. How
differently We and Sectaries proceed in this Controversy. What they are to
Prove. 506 CHAP. VIII. The Conclusion. The Churches Evidence. 517
SOME FEW OF THE MORE CHIEF CONTENTS OF THIS TREATISE.
THE FIRST DISCOURSE.
Of Infallible Teachers, and the Motives of Credibility.
Christ's Church has infallible Teachers of true Christian Religion. Christ's
infallible Doctrine requires infallible Teachers. A Doctrine that is fallible may
be falls. Christ sent none to teach any other Doctrine but that which may be
resolved into Gods certain Revelation, but such a Doctrine can neither be falls
nor fallible. Sectaries preach no other Doctrine but what is fallible and may be
falls. The Objective infallibility of Gods Word in Scripture is not ex terminis
Evident, and no Church (as They say) Ever yet told them or can tell them
infallibly, that it is infallible. If all Pastors and Doctors may err in their
delivery of Christian Doctrine, God would as indifferently oblige us to believe
a lie, as his certain verities. If God deprive all Pastors of infallible
Assistance, Christian Religion now stands on no more firm ground then man's
weak, mutable and erring opinion. Gods infallible Revelation avails nothing in
order to Faith, unles Christians lay hold on the certainty thereof by Faith
which cannot be don, unles that Oracle which proposes the Revelation to all be
infallible. If the Proponent of a Revelation only say doubtfully. I think God
speaks as I preach, but am not certain, the Assent given to his Preaching is
also doubtful, and no Faith. Faith surpasses in its strength and Tendency, all
moral and Metaphysical certainty. Though Moral certainty were sufficient for
Faith, yet Sectaries have not so much for Protestancy, as it is reformed. How
Sectaries err in their search made after Religion, and both weakly and
improbably oppugn the Doctrine of the Catholic Roman Church. Reflections upon
the motives of credibility. It is impossible (after the establishment of true
Faith in the world) that God permit a falls Religion to be more clearly
evidenced to reason by force of rational Motives, then true Religion is
manifested. A falls Religion cannot equalize Gods true Religion in the evidence
of prudent motives, inducing to Faith. No Religion has motives founding moral
certainty (prerequired to Faith) but the Roman Catholic Religion only.
Protestants have nothing like rational motives, whereby Protestancy, as
Protestancy, is proved to be so much as probable. Where Mr. Stillingfleet
Treats of resolving Protestants Faith, He waves the Question wholly, and speak's
no more in behalf of Protestancy, then Arianism, or another Heresy. Arguments
drawn from Reason against Protestants upon the consideration of the Churches
motives. Sectaries cannot for want of prudent motives (inducing to Faith)
convert an infidel to Christian Religion. Their Religion Dishonors Christ and
makes way to any new coined Heresy.

THE SECOND DISCOURSE.
Of Scripture.
SCripture is a useles book in the hands of Sectaries, if none, as they
confess, Declare infallibly the sense of it in high points of Controversies.
Arians interpret Scripture as probably as Protestants, when they oppose the
sense received by the Church. Sectaries make Scripture a book, that proves all
Religions, and more significant for Arianism then Protestancy. The fallacy of
Protestants concerning the Interpretation of Scripture, is discovered. Grant no
infallible Church, we have no Assurance of true and interrupted Scripture.
Scripture might be more easily corrupted then a whole Church cheated into falls
Doctrine. No man can prudently suppose, that God had more care to preserve
Scripture incorrupt* then a Church free from error. All Substantials of Faith
are not in Scripture. A Learned Philosopher by his own reading Scripture cannot
judge what it means in a hundred Passages without an Interpreter. Sectaries
now are in the very same case without an infallible Interpreter. Sectaries in
their Glosses on Scripture do nothing but add, and substract from Gods Word,
When They Oppose the Churches sense of Scripture. Sole Scripture without an
infallible Interpreter, can be no Rule of Faith. Protestants have not one word
of Scripture for their Religion, as it is Protestancy. The Reason of private
men, or of a private spirit cannot interpret Scripture. The new mode of
Protestants misinterpreting Scripture is amply refuted. All our Sectaries
endeavor is to turn Scripture off from the Catholic sense by their own
fancies, and then think the work don. It is one thing to say (and only to say
it) that Scriptures alleged by us prove not what we intend, and another
positively to prove the Doctrine contrary to us to be grounded on Scripture, In
this Sectaries always fail. The new mode of Sectaries interpreting Scripture
destroys Protestant Religion. Here is the sequel of Sectaries. We Catholics
Prove not what we assert, therefore they make the contrary Doctrine an Article of
their new Faith. Faith cannot rely on such Negatives. Of the means left by
Almighty God to interpret Scripture. The Holy Ghost only, speaking by the
Oracle of the Church, Interpret's Scripture infallibly, in those matters which
concern the general belief of all. Protestants, who profess themselves to be
fallible in what ever they teach, are no Instruments assumed by the Holy Ghost
to teach and interpret infallibly Gods Word. No Sectary can judge the Church,
but the Church is to judge all Sectaries.

THE THIRD DISCOURSE.
Of the unreasonable proceeding of Protestants in some Chief matters of
Controversy.
PRotestants, who seemingly hold a Catholic Church before Luther larger then
the Roman Catholic Church, and cannot design it, Proceed unreasonably, and
must falsify that Article of our Creed. I believe the Holy Catholic Church.
Before Luther there were no Christians in the world for a thousand years, at
least, but Roman Catholics, and known Heretics, neither those Catholics
alone (as Protestants say) nor the known Heretics (nor both together)
constituted the true Catholic Church, therefore there was no true Catholic
Church on earth for so vast a time. No abstract Doctrine common to all, who are
named Christians, is sufficient to constitute Catholic Doctrine. Mr.
Stillingfleet is confuted, and his Doctrine showed improbable. Faith in Christ
only, as a Redeemer, is insufficient to Salvation: A more explicit Faith of
other particulars is proved Necessary. If Catholics and Sectaries are right in
the fundamentals of Faith, all the pretended Reformation of Protestants comes
to a slight work about Non* Essentials, which may have made Things wors then
before. It is not the less or more weight of things revealed that makes Faith
less or more valued of, but the Submission we yield to Gods Veracity, which is
one, and of equal Authority in what ever he Reveal's. Though a Distinction were
granted between Fundamentals and not Fundamentals: Yet Protestants cannot so
much as probably sever the Fundamentals from the others by any known Principle.
If there be no Catholic Church owned (at least) infallible in Fundamentals,
all Faith both of Christ and Creed may perish before the world end's. And if
there be such an Infallible Church in Fundamentals, Sectaries ought to design
it, and say, to whom that Spirit is granted, in what subject it resides etc. A
Protestant, who so far Denies Christ's true Church, That he cannot say where it
is, and endeavour's to reform others before he have certainty of his own half
well made Reformation, cannot probably go about to withdraw a prudent Catholic
from his Religion. Some Propositions of Mr. Stillingfleet are examined. His
Discourse of Fundamentals destroy's Protestant Religion. He Speaks of the Being
of a Church and says not precisely how much Doctrine constitutes that Being. He
cannot name any Orthodox Church that ever Excepted against the Articles
believed by the Church of Rome. He makes the Negative Articles of the English
Church not to be Articles of Faith, but only inferior Truths held only in
order to peace and tranquillity. His Church therefore is essentially
Hypocritical, which may believe one thing and must profess an other. Though
Protestants were very Papists in heart, yea, and Anathematized all These
Negative Articles, They may be looked on as Blessed Children of this new
Negative Church, if their Exterior be fairly Protestant-like. He makes his
Church no more an English Church then a Church of Arians, and of all condemned
Heretics. He says the English Church makes no Articles of Faith, but such as
have the Approbation of the whole Christian world and of Rome it self. The
Assertion is Evidently Untrue, For no Orthodox Church, no Heretical Society, no
Consent ^f the whole Christian World Ever taught, That a Doctrine wherein all
Christians agree is sufficient to Salvation. When Sectaries Say. Christ's gave
to his Disciples a Sign only of his Body. This very Doctrine is either an
Article of Their Faith, or one of their Inferior Truths. If the first; They
believe that which never had the approbation of the whole Christian World, much
less of Rome it self. If the second be granted: They have no Divine Faith at
all of the Blessed Sacrament. The Nullity of our Adversaries ground's is
declared, though the Church made new Articles of Faith. If we speak
rigourously, The Church makes no new Articles, but only declares more
Explicitly what was anciently believed* The Fathers call the Church a rich
Treasury wherein the Depositum of Apostolical Doctrine is securely preserved. The
Analogy of Faith is explicated. There was a Platform of Christian Religion
before Scripture was Writ, and the Apostles separated Themselves and Preached
to several Nations. Sectaries who seemingly acquiesce in the Judgment of one
or two Ancient Fathers, most inconsequently reject the Authority of a Learned
General Council that is of greater weight and Estimation. If the Churches
Definitions are therefore to be thought fallible, because men declare them, and
all men are liars; much more are our Sectaries Novelties and Glosses on
Scripture to be valued of as Fallible upon the same ground. These fallible men
tell me my Churches Doctrine is fallible, suppose falsely it were so, it is
altogether as good as this very fallible Proposition is that says It Is
Fallible; and if (which is true) it be infallible, it is much better. No man
that holds His Religion fallible, can probably endeavor to convert an other,
though the contrary Religion Professed by this other be acknowledged to be no
more but fallible. Much less can he persecute Him for not yiedling Assent to a
fallible Religion. All the Storms of persecution raised against Catholics are
not upon any account of want of Faith, but for this sole cause, that we will
not believe one thing and force our Consciences to Profess an other: Which is
to say, we are persecuted because we will not be Hypocrites.

The Unreasonableness of Protestants Schism laid forth, from the VIII. Chap. of
the third Discourse to the XV.
THe Separation of Protestants from the Roman Catholic Church, is as plain and
manifest a sinful Schism, as ever was Decryed Rebellion in a Kingdom, or any
Violation of a Countries Right. The formal Schism of Sectaries, is evident, but
the Causal charged on Catholics, is no more but an unproved Calumny. Proofs
brought to received Principles fail Sectaries, whilst they make the Roman
Church to be the cause of their Formal Schism. The supposed errors charged on
the Roman Catholic Church by Sectaries are not like the first Principles in
nature, Evident ex terminis, and therefore must be proved by a Discourse grounded
on certain Principles. We License Sectaries in their Discourse against us, to
make use of all Imaginable sound Principles, Scripture, Fathers, Tradition, or
what They pleas, and only exclude Their own self-voting from the nature of a
rational Proof and Principle. When a Rebellion is manifest in a Kingdom, the
sole Authority, of them who began it, is insufficient to make it Justifiable*
And the Authority of Sectaries is as forceles to Justify their Evident Schism
against the Church. Whilst Evidence comes not against our Church, it stand's
most firm upon its ancient possessed right. This long Possession proves our
Church Orthodox. Examples Hereof. Mr. Stillingfleets Exceptions against our
pleading Possession, are proved to be weak, forceles, and mere ungrounded
Suppositions. Though the Obligation of proving Evidently lies on our
Adversaries, who are the Aggressors, yet we prove not only a personal
Succession of our Popes and Prelates in forgoing Ages, but also manifest a
Quiet Possession of Truth that descended with these continued Popes and Bishops
from the days of S. Peter to this very Age. No just Exception can be made
against our Tradition, which is Evidently its one Proof, for there cannot be a
clearer. Mr. Stillingfleet supposes that our Right of pleading Truth is a mere
Occupancy. He is to prove this because he is the Accuser. No Antecedent Law has
determined Contrary to what we Challenge by virtue of our Possession. We have
both the Law for us, and ancient Possession, besides; And there is no Reason
when we allege two Proofs, Law and Possession, that we Quite the one, which is
Possession, as Mr. Stillingfleet pretend's we should do, which is against all
rational Discourse of this subject. It is improbable to say, that Protestants
first saw these supposed errors imputed to our Church, when others as
Quick-sighted, more numerours and Learned then They, saw them not for ten whole
Ages before Luther. It is a degree of madness to suppose, that all those worthy
and Learned Professors of the Catholic Faith were either so stupidly blind, as
not to have seen such supposed errors, or so wickedly Hypocritical as to have
wincked at them, after their plain Discovery. It is a Paradox to say, that our
new men saw these too plain and visible errors, when that great Catholic
Church (which Sectaries make more large then the Roman) saw them not, but
permitted Rome to countenance these supposed errors, without check or
reprehension. Of the Impossibility of errors entering the Church after the
first 4. or 5. hundred years. Though Sectaries should convince (which is
impossible) the Roman Catholic Church to be guilty of error, yet they cannot
show that they have set Christian Faith right again on its old Foundations, as
it once stood pure. All Principles fail them in this particular. Fancy only,
and nothing like a rational Proof, uphold's this charge of error against our
Church. Mr Stillingfleets Assertions are refuted. If the Roman Catholic Church
has erred by imposing unreasonable conditions, Sectaries who Profess themselves
fallible in all they say, may have erred more and spoiled all they went about
to mend. Nothing can be more unreasonable, then to make a few Rebellious people
receding from an ancient Church first to accuse it, and then to sit judges in
their own cause, and condemn it. None can probably show, that these late
Reformers of Protestants, who opposed all other Religions, are untainted, or
purely Orthodox. As no men before the Donatists made the Church so strait as
they did: so never Christians before these later Sectaries made it so wide, as
to hold in it all the Heretics in the world. Protestancy, as Protestancy, is
no Christian Religion at all, if the belief of that Doctrine which is common to
all Christians be amply sufficient to Salvation. Protestants may Anathematize
all the Doctrine within the compass of their reformed Religion, and yet be saved.

THE FOVRTH DISCOURSE.
Of the Churches Evidence, and Improbability of Protestant Religion.
PRotestants, as they make not good their own Doctrine, by Proofs grounded on
certain Principles: so they never impugn the Roman Catholic Faith by rational
Arguments. Catholics contrariwise prove their Churches Doctrine by undeniable
Principles. The Grounds of Catholic Religion are briefly laid forth. As it is
an evident Principle, that all those Wife and Learned Doctors who taught
Christians Popery for a thousand years, were neither fools nor perversely blind.
So it is more evident, that God suffered not those millions of Christians,
instructed by these Teachers, to be grossly abused with falls Doctrine, whilst
there was no other Catholic Society in the world ^o unbeguile them. All other
Sectaries, who deserted the Roman Catholic Church erred grossly: and it is
improbable to think, that Protestants only among so many straying Teachers,
were the only privileged people, elected by God to mend (had any thing been
amiss, in a old decayed Church, without mixture of error, or marring more then
they mended. Protestancy is unevidenced, and an improbable Religion, that is,
no Religion, but a fancied opinion. No Doctrine fallibly taught, as Protestancy
is, can be ultimately resolved into Gods infallible Revelation. Scripture alone
without an infallible Interpreter makes no man infallible. A Doctrine which at
its first rise was, and is still opposed by all Christians (excepting the
Sectaries who broach it) is as improbable, as Arianism. A Church essentially
errable, may lo^s all Truth, and consequently all grace, and so become divorced
from Christ. A Doctrine proved improbable by undoubted Principles, cannot be
made credible by rational Arguments, unles Truth be contrary to Truth. Of the
slight way of Sectaries Arguing against Catholic Doctrine. Mr. Stillingfleet,
like his other Brethren, in a Discourse of Purgatory, begins with Ieers, with
Mistakes, and dissembling of Difficulties. He states not the Question rightly
between the Latin and Greeks. The Dispute between the Latins and Greeks is
clearly laid forth by Leo Alatius a Grecian. What passed in the Council of
Florence concerning This Dispute. The Greeks most certainly, both before and
after the Council held, a place of punishment for souls departed, from which
place they are freed by the Prayers of the Living. They also hold that souls
enjoy the beatifical Vision before the day of Judgment. The weakness of our
Adversaries cause is best seen by a Parallel of Proofs for Purgatory and
against it. The Catholic Principles for Purgatory. S. Austins was not the
first that held Purgatory. Mr. Stillingfleet misunderstands two passages in S.
Austin. The Sectary when He Explicates Scripture or Fathers, makes his own
Gloss the surest ground of his Interpretation. When the Catholic explicates a
dubious passage* He relies on a sure Principle distinct from his
Interpretation. Objections are Answered. How the Supplications of the Church
respect mercy and Forgivenes to be showed the just at the Day of Judgment. An
Objection is proposed in behalf of Sectaries, and solved in another Discourse
concerning the Blessed Sacrament. The Grounds of our Catholic Doctrine for the
Real Presence. The contrary Opinion of Sectaries is proved to be mere Fancy.
Sectaries cannot by virtue of any one received Principle remove the Catholic
from the plain and Obvious senfe of Christ's most significant words. The
Testimonies of Fathers are as clear for our Catholic Doctrine, as the words of
the Council of Trent. A Parallel of Proofs for and against the Doctrine of the
Real Presence. The way of Sectaries is, chiefly to loos Themselves in proposing
difficulties against us, without casting a serious thought on sure Principles
that solve them. They find the Mystery of the Blessed Sacrament uneasy to
sense, but reflect not, that They believe two or three other Mysteries fully as
hard, if not more difficile, for Example, a Trinity, the Incarnation, and
Original sin. It is most Evident, what Ever Principle (whether it be Scripture,
Church Authority, or consent of Fathers) that moves to believe these Verities,
that very Principle is as pressing, forceable and urging, yea and often more
express for the Belief of our Sacrament whereat they boggle. What the Sectary is
obliged to prove, if He except against our grounds in this Controversy? We
admit of Christ's plain Words, according to their most obvious sense: we find
them so understood by a number of the most venerable ancient Fathers, as we
understand them, and moreover have a Learned Church that speak's as both
Scripture and Fathers speak. Can Sectaries now exact of us that we leave these
strong Principles, and rely on their word because They will have us do so? It
is impossible, unles They give us in lieu of the se, as plain Scripture, as
plain Testimonies of Fathers, and produce the warrant of some other Church more
ancient and Orthodox then ours is, that once Patronized their Novelty. If they
say, They can explicate our Scripture and ancient Fathers. I have Answered
above. Their explication is worth nothing unles it be grounded on more express
Testimonies that favor their Novelty, then our contrary authorities are for
Catholic Doctrine. If again they reply As we must explicate their Authorities
brought against us, so They can explicate ours alleged against them. I Answer,
if a stop be made here, neither they no^ we yet come to the last Principles.
But here will be the final Decision of all. We appeal to the clear Words of
Scripture, They have Evidently non so express. We appeal to the most manifest
Testimonies of Fathers delivered i^ this Controversy (The Council of Trent
speaks not more clearly) They Oppos^ a few dark Sentences helped on with their
Glosses, contrary to the Fathers sense, a^ is largely proved. Lastly, we appeal
to the Judgment of our Ancient and fa. extended Church, Herein they are forced
to yield, for they have no Church comparable to it that Defends their Novelty.
The Churches Evidence. Why God permits Heresy to be in the World.

A FEW NOTES UPON MR. POOLES APPENDIX, AGAINST CAPTAIN EVERARD.
1. I Say a few for I must be brief, finding very little to stay me in the
Appendix which is not directly solved in the foregoing Treatis. And therefore
wonder not, it I often remit the Reader to the former Discourses as occasion
requires, it being impossible to reply to an Adversary upon this subject of
Infallibility, without touching on what is said already, where the Direct
Answer is given to His objections. I would not indeed have writ thus much
against Mr. Poole, but only to hinder a little vanity in the man, for if no
notice had bin taken of his Appendix, He might perhaps have thought too well of
his work, and judged it so learned a piece that none would Dare to meddle with
it. To gain what time is possible, I pass by all His jeers, his harsher
language, and Calumnies cast on Catholic etc. Those Personal exceptions also
uniustly made against the Converted Captain, and some vulgar Difficulties
solved a hundred times, shall give me no work at present, who will only fall
(and closely) upon that which Mr. Poole (its likely) may think most material,
and to the purpose. And because the best strength He has, lies in the
beginning of the Appendix, I Will examine that most, and make his errors manifest
by sound proofs and Principles. Briefly.

2. The occasion of Mr. Everards Conversion was a Discourse held with a
Catholic Gentleman. Who Asked me (says the Captain) whether I was so
certainly infallibly assured of the Truth of the Christian Religion, that it
was not possible for me, or those that taught me Christianity to be mistaken
therein; and He gave me this reason for his question, that otherwise, as to me,
Christianity could be no more then probably true, And we could not condemn the
Jew or Turk, or Pagan, since they were as well persuaded of their several
ways, as we could be of ours upon a fallible certainty, And for ought we knew
(not having any infallible certainty for our Christianity) some of them might
be in the right, and we in the wrong way, sor it is possible, you may be
mistaken. Thus Mr. Poole Appendix page 8. who slight's the Discourse, as silly,
weak, and ungrounded.

3. I say Contrary. The Discourse is strong, rational, and most convincing. The
ground of my Assertion further declared Disc. 1. c. 1. 2. is thus. A Doctrine
which by virtue of all the Principles it has (or can rely on) cannot but be
fallibly taught by all Teachers now within the bounds of Christianity, is, by
force of its Proposition, and merit of the Doctrine precisely considered) most
certainly fallible, and may be falls. But such a taught Doctrine, which by virtue
of all the Principles it has, (or can rely on) and merit also of the Doctrine,
or force of its Proposition, is fallible and may be falls, is not the certain
Doctrine of Christ, which cannot by the virtue of any Principle it has or merit
of the Doctrine, and force of its proposition, be either fallible or falls, Ergo
such a taught Doctrine is not Christ's certain Doctrine, which neither is, nor can
be fallible or falls. Now further. A Doctrine which is not Christ's certain
Doctrine (because remo(...) from certain Principles) can be no other but the
Doctrine of man's errable judgment or Fancy, And consequently gives as little
Assurance to him that teaches it fallibly, or those that hear it, as that of
the Jews gives to them. Observe my reason, equally Convincing in both cases.
Therefore we say, the Doctrine of a Jew gives If you say the Doctrine of a Jew is
not only fallible, but falls also, you suppose what is to be proved against him.
no Assurance to Him that Teaches, and those who hear it, because it is removed
from all infallible Principles, and relies only on his errable judgment or
Fancy that teaches it, but the Fallible Doctrine of these Sectaries now
mentioned, is also removed from all Infallible Principles (for no man amongst
them can deliver Doctrine infallibly) Therefore it relies only on an errable
judgment or fancy that teaches it, and by good consequence, is none of Christ's
infallible Doctrine. But if it be none of Christ's Doctrine, it gives no more
Assurance to them that Hear it, than the Doctrine af a Jew gives to any of his
Sect, Ergo. Here briefly is my Ground and I would se it Answered.

4. Some perhaps will say, the Doctrine of these Sectaries relies on Gods Word,
and that alone is a sure and infallible Principle. I answer, if we speak of
Sectaries particular Doctrine as reformed, They have not one Article clearly, no
nor so much as probably grounded on Gods express word, for Scripture says no
where that Faith only justifies, that all Churches are fallible, that there is
no Purgatory, no Sacrifice of the Altar, etc. Ergo these Doctrins want certain
Principles. Now if they Reply, Though these particular Doctrins are not express
in Scripture, yet the general Truths of Christianity are, And They rely on
these, not careing for more. I Answer, Though these Verities as revealed be
infallible in themselves, yea and infallible also to the Catholic that admit's
of them as infallible, for the certain Testimony of his Church, yet no man, no
Church, no Oracle of Truth, ever hitherto assured the Protestant infallibly,
that they are infallible (for all these with him are fallible) therefore They
are removed from the nature of being certain Principles in order to his Faith
and Doctrine also, unles He say that the Objective infallibility of Scripture is
evident ex terminis to the very eyes that read the book, which is proved
improbable Disc. 1. c. 12. n. 4. Whereof more presently. I Answer. 2. If the
Objective infallibility of these great Verities be a certain Principle to the
Protestant, it either Derives into his understanding that teaches them a
Subjective infallbility in order to his Doctrine; or leaves him as He was before
liable to mistake and error, if the first be granted; He is Subjectively
infallible when He teaches, and this He will not hear of. Grant the second viz.
That He is liable to mistake and error in his teaching, He may well miss of
the objective Truth, because He only says fallibly what God speaks infallibly,
and consequently his Doctrine ultimatly resolved, says no more but timidly thus
much: Perhaps I declare what God speaks, and it may be not, for my Declaration
is fallible and may be falls, Therefore you Christians who hear me, can believe
nothing infallibly, because my very Teaching is doubtful, And it is against the
nature of a doubt, to convey certainty into any understanding. Se Disc. 1. c.
4. n. 7. 8. Now if you Ask why it is doubtful, though he speak truth as it were
by Chance, I answer the Reason is: Because he has no P^i^ciple which
determinates his teaching to say that Infallibly which God speak's infallibly.
The External Principle of Scripture makes him no more Infallible, than the
worst of Heretics who read it, And all other Principles He works by, are
liable to error. And here briefly you se the difference between the Truth of
an Act, and its Certitude, The first only says in contingent matters a
conformity with the Object; The other, a necessary Determination to Truth by
Principles not liable to error, And Sectaries always want these Principles,
whilst They teach a Doctrine fallibly. If here they take recourse to moral
certainty only and think that sufficient, turn to the fifth Chapter of the first
Discourse and you will se them evidently confuted. It is lost labor to repeat
again what is said in that place.

5. These grounds supposed, you shall se how Mr. Pooles Exceptions against them
comes to nothing. Let us says He P. 9. n. 2. examine a little the strength of
this pretty Proposition viz. That if we be not infallibly assured of the Truth
of Christianity Jews, Turks and Pagans are as well persuaded of their ways,
as we (Christians) of ours. What a mad Assertion (says He) is this, that
nothing is credible, but what is infallibly certain, and that there is no
difference between Probabilities and Improbabilities etc. To this I answer in a
word, (you shall have the Reason hereafter) Nothing in true Christianity is
credible, but what both may, and must be believed by most certain faith, in
other moral matters things are morally credible, though we arrive not to
certainty, but Faith has its exceptions. Mr. Poole goes on. I am not
infallibly certain, that there is such a place as Iamaica (for it is possible
that all Geographers may mistake, and Travelers may lie) Therefore I am as
uncertain that there is a sea passage to China by the North etc. I am not
certain, if I find a Calf in a field, but that it may (as some time it was)
dropped from the Clouds, but will any sober man think that it came not from a
cow? He has other instances to this purpose, And the man (if I mistake not)
would here liken the cettainty of that Truth we have of Christianity, to the
certainty we have of Iamaica and a calf coming from a Cow, and the Doctrine of
Judaism He would have so improbable, as if one should say, the Calf was dropped
from the Clouds. In a word if He dispute with a Jew, He will hear that his
whole Discourse is Petitio principij, and that his Instances of Iamaica and a
calf are nothing to the purpose, because he supposes what should be proved
viz. That the Doctrine of a Jew is so improbable to that Sect, as this
Antagonist makes it, And that the taught Doctrine of Sectaries is so highly
Probable in order to them, as is here supposed. Alas, the Jew will utterly
silence Mr. Poole with this convincing Reason. What ever becomes of my Doctrine,
I tell you, your Protestant taught Doctrine which may be falls, is no better than
mine, because it is not ultimately resolvable into Gods infallible Revelation
which cannot be falls. That it cannot be thus resolved is evident, because a
Doctrine that is fallible and may be falls (though true in it self) as fallible
and liable to falsity, cannot be, as it were, cast or laid on Gods infallible
Veracity, that essentially Disowns and rejects all Doctrine that is fallible, and
may be falls. Therefore, as Fallible, ultimately resolved, it must be brought to
its one home, which is not Gods infallible Revelation, but to mere fancy, or
some other uncertainty. For example: Put the case, that an English Synod
truly Defines: Christ Jesus is God and man, yet so that the Definition by
virtue of all the Principles it has, or its own intrinsic merit, is fallibly
Delivered. One reflects on this Definition and consider's the Truth of it,
which is a conformity with its object, as also the Weakness of it, which is
Fallibility for want of Principles that Determine it to Truth. I Ask now why Do
Sectaries believe Christ to be God and man by this Fallible Definition ('It Is
one of your Acts of Faith is it not?) You must Answer; you Believe so because
God has said it in Scripture. Very good. But I Ask again? Has he said this
Fallibly by a Revelation that is capable of falsity? No must evidently, His
Revelation is infinitely certain, Ergo I say your Definition or Act of Faith,
Qua fallibilis, or as merely fallible, cannot under that Notion of Fallibility,
rest upon an infallible Veracity, for this infallible Veracity has neither
measure nor Proportion with a fallible Assent, nor can a fallible Assent have
any measure or Proportion with an infallible Revelation. Mark therefore well the
Resolution of this whole Assent. I believe Christ to be God and man by a
fallible Act which may be falls, because Gods infallible Revelation which can
neither be fallible or falls, Moves me to believe so, And most justly call it no
Faith at all, for an infallible Revelation Moves none to believe fallibly,
therefore the tendency of this Act, as it is Fallible, Moves forward without a
Divine Motive to rely on, and hitt's not upon the Strength of Gods certain
Revelation, but leaves that, and runn's no man knows whither, or stands without
any motive. You se therefore that Gods Revelation which is infallible cannot
support a fallible Assent, and consequently the very best Acts of our Sectaries
Belief are no Faith, whereof more Disc. 1. Chap. 5. and 6. I say the very best
Acts. For you may distinguish two sorts of them in Sectaries. The first tend to
their own particular Novelties, and these are both falls and Fallible. The other
Acts adhere to the general Truths of Christianity, And all these though
conformable to their objects, are yet subjectively fallible, and consequently
have not the strength of any firm or supernatural Principle to uphold them, as
you may se in places now cited.

6. But we have not yet don with Mr. Poole, there are more exceptions against
Him. Mark his words. If says He, we be not infallibly assured of the Truth of
Christianity, Ie^es and Turks are as well persuaded of their ways, as we are
of ours, And then Ask's what a mad Assertion is this, that makes no difference
between Probabilities and Improbabilities. Now here his Instances follow of
Iamaica and a Calf, and I think He would say, That the Truth of Christianity is
probable, and so highly Probable, as that there is a Iamaica, And that Judaism
is so improbable as that a Calfe found in a field, should be thought to be
dropped from the Clouds.

7. In the first place, we are to explicate more fully what M. Poole huddles up
in these general Terms. The Truth of Christianity. Three Things therefore may be
here reflected on, which essentially constitute Christian Religion. The first
is the Object of it, which is Gods infallible Revelation. The second is the
matter believed by virtue of this infallible Revelation. The third is a firm
act of Faith, that tends into the Revelation and the matter Revealed, upon that
Devine motive Infallibly Proposed, And this firm Assent of Faith, intrinsecally
Denominates all good Christians Faithful Believers. I say infallibly Proposed:
For if a Revelation lie as it sometime does dark in Holy Scripture, a Proponent
is necessary, that brings it to more light, And as I noted Disc. 1. C. 4.
According to the measure or degres of certitude which the Proponent gives to an
obscure Revelation, An Assent in the Hearer follows and no stronger. If He
only say probably God speaks thus, The assent can be no more but probable, if
with truth he say certainly, it is certain. These things supposed be pleased to
reflect once more on Mr. Pooles words. What a mad Assertion is This? That
nothing is Credible (He means concerning the Truth of Christianity) but what is
infallibly certain, and that there is no difference between Probabilities, and
Improbabilities. He would say, it is madness to judge so, and Wisdom to make the
Truth of Christianity highly Probable, and Judaism improbable.

8. Now I say. Nothing that essentially Constitutes the truth of Christianity
is less then certain, Nothing in it can be so meanly thought of, as to be
called only probable. And first if we speak of the Material Objects believed,
These Solely and Objectively considered (may we use proper Terms) are neither
Probable nor improbable, for there is no Probability in Objects, every thing
being what it is in its self, independent of my Probable or Improbable
Assertion. No man when He see's the sun so darkly through a Cloud, that he
cannot say whether it be the sun or no, yet thinks it is, Call's it a Probable
sun, the Probability is in his act that makes a judgment of it, and not in the
object. Again, if we speak of Gods Revelation that Assures these Material
Objects to be as they are spoken, That very Revelation because it proceeds from
an Infinite intellectual power, is properly not only infallible, but infinitely
more infallible then all the words of men and Angels are, put together. And
here is no place for mere probability only, though we think of the greatest
Imaginable. He therefore that Parifies the moral Certainty one has of Jamaica,
with the more then Metaphysical certainty of Gods Revelation, Does not only
hideoufly err, but wrongs God and his eternal verity. 3. If we speak of the
internal Assent of Faith, which Denominates us true Christian Believers, and
tend's into Gods infallible Revelation upon the perfection of its
infallibility, as also into the Material Object infallibly revealed, This very
Act goes far beyond the strongest probability, and is more certain then that
judgment is which men have of Iamaica. The Reason is. That which uphold's this
act of Faith (to say nothing here of other principles which steadfastly fix it
on Truth) is an infinite Verity, an Infinite Objective Certitude, Contrariwise,
that which upholds an Assent given to the Being of Iamaica, is only moral
Certitude and may be falls, For the Act ultimately resolved comes to no more but
this. Men say so: Those are living that have feen the place, letters are
conveyed thither etc. But all these proofs, though most morally certain,
equalize not the Infallibility of an Assent that relies on an Infinite verity,
that can neither deceive nor be deceived.

9. Perhaps you will say: Though this Veracity of God be infinitely infallible
in it self, yet one may rely on it with an Act only Morally certain, and you
require no more for Faith. I grant the case is possible, but withal say such
an Act is no Faith (as is largely proved Disc. 1. c. 5. and 6. because it is
not ultimately resolvable into Gods infallible veracity as the last Motive to
rest on, but into some other inferior Motive extrinsick, and Distinct from
Gods Revelation. Put the case, that three or four Learned Heathen Philosophers
of good repute, Assure one of their sect upon their Credit and humane
Authority, They cannot but judge, all things considered, that God has revealed
the Incarnation of the Divine word in Holy Scripture. Admit also that the
Hearer, because he esteems them knowing, upright, and sincere, yields his
assent to that Revelation merely for their Authority: The Formal Object or
Motive of his Assent is not (if the supposition stand) Divine Revelation, for
this is only yet the Material Object Believed upon humane Authority,
consequently it cannot be an Act of Faith, For Faith as Faith, precisely rest's
always on Gods Revelation as the last and ultimate Motive, without the mixture
of any other. See Disc. 1. c. 5. n. 5. 6. as also Chap. 6. Now if you desire to
know more concerning the certainty of him that Proposes the Object of Faith
darkly revealed in Holy Scripture, read the 4. Chap. of the first Discourse.

10. By what is said hitherto, you se (Good Mr. Poole) that true Christian
Religion must either signify the Objective Infallibility of Gods Revelation, or
the Assent of Faith whereby we Captivate our understanding, and submit to an
Infallible Veracity, both the one and other go far beyond the mean measure of
mere Probabilities, or the highest moral certainty. Therefore your Instances of
Iamaica and a Calf are here useles and insignificant. I say True Christian
Religion, or to speak in your words, The Truth of Christianity, For if by the
essential Truth of Christianity, you will understand the prudent Motives or
Inducements that precede Faith, and show us where True Christianity is
professed, and call these the Essentials of Christian Religion; know first you
have none of them, as is proved Disc. 1. C. 8. 9. and 10. Know secondly, that
these Motives previously pondered before we believe, though most requisite to
belief, are not the Essentials of Faith (whether you take Faith obiectively For
the matter believed or subiectively for the Act of Belief) But objects of
Science, as you may read in Chapters now Quoted: For Faith, which essentially
constitutes Religion, follows in every good Christian after the Consideration
of these Motives, and sub Notione fidei, or as Divine Faith, ultimately relies
not on them.

11. Upon these Grounds all comes to nothing that you have P. 10. and 11. where
you say: If besides the Infallibility of the Thing, there be required Certitudo
subjecti the Infallibility of the person, you will bring this fox out of his
hole by a notable Dilemma. A word only in passing. Pray you, Sir, what is here
understood by the Infallibility of the Thing? You either mean Gods certain
Revelation and this certainly most infallibly, is not to be called a Thing but
ought to be spoken of with greater Reverence, or you mean (and your context
bears no other sense) the material Objects of our Christian belief, now these
solely considered can no more properly be called fallible or infallible, then
probable and improbable. No man says that a stone which he sees in the high
way, is either fallible or infallible, probable or improbable. The Reason is,
Because these Terms, certain, fallible, infallible, probable, improbable, etc.
note ever the tendency of vital Acts proceeding from an intellectual power, And
therefore most improperly belong to objects, neither vital, nor intellectual.
Thus much only by the Bye. Now to your foxing it and fearful Dilemma. Either
(say you) a subjective certainty or infallibility of Belief, (mark your own
words) of the Truth of Christianity is necessary for particular Christians, or
it is not. If it be not necessary, then Papists too vainly boast of it, and
must Confess probable evidence sufficient for particular Christians, and
infallibility necessary only for the Pope and Council: if a subjective
infallibility be necessary for particular Christians, then every Papist in
England has a Pope in his belly, etc. Here is the substance of your Dilemma,
and it is a strange piece of confused Stuff. Observe well. You begin with the
Subjective infallibility of the Belief of the Truth of Christianity, and then
run further then to Iamaica, to talk of that which you call the probable
evidence of it. Good Sir, the evidence of credibility belonging to true
Christianity, is totally distinct from the infallible belief of it. That; if we
make a right Analysis, precedes Faith, Faith follows, and is far more certain
then the judgment is, all have of the Evidence of Credibility. See Disc. 1. c.
7. 8. 9. 10. Briefly I say first. The belief of true Christianity is
subjectively infallible in every faithful Christian, who therefore may have as
sound Faith as the Pope himself, or any that sitt's in Council. The Reason,
already given and further declared Disc. 1. c. 1. is thus. God an infinite
Verity speaks to us for this end that we believe him, He speaks infallibly;
Faithful Christians believe both what He speaks, and (answerably to their
power) as He speaks, Ergo they believe infallibly. Again. A fallible Belief
cannot be ultimately resolved into an infallible Revelation, none therefore that
holds himself obliged to Believe an infinite Verity owned as infallible, can
proceed doubtfully upon that Motive, for he knows, An infinite Verity speak's
not doubtfully, or opinatively. I say secondly. Infallible Faith of the Truth
of Christianity is miscalled, if you style it probable Evidence: it is not
probable, but certain, because it relies on an infinite Verity. It is not
Evident, but obscure, because, Argumentum non apparentium. Thus much is
undoubtedly true, if we speak of the Assent of Divine Faith. Now, if when you
talk of particular Papists having a Pope in their belly, you grossly Imagine
that every one can Define, or Declare infallibly Christian Doctrine in order to
the whole Church, as the Pope and Council Do, you fight with shadows, no
Papist hold's such fooleries. And by this you se the last strength of your weak
Dilemma brought to nothing.

12. You are also as unlucky in your next Assault, where you Challenge the whole
Club of Jesuits to Answer solidly. By the Grace of God you shall have an Answer
that will make you silent hereafter. Thus you go on. Were the Popish opinion of
the Churches infallibility true in it self certitudine Objecti; so also is the
Protestants opinion concerning the infallibility of Scripture true in it self,
and certitudine Objecti, as the must desperate Papists Grant. For they say the
Scripture is Divine, true, and certain in it self, but not quoad nos, therefore
hitherto there is no difference. It is not worth the while to insist here upon
a Catacresis or abuse of words, or to say how incompossible these two terms
combined together are in the Papist. Opinion, and certainty of the Object: For
Catholics in Matters of Faith content not themselves with a bare opinion,
where there is certitudo Objecti or Gods certain Revelation duly proposed,
that exacts from them no Opinion, but a sure Assent of Faith, And so we say
that the infallibility of the Church is a matter believed by us, because God
has revealed it, consequently its no Opinion. But Sir, this is not what I aim
at. We will hear you say all, And come to the strength of the Difficulty. If
say you, it be a sufficient foundation for a Romanist, that He has such
probable evidence of this Doctrine of the Churches infallibility, why should it
not be as sufficient a fundation for a Protestant, that He has such (nay
infinitely more) probable evidence of the Doctrine of the Scriptures
infallibility? Since the evidence of the later is granted by the Papists
Themselves, and the evidence of the former (that is of the Churches
infallibility) not only denied and Disputed down by Protestants, but also
questioned by their own Authors. You End. This Question I challenge the whole
Club of Jesuits solidly to Answer. I Answer very catagorically without Clubbing
it, and say first. The Catholic has more then mere probable Evidence of the
Doctrine of the Curches infallibility. The Sectary by his own Principles, has
not so much as probable evidence of the Doctrine of the Scriptures
infallibility, Independent of the Church. I say 2. Though the Sectary had
probable evidence of the Scriptures infallibility, yet it is a useles book in
his hands.

13. The first Assertion contain's two parts I prove the first. The Catholic
has a Church evidenced by Unparalleled Miracles, by conversions of whole
Nations, from Infidelity, to our Christian Verities. He has a Church
manifested by all those other Glorious Cognisances of Truth, which the
Apostolical Church showed to the world (not one is excepted) as is proved Disc.
1. c. 9. 10. If therefore that Apostolical Church, was prudently believed to
deliver infallible Doctrine (and this before Scripture was writ) by the
inducements of those illustrious marks and Characters of Truth wherewith it was
adorned, our Roman Catholic Church, that undeniably evidenceth the very like
signs, is proved upon that Reason to deliver also infallible Doctrine: For where
there are the same effects and signs of infallible Doctrine, the Infallibility
of it is, as it were, witnessed by them, otherwise such Motives would be both
inefficacious and useles, whilst God shows them for this end, that all may
give Assent to his infallible Verities, taught by that Oracle where they
evidently appear, and I believe led on by the inducements, yet must forsooth,
only believe uncertainties, or fallible Doctrine that may be falls.

14. The Doctrine therefore of the Roman Catholic Church is now as well made
immediately Credible by virtue of these Motives, as the Apostolical Church was,
before the writing of Scripture. And These Motives in order to the Learned, and
those who prudently seek for Truth, first and most immediately Demonstrate the
Church, or Those persons that teach infallible Doctrine, by whose Authority we
learn, what and where infallible Truth is professed. That these marks and signs
immediately belong to the Persons that Teach infallibly and not to Scripture, is
undoubted. Mark 16. 17. These signs shall follow, in my name they shall cast
out Devils etc. Again not only the Doctor of the Gentiles. 2. Cor. 12. 12.
call's the wonders He wrought, Signa Apostolatus sui, the marks of his
Apostleship, but a greater Doctor also, Truth it self John 10. 25. (when the
Jews would not believe him) remitted them to the evidence of his Miracles. The
works which I do in the name of my Father, these give Testimony of me. And
verse. 38. If you will not believe me, believe the works. Works therefore and
wonders Annexed to the persons, or Church that Teaches, Forceably induce
prudent men to believe the certain Doctrine Delivered by them, who show such
wonders. In a word, here is all I would say. No Religion is evidently true or
falls ex Terminis, upon the bare Affirmation of Him that says its true or falls,
Therefore it must have the Evidence of its Credibility manifested, before
Christians admit of the Doctrine. But this Evidence is first manifested by such
signs and Miracles, as Christ and the Apostles personally showed to the world,
and by virtue of them induced Aliens from Truth, to believe it as Infallible
Doctrine, Therefore whatever Church shows such Miracles, the like signs and
wonders as Christ and his Apostles manifested, plead's as well for the
Infallibility of its Doctrine witnessed by such Miracles, as the Apostolical
Church Did. But the Roman Catholic Church only and no other, shows these
Miracles, Efficacy of Doctrine, Universality, strange Conversions and other most
Convincing Motives. Therefore if the first Christians induced by such evidence,
firmly believed the Apostolical Doctrine to be infallible (which was not ex
terminis evidently infallible) we may now upon the very like Inducements (not
for the inducements as the last Motive) Believe as securely upon our Churches
Authority the Doctrine taught by it, to be infallible. Deny this Evidence of our
Motives, and we force Sectaries to prove the Denial by as sure Principle, as we
Assert them: Grant them and our Argument is concluding. And here you have more
them a mere probable Evidence of the Churches infallibility.

15. An Other Argument for it, besides those Scriptures cited Disc. 2. C. 6. n.
^. is not only probable, but unanswerably Convincing, hinted at Disc. 1. C. 2.
n. 9. Christ as is confessedly granted both by Catholics and Sectaries, sent
Pastors up and down the world to teach Christian Doctrine, But he never sent any
to teach fallible Doctrine which may be falls, Ergo He sent them to teach his own
infallible Doctrine, and Infallibly. I prove it. He sent none to teach any other
Doctrine then that, which may be ultimately resolved into Gods infallible
veracity revealing Truth: But that which is ultimatly resolved into an
infallible Veracity, can neither be falls nor fallible Doctrine, because God as I
now said, ownes no fallible Doctrine that may be falls, Therefore, this Resolution
of an Act tending fallibly into Devine Revelation, is rather Nonsense then
Faith. I infallible believe Christ to be God and Man, because Gods infallible
Revelation will have me to believe so: For No Infallible Motive applied to my
understanding, as it is infallible, can draw from me a fallible belief of a
Doctrine that is merely fallible. But All Sectaries, whether Arians, Donatists,
or Protestants Teach only fallible Doctrine, and fallibly Ex part Docentis,
Ergo they Teach not that Doctrine which Christ sent his Ministers to teach, or
that can be resolved into Gods infallible Veracity revealing Truth. Yet most
certainly, some Christian Pastors by virtue of Christ Mission, teach his
infallible Doctrine Infallibly, and these are the Pastors of the Roman Catholic
Church, who only lay claim to Infallibility and prove it also, as the Apostles
Did by the Antecedent Evidence of those Motives, which the Church shows and
manifests to the world, as is now Declared. I challenge Mr. Poole, directly
and Catagorically to Answer this my Reason (without talking any more of Clubbs,
or running into Generalities) and in as few clear words as I Deliver it.

16. Now to prove the other part of my Assertion. Viz. Sectaries by their own
principles have not so much as a probable Evidence of the Scriptures
infallibility, without Church Authority? Here is my principle. The
infallibility of Scripture which contains many Difficulties, tell's strange
stories, and seemingly often speak's contradictions, is not by it self or own
light, so evidently Credible to the Eyes of a Reader, as the infallibility of
the Apostolical Church was evident by Miracles, and Conversions to the
Primitive Christians, who believed it infallibly: At least S. Austin judged it
not so Evidently Credible, when He says, He would not believe the Gospel unles
the Authority of the Church moved him to believe it. The Infallibility of it
therefore, must by proved by some good Principles extrinsick to Scripture, but
the Sectary has not one sound Principle, Distinct from the Tradition and
Authority of the Church whereby this Infallibility is proved, Therefore Scripture
in order to Him is not so Infallible, as the Church is to the Catholic. If any
Deny my principle, and make the Scriptures Infallibility Discernable by its own
light, by the Majesty, of the style, purity of its Doctrine, or efficacy it
works in the minds of those who read it etc. I think there are evident
Demonstrations against the Paradox: For as I noted Disc. 1. C. 2. 12. n. 4. Two
things are to be considered in Scripture, first, the exterior Syntax or
Connection of the words, and so much precisely is not the Scriptures total
Infallibility, which says more besides that exterior language, and
necessarily implies A Divine Act a Volition, or Decree of God, whereby the
Hagiographers that writ the words, were infallibly assisted, and determined to
record truth, and nothing but Truth, Now this Divine Volition or Decree because
it is essential to God, and therefore no other but God Himself, can be no Object
of our senses, when we hear or read Scripture: Consequently it is to be
Discovered by a Discourse grounded on Principles, distinct from the outward
letter of Scripture, whereby we may come to a sure Evidence of its
Infallibility, not at all yet within the reach of our senses, And this no
Sectary can do, as I shall presently make Evident.

17. I say Therefore, if the Motives now alleged for the Churches Infallibility,
as Conversions, Miracles Universality etc. induce not immediately to believe
that Church they demonstrate to be Infallible, much less can the exterior
words or sintax of Scripture, be a fit Medium to Convince any of its
Infallibility. And to prove this, besides what is often noted in the Treatise,
Chiefly Disc. 1. C. 8. n. 7. Ill here only Propose two Questions, The first:
Whether if St. John, who was infallibly Assisted, had not recorded that short
sentence in His Gospel: The Word is made flesh, but some other not infallibly
Assisted by the Spirit of God, had written the very same Verity, as it were by
Chance: My Question I say is, whether the Sectary that now reads this sentence
in S. John Gospel, can more Discover an Infallibility in it by force of the
outward words, then if they had been Casually written by one without Infallible
Assistance? I think He will not dare to say yes, or if He Do, I Will urge Him to
prove it by Principles, when the outward words are the Very same in both Cases,
and in like manner clear to all that read them. My second Demand may yet
perhaps better evidence what I aim at, and is thus. Suppose that our Sectaries
should put the book of Eclesiastes, which they hold Canonical, into the hands
of twelve learned Gentile Philosophers, and with it the book of Wisdom or
Eclesiasticus also, not held Canonical by them: Suppose again, They desire
these learned and disinterressed men, seriously to read these three books, and
after the reading Sincerely to tell them, which of them has Gods Spirit in it,
or contains his infallible Verities, For, this may be easily gathered by the
very natural evidence of what they read, by the Majesty of the style, Efficacy
of speaking which appears Clearly enough in the outward letter. Thus much don,
separate these Philosophers, by four and four, into three Companies, put them
into three different cells, much after that manner, as some say, the sevently
Interpreters were separated. Let them with all sincerity read, examine, and
peruse these Books, and if when the work is ended, they unanimously accord,
that a greater Divinity, a stronger infallibility appears in the song of
Solomon, then in the other two books, we will say something is proved, and hold
it as strange a Miracle, as that which S. Austin recounts of the 70.
Interpreters. Now if Any tell us, this light of Scripture, though sufficient in
it self, is not evident to every one that looks on it, because the blindness or
perverseness of men's minds may keep them from the Discovery of it: The Reply has
no place here, for we suppose first, these Philosophers to be disinterressed,
learned, upright and sincere, as well in their reading, as in the judgment
they give of it, And secondly we will suppose, that all those are not blind
whom Sectaries make blind, nor only those quick sighted (I mean themselves)
whom they will have so.

18. To these Questions I add one more, it may pass for an Argument Ad hominem
against Sectaries, who hold all the Definitions of our Church, even when they
are true, to be yet fallible. I Ask, whether these Quick sighted men are able
to Discern the Fallibility of these Definitions, by force of the outward words
thereof only, as they Discover the infallibility of Scripture by the Majesty of
the style, and outward Sintax. And mack where the force of the Difficulty lies.
As Infallibility necessarily implies Divine Assistance in order to the Truths
Delivered in holy Scripture, so the supposed Fallibility of the Churches
Definitions, implies a want of that Assistance in order to those Definitions. I
Ask therefore, whether as the first is Discernable and visible enough to their
Eyes, by the very context of the outward letter, They will consequently grant,
that the other also is as clearly visible, and Discernable by the very words of
the Definition? If They Answer, yes, First they need not hereafter to impugn
the Churches Definitions by any other Medium but this, that they are without
further proof by themselves evidently fallible: So much is said by them, and it
proof enough. 2. They may as well say, They know when a man tell's a lie, and
this by force of his very speaking, as that they know the supposed Fallibility
of the Churches Definitions by her speaking: For, if their eyes can Discern the
want of Divine Assistance in the one case (which really is not wanting) they
may more easily Discern the want of Truth in the other (which really is
wanting.) And if this be not a Paradox, there was never any in the world. Now
contrariwise, if they cannot Discover the Churches supposed Fallibility in her
Definitions merely by her Exterior words, because that is a thing invisible, I
would gladly learn how They come to know the Infallibility of Scripture by the
words Thereof, for that is as much (if not more) invisible, and as far removed
from our eyes and senses.

19. Some, who pitifully suppose, Scriptures to be proved Divine and
Infallible by the very light which is in them Object first. When we see the
sun, and the vast extent of the light it has, we may well infer it comes from
that luminous body, And may we not (say These) proportionably infer, from the
clearnes, Greatness, Majesty, and Coherency of those Truths revealed in
Scripture, that they must certainly come from none but God? Answ. What will not
men say at last, who dare Propose such evident improbabilities? Why, the whole
world agrees in this that the light comes from the sun, for it is evident to
our senses, but do all unanimously agree about the very Canon of Scripture, or
the clearnes of those books all admit of, which are evidently obscure in a
hundred passages, and so seemingly incoherent in many other places, that it is
mighty Difficile to reconcile them? Again. What more Greatness or exterior
Majesty, can any Discover in Salomons Proverbs, then in the books of Wisdom and
Ecclesiasticus, or in those two pious Hymns Te Deum, and Gloria in Excelsis?
such arguments therefore are not only slight, but improbable.

20. They Object 2. The works of Creation Evidence Gods Wisdom Power, and
Greatness. Ergo God can give as great evidence of a Revelation. Answ. I grant He
can do so, But What then? Does it follow that He has don it de facto by the
words internal to Scripture (which is here only to the purpose?) without the
light of orher Motives, as Miracles, Conversions and the like, which as I now
said, immediately manifest the Church, and not the book of Scripture.

21. They object 3. No other way is conceivable, that it should be evident that
a Doctrine comes from God (and consequently is infallible) but that it contains
things highly suitable to the Divine nature, things above the finding out of
human reason, things only tending to Advance Holiness and Goodness in the world,
And this Doctrine to be Delivered by persons, who wrought Vnparrallel'd
Miracles. And They ask, whether all these be not in the most evident manner
Imaginable contained in the Doctrine of Christianity and in the books of
Scripture? I Answer first: The Opponent is far from Conceiving any thing like a
probability in this Objection. For, if it be evident that a Doctrine comes from
God, and therefore is infallible, because it contains Things suitable to the
Devine Nature, the very Gentiles without other Motives should as well see this
Evidence, as we se the light of the Sun. Now if you say its an Evidence, but
not perceptible by all you runn into Darkness, Destroy the Nature of Evidence,
and make it now evident now unevident, when, and to whom you please. If again
you say its an Evidence sufficient to breed Faith, you beg the Question and
speak improbably for nothing can beget Faith but what is owned for Gods
infallible Word upon prudent Motives, and the Testimony of some Infallible
Oracle. To confirm what is here said, I Ask whether if Christ and his Apostles
had appeared in the World, and only preached the high Mysteries of our Faith as
a Trinity, the Incarnation, Original sin, with other Doctrins now registered in
Scripture that advance Holiness of life etc. But all this without doing one
Miracle, Converting one Nation, or showing any the least wonder, that they were
sent from God, to teach as they did. My Question I say is, whether upon this
supposition, either Jews or Gentiles would then have believed them or could
have discovered an Infallibility in a Doctrine thus Orally Delivered, or writ in
patchment merely by the force of the words. If Sectaries say Yes, They do not
only speak a Paradox which no Christian ever uttered, and make our Saviors
Argument Against the Jews ( Si opera etc. If I had not don works amongst them
which no other did they would not have sin) null and inefficacious, but
moreover are convinced by this clear proof. Suppose, (And it implies no
impossibility) that God, who has yet within the vast reach of His Omnisciency,
a Thousand other Verities unknown to the world, and not at all revealed in
Scripture, or Delivered by the Church (for certainly He has not revealed all
He knows) should now both inspire, and Assist twelve poor Fishermen, to
preach infallibly these Truth never heard of before, yet so, that they Teach
only, but do no Miracles, work no Conversions, show no wonders, and give no
other Testimony of their being sent from God, but by their own bare word. Would
any men in the world, think ye, prudently believe them merely for their
preaching, or would Sectaries as well Discover the Infallibility of these
Verities taught by their preaching, as they now Discern the Scriptures
infallibility? No, the whole world would prudently set light by such Doctrine,
though in it self, both Divine and Infallible for want of prudent Motives to
make it evidently Credible, and so all would have don, had the Apostles only
preached the Divine Truths already registered in Scripture, without further
Motives. Therefore more is required to prove that a Doctrine comes from God, then
thus much only, that it contains in it self things highly suitable to the
Divine nature, things above the finding out of humane reason, and conduceing to
piety. I say in it self for if we go to a strict Analysis of the Scriptures
Verities, we are not to suppose, as the Opponent does, but to prove, that all
these Verities are suitable to the Divine nature, which both Jews and Gentiles
Do Deny, And therefore must be further proved.

22. Now if on the other side They grant, and most truly, that none would have
Discovered any Infallibility in Apostolical Doctrine without further evidence of
Miracles, of signs, and wonders, we have our Intent: For it follows
inevitably, that Scripture cannot be Discovered to be Divine by it self, nor
Infallble, by virtue of any light contained in the words, or Sintax thereof. It
follows 2. that Mr. Stillingfleet is more then a little out, in his seventh
Interrogatory part. 1. Chap. 7. p. 230. fine, where He Ask's whether it be not
the highest Disparagement of this Divine Doctrine to make it stand in need of an
Infallible Testimony of any, that call themselves the Catholic Church? Good
Sir reflect. These Motives of Credibility manifested by Christ, and his
Apostles, their Miracles, Conversions, Sanctity etc. taken purely as Motives
previous to the Faith, of those who believed, were either fallible or
Infallible (take whether side you will:) If Infallible; you evidently see that
most certain Doctrine stood (without Disparagement) so far in need of those
Inducements, that it would never have been believed without them (as is already
proved) though most infallible in it self. If you hold those previous
Inducements to be only Fallible, you must yet Grant, that the belief of that
Apostolical Doctrine stood still in need of them without any Disparagement.
Therefore much less does the Testimony of an Infallible Church Evidenced by the
like Motives, Disparage it. I say the Testimony of the Church Evidenced by
clear Motives: For as the learned Snares Observes 3. Par. Tom. 2. Disp. 31.
Sect. 2. n. Dico^primo. The very Miracles of Christ precisely and solely
considered, (or separated from all other certain Principles) would not have
proved Him to be the eternal Son of God, because God might have wrought
Miracles by one that was purely Man, and not Omnipotent, and He did so de
facto, by his Disciples, as He for told them, John 14. 12. Majora horum
facient, that they should do greater wonders. Therefore other Principles (and
none could be more strong then Christ's own Testimony) besides His Miracles,
were necessary to beget certain Faith of his Godhead in Believers: And so we
say, The Testimony of the Church, Evidenced by signs and wonders, is also
necessary to beget a full Assurance of the Scriptures Infallibility, without it
we have no Divine certainty of Gods Word.

23. Now I return a second Answer to the Objection, and say: A person that is
not infallible can speak of things suitable to the Divine Nature, and above the
reach of humane reason, of virtue and Godliness etc. For not only the book of
Herman, or Hermes Called the Pastor, highly valued of by some Ancient Fathers,
but other writings also, though untruely ascribed to the Apostles, often speak
Divinely; yet never were admitted by the Church as Canonical, or Gods
Infallible word. Nay more. Some parts of the Gospel, and the Epistles of S.
James and S. Jude also, were not for a time received as Canonical by the
Ancient Church, though they spak then as Divinely, and were as Insallibly Gods
word, as they are now, the Ancient Church, that had eyes as good as Sectaries
red them, yet Discovered no Infallibility or Divinity in them upon this
account, that they spak of things suitable to the Divine nature. And who sees
not, but that the books of Wisdom and Eclesiasticus, contain as high Doctrine,
as Divine Precepts, as are in Salomons Proverbs, or Eclesiastes, yet the later
are Divine with Sectaries, and the former not? And here I would willingly
learn, whether the first Protestants that admitted of the later, and rejected
the Other as Apocryphal, did so, because they smel't, as it were, a Divinity in
those they received by the very reading, and not in the former? I am sure, the
more learned Protestants give other Reasons. For these grounds therefore I say,
the Argument above is so unreasonable, that I wonder men of judgment Ventured
to propose it. Now if they believe the Scripture to be Infallible, because of
the Miracles and other wonders, internal to the book, wrought in confirmation
of its Doctrine. Make a right Analysis, and Ask, why they believe these Miracles
to be Infallible Scripture, and follow them closely till they come to a
Propositio Quiescens, or an undoubted Principle? And you will find the very Reason
returned you, to be the thing in Question: Although we granted (which is not
true) that Scripture it self said, all things contained in the book are
infallibly Gods Word, For it would be demanded a new, How They know, that very
Assertion to be Scripture.

24. For these Reasons some Sectaries will say, The Scriptures infallibility is
to be proved by Discourse, not grounded on the mere light, or Majesty thereof,
but by probable Principles extrinsick to it. And here is one Argument. We know
by humane Authority Morally certain, that Scripture was writ by holy men,
Prophets, Evangelists, and Apostles. I answer, we know not so much of all the
books in Scripture, without the Churches Testimony. For it is doubtful who writ
the books of Iosue and Judges, and it is still in Controversy, whether Solomon
writ the Proverbs, and therefore, some, not only Catholics but Sectaries also,
are of opinion, that if we rely on humane and historical Authority only, we
have greater and more particular Assurance, that S. Thomas, for example, writ
his sum of Divinity then we have Assurance of the particular Authors, of no
few books in Holy Scripture. Again, though we had this certainty grounded on
History, yet no man among Sectaries (who say all Churches erred before Luther)
can tell us, upon moral certainty, whether the first Authentic Originals, were
afterward Corrupted or no, by Ancient Heretics, and the supposed erring Church
of Rome. Se more of this subject Disc. 2. C. 2. n. 7. 8. Others again may
Argue, from the Miracles wrought by Scripture immediately, And one was, as
Baronius recounts, that this sacred book in Diocletians time being cast into
the fire, the flames were forthwith extinguished. I Answer first, both this and
other Miracles, were only wrought in the true Church, and at most prove (which
is to be noted) that the book is true, pious, and holy, but is far from
Convincing that (we now only inquire after) which is its infallibility. For,
God might have don the like Miracle for a true Christian Catechism, Had
Diocletian, who desired to raze out all memory of Christianity, cast that into
the Fire also. Others argue from the Accomplishment of Prophesies, which proves
little, without the Testimony of the Church. First because the very Prophesies,
and the fulfilling of them, must be proved to be Divine Scripture, and this
cannot be don, abstracting from Church Authority. 2. These two things are to be
distinguished: A power to Prophesy, and to write, as Hagiographers Did,
Canonical books. One may prophesy, who only hears from a Prophet what was told
him, upon the Prophets own Authority, but none can write infallibly Canonical
books of Scripture, but such as have immediately the Assistance of the Holy
Ghost to direct him. In a word, here is the last and most true Resolution of
all these Difficulties. Unles Sectaries rely on our Churches Testimony for the
Infallibility of Scripture, they are evidently beaten out of all likelihood of
other Principles, whereby to prove it is infallible. Yet this very Principle of
the Church in order to them, does little or nothing, for reasons clearly
alleged Disc. 2. C. 2. n. 6. 7. It is needles to repeat them in this place.

25. And it is as needles to prove my second Assertion above n. 12. Which is.
Though Sectaries had Probable Evidence of the Scriptures infallibility in
general, yet that does them no service, because it is a useles book in their
hands. This Proposition is so Copiously proved, in the second Discourse C. 1.
and 2. Where much is said of Sectaries endless dissentions, concerning the sense
of Scripture (though admitted of as Divine) that no Unorthodox man shall acquit
Himself of the Difficulties, there proposed. All I Will do now (Though it has
not been my Custom to tire the Reader, with long Authorities of Ancient
Fathers) is to mind him of one only Tertullians Testimony, in his book de
Praescriptionibus adversus Haereticos cap. 19. His words are. Ergo non ad
Scripturas provocandum est: nec in his constituendum certamen, in quibus aut
nulla, aut incerta victoria est. (Rigaltius read's, par incertae, aut parum
certa) Nam etsi non evaderet collatio Scripturarum, ut utramque partem
sisteret, ordo rerum desiderabat illud prius proponi quod nunc solum
disputandum est, quibus competat fides ipsa cujus sint Scripturae, a quo, and
per quos, and quando, and quibus, sit Disciplina, qua fiunt Christiani. Vbi
enim apparuerit esse veritatem disciplinae, and fidei Christianae, illic erit
veritas Scripturarum, and expositionum and omnium traditionum Christianorum.
The sense of this whole sentence is this. We are not therefore to appeal to
Scriptures, nor are our debates to be determined here, wherein there is no
victory, or a very uncertain one. For although there were no Collation, or
comparing of places together, that might stay the two Advers parts, yet the
order of things requires this to be first proposed, which is now only to be
disputed viz. To whom the Faith appertains, whereof the Scriptures are. From
whom, and by whom, when, and by what Persons, that Discipline is, whereby they
were made Christians. For where there appears the Truth of Discipline (that is
as Macereus and Pamelius interpret, the Rule) and of Christian Faith, there you
shall have the Truth of Scriptures, the Interpretation of it likewise, and of
all Christian Tradition. Observe well. The whole context of these words says
first, that debates can never be ended by Scripture only. 2. That before we
Dispute by Scripture, we ought to know, and by other Reasons, who those are to
whom Scripture belong's. 3. That where the Discipline, or Rule of Christian
Faith is previously known, by other grounds distinct from Scripture* there you
have the True Interpretation of Scripture, and all Christian Tradition. After a
full ponderation of these words, I leave any man to Judge that loves Truth,
whether that Doctrine be not here most remarkably expressed, which is taught and
mantained, by the Roman Catholic Church.

26. Mr. Poole from his 12. page to his 37. has no work for me, for his whole
strain is to run on in cavils and finding fault with such Arguments of
Catholics, as He forsooth, judges inefficacious to prove the Churches
Infallibility, whereas God knows, Had He had where withal to do it, He should
have gone a contrary way, and proved positively by Scripture, Fathers, and
Tradition the Churches Fallibility, but Herein He is silent, because in real
Truth He has nothing to say. The ground of the Churches Infallibility, which
Mr. Poole never touches on, is briefly hinted at above n. 15. and further laid
forth Disc. 1. c. 1. and 2. and I desire an express Answer to it. Now and then
He has something against the Writings of the Ancient Fathers, who with him are
fallible, because they speak of the Churches Infallibility, and the good man
never reflect's, that he and his little book, are far more fallible. I wave
such trifles.

27. Page 37. He begins with his Distinctions of the Judge and rule of Faith,
and says first: The supreme and truly Infallible Judge of all Controversies
is God and Christ. Very Good, but nothing is yet Done, unles you fallible man
can say, in all the Differences between us, what God and Christ speak, what is
judged for you, and against us, which is so far from being a Truth proved, that
in Every Controversy it is the very thing in Question, and merely supposed by
you, without either Proof or Principle. You say again. The External and
political Judges, to wit the Governors of the Church, are subordinate to the
supreme Judge. Answ. Very true. But what then? Marry this follows, that if
they really contradict the supreme Judges sentence, They must give their
subjects leave to argue, whether it be right in the sight of God. Hold Sir a
little. If you rationally contradict them, you must first prove your self wiser
then these subordinate Judges are, and Evidence their Errors by undoubted
Principles, which is impossible. For either these Judges are Infallible, or
fallible, if you grant the first, you cannot rationally contradict them. And if
they be fallible: How dare you a private fallible man speak contrary, when your
very Contradiction is no better then their opposite Assertion is, I mean purely
and poorly Fallible? In a word without any certain Principle to rely on (which
you shall never have) you too boldly take leave to oppose your Judges, and make
your self a Rebel by it. You say 3. There is in Every particular Person a
secret Judge, which is called Reason, or Conscience. I must Ask once more, what
then? Have not Arians, Pelagians, Quaquers, and all other Sectaries reason, as
well as you? What therefore this Instrument of reason can apprehend, judge, and
work in you after your fashion, it does the like in these other, after Their
fashion. Do you not therefore se how little you advance your cause by talking of
your Reason, which, unles it be Evidenced by sure Principles to be better then
that of your Adversaries, proves just nothing; And add what private Spirit you
pleas to help your Reason out, They will talk as much of their contrary Spirit,
to help theirs. These two points are so largely declared, and proved Disc. 2.
c. 5. that I believe your Answer to them will prove unreasonable.

28. Page 40. You go first very warily to work for no man knows what you
would say. Then you are manly resolute in your Decisions. We willingly
acknowledge (say you) and reverently esteem the true and rightful Governors of
the Church, orderly assembled and proceeding regularly in Councels, whose
decisions are to be highly valued etc. Here is no man knows what. Pray you
speak out, and name more clearly the Church you reverently esteem of, Tell us
who these true and rightful Governors, of it are (and do not put us of with an
old piece of a long since rejected Doctrine. They are those, who hold closely to
the Truths of Scripture, for we must know who these are.) Finally say when
Councels are regularly assembled, not according to your Fancy, but, (which will
be a long work for you) let us have laws prescribed, whereby we may know by
sure Principles more particularly, without this general talk, when Councels are
orderly assembled, or unorderly. A word now to your resolute Definitions. You
say first, this Judge of the Church is not infallible, but subject to error.
Answer. And so are you, Sir, also fallible when you oppose your self to the
Judgment of a Church, whether it be your own English Church, or the Roman
Catholic: If therefore the Judgment of both Churches were supposed fallible
(as the one is not) your singular Judgment is no more but fallible also, and
what gain you by that? Thus much only: You Contradict the Church fallibly, and
the Church again Contradicts you fallibly, and thus you may remain
Contradicting one another to the Worlds End, without the Decision of one
Controversy, unles you make it Evident by undoubted Principles, that you are to
judge the Church when you please, and the Church is not to meddle with you, or
your Judgment. You say 2. this judge of the Church being subject to higher
Authority, and tied to a higher rule, if its Decisions be Manifestly repugnant
to that Superior Rule, they are not to be obeyed. Answ. You purely suppose
what should be proved. Viz. That the Decisions of the true Catholic Church,
which is ever assisted by the Holy Ghost, can be tepugnant to any Superior
Rule, and therefore touch not Catholics in the least manner. But if you speak
of the Decisions of your English Church, which (because fallible) may be
repugnant, you license your self by your own Principles, to disobey it, And
look you to that. You say. 3. The judge is Constituted by God in the Church,
not for the Command of men's Consciences, but for the regulation of their
Actions, and Preservation of peace in the Church, which is not Violated by men's
inward and unknown Sentiments, but by their External demeanor, and sensible
Effects of them. Answ. Most pitiful Doctrine. What, is all the preaching of
Sectaries Come to no more, but only to teach how the Exterior Actions of men
are to be regulated, and peace may be preserved? This Truly more be longs to
the Iusti^ies of Peace in their Several Districts, then to Ministers, if
therefore they go no deeper into Consciences by their Doctrine, they certainly
preach not the Word of God, for I read Heb. 4. 12. the Word of God is lively
and forcible, and more persing, then any two Edged Sword: and reaching unto the
Division of the soul and Spirit, of the joints also and the Marrows etc. And
these men go no further, then only to give instructions concerning the
Exterior Regulation of Actions, or preserving of Peace. If therefore their
Hearers were very Hypocrites, Jews or Arians in heart, and only demeaned
themselves fairly in the Exterior like Protestants, Ministers are not to meddle
with them but leave them to their own Consciences, without Check or reproof,
whereof se more Disc. 3. C. 7. ^. 17. 18. Now if Mr. Poole will find some
Mystery in the words he uses Command of men's Consciences, let him read S. Paul
to Titus 2. 15. Haec loquere. Speak these things, and rebuke Cum omni Imperio,
with all Command, and Authority: And so Pastors should Speak to Consciences Cum
Imperio in Gods cause, and people should obey them. The Apostle gives the
reason. Hebr. 13. 17. Obey your Prelates, your Guides, or Commanders, for they
watch, as being to render an account for your Souls. And if they must render an
account of Souls, they may certainly speak like Prelates to their very
interior Consciences.

29. Page 41. you say the Scriptures of the old and now Testament, are the
Infallible rule and ground of Faith. Answ. They are so, Faithfully interpreted.
Se Disc. 2. C. 4. where you have your Errors Discovered, and the Objection
fully Answered. You say again, Universal Tradition rightly understood is of
great use, and like a channel, whereby Scripture (which alone is our rule) is
conveyed to us. Answ. the Parenthesis ( which alone) is refuted in the Discourse
now cited, the rest of your Assertion has no hurt in it. But you add a
Mysterious piece of Divinity, where you distinguish between, Rem Tradi^am the
thing Delivered, and Traditionem, and the Tradition or Delivery of it, and say
Papists by Tradition understand the first that is res tradita. Answ. either I
understand not you, or you (which is more likely) misconceive the Doctrine of
Catholics, For they distinguish between Tradition and the thing Delivered: For
example. The Baptizing of Infants, the keeping of Sunday in place of the
Sabbath, are Objectively Doctrins delivered, and the Testimony, Consent, and
Acknowledgment of the whole Universal Church witnessing these Verities, are
rightly called the formal Tradition, therefore you mistake our Doctrine. It is
true as this word Faith, sometimes signifies the matter revealed by Almighty
God, And most properly the internal Assent we yield to the Revelation, so this
word Tradition may also signify, either the Doctrine delivered, or the formal
Delivery of it, but this makes not to your purpose. You say again, Tradition
taken for the vehicle or conveyance of the books of Scripture, is in some sort
necessary to bring the Rule to you, yet is no more a part of the Rule, then a
Basquet is Nourishment wherein bread is brought to feed on. Here is your learned
instance. Believe it, Sir, if you take the Basket, and find Nothing but a stone
in it, you will have a poor dinner, And if you make Tradition minutely like
the Basket ( in some sort necessary) you may well have a stone for bread, that
is, no Scripture given you, for Scripture. Tradition therefore, whether part of
the Rule or no, is absolutely a necessary conveyance, and must be Infallible.

30. Page 44. you tell us. Scripture is the Object, only rule, and standard of
Faith, by which all Controversies of Faith are to be decided and judged.
Answer. The Proposition is only your own bare word: Scripture alone can be no
rule without an Infallible Interpreter, as is proved Disc. 2. c. 4. And had we
no more to say, but thus much, that Scripture proves nor it self to be
Infallible it were enough. But grant, which you yet Convince not, that it is
infallibly Gods Word, an insuperable difficulty remains to be decided, And it
is, whether you Sectaries know so exactly the sense of Scripture in all
controverted matters, that your fallible Glosses are to be stood to, contrary
to the judgment of a learned Ancient Church? Hence I say, you talk at random,
when page 48. you tell us. There is enough delivered in Scripture by which all
Controversies might be ended, would men be humble, studious, and Self denying.
Lay your hand on your heart, and speak your conscience, can you judge this to be
true? Or can you persuade your self, that none are to be found within the
limits of this Ancient Church as humble, as learned, and studious as a few
Ministers are in England? Why vent you such Paradoxes without proof, or so much
as a probability? You say again page 48. after some parergons of conditional,
and absolute power, That if the Church be sufficient to end all Controversies,
because all must submit to its decrees and Doctrine, the Scripture in like
manner, may be said to be sufficient, because all are obliged to submit to the
Decrees and Doctrine thereof. I Answer all are to do so, when they know by an
infallible Interpreter what the Scriptures Teaches, but this in controverted
matters, is ever the difficulty. You say it speak's one thing, and we say the
contrary, therefore Scripture alone, which is as silent now, as it was Sixteen
ages since, is a less meet Means to end these Contentions. Contrariwise, the
Church proposes all she teaches with the greatest clarity, and if any doubt
occurr, is ready, able, and sufficient to declare it self further, Scripture
that hitherto never ended any difference between us, cannot do so. For a
further satisfaction read the 5. Chapter of the 3. Discourse.

31. We return now to your 44. page where you tell us. First, Tradition is the
Vehicle to conveigh the rule of Scripture to us. 2. Reason is the instrument or
Eye, whereby you apprehend and se the Rule. 3. The Spirit of God is the
Eye Salve that annoints your Eyes, and inables you to see the Rule. 4. The
Church is the Interpreter (but not infallible and Authentic) the witness, or
guardian of this Rule. Observe well. We have here a number of words, but
Nothing proved, Nothing so much as cleared. Say therefore plainly: What
tradition is it, that conveyed to you the books of Scripture? Most surely, it
is the tradition of the Roman Catholic Church, for you have no other. If
therefore, you dare trust this Church in a matter of so weighly importance, as
to hand to you Gods Sacred Word, you may as well, and with as good Conscience,
believe what ever other Doctrine it Teaches by Tradition. See Disc. 2. C. 2. n.
4. 5. You talk secondly of Reason, that see's this Rule of Scripture, and you
certainly mean the true sense of it, or you say nothing. Now I would willingly
learn, how your Reason comes to have the privilege, or pre-eminence of knowing
such Secrets, before your elder Brethren the Papists, or your more nearer
Allies the Quaquers, or the old Arians? The like doubt I move about the
Eye Salve, that annoints your Eyes, you call it the Spirit of God, And I am
sure there is no Donatist, or Pelagian, but will say as much of his contrary
Spirit. But above all Satisfy me in one doubt, and plainly point me out the
Church that interpret's Scripture as you do in all those matters of Controversy
now between us? I tell you Sir: There was never any such Church in the world
fallible or infallible, that favors your glosses and interpretations of
Scripture.

32. Page 46. You have a Fling at the Captains Arguments against the judgment
of Reason, who, if you relate truly, (for I have not now his Epistle by me)
says first. Reason must submit to the judge, therefore it is not the judge. You
Answer. It is not the supreme judge, but subordinate, and tied to Rule. Contra.
Every judgment with you is fallible, and may easily Swerve from the rule, or
mistake the supreme judges Sentence: if it do so, it is erroneous and not to be
followed. Say therefore, who ties your judgment that is fallible, and may be
falls, to any certain Rule? This should be Answered.

33. He Objects again. The judge must be Infallible, but reason is fallible,
Ergo. You Answer: The Mayor is a pitiful Petitio principij. Contra. Your Reply
is more pitiful. Observe well. All judgments, you say, are fallible, and many
are not only fallible; but falls also. Most surely, you will not have us to
follow any falls judgment* and yet we must follow a fallible judgment.
Vouchsafe, to tell us, whose fallible judgment we are to trust to, in these
weighty matters of Controversy? And I have all reason to be satisfied in the
doubt, because it avail's me Nothing, to know that I must rely on a fallible
judgment which may be falls, Unless you teach me whose fallible judgment it is,
I am to rely on. For example: When you interpret a passage of Scripture
contrary to the Churches Sense, your explication is fallible. Answer therefore,
why will you rather have me to rest on your judgment that is fallible, then on
the Churches contrary sense, though it were falsely Supposed fallible? If you
say, All things considered, your explication is more probable, you are the very
man, that pitifully begg's the Question, and speak's without any probable
Principle.

34. Now, if wearied with those Interrogatories, you say roundly (and this must
be answered in your Principle) that every man is to follow his own judgment,
in these debated matters: The Arian is to follow his private judgment, the
Socinian his, the Quaquer his, the Donatist his etc. you do not only license
all the Heretics in the world, to remain still in their Heresies, But moreover
Counsel them to believe Falsities, for you know, or should know, that these
private judgments are all falls. If finally you Answer: We must rest on a
judgment that is True, although it be fallible, I know not what you mean, for
no man amongst you, can assure me in these high points of Controversy, when a
judgment is to be reckoned of as true, that is fallible, because Truth is most
easily separated from an Act, that is really Falli^^.

35. In a word, Sir, your whole Mistake lies in this. You sound not to the
bottom, the signification of these words. The Judgment of Reason. For Reason
in this place, cannot be taken, for a weak Discourse, or the private Sentiment
of every erring man, after He has humm'd over, or paused on Scripture (the
Arian or Socinian, will make his Religion good this way) but the Judgment of
Reason Goes further, and ought to be deeply rational indeed, that is: It must
rest at last upon a solid and satisfactory Principle, which thoroughly pondered,
work's powerfully upon every prudent disinteressed Understanding, and gently
forces the man, that lays prejudice aside, to acquiesce and yield, without
fear or trouble. The Catholic Church of Christ only, most evidently proposes
these undoubted satisfactory Principles, whereon a rational judgment does rest
securely, when the Faith She holds, is resolved. No Sectary ever yet showed,
nor shall hereafter show, any think like a Satisfactory Principle, to ground a
rational judgment on, when He believes contrary to this Church. All he can do
is to tell us, what He thinks, but you shall never learn from him, upon any
solid Principle, extrinsecal to his own bosom thoughts, That God speaks as He
thinks. But I have said so much of this Subject Disc. 1. c. 7. n. 4. 5. and
Disc. 2. c. 5. n. 8. 9. 10. that it is needles to add More.

36. To the 3. Argument. If Reason were judge a man might pleas God without
Faith, (I know not whether you propose it fully enough) you Answer, this would
overthrow the Church. You are much deceived, for the Church teaches, that none
^an please God without Faith. In your fourth Answer, your are ^^ing up again
your Reason, to a Law and Rule in things you understand not. Sir, if you
understand not, you want cords to tie fast withal, and therefore may easily not
close, with the supreme judges sentence. But of this we have said enough
already. You will find the substance of what follows in your Appendix refuted
upon several occasions in the Treatise. Had I more time, I would say a word to
your Glosses upon these two places of Scripture quoted by you. In the first,
though S. Peter says contrary 2. Pet. 3. 16. that Scripture is difficile to be
understood, you will have it easy, unles it be to the ignorant and ungodly: and
it is likely you suppose, there are none of these ignorant or ungodly people
among you. Upon the other Text 2. Tim. 3. 15. 16. you seem to infer, from the
Vtility of Scripture, a sufficiency in order to Salvation, which is as good an
Inference as if you said: Your head is profitable to make you to live, therefore
it is sufficient. Or* the Principles of Philosophy can instruct you to learn
Divinity, Ergo they make you a perfect Divine. Sir, the general Truths
contained in Scripture* because they teach us to believe the Church, Tradition
and other Apostolical Doctrins, orally delivered, are in this general way, able
to make us wise to Salvation, but none can so much as probably draw from hence,
that all things in particular, necessary to Salvation, are explicitly set down
in Scripture. Every Catholic Writer that Explicates the Text, shows your
Deductions to be weak, and unconcluding. That work therefore being don to my
hand, I end, wishing you much Good, and eternal happiness.

FINIS.
Besides other faults noted in the beginning you have these.
In the Advertisment. page 18. l. 22. Invocations R. Innovations p. 19. l. 16.
of long standing Church our R. of our long standing Church p. 22. l. 5. were R.
where in the Treatise p. 49. l. 7. Fallibility R. infallibility p. 158. l. 28.
improperty R. impropriety p. 176. l. 18. Marck R. mark p. 239. l. 3. above R.
about.

ERRATA CORRIGENDA. Page 4. line 5. often Read of page 6. last line retour R.
return. p. 11. l. 4. put R. but p. 17. l. 24. reach R. reaches p. 19. l. 10. as
it R. as it is p. 22. l. 13. feaching R. teaching p. 22. l. 23. true R. true p.
24. l. 8. Insalibility R. Infallibility p. 22. Title Teachere R. Teacher p. 25.
l, 1. trough R. through p. 26. l. 1. foor R. for p. 27. l. 2. asserward R.
afterward p. 30. Tit. futher R. further p. 39. l. 24. te R. the p. 40. Tit.
Relyes R. Replies p. 41. l. 16. in R. it p. 43. l. 11. assurance R. assurance
p. 46. Title Relyes R. Replies p. 47. l. 27. fundemeetals R. fundamentals p.
53. l. 14. dot R. does p. 58. l. 2. vetities R. verities p. 69. l. 4. it if
follows dele if p. 69. l. 9. praging R. praying p. 69. l. 23. Realon R. Reason
p. 71. l. 17. whick R. which p. 74. l. 1. fo rit R. for it p. 77. l. 17. Father
R. Fathers p. 77. l, 30. standingh R. standing p. 81. Title dele certainty p.
90. l. 7. owing R. owning p. 93. Marg. loct R. lost p 94. l. 12. is R. it p.
94. l. 13. Prophet R. Prophets p. 103. Marg. sew R. few p. 113. Tit. Prave R.
Prove p. 141. Marg. propose R. proposed p. 143. l. 6. pretend R. pretend's p.
144. l. rotterin R. tottering p. 149. l. 20. other R. others p. 158. Marg. te
R. to p. 159. l. 2. Christ R. Christ's p. 159. Marg. no Read not p. 175. l. 6.
opposite, opposite Read opposite p. 178. l. 5. stead R. instead p. 182. l. 22.
were sent R. they were sent p 182. l. 27. casting of R. casting out p. 184.
Marg. uncompossible R. incompossible p. 186. l. 5. buth R. but p. 189. l. 17.
see R. seem p. 195. Marg, an R. on p. 209. l. 28. interpred R. interpreted p
212. Marg. Siciety R. Society p. 215. l. 4. Propecying R. Prophesying p. 217.
l. 24. if self R. it self p. 218. l. 5 yo R. you p. 222. l. 29. Objection R.
Objection p. 228. l. 9. of R. or p. 256. Marg. cansists R. consists p. 256. l.
12. nos R. not p. 260. l. 7. ptosed R. proposed p. 261. Marg. datiful R.
dutiful p. ^62. Marg, doclare R. declare p. 269. l. 10' caslesly R. causlesly
p. 275. l. 29. both we dele both p. 278. l. 13. reclaim R. convert p, 295. l.
15. Chutch R. Church p. 302. Marg. uncluding R. unconcluding p. 311. Marg. care
for R. care for p. 313. Marg. in in dele in p. 314. l. 16. sht R she p. 318. l.
32. ditt R. dirt p. 329. l. 26. unevidentced R. unevidenced p. 330. l. 29. An
R. and p. 342. l. 30 party R. parity p. 344. l. 5. An R. and p. 346. l. 10.
these R. those p. 350. l. 10. Cutch R. Church p. 351. l. 13. for long a time R.
for a long time p. 352. l. 26. onveyed R. conveyed p. 356. l. 1. infallibily R.
infallibly p. 358. l. 15. Argumen R. Argument p. 359. Marg. Soy R. Say p. 362.
l. 15. wales R. walls. p. 363. l. 21. impiously. dele p^^ctam p. 363. Merg.
then, then R. then p. 365. l. 31. licencence license p. 372. l. 2. convinces
R. convince p. 375. Tit. Curch R. Church p. 375. l. 14. ad R. and p. 378. l,
13. chis R. this p. 382. l. 29. overtrow R. overthrow p. 402. l. 18. that is R.
it p. 405. Marg. mare R. more p. 406. Marg. smay R. sway p. 412. l. 14.
confuthed R. confuted p. 417. l. 10. toughts R. thoughts p. 420. l. 7. ns R. us
p. 424. l. 18. unworthly R. unworthy p. 425. l. 30. and is dele and p. 441.
Marg. whac R. what p. 443. l. 4. teachers R. teaches p. 448. l. 18. Cathalick
R. Catholic p. 449. l. 7. expreffing R. expissing p. 452. l. 11. ttial R.
trial p. 453. l. 17. Cutches R. Churches p. 460. l. 20. Ground R. Grounds p
501. l. 6, worst R. wors p. 516. l. 15. Scripiture R. Scripture.

After Page 431. is Page 332. R. 432.

There are without doubt many more faults in Orthography passed over, to say
nothing of points ill placed, of Capi^^l letters to often, and comma's
needlessly multiplied. What ever is found amiss impute it boldly to the Printer,
or to the Author, and please to pardon both, for the first knovwes not a word
of English, and the other has not the language perfectly.


