Truth Will out: OR, A Discovery of some Untruths Smoothly told by Dr. JEREMY
TAILOR In his DISSWASIVE From POPERY: With an Answer to such Arguments as
deserve ANSWER.

By his Friendly Adversary Ed*Worsley

Ergo inimicus vobis factus sum verum dicens vobis? Gal. 4. 16. Printed, in the
Year, 1665.

THE EPISTLE To the READER.
WE say, all is not Gold that Glisters, and that Most worth lies not ever hid
under a fair Outside. A Comet seems sometimes as glorious as a Star; a Parelion
like the Sun; and Falsehood got under a handsome Visard well trimmed up, may take
with many and pass Disguised for current Truth: But such slight Beauty beguiles
not long. True Worth undoes it. The Suns lasting Glory, the Stars constant
Brightness, enough Dislustres both Parelion and Comet: And Truth, though
perhaps it may not here quite vanquish Falsehood (for Some will Defend it to the
Worlds end) is able at least to pull of it is Gaudy Visard, and put it out of
Countenance.

A World of this Counterfeit Luster, we have now a days in Books, set forth (as
is pretended) to Beautify the Heaven of Christianity, and Englighten a People
that sit in Darkness. One I have met with ('it is the Disswasive from Popery)
that Parelion* like in a Triple Cloud is (as I am told) Gloriously out in three
Editions; and lately appeared in the two Kingdoms of England and Ireland. More
I believe have been Gazing on it then well discovered the faulty Luster: Real
Worth I cannot mention; for what find we I beseech you considerable in this
Book, but a useless Repetition of old defeated Objections? which have now for a
whole Age run through a few Vulgar worn-out Controversies, and in Rigor require
only a Return of the Old Answers given a hundred times by Catholic Writers:
new Arguments, which one might have expected from so Great a Doctor, seldom
appear. You have moreover, more then a few Mistakes relating to Catholic
Doctrine: Want enough of Divinity: A seeming Zeal, ('it is true) but ill seasoned
with Jeers and harsher Language: Calumnies vented: Talk and no Proof. Here is,
what I think, the Doctor must own, the Inside and best substance of his
Disswasive.

The Flash therefore and fair Luster of his Book lies neither in the choice of
Matter, nor manner of handling it; but in specious Quotations that flourish in
the Margents. These set down in the ensuing Treatise, I have carefully
examined; Read with my own Eyes in the Original Authors; (not one have I taken
on trust) and after a diligent search must profess with all Candor; not one
(worth notice) have I found, but it is either wholly impertinent to what he
would Prove; or strangely wrested to a sinister Sense; or not found at all in
the Original (nor a Word like it:) Or finally, (which is most usual and to be
pitied in a Doctor) unpardonably corrupted. To insist on every less valuable
Authority, or on such as show themselves Profless even Read in the Disswasive,
would be Time misspent, and weary a Reader. These I offer to your View, are of
the grosser Sort; and Numerous enough to Evidence that the Doctors pretended
Faultless Book is Proved Faulty; and no more powerful to Dissuade from Popery,
then Error is to draw men from Truth.

Far am I off from the Doctors Humor, in Judging this small Treatise
Faultless. I willingly acknowledge many Faults, but know not how to mend Them.
One is, no little want of English; but this I hope dear Reader you will easily
Pardon; I am sure you would, did you but know how long I have been a Stranger
to my Country. An other is, too tedious a length sometimes in Latin Sentences:
The Fault (if any) is unavoydable: For while the Charge is laid on ill
Quotations, the Right ones must appear, and in their proper Terms. To give an
Authors Meaning only, and Wave his Words seems Forceless: And in stead of
laying Difficulties may Raise up more. Where it most Imports I have done my
best to English the Latin faithfully, Ad pedem literae: the Translation
therefore cannot but look Rugged; yet that is better, then to have the Genuine
Sense miscarry in smoother Language. Lastly, a harsher Word may perhaps,
through have or unawares, have casually fallen from me; if so, I here unsay it,
and Humbly crave Pardon: And were my Papers (now out of my reach) in my Hands
again, I would in this Correct whatever might justly seem offensive.

If Doctor Tailor shall please to warn me of greater Faults, I Will thank him for
his Charity: And if he thinks it worth his Pains to take notice of my
Exceptions against his Book, my earnest Request is, that he mispend not Time in
Trifles, nor weigh only lesser Matters, while he has greater charged on him
that justly require Satisfaction. For Example: I have plainly taxed him of
wrong done to Sixtus Senensis, to the Expurgatory Index, to Petrus Lombardus,
Otho Erisingensis, and others in the beginning of my Treatise; let him as
plainly Purge himself in these Particulars, and show me my Error: for most
certainly I have either wronged him, or he these Authors. I press him afterward
with undeniable Authorities of most Ancient Fathers, both for the Use and
Worship of Holy Images. His express Answer is herein required also, chiefly to
St. Basil, and St. John Damascen. I have told him of his Forging strange
Doctrines, and Fathering them on Tolet, Suarez, Bellarmin, Emanuel Sa, and
others: If he be injured he can Right himself, and show where Sa affirms, That
if a man lies with his intended Wife before Marriage it is no sin, or a light
one. Whether the true Sense of Bellarmin in his Quotation, page 167. be not
wholly perverted, If the Pope should Err by Commanding, etc. These for an Essay
only; more you will have, and of greater Concernment hereafter. May it please
the Doctor to clear himself by a solid Answer, he will hearten me to Reply: Or if
he can produce against me but one Quotation so fowly amiss as that one Charged
on Emanuel Sa (to say nothing of many worse) I do here profess a Readiness, and
will comply with it, to publish my Fault to the Whole World. O, would he
Encourage himself to proceed with like Candor! and unsay only what his own
Conscience knows Faulty in his Disswasive, he might be Eternally Glorious. And
why should I forbid my self to hope for so Laudable a Retractation? Justice
requires it: Conscience forcibly presses: Truth, that suffers, strongly Pleads
for it: Christian Humility easily submits: And Gods Victorious Grace is now no
less Powerful to do this Work on him, then once it was to Reclaim a Blessed St.
Austin. Quare Arripe obsecro te (they are the Pious and well meant Words of
this Saint, Tom. 2. Epist. 9. to a Great Doctor, and my Submissive Petition to
Doctor Tailor.) Arripe obsecro te; ingenuan, and vere Christianam cum charitate
severitatem ad illud (tuum) opus corrigendum, atque emandandum and (...) ut
dicitur, cane: Incomparabiliter enim pulchrior est Veritas Christianorum quam
Helena Graecorum, etc. Such I say is my Petition presented to our Doctor: and
if the Love of Truth bears sway in his Breast, yield he needs must to a speedy
retractation. Nothing can Retard him from so generous a Resolution, but either
Motives of interest drawn from a naughty World; or his own once vented (...).
So, (forsooth) he has said in his Disswasive, and so it must stand: though all
run to Ruin, and Christianity suffers.

The Doctor I confess has been most Unluckily in broaching Heresies, and
wanting Grace to retract them. Some years are now past since he was so
Unfortunate as to become a Patron of the Pelagian Heresy; when ex professo he
Writ a Book against Original sin, and stoutly defended it: and being Friendly
told by his own Brethren, that what he said was not only opposite to Catholic
Faith, but also to the very Doctrine of the Church of England expressly
delivered in her Liturgy, in 39. Articles, in the Office of Baptism, etc. He
had yet the boldness to deny all, and assert that the Church of England held
not Original Sin, though both Prince and Prelate knew then and believed the
contrary. I know not that he ever yet Recanted this Heresy; if not, it is now
high Time to do it: and with it, to Weep for the Errors in his Disswasive: if
he fails in both Duties, the World will say (and say truly) that Dr. Tailor is
Notior peccans quam paenitens; more known for his Sin then for his Repentance;
and may Prudently Judge that he of all others was the unfittest Man to Write
against Popery that disowns the Doctrine of his own Church: unless this makes
him fit; that being a Pelagian, his Words (though he multiplies Volums) will
want weight against Catholics: For this is my reflection (and I think a true
one) that this man who dared to say that the Church of England holds not
Original Sin, so plainly taught and believed by all; will not Boggle to miscite
the Fathers, remote from our knowledge, Read by few, and Understood by fewer.

Farewell Gentle Reader, with a thousand well-wishes for thy profitting by this
Treatise; I bestow as many on Dr. Tailor, whose Enemy (God knows) I am not: Nor
can he think me one, for laying out his Errors, and telling Truth: Upon this
very Account he ought (and I hope will) to return me Thanks. If now I Merit
none, I may hereafter have better Luck and deserve them. If plain dealing may
do it, he shall have Reason to account me, as indeed I am, his Faithful True
SERVANT, and Friendly ADVERSARY.

E. W.

QUOTATIONS Faulty in DOCTOR TAILORS PREFACE To the READER.
TO destroy Tradition not contained in Scripture, the Doctor cites Tertullian
thus, I adore the fullness of Scripture, and if it be not written, let
Hermogenes fear the Woe that is destined to them that detract from, or add to
it. I answer, the Dr. turn's the true genuine sense out of this whole sentence,
chiefly by these guileful particles of his own making: And if it be not
written, which seem exclusive of all unwritten tradition; yet this Authority no
more relates to Catholic Doctrine concerning Tradition, then a Fable in Esop.
Briefly therefore; Tertullian, disputing against Hermogenes that held these
visible things were created of I know not what prejacent matter; speaks thus:
Lib. adversus Hermog. Antwerp Print cap. 22. page 495. In principio, etc. In
the beginning God made heaven and Earth: then adds; Adoro Scripturae
plenitudinem, I adore the fullness of Scripture: Wherein? in what does he adore
this fullness? He answers, Qua mihi and factorem manifestat and facta, I adore
the fullness of Scripture, that does manifest to me both the Maker, and things
made; As who should say, in this particular the Scripture is complete, and I
adore its fullness, etc. Now these last words, Qua mihi and factorem, etc. which
explain the Fathers sense, our Dr. wholly omits, and beguiles his Reader with
these perverted particles, if it be not written: Tertullian, after those words
[ In Evangelio vero amplius] goes on, An autem de aliqua subiacenti materia
facta sint omnia nusquam adhuc legi: Whether all these things be made of a
subjacent matter, I never yet read: Scriptum esse doceat Hermogenis officina;
Let Hermogenes his Workhouse show us that this particular is written. Si non
est Scriptum, timeat vae illud adjicientibus, aut detrahentibus destinatum; If
this thing now in controversy concerning the prejacent matter Hermogenes
asserts, be not written; let him justly fear that Woe destined to them that
detract from Scripture, or add to it. Here is exactly the whole context of
Tertullian; and it renders this sense; Hermogenes holds the world made of a
strange unknown matter: The Scripture directly tells us how it was made and
Created of nothing. I adore the fullness of Scripture in this particular; let
therefore Hermogenes (when the Scripture has clearly said all that belongs to
the first Creation of things) prove by Scripture that unknown matter he
defends; if he cannot, he may well fear that Woe threatened to such as detract
from Scripture, or add to it a prejacent matter never mentioned in it. Judge
good Reader whether this Quotation have so much as a likelihood of gainsaying
any constant received Tradition in the Church. The Dr. may reply, as Hermogenes
added to Scripture his unknown matter, so we add our unknown Traditions: I
answer first, what Hermogenes defended was not only an addition, but expressly
contrary to Holy Scripture, declaring that God made the World of Nothing: No
Catholic Tradition is expressly or positively opposite to Gods written Word
(unknown tradition we own not) 2. Hermogenes had no such approved consent for
his foolery, as we have for our Catholic, and ever received Tradition; justly
therefore did Tertullian oppugn him by the Authority of Scripture only; for
destitute he was of all warranted Tradition: 3. The Doctrine of our Tradition
(not a pretended one, or any superaddition of new Articles, as the Dr. imputes
to us) is expressly allowed of by Scripture it self; the place is known 2
Thessa. 2. 14. and enervates what ever has the color of an objection against
us.

He cites next St. Basil de vera fide, whose words are these Paris Print 1618.
Tom. 2. page 251. Haud dubie manifestissimum hoc infidelitatis argumentum
fuerit, and signum superbiae certissimum, si quis eorum quae Scripta sunt
aliquid velit rejicere, aut eorum quae non Scripta introducere: Without doubt
this is a most manifest Argument of infidelity, if one will reject any one of
those things which are written (these words our Dr. omits, to make the
Quotation sound to his sense) or, of those things which are not written,
introduce; to wit, into Scripture; and so the St. explicates himself clearly in
these following words -- Vehementissime interdicat ne quid little quae in
Divinis literis habeantur, dematur, aut quod absit, addatur: Which is in plain
English to say, Add we must not, nor diminish any thing in Scripture. No
Catholic pretends to make that Scripture, which is not Scripture: Nor to
diminish so much as one jot in that sacred Book: You see therefore, so
forceless this Authority is to gainsay received Tradition, that it does not so
much as touch upon the very Question: As proofless also are those other two
Quotations in the Doctors Margent out of St. Basil's Morals; for regula 72. C.
1. in the same Edition, page 372. He only speak's as the Apostle does; Though
an Angel Preach another Gospel then what is Preached, let him be Anathematized,
and reg. 80. cap. 22. page 386. he says no more, but that we must believe the
true force of those things that are in Scripture; reject nothing, or make any
thing new, extra divinam Scripturam; that is, as I interpret, without the
warranty of Scripture: but the Scripture indubitably warrants the declarations
of Councils (witness the Nicen definitions) and constant received Tradition of
the Church. Therefore this Authority also is wholly impertinent to the Doctors
purpose.

Who next, to oppose Tradition, cites Theoph. Alexandrinus in English, thus;
It is the part of a devilish spirit to think any thing to be divine, that is
not in the Authority of Holy Scripture. I Answer, here are three faults in this
one Quotation: First, The words are not faithfully cited; Secondly, They are
weighed outof their circumstances, and wrested contrary to the Authors meaning;
Thirdly, Were they as the Doctor would have them, they prove nothing against
Tradition. Briefly, all know how sharp an Adversary Theop. Alex. was to Origin
and his followers; He writ expressly against his errors, but that work is not
extant; and in his 2. Epist. paschali cited by the Doctor (you have it Tom. 4.
Biblioth. Patrum, Cullen Print 1618. page 716.) after he had checked Origin for
his rashness, for broaching Fopperies of his own head, and arrogantly making
himself his own Master, contrary to St. Paul's Humility who conferred the Gospel
with other Apostles: He speaks thus of Origin solely; Sed ignorans quod
Daemoniaci spiritus esset instinctus sophismata humanarum mentium sequi, and
aliquid extra Scripturarum authoritatem putare Divinum: But not knowing that it
is an instinct of a Devilish spirit to follow the sophistry or deceit of man's
Wit (these words which fully express the Authors sense our Doctor totally
omit's) or to think any thing divine, not authorized, or without the Authority
of Holy Scripture: So Theophilus; who, as you see, wholly here relates to
Origen's private errors, condemns his Pride, opposes his sophistry and
boldness, in making himself a master of new Fancies, but touches not the least
on Catholic Doctrine, concerning unwritten Tradition: and though the Doctor
draws him to such a sense; it is soon answered, that Catholic Tradition, so
expressly approved by Scripture, cannot be thought a Doctrine extra Scripturae
authoritatem, without warrant of Gods Word. Now if he tells us that he opposes
not any ancient Tradition, but our pretended one only that found's New
Articles, New Propositions, etc. I Answer, He merely combats with shadows; we
neither own such a Tradition, nor can the Doctor prove it: He should have first
named one or two of these New Articles, and then assaulted us with the
Authority of Fathers directly opposite to our Doctrine, and not winck and
fight, as he does against no man knows what. If he says again, that he impugns
all Tradition in general, all Doctrine not expressly contained in Scripture;
forced he is, not only to throw away Scripture it self, and the Nicen
definitions: not only to disclaim a Trinity of Persons in one Divine Essence,
Baptizing Children, etc. but every tenet of Protestant Religion (as
Protestanism) E. G. the belief of two Sacraments only, which is not at all
contained in Scripture, nor can it be drawn from Scripture by any probable
discourse or gloss of Protestant testants, though these are worse, and less
able to derive unto us a true belief, then the poorest tradition (were any
such) that the Doctor can except against in the Catholic Church. When the
Doctor pleases, I am ready to discuss this sole point with him of proving
Protestant Tenets by Scripture only: I believe he will not accept the Challenge.

Against the worshipping of Images, he cites Lactantius, lib. 2 cap. de Orig.
Error: observe, I beseech you. Lactantius has seven Books de Divin. Instit.
adversus gentes, the Title to his second Book is de Origin erroris, which
contains ninty Chapters; and our Doctor unskilfully throws the Title of the
whole Book into a Chapter not found at all in the Author, either in my Copy,
ann. 1465. or in that extent Biblioth. Patrum saeculo 3. page 224. However
Chap. 18. these words are found, Quare non est dubium, quin religio nulla sit,
ubicunque simulacrum est, which the Doctor unworthily translates thus, Without
all peradventure wherever an Image is (meaning for Worship) there is no
Religion; I say unworthily (and it pitties me to see so much want of candor)
for here a sense is rendered, as if Lactantius declaimed against the use and
worship of Images among Christians; whereas it is more then evident, that he
only speaks against Simulacra, (not Images) against the Idols, and Gods of the
Gentiles: Non sub pedibus quaerat Deum, says he, in the beginning of this
eighteenth Chapter; None is to seek for his God under his feet: Nec a vestigijs
suis eruat quod adoret, Nor pull from under his footsteps what he is to adore:
Sed quaerat in sublimi, quaerat in summo, Let him look for God above in Heaven,
etc. The Worship therefore of one Supreme God, Lactantius chiefly presses in
this whole second book: In his first Chapter he tells us, that he had above
demonstrated the false Religion of many Gods; and that in this second Book, he
declares against the Gentiles, the cause or Origin of their multiplying many
gods. In his second Chapter he says, That though the Image of a man absent be
necessary, yet to circumscribe God, diffused every where, in any form, is both
needless and superfluous; afterward he shows that no deceased men, nor any
thing in this world ought to be adored as God. In his fourth Chapter he gives
this reason, Unde apparet istos deos nihil in se habere amplius quam materiam
de qua sunt fabricati: These gods have nothing but only the matter they are
made of. In his eighth Chapter he proposes the question how these false Gods
of the Gentiles did work strange wonders, and prosecutes the same subject in his
ninth Chapter. In a word, Lactantius through this whole Treatise, speaks no
more against the Catholic use of Images, then I do now while I defend them;
yet hear we must the Doctor talk, and without all peradventure, as if he had
read where an Image is, there is no Religion; without all peradventure the good
man is deceived. I say no more: To what he next cites out of Origin, we shall
answer hereafter. Now to the Doctors Chapters and Sections.

CHAP. I.
Of the Doctors ungrounded discourse, to the wrongful charge on Catholics, for
making new Articles in Faith.

TOugh my task be chiefly to follow the Doctor in his Quotations, and note, (as
he goes along) some few of his many Errors: Yet touch I must a little on a
discourse he is pleased to begin with, Chapter the first: It seems to enervate
much our Christian Faith, and weaken the Authority of the most Ancient Councils.

Page then the fourth and first Section, he holds the two Testaments, the words
of Christ and of the Apostles, the Fountains of Faith; (which none denies) but
next he adds; Whatsoever caeme in after these, foris est, is to be cast out, it
belongs not unto Christ. This latter assertion (to say no more) has too much
of the harshness in it: for the difinitions of the Nicen Council, and of the
other three general Councils, with St. Athanasius his Creed, came in after the
words of Christ, and Holy Scripture; are these, Think ye, like old Garments to
be laid a side, or cast out, as not at all belonging to Christ? belong they do
most certainly, as Rivers to their Fountains, though not owned as Original
Springs, and the first Foundations of our Faith. Observe therefore, I beseech
you, how the Doctor deals with us, how he leads us on in darkness, whilst he
sets men a seeking after the Fountains of Faith, but with it, turns by the
Stream, cuts of the Torrent of Authority whereby to find them; that is in a
word, he makes null all Authority that can assert with certainty, Such were the
Words of Christ, such the Doctrine of the Apostles, etc.

Judge whether I say not aright, and demand of the Doctor upon whose certain
proposal can he rely, or indubitably admit of Christ's words as sacred? If he
answers Scripture; the Question return's again, and he is asked a new, who it
is that does ascertain him of Scripture? If the Fathers, they are, with him,
Fallible, yes, and full of ambiguous senses. If the Church, that (says he) is
changeable, has brought in novelties contrary to Ancient Faith; if Councils,
not one is found but liable to Error. Turn by therefore these intermedial
Streams running between us and the Fountains of Faith, destroy the certainty of
such Witnesses, say that no man, or society of men since Christ and his
Apostles has, (without a possibility of erring) assured us that Christ spoke,
that the Evangelists writ as they did; the whole Scripture, God knows, will be
cast aside also; yes, and become a comfortless, an unwarranted Book. Whence
fallows a total ruin of Christian Religion. This is not my assertion, but the
great St. Austins (the Quotation is known) Tom. 6. contra epistolam Manichei,
cap. 5. Ego vero Evangelio non crederem, etc. I would not believe the Gospel,
unless the Authority of the Church moved me to believe it.

Our Doctor may think he salves this objection in his next ensuing lines, page
4. where he says; To these (that is to Scripture) we add, not as Authors, but
as helpers of our Faith, and Heirs of the Doctrine Apostolical the sentiments
and Catholic Doctrine of the Church in the Ages next after the Apostles; not
that we think, etc. I Answer: Here is, no man knows what, confusedly shut up in
two Ambiguous Words; Heirs and Helpers: to get out of darkness, I might first
demand; how knows the Doctor now exactly, what the Sentiments, or Catholic
Doctrine of the Church Anciently were in the Ages next after the Apostles? The
Proposal of our present Church (overgrown, as he says, with a thousand Errors)
is an infufficient warranty: Both Fathers, and Councils were even then
Fallible; and had they been Infallible, their writings since that, may perhaps
have fallen into ill hands, and lost their purity. But I wave this discourse;
and propose to our present purpose this Question only. Are we Christians now
being, obliged under Damnation to believe those Sentiments of the Ancient
Church, as undoubted Helpers, as certain apparent Heirs of Divine Truth, or no?
if not: They cast us wholly upon uncertainties, and may as well help us on to
Err, as hit right: if we are bound to own them as certain Heirs of Divine
Truth; Scripture must assure it, (for says the Doctor, To believe any thing
Divine, that is not Scripture, is a divillish spirit) and undoubtedly affirm
that at least in the Ages next after Christ, there was a society of men, not
liable to Error, that kept our Christian Faith entire without spot or blemish,
faithfully transmitted it to Posterity, etc. Now all I can desire of the Doctor
is, to produce that Scripture, which purifies the Ancient Church only, and
makes the next ensuing Ages of that Church Spurious in Doctrine, fearfully
despicable, and liable to Error. Thus much I am confident he shall never show:
for our dearest Savior that Established a Christian Church, promised he would
be with it to the end of the World. Gods alseeing providence drives not on his
work by halfs, nor leaves his Church when the Doctors fancy lists: Souls are
now as dear to Christ as they were in the Primitive Ages: He shed his Sacred
Blood for All; if then he secured his Church from Error, and directed Souls
into Truth; he does the like favor now, and will not permit his Immaculate
Spouse to beguile them with falsehood.

All therefore the Doctor says here, is a deceitful Paralogism, yes, and
Paradoxes, not to be tolerated. A Paradox it is, to talk of Heirs, and Helpers
of Apostolical Doctrine, and rob them of their Infallibility. A Paradox it is
to say, that these Heirs, and Helpers sent Milions of Souls into the Bosom of
Christ, and cast more Milions in after Ages out of his Bosom, for want of true
Faith. A Paradox it is, that Christ only remained with his Church for a time,
and then left it destitute of Divine Assistance; yes, and in points most
Fundamental. But the greatest Paradox of all which amuses every one, is; That
now toward an end of the World, a new sort of unknown men (the Doctor is one)
will become our Teachers, and tell us exactly how long Christ was with his
Church, and when he leaped out of it. He was with it, say they, for some three
or four hundred years, and then left it, fluctuating, tossed, and at last saw
it without Mercy overturned with a deluge of Errors. And credit this we must
upon their bare word, because they say it; without Sctipture, without Reason,
yes, expressly contrary to both, and all Ancient Authority.

The Doctor to prove the Church by Scripture only, quotes St. Austin in his
Margent, page 4. de unit. ecclesiae cap. 3, and 4. 5. but both mangles his
words, and conceals the force of his Argument. Sunt certe (says the Saint)
libri Dominici quorum Authoritati utrique consentimus, utrique credimus, etc.
There are certain books of our Lord (He means Scripture) to whose Authority we
both yield, we both believe: Ibi Quaeramus ecclesiam, Let us look for the
Church there etc. That is, seeing we both, who now dispute, admit of Scripture,
and believe it, let us upon such a supposition go forward and prove the Church
by Scripture: which is an excellent way of Arguing; but if any question the
Authority of Scripture it self, take it we must (when we make a right Analysis)
upon the Church's Authority solely, and say with St. Austin: I would not
believe the Scripture but for the Church.

I omit the brags he has page 6. of Protestants being more then indubitably
Conquerors (mere empty words) and observe how he puts himself on a new trouble,
page 7th. where he says; Whatsoever we cannot prove by Scripture we disclaim
it. I will not here tell the Doctor he must then disclaim every Tenet of
Protestant Religion, (no more in Scripture then Arianism) as it stands opposite
to the Roman Faith: But briefly, I argue thus; A Church secured from Error, and
which Infallibly proposes Divine Truth can be proved by Scripture, or cannot:
If the first, there was, is, and shall ever be in the World a society of
Christians un-crrable, and certain in Doctrine that neither injures Faith, nor
(by intromitting Novelties) destroy Apostolical Doctrine; for the Scripture,
(as we now suppose) says so, and what it says is true. One favor therefore I
humbly beg of the Doctor that he would by a plain designation point me out this
unerrable body of Christians; and clearly also design me such known out cast
Christians, that are not of this Moral body; my demand is reasonable, and
require's no long discourse, nor any definition of a Church, but to have this
unerring company designed, and heartily.

If the Scripture Warrant's not such an Infallible company of Christians; the
Doctor (though he pretend to it) can never believe with a true, and infallible
Act of Supernatural faith, that the Ancient Church Inherited Catholic
Doctrine; that it sent Milions of Souls to Heaven: That what we now read, is
the Apostles Creed; that the Ancient Councils erred not in their Definitions;
No, nor that there ever was, or is now, Pure, and Incorrupt Scripture among
Christians: I say, he cannot believe these truths with a certain assent of
Supernatural Faith, but at most with a mere opinative Judgment, which may as
well be wrong, as right; false, as true: staggering assuredly it is, and not
steady (if a mere Opinion) yes, and wholly destitute of that strength, which
God requires to Supernatural Faith.

In his 10th. page he is fierce against the Church of Rome, for pretending to a
power not only of declaring New Articles of Faith, but of making new Symbols,
and Creeds, and imposing them as necessary to Salvation. To this purpose he
cites the Bull of Leo the tenth against Martin Luther; whose twenty seventh
Proposition is this, and condemned; Certum est, in manu Ecclesiae, aut Papae,
non esse statuere Articulos fidei, imo nec leges morum seu bonorum operum. It
is certain that it is not in the hand of the Church, or Pope, to appoint, or
determine Articles of Faith, nor Laws of manners, or good Works.

First, here is not a word of making new Articles or Creeds; and the word
statuere may as well signify to determine a Question not yet decided, as to
make any thing a new; but to pass these niceties, and show clearly the Doctors
Error: I demand whether the Fathers assembled together in the Nicen Council
made new Articles of Faith against the Arians? whether St. Athanatius in his
Creed did the like? who was no Pope. What the Doctors Answer is here, is ours
also for all and every Definition made by the Church in after Ages.

And I would have him to reflect, that as he now cavil's at both Pope, and
Church, for constituting new Articles; so the Arians might have done against
the Nicen Council, and Athanasius his Creed; yes, and cried out, Novelties,
novelties, as loud as the Doctor. In a word then, I answer, with St. Gregory in
Ezechiel homit. XVI post. med. page 1164. 6. edit. Antwerp. 1615. that, per
incrementa temporum Crevit scientia spiritalium Patrum: With time Faith
increased, hut how? not that either the Church or Pope have Power to coin
Articles at pleasure, or to force Christians to the acceptance of Novelties
contrary to Scripture, or ancient Tradition; No, but the Power given them is to
dispense the Mysteries of the Word of God, to lay out more clearly verities
contained in Scripture, (so the Fathers did in the Nicen Council, when they
defined the Son to be consubstantial with his Father, which word (...) is never
read in Scripture) Finally, to declare more explicitly what the Ancient
Tradition of the Church, and sense of the Fathers has been; within such a
compass the Church holds it self, when after mature deliberation it defines in
Council.

Hence both Divines, and Canonists teach; that rigorously speaking, the Church
has no new Articles of Faith; but only a more full, and explicit knowledge of
that belief, which anciently was among Primitive Christians; yet none there is,
that reads our Doctor, both in the page now cited, and elsewhere after; but
must have this persuasion wrought in him, that the Church and Pope, may define
as it were at Random; make new Articles, new Creeds as they list; and impose
them as necessary to Salvation. All is false, and fraudulent dealing.

CHAP. II.
The Doctors Quotations not true. His Errors concerning the Index
Expurgatorius. His ill dealing with Sixtus Senensis.

THe Doctor in his tenth page, to prove our making new Articles, cites
Augustinus Triumphus de Ancon^a quaest. 59 Art. 1 and 2. and pitifully abuses
that Catholic Author, who in his resolution Art. 1. ^* concludes thus;
Respondeo quod hanc quaestionem determinat Augustinus libro 1. de symbolo, ubi
vult, quod omnis symboli condendi, and ordinandi in sancta dei ecclesia
terminatur authoritas. I Answer, St Austin resolves this Question, lib. 1. de
symbolo, Where he says, That all Authority of making and setting a Symbol in
order is within the bounds of the Church. (Mark first St. Austins words; Omnis
authoritas condendi and ordinandi, etc.) Then follow these other in Anconitanus
his resolution, (wrongfully interpreted, and unhandsomly mangled by the Doctor)
Ex his patere potest, quod novum symbolum condere, solum ad Papam spectat; nam
in symbolo ponuntur illa, quae universaliter pertinent ad Christianam fidem: By
this you may see that to make a new Symbol belongs only to the Pope; for those
things are set down in a Symbol, which Universally concern Christian Faith.
These last words which explicate both St. Austins, and Anconitanus his meaning
are fraudulently left out by the Doctor: Briefly then, condere Symbolum are St.
Austins words; and both in his sense, and this Authors, stand consignificant
with Ordinare; which is not to make a Novelty in Faith, but to reduce to a
Method, or short form those Points which Christians both now do believe, and
have anciently believed in the general; most evidently this is Anconitanus his
sense: First, by the words now cited ( Nam in symbolo ponuntur illa, quae
Universaliter, etc.) 2. By the express Doctrine in his resolution, where he
says; Una fuit fides antiquorum, and modernorum, one Faith there was
anciently; And now; 3. by his answer to the 2d. Argument Art. 2d. Ad secundum
est dicendum; quod ad illa quae in sacra Scriptura ponuntur, non debet fieri
aliqua additio erroris, vel falsitatis, vel diminutio veritatis; sed addere
veritatem, quam continet (Scriptura) explicare and semper licuit Ecclesiae, and
semper licet. To the second Argument we say, That to those things which are in
Holy Scripture, no addition of error, or falsehood is to be made, nor diminution
of Truth. But to add a verity, which the Scripture contains, was, and is ever
lawful in the Church.

As he deals with Anconitanus, so he abuses Panormitanus cap. cum Christus;
the Doctor cites him thus; Papa potest inducere novum Articulum fidei, and
leav's of there: But Panormitan's words are, Papa potest inducere novum
Articulum fidei, declarando istud jus Divinum and ex hoc infertur quod ista
Constitutio respicit praeterita. The The Pope can introduce a new Article of
Faith by declaring it to be Divine; whence we have, that this constitution
relates to things past. Mark; a declarative Sentence, and of things anciently
believed.

Lastly, he cites Ostiensis, and Ferdinandus de Inciso apud Petrum Ciezam, an
Author I never heard of; but assuredly most false it is, that any Catholic
Writer says; The Souls of men are in the hands of the Pope, and that in his
Arbritration Religion does consist.

Page 12. he tells us of a story of the King of Spain giving Commission to
purge all Catholic Authors, with such secrecy that the Expurgatory Index might
not be imparted to any. Howsoever, says he, by Divine providence Joannes
Pappus, and Franciscus Junius 13 years after met with it, made it public; and
since it came abroad against the Inquisitors wills; they own it, and have
printed it themselves: Yet more: in their Index, some words in St. Chrisostom,
others in St. Austin are commanded to be blotted out; yes, and Sixtus Senensis
in his Epistle Dedicatory highly commends the Pope, Pius Quintus, for purging
all Catholic Authors, and chiefly the writings of the Ancient Fathers. Thus
the Doctor: and he lays a foul aspertion on us for corrupting of Witnesses,
and razing out the Records of Antiquity.

I answer that he is both false, and faulty through this whole Paragraph;
faulty, in telling us of a clancular commission given by the King of Spain to
the Inquisitors, etc. without directing us to either Book, or Index where to
find it: Faulty he is, in asserting (without nameing his Author) that the
Inquisitors were forced to own the Expurgatory Index, because Pappus, and
Iunius had first printed it against their wills; faulty, finally he is, for
citing words razed out of St. Chrisostom by an Index expurgatorius, and leaving
his Reader in darkness where to find the Quotations.

Now to his falsities which are evident: In St. Chrisostoms works (says he)
Printed at Basil these words [ The Church is not Built upon the Man, but upon
the Faith] are commanded to be blotted out: yet they are read in his first
Homily, upon that of St. John, Ye are my Friends. Here are two falsities: The
first is, that these words are commanded to be blotted out of St. Chrisostom's
works; whereas, most certainly the Prohibition falls only on St Chrisostom's
Index made by Froben, Printer at Basil, or some of his Friends: And is it not
gross to mistake the Index of a Book (drawn out by God knows whom) for the
Authors Doctrine? If the Reader please to see, that I wrong not the Doctor, let
him turn to this Index published by Cardinal Sandonal's order, and Printed at
Madrid, anno 1612. page 556. he shall read Ex D. Iohannis Chrisostomi Indice
Basileae ex officina Frobeniana, dele sequentia: and, in the very next page (1.
columna) soon after the middle these words of Frobens Index. Ecclesia non super
hominem, sed supra fidem aedificata.

The second Error is, that these words are found in the Homily now cited upon
St. John; believe it, there is not a syllable like them in that Homily. Again,
says the Doctor, these words of St. Chrisostom [There is no merit, but what is
given us by Christ] are commanded to be blotted out; yet, they are found in his
Sermon upon Pentecost. Here are three Errors at once: First, the Index is taken
for the Text: Secondly, Frobens words are not as the Doctor gives them, but
thus: Salus nostra non ex merito nostro: Our Salvation is not by our merit, see
the Index, page 558. 1. columna. 3. These words. There is no merit, etc. are
not in the Homily of Pentecost, but in the other upon St. John; Ye are my
Friends: and as they stand in St. Chrisostom's Text, are thus ( Frobens
Edition) Nullum in nobis meritum nisi quod contalit Christus. There is no Merit
but what Christ gave us, which is most Catholic Doctrine. Again, those words:
The Church is not built upon the man, etc. Are not in that Homily on St. John,
Ye are my Friends: but in St. Chrisostom's Homily on Pentecost. In a word, to
speak plain English, our Doctor cited Kim Kam, one Homily for an other, which
may pass for a fault or falsity, make of it what you please. However, he may
yet reply, though he miscited the places, at least grant we must, that those
words, The Church is not built upon the man, etc. are extant in the Pentecost
Homily; and the Index Expurgatory commands them to be razed out. I answer, that
it commands them to be razed out of Frobens Index, is granted; out of St.
Chrisostom's works, is denied; which yet our Doctor affirms: And herein John
Pappus is the more honest man of the two, for he ingeniously confesses in the
3d. page of his Preface, ( anno 1599) that we never yet had the boldness to
change or cancelate a word in the writings of Ecclesiastical Authors, read his
11th. line: Eo audaciae nondum proruperunt, etc. The Doctor may yet demand why
then purge we Frobens Index, of words found in St. Chrisostom's Works? I
answer, because, as they stand nudely in that Index divested of their precedent
and subsequent words, they may render a harsher sense to a Captious Reader, and
not sound well to any ear, though pondered with a further explication of the
Author, they soon lose the harshness and clear themselves. And so really is
this very sentence, if you will compare it with those following words of St.
Chrisostom in Frobens Edition: Hoc est, super confessionem, super sermones
pietatis, etc. That is, Christ built his Church not upon the man, as man, but
upon Peter, confessing and piously acknowledging his Saviors Divinity, which
Flesh and Blood taught him not, etc. You see therefore a sentence weighed out
of its circumstances changes often most blamless Doctrine, and speaks well with
them, less well without them. One only instance in Doctor Tailors 167. page
shall serve for our purpose, where he cites Bellarmine thus: If the Pope should
Err by commanding sin and forbiding Virtue, the whole Church were bound to
believe that Vices were good, and Virtue evil; unless she would sin against her
Conscience. These words are Bellarmin's, and as they stand in the Doctor, sound
harshly, (and therefore he Quotes them) but read in Bellarmine they have an
excellent sense, and directly prove that neither Church nor Pope can Err:
whereof see more in the 28. Chapter of this Treatise: So true it is, that words
as they run on in the Context of an Author, are often harmless, though stripped
of their adjuncta, they may prove hurtful to a less diligent Reader. Our Doctor
in his Disswasive is almost endless, with these maimed and half-quoted
Authorities.

Observe lastly, good Reader, how unworthily the Doctor (page 13.) deals with
Sixtus Senensis by turning the Genuine sense of his words into another, highly
injurious: Mark I beseech you. Sixtus Praises Pope Pius the 5th. for purging
the Ancient Fathers, vitiated by modern Heretics, etc. But our Doctor (for
sooth) will not allow him this sense, but makes him speak as if he extolled the
Pope for razing out the Fathers own Doctrine. To know the truth, read Sixtus
his Epistle Dedicatory, (it is before his Bibliotheca) where he speaks thus to
Pius Quintus: Deinde expurgari, and emaculari curasti omnia Catholicorum
Scriptorum, ac praecipue Veterum Patrum Scripta haereticorum aetatis nostrae
faecibus contaminata, and venenis infecta. You have caused (says he) all the
writings of Catholic Authors, and chiefly the Ancient Fathers stained with the
dreggs of Heretics in this our Age, and poisoned with their Venom, to be
purged, and made clear from blemish. What is here more offensive then to take
Poison out of a sound body? Yet our Doctor to persuade the world, that Popes
are ever busy in cancelating the Records of Antiquity, gives you only Sixtus
his first words: You have purged the Ancient Fathers, etc. and there
fraudulently leaves of, utterly concealing what follows, and clears all:
Hereticorum, faecibus contaminata, etc. that is, You have purged the Ancient
Fathers, contaminated with Heresy in these our days.

Briefly then our Doctor by this Quotation would either have his Reader judge
that Sixtus praised the Pope for blotting out the Authentic writings of the
Fathers, or only for purging them from later Heresy: If the second, its worthy
praise; if the first, viz. that the Pope is here commended for blotting out the
writings of the Ancient Fathers (which is the only thing aimed at) I do affirm
this a flat corruption, a wrong (as you see) to Sixtus. A ginne to catch the
unwary Reader; and therefore deplorable in a Doctor of Divinity. What is
further opposed in that 13. page of places razed out of St. Austin is an Error;
read the above mentioned Expurgatory Index, page 37. and you shall find the
correction to be made upon Erasmus and Ludovicus his Notes, not on St. Austins
words; and page the 39, you have Cluadius Chevalonius his Index upon St. Austin
amended, not any syllable of the Saint's corrected. And this is the first,
which our Doctor storms at: Solus Deus est adorandus: God only is to be adored.
Frobens Indices mentioned in the same page of our Doctor, deserved correction,
wholly contrary to the Originals.

CHAP. III.
The Doctors Quotations not right: Prayer for the dead proves a Purgatory.

TO what the Doctor has in his 2d. Section, page the 14th. concerning the
power of making new Articles, we have answered already, and say that the Church
coyns no Novelty; yet may explicitly declare what anciently was believed
implicitly. The Declaration is new, the substance of the Article as old as
Christianity: In the next page after, he had a fling at a new Article ready for
stamp concerning the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin, (which is
more then he knows) He passes to his third Section of Indulgences, page 16.
where he cites St. Antoninus Archbishop of Florence part 1. summae cap. 3.
saying, We have nothing expressly for Indulgences in Scripture etc. The Doctor
omits what follows immediately; quamvis ad hoc inducatur illud Apostoli 2. cor.
2. si quid donavi vobis propter vos in persona Christi. Although says
Antoninus, that of the Apostle is alleged, si quid, etc. He cites again our
Bishop Fisher in Art. 18. Lutheri to this sense; At the beginning of the Church
there was no use of Indulgences. Answer, he says it not so absolutely, but
with this interrogation; Quis jam de Indulgentjis mirari potest? and expressly
in the beginning of that Article has these words: Fuit tamen non nullus earum
usus, ut aiunt, apud Romanos vetustissimus, quod vel ex stationibus in urbe
frequentissimis intelligi datur. There was, as they say, a most ancient Use and
Practice of these Indulgences at Rome, which thing the most frequented Stations
of that City gives us to understand.

In the rest of that Section, he has only Vulgar Objections answered over and
over, and a number of calumnies a rising from the misunderstanding of Catholic
Doctrine: I therefore leave him, for it is not my task to repeat what has been
most largely writ concerning Indulgences by others.

What I find more material in the Doctors fourth Section is, page 27. Where he
tells us our Writers vainly suppose, that when the H. Fathers speak of Prayer
for the dead, they conclude for Purgatory; For it is true, says he, the
Fathers did Pray for the dead; But how? that God would show them Mercy, and
hasten their Resurrection, etc. Mark well, that God would show them Mercy:
whence I argue, if the Souls prayed for, be in Heaven, they have Mercy, the
sentence is given for their Eternal happiness; if in Hell, they are wholly
destitute of Mercy* vain therefore were the Prayers of the Fathers for Mercy,
unless there be a third place where mercy can be showed them. I would willingly
know of the Doctor (if he would deal heartily) what St. Austins ingenious
meaning was when he prayed thus for his Mother Monica lib. 9. confess. cap. 13.
Dimitte illi and tu, debita sua, si qua etiam contraxerit post tot annos post
aquam salutis: Forgive my Mother her debts, if she has, after so many years
contracted any, since Baptism: What are these debts? Again, Non se interponat,
nec vi, nec insidiis Leo, vel Draco; neque enim respondebit illa, nihil se
debere, ne convincatur, etc. Sed respondebit dimissa debita sua ab eo, etc. Let
not that Infernal Enemy, intermeddle by his force, or treachery; she will not
answer that she owes nothing, least she be convicted, but will say her debts
are remitted by him, etc. Afterward he beggs of his Brethren to Pray for his
deceased Mother, at the Altar; and above in the same Chapter speaking to
Almighty God, he gives this reason why he Prays: Quia vero non requiris
delicta vehementer, fiducialiter speramus aliquem apud te locum inveniri
Indulgentiae: Because you deal not severely with offenses; confident we are
that a place for Mercy may be found, for Pardon and Remission; that is in plain
language for Remission of Pains: But in Heaven all is remitted, in Hell there
is nothing forgiven. Let the Doctor make here the inference, and conclude for
Purgatory: There is no avoiding it.

Yet he goes on: It is to be remembered that they (the Fathers) made prayers,
and offered for those, who by the confession of all sides, never were in
Purgatory; for the Patriarks, Apostles, etc. and especially for the Blessed
Virgin Mary: So we find in Epiphanius, and Saint Cyril.

The Doctor here is both out, and unlucky in his citations: first, there is not
one word (in either place cited) of the Blessed Virgin. Secondly, Not a
syllable of Pardon, or Remission of Debts, when a memory is made of Patriarks,
Apostles, etc. (which is only to the purpose) but expressly the contrary. Be
pleased to hear St. Epiphanius Heresy 75. where he speaks thus: Pro justis,
and peccatoribus memoriam facimus, pro peccatoribus quidem, misericordiam Dei
implorantes, pro justis vero, and Patribus, and Patriarchis, Prophetis,
Apostolis, Evangelistis, etc. ut dominum Iesum ab hominum ordine separemus per
honorem quem ipsi exhibemus, and adorationem ipsi praestemus; that is, We
remember both just men, and sinners; for sinners we implore Mercy; for the
just, and for the Ancient Fathers, and Patriarks, Prophets, Apostles, etc. that
we may separate our Lord Jesus from the Order of men (living) by the honor we
exhibit, and adoration we give him. Here is no praying for Patriarks, and
Apostles, to have Pardon, or Remissio (as St. Austin did for his Mother) but a
memory of them to honor Christ Jesus. St. Cyril also cited Catech. Mystagog.
5. is more plain against the Doctor: ( Cum hoc sacrificium offerimus (says he)
postea facimus memoriam etiam eorum omnium qui ante nobis obdormierunt, primum
Patriarcharum, Prophetarum, Apostolorum, Martyrum, ut Deus Observe praying to
Saints.
orationibus illorum, and deprecationibus suscipiat nostras preces. When we
offer up this Sacrifice, we afterward make a memory of all those who are
departed this life; and first of the Patriarks, Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs,
that God by their Prayers and intercessions, would accept of our prayers:
Deinde pro defunctis Patribus, and Episcopis, denique pro omnibus oramus qui
inter nos vita functi sunt, maximum esse credentes animarum juvamen Observe the
Sacrifice of the Altar is offered for the deceased.
pro quibus offertur obsecratio sancti illius and tremendi, quod in altari
positum est, sacrificji. Then we pray for the deceased Fathers, and Bishops who
dyed amongst us, believing it a mighty help of Souls, for whom that holy, and
dreadful Sacrifice, laid on the Altar, is offered up. And eight lines after: Ad
eundem modum and nos pro defunctis peccatoribus precationes adhibemus, non
quidem coronam plectimus, sed Christum pro nostris peccatis mactatum offerimus,
ut and nobis, and illis eum qui benignissimus est, propitium reddamus. In like
manner we pray for departed sinners, not making them a Crown, but we offer up
Christ slain for our sins, to make him who is most benign, propitious, and
favorable both to our selves, and departed sinners: Unluckily, I say; did the
Doctor make use of this place in his Disswasive from Popery, which is all over
old Popish Doctrine. First, a memory is made of Patriarks, Apostles, etc. not
to have Pardon, or Remission; but that God by their Prayers accept of ours:
Plain Popery. 2. We pray for all the deceased, believing those Souls are
mightily benefitted, for whom that holy and dreadful Sacrifice of the Altar is
offered: Two points of Popery more. 3. We offer Christ Jesus Sacrificed,
mactatum, slain on the Altar; to the end that we may make Almighty God, who is
most benign, merciful and propitious, both to our selves, and to the dead.
Still nothing but Popery.

By what is here said, you may see the fraud of the Doctor, who unlearnedly
argues thus: The Fathers prayed as well for Saints, as sinners, Ergo, from
prayer for the dead no conclusion for Purgatory. Answer: These Fathers made a
memory of B. Saints, as the Church still does, but never prayed that they might
be released from punishment, or have their debts forgiven, as St. Austin did
for his Mother. Here then is the true Argument, and a most efficatious one: The
Fathers prayed for deceased Souls, that they might have Mercy, Pardon, and
Remission of Debts contracted in this life: They prayed that God would be
propitious, and favorable to them; and for this end offered up Christ Jesus
Sacrificed on the Altar: therefore the Fathers supposed a place, where Mercy,
Pardon, and Remission might be had, where God can show himself propitious to
them, and the unbloody Sacrifice may be offered on the Altar, for the
cancelling their debts, and abating their torments. But this place is neither
Heaven nor Hell, in the one, all debts are pardoned; in the other is no
Remission: Ergo, a third place or Purgatory is hence rightly concluded.

CHAP. IV.
The Doctors Quotations still amiss. St. Austin, and Otho Frisingensis are
abused by him.

THe Doctor, page 30. cites St. Austin, and Otho Frisingensis against the
Doctrine of Purgatory, but plainly corrupts both. St. Austin is quoted in his
Enchiridion, cap. 69. and lib. 21. de civitate cap. 26. as one that doubts of
Purgatory: By the way our Adversary, and the Church of England go higher, and
expressly condemn the Doctrine of Purgatory. So the Doctor, page 28. which is
more then St. Austin dared to venture on: But let that pass: He gives you St.
Austins words in English thus: Whether Purgatory be to be found or not, may be
inquired, and possibly it may be found, and possibly it may never. Answ. There
are no such words; and possibly it may never: in either place of St. Austin;
but here is the least of Errors, for the whole drift of the Saints discourse is
mistaken, who first lays this Principle in his precedent Chapter 68. that some
are Purged by the Fire of Tribulation, or Grief for the loss of Temporal Goods
in this Life, yet keep to the True Foundation which is Christ; and such a man
is saved (says St. Austin) as it were by the Fire of Tribulation. Next he
gives the reason of this assertion, as follows: Quia urit eum rerum dolor, quas
dilexerat, amissarum, etc. Because the grief he has for things he loved,
torments him, yet shakes not the Foundation he is fortifyed withal; As who
would say, he has a sense for the loss of Temporals, yet the Foundation is not
subverted.

Upon this reason: Quia urit eum rerum dolor, etc. these words immediately
follow, cap. 69. Tale aliquid etiam fieri post hanc vitam incredibile non est.
Et utrum ita sit quaeri potest; and aut inveniri aut latere nonnullos fideles
per ignem quendam purgatorium quanto magis minusue bona pereuntia dilexerunt,
tanto tardius citiusque saluari: That such a like thing be also after this
life, is not incredible: What is not incredible? [Mark well the connection
between urit eum dolor rerum amissarum, and the ensuing words: Tale aliquid
etiam post hanc vitam fieri non est incredibile.] This is not incredible, that
as some are punished in this life, for their too much affection to worldly
commodities, by grief for the loss of them; so likewise it is not incredible,
that they suffer a torment in those purging flames upon that account: Of this
particular pain, says the Saint, we may inquire, whether it be a part of
Purgatory, or no? whether faithful Souls find it there, or it be yet latent?
Find what I beseech you? Quanto magis, minusue, etc. that by How much more, or
less they loved their perishing goods, so much sooner, or later they are saved,
and come to Heaven: Which last words plainly gives us St. Austins meaning, and
show that he doubted not of a Purgatory (which he here supposes) but calls
into question such a particular pain, as is expiatory of lesser transgressions.
The ground of all is taken out of St. Austins Doctrine, who much inclined to
this Opinion, that lesser offenses are usually purged by the fire of
Tribulation in this Life. So Suarez observes, Tom. 4. in 3. part. disp. 45. nu.
23. Fine. Et ideo dixit Augustinus, haec peccata leviora in hoc saeculo purgari
per Tribulationem. And therefore St. Austin said that these lesser sins are
purged by Tribulation in this life. See his 41. Sermon de sanctis Tom. 10.
where he first distinguishes between great sins, and little ones; then shows
the penalty due to both: Finally, concludes thus of lesser sins (and he
specifies the too much love of worldly substance) Ita peccata ipsa in hoc
saeculo purgantur, ut in futuro ille ignis purgatorius, aut non inveniat, aut
certe parum inveniat quod exurat. So these lesser sins are purged in this Life,
that in the next the fire of Purgatory will not either find at all, or truly
very little to punish. The Saint goes on: Si autem nec in tribulatione Deo
gratias egimus, nec bonis operibus peccata redimimus, ipsi tamdiu in illo igne
purgatorio moras habebimus quamdiu supradicta peccata minuta tanquam ligna,
faenum, stipula, consumantur. But if in our Tribulation we neither give thanks
to God, nor redeem our sins by good works; we shall stay in Purgatory until
those above mentioned little sins, like Wood, Hay, and Stubble be consumed.
Thus the Saint, who may rationally inquire, as he does; yes, and affirm, that
those lesser transgressions are usually cancelled by the fire of Tribulation in
this Life. The Doctor perhaps will say: These Sermons de sanctis are not St.
Austins, for-sooth, because they please not his Lordship: Let him prove this
Sermon now cited is not. The same certitude, says Bellar. de seript.
Ecclesias. cannot be had of those Sermons; yet credible it is, that for the
most part they are St. Austins. Be it how you will, they are of greater
Authority then any the Doctor can give us against Purgatory. I hope the 2.
Books de genesi contra Manichaeos, are undoubtedly St. Austins: Let the Doctor
read the 20th Chapter of his 2d. Book: Fine; he shall find these words, qui
forte agrum suum non coluerit, and spinis eum opprimi permiserit, habet in hac
vita maledictionem terrae suae in omnibus operibus suis, and post hanc vitam
habebit vel ignem purgationis, vel paenam aeternam. He that cultivates not his
Field, but suffers it to be over grown with Thorns, has a curss on him in all
he does; and after this life, shall either have a Purgatory, or suffer pains
for ever. St. Austins Books, de civitate were never doubted of: Read the 16.
Chapter of his 21. Book, where he says: If one be regenerated by the
Sacraments of Christ our Lord (as by Baptism) and so pass from the power of
darkness, etc. Non solum in paenis non praeparetur aeternis, sed ne ulla quidem
post mortem purgatoria tormenta patiatur. Has not only any Eternal punishment
prepared for him, but not so much, as any purging torments after death. Again,
in Psalm. 37. he distinguishes a double Fire, the one Eternal, the other he
calls a Fire, Qui emundabit eos qui per ignem salui erunt, which is more
grievous then any torment in this world: It would be endless to produce other
Authorities for Purgatory.

Now to Otho Frisingensis whom the Doctor cites lib. 8. Croni. cap. 26. and
says, Purgatory in his time was got no farther then to a quidam asserunt: Some
say there is one. Answ. The Doctor says, He knows not what, and strangely
abuses this Author; Famous both for Virtue, and Nobility. In a word; The Title
of that 26. Chapter is this: Si post judicium extra infernum inferiorem, etc.
Whether after the day of Judgment any place for lesser pain remains out of
Hell, and what is to be thought of little ones who have Original sin only. Thus
the Title, which meddles not with Purgatory: The Chapter then begins; His
dictis indagandum puto si transacto judicio extra infernum inferiorem ad
leviores paenas locus remaneat; esse quippe apud inferos locum purgatorium, in
quo salvandi, vel tenebris tantum afficiantur, vel expiationis igne decoquantur
etc. We are to inquire, says Otho, whether, when Judgment is past, there
remains a place for lighter punishment out of Hell, for there is place of
Purgatory [ apud inferos] amongst those that are under ground, wherein saved
Souls are in darkness, and tormented with Fire. Then follows the quidam
asserunt of the Doctor which relates not to Purgatory, but to that other place
after Judgment, whereof Otho makes inquiry, and he answers negatively, viz.
That such a place, when all causes are heard in the General Judgment, remains
not; though some Fathers inclined to think the contrary: See Lactan. lib. 7.
cap. 21. and Origin Homil. 14. in Lucam, and these perhaps Otho impugned: Next
he discourses how Infants, that dye with Original sin only, are to be
punished, whether with a milder pain or no? Here is the substance of that
Chapter. I could wish the Doctor would read those words of Otho, toward the
end of this 26. Chapter [ Quod si locus etiam ille superior, non ut prius ad
purgationem] which manifestly declare the Authors meaning, nothing God knows
contrary to Purgatory.

Page the 33. he cites Maldonat, alleging diverse Greek Fathers denying that
the Souls of the dead ever do appear: what is that to our purpose of Purgatory?
Maldonat gives you St. A(...)ins severe censure against them, and a proof is
evident. Moses, and Elias appeared to our Savior in Mount Tabor: Ergo, Souls
do appear.

The Authorities he brings against Purgatory, page 34. are both so weak, and
vulgar, that they deserve no answer. There is no place of Penance, says, he
out of St. Ciprian, There is no Effect of Satisfaction. Answ. Most true
doubtless; for this life is the place allotted for wholesome penance. In
Purgatory there is no meritorious satisfaction. I see not where the least
shadow of a difficulty lies in his next Quotation out of St. Denis, Ecclesias.
Hierarch. cap. 7. whose words faithfully rendered are these. Those that have
lived holily, looking on the true promises of God, as if they saw the verity of
them in his Resurrection, with firm and true hope, full of Divine joy, go to
the extremity of death, as to an end of their holy conflicts (...). (to wit in
this life) and therefore the Saint adds: Because they certainly know that all
their conflicts for their future and entire Resurrection, will be safe in a
perfect and Eternal Life. He goes on. For holy Souls while they are in this
life, can be changed to worse; but in the second Resurrection by a likeness
they have with God, they cannot be changed. Thus St. Denis. Now let the Doctor
make his Argument: Holy men relying on Gods promises full of Hope and Joy,
consider death as an end of their conflicts in this World, knowing a happy
Resurrection will recompense their grievances: Ergo, there is no purgatory or
penal suffering hereafter. A most powerful Argument. Had the Doctor only
reflected on what Bellarmine cites lib. 1. de Purgatorio cap. 10. initio. out
of this very 7th. Chapter of St. Denis, he would never have troubled the Reader
with so unweighty an Objection. Bellarmine relates St. Denis his words thus:
Accedens deinde Venerandus Antistes, etc. The Venerable Prelate, then coming,
makes his Prayer over the dead, and that Prayer is to beg for Gods Clemency,
that he remit all sins done by the deceased party, through humane infirmity,
and set him in a place of Light, and the Region of the Living. The substance
hereof you have, Bibliotheca Patrum saeculo 1. Colen Print Page 135. 1. Columna.

Next the Doctor cites St. Justin Martyr questi. and Respons ad Orthodoxos
questi. 75. saying, That when the Soul is parted from the body, (...) presently
there is made a separation of the lust and Unjust: the Unjust are carried by
Angels into places they deserved, but the Souls of the Just (...) where they
have the Conversation of Angels, etc. Answ. Take notice first, how the Doctor
varies from himself; page 29. Where we heard him speak thus: Sixtus Senensis
says, and says very true, That Justin Martyr did affirm, that before the day
of Judgment the souls of men are kept in secret receptacles, reserved to the
sentence of the great Day; and that before then, no man receives according to
his works done in this Life: Here, presently, the Souls are carried into
Paradise, that is into Heaven, If Iustins Authority be for the Doctors purpose,
otherwise there is a third place. These Souls therefore make a long demur,
after their separation from their body in secret Receptacles even to the Day of
Judgment, and yet are carried presently into Heaven; Let him that can, accord
these two Assertions; and learn moreover, that Justin only says, the separation
of the Just and Unjust is made presently (...), but affirms not, that all Just
Souls are forthwith carried into Heaven; if yet, (...) in Iustins sense
signifies Heaven, and not rather another place, whereof see Bellarmine, l. 2.
de Purgat. cap. 7. videtur mihi dicendum. Be it how you will, at most this
Ancient Father only points out the two Final places of Woe and Happiness, for
two sorts of men, which is no way inconsistent with an intermedial place of
Purgatory, or atrium Caeli. Thus much is said to comply with the Doctor, who
cannot but know, that these Quest. and Respon. ad Orthodox. are not Justin
Martyrs. See Bellar. de Script. Eccl. The Authority of St. Ambrose next
following, asserting That death is a Haven of Rest, and makes not our condition
worse, etc. is an excellent saying; for worse he is not, but infinitely better,
that quit of the occasions of living here, is acertained of future Bliss
hereafter; which is the whole drift of the Saint in that fourth Chap. de bono
mort is cited by the Doctor. Read it, and say afterward, whether I say not
true.

The Doctor quotes again St. Gregory Nazianzen, in his 5th. Oration in Plagam
grandinis; by his good leave it is the 15th. not the 5th. as I have seen in
three Editions, that which I follow is Paris Print, anno 1609. page 249. his
words, after he had mentioned the calamities of this World, are (...), etc. I
omit to speak of those great Tribunals in the next life, to which pardon and
impunity in this delivers them; so that it is much better to be chastised and
purged now, then to be sent to punishment (to wit, those Tribunals.) Now is a
time of penalty, (...) not of Purgation: Therefore says the Doctor, there is no
Purgatory: I say contrary, that the Saint speaks not a word of Purgatory, but
only denies a purgation of Life and Manners after those Tribunals: The
following particles (fraudulently omitted by the Doctor) make my assertion
evident; for says St. Gregory: As he that is mindful of God, is superior to
death, so to the departed, (as holy David affirms) Non est in Inferno confessio
nec morum correctio, So in Hell there is no confession, nor correction of
Manners: and he gives this Reason, because God here shuts up both Life and
Action with a final sentence of things done, etc. St. Hilary, and St. Macarius
speak only of the two Final States of Souls, and make no third place Eternal.
Conformable to this, Olimpiodorus cited by the Doctor, speaks in Eccles. cap.
11. his words are Biblioth. patrum Com. 2. Paris Print 1624. page 670. (...),
etc. In what place soever of Light or Darkness; that is, whether in a filthy
station of Wickedness, or a good state of Virtue, a man is taken when he dies,
in that degree and order he remains for ever; which is to say, great sins will
abide with the damned for Eternity, and so Virtue shall ever remain with the
Blessed; for says Olympiodorus, He shall either rest in the Light of
everlasting Felicity with the Just, and Christ, King of All; or be tormented in
Darkness with the Wicked, and Prince of this World, the Divil. Most true
Doctrine; for there is no third place Eternal. The Doctor lastly cites St. Leo
Epist. 59. for words not found at all in that Epistle: he writes to Martianus,
and gives thanks for peace restored to the Church, by the Great Council of
Calcedon. See this Epistle Colen Print 1561. Pittyful it is to see such
strengthless Authorities produced, not only against the express Testimony of
other Fathers asserting Purgatory, but more, against the sentiment of the
Universal Church.

But I know not by what chance we have missed a former Argument of our Doctor
against Purgatory: He has it page 29. and speaks thus: Sixtus Senensis says,
and says very true, That many Fathers, as Justin Martyr, Tertullian, St.
Bernard, and others did affirm, that the Souls of men before the Day of
Judgment are kept in secret Receptacles reserved unto the sentence of the great
Day, etc. Then he Argues: if this Opinion be true; the Doctrine of Purgatory is
false; or if not true, it is inconsistent with an Opinion of Fathers so
generally received. Answ. The Doctor has not one true word in this Objection;
false it is, that Sixtus so peremptorily ascribs this Opinion to the Fathers,
he rather makes it his work to interpret them favorably; and to do it,
distinguishes a double beatitude, the one imperfect of Soul only, the other
consummat and perfect of Soul and Body; the first, the Fathers called by
several names of sinus Abrahae, Atrium Dei, sub altar, etc. the other, perfect
Joy, the Glory of the Resurrection, and entire reward of merits, a time of
Coronation, etc. And this later they held was not till the day of Judgment.
Read Sixtus lib. 6. Bibliot. Annot. 345. in his two last Paragraphs Hactenus
and Demum, where after a friendly check given to Ockam, he also takes off the
charge laid on Pope John 22. for any Decree made by him against the present
beatitude of Souls. Again:

False it is that the Doctor exactly set's down in his Marginal Quotation
Sixtus his words; more then half of them are not the Authors, who ends with St.
Bernard at the particle Praebuisse; and our Doctor runs on, in one continued
uniform Character, with a praeter citatos enumerat, etc. yet there is not a
syllable like them in Sixtus, and as they stand in the Doctors Margent are
strangely incoherent: False, finally, it is, that though the Fathers held Souls
as it were immured in secret Receptacles, therefore their Tenet destroys
Purgatory. Why? they may have a Purgatory before they enter those Receptacles:
They may have it in Origens Opinion afterward; yes, and if need were to assert
it, punished they may be for a time in those very secret Cabinets. Devils are
tortured, whether in the material place of Hell, or out of it; and so may souls
be also, though we supposed (against Faith) our Purgatory were not, or no other
then those Receptacles. What I say here, is not in the least to favor a
condemned Opinion by the Church, but only to show the Doctors weak way of
Arguing.

CHAP. V.
The Doctors cavils against Transubstantiation. His false Quotations. His
impertiment Questions and weak Arguments.

THe Doctor in his 5th. Section, page 36. falls upon the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, where he brushes up a few old dusty Arguments answered
every where by our Writers. We know, says he, the very time it began to be
publicly owned, the very Council, etc. Answ. Arius might have said thus much
against the Consubstantiality of the Son of God with his Father, and made it a
Novelty, first owned by the Council of Nice. The vulgar, solid, and true answer
is; that the Doctrine of Transubstantiation was ever believed in the Church,
though more fully, and explicitly declared in the Lateran Council. I say, Was
ever believed, for if the most eminent Fathers that lived before the Lateran
Council, told us that Bread is changed out of his Nature into the Body of
Christ: That by Holy Invocation, it is no more common Bread: That as Water in
Cana of Galilee was changed into Wine; so in the Evangelist Wine is changed
into Blood: That Bread is only Bread before the Sacramental Words, but after
Consecration, is made the Body of Christ. If Ancient Fathers speak thus, (as
most certainly they do, every Polemical Writer furnishes you with these
Testimonies) conclude we must that they either cheated the World into a false
belief, or held as we do, the real Doctrine of Transubstantiation. But my task
is not so much to prove Catholic Doctrine (already done by innumerable
Authors) as to show you our Doctors faylings in his Quotations; page therefore
the 37. he cites Scotus, saying, that before the Lateran Council,
Transubstantiation was not an Article of Faith, as Bellarm. confesses. Most
willingly would I have the Doctor to point me out the distinction and question
where Scotus affirms this; some cite him in 4. distin. 11. q. 3. where he only
says (in all Editions I have seen,) that the Doctrine of Transubstantiation
was more explicitly defined there, but not first made an Article of Faith.

But the Famous (or rather infamous Quotation) is out of Petrus Lombardus
(usually called Magister Sententiarum) the Doctor has it (to his disgrace)
page 38. after he had said, that Transubstantiation was so far then from being
an Article of Faith, that they knew not whether it where true, or no; yes, and
that Petrus Lombardus could not tell whether there was a substantial change or
no.

I beseech you mark an unexcusable Error, Petrus Lombardus, lib. 4. distinct.
11. lit. A. begins thus: Si autem quaeritur qualis sit ista conversio, an
formalis, an substantialis, definire non sufficio, etc. If it be asked what
kind of conversion this is, whether formal, or substantial, I am not sufficient
to define: observe the word ( define.) Then he sets down several Opinions much
in those words the Doctor has. To these Opinions, or Objections, where the
Doctor leaves off fraudulently, Lombardus answers lit. B. Quibus hoc modo
responderi potest, quia non ea ratione dicitur corpus Christi confici verbo
caelesti, quod ipsum corpus in conceptu virginis deinceps formetur: sed quia
substantia panis, vel vini quae ante non fuerat corpus Christi, vel sanguis,
verbo caelesti fit corpus, and sanguis, and ideo sacerdotes dicuntur conficere
corpus Christi, and sanguinem, quia eorum ministerio substantia panis fit caro,
and substantia vini fit sanguis Christi, nec tamen aliquid additur corpori, vel
sanguini, nec augetur corpus Christi, vel sanguis: To which we answer thus:
Christ's Sacred Body is not said after that manner, made by a Heavenly word,
that it is framed a new in the Virgin, but because the substance of Bread and
Wine, which before were not the Body and Blood of Christ; by the Heavenly Word
of Consecration is made that Body, and Blood; and therefore Priests are said to
make Christ's Body and Blood, because by their work, or Ministry, the Substance
of Bread is made the Flesh of Christ and the Substance of Wine is made his
Blood, yet nothing is added to that Body and Blood, neither are made more, or
increased. Thus Lombardus answers the Objection which the Doctor only sets
down; and therefore in plain English he deals with his Reader, as Sr. Morney
Plessy once did with Cardinal Peron; he gives you the Objections for Lombards
own doctrine: that this is most evidently Lombards Doctrine, lit. D. clears
all; chiefly toward the end: Non sunt tamea multa corpora Christi, sed unum
corpus, and unus sanguis, ideoque sive plus, sive minus quis inde percipiat,
omnes aequaliter corpus Christi integerrime sumunt; post consecrationem ergo
non est substantia panis, vel vini, licet species remaneant, est enim species
panis and vini, sicut and sapor, unde aliud videtur, aliud intelligitur. Yet
there are not many bodies of Christ, but one only Body and Blood; and therefore
though any take more or less, all equally, and wholly take the Body of Christ.
After the Consecration then, there is no substance of Bread and Wine, although
the species of Bread and Wine remain, as also the taste, wherefore one thing is
seen, and another is understood. Never did Lateran Council, or any Catholic
Author speak more plainly for Transubstantiation: To be sure of what I here
affirm, I have read two Editions of Petrus Lombard, that which was Printed at
Loven, anno 1546. and the other, most usual, with Albertus Magnus his
Commentaries.

The Doctor next quotes Durandus lib. 4. sent. distinc. 11. qu. 1. Sect.
Propter tertium, who, says he, Publicly maintained that after consecration
the very matter of Bread remained, although he says by reason of the Authority
of the Church it is not to be held. I Answer, That Durand in all that first
question has not a word like what the Doctor asserts; read him Art. 3. he
plainly maintains the Catholic Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and absolutely
concludes that the Substance of Bread and Wine are converted into Christ's Body.
All he has, Sectio propter tertium is, that the Words of Christ might be
verified, although the Body were present with Bread, which is a Theological
disputation, and neither clears the Doctor for his abusing Durand, nor
advances him one whit in his cavils against Transubstantiation.

Page 40. and 41. he gives you a few weak Authorities against our Doctrine, and
thinks to confute all by the Testimony of St. Gregory Nazianzen; cited page 42.
Orat. 2. in Paseha: The Oration is long, and the Doctor well might either by
page or number have helped his Reader to find the place; but thus he deals with
you often, and far worse afterward. Well, St. Gregory in his Works Printed at
Antwerp 1612. Orat. 2. in Pascha page 261. nu. 5. says, Iam vero Paschalis
participes erimus, nunc quidem adhuc typice, tametsi apertius licet quam in
veteri; legale siquidem pascha (nec enim dicere verebor) figurae figura erat
obscurior. These words the Doctor gives you in English, and what conclude they
against Transubstantiation? nothing; for were the Sacred Body of our Dearest
Lord present in the Eucharist, with the substance of Bread, were it (as it now
is) really present without the substance of Bread; In St. Gregori's sense,
Christ concealed under the species of Bread may be rightly called a Figure of
its own self, more clearly hereafter to be showed us in Heaven: For as the
legal Pascha was a Figure, because it more obscurely pointed out this true one
in the New Law: So this also, where Christ Jesus is concealed from our senses,
may be rightly called a Figure, because it exhibits not most clearly that
Savior we shall see with greatest clarity in Heaven. This sense is gathered
out of St. Gregory's next ensuing words (which the Doctor wholly omits) Figurae
erat figura obscurior (says the Saint) aliquam post autem perfectius, and
purius, tum videlicet, cum verbum novum illud nobiscum in regno Patris bibet,
pate faciens and docens, quae nunc plane demonstravit. The legal Pascha was a
more obscure Figure of this Figure which we shall afterward see perfectly, and
with greater clarity; to wit, when the new Word shall drink it with us in his
Fathers Kingdom, laying open himself, and teaching us those things which now he
has fully demonstrated. Mark these last words, very useful to explicate other
Authorities where mention is made of a Sign, a Type, and Figure in this matter;
but they are neither for, or against Transubstantiation, unless the Doctor
shows (which he shall never) that Christ's Sacred Body is so barely Figured in
this Pascha, that it is not also really present. Theodoret and Gelasius cited,
page 43. are answered in every Book by our Writers. The nature of the Symbols,
or Signs are not changed; that is, the Species, or accidents of Bread and Wine
remain; these recide not from their nature: Grace is added. What is here
against Transubstantiation?

I pass by those witty questions which the Doctor moves, page 45. What if a
Priest says: Hoc est corpus meum, over all the Bread in a Bakers shop? does he
turn it into Christ's Body? the like question is, And what if a Minister say the
same words over the same Bread, does he turn it into Holy and Sanctified Bread?
may the People kneel down, and take this as Christ's Body? Again, Whether a
Church-Mouse does eat her Maker? And what if a Mouse, or a viler Creature had
bit the Sacred body of our Savior laid in Bethlem Stable, had they bit their
Maker? Away with these Trifles, they become not a Doctor of Divinity. And be
pleased,

To reflect on one doubty Argument he has, page 46. which is indeed pressing,
but how? to show that he knows not our Catholic Doctrine. Since secondly
(says he) they say that every consecrated wafer is Christ's whole Body, and yet
this wafer is not that Wafer, therefore either this or that is not Christ's
Body, or else Christ has two Bodies, for there are two Wafers. My God! what is
here? out of two Wafers he inferrs two Bodies, as if one from the two parts in
man, his Head, and Feet should infer a necessity of two Souls, or conclude
there are two Gods, one in Heaven and the other in Earth, because Heaven and
Earth are more distinct then two Wafers. That known passage of St. Austin,
Ferebatur in manibus suis in Psalm. 33. When Christ sitting at the Table with
his Disciples, gave them his Sacred Body, ( Ferebat enim illud corpus in
manibus suis, says the Saint) might well have learned the Doctor, that then
there were not two Christ's at the Table. Had he read what I cited above out of
Petrus Lombard: Non sunt tamen multa corpora Christi sed unum corpus, etc. He
might well have spared the labor of this Argument.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Doctors weak Arguments against Communion under one kind. Of his slight
impugning Prayer in an unknown Language. Of his ill Quotations.

THe Doctor in his 6 Section, page 47. treats (as he calls it) of half
Communion, that is of receiving the Holy Sacrament in one kind only; and
besides a few vulgar Objections solved by every Catholic Writer he has
nothing. That which he alleges out of Paschasius Rathbertus supposes a Law
or practice in the Church for Communicating in both kinds: Would to God our
Doctor had reflected on what this good Abbot has in the beginning of his 19.
Chapter, where he plainly acknowledges that the Blood which is in the Chalice
is the very same that flowed out of the Sacred Side of our Savior; so far at
least Rathbertus was a Papist, and never said that Communion in both kinds is,
or was commanded by Christ our Lord. Pope Gelasius his Authority is so often
answered by others, that I need say little. Briefly, to discern Catholics from
the Manich'es occasioned that Law. Christ his institution in both kinds,
(figured in Melchisedeck's Oblation of Bread, and Wine, and not a perfect
Sacrifice unless Priests do it in both) is a most weak Argument to infer:
Therefore the Layety is commanded to receive the Sacrament as Priests do in
both. S. C. In his late excellent book against Doctor Pierce Chap. 12.
demonstrat's by the Testimonies of ancient Fathers, that Communion in one kind
has been in the most primitive ages a practice among Christians. Thus much
only I Will say, and end; if Infants once received the Holy Eucharist in one kind
only: if men of riper Age did the like in time of persecution: if what the
Fathers assure us of Domestical Communion, and the like of Ermits keeping the
Blessed Sacrament in their solitude, (whereas the Cup was not given but in the
Church) be true: (and most true all is.) Finally, if our Blessed Lord after his
Resurrection gave his own Body (going to Emaus) to his Disciples, as diverse
Fathers testify without the Cup, and they had their eyes opened: let the
Doctor once open his also, and confess ingeniously that the Sacrament was in
these cases reputed effective, lawful, and laudible in one kind only. More I
need not say, for its from my intent to handle this Controversy at large:
might I go on, I could tell him that seeing the Fruit of Protestant Communion
is only to stir up Faith in the receiver; I can find no reason why their bit of
Bread only, may not as well work that effect, as to taste of their Wine with
it. But enough of this Section.

The Doctor in his 7th. Section, page 50. cites against public Prayer in in an
unknown Language that so often discussed passage of the Apostle 1. ad corint.
14. It would be lost labor to repeat here what our Learned Writers have with
all clarity answered; I. S. in his short Treatise against Doctor Pierce his
Sermon, page 89. and 90. solidly ponders that text, and shows it makes nothing
for Protestants. Next,

He cites Origin lib. 8. contra Celsum without either page, or number, whereas
that 8th. book with me, Printed at Basil 1571. (and in a closs letter) has ten
whole leaves in Folio. However, the proof is nothing: The Graecians were to
pray in Greek, the Romans in their Language; (both Sacred Tongues) what is this
to the Doctors purpose?

Page the 52. he cites St. Basil lib. qu. ex ver. Scrip. locis q. 278. we have
three Editions of St. Basil, and the last both in Greek and Latin Printed at
Paris in two Tomes, and in no one Catalogue of his works do I find that
Treatise the Doctor points at lib. qu. ex. etc. He would oblige me to direct me
better to the Book. Next he cites St. Chrisostom in a long Homily without
giving his words, and St. Austin in Ps. 18. com. 2. (with me) it is Expos. 2.
All I can find here to any purpose, are these words: Nos autem (says the
Saint) qui in Ecclesia divina eloquia cantare didicimus, simul etiam instare
debemus quod Scriptum est; Beatus populus qui intelligit jubilationem, proinde
charissimi, quod consona voce cantavimus, sereno etiam cord nosse, and videre
debemus. We who have Learned to sing the Divine Words (or Psalms) in Church,
must also be earnest to follow what is written. Blessed are they who understand
Iubilation. Therefore, my dearest, what we sing out with one voice, endeavor
we must to know and see with a serene heart.

First, who are these We? Priests, and the Clergy that understood Latin, yet
perhaps penetrated not the deep and latent sense of those Sacred Canticles.
This says St. Austin, We are to be instant in, and not only to sing the words,
but to know with a serene heart, etc. I believe most of the Ministers, though
they say, and sing these Psalms in English, are yet to seek for the very
literal sense of them: good Counsel it is that all according to their capacity
learn by an Interpreter, or otherwise somewhat of it; yes, and of the Mystery
also. But to infer from hence: Ergo, these sacred words must be read in a
vulgar Tongue in time of Church Service, is no consequence at all: though let
me tell you, things well considered, the Greek respectively to the East, and
Latin to the West, may be better called a known Tongue, (though not vulgar)
then particular Languages of several Nations. Spain, France, England, Germany,
Poland, etc. in the generality know Latin. But does the Spaniard know French,
or other People Dutch, or Dutch the Poland Language? not one among many.

The Doctor, page 54. rightly cites (which is a wonder) the words of the great
Council of Lateran, sub Innocentio 3. cap. 9. but proves nothing with them.
First, because the Several Rights and Languages there mentioned, cannot be
showed to be different from Greek and Latin, and in use among those who have
one and the same Faith. 2. Admit they were different, the Church can upon
weighty reasons dispense in her Law with Children of one and the same belief;
at most then, here was a dispensation, which both supposes, and confirms the
received Law. I say at most; for I read in Binius his Notes upon this Council,
page 699. prim a columna, Fine; that the Patriark of the Maronites, who had
abjured his Heresy of the Monothelits, came to this great Council, submitted
himself, embraced the Catholic Faith, and believed as those Fathers assembled
did, etc. to him and his might well be granted the use of their Rights, and
Lithurgy while their belief was one, and Catholic. Now let the Doctor tell me
what Language the Maronits then used in their Lithurgy; if Syriack? it was
Sacred, and spoken by our Savior. What the Doctor has out of Quint. page 55.
is only to talk of Gypsy Language; we use no such Barbarous Tongue in our
Lithurgies.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Doctors cavils against Images. Of Antiquity approving their Veneration.
Of the Doctors ill Quotations.

PAge 56. Section 8. our good Opponent spits a little Venom against the
veneration of Images; The Poison he vents is cast upon the most Ancient Fathers
that have lived in the Church. Let him read Eusebius Caesariensis (who lived in
the third age) lib. 3. de vita Constantini cap. 48. Paris Print, where speaking
of the pious Emperor, he says: Tantus item, and divinus amor animum
Imperatoris complexus est, ut in ipso palatji introitu in medio tecti laqueari
inaurato, in tabula maxima explicata salutaris passionis insigne ex lapillis
pretiosis polite elaboratis figendum curaverit. Istud Imperatori sanctissimo
regni firmum videbatur esse propugnaculum. So Great, and Divine a Love possessed
this Pious Emperor, that he caused the Ensign of our Saviors Passion to be
fixed in the very entrance of his Palace, in the middle of his gilded Roof;
and this, in a large displayed Table, curiously wrought with precious Stones.
And this very thing seemed to the most Holy Emperor a strong Fortress and
defense for his Kingdom. Read St. Basil in his Sermon of Barlaam: Assurgite
nunc mihi (says the Saint) O clarissimi Athleticarum virtutum pictores, and
militis abbreviatam imaginem vestris magnificate artibus, etc. (and a few words
after) and pingatur in tabula similiter and ipse Agnotheta luctaminum,
Christus. Rise up now ye Famous Painters of Champion-like Virtues; show your
skill in abreviating a Soldiers Picture: place also in your Table the Master,
or Judge of such Warlick conflicts, Christ our Lord. If you desire to know how
Churches were adorned with Noble Pictures, you may read St. Gregory Nazianzen
Orat. 19. in laudem defuncti Patris. The like you have in St Gregory Nyssen
oratione de laudibus Sti. Theodori before those words: Solet enim etiam pictura
tacens in pariete loqui, maximeque prodesse. A silent Picture speaks to us on
the Wall, and profits exceedingly. See St. Austin de consensu Evangelji lib.
1. cap. 10. St. Gregory the Great, lib. 9. Epistola 9. adserenum Massilensem,
our venerable Bede de templo Salamonis cap. 19. and innumerable others: A
Volume would not suffice for all: But you will say, here is nothing for the
Venaration of Holy Images. Answ. I have often wondered why our good Protestants
when they hear the name of Jesus, bow in their Churches, and when they see his
Picture scruple to do the like reverence. Well, for the Veneration of Images,
besides the definition of a General Council: (the Second at Nice) we have
endless Authorities. I Will produce a few manifest ones which the Doctor shall
never answer. St. Basil the Great in his Epistle 205. ad Iulianum (read it in
the second Tome of his works, Printed anno 1618 at Paris, page 993.) has these
unanswerable words: Suscipio autem, and sanctos Apostolos, Prophetas, and
Martyrs, and ad supplicationem, quae est ad Deum, hos invoco, ut per eos, id
est, per interventionem eorum propitius mihi sit misericors Deus, etc. I
willingly admit of the Holy Prophets, often he Apostles, and Martyrs, and in my
Prayer made to God call upon them, that by their intercession, God may be
propitious and merciful to me, etc. He goes on thus: Unde and Figuras imaginum
eorum (...) honoro, and adoro, praecipue cum hoc traditum a sanctis Apostolis,
and non prohibitum sit, quin and in omnibus Ecclesiis nostris ostendatur.
VVhereupon I honor, and adore the Portracture or Figure of their Images;
chiefly when this adoration is delivered to us by the Apostles, and no where
forbidden; but is manifestly showed us in all our Churches. What can be
clearer? Now if you will know how this Great Saint adored those Images, none can
tell you better then St. John Damascen, lib. 4. Orthod. fidei cap. 17. soon
after the beginning of that Chapter: Nam ut ille magna rerum divinarum
eruditione praeditus Basilius ait, imaginis honor exemplum transit, etc. For as
that Great Master St. Basil, highly endewed with the knowledge of Divine
mysteries, tell's us, The honor given to Images passes to the Prototype.
Bellar. in his Appendix de cultu imaginum, cap. 4. paulo post, has this
Authority of St. Basil; but, as you may see, of another Edition, which makes it
irrefragable. To avoy'd all exceptions of the Doctor, I here give you St. Basil
in his own Language: (...).

My second Authority is taken out of Athanasius in his interrog. and respons.
ad Antiochum cap. 38. Nos Christiani non alia ratione imagines colimus nisi I
do not say this is the great Athanius, valeat tamen quantum valere potest.
quem admodum cum filios nostros, and patres osculamur, animi nostri desiderium
indicamus, sicut and Iudaeus olim legis tabulas, and duo cherubim aurea, and
sculptilia quondam adorabant, non lapidis, aurive naturam colens, sed dominum,
qui ea ut fierent praeceperat. We Christians, says he, worship Pictures no
otherwise then as we do when we show great kindness, and affection to our
Children and Parents; or as the Jews once worshipped the Tables of the Law, and
the two gilt or graven Cherubs. They Worshipped not the material Stone or Gold,
but God; who commanded them to be made.

The third is out of St. Chrisostom in Liturgia, interpret: Erasmo. Sacerdos
egrediens e parvo ostio portans evangelium, praecedente Ministro cum lucerna,
and conversus ad Christi Imaginem inter duo ostia inflexo capite dicit hanc
orationem, etc. The Priest going out of a little door carrying the Gospel, and
his Minister before him with a Light, turns himself to our Saviors Picture;
and between two Portals bows his head (before the Picture) and says this
Prayer, etc. The fourth is out of St. Gregory, lib. 7. Epist. 54. ad
secundinum. Nos quidem, non quasi ante divinitatem, ante imaginem salvatoris
nostri prosternimur, sed illum adoramus, quem per imaginem, aut natum, aut
passum recordamur. We fall not down before the Image of our Savior, as before
a Divinity, but we adore him, whom we remember by his Image as he was born, or
crucified.

The last is St. John Damascen's, lib. 4. Orthodoxae fidei cap. 17. Quoniam
nonnulli (says the Saint) eo nomine nos reprehendunt, quod salvatoris, ac
Dominae nostrae reliquorumque sanctorum, ac Christi servorum imagines adoramus,
atque honor afficimus; audiant velim quod Deus, etc. Because some upon this
account reprehend us that we adore, and honor the Images of Christ, of our
Lady, of other Saints, and servants of Christ. I would have them know that God
from the beginning made man to his own likeness; from whence is it then that we
worship one another, but that we are made to Gods likeness? Next the Saint
discourses about the use of Images amongst Christians; and finally concludes
thus: Siquidem persaepe usu venit, ut domini passionem animo minime versantes,
conspecta Christi crucifixi imagine in salutiferae passionis memoriam redeamus,
ac prostrati, non materiam, sed eum, cujus imago effingitur, adoramus. For it
often comes to pass, that when we are least thinking of our Lords passion, by
seeing the Image of him crucified we remember his Sacred Passion, and prostrat
adore, (not the matter of the Image, but) him whose Picture is there drawn out.
Thus St. Damascen, who with the other Ancient Fathers now cited delivers most
Catholic Doctrine. I could wish the Doctor would teach his people to answer
this one only Authority, and that of St. Basil. In the interim let us see what
our Doctor has against Images, and their Veneration. We find, says he, page
57. Images brought into Christian Religion by Simon Magus; where I beseech you?
the Doctor cites Theod. lib. 1. Haereticarum fabularum. St. Austin de
haeresibus, resibus, and St. Irenaeus, lib. 1. cap. 23. Answ. Theodoret has
nothing like it, either under the Title de Simone, Or Carpocrate. St. Austin
relates at large Simon Magus his Heresy in that book de haeres: ad quod vult
Deus, but not a syllable is there that Simon Magus first brought Images into
Christian Religion. St. Irenaeus in that book and Chapter now cited under this
Title: Quae est saturnini argumentatio: Relating how Basilides held the first
begotten Nun to be Christ, has these words: Qua propter neque passum eum sed
Simonem quendam Cyrenaeum angariatum portasse crucem ejus pro e^. Wherefore, he
said, that Christ fuffered not, but Simon Cyrenaeus for him who was forced to
carry his Cross: But not a word of Simon Magus his being Author of Images in
that whole Chapter. Simon Cyrenaeus was a different man from Simon Magus. Well,
says the Doctor, page 58. these Fathers tell us that the Gnostics, or
Carpocratians did make Images, and said that the form of Christ as he was made
in the flesh, was made by Pilate; and these Images they worshipped as did the
Gentiles. My God! what stuff is here? Carpocrates, says St. Austin, who held
that Christ was man only, worshipped the Images of Jesus, Paul, of Homer, and
Pythagoras (these the Doctor omits.) The Gnostics, says St. Irenaeus, (not in
his 23. but 24. Chapter) had some Pictures Painted, others of other matter,
Dicentes formam Christi factam a Pilato illo in tempore quo fuit Jesus cum
hominibus, and has coronant, and proponunt eas cum imaginibus mundi
Phylosophorum, viz. cum imagine Pythagorae, and Platonis, and Aristotelis, and
reliquorum, and reliquam observationem circa eas similiter, ut gentes faciunt.
Saying the form of Christ was made by Pilate when Jesus conversed with men;
these they crowned, and set out to show with the Pictures of worldly
Philosophers, Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle, and the rest, and honored them
just as the Gentiles did, etc.

The Fathers here are exactly cited by me. And what is it that the Doctor
concludes? Observe well: These Heretics Worshipped the Picture of Christ with
such an Homage as the Gentiles did their Idols; Ergo, Catholics may not honor
the Image of Christ, and his Saints with Relation to the Prototypes, and not
after that manner the Gentiles did their Idols, leaving out the Pictures of
Pythagoras, and Aristole. Is this a good Conclusion? Had he given you
faithfully the Fathers Words expressly mentioning the Images of the Ancient
Philosophers, the Reader would have seen the weakness of his Argument: But what
will you? to make Images odious, Juggle he must, and conceal what is against
him. Epiphanius cited relates the Heresy of the Carpocratites as Irenaeus
does, only he adds: Habent eas imagines occulte, insuperque Phylosophorum,
Pythagorae, Platonis, etc. cum quibus Phylosophis, etiam alias imagines Jesus
collocant, collocatasque adorant, and gentium misteria perficiunt. They have
these Images privately; and moreover, the Philosophers Pictures, these with
other Images of Jesus they place before them, and adore, and do the Gentiles
Ceremonies.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Doctors confused Quotations. Of Veneration due to the Holy Cross. Of
Picturing the Sacred Trinity.

THe Doctor goes on, and tells us That Christians and Clemens Alexandrinus
declare against these things. Answ. And well they might, for I know no one will
Patronize the placing our Savious Picture with the Philosophers, and worshipping
all alike as the Gentiles did their Idols. Yea, but Clemens Alexandrinus says,
We have no Image in the World, it is apparently forbidden to exercise that
deceitful Art, for it is written, Thou shall not make any similitude of any
thing in Heaven above. Strange it is that Clemens speaks so; certainly there
are Pictures in the World, and as I have heard, a Crucifix in many Protestant
Churches. Certainly the Art of Painting is not forbidden in England as a
deceitful Art; for if one should Paint the Sun, or Stars above in Heaven, is
this prohibited? where then does Clemens Alexand. deliver this Doctrine? lib.
6. Stromatum (says the Doctor) and in his Pareneticon. Answ. A strange manner
of citing. That 6. book strom. Leydon Print 1616 has 58. pages in Folio (and a
closs letter it is) the Greek on the one Column, and the Latin on the other,
and his paranaete is within apage or two of the same length. Must I read such
Treatises over to find a Quotation thus set down at random? What ingenious
dealing is here? I have, though not very exactly perused that whole 6th. Book,
and cannot find this passage. Clement, page the 470. tells us that God is not
to be worshipped as the Grecian Idolaters did, ^y any Wood, Stones, etc. More I
have not: Let the Doctor direct me to these words. We have no Image in the
World, etc. though if found, the Latin I am confident (by what I read in
Clement) will be Simulacrum, and the whole sense relate to that of Scripture,
Non facies tibi sculptile or (...) an Idol.

He cites next Origin lib. 7. and 8. contra Celsum without either page, or
number, or his words; yet these two Books Basil Print 1571. contain 40. pages
in Folio. In a word, Origin has nothing against the use of Images, but wholly
impugns the gods of the Gentiles, their counterfeit semblances, their Idols; and
declares our Christian Doctrine thus: lib. 7. contra Celsum number. 18. page (with
me) 789. Nos vero ideo quoque non honoramus simulacra, quia quantum possumus
cavemus, ne quo modo incidamus in eam credulitatem, ut his tribuamus
divinitatis aliquid. We therefore honor no feigned Figures, because we warily
hold our selves from a credulity of ascribing to them any Divinity.

A few lines after Origin, he cites St. Cyril denying That in the time of
Julian the Emperor, the Christians did give veneration to the Images, even of
the Cross it self. The Doctor here runs more at random then ever: which St.
Cyril* Alexand. or Hieros. where? in what Treatise is this denied? I think he
means St. Cyril Hieros. who lived near the time of Julian, and has in the end
of his Catechesis, printed at Paris 1609. a letter to Constantius Augustus,
wherein he declares a strange apparition of the Cross seen in the Heavens by
innumerable at Jerusalem, but not one word in it that denies Veneration to that
Holy Ensign, but rather the contrary. Beata, inquam, crux (they are his words)
splendoribus luminis coruscans Hierosolimis apparuit, etc. The Blessed Cross
all luminous and glorious, appeared at Jerusalem, etc. Until the Doctor
therefore directs me better to the place in St. Cyril, I Will tell him that
Athanasius, de passione Domini Edit. ex officina Comeliniana, anno 1600. page
808. highly honored the Cross. Nunquid dignius est, and potius crucem adorare,
quam Iudaeorum, and mundi gratiam lucrifacere. Is it not more worthy, and
better to adore the Cross, then to gain the favor of Jews, and of the whole
World. Again, the other Athanasius quaest. 39. ad Antioch. eadem edit. page
286. Crucem nobis fidelibus adorari, and osculando honorari propter Christum
qui in ea pependit, manifestum. It Is manifest that the Cross is to be adored
and honored by us Christians for Christ our Lord, who dyed on it.

St. Ambross agrees also, oratione de obitu Theodosii thus, Colen Print anno
1616. Tom. 5. page 60. Sapiens Helena egit quae crucem in capite Regum levavit,
ut Christi crux in Regibus adoretur; non insolentia ista, sed Pietas est cum
defertur sacrae redemptioni. Helena did wisely, that placed the Cross on the
head of Kings, to the end it might be adored by them. Insolency it was not, but
Piety done to our Sacred Redemption. St. Hierom also is consonant, Epist. 17.
ad Marcellam Paris Print anno 1609. Tom. 1. page 156. Ergone erit illa dies,
quando nobis liceat speluncam salvatoris intrare, and crucis lambere lignum?
Will that day once be, when we may enter the Sepulcher of our Savior, and kiss
the Wood of his Cross? Again, Epist. 27. ad Eustochium, page 221. Prostrata
ante crucem, quasi pendentem Dominum cerneret, adorabat. Postrat before the
Cross she adored, as if she had seen our Lord hanging on it.

See St. Chrisostom in a Sermon he has de veneratione crucis, Tomo 1. Paris
Print 1588. page 1331. none speaks more significantly: Venit anniversarius Dies
omni religione colendus, etc. The anniversary day of the Cross is come, worthy
of all Religious Veneration: And a little after: Quia igitur pretiosae crucis
venerationi constitutus est, huc adeste omnes, cum metu atque desiderio eam
amplectamur. Because therefore this day is appointed for the worship of the
precious Cross; come ye all, let us embrace it with fear, with love, with
affection. Again, Ejus pretiosam atque vitalem crucem adoramus, and pro
thesauro magni pretji tenemus. We adore his precious, and life-giving Cross,
and hold it as a Treasure of mighty value. Read St. Austin also tractatu 36. in
Iohannem, ante medium, and in Psalm. 36. ante medium; you will see what
veneration was given to the Cross in his days. I cite not others in after ages,
they are innumerable.

The Doctor, page 59. brings that often answered objection out of the Council
Elibery, that pictures might not be in Churches. Ne quod colitur, aut adoratur
in parietibus depingatur. Least What is worshipped and adored be Painted on the
Walls. Mark; first the Council supposes worship, and adoration due to
Pictures. Ne quod colitur, and adoratur. Next it will not, that what is thus
Adored and Worshipped be Painted on the Walls; either because, as Bellar.
observes, the Humidity of the place spoiled them, or because they could not be
so readily took away when the Gentiles persecuted Christians; in Frames or
Tables they might most easily. Baronius suspects this Cannon to be
supposititious, but there is no need of his answer.

The Doctor in the same page has three places out of St. Austin to no purpose.
The first is de moribus Ecclesiae lib. 1. cap. 34. where he speaking to the
Manichees, says, Novi multos esse and Sepulchorum, and Picturarum adoratores,
etc. I know many honoring Sepulchers and Pictures; yet in life reprehensible.
The second deside, and symbolo, cap. 7. where he says, and truly, that God
cannot be circumscribed in any humane form; and then adds Tale enim Simulacrum
Dei, nesas Christiano in templo collocare. It Is wickedness in a Christian to
place such a vain Figure (of God circumscribed) in a Church. The third is
contra Adimantum cap. 13. where he forbids cultum simulacrorum, which God
prohibited in the old Law. What is here for the Doctor? who next has a fling
at the seventh Synod, or second Council of Nice; Whose Acts about the
worshipping of Images were reproved by the Council of Francfurt. An old, old
story answered a hundred times over. Let it pass: yet I must not omit to say a
word of what he has, page 58. out of St. Epiphanius his Epistle to John of
Jerusalem, because Protestants urge it much. The story, which you may read in
the very end of that Epistle is briefly thus: Praeterea quod audivi, quosdam
murmurare contra me, etc. Besides, that I heard some murmur against me; because
when we passed to the holy place which is called Bethel [ the Doctor calls it
the Village of Bethel, for fear [I think] of naming a holy place] that there I
might make a collect, according to the custom of the Church, Et venissem ad
villam, quae vocatur, and came to the Village called Anablatha: and passing by,
had seen a Lamp burning, asking what the place was, and understanding it was a
Church, and entering to Pray. Inveni ibi velum pendens in foribus Ecclesiae,
tinctum, atque depictum, and habens imaginem quasi Christi, aut sancti
cujusdam. I found there in the entry of the Church, (no decent place, but the
Doctor conceals this) a Veil hanging, dyed and painted, having an Image as it
were of Christ, or some Saint, for says St. Epiphanius, I do not remember
whose Picture it was: when I had seen this, viz. the Picture of a man hanging
in the Church contrary to the Authority of Scripture I cut it in pieces, and
gave Counsel to those who kept the place, that some poor man should be buried
in that Veil. Here is the story; that which follows adds no new light to it for
the Doctor. Now if all this were true, what makes it for the Doctors purpose?
St Epiphanius cut in pieces a cloth Picture, the Image was unknown to him,
whether of Christ or no, perhaps it was of some profane man who was there
honored for Christ, or a Saint; therefore, St. Epiphanius judged that the
undoubted Picture of Christ, and his Saints cannot be in Churches: No
consequence at all. But in a word, the story is supposititious, and added to
the Letter, as Bellar. Learnedly shows, lib. 2. de Imag. 9.. ad quintum. First,
because Epiphanius his Epistles clearly ends with these words: Deus autem pacis
praestet nobis juxta suam clementiam ut conteratur satanas, etc. Then follows
Praeterea audivi so harshly and Either this story is true, or false: If true,
it condemns the Practice in England, for they have Crucisixes in their
Churches; if false it is not to the purpose.
dis-joynedly that one with half an eye might see the want of order in it. 2.
Because those Haereticks, who withstood so industriously the use of Images in
the seventh Synod, or 2d. Nicen Council, and objected all that could be said
against Pictures out of any Fathers, never so much as alleged this Testimony
of Epiphanius, which argues, they either thought it not to the purpose, or
which is true, judged it supposititious. 3. Because Epiphanius Diaconus
demonstrated in that 7th, Synod, that two other Testimonies were falsely shufled
into St. Epiphanius his Works by Heretics: Add 4. that St. Basil, and others
who lived with Epiphanius had Images in their Churches, and reverenced them.
Thus Bellarmine; and he has yet more on this subject. The Doctor in his 9th.
Section, page 61. fiercely reproves the Picturing of God the Father, and the
undevided Trinity: And liberal he is with the Fathers. He gives you a whole
list of them in his Margent, but not their words, and he does wisely; for their
words would have taught the Reader how little they make for him: though I must
tell you, that it is not so certain that Images may be made of God and the
Sacred Trinity, as of Christ, and his Saints; some Catholic Doctors dislike
the first, saying it is only tolerated by the Church, not approved: None the
second.

Well, one Principle of St. John Damascen lib. 4. Orthodox. fidei. cap. 17.
(and St. Austin points at the same de fide and symbolo cap. 7.) solves all the
Doctor has, or can allege in this matter. Quisnam est (says St. Damascen)
qui invisibilis, and corpore vacantis, ac circumscriptionis, and Figurae
expertis, Dei Simulacrum effingere queat? extremae itaque dementiae atque
impietatis fuerit, divinum numen fingere, and figurare. Who is there that can
make an Effigies of, or Paint out the likeness of God, invisible, without any
body, without Circumscription (that is immens) and Figure at all? Madness it is
thus to figure a Detty, or a Divine Power. As who should say: He that goes
about to express by any Image the perfect Similitude of Gods intrinsecal
Perfections, or his Nature which (is Immens) without body or figure, would be
both impious, and act the part of a mad man; Yes, and as Bellar. observes lib.
2. de imag. cap. 8. prosolutione, would make a very Idol. Such picturing of
God, the Fathers now cited reprove; but if God, or an Angel appear in the form
of a man, as he did walking in Paradise: why may not those visible, and
circumscribed Lineaments, be exhibited to our eyes? He was no Idol walking in
Paradise, neither is he one Painted in Paper. The Doctor page 62. after the
Fathers, cites Macrobius lib. 1. de somno Scipionis cap. 2. The exact words of
Macrobius are these: (after he had declared, what a powerful Being God is: Quod
sciri quale sit ab homine non possit: that it cannot be known by man of what
Nature he is.) Ideo, and nullum ejus simulacrum quod cum Dis aliis
constitueretur finxit antiquitas. And therefore Antiquity never made any
semblance of him that might be placed with other of their Gods: Exactly the
same that St. Damascen, and other Fathers say. Next he cites Nicephorus
Calixtus lib. 18. cap. 53. where delating the Heresy of the Iacobits, and
Armenians, the Doctor says, They made Images of the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, which is absurd. Hold there good Doctor, you name one person more then
Nicephorus does: Imagines (says he) Patris, and spiritus Sancti effigiant,
quod perquam est absurdum. They made Pictures of the Father and the Holy Ghost,
which is very absurd. And pray you, is it not absurd to Picture the Father, and
the Holy Ghost without the Son? Well, I answer: To Paint their incomprehensible
Divinity is most blameable; but not to Picture their visible apparitions:
neither does Nicephorus affirm it, nay he says four lines after: Imagines
sacras honorant illi quidam, sed non osculantur. These Heretics worshipped holy
Images, etc. Ergo, he held some Pictures Holy and Sacred, but this the Doctor
mentions not; yet shuts up his Sect. page 63. with a weighty sentence of
Polidor Virgil, lib. 2. de inventione rerum, cap. 23. His words are these in
the beginning of the Chapter, Quo fit, ut cum Deus ubique praesens sit, nihil a
principio post homines natos stultius visum sit quam ejus simulacrum fiagere.
When God is every where present (that is immens) a foolery it is to make his
Picture: For immensity cannot be circumscribed. If Polidor means more I care as
little for his Authority as the Doctors.

Thus you see how one Principle out of St. Damascen (a most exact truth)
silenceth the Doctor every where, though he cites so new an Author, as Polidor
Virgil.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Popes Supremacy: Of the Doctors cavils against it. Of his deceitful and
false Quotations.

THe Doctor page 63. Sect. 10. enters upon a large debated controversy, the
Popes Authority, and thinks with his four leaves, and a few old defeated
objections to undo both Pope and Popery. He tells us first, When Christ founded
his Church he left it in the hands of his Apostles without any Praerogative
given to one above the rest, save only of Priority, and orderly precedence,
which of it self was natural, necessary and incident. I would gladly know of
our Doctor in plain English, what these minced words of Priority, and orderly
Precedence signify? or what could that one Apostle, (let it be St. Peter, if
he please) do more by force of this Priority, and orderly Precedence then St.
Paul, or any of the Apostles? St. Peter writ Canonical Scripture, so did St.
Paul; St. Peter governed the whole Church, and had jurisdiction over it, so
(says the Doctor) had St. Paul; St. Peter could make Laws for the Universal
Church, and was St. Paul limited in this Power? what then signifies this
Priority, and orderly Precedence in one above the other Apostles? Let him
declare this ingeniously, bring it to a reality, and prove it (as it behooves
him) by Scripture, and that very Place he cites shall prove also that Primacy,
which Catholics give to St. Peter.

In the interim be pleased to hear how page 64. he quotes St. Cyprian deunit:
Eccle. for equality of Power among the Apostles, and deceives his Reader by
concealing part, and depraving the whole sense of St. Cyprians words: They are
long and thus. Loquitur Dominus ad Petrum. Ego dico tibi quia tu es Petrus, and
super istam petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, and portae, etc. and tibi dabo
claves, etc. and iterum eidem, post resurrectionem suam dicit, pasce oves meas.
Super illum unum aedificat Aecclesiam suam, and illi, pascendas mandat oves
suas. Et quamvis Apostolis omnibus post Resurrectionem suam parem potestatem
tribuat, and dicat, sicut misit me Pater, and ego mitto vos, etc. Tamen ut
unitatem manifestaret, unam Cathedram constituit, and unitatis ejusdam originem
ab uno incipientem sua Authoritate disposuit. Our Lord spoke unto Peter: I say
unto thee that thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church, etc.
And again, after his Resurrection, he said unto him, Feed my Sheep: Upon him
one alone, or only, he builds his Church, to him he committed his Flock to be
fed. And although he gave after his Resurrection equal power to all the
Apostles, and said, As my Father sent me, I send you; yet to manifest Unity, he
appointed or settled one Chair, and the Origin of this Unity he ordered by his
own Authority to proceed from one. (Now follows the Doctors words) Hoc erant
utique and caeteri Apostoli quod fuit Petrus, pariconsortio praediti and
honoris and potestatis, sed exordium ab unitate proficiscitur. Primatus Petro
datur, ut una Christi Ecclesia, and Cathedra una monstretur. What Peter was the
other Apostles were, endowed with like fellowship of Honor and Power, but the
beginning comes from Unity. The Primacy is given to Peter, that one Church of
Christ and one Apostolical Chair might be manifest. These last words, sed
exordium, etc. Primatus Petro datur, and super illum unum, as also the
precedent, unam Cathedram constituit, which clear all, the Doctor conceals. Is
not here plain juggling?

This Primacy, and true Head-ship of St. Peter all Antiquity so amply confirms,
that Volumes might be made of their Writings. See that Learned and ancient
Author Optatus milevitanus, lib. 2. adversus Parmenianum, page (with me in his
works printed at Paris 1631) 48. Igitur negare non potes, scire te in urbe Roma
Petro primam Cathedram Episcopalem esse collocatam, in qua sederit omnium
Apostolorum caput Petrus: unde and Cephas appellatus est, in qua una Cathedra
unit as ab omnibus servaretur, ne caeteri Apostoli singulas, sibi quisque
defenderet: ut jam schismaticus and peccator esset, qui contra singularem
Cathedram, alteram collocaret: Ergo, Cathedra una est, quae est prima de
dotibus. sedit prior Petrus, cui successit Linus, Lino successit Clemens,
Clementi, Anacletus, etc. The sense is. Deny you can not, that you know, that
the first Bishops Seat was placed at Rome, where Peter the head of all the
Apostles did sit, and therefore was called Cephas. This was done to prevent,
least any should erect another Chair against it. The Seat therefore is one, the
first of Gifts and Graces: first sat Peter, Linus succeeded, etc. And he gives
you a List of the other ensuing Popes to Siricius, who sat in this Chair when
Optatus lived. See also that known passage of St. Hierom lib. 1. adversus
Iovinianum, cap. 14. circa medium, in his works printed at Colen, anno 1616.
where after those words which Protestants usually allege: Ex aequo super eos
Ecclesiae fortitudo solidetur. He adds, Tamen propterea inter duodecim unus
eligitur ut capite constituto, schismatis tollatur occasio. Yet therefore among
twelve one is chosen, that a Head being appointed, occasion of schism might be
taken away. See also Tertullian de pudicitia, with me, page 743. printed at
Paris anno 1641.) Qualis es evertens, and commutans manifestam Domini
intentionem personaliter hoc Petro conferentem: super te aedificabo Ecclesiam
mean, and dabo tibi claves. What a man are you overturning and changing the
manifest intention of our Lord, who gave to Peter personally this privilege?
Upon thee will I build my Church, to thee will I give the keys, etc.

See lastly St. Cyprian, (to omit St. Austin de Baptismo, lib. 3. cap. 17.)
Paris Print 1648. (it is page 139.) and 71. Epistle ad Quintum, where spkeaking
of St. Peter's humility reprehended by St. Paul, he says, Nam nec Petrus, quem
primum Dominus elegit, and super quem aedificavit Ecclesiam suam, cum secum
Paulus de circumcisione post modum disputaret, vindicavit aliquid insolenter,
aut arroganter assumpsit ut diceret se primatum tenere. For Peter whom our
Savior first made choice of, and upon whom he built his Church; did not
insolently vindicate himself when Paul disputed with him concerning
Circumcision, or proudly said? that he was superior or held the Primacy, etc.
Endless should I be, if I held on with such manifest Authorities for St. Peter's
Primacy, and Superiority even over the Apostles. If you would have more?
Ballarm. largely furnishes you; but none me thinks goes beyond a book Printed
at Paris, anno 1553. the Author is a Lawyer Remundus Rufus a most Eloquent,
Solid, and Learned man that writ against Molinaeus, and so pithily defends the
Popes Authority, and solves all Arguments against it; that I verily persuade my
self, had the Doctor read him, he would never have troubled the World with his
four forceless leaves against either Pope, or Peter.

My task is now to solve those words of St. Cyprian, which the Doctor has,
page 64. The other Apostles were the same that St. Peter was, etc. add to them
St. Hieroms: Ex aequo, etc.

One obvious and known distinction clears all; distinguish then, inter
Apostolatum, and Primatum, between Apostles-ship and Primacy, and whatever the
Doctor has, or can allege falls to nothing. The Apostles therefore were all
equal in the Dignity, and Office of their Apostles-ship, or to speak with some
Divines, quoad clavem Doctrinae: this is most true, and granted: But that they
were all equal in Government, in Superiority, and Primacy shall never be proved,
so long as those words stand in the Gospel. Tu es Petrus, etc.

You will ask, where I have this distinction of Apostles-ship and Primacy. I
Answ. First out of St. Cyprian and St. Hierom now cited: Hoc erant utique
(says the first) caeteri Apostoli, quod fuit Petrus pari consortio praediti,
That is equal in this fellowship and office of being Apostles: Sed Primatus
Petro datur: But the Primacy is given to Peter. Where you see, that Cyprian
clearly grants an equality common to the whole College of Apostles, and withal
establishes a Superiority proper to St. Peter only; either the words of this
Saint are senceless, or the distinction of equality in many, and Supremacy in
one must stand. And

In this sense St. Hieroms Doctrine is most significant, without gloss, or
wresting one syllable: Ex aequo super eos, etc. The strength of the Church was
equally built upon the Apostles, viz. as Masters, as Doctors, and Teachers
illuminated by the Holy Ghost; yet therefore among twelve One was chosen that a
Head or Governer being constituted, all occasion of schism might be prevented.
Here is certainly more then that Dimunitive orderly Precedence, our Doctor
allows good St. Peter: Ut schismatis tollatur occasio are significant words,
and point at what is most essential to the Church: The Unity of it. See the
absolute necessity of this Head in order to Unity most solidly laid out by S.
G. and remember well what I was to show, that St. Hierom acknowledges an
equality amongst many, and a Supremacy in One. Once more I repeat it: equality
relates to their Apostolical dignity, Supremacy to the Head and Governor.

2. I draw this distinction of Apostles-ship in All, and Head-ship in One, from
St. Gregory the Great, lib. 2. Epist. 38. indictione 13. (so it is with me in
his works printed at Antwerp anno 1572.) though others cite lib. 4. Certe
(says the Saint) Petrus Apostolus primum membrum sanctae and Universalis
Ecclesiae est. Paulus, Ioannes, Andreas, quid aliud quam singularium sant
capita? and tamen sub uno capite omnes membra sunt Ecclesiae. St. Peter is the
first Member of the Universal Church, the other Apostles not so, nor in like
manner Universal. Yet with this Supremacy in Peter our Opponent must
acknowledge an equality of their Apostle-ship.

I will add one word more, and tell you though the Doctor should allege out of
some Fathers that St. Paul may be rightly styled the Head of Nations, and be
said to have had a Principality over the Church, yet the difference between him
and St. Peter is most remarkable. St. Paul and the other Apostles, had this
Principality as Legates by extraordinary concession. St. Peter had it over the
whole Church in solidum, yes, over the Apostles themselves, as Pastor Ordinary.
I say Over the Apostles themselves: so Anacletus Scholar to St. Prter cited by
Remumdus Rufus in Molinaeum page 86. Inter beatos Apostolos (says he) fuit
quaedam discretio, and licet omnes essent Apostoli Petro tamen a Domino est
consessum, and ipsi inter se voluerunt id ipsum, ut reliquis praeesset
Apostolis, and Cephas, id est; caput and principium teneret Apostolatus. There
was a difference a distinction among the Blessed Apostles, and although all
were Apostles, yet our Lord gave to Peter, and the other Apostles among
themselves willed the same thing that Peter should be Superior to the rest,
and Cephas, that is Head and chief of Apostleship.

See this Authority more largely in the Cannon Law, Decreti prima par: distinct
22. cap. 2. and never leave^ of to wonder at the bold assertion of our Doctor:
page 65. viz. That by the Law of Christ one Bishop is not Superior to another:
Christ gave the Power to all alike, he made no Head of the Bishops, he gave to
none a Supremacy of Power, etc. So the Doctor,

In the same page 65. he fills his Margent with a cluster of Authors, but to
what purpose God only knows; if they be to prove that Apostolical power is, and
shall be ever in the Church: We grant it to the Pope of Rome. If to prove that
Bishops succeed the Apostles in all privileges, and ample power they had in
the Church; not one Father in the Doctors Margent asserts it; though in a real
sense, Bishops that have a true mission may be called the Apostles successors,
by reason of their duty which is, to uphold the Doctrine of Christ taught by
the Apostles, by reason of their spiritual power, and Princely, and Priestly
Dignity; and this is all St. Irenaeus says in the place cited by the Doctor,
lib. 4. cap. 43. Quapropter eis qui in Ecclesia sunt Praesbiteris obaudire
oportet, his, qui successionem habent ab Apostolis. Wherefore we ought to obey
those, who are Priests in the Church, those, who have succession from the
Apostles.

Thus St. Irenaeus, and the other Fathers say no more.

I see not to what purpose the Doctor cites those words of St. Paul: We are
Ambassadors or Legates for Christ, unless it be to prove what I asserted above,
that the other Apostles, though Princes of the Church, were not Pastors
Ordinary, as St. Peter was? Less do I know, why the Preface of the Mass ( Quos
operis tui vicarios, etc. is brought in: Pastors they were, but all subordinate
to St. Peter as I have showed.

In his page 66. he jerks the Jesuits, Monks and Cajetane, for defending the
Popes Authority over Bishops. But frivolous stories are but weak Arguments, yet
the best the Doctor has at hand. Next he cites Pope Elutherius, saying, That
Christ committed the Universal Church to Bishops. How good Doctor? That every
Bishop has jurisdiction over the Universal Church? It Is very strange! the
Bishop of Down and Connor will not pretend to such a power. Christ indeed
committed the Universal Church to Bishops by parts, or portions, whereof the
whole Church is made, yet ever with subordination to one head, which prevents
schism, and conserves Unity.

Page 67. he cites the famous words of St. Cyprian. The Church of Christ is one
through the whole world, divided by him, into many members, and the Bishopric
is but one, etc. No hurt in this, which makes against the Doctor; for if the
whole Church of Christ be rightly called one Bishopric, there must be
certainly one Head over so Vast a Bishopric; no other can be but the Pope, who
Governs in Ecclesiastical affairs. Other Bishops have only a portion in the
Flock.

He next cites you Pope Symmachus his words apud Baronium. Tomo 6. anno D. 499.
number. 36. but falsely, for Symmachus writing to Eonius speaks thus: Nam dum ad
Trinitatis instar, cujus una est atque individua potestas, unum sit per
diversos Antistites sacerdotium. As in the Blessed Trinity, whose Power is one
and individual, so their is one Priesthood, (our Doctor reads one Bishopric)
amongst diverse Bishops; and thus he reads after he had thrust in a Parenthesis
of his own head, not in Symmachus his Letter. But the worst is the inference he
draws from Symmachus his words: They being spoken (says he) against the
invasion of the Rights of the Church of Arles, by Anastasius, do fully declare
the Bishop of Rome had no Superiority by the Law of Christ over any Bishop,
etc. A most weak discourse! For admit Anastasius had less prudently dealt with
the Church of Arles, in changing the Ancient Custom, admit a confusion ensued
upon this change; does it therefore follow that the Bishop of Rome had no
Superiority over any Bishop in the Catholic Church? Both Prince and Prelate
may, out of less foresight, make a Law damnable to their people; Ergo, they
have no Superiority over them, is but a wretched conclusion, made by a Doctor
of Divinity; who, if he had read Symmachus his Letter (and long it is not) he
might have found the Popes Superiority asserted thus: Relegentes ergo veterum
antistitum, etc. dilectionem tuam enixissime commonemus, ut in ordinandis per
singulas urbes, cana, ac reverenda servetur antiquitas, nec novella constitutio
vetustae sanctionis robur imminuat. Reading what was anciently done, etc. We
warn you, that in your Ordination through every City, Venerable Antiquity be
exactly observed, and that no new Constitution impair the force of old
Ordinances. Here are words of Power and Authority.

Page 68. he cites St. Ignatius, and before him St. Denis, two Blessed Saints,
who in the very words the Doctor gives, speaks not a syllable for him.

Next he cites Origin: God knows where, for he points to no place: Then he
furnishes you with Pope Gelasius his Authority, and St. Hierom: The first
says he is, distinct. 97. cap duo sunt. He mistakes the place, it is
distinctione 96. rightly cited thus: Decreti prima pars. distinct. 96. cap. 10.
Duo sunt: the words are these: Honor, fratres, and sublimitas Episcopalis
nullis poterit comparationibus adaequari, si Regum fulgori compares, and
Principum diademati long erit inferius. Episcopal Honor and high Dignity,
cannot be matched, though compared with Kings and Princes. What makes this I
pray you to prove that there are no intermedial Degrees, between Christ, and
the poorest Bishop in Europe? True it is, that the meanest Bishop in the
Church, for his Character, or Dignity of a Bishop (precisely considered) is
equal to the highest; (so all Priests are, in respect of their Characters in
Priesthood) yet this shows not, but that one Bishop may have a more ample
power and jurisdiction then an other. I think my Lord of Down and Connor will
not equalize himself with the Primative of England every way, though if he were
a true Bishop (as he is none) Gelasius his words would be verified: Sublimitas
Episcopalis nullis poterit comparationibus adaequari. The dignity of a Bishop
is above comparison, etc.

Now to St. Hierom cited in Ieremiam Homil. I answ. Doctor* Jeremy surely
mistakes St. Hierom: I have before me at this moment three Editions of St.
Hierom, whose Commentaries upon the Prophet Hieremias are divided into 6 books,
the Chapters handled, are the Prophets; but there is not one Word or Title, of
any Homily upon Jeremy. I entreat him to direct me to that 7th. Homily; and
because he cites also St. Hierom adversus Luciferianos, which has 8 or 9 Pages
in Folio, and 8 Chap. I desire he would point me out the page or Chapter. I
know what he aims at, but because the objection is old, it shall pass until he
please to be more exact in his citations. His fling at Bellarm. for speaking
Truth, deserves no answer; nor that of St. Cyprian, which he cites in Con.
Carth. for, who among those he speaks of, could with probability make himself
a Bishop of Bishops? Or, by Tyrannical power drive his Colleagues to an
necessity of Obedience? No Pope pretends to this Tyranny.

CHAP. X.
Of St. Gregory's refusing the Title of Universal Bishop. Of Fathers asserting
the Pope to be Supreme Pastor. Of the Doctors faulty Quotations.

NExt page 69. comes that so often answered objection, out of St. Gregory, who
because John Patriarck of Constantinople, called himself Universal Bishop, said
it was a proud, profane, Sacrilegious, Antichristian Title. And it was so
indeed in this Patriarck, who had no right to the Title, or thing either.

To clear the difficulty, be pleased to know, that this word Universalis may
have a triple sense: First, it may signify Unum Solum singular, one sole
singular, so we speak usually, Universalis Ecclesia, id est, una tantum, extra
quam non est salus. One Church only Universal, out of which is no Salvation.

Whosoever therefore assumes to himself the Title of Universal Bishop in this
sense, importing that he is the sole, only, and singular Patriarck, and that
other Bishops are no more but suffragans, or delegates, is both Sacrilegious
and Antichristian: Sacrilegious because (engrossing to himself the sole power)
he robs his Brethren of their true dignity. Antichristian, because he opposes
Christ, who appointed Bishops with their respective power and jurisdiction, to
govern as spiritual Princes in the Church.

Now, that the Patriarck of Constantinople arrogated to himself such an ample
power, may be proved out of St. Gregory in that often cited Epistle to
Mauritius. Nullus (says the Saint) eorum unquam hoc singularitatis vocabulum
assumpsit, nec uti consensit. No one ever assumed, or consented to use that
word of Singularity: (and mark the reason) Ne dum privatim uni aliquid daretur,
honor debito privarentur universi. Least whilst something is given to one
privately, the General or Universal are deprived of their due honor. And a
little before: Si igitur illud nomen in ea Ecclesia sibi quisquam arripit,
Universa Ecclesia, quod absit, a statu suo corruit, quando, qui appellabatur
Universalis, cadit. If therefore any one takes to himself that name in the
Church, the Universal Church (which God forbid) must fall, when he that was
called Universal, falls. More to this purpose you may see Apud Gratianum
distinctione 991. But no where speaks St. Gregory clearer then in his 4th. Book
of his Epistles writing to John. Qui indignum te fatebaris ut Episcopus dici
debuisses, ad hoc quandoque perdactus es, ut dispectis fra^ribus, Episcopus
appetas solus vocari. Thou who did confess thy self unworthy to be called a
Bishop, art now come to this, that dispising the Brethren, then covetest to be
called the only Bishop. Evident therefore it is out of St. Gregory that this
ambitious Patriarck, with contempt of his Brethren, would be the sole and only
Bishop, which is Sacrilegious, and Antichristian, and neither due to Pope nor
Patriarck.

2. The Title of Universal may render you a sense that savors of Pride,
Hautiness and Profaneness, and therefore as Remundus Rufus observes, it was
often used by the Roman Emperors, and sounds high in the Greek Language. Be
pleased to hear Remumdus his own words: page 26. circa medium: Et ille Ioannes
cum Graecus esset, utebatur graeca voce (...) quae non aliud significat, quam
mundi vel orbis terrarum patriarcham, (...) enim orbis terrarum est, and Latin
(...) Universalis dicitur ut Pelagius and Gregorius interpretabantur. And John
being a Grecian, used the Greek word (...) which signifies no other but
Patriarck of the whole World, for (...) is the Universal World, and (...) in
Latin imports Universal, as Pelagius and Gregory did interpret the word. This
Title also, as Secular and Profane, St. Gregory rejected.

3. The word Universal, or Universalis Episcopus without any ill sense at all,
may signify that ample Power, and spiritual jurisdiction which Christ's Vicar
here on Earth has over the Church: and under this notion, the Fathers
assembled in the Council of Calcedon offered it to Pope Leo in these words:
Sancto, and amantissimo Domino Leoni Universali Episcopo Romae, etc. To the
Holy and most beloved Leo Universal Bishop of Rome, etc. Certainly, those Grave
and Learned Fathers cannot be supposed, either to have flattered the Pope, or
given him a profane Title, or the Title of sole and only Bishop, assumed by
John of Constantinople. Well, Leo refused the Title, and why? either because it
seemed new to him, or because it had not been given to his predecessors by any
solemn and public Rite in former ages; or finally, because the blessed man
waved it out of Humility. Admit that St. Gregory did so likewise upon the like
Motives, does it follow that he yields up his Supremacy? No, he asserts this
Supremacy over and over writing to Mauritius: Petro Apostolorum principi, cum
totius Ecclesiae principatus committitur, and tamen Universalis Apostolus non
vocatur; and vir sanctissimus, consacerdos meus Ioannes, vocari Universalis
Episcopus conatur. When the Principality of the Church was committed to Peter,
chief of the Apostles, he was not called Universal Apostle, and John my fellow
Priest, endeavors to be called universal Bishop. Now the Saint says, That he
knows no Bishop that is not subject to the Seat Apostolic. Now, That the Seat
of Constantinople is also subject to him. Now, That it is lawful for none to
transgress the Laws of that Seat. Nec nostrae dispositionis ministerium. Much
more to this purpose you have in every Writer on this subject. The Authorities
are known and vulgar.

This truth supposed: let us see the force of the Doctors Argument, which must
be this, or nothing. St. Gregory refused the Title of Universal Bishop: Ergo,
he denied his Supremacy over the Church. In answer, I plainly deny the
consequence, and say, that the Saint, by refusing a Title which might seem new
to him, and which his Predecessors had not by solemn Rite, or finally, out of
the motive of Humility, does not therefore deny his Power and Supremacy over
the Church, whereunto positively he lays claim so often. A Principality stands
good, entire, and unshaken, Though an innocent Title, harmlesly expresing that
Principality, be for some reason refused by him, who justly possesses the
Principality. His Majesty, King Charles the Second, is now absolute Monarch and
Sovereign over his Kingdoms, and is rightly styled King of England, etc. Put
case that either Parliament or People, should go about to invest him, with a
New Title, and call him Emperor of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
might not his Majesty refuse this Title, (which neither adds to, nor deminishes
his regal Power) without denying his Soveraignity? This is our case in St.
Gregory; who, as he never laid claim to be Sole Bishop of the World, nor to any
profane Title, so he never left off to maintain his due of Spiritual
Principality over the Church.

Thus much is said, in case it can be showed that St. Gregory rejected the
Title of Universal Bishop in the last sense, above mentioned: For by what I
have yet read, he rejects it only in opposition to John, or in that sense, in
which this ambitious Prelate laid claim to it.

The Doctor page 70. cites St. Chrisostom in cap. 1. Act. Apost. Hom. 3.
Answer, St. Chrisostom treats in that passage of electing one in the place of
Judas, and has these words. Illud considera quam Petrus agit omnia ex Communi
discipulorum sententia, nihil Authoritate sua, nihil cum imperio. (Nothing by
his own Authority) which the Doctor more carefully, then sincerely translates (
nothing by special Authority) intimating, (as I conceive) no special Authority
given to St. Peter, whereas those words Nothing by his own Original Authority
(...) evidently suppose, both Power and Authority in St. Peter: for no Prince
can properly be said not to do a thing by his own Authority only, (but with the advice of his Counsel) unless he be supposed to have Authority: which is here
evidenced in St. Peter, by the next ensuing words of St. Chrisostom. Neque
simpliciter dixit, hunc in locum Iudae sufficimus, sed consolans illos, etc. As
who should say, St. Peter used not the Power he had in this Election, but
rather sought the comfort of his fellow Disciples, who were much disanimated at
the fall of Judas. Here, by the way, observe a most weak kind of arguing in our
Doctor. St. Peter did all in this particular by common consent of the Apostles,
nothing by his own Power, or Command, Ergo, he had not the Power: why? because
he used it not. Is this a tolerable discourse? A Prince concludes of some
weighty Affair, See the Supremacy of St. Peter amply confirmed by St.
Chrisostom upon the Acts, even in Sir Henry Savils Edition Tom. 4. page 624.
and 625. chiefly at those words (...) n. 22. Again n. 26. (...) etc. Afterward
page 625. at those words (...), etc.
by, and with the advice of his counsel, not by his own Authority: Ergo, he
has not this Power; Does the not actual using of Power and Authority either
imply, or argue the not having of it? Toys. Had our good Doctor but cast his
Eyes upon St. Chrisostom's Doctrine, delivered a few lines above the place now
quoted, he would have found St. Peter's Authority made good in these words: Quam
est fervidus? Quam agnoscit creditum a Christo gregem? Quam in hoc choro
princeps est? and ubique primus omnium incipit loqui. How fervent is St. Peter?
How does he acknowledge, or own the Flock committed to him by Christ* In this
assembly he was Prince, and chief, and everywhere, first of all begins to
speak. Here is enough to silence the Doctor.

Who cites next Melchior Canus de loc is Theolog. lib. 6. cap. 8. There is
(says he) no Scripture, no Revelation that the Bishop of Rome should succeed
St. Peter in it. Answer, Here is an Emphasis too much: ( no Scripture, no
Revelation) and that left out of Canus which moderates all. Canus his words are
these. Illud quoque magnopere advertendum est, Romanum Pontificem Petro
succedere, non esse (per se quidem) in sacris literis revelatum, sed aliunde
constare, exeo scilicet, quod gravissimae historiae prodidere, Petrum Apostolum
suam Cathedram Romae demum collocasse, ibique cum esset, Episcopum fuisse
defunctum. It Is much to be reflected on: That the Bishop of Rome succeeds
Peter, is not indeed (by its self) revealed in Scripture, but is manifested by
other means; to wit, by most grave History, that has left on Record, that
Blessed St. Peter placed his Chair at Rome, and when he was there, dyed Bishop
of that place; For this, Canus cites you eighteen or nineteen of the most
Ancient Fathers that lived in the Church, as St. Denis, Clemens, Anacletus,
Tertullian, St. Hierom, St. Austin, etc. and finally concludes: Will the Doctor
stand to this Bishops Judgment? what thinks he of this determination of the
Question?
Tam vero multis, and incorruptis testibus qui non credit, is aut stultum, aut
haereticumse esse demonstrat. He who gives not credit to so many, and sincere
witnesses, either shows himself a Fool, or an Heretic. Now mark the
disingenious dealing of our Doctor with Canus who to make his words sound loud
for the Protestants purpose, fraudulently omits these particulars, ( non esse
per se quidem) which abates much, and turns them out of that furious sense the
Doctor gives. [ There is no Scripture (says he) no Revelation, that the Bishop
of Rome should succeed Peter.] Canus speaks thus, and moderately: That the
Bishop of Rome does succeed Peter, is not by it self precisely, or in express
terms revealed in Scripture; which has Truth in it, for the Bishop of Rome per
se, or in formal express terms is not named in Scripture: Yet, neither Canus,
nor any can doubt but that this succession of the Roman Bishop is evidently
deduced out of Scripture, though not per se revelatum.

Were the Doctor versed in School Divinity, or knew how precisely Schoolmen
speak, when they inquire what is per se, by it self immediately, or in formal
terms revealed: I could tell him that Canus his words deserved more, then
totally to be omitted by him. Put case it were revealed per se, that a man is
animal rationale, a reasonable creature; it follows by evident discourse, he is
also risibilis, risib^le: Yet, I know many Divines, (and Canus may be one) who
say, that the man is risiblle; is not per se revealed; why? because this is not
per se, or in express terms affirmed by the Revelation, though drawn from
thence by good consequence. But enough of these subtilties, they are not for
the Doctor.

After Canus he cites Cardinal Cusanus and Soto affirming, as he says, that
This succession was not addicted to any particular Church, etc. Answ. First,
Nicolaus de Cusa, or Cardinal Cusanus writ that Treatise de Concordantia
Catholica when he was a young man, about the beginning of the Council of Basil,
and as Bellar. observes, to exalt the Authority of the Council, too much
depressed the Sea Apostolic; but afterward seeing his error, and how the
Schisms grew on, he opposed it, and stood earnestly for the Sea Apostolic, as
you may see in that Epistle writ to Rodericus Trevinus; you have it in Cusanus
his works printed at Basil page 825. anno 1442. [20. May the Letter was dated.]

2. Cusanus speaks not so absolutely as the Doctor makes him, for although he
said, Siper possibile, Trevirensis Archiepiscopus per Ecclesiam congregatam,
etc. If possible the Archbishop of Trevers were by the Church assembled,
chosen for Head and Governor, he would be more the successor of Peter then the
Roman Bishop: Yet he adds this mitigation: Licet credendum sit Romanum
Pontificem, sicut locum Petri, ita and principatum nunquam perditurum. Although
it is to be believed, that the Roman Bishop, as he will never lose the place of
Peter, so he will never lose his Principality. This the Doctor thought fit to
conceal.

Dominicus Soto, in the place cited by the Doctor,. Sed forsan, stiffly defends
the Succession of the Roman Bishop to St. Peter: Verba ipsa (says he) tu es
Petrus, and super hunc, etc. and pasce oves meas, palam demonstrant illa
ratione Ecclesiam, usque ad postremum diem orbis duraturam, fundasse, ut Petri
successores, perinde ac Petrus ipse, vice Christi fungerentur: atque adeo
unusquisque eorum summum in Ecclesia fastigium teneret. Those words, Thou art
Peter; and feed my Sheep; evidently demonstrate the Church founded in such a
manner to the end of the World, that the Successors of Peter as well as Peter
himself be in the place of Christ, and every one of them hold Supreme Authority
in the Church of Christ. It is true. Duo ergo (he says) rem esse impendio
decentissimam ut Romana seeds Petri sanguine decorata sit seeds successorum
Petri. It is most decent that the Roman See honored with the blood of Peter,
be the place of all the Successors of Peter: And then adds: Hac non obstante
veritate, nulla profecto ex Evangelio prohibitio plane colligitur, quo minus
posset Ecclesiae constitutione fieri ut Episcopus sedem suam ab urbe demutaret:
Imo ut nullam sibi particularem applicaret, cujus diceretur Antistes, sed esset
Universalis mundi Episcopus cui omnes particulares subjicerentur.
Notwithstanding this Truth, there is no clear Prohibition in the Gospel,
forbidding (if the Church appoint so) that the Bishop of Rome change his Seat,
yes, and apply no other particular one to himself, of which he may be called
Bishop and yet he would be the Universal Bishop of the World: to whom all
particulars ought to be subject.

See now how little the Doctor has got out of these two Authors: Cusanus
says, that if by any possibility the Bishop of Trevers were by the Votes of
the Church, Head of it; he would have Universal jurisdiction over the Church,
as the Pope has now; (for Cusanus ever defended this ample Authority of the
Pope.) Soto says, that it is not plane, fully, clearly, forbid in the Gospel,
that the Bishop of Rome change his See, yet if he did so, he would be still the
Universal Bishop of the World; to whom all were subject, even the Bishop of
Down and Connor. Now here is that which vexes our Doctor, viz. that one man
have such an ample command, and Authority over all: Put case, Per impossible,
(say I) that the Bishop of Trevers were elected Pope, (qua Trevirensis) with
the same ample Power and jurisdiction that the Pope ever had, and that the
Roman Bishop were laid aside: our good Doctor would even then, storm as much
against Trevers Pope, as he now does against the Roman. It is not, God knows,
the place or person that he so furiously opposes, but the Power and Dignity
annexed, to what See soever. This gives him regret.

Next he says, It cannot be proved that the Bishop of Rome. is Prince of the
Church; And I think by his Marginal citation he directs me to Ioannes Driedo de
dogm. lib. 4. cap. 3. This Chapter has 13. or 14. Leaves in Folio, and three
parts in it. The Doctor might well have quoted the part, had he ever read
Driedo: But let that pass. I answer, Driedo has nothing for the Doctors
purpose, but expressly the contrary: thus: part. 2. cap. 3. Folio with me, 227.
Primus Simon qui dicitur Petrus, Mat. 10 -- Hoc autem non potest intelligi,
quod Petrus fuerit primus tempore, aut vocationis ordine, quoniam Andreas prius
secutus est Christum, quam Petrus, etc. dicitur ergo Petrus esse primus
Apostolorum, dignitate, and praelationis potestate. St. Matthew reckons of St.
Peter as first, But this cannot (says Driedo) be understood that Peter was
first called, for Andrew Was before him and first followed Christ: Peter
therefore is styled the first of the Apostles, because of his Dignity and Power
of Superiority. And this Principality Driedo earnestly maintains, not only in
St. Peter, but in every lawful elected Bishop of Rome. Vide folium 229. Part 2.
Omnes (says he) ab initio Ecclesiastici Pontifices, Patres, Martyrs, and
Universalis Ecclesiae concilia, honoraverunt Romanae Ecclesiae Pontificem,
tanquam supremum and Universalis Ecclesiae Episcopum. All Bishops from the
beginning, The Fathers, Martyrs, and Councils of the Universal Church, have
ever honored the Pope of Rome as the Supreme Bishop of the Universal Church.
And here is enough of the Doctors 10th. Section, for what he says of the
African Fathers opposing the Pope is handled so often, that it is time lost to
repeat it: So also is that which he hints at, out of the Council of Calcedon
giving equal Rights, and Preheminency with Rome to the Patriarck of
Constantinople. I answer briefly, This is most untrue, the very Decree, were it
Authentical, gives him only the second place, as is manifest by these words:
Secundam post illam existere: that is, next after Rome: I say, if the Decree
were Authentical, for it was both clancular, and surreptitious, procured by
Anatolius and his Confederates while the Popes Legates were absent. This
manifestly appears both by Pope Leo his Letters to Anatolius, and the
attestation of the whole Council, which I have read more then once, and am
ready to maintain what I say against Dr. Tailor, or any body else.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Doctors harsh Doctrine concerning speedy repentence after sin. Of his
mistakes, and wronging Authors.

IN his 11th. Section, page 71. he has little worth notice a crowd of
Controversies you have, superficially run over E. G. Invocation of Saints, in
sufficiency of Scripture: Nine penny Masses: and I know not what, lightly are
they touched on by him without proof, and let them on Gods name as lightly pass
without answer.

Page 72. he cites the Cannon Law de consecrat. distinct. c. peracta. where it
is said, that Consecration finished, all are to Communicate, etc. for so the
Apostles appointed, and the Church of Rome holds. Had the Doctor the Marginal
gloss upon this Chapter, he might have seen, that this Ancient Law is now no
more in force, and this by the permission of the Church, obliging only to
Communicate once a year. O, but the Apostles appointed it: So they also
appointed, Act. 15. v. 20. To abstain a suffocatis, and sanguine, from
strangled meat and blood; Does the Doctor comply with this precept? Every
positive Law, even of the Apostles, had not always force in after ages. I
wonder he cites this Law against us, while Protestants themselves do not
observe it: does every one, that is present at service, Communicate when the
Minister makes his Caena? but what will you? there is neither Consecration nor
Communion. The rest that follows in this Section is most empty stuff.

Page 75. cap. 2. Sect. 1. he much reprehends Catholic Doctors, who teach that
a sinner is not bound presently to repent of his sin, as soon as he has
committed it. He adds, page 76. Though the Church calls on sinners to repent on
Holy days, or at Easter; yet that by the Law of God, they are not tied to so
much, but only to repent in the danger or article of Death. (Mark the word
only.) And for this Doctrine he cites the Famous Navar, in his Enchir, or
Manual, cap. 1. number. 31. Answ. I see he never read Navar, for he neither gives
you the Right number, nor his Doctrine exactly; the number, with me in his
Manual printed at Antwerp 1601. is, number. 27. The Doctrine thus, after Navar had
declared that the other two affirmative precepts of Baptism and confession do
not oblige under pain of a new sin but in time of necessity: Ita, says he, per
consequutionem, praeceptum affirmativum de se convertendo, non obligat sub
paena novi peccati Lethalis nisi in articulo necessitatis; in illo vero sic:
quamobrem ad praedictam paenitudinem concipiendam tenebimur imminente articulo
mortis naturalis, vel violentae, vel administrandi, suscipiendique aliquod
sacramentum, imo etiam instante populi necessitate aliqua grandi, cui absque
orationis fervore provideri non posset. So by consequence, the affirmative
praecept of converting one self, does not oblige under pain of a new mortal sin
but in time of necessity, and in that Article thus: wherefore bound we are to
repent in the imminent Article of death natural or violent, or when we receive
any Sacrament, or any danger, or great necessity presses on us, not to be
prevented but by ardent Prayer, etc. Perhaps the Doctor will say, that these
two last cases of the Sacrament, or great necessity, Per accident, accidently
oblige a sinner to contrition. Be it so, yet Navar says not so much, at least
he does not say, that a sinner is obliged only to repent in the hour of his
death. It is one thing to oblige a sinner to repent, when he is ready to dye,
and another to say, he is only then obliged. All sinners are certainly bound to
repent then, yet many great Divines add to this a further obligation, and
affirm that, aliquoties in vita, for some time in their life, this Obligation
lies on them.

I cannot but smile reading our Doctor, page 76. (whose whole aim is to show
out of our Authors, that repentance is never necessary but in the hour of death
only) to see how unwarily he speaks from his own purpose, while he makes
Renaldus to say, that a sinner is obliged to repent (which is undoubtedly
true.) He cites him, Prax. Fori. Paen. lib. 5. cap. 2. Sect. 4. n. 23. In
English thus: It is true, and the Opinion of all men, that the time in which a
sinner is bound by the commandment of God to be contrite for his sins, is the
imminent Article of natural or violent death. Let every ingenious Reader ponder
these English words till Doomsday, and say afterward whether he can force any
other sense out of them, but this ascertained Truth only, that a sinner at
death is obliged to repent, but that he is then only obliged (which is to the
purpose) shall never be proved.

I Will deal ingeniously, and help the Doctor: Reginald seems to say more then
what this Empty English Quotation sets down. His words are: Omnium communis,
sententia est, tempus in quo peccator conteri tenetur, (intellige per se, seu
vi specialis Praecepti de contritione a deo dati) esse imminentem articulum
mortis naturalis, vel violentae. The common Opinion of all is, that the time
wherein a sinner is bound to repent, (understand Per se, or by force of a
special command given by Almighty God of contrition) is the imminent Article of
a natural or violent death. This Parenthesis ( intellige Per se) which I say it
seems for I cannot assert that Reginald plainly says so much.
seems exclusive of other special precepts save only at death, and would most
have been for advantage, the Doctor wisely leaves out. However with it he shall
never make his assertion good, viz. that Reginald holds, a sinner is not
obliged to repent but only in the hour of death, and I speak of an Obligation
per se, not of accidental cases, as if one makes a vow to have contrition, or
to come to the Sacraments, etc. My reason is: that although there be no special
command, given by Almighty God for contrition, but only in that Article; yet,
the very Law of Nature, and the Charity, that a long inveterate sinner, owes to
his own Soul, both may, and does oblige him sometimes in life to convert
himself to his Maker by hearty repentance; whereof more hereafter. Reginaldus
further observes, out of St. Austin, That he who lives thus impenitent, incurs
not only the danger of transgressing anew, but deeply hazards his Salvation,
which hazard, intrincical to the state of such an inveterate Criminal; calls
loud upon him; yes, and obliges him sometimes in life to repentance, or the
Love of God. Had the Doctor considered the counsel given us in Scripture,
Eccles. 5. Ne tardes converti ad Dominum, and ne differas de die in diem: Do
not delay this conversion, etc. And how Zealously both Divines in Schools, and
Preachers in their Pulpits inculcate this wholesome Doctrine, and lay open the
danger of delaying sinners, He would never have blamed Reginald, who only
rigoriously examins what men are obliged to, under mortal sin; Ex vi specialis
praecepti de contritione a deo dati: where every particle is restrictive, and
little warrants the Doctors charge on him, in the general: No repentance but in
the Article of death only. The Doctor cites other words of Reginald mangled,
and weighed out of their circumstances. Let that pass among lesser faults.

Now one word of his new Learning: He says then page 76. that a sinner ought
to repent presently after his sin. I ask him whether he has any precept for
this assertion in Scripture, and mind him of his own Quotation: It Is the part
of a Devilish spirit to think any thing to be Divine, that is not Scripture.
Here we may have plain dealing, if he please; Either he can give Scripture for
a sinners present repentence after sin, or no; if he cannot, he has a devilish
spirit, imposing on poor Souls a Divine command, not proved by Scripture; if he
warrants this precept by Scripture, without gloss, and interpretation of his
own, I will proclaim to the whole World, that Dr. Tailor is one of the most
profound Divines we have now in Europe: But this he shall never do: Therefore I
am afraid the other Lot will fall on him.

I will be plain. Most harsh and an intolerable Doctrine it is to say, that a
sinner under new mortal sin, is obliged to repent presently, especially in the
Doctors Opinion, who makes no distinction between sins mortal, and venial in
their own Nature. Observe I beseech you: Put case that one commits a Murder
this day, and continues in the sin for Months and Years, it follows
evidently, that for every Moment of these Months and Years, (if he reflects on
his Homicide) be sins a new unless he repents: Why? The command of God is that
he repent presently after his Fact: This command he Transgresses, and therefore
sins a new; the next Moment, Hour, or day, the same severe Command of God
(obliging to repentance) leaves him not, he sins still on, and consequently,
for as many Moments as he lives (let it be for Years) he heaps sin upon sin,
and multiplies them without number: for the command of God obliging all this
while to repentance, is grieviously transgressed, and to transgress that Law,
makes so often, with our Doctor, so many sins. Is not here a sad and deplorable
story, to use the Phrase of our Doctor? Is it not much better to say with
Reginald that it is a lesser evil for a man to continue under one sin for a
time, (though such a condition is deplorable) then to have sins multiplied
hourly and daily, almost numberless? Now if the Negative precept, as Reginald
holds, forbids not the perseverance in sin, (at least for some time) these
whole Troops of transgressions, which (according to the Doctor) intervene
between the first sin committed, and final repentance are avoided. Here is
mercy to a poor sinner. The Doctor mercilesly without Scripture, without
Authority at all, says what God never spoke, and drives him to desparation.

Page 77. he shows himself more then strangely ignorant: And first, I do not
touch upon what he says, That the Church has been more severe then God, tying
a sinner by collateral positive Laws to repent at Easter; nor secondly, of the
seeming contradiction, which follows, that the Church Ordains but the means,
the exterior solemnity of it (that is confession, etc.) These I wave, and wish
the Reader to reflect on the last words in that Paragraph: So that sinners,
says he, are still left to their liberties, etc. even to satisfy our selves
with all the remaining pleasures of that sin for a little while, even during
our short mortal Life: only we must be sure to repent at last. Mark well, Even
to satisfy our selves, with all the remaining pleasures of that sin for our
mortal life. What! a Doctor of Divinity and speak thus? why there is none but
knows, that the taking of content, or satisfaction in the pleasure of a sin
past, is another hidious sin, forbidden by Almighty God, and execrated by all
Doctors. A sin once committed remains habitually, (misery enough) until it be
retracted by penance; but to take pleasure in it afterward, is another guilt
distinct from the former, unto which it seems our Doctors Divinity reaches not.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Doctors cavils against Contrition and Confession. Of his wronging the
Council of Trent and Catholic Authors.

THe Doctor in his 78. page has nothing but talk without substance: In his 79.
he excepts against our Doctrine of contrition, and says we allow it not
valuable, unless it includes a desire, or will to confess our sins to a Priest.
Answ. We do so, and give this reason: True contrition, which reconciles to God,
votively at least implies a will of doing what God Commands: But one Command
is, that we confess our sins to a Priest; therefore true Contrition submits to
it. This proof is evident, if God have laid a precept on us to confess to a
Priest, which by all Law of disputation we may here suppose, until the Doctor
shows the contrary.

Add to this what our Doctor has, page 101. viz. That confession is of
excellent use among the Pious Children of the Church of England. If so, give me
leave to ask him, who Ordained this Confession? God, or the Church? or whether
there is Scripture for it, or no? if neither God, Scripture, nor Church warrant
it, it is an invention of man, and may participate, (according to our Doctor)
of a devilish spirit, consequently cannot be of excellent use among any, etc.
Now, if Scripture be for Confession, if God, or the Church have Ordained it,
the Doctor must say, (if he knows what true Contrition is) that the
Supernatural Act which reconciles to God, does of necessity imply (Actually or
Votively) a serious will of doing what ever God, Scripture, or Church Commands
us: for to say, I am sorry for my sin, out of the Motive of Gods infinite Love,
I purpose amendment, I Will do his Will hereafter; and not to say, I Will do what
God, Scripture, or Church commands, implies a contradiction; in a word, it is
to say and unsay, purpose and not purpose, etc.

To confirm this discourse, I have enough from the Doctor, page 79. who says
that Genuine and true Contrition is a Cordial sorrow for having sinned against
God, etc. -- Ending in a dereliction of all sin, and a walking in all
Righteousness. I wish no more; for this very walking in all Righteousness,
implies the obedience we give to Contrition, and will make our good Doctor walk
to Confession also, if Scripture or Church have Ordained it for finners:
perhaps he may say, that Confession is only of Counsel, not of Command, when I
have his Scripture for such an assertion, he shall have his answer fully.

In the interim, know, that it is but vain to talk (as our Doctor does) of a
repentance toward God, (as it were in abstracto) without descending to the
ultimate worth and Efficacy of it, which as now I said includes a serious will
of doing Gods Command. This truth supposed, with what conscience can the Doctor
say that we prefer repentance toward men, before that which the Scripture
calls repentance toward God? It is a flat Calumny, and as ill intended, as
expressed improperly; for in this Sacrament there is Confession to a man, but
what repentance is there toward men that we prefer before the Noble Act of
Contrition, which resting in God, prefers him and his Commands, before all
things in the World?

A few lines after he says, page 80. As Contrition without their Ritual and
Sacramental Confession will not reconcile us to God; so Attrition with their
Sacrament will reconcile the sinner: Contrition without it will not: Attrition
with it will reconcile us. And this Doctrine (says he) is expressly Decreed at
Trent.

I stand here astonished at this ignorance: Do I read in a Doctor, that
Contrition without Ritual and Sacramental Confession does not reconcile a
sinner, and that the Council of Trent Decrees this expressly? I say first, that
the Council expressly declares the contrary. Sect. 14. cap. 4. de contritione:
Docet praeterea [Sancta Synodus] and Si contritionem hanc aliquando charitate
perfectam esse contingat, hominem Deo reconciliare, prius quam hoc Sacramentum
actu suscipiatur, etc. The Holy Synod teaches, Although it sometimes falls out,
that this Contrition when perfect with Charity, reconciles a man with God
before actual taking of the Sacrament, etc. The words are contrary to the
Doctors assertion, and need no explication.

I say, 2. It is the certain and constant Doctrine of Divines, that Contrition
(proceeding from the Love of God, or true motive of Charity) in the very Moment
a Soul has it, gain's pardon, reconciles to God, disposes immediately to
supernatural Grace, whereby a sinner is justified, and made an adopted Child of
God; and this I say, In the very Moment a Soul has it, though Sacramental
Confession follows not, for weeks, or months, or by accident never; for would
it not be apittiful case to send a poor sinner to Hell, who lies at deaths
door, or is mortally wounded, and does his utmost to be contrite for his sins,
though neither Priest is present, nor Sacramental Confession can be had or
hoped for? This very case is enough to unbeguile the Doctor, and to satisfy
him that we Catholics are not so severe in exacting Sacramental Confession,
when either accident or necessity excludes a poor penitent from it.

I know not how the Doctor will come off, and satisfy for the enormious
injustice done, both to the Council of Trent and all Catholics, but by one
evasion that shall nothing at all avail him.

Perhaps he may tell us, that when he says, Contrition without Sacramental
Confession will not reconcile us, he only speaks of Votive Confession included
in the Act of Contrition, and not of Actual. No, I thought Ritual, as he terms
it, and Sacramental Confession had been in plain English Synonimas, or of the
same signification with Actual Confession. However, if the Doctor understands
it of Votive Confession, read his words thus: Contrition without Confession in
Vote or desire, reconciles not a sinner to God, and this you must suppose to be
his meaning. Then know, we Catholics hold constantly, that Contrition without
the Vote or Efficatious will of Confession is no Contrition, consequently all
he proves is, that that Act which is no Contrition does not reconcile to God.
How then does he advance any new proof against us? Where lies the Mischief or
Malignity of our Doctrine in saying, that an Act, which is no Contrition and
submits not in Voto to Gods Command, does not reconcile us to God? yet more.

If he speaks not of Actual, but Votive Confession included in Contrition, his
whole discourse is lame, hobling, and renders you this Nonsense: As Contrition
without Sacramental Confession (in Vote or desire) does not reconcile us to
God, so attrition with actual, Sacramental Confession does reconcile us, which
inference without life and vigor, shows nothing to the Doctors purpose; for
what does it avail him to say in this place, as no Contrition does reconcile
us, so Attrition with the Sacrament does? Had he said, as Contrition with
Votive Confession reconciles us to God, so Attrition also with Actual
Confession does; the sense had been good and Catholic: But never shall he make
sense out of these words: As Contrition without Confession will not reconcile
us to God, so, etc. unless he speaks (as really he does) of Actual Confession
as well requisite for reconciliation when a sinner is contrite, as when he is
attrite only, which is injurious to Catholics. If you ponder well what I have
said, you will find the Doctor in a Labarinth, pull him out who will.

He goes on in his ignorance, and says first, that with us there is no
necessity of Contrition at all. Answ. Most Untrue: It is necessary in a
thousand cases of death and danger, when Attrition only will not avail without
the Sacrament. He says, 2. A little repentance will prevail as well as the
greatest; and cites Gulielmus de Rubeo; (he means de Rubeone.) I answ. Two
things may be considered in repentance: for Example in an Act of Contrition:
The first is, the substance of that Act which implies a sorrow for having
sinned against God, and offended his infinite goodness, with purpose of
amendment, and this appretiative esteem of God is the same, and intrinsecal to
every Act of Contrition, so much perfection it has, or it is not Contrition.
The second, is the gradual remiseness or intensness of it, which may be various
in a sinner; if remiss, it gains less Grace, if intenss, more; and therefore
upon this account benifits the sinner accordingly. But know, that the Doctor
can never show, either by Scripture or any received Authority, that Contrition,
which is a remorse for sin upon the motive now specified ought to have such a
gradual intention for the remission of it; and this is all that Gulielmus de
Rubione, Tolet, and others say in our present controversy. If the Doctor will
have more concerning this subject, he may read Suarez tract. de charitate.
Sect. 2. n. 2. (and well Learn of him) that the gradual intention in acts of
love toward God, is not necessary to comply with the precept of Loving him
above all: Suarez his words are: Illa perfectio dilectionis dei pertinet ad
speciem, and naturam talis actus qui saluatur in quavis intensione. The
perfection of Charity belongs to the species or nature of the Act, which is had
whether the Act be more or less intens. If Suarez his Authority like not the
Doctor, I expect his Scripture to the contrary, and with all desire he would
plainly say, how strong an intention in Contrition is necessary to reconcile a
sinner, and this by Scripture, or some approved Authority.

Page 81. he shows himself little versed in our Divines, where he tells you,
that we say, if a man live a wicked life for 60 or 80 years, yet, if when he
dies (sooner then which God has not commanded him to repent) he be a little
sorrowful for his sins, and though this sorrow have no Love of God in it, if
the Priest absolve, he is safe, the Priest with two Fingers and a Thumb does
the work for him, etc.

First, I slight this jeer of two Fingers and a Thumb, God has his Judgment
for it, and may in time stupifie those two Fingers and Thumb that writ it, as
once he did Valens his whole hand for an intended injury against a Priest. Next
to clear this doubt, our Divines hold, that a man is commanded to convert
himself sooner to God then in the Article of death; some whom Suarez Supar
cites, Sect. 3. nu. 1. as Capreol and Scot, (too scrupulously) say, That as
often as other precepts oblige us, (for example) to give an Alms, so often
Charity must accompany the work done: others say not much less: Suarez teaches
and truly, n. 4. That this precept of loving God some time in man's life
obliges per se by its self, and adds, that it is not to be deferred for a long
time after the use of reason. Finally concludes, Qui per multos annos non
exercet hunc actum amoris delinquit contra hoc praeceptum. He that for many
years exercises not this Act of Love, offends against the precept of Loving
God. Now if the precept obliges all, much more a sinner, who is an enemy to
God. And here by the way, you may see the Doctors Argument above, page 76.
further answered, and that Reginaldus and Navar there cited, have nothing
contrary to this known and received Doctrine.

But what if one sins lustily on for 60. or 80. years, and omits these acts of
loving God and his duty every way, can he, if he comes in the Article of death,
with Attrition only to a Priest, pass into a state of Salvation, though then he
neither loves God, nor has true Contrition? I answer, That many both Learned
and Grave Divines say No; not only, because the precept transgressed so long
then if ever obliges him, but upon this account chiefly, that such an obdurate
sinner is bound in that dangerous hour to seek reconciliation with God, by the
best and securest means; but an Act of Love and perfect Contrition are the
securest; therefore to the one or other he is obliged. See Suarez now cited,
number. 3. Con. disp. 24. de charitate. dub. 5. conclus. 3. and others: Withal be
pleased to reflect, that the Doctor spoke without book, when he so roundly told
us, (as if none gainsaid it) that a little sorrow and the fear of Hell only
(which is false) though it has no Love of God with it, passes a sinner in the
Article of death to a state of Salvation. All this is said at random: But what
will ye? his head was so taken up with his pretty conceit of the Priests two
Fingers and a Thumb, that he forgot his Divinity.

In his 2 Sect. page 82. He comes full charged against the use of Confession
among Catholics, Though with the pious Children of the Church in England, it
is of excellent use. Answ. Besides calumnies, and slanders in this Section he
has nothing worth notice. Princes, says he, and Prelates do often confess, and
are never the better. How proves he this slander? or let him say, what is done
better with his excellent use of Confession among the Pious Prelates in the
Church of England. 2. He says, That men look on this Cure like pulling off
their Clothes. Answ. A slander: But tell me, is it better in the Church of
England among those Pious Children he mentions? 3. That they confess to day
(page 83.) and sin to morrow. Answ. And do none sin to morrow, who confess to
day in the Church of England? Confession makes not men impeccable, yet is an
excellent remedy to prevent sin, and so our Doctor will suppose it is among the
Pious Children of the Church of England. 4. He says, Confession is made a
Minister of State, a Pick-lock of Secrets, a Spy upon Families, etc. Answ. A
Calumny: The whole Christian World knows the contrary, and I tell you the
Doctor is more obliged to make restitution for the wrong done to Catholic
Priests in this particular then any Theif is, who picks his pocket: But tell
me, is Confession a pick-lock with Catholics only (in case all were true that
he says without conscience) is there no Pick-lock of secrets, or spy upon
Families among those Pious Ministers in the Church of England? I have heard the
contrary, that whole Confessions have been revealed by them; whether true or
no, I say not; yet I know well, that for the space of forty years that I have
lived in Catholic Countries, I never heard the least complaint against
Confessor for being a Pick-lock. The Doctor therefore may well expect Gods just
Judgment on him for this injustice, unpardonably done, (unless he repents and
makes restitution) to Catholic Priests. But enough of this Section.

Page 86. Sect. 3. he has a bout with our Penance and satisfaction, and makes
a long list of their abuses. They are (says he) reduced from the ancient
Canonical Penances to private and arbitrary; from years to hours; from great
severity to gentleness and flattery; from public shame, to the saying over
their beads; from Cordial to Ritual, from smart to money, from heartiness and
earnest, to pageantry and theatrical Images of Penance. Answ. Though it is true
that the Church has upon weighty reasons much lessened the rigor of ancient
Penances, and therefore so frequently grant's Indulgences, yet what follows in
this pretended Catalogue of abuses, is nothing but a long List of Calumnies,
false and injurious. False it is, that if the sin confessed deserves a years
Penance, we reduce it to an hours: False, that we turn the severity of Penance
into flattery, (unless the Doctor calls the charitable comforting a poor
penitent flattery.) No, so far are we from flattery in this Tribunal of
Penance, that we lay open the enormity of sin, threatening Gods Judgment upon
it, and spare no pains to beget a horror of sinning in a penitents heart. False
it is, that if the sin be enormious or scandalous, the saying ones beads is
enough. False it is, that we exact only Ritual and not Cordial satisfaction.
False likewise, that when the penitent ought to smart for his sin, the smart is
turned into money; though I think the Doctor will not deny, but that in
circumstances of age or infirmity, when the penitent cannot bear austerity, the
charitable giving of Alms is laudable and satisfactory; at least holy Daniel
liked well of it: Cap. 4. 24. Peccata tua elemosynis redime, and iniquitates
tuas misericordiis pauperum. Redeem, make amends for thy sins with Alms-deeds,
and thy iniquities with mercies of the Poor. False, finally it is, that we
require not heartiness and earnest in the performance of Penance. Now what the
Doctor means by his Pageantry and Theatrical Images of Penance, God I think
only knows: Perhaps he blames some public Penances now and then done in the
Church; If so; first, all public Penances are not laid aside. 2. You see the
Peevishness of our Doctor, nothing escapes his censure; if Penances be private,
the Ancient Canons suffer; if public, they are pageantry and theatrical
Images: What will content the man? When one stands there among you at a Pillar
for Perjury, or in a white Sheet for Fornication; is this pageantry, or any
threatrical Images? and what further use have you I beseech ye, of these
ancient Canonical Penances among the Pious Penitents of the Church of England?

Well, to conclude; the Doctor I am sure deserves justly a severe Penance for
this heap of Calumnies, and if ever God (as I wish) make him a Catholic, and
choose me for Confessor, he shall have it home without flattery; an hours
Penance, or saying his Beads will be too little; in a word, his Penance shall
be proportionate to his sin, and if he thinks it not enough, let him go on Gods
name to Sancta Maria de populo, for the gaining of those thousand Indulgences
he mentions. He holds on this 3d. Section, and tells you of strange
Indulgences granted to several places, whether truly or no, it imports little:
Admit he speaks truth, all he gets is that the Church is liberally good to such
great sinners as he is, who as Holy Job says, Drink iniquity like water; and
if after their repentance, it grants them Mercy, what offense is there in doing
so? In the rest of that weightless Section, while he explicates what Divines
say of Indulgences; sometimes he hits right, sometimes misses, but is
ordinarily very plentiful in jeers, all slight stuff: I leave him; only be
pleased to reflect, how, though without pointing to any place, he cites Gerson
and Soto against himself, for if it be true, that Soto says in 4 Sent.
distinct. 21 q. 2. a. 1. That the Pope never grants these Indulgences for a
100. or 1000. years, The Doctor has no more to say, but that such pardons are
not at all (the Questuaries only procured them) and consequently impugns what
never was.

CHAP. XIII.
The sum of our Doctors discourse concerning Indulgences. His two mistakes are
discovered. His Objections answered.

THe Doctor page 91. Sect. 4. pretends much chacharity to our Souls, and to
unbeguile us, will needs add one consideration more: And what is this think
you? Marry, There is no Foundation of truth in these new Divices; and this to
boot, that when our Doctors are pinched with an objection, they let their hold
go, etc. Good man! Are these his considerations? A young Student in Divinity,
would make good sport with such considerations. But, ad rem.

I constantly affirm, that all he has said in this Section, has not so much as
a shadow of an objection in it against the received Doctrine of Indulgences,
much less any that pinches. To prove my assertion, be pleased to have in mind
what this received Doctrine is, which the Council of Trent sess. 25. decret. de
Indulg. declares thus: Sacrosancta Synodus Indulgentiarum usum, Christiano
populo maxim salutarem, and sacrorum conciliorum authoritate probatum in
Ecclesia retinendum esse docet, and praecipit. The holy Synod teaches, that the
use of Indulgences is most wholesome and profitable to Christians; and commands
this use approved by the Authority of holy Councils, to be held still in the
Church. Next, it requires a moderation in granting Indulgences, according to
the Ancient Custom of the Church, and that all abuses crept in, be amended,
etc.

This Catholic truth supposed: you will find the Doctor strangely beguiled, and
his whole discourse (chiefly founded on two mistakes) weaker then a Bul-rush.
His first mistake is, that because Catholics cannot arrive to a certain
knowledge of gaining an Indulgence, or the full fruit of it, he thinks no trust
is to be had in it, no endeavor used to purchase this Grace. An error: For
Divines say, and truly, no one can know with certainty, that he has an act of
true supernatural Faith, or of true Charity in that Degree, Purity and Measure
which God exacts; is therefore Faith and Charity ( without trust) to be laid
aside? is our endeavor to have them carelessly to be left off? is it wholly
useless and unprofitable? God forbid.

His second error is, that he builds too much upon those many difficulties
which our Divines raise in this matter of Indulgences, while they speculatively
discuss several cases relating to them; and because this is done with variety
of Opinions, the Doctor thinks all undone, and that both the sustance and fruit
of Indulgences fail's in the Catholic Church.

A great mistake: For are there not innumerable difficulties speculatively
examined almost in every Article of Christian belief, concerning Baptism and
other Sacraments? yes, concerning the profession of our Faith in certain
exigences: yet these speculative considerations terrify none from professing
the necessity and benefit both of faith and Sacraments. The like with a due
proportion we say of Indulgences (not so necessary to Salvation, as Faith or
Baptism;) though difficulties in such and such particular cases are moved
concerning them, yet all agree in the general with the Council of Trent, that
they are useful, profitable and beneficial to Christian penitents.

Having thus discovered the two transcendent mistakes of our Doctor, you shall
see how unskilfully he combats against Indulgences.

Page 92. he says, Suppose the Indulgence be for forty years, a hundred, a
thousand; yet peradventure according to the old penitential rate, you have
deserved the Penance of forty thousand years, etc. Answ. A long time indeed!
but peradventure this peradventure of the Doctors is a mistake; at least
something is gained besides the merit of the work, though we know not how much;
and better it is to have forty years of Penance taken off, then to suffer
torment for forty years, though not yet quitted of all pain. (If the damned in
Hell could but have forty years of their pain released, thsy would deem it a
favor) Therefore the Doctrine of the Council of Trent is true: Usus
indulgentiarum est salutaris.

Again he says, No man can tell the difference, when what remains shall be so
great as to surmount all the evils of this life. Answ. Neither is it necessary:
The duty of a good Christian is to take off what pain he can, though he knows
not in what measure; and if he diminishes but some little, the use of
Indulgences is both good and profitable. I leave that jeer of the Daemoniack
with the Doctor; and tell him that if one poor soul were possessed with a
legion of Deviles, and had moral assurance that he is freed of some (though he
knows not of how many) that little releasement would be of comfort.

Page 93. He goes on doubting. It may be your Quadragenes, are not carenes,
etc. It may be you have purehased but some lighter thing; and then, if your
demerit arise to so many Carenes, and you have purchased but mere Quadragenes,
you may stay longer in Purgatory then you expected. Answ. It may be the Doctor
is deceived in all he says here: It may be a penitent gets all he expected.
But admit he does not, something is got, (he has at least the merit of his
work) though he knows not how much. The not knowing of his gain does not lessen
it. Though the Doctor knows not precisely how pure his Act of Charity is, the
value of it is so much in the sight of God, neither more nor less, upon the
account of his own not knowing it.

He says again: It is not agreed among Doctors, whether a plenary Indulgence
is to be extended beyond the taking off those Penances, which were enjoined by
the Confessor. Answ. Though it be most true that a plenary Indulgence
proceeding from lawful Authority, granted upon a Just and Pious Cause, extends
it self to the taking away of all pain, if the penitent complys with his duty;
yet here we will not enter on this Question, nor say, how sincerely
Turrecremata with the others are cited. Content we are with that which the
Doctor does not deny, viz. That Indulgences take off those Penances enjoined by
the Confessor: And with this small Pittance of Pardon we conclude that the
Council of Trent says true: Usus Indulgentiarum est salutaris. The use of
Indulgences is wholesome.

He further tells us, page 94. That if a person be not capable of an
Indulgence, because he is not in the state of Grace, he gains nothing. Answ. No
one doubts of this. The only wonder is that our Doctor spends his Ink and Paper
to no better purpose. Soon after he says, that Pope Adrian troubles the whole
affair again, and for it he cites Petrus Suavis Polanus in his History of the
Council of Trent to prove just nothing: Polanus his words are (though his
Authority is little with me) Pontifex, qui ut Theologus, etc. The Pope, who as
a Divine had writ of Indulgences (before Luther ever handled the matter)
thought to establish by an Apostolical Decree, what he had formerly taught as a
private Doctor. And what is this Doctrine of Adrian a private Doctor? Quando
Indulgentia conceditur alicui, etc. When an Indulgence is granted to any body,
it may be he does not the work required to be done so perfectly, as to gain the
whole Indulgence: Now if any thing be wanting to the perfection of the work, he
gains not the whole Indulgence, but a part of it, corresponding to the Work,
less well performed. What is here for the Doctors advantage? What is here
against the Council of Trent? Usus Indulgentiarum est salutaris. Something is
got by Indulgences according to Adrian, who only spoke as a private Doctor Were
any thing amiss, as in reason there is not. But here I must tire you with a
piece of the Doctors subtilty, who says, That if the Indulgence be only given
according to the worthiness of the work done, then that (viz. the work) will
avail of it felf, without any grant from the Church. A strong Objection! I
answer, The work will avail of it self to merit, and if penal, to some
satisfaction, but not to the releasing of so much temporal pain as the
Indulgence takes off, in case it be worthily complied with.

The Doctors greater heap of dangers, which he sets down from his 6. number of
page 94. to 98. has so little danger of an Objection, that to read them is to
answer them. For what sense is there to tell us, That we must be sure of the
Authority of him that gives the Indulgence? We have all Moral assurance for it,
and incomparably greater then any one has in England, that his Minister
Preaches with Authority to Preach, or delivers true Doctrine. What sense is
there to ask. If one has an Indulgence for the Article of death, and dies not
then; whether a new one is to be got for the next sickness? As doughty an
objection it is, that he has concerning the Gregorian Calendar: as likewise,
his doubt whether a Pope can recall an Indulgence granted by his Predecessor.
This and a great deal more which the Doctor has concerning this matter is (he
himself knows it) most empty stuff.

But you will ask what I say to the great objection he touches on here: page 96.
and proposes more largely in the beginning of this Section, concerning the
emptying of Purgatory? Certainly the Millions of Indulgences, and innumerable
other helps in the Church should ere this have a hundred times over evacuated
that place of its sad Inhabitants. I answer, this Objection is like the rest,
feeble and forceless; and would the Doctor ponder well these words of the Royal
Prophet Psalm. 100. Misericordiam and judicium cantabo tibi, Domine, He would
see the weakness of it: God is Merciful, but withal just. His Mercy impowers
the Church to free many: But that prodigal use of the Keys in freeing all,
would be against Justice, and would make sinners little to value or fear those
torments, which St. Austin says, Surpass all the pains in this World.

CHAP. XIV.
A word more of Indulgences. Of the Doctors Mistakes in quoting Authors.
Whether the Prayer of a sinner avails him. Of the Doctors harsh Doctrine.

THe Doctor after his High heap of dangers and great number of little doubts,
page 97. tells us that there is one thing necessary, viz. To work out our
Salvation with fear and trembling. Answ. First, a poor penitent that apprehends
most deeply the pain of Purgatory, and does so much Penance as we see daily
done among good Christians for the releasment of that pain, cannot be supposed
in any Christians Charity to be without fear and trembling. 2. We might (if it
were worth the while) move as many doubts concerning this fear and trembling,
as he does against Indulgences. We might ask him to work out our Salvation: how
often must we fear? How often must we tremble? From what motive-must this fear
proceed? How strong and intens must this trembling be? when all is done: How
know we that we have trembled enough? and whether we are not to tremble, till
we all turn Quakers? Let the Doctor resolve these doubts upon good certainty;
and I Will warrant you, his scruples about Indulgences will cease. What he adds
of Venial sins hindering the fruit of Indulgences, is not worth taking notice
of. But,

Says he, page 99. Pope Adrian taught a worse matter, viz. He that will obtain
an Indulgence for another, etc. And where find we this worse matter? Mark, I
beseech you, his Marginal Quotation, Apud Petrum de Soto. lect. de institut.
Sacerd. de necessariis ad effectum Indulg. Truly our Doctor all along has been
unfortunate in his citations, and here he shows himself so very unskilful, that
I believe he never saw Soto. Know then that Petrus de Soto; besides other
works, has a book in a large Decimo sexto, which he Intitles: Tractatus de
institutione sacerdotum, (with me it is printed at Brixia, anno 1586.) under
that Title in general he handles many Questions, De scientia sacerdotum, de
Baptismo, and other Sacraments; etc. Every Treatise he devides into Lectiones:
And after the middle of the Book has a Title, de Indulgentiis, page 263. This
Treatise he divides into three Lectiones. Now the Doctor gives you not the
Right Lectio of that Treatise (which is the third in number) but unskilfully
directs you to his Lectio de Institutione sacerdotum: There is no general
Lectio, but Tractatus de institutione sacerdotum, the Lections are subdivisions
to several Treatises.

Well, though without much help from the Doctor we have found the place in
Soto: Lectio 3. now cited page (with me) 275. his words are: Notat Hadrianus
circahoc, and movet quaestionem, etc. Adrian (who by the way speaks not as
Pope, but as a Divine or private Doctor) proposes this Question, whether one
in mortal sin can avail to obtain an Indulgence for another, as if an
Indulgence (for Example) be granted to him who gives an Alms, or to him for
whom it is given by another. Adrian holds the Affirmative, So that he who does
the work, and wishes the Indulgence to another, does an action Morally good:
Nam pro* peccato non conceditur Indulgentia: For an Indulgence is never granted
for a sinful work. This I say, was Adrians private Opinion not so harshly
related by Soto, as it is by our Doctor, who talks as if it were a definition
of a Pope. Pope Adrian taught a worse matter.

I censure not Adrians Opinion (he was a great Divine) nor approve it; yet this
I Will say, that the Doctor does not so much as probably impugn it. Mark how
weakly he argues: As if, says he, a man could do more for another, then he can
do for himself. Answ. Most certainly he may: Cannot one incapable of a dignity,
or a favor in a Commonwealth, beg of his Prince a Grace for another who is
capable? A mere secular man, unlearned and Married, may petition his Majesty
(and perhaps prevail) that Doctor Tailor be the next Bishop of Canterbury (who
they say lives ever unmarried.) Here is our very Case: This secular man is
incapable of such a Grace: So a sinner is of an Indulgence. This secular man
prevails to get the Grace for another who is capable: so a sinner may prevail
to obtain an Indulgence for another just man capable of the favor. (The parity
holds exactly) Therefore it is evident, that one may do more for another then
he can for himself in some cases. The Doctor goes on, and speaks not like a
Christian: As if (says he) God would regard the Prayers of a wicked person
when he intercedes for another, and at the same time, if he Prays for himself,
his Prayer is an abomination. Answ. This last is certainly impious Doctrine,
for the consequence of it must needs be this; That no sinner ought in
conscience ever to Pray for himself. I Will prove what I say thus: No sinner can
in conscience commit an abomination in the sight of God, or sin mortally: But
to pray for himself is an abomination, and a mortal sin: therefore no sinner
can in conscience pray for himself. Consequently that poor Publican, (9 Joan)
that prayed for himself Deus propitius mihi esto peccatori. God be merciful to
me a sinner: Was an abominable man upon the account of his Prayer: which place
of Scripture, no less a Doctor then St. Austin made use of, to prove that a
sinner may pray for himself.

Were the Doctor a Divine, I could tell him that prayer in a wicked man may be
a supernatural Act, and proceed from Gods Grace (not sanctifying Grace) as
Faith is supernatural, which preceeds justification in a sinner. What he adds
of a work done ungratiously, is a wrong to Adrian; who requires Opus Moraliter
bonum: A work morally good, though not meritorious.

Finally, the Doctor says, that because Divines require the state of Grace
necessary in a man at that time he gains an Indulgence, (though before a
sinner) they turn Divinity into Mathematics and Clock-work. A conceit not
worthy a Doctor; say, I beseech you, if this good man ascends a Pulpit, and a
larems his hearers thus. Good people, you have hitherto profited little by my
Sermons: Hodie si vocem ejus audieritis: To day, this very moment, this minute,
if you will hear God speak by me, you are happy, etc. Does he turn his Sermon
into a Clock-work? Or, did the Apostle Clock it when he told the Corinthians
Ecce nunc tempus acceptabile. Now is the time acceptable. Ecce nunc dies
salutis. Now is the day of Salvation. 2 Cor. 6. Again. Hora est jam nos de
somno surgere, nunc enim proprior est nostra salus. It Is the hour now, etc.
Here is more of the Clock, of Minutes, and hours, then any Divine mentions in
our present matter.

Yet more. Pray see how artificially he winds about to bring in his
Clock-work. Though says he, it be not necessary, that when the Indulgence^ is
granted, the man be in the state of Grace; yet it is necessary that at some
time or other, within the term prescribed of the Indulgence, if he will gain
it. And to make his conceit of his Clock to run on: he adds: At any time (it
seems) it will serve, which sounds falsely, and is so; but here is enough of this
Clock.

Next he blames some Divines who say, That if a man sin in hope of Iubilee, or
Indulgence to be granted afterward, he may yet gain the pardon. Answ. He may
so, unless the Indulgence positively excludes such a man from the favor: Why?
the guilt of that sin is remissible by Contrition and Penance; and so likewise
is the temporal pain due to it pardonable, by virtue of an Indulgence.

Page 100. He is upon his old mistakes again concerning Contrition, and thinks
it may be sufficient without either act or desire of Confession. This is
answered above.

Page 101. After the praise he gives to that excellent use of Confession among
the Pious Children of the Church of England: He finds fault with our
satisfaction and Penance, much taken away by the new Doctrine of Indulgences.
Answ. Most evident it is, notwithstanding so many Indulgences granted, that the
Ancient use of Penance is in a manner only found among Catholics: These are
they who fast, these Pray, these curb their passions, these often practice
great Austerity; yes, and live sometimes in a mean condition, to relieve the
Poor. A Volume would not suffice to express the fruit of their hearty
Repentance and eminent Charity, manifest to our eyes in every Town and City.
Now for Gods-sake, what have we like this among Protestants? The hearing of a
Sermon on Sunday is the most they do; and yet there is no Declension of
primitive Discipline among them. Would to God our Doctor were shut up in a
Carthusians Cell, and lived as they live but for one year only: he would both
practice and see more Penance done, then he has either practiced, or seen in
England for his whole life; and yet forsooth, we must hear his Lord-ship talk
of a Declension in Primitive Discipline, and think all fine, when he words it,
with living Godly in Christ Jesus.

I never saw that book of Taxa Camerae, which the Doctor mentions, page 102.
and therefore cannot say what is in it, likely it is a Libel; sure I am that
Claudius Espencaeus wishes it suppressed, and if as he says, Plurimis quidem
licentia, omnibus autem absolutio empturientibus proposita. That license is
given to many, and absolution proposed to all that buy it. I cannot but judge
ill of the book; and as ill of the Doctor who Englishes Espencaeus, thus -- And
yet to them who will pay for it, there is to many given a License, and to all
an absolution for the greatest and most horrid sins. Pray you what may these
words, Mark how the Doctor equivocates in those words. To them that will pay
for it.
yet to them who will pay for it signify? do they relate to the Book, or to
the License and absolution for sin? if the second, the whole sense is: They who
will lay down money, have License, (many at least) to sin, and all have
absolution from the most horrid sius. If the Doctor works this sense out of
Espencaeus his words, he is more then uncharitable, to think that ever Pope or
Prelate favored that book; it is an infamous Libel that pretends License given
to sin. The best solution therefore is, that Espencaeus is blamable as appears
by the Index Expurgatorius of Cardinal Zapata printed, Hispali. 1631. where
this very second digression of Espencaeus is prohibited. Vide verbum Claudius
Espencaeus, page Indicis 219.

The Doctor soon after cites you Augustinus Triumphus de Ancona teaching, That
the Pope ought not to grant Indulgences to them who have a desire of giving
money, but cannot; as to them who actually give: and he adds immediately: That
in such a case, it is not inconvenient that the Rich should be in a better
condition then the Poor. In my whole life did I never meet with such a Doctor,
who neither cites right nor says right. Mark I beseech you, how he cites
Augustinus de Ancona in his Margent: De potestate Papae quaest* 3. ad 3. The
Quotation is ridiculous, and no more directs you to find any thing concerning
Indulgences then if he sent you to the first Chapter of Genesis. Know therefore
briefly, that August. de Ancona writ a sum of Divinity De potestate
Ecclesiastica printed anno 1320. under which general Title he handles many
Difficulties, and proceeds Methodically; first by Questions, next by Articles;
then gives his resolution; and finally solves the objections. At the beginning
of his Book, his first question is, De potestate Papae, and has nine Articles
under it: in the third Article not a word of our present matter, nor in any
solution ad 3. In his third Question he treats De eligentium jurisdictione, and
has ten Articles under it, and so many Resolutions and Answers, not a word of
Indulgences. In the mean while you see that our Doctors direction; De potestate
Papae quaest. 3. ad 3. Helps you nothing. He should (had he lighted on the
right question) have pointed out the Article, and then his ad 3. might have
guided the Reader.

Well, I find in the 31. question of Augustinus (far off from any 3. question
De potestate Papae) Articulo 4. where he treats of Indulgences) these words, ad
3. Si dives ita parum dat ut pauper, puto, quod non tantum habeat de
Indulgentia dives sicut pauper, quia tunc oportet recurrere ad justam
aestimationem facientis Indulgentiam, quae pensanda est valere secundum
facultatem dantis. Sed si sic dicatur: quicunque dabit unum denarium and dives
illud daret, sicut pauper; puto, quod tantum haberet dives sicut pauper:
quamvis tamen in hoc essent pares, in multis aliis melioris conditionis esset
pauper, quam dives. The sense is: If the Rich man gives as little as the Poor
man, I think the Rich man will not gain so much of the Pardon as the other.
Recourse here must be had to his will that grants the Pardon. But if it be
said: whoever gives a penny (or such a small pittance) and the Rich man gives
so much and the Poor man also. These two will be equal, and the one have as
much as the other; yet upon other accounts the Poor man's condition will be
better. Here is all I can find in this Author, and it is most blamless
Doctrine, nothing to the Doctors sense, viz That Indulgences are not to be
given to them who have a desire of giving money, but cannot. And that in such a
case, it is not inconvenient that the Rich should be in a better condition then
the Poor. If the Doctor will give me better direction to find what he quotes
out of this or any other Author, he shall have his answer. But I perceive his
way is not to examine the Originals, and therefore abuses a simple Reader; who
when he sees such a cluster of Marginal Quotations glitter like the Sun, thinks
our Doctor more Learned then Rabbi Kimki.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Doctors weak Argument against one satisfying for another. Of his new
Divinity, that the habit of sin, is sin. Of his worse Doctrine that all sins
are mortal. Of his mistaks, and charging on Catholics what they hold not.

THe Doctor, page 103. and 6 Section (I think his 5th. Section has suffered
shipwreck in the fourth, no great loss of it) assaults us many ways. First, he
likes not our Doctrine, That one man may satisfy for another; and cites Suarez
for it by halfs: Part. 4. (we say) Tomo 4. in 3. partem disp. 38. Sect. 9. I
say by halfs, for Suarez holds expressly one cannot satisfy for another, unless
the Confessor Licenses that way of satisfying: for Example; if the Confessor
injoyns his penitent to fast: Certum est (says Suarez) It is certain, that
another man's fasting will not be satisfactory. He says: 2. That a Confessor is
not to do this without a just and necessary cause (perhaps of weakness and
infirmity) because it is not usual in the Church. These limitations our Doctor
leaves out, and runs on with a jest. The Rich man is whipped upon another man's
back, and his purse only is the Penitent. I answer, If the Rich man's back
deserves stripes (as well as some body does) no Confessor causelessly lays them
on another, nor makes his purse the penitent; No, it is a slander to say that
enjoined satisfaction is thus bought off with money.

Next comes the Doctors weighty Argument: For by this Doctrine (says he) viz.
that one man may satisfy for another: it is not to be said of Christ alone,
that he was wounded for our transgressions, that he only satisfied for our
sins. I answer, If this Argument have force, it proves as much against a man's
own satisfaction, as against satisfaction done by another; for if Christ
satisfied for all, (in the Doctors sense) the Penitents own satisfaction (who
is one amongst all) is vain and fruitless, which is not here in question.
Again, our good Doctor gainsaies all the severity of those ancient Canonical
Penances practiced in the Church, and praised by him; for if Christ only has
satisfied for all; what need was there of such rigid Penances among the
primitive Christians? it was done to their hands by Christ, their Penances
therefore were superfluous.

2. He blames us for saying, The habit of sin is no sin distinct from the
former Actions by which the habit was contracted. So the Doctor, page 104.
Answ. Here is the most strange Doctrine I ever read. Know therefore, that
Divines distinguish between actual sin; habitual sin, which is sin past, not
yet pardoned; and the habit of sining generated by frequent acts of vice, which
makes a man unhappy, prone, ready, and facile to sin again, just as the often
repeating of a Verse gives facility to say it anew with ease.

Now to affirm that this habit contracted by former multiplied acts of sin, is
a sin; seems a piece of new coined Divinity: and proves that no sinner
habituated in Vice if he dies immediately after his first act of Contrition, or
ardent Love of God (which justifies him) can be saved. Why? This fervent act of
Contrition Roots not quite out the contracted habit of sin; no says our
Doctor, (and truly) There is required a longer time, and a procedure in the
Method of a holy life to do this: But this contracted habit of sin, is a sin,
which the most fervent act of Contrition takes not away in a Moment; therefore
if a sinner dies suddenly after his first Contrition, he cannot be saved;
consequently, had St. Mary Magdalen departed this life, the next instant after
her ardent Charity, she had been a lost Soul; and so the Doctor must say the
good Theif on the Cross is who had little time granted to Root out his bad
habits.

What the Doctor adds, that in our Doctrine a man is not bound to interrupt the
procedure of his impiety, is most unjust dealing; for such an one is bound by
the Law of God, and reason, not to sin, yes and by Repentance too, in case
Repentance be the only means to help him.

The Doctor speaks not well while he insinuates that we are obliged to repent
of our habits, if Repentance be taken properly: Repent we must of our sins, and
Root out ill habits by contrary acts of Virtue; this is our duty. Finally, he
is strangely out in saying, As for those (sins) that come after, they are
excused, if they be produced by a strong habit. Answ. A strong habit of erring
brought forth this assertion; it is highly injurious to Catholics, and as far
from truth, as the Doctor is from honest dealing with us.

Page 106. he teaches that every venial sin in its own Nature, and the rigor
of Divine Justice is damnable; and that in the unregenerate these venial sins
are so accounted. Answ. Most merciless and execrable Doctrine against the very
light of Nature: For who can say, (if a spark of Reason lives in him) that in
case one by special favor pass his whole life without all other sin then once
speaking an idle word, and dies immediately, who I say dare affirm that this
man in rigor of Gods Divine Justice is a damned Soul, and must for that one
little transgression suffer the torments of Hell for eternity? Where is your
Scripture, good Doctor, for this desperate Doctrine? produce it, let us read
the place with you; but never shall you do it, till you prove it by Scripture,
that a Gnat is as big as a Camel, and a Mote in the Sun as great as a
House-beam: He may say the case now set down is somewhat extraordinary; be it
so, it implies no impossibility, and therefore lays open even to Turks and
Heathens the prodigious impiety of this Doctrine.

The Doctor goes on, and tells us; That though venial sins of their own Nature
are damnable, yet by the Divine Mercy, the smaller committed by invincible
ignorance, inadvertency or unavoydable infirmity, shall not be imputed to those
who love God. Answ. First, if these sins be damnable in the Unregenerate, as
Infidels and those who want Faith; I see not why they are not Damnable also in
the Regenerate; for these by reason of the great knowledge they have of
Christian Profession, seem more obliged upon that very account to avoid venial
sins, then Infidels or the Unregenerate. 2. I Argue thus: Doctor Tailor is
(we'll suppose it) a man who loves God; we'll suppose also, what he says, page
95. is true; That no man lives without the intromission of venial sins daily;
from whence it follows that Doctor Tailor has such a heap of evils in his
Soul, which (though he loves God) of their own Nature, and the rigor of Gods
Justice may damn him for ever. If so, I ask why Gods Justice (overcome as it
were by Mercy) is less severe to these sins, then to others which we call great
and Mortal? No Reason can be given, but that those lesser sins are venial,
pardonable in their own Nature; these greater deserve the severity of his
Justice. Pardonable I say they are, and little, antecedently to Gods Justice
and Mercy, and therefore mercy makes them not so, but finds them pardonable,
because little.

Hence it follows, that no heap of venial sins considered as venial, can
equalize the gravity of one Mortal offense; for though the growth and numerous
augmentation of them add more misery to a Soul; yet their increase is (as
Divines speak) in inferiori ordine in a lower Degree of Malice, and reach no
more to the enormity of a mortal sin, (which make us enemies to God) then a
thousand idle words reach the indignity of high Treason against a Prince or
Sovereign. I say considered as venial, for if the careless multiplying of
venial sins drive us on to the next step or danger of offending mortally; the
case is altered; Qui amat periculum peribit in eo. He that loves danger shall
perish in it.

The Doctor adds page 107 ( That this Doctrine of sins venial gives rest to
men's consciences: and that concerning such sins we are bidden to be quiet) I
answer, His mistake is notorious. We inculcate, God knows, the danger of those
lesser evils, we lay open their Malice, and say, That for every idle word an
account must be given before a severe Judge. O but says he, It Is impossible to
tell in a thousand cases which are, and which are not venial sins: And page
(108) If a Confessor says that is venial which is mortal, your Soul is betrayed.
Why so good Doctor? I answer then: The penitents duty is not perfectly to know
what is, and what is not venial; but to have hearty sorrow for his sins
committed, whether great or little. For no man says I grieve for my sins as
little or only venial; but most securely thus: I am sorry for them all, as God
knows them offensive to his Divine Majesty: And answerable to this sorrow the
Confessor gives absolution; therefore though his knowledge may in some cases
fail, and not rightly distinguish between sins mortal and venial; yet his
absolution is good, for he absolves from all, whereof the Penitent humbly
contrite, accuses himself guilty.

CHAP. XVI.
Divines prudently follow in innumerable cases a probable Opinion. Of the
Doctors exceptions against it. Of his mistakes.

THe Doctor page 110. Sect. 7. lays about him to undo our Leading men
concerning the Doctrine they hold of a probable Opinion. Briefly, The Judgment
of Divines is this: That if an Opinion well examined by learned men, be not
contrary to known received Doctrine, or any decision of the Church, it may be
safely followed in practice; and this, though one grave Doctor says it;
Provided, I say, that his Judgment be not opposite to the general received
Doctrine of others.

The ground of this assertion is: Innumerable difficulties daily occur in a
Moral life relating to the practice of Virtue, to the shunning of sin, to the
doing of Justice; In fine, to a Christian man's Obligation in a thousand cases;
which difficulties can with no evidence be decided either by Scripture, or
definition of the Church. Divines therefore, who are supposed both rational and
best versed in the Principles of Christian Religion unavoydably must, when
evidence cannot be had, opinatively Judge and give a probable decision to the
doubts proposed: and this I think neither our Doctor, nor any Protestant living
can deny. For,

If a Judge comes to Doctor Tailor and tells him, Sir, this very day I am to
pronounce Sentence against a supposed Delinquent, or must free him. To give
sentence against him I have Accusers enough, and plenty of Witnesses: None can
except against them, their proofs will make him guilty; yet I know most
certainly by my private knowledge that the man is innocent; my difficulty now
is, whether as a public person and Judge, I may condemn him as guilty upon the
attestation of these public Witnesses, or quit him (though to my prejudice) on
the certain knowledge I have of his innocence. What will the Doctor say to this
case? will he plead ignorance? He cannot; for both in his Books and Sermons he
takes upon him to decide the greatest Controversies in Faith; and therefore of
necessary must here answer a difficulty in practice: let him say what he
pleases, he can do no more, but follow a probable Opinion; for if he counsels
the Judge to free this supposed delinquent, he has a whole Army of Schoolmen
against him, if to condemn him, he has as many contrary; none of these Doctors
can be supposed to speak against the evidence of truth; therefore they only
deliver their probable Opinions, and so must our Doctor do likewise if he
speaks with either one side or other.

A thousand such cases are almost endlesly proposed, where the Wit of man must
rest upon probability, without reaching to evidence in every particular case;
only this reflex evidence we have, that none can sin who follows the dictamen
of Prudence. But he that adheres to a probable Opinion follows Prudence, (when
evidence cannot be had) therefore he is blamless and sins not. yet,

One word more with our Doctor, who (page 79.) talks of something, Their
Writers have often proved in their Sermons and Books of Conscience. I ask him
therefore, seeing they have such books; whether there Writers resolve every
particular case of conscience upon certain undoubted Principles of Faith: if he
says no; then they have probable Opinions among them also. If, yes; This very
saying is at most no more then probable; and will be (upon solid Reasons)
contradicted by a hundred as Learned Scholars as the Doctor is; therefore he
must decide the case upon a prudent Opinion, and probability only. Yet more.

Can the Doctor persuade himself that all he says in his Book runs on with
such evidence, that a judicious Reader must hold it demonstrative? No. The most
he can think, is that he discourses probably; and yet, by this mere
probability he hopes to dissuade the World from Popery. I say the most he can
think; for I profess (and I have thousands will Judge with me) there is not so
much as one Section in it that comes near a probability. Conclude then from
hence; that if as the Doctor says, page 111. It be not safe to follow Caius
and Sempronious in a probable Opinion, because they are but private Doctors;
Much less is it safe to follow Doctor Tailor in his Disswasive from Popery,
(who at most speaks but probably) and is no more but a private Doctor. What he
adds at the end of this page, viz. That we suffer casuists to determine cases
severely, and gently: Entertain all spirits: Please all dispositions, and
Govern them by their own inclinations, as they lift to be governed; etc. Is in
a word, a long list of mistakes; and the Doctor is obliged in conscience (by
more then a probable Opinion) to unsay the slander.

Now to some famous Quotations of our Doctor; who though he could show that
those particular Opinions which he cavils at in the ensuing part of his
Section, were as false as that impious Doctrine is of killing Kings, or Durands
Opinion of Fornication; yet he gains nothing: for all at most he proves, is
that such and such particular Opinions are to be cast aside; which God knows,
makes little to decry the Doctrine of a probable Opinion in general. Five or
six Ministers in England, (and perhaps more) are worth little; is therefore
their whole Ministry in general not to be valued.

CHAP. XVII.
How the Doctor wrongs both the Canon Law and Catholic Authors. Of his
Quotations unworthily corrupted.

OUr Doctor cites page 112. Emanuel Sa in his Aphorisms verbo. dubium. for this
Doctrine; viz. If one Doctor say it is safe to swear a thing as of our
knowledge which we do not know, but believe it is so, it is therefore probable
that it is lawful to swear it. Answ. Eman. Sa in this word Dubium, (with me
printed at Antwerp 1599.) has not one word of swearing (in which is particular
difficulty) but numero 3. speaks thus: Potest quis facere quod probabili
ratione, vel authoritate putet licere, etiamsi oppositum sit tutius. One may do
what he thinks probable by Reason or Authority, though the contrary be more
safe. What is here of safety to swear a thing as of our knowledge, which we do
not know?

Antonius de Escobar, Whom the Doctor should have cited thus: Lib. 2. Theol.
Moralis cap. 2. De conscientia probabili, has not a syllable of Swearing by
any Warrant of a probable Opinion; but rather the contrary. Moneo, says he, n.
15. haud licere uti probabili Opinione, quando ex ea magnum periculum
sequeretur, vel proximi damni, etc. I put you in mind, that it is not lawful to
use a probable Opinion, when either great danger or hurt of our Neighbor may
follow on it; which may easily fall out, if we swear a thing as of our
knowledge, which we know not.

He tells you soon after a story of Pope Constantine the 4th. Who being accused
in the Lateran Council for holding the Sea Apostolic when he was not in
Orders, justified himself by the Example of two Bishops: And he cites Nauclerus
for the story Generatione 21. and 26. Answer. First, Nauclerus Generat. 21.
has not one word of Pope Constantine, much less this story: Generat. 26. (with
me, page 9.) he speaks thus: Perstitit autem per annum in Petri Cathedra
Constantinus, and Episcopos Praesbiterosque more Pontificum ordinavit, quousque
clero Populoque Romano in tribus foris -- Constantinus est ejectus, and in ejus
locum omnium fuffragiis Stephanus 3. extitit suffectus, etc. Constantine
continued in the Chair of Peter for a year, and ordained Bishops and Priests,
as Popes were accustomed; until the Clergy and People of Rome assembled in
there several places, etc. -- Constantine was cast out, and by the Votes of
all, Stephen was set in his place. Here is nothing of the Lateran Council, or
the pretended Example of two Bishops. You may see therefore how unlucky our
Doctor is in his citations. 2. I answer, Admit that Constantine alleged the
Example of two Bishops, were either he or they on that account good or
laudable? no certainly: such presidents make no probable Opinion.

Next he cites you Cardinal Campegius and Alber. Pighius teaching, That a
Priest lives more holily that keeps a Concubine, then he that has Married a
Wife. Answ. Observe, first, I beseech you, how our Doctor cites you these
Authors without their places. Observe, 2. How he juggles in that word, He,
which must relate either to a Secular man that may Marry; or to a Grecian
Priest that is Married before his Priesthood; or finally, to a Latin Priest
that cannot Marry, either Liciteacute;, or Valide without dispensation. Hence I
infer: whoever affirms that a Priest lives more holily that keeps a Concubine,
then a secular man that may Marry, or a Grecian Priest that was Married before
Orders, delivers most impious Doctrine ( Pighius never said it.) Again, whoever
affirms, that a Priest that keeps a Concubine lives more holily then a Priest
that Marries; talks De subjecto non supponendo; for a Latin Priest cannot
Marry. If he therefore be so damnably wicked as to Marry a hundred times, his
supposed Wife is no more but a Concubine; and then the Doctors Wise allegation
must make this sense: That Priest lives more holily that keeps a Concubine,
then he that has a Concubine. Perhaps Pighius may say, that if a Priest
endeavors to Marry a Wife, as Luther did, and owns that Sacrilegious contract
as a Marriage; To his impure living with a Harlot, he adds a new sin: And this
Doctrine is true.

The Doctor goes on in the next lines: Seeing we find in the Popes Laws that a
Priest is not to be removed for Fornication; who will not, or may not
practically conclude, that since by the Law of God Marriage is Holy, and yet to
some men Fornication is more Lawful; that therefore to keep a Concubine is very
Lawful. Answ. Let the Doctor speak out plainly, and tell us to what men
Fornication is more Lawful then Marriage: It is absolutely unlawful in all; and
therefore if we speak properly, Fornication admits no Degree of being more or
less Lawful. Had the Doctor said, the sacrilegious Fornication of a Priest is a
lesser evil then sacrilegiously to use and own a Woman as his Wife, he had
spoken sense: But hence it follows not, that to keep a Concubine is very
Lawful. Nay if ( per impossible) Fornication were in some cases Lawful, it does
not yet follow, that to keep a Concubine is very lawful: In a word, the Doctor
says he knows not what.

Now to the Popes Laws, which he cites so confusedly, that no man understands
him: He Writes in his Margent thus: 3. quaest. 7. which Canonists would take
for Causa 3. q. 7. (but then the Chapter should be added) not one word of this
Subject in that quaest. 7. Then he adds, lata, which should signify the
beginning of a Chapter: Where to find it no man knows, nor whether it relates
to quaest. 7. or the Extravag. Next follows, Extravag. de Bigamis. There is
nothing de bigamis in the Extravag. in decret. tit. 21. There is de bigamis non
ordinandis, cap. 5. yet nothing to this purpose; and I dare boldly affirm that
in all the Canon Law, he shall not find either that Doctrine he attributes to
Albertus Pighius, or That Fornication is more Lawful then Marriage in any. I
wonder why the Doctor when he cites Campegius and Pighius for that filthy
Doctrine of a Priests living more holily with a Concubine, then he that is
Married; places directly against it, in his Margent the Canon Law; distinct.
82. can. Praesbiter in glossa, as if the Doctrine were allowed of. In a word,
there is no such thing, but expressly the contrary. The words are thus: Cap. 5.
Presbiter. Si Fornicationem feceret, quanquam secundum canones Apostolorum
debeat deponi: tamen, juxta Authoritatem Beati Papae silvestri, si in vitio non
perduraverit, sed sua sponte confessus adjecit, ut resurgat, december annis in
hunc modum paeniteat tribus quidem mensibus privato loco a caeteris remotus,
pane, and aqua, a vespera in vesperam utatur. A Priest, if he commits
Fornication, although by the Canon of the Apostles he is to be deposed, yet
according to St. Sylvesters appointment, if he persever not in that state of
sinning, but having confessed willingly, amends his life, he is to do Penance
for ten years in this manner. For the first three Months he is to live a part
from others, and from Evening to Evening have only Bread and Water, etc. And
still that Chapter goes on prescribing further and most severe Penances to such
a Delinquent. Read I beseech you the whole Chapter, and never leave off to
admire our mistaken Doctor.

Page 113. he cites Durandus: Sent. lib. 4. distinct. 33. (but gives you not
the Question under the Distinction.) Well, he means quaest. 2. toward the end.
Durandus his words are: Quod autem quidam dicant, quod est peccatum mortale de
se, (nempe Fornicatio) exclusa omni lege positiva, Divina and humana, non been
intelligo. But for what some say, that Fornication by it self is a mortal sin
excluding all positive Law Divine and humane: I well understand not. Thus
Durandus: And though his, non been intelligo, be not assertive; yet he says
too much; and is therefore contradicted by the generality of most Learned
Doctors. His Opinion then (according to the Rule given above) is not probable.
One Swallow makes no Summer, nor one Divine against the general received
Doctrine of others, makes no probable Opinion.

Next he cites Martinus de Magistris asserting, that it is not Heretical, to
believe simple Fornication to be no sin. Answ. I have not now that Author by
me; but yet believe, that the Doctor wrongs him. If he held such a Tenet; I say
it is Heretical, and consequently no probable Opinion. Perhaps he may favor
Durands Error too much, and that is all: I little regard what Daniel Tilenus
says, he was an Heretic, and Writ a Book that the Pope of Rome is magnus ille
and proprie dictus Antichristus. I think the Doctor will not say so.

Next the Doctor cites Cardinal Tolet. Instruct. sacerd. lib. 5. cap. 6. number.
15. Saying, That if a Noble man be set upon, and may escape by going away, he
is not tied to it, but may kill him that intends to strike him with a stick.
Answ. The Doctor mangles Tolets Doctrine, and wrongs him exceedingly; whose
words are: Ex quo fit, ut si nobilis invasus possit vitam salvare fugiendo; non
tenetur, (si inde infamian contrahit) fugere, sed occidere hostem potest, si
aliter vitam cum honor tutari non potest. Whence it follows that if a Noble
man set on, might save his life by running away, he is not obliged to it, if he
gets infamy by his running away; but may kill the aggressor, if otherwise, he
cannot defend his life with Honor. Now comes the stick: Similiter si non
potest fugere injuriam notabilem inferendam, ut ligni percussionem paratam,
potest etiam tunc occidere inimicum. In like manner if this Noble man cannot
avoid a notable injury, ready for him, as is a Bastinado, or a stroke with a
Cudgel he may then kill his Enemy. Compare these words of Tolet with those of
the Doctor, and you will see a difference.

Tolet says again, lib. 4. cap. 13. (says the Doctor) That if a man without
advertency speaks a blasphemy in a strong passion, not considering what he
says, sins not. Answ. Yet he adds: Nisi cum homo esset assuetus Blasphemare,
nec vult emendationem: talis enim peccaret mortaliter tunc, quia est in culpa
praecedenti quia non abstulit occasionem peccati. Unless such a man were
accustomed to Blaspheme and will not amend; for then he would sin mortally in
the precedent fault, and because he took not away the occasion of sin. These
words the Doctor omits, to make Tolets Doctrine odious, which yet is grounded
in this certain Principle; that as sin is a free act; so it must arise from a
knowledge or advertency of that evil, the will voluntary embraseth. Hence you
may solve that other Quotation out of Tolet, lib. 5. cap. 10. viz. If a man be
beastly drunk and then commits Fornication, Fornication is no sin; solve it I
say; for the use of Reason is requisite to every sin; here is no use of Reason,
Ergo, no sin. And pray you, will the Doctor say that Lot sinned mortally, when
so drunk as he was; he committed Incest with his Daughters: Or will he hang a
mere natural Sot in England, (who has not Reason to know good from evil) for
stealing thirteen pence halfpenny? I would have this case plainly resolved by
the Doctor, if he holds that Lot sinned mortally, and his resolution brought to
a clear and certain Principle; for if he gives not evidence in the decision of
the case against Tolet, he can not by his own Rule make use of a probable
Opinion.

Once more Tolet is cited, page 114. for saying lib. 5. cap. 13. If a man
desires Carnal polution that he may be eased of his Carnal temptations, or for
his health, it were no sin. Answ. He highly abuses Tolet; who speaks of no
Lascivious or Carnal desire; so far is he from this, that he says; if one
takes complacency in it, Ob delectationem, for the delight had, he sins
mortally; and then adds: Dico ob delectationem, quia complacere ob sanitatem,
vel, ut carnales tentationes non sint ita vehementes, non esset peccatum. I say
for delight, for to be glad of it for health, or that carnal tentations be not
so violent, it is no sin. The end or motive is here far different; but to
desire or delight in that filthy act, is ever a sin and mortal.

Yet one citation more remains of Eman. Sa which will make the Doctor famous;
he referrs us to Sa, Tit. debitum conjugale n. 6. who (says he) affirms, that
if a man lies with his intended wife before Marriage, it is no sin, or a light
one only. Answ. Hear, I beseech you, Sa his own words in my Edition printed at
Antwerp anno 1599. (and never cease to wonder at what the Doctor says) n. 6.
Copulariante benedictionem aut nullum, aut lene peccatum est, (and si quidam
mortale esse putant) quin etiam expedit, si multum illa (Benedictio)
differatur. That is, For a man and Wife to lie together now married, before the
Solemn Benediction of the Sacrament (not before Marriage as our Doctor
unworthily tells ye) although some think it a mortal sin, is not so, but at
most venial. Yes, its sometimes expedient, if Benediction be put off for a long
time, that they live together as Man and Wife; Did you ever hear of a Doctor
that does not distinguish betwixt the Sacrament of Marriage, and the
Benediction of the Married couple? Thus much of the seventh Section.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Attention necessary in prayer. One may pray that perfectly understands not
the words of prayer. The Doctor quotes amiss, and abuses Suarez.

THe Doctor in his 8, and 9th. Section has much slight work, and his 10th.
Section is a story of Exorcisms. Of these a word. In passing I must not omit to
make him memorable for his quotations, you know this is my chiefest task.

Page 117. Sect. 8. he says. They teach, (we Catholics,) that prayers
themselves ex opere operato, or by natural work it self, do prevail, for it is
not essential to prayer, for a man to think particularly of what he says; or,
of the things signified by the words: So, (says he) Suarez teaches. And where
think you? lib. 3. de Oraratione cap. 4. says the Doctor. Briefly. He should
first have cited the Tome, and the general Title of it thus; Tomo 2. de Statu
Religionis before he came to the Book and chapter, but we will pardon this
Lesser Fault, and complain of a greater, and it is, that he wrongs Suarez
unpardonably. Suarez says no where in that whole chapter, (nor any Author I
ever read) that prayers prevail ex opere operato, or by the work it self done,
as the Sacraments prevail. He excludes no where attention, but requires it in
prayer. Hear this Learned Author number. 3. (in the chapter now cited.) Imprimis
necessariam esse attentionem ut oration honest fiat, communis est sententia
doctorum. First that attention is necessary, that prayer be well done, is the
common opinion of Doctors, and this not only in prayers we have of obligation,
but in others also not obligatory; for, although (says he) we are not obliged
to pray (in such, and such circumstances,) yet if we do it, we are bound to
pray debito modo in a dutiful way and manner. He adds more to this purpose,
Number. 4. and Number. 5. concludes, that that vocal prayer, or speaking to Almighty
God which is made without mental attention is no prayer at all. Whence it
follows that who prays, must either attend to what he says, or have his mind
so devoutly elevated to Almighty God that his prayers prove acceptable: for if
that known Maxim be true, Divisum cor non impetrat quod petit: a heart divided
in prayer (that is, partly in Heaven, partly in earth) gets little, much more a
heart which attends to no good thing when we pray, does the work without fruit.
Attention therefore is even necessary, actual, or virtual, whereof see Suarez
Number. 7.

To what the Doctor opposes next after, thus: Nay, it is not necessary to the
essence of prayer that he who prays should think de ipsa locutione, of the
speaking it self. Suarez answers from his Number 15. to the end of the chapter.
His discourse is long, I Will therefore give you the substance of his resolution
by proposing to our Doctor one or two questions. Suppose, Dr. Tailor has made
to himself a set form of prayer which he knows most perfectly, and says it
before his Sermon, yet now and then surprised by an unvoluntary distraction
thinks not de ipsa locutione. I ask whither the fruit of such prayer is lost,
and the essence of it perish? if he says yes, he speaks a paradox, and must
either conclude that few Ministers pray to the purpose; or tell us a strange
story, that they are never distracted in prayer.

Yet more, suppose Dr. Tailor while he says his prayer, has his mind so
deeply fixed on Almighty God that (though his tongue speaks) he thinks not of
the speaking, but of God only, and his immense goodness: Will he also say that
his prayer is worth nothing? It Is impious to think it. Now hear Suarez at the
end of his 17. number, and observe how he is abused. Non est, (says he) de
ratione orationis, ut cogitet orans de ipsa locutione, sed, satis est si
cogitet de Deo cum quo loquitur. It Is, not of the essence of prayer to think of
the speaking, but it is enough that he who prays think of Almighty God with
whom he speaks; for here is ascensio mentis ad Deum the lifting up of our heart
to God, therefore true prayer. This of prayer in general, for those who have a
set form of prayer prescribed, (as Priests have) Suarez number. 19. requires a
decent attention to the words, according to that of the Wise man. Ne temere
quid loquaris etc.

I must not quite omit that other cavil of our Doctor; It is not necessary
(says he) out of Suarez to think of the things signified by the words. Answ.
God forbid it should be necessary; for if our Doctor should pray for Vrim and
Thummim, and to have Such is the dark Language of D. Tailor and D. Pierce.
his tongue touched with a coal from the Altar, and that God would bless him,
and his, from that Empuse that met Apollonius Tyanaeus, and all remnants of
embrodery from the Theopneust Aholiah, and finally from the pride of Popes
stigmatized by a prolepsis: Few I believe, and very few who pray with him,
would think (because they understand not) of the things signified by these
words, Yet, they pray, or do not pray: Angustiae undique. If the first: poor
people may pray though they know not the thing signified by words. If they do
not pray, all is vanity when they kneel down at such a prayer, and say Amen to
it. The Doctor may say, they use no such language in prayer. Ans. They use
worse in preaching, witness Dr. Pierce's late Sermon, whereof, part at least
might by some industry be turned into a long prayer, with all its pedantry and
vain affectation. If so; I seriously ask whether a hundred old women, who heard
such a prayer, said at Paul's Cross, and pray according to the sense of it;
pray, or no? if they do, old women may pray when they understand not things
signified by words: if they do not, they pray not, yet say Amen to all.

I dare a vouch it with certainty, that there is not a Cobbler, or Tailor in our
Catholic Town here, who do not better understand the whole substance of Mass,
(though in Latin,) then the generality of English men understand Dr. Pierce's
Sermon. Yet it is printed for the profit of all. Be it so or not, I justify by
the example now given, and good reason against the Doctor, that prayer in an
unknown Language though the thing signified by the words be not perfectly
understood, is allowable, and looses nothing of the essence of prayer: I prove
it thus.

Such a prayer known by the authority of the Church, and consent of virtuous
men to be good and pious, (though in an unknown Language,) may be offered up by
an ignorant man, both to praise Almighty God, and to petition his Divine
Majesty for a grace and favor; just as one not knowing Latin, may prefer a
Petition to the Pope in that Language, which contains both praise due to so
great a Prelat, and withal begg's a boon or favor of him. Hereis our very
Case. The unlearned man knows not perfectly the Latin Service; no more does
this ignorant Suppliant know his Latin Petition. The first is assured by the
greatest authority imaginable, that the Latin Service ascribes praise and
thanksgiving to God, and begg's a favor of him; The second is assured, ('it is
true by a lesser authority,) that his Petition runs on in the like nature; if
therefore this man who knows not Latin, may petition (and with hope of grace) a
Pope, or Prince in Latin; never shall the Doctor show why an ignorant man may
not also petition Almighty God in the same Language; let the Doctor here give
me but a shadow of any disparity, and he shall be an Apollo.

Were it not over tedious, I might give you (with the learned Suarez) the true
reason of this doctrine; briefly in words or writings, you may distinguish a
twofold signification. The first is more general, the second may be called
specifical, or if you please individual. The general signification is had, when
we know that such a prayer is good, pious, and laudable: But to have perfectly
the specifical, we must know the sense and meaning of the words. To pray
therefore well, this knowledge is required, that the prayer is a good and pious
petition, and as such, (uniting my self with all faithful Christians) I offer
it up to Almighty God, though I comprehend not the ultimate specifical or
individual signification of it. May not I beseech you our Doctor say those
words of the Royal Prophet Psalm. 68. and praise Almighty God by them; Si
dormiatis inter medios cleros pennae columbae deargentatae etc. Though perhaps
he knows not perfectly the specifical signification of them? Yes, and so may an
old woman do, when she hears her Minister pray for Vrim and Thummim, or to have
his tongue touched with a coal, etc.

Add to this, (and it is worth reflection,) that beside the general knowledge
poor Idiots have of the piety in Latin Service, innumerable by continual use
come to a specifical knowledge of most things said in holy Mass: and more your
poor Idiots in England know not, either of those wordy extemporal prayers made
by Ministers, or of their affected and fruitless Sermons. No Chrysostom, no
Ambros, no Austin ever preached or prayed like them. But what will you? Novelty
in doctrine brings with it these new nothings in morality.

CHAP. XIX.
The Doctor yet holds on in quoting Authors amiss. His Errors are discovered.

THe Doctor next cites you Salmeron saying, that prayers prevail when they are
not understood like the words of a charmer. Answ. Where says Salmeron this?
The Doctor points to no place, nor can he I believe; if he cannot, he both
charms and cheats his Reader. He cites next S. Antoninus summae, part. 3. tit.
23. Answ. That 23. title has five long Chapters under it, and every Chapter is
yet further subdivided into several members, sections, or paragraphs, and our
Doctor neither gives you Chapter, nor paragraph, where we may find that prayer
is like a precious stone in the hand of an unskilful man: Nor can he I think,
for that 23. title treats de conciliis universalibus, de differentia Papae, and
concilii, a matter remote enough from handling what prayer is. Well, but admit
S. Antoninus say so, there is nothing reprehensible: The similitude is good, if
the unskilful man knows as well in general, that he has a precious stone in
his hand, as the unlearned man that his prayer is pious.

The Doctor page 118 remits us to Jacobus de Graffiis de orat. Answ. I have 3.
Tomes in a large 4to. of this Author, and perusing the Index of the Title he
has in each Tome, I find none de oratione. Yet, part. 1. decisio: Aurearum
lib. 2. cap. 52. he proposes this question: Qualiter dicendae horae canonicae?
how our Canonical hours are to be said, and he resolves the question thus; number.
3. Vt animus sit in divino officio attentus, hoc est, ut mentem habeat
praefentem ad id, quod dicitur, nempe ut quod lingua foris personat, men's simul
intus concipiendo loquatur, unde Augustinus: Hoc versetur in cord, quod
proferatur ore. That is, that the mind be attentive in the Divine Office, and
it be present to what is said, that what the tongue speaks the heart conceives,
according to S. Austin; Let the heart speak, what we say in words. Thus much I
cite out of Graffys to prove that the Doctors illation is far from truth, in
the beginning of his 118. page Therefore attention or devotion in our prayers
is not necessary.

Immediately after he quotes Cardinal Tolet lib. 2. de instruct. Sacerd. cap.
13. whose words are these, Circa modum etc. concerning the manner (how we are
to say our Canonical hours,) it is to be observed, that every one say them
attentively, reverently, and devoutly. Next he shows particularly what
attention is requisite, and says in the second place that advertency to the
sense of the words is not necessary, and he affirms this most truly, for few
old women in England can attend to the sense of every word said by their
Minister, because they know it not.

Mark now a most strange illation of our Doctor, so that, says he, by this
doctrine no attention is necessary. Tolet says, We are to say our Canonical
hours attentively, devoutly, and reverently, and the Doctor infers; that no
attention is necessary. Whether such an unworthy dealing, with so learned a man
as Tolet was, be tolerable, let the world judge.

The Doctor page 120. would even tire a patient man with his tattle. They in
England, says he, pray with the heart, We (the Church of Rome) with our lips,
They pray, We say prayers, etc. And what good Doctor do we say them without a
heart? who made you judge of this forum? The secrets of hearts are only known
to God, (not to Angles) much less to any poor spirit in England. What follows
in that 8th. Section is only talk without substance. And,

Truly his. 9th. Section is like it; though worse, for blasphemies against the
Mother of God, and the blessed Saints in Heaven. The Doctor about page 33.
tells us, that Scripture expressly forbids us to enquire of the dead, but here
he is more then inquisitive, for he takes upon him to judge, to degrade, and
cast out of Heaven many a happy soul; witness his page 133. I pass by his
jeers, and blasphemies, (they are all numbered by one that errs not,) and take
notice only of two or three quotations.

Page 124. he cites you S. Antoninus Sum. part. 4. tit. 15. without either
chapter, number, or further direction. Whereas that 15th. title, in an old
close abreviated character, contains about 60. whole leaves in folio, which if
printed in such a letter as the Doctors Dissuasive is, would well make two, or
more of it. I chiefly doubt whether S. Antoninus be fairly dealt with, cited
for these words. How shall a sinner go to Christ as to an advocate? but cannot
now run over so large a Treatise to find the truth. In the interim the Doctor
may blush to paint his margent with such confused quotations. A child may see,
he either read not Antoninus, or, minded not his Reader should meet with the
place.

Soon after he cites F. Salazar in cap. 8. Proverb. in ver. 19. Saying, that
the Virgin Mary by offering up Christ was worthy to have, (after a certain
manner) that the whole salvation and redemption of mankind should be ascribed
to her, and that this was common to Christ and the Virgin. Answ. The Doctor
deals most disingeniously with Salazar, who numb. 206. number. 19. lays this
Principle, Exploratum est illud apud Catholicos Virginem nostrae salutis
principalem causam minime fuisse, (solus enim Christus rem totam peregit) pro
peccatorum debito integre satis dando,) sed tantum, sua impetratione eandem
salutem quodammodo, promovisse, and juvasse. It is known to all Catholics that
the Virgin no way was the principal Cause of our Salvation. (Christ alone did
that work and paid our ransom fully) but only by her impetration she promoted,
in some sort, and set forward that salvation.

S. Hierom cited by Salazar, numb. 204. says more, and calls the Virgin,
salutis auctricem. S. Anselm reparatricem. S. Ireneus, universo generi humano
causa salutis, etc. Salazar therefore, grounding himself upon these, and other
authorities of Fathers, and pondering the great oblation the Virgin made of her
only Son, concludes number. 222. Haec cum ita sint ob tantam tamque insignem,
tantique valoris, ac meriti actionem. Virgo Dei-para digna fuit ut illi
communis totius generis humani salus, and redemptio, aliquo modo ad
scriberetur: that is, For that worthy and noble action she did, in offering up
her Son to his eternal Father, she may be styled (with S. Hierom) the Actress
of our salvation, and accounted so worthy, that the common safety and
redemption of all mankind might, in some manner, be ascribed to her. Which is
not, (God knows) to say as our Doctor strangely interprets, that this
redemption was common to Christ and the Virgin. Christ was the sole and
principal cause of our redemption, he alone did the work, says Salazar, and
under this notion the Virgin had nothing common with him. You see how constant
the Doctor is, in wronging Authors.

I should have told you how our Doctor before he cites Salazar talks of strange
blasphemies, delivered by Bernardinus de Bustis, and Valentia, but gives you no
particular; an answer is ready when he produces them: in the interim let him
know that fraudulenti versantur in universalibus, cheats like well to se^lk in
generalities, and that all is not blasphemy the Do* (...) at.

CHAP. XX.
Of recourse had by the Living to the Saints in Heaven for temporal
Necessities. S. Austin warrants this Practice. S. Gregory Nissen approves it.
Of Miracles done in our age.

MUch patience I confess is necessary to read our Doctor, and more to lose time
in weighing his unweighty arguments. Yet go on we must. In his 9th Section
therefore, page chiefly 123. He tyres you with a few old trivial objections
against invocation of Saints, made long since by others, and, God knows,
answered by Bellarmine before the Doctor was born, though he talks, as if they
were the new Lights of his own learning, never thought on by any body else. He
argues first, We have no command, no testimony, no promise in Scripture for the
invocation of Saints. Bellarmin answers Tom. 2. de Sanctorum Beatit. lib. 1.
cap 20.. argumentum sextum; and says well, the argument proves too much, viz.
That Saints cannot pray in general for the good of the Church, which yet
Protestants grant. He argues. 2. prayer to Saints lessens our honor to Christ,
destroys our confidence in God. Answ. If so, we cannot pray for one another
here on earth, without lessening Christ's honor, and weakening our confidence
toward God. See Bellar. lib. Citato cap. 20.. argumentum secundum and cap.
19.. preterea in utroque testamento. He objects 3. We cannot know how our
prayers come to the knowledge of Saints in Heaven. Bellarmine answers codem
cap. 20.. argumentum tertium, and. de mode aut: Shows you by four opinions of
Doctors, how Saints may hear our prayers. I think the Doctor will not deny,
that the blessed soul of our Savior in Heaven hears our prayers (I speak of
his sanctified created soul, not of his Divinity every where present,) if this
can be explicated, all difficulty cease; well may both Saints and Angels in
heaven hear our prayers. He says 4. We give Saints too high titles. Bellarmine
answers lib, Citato cap. 17. Est tamen Notandum, and says, we call not on^
them as gods, nor honor any above their merits He argues 4. afterward, Every
Nation has a particular guardian Saint. Answ. And is this such a trespass? I
say no more; But S. George for England. Yet see, if you please Bellarmine, cap.
20. Citato.. argumentum octavum. he lastly argues out of Scripture (in the end
of this Section.) Romans 10. 14. Bellarmine directly answers the place, cap. 22.
Citato initio.. primum argumentum. And is it not pitiful to hear such stale
arguments as these, thought doughty enough, by a Doctor, to defeat Popery. God
help him. Now to some other Cavils he has in this 9th Section.

Page 126 he sl^ights the practice of common people, who have recourse to
Saints for their temporal goods; make their addresses to them for health, seek
their Patronage, etc. Answ. It was doubtless some good congruous thought that
withheld our Doctor from sl^ighting also that poor Tailor of Hippo, by name
Florentius, who having lost his Cloak, had not wherewithal to buy an other:
What did he? Ad viginti Martyrs, etc. he prayed before the twenty Martyrs, and
begged with a loud voice that he might be clothed, some young men heard him,
and scorned the good Tailor, (as our Doctor does here vulgar people) yet his
prayer proved successeful, heard he was, and his want miraculously supplied.
This you may read in S. Austin lib. 22. de civit. Dei. cap. 8. circa medium.

Whence I argue, if this poor man, by addressing himself to deceased Martyrs
for a cloak prayed well, and laudably, yes, and by such prayers got what he
asked; most blameless certainly are the common people, while they petition any
Saint in Heaven for their temporal goods, (whether sheep, or oxen it imports
not) or, if the Doctor jeered at these men's devotion, he may, if he like it
also play the boy, and laugh at the Tailor, S. Austin did not so. And,

Here, without much digressing, reflect I beseech you on that witty margent
note Mr. Whitby has in his book against S C. page 292. where, to discredit
this known miracle, he speaks thus. Further let it be considered that here we
have no better president then a Tailor, and he so simple, as to bargain with
the Martyrs, how many halfpence he would have to buy his cloak. Subtilely
observed, for first there is not a word in S. Austin of the poor man's
bargaining with the Martyrs, unless his earnest prayer be called a bargain.
Secondly Mr. Whitby says in his context that the Tailor prayed not to the
Martyrs, but to God at the tomb of the Martyrs, if therefore he bargained with
any, it was with God for so many halfpence. Thirdly he sl^ights this miracle
upon the account of the Tailors simplicity, as if, (forsooth) God could do
wonders on none but the Learned, or Doctors of Divinity. Fourthly and chiefly,
he is pitifully out every way, for no one takes this miracle upon the Tailors
credit, but upon S. Austins, who recounts it as a wonder done in behalf of this
poor man, and so we credit what he adds of the Cook that opening the fish,
found a gold ring in it, and pitying the distressed Suppliant gave it him
with, ecce quomodo viginti Martyrs te vestiverunt: See how the twenty Martyrs
have clothed thee. And thus much of good peoples devotion to Saints for
temporals. Now if you further inquire, not only after the recourse made by
devout Christians to the blessed See Bellar. cap. 20. Supra. Argumentum nonu^.
in Heaven for health, and cure of Infirmities, but also after the happy
success they have had by their prayer, volumes would not suffice to recount
particulars. The most I Will do here is to remit any that doubts, (if judicious
and prudent) to S. Austin in the place now cited, where he tells us, next after
those words ad Aquas Fibilitanas, not of one, but many miraculously cured at
the relics of S. Stephen. There a blind woman received her sight. There
Eucharius a Priest of Spain tormented with the stone, we freed of his misery,
and the self same man cast do(...) by an other infirmity, lay so dead, ut ei
jam pollices ligarentur, but was raised up miraculously; and ^his says S.
Austin was done ^pitulatione memorati Martyris by the help and assistance of S.
Stephen.

Learn therefore, (and it is the main drift of S. Austin,) that Saints hear ou^
prayers, pray for us, yes, and obtain by (...)ir in(...)ssion many a large
blessing. So the Saint in the ^suing ninth Chaprer which relates to the
miracles ^entioned in the precedent; pro ista fide mortui sunt qui (...) a
Demino impetrare possunt, for this Faith the Martyrs dyed, who can get such
favors of our Lord. Again, a few lines after, quare Martyrs tanta possunt qui
pro ea fide, etc. wherefore Martyrs can do these great matters, who were slain
for that Faith which preaches Christ's holy resurrection. Finally, he ends thus,
sieve enim Deus ipse per se ipsum, etc. whether God by himself work after a
strange manner, or do these wonders by his Ministers, or some of them by the
Spirits of Martyrs, eis orantibus tantum and impetrantibus, non etiam
operantibus, they only praying for us, and impetrating, but not effecting, or
working these wonders immediately, cannot be comprehended of mortals. Thus S.
Austin, who undoubtedly here affirms that these blessed Spirits pray, and
obtained by their prayers, orantibus, and impetrantibus (mark the words) both
health of body and greater benefits.

Mr. Whitby page 292. cited above, seems to make little account of S. Austins
eighth Chapter now mentioned, because of some corruptions (so he speaks) noted
by Ludovieus Vives. And what are these? I Answer; two or three differences in
words only, variously read in other copies, as for, Episcopo projecto, other
copies have, Episcopo afferente projecto, etc. greater exceptions Ludovicus
Vives has not against this eighth Chapter, nor questions at all the substance
of one miracle there related by S. Austin. No, these stand as they are told
(and so does the ninth Chapter entirely) unexcepted against by Ludovicus, or
any body else and do so powerfully prove, that the Saints in Heaven pray for
us, and afford us assistance that none shall ever answer them with probability;
It were but lost time (because they are vulgarly known) to add to these ancient
miracles, others of undoubted credit, wrought by the intercession of Saints in
later ages, and very universally. There is not a Kingdom or Country where
Catholic Religion florishes, which will not evidence these wonders. And
England also anciently has had this glory, but now a new Faith has outed all
old miracles. Blessed be Almighty God, not only our age we live in, is
renowned for miraculous cures done upon the infirm and diseased, by earnest
prayer made to the ever immaculate Virgin, mother of God; but, this very year
also (and the last now over) affords us most undoubted ones wrought in Antwerp
and Mecklin by the intercession of the ever glorious Saint Xaverius a Saint our
Doctor page, 133. would cast out of Heaven. (For the first, see Justus Lipsius
(an erudite, and learned writer) in his third Tome toward the end printed at
Antwerp anno 1637. page 687. entitled thus, Diva Virgo Hallensis; and page
721. with this title. Diva Sichemiensis, sive Aspricollis.

For the Second, to wit, for strange cures done on the diseased by the great
Apostle of the Indies S. Xa^^rius, they are here most manifestly laid open to
the eyes of all, sick patients own them, sworn witnesses testify them, expert
Doctors of Physic, (after long trial to cure them) acknowledge the cures to be
miraculous; Bishops after a most ^igid examination, have approved them, none
can doubt of them, but such as either incline to a spirit of Atheism, or vainly
endeavor to make null the best proof of our Faith, to extinguish the clearest
light of Christianity, which Age after Age has beautified the Church, and
gained millions to it, I mean the glory of miracles: And this is done by a
Doctor to maintain his wordy Religion made up of a few abused Scripture phrases
and I know not what other canting language without fruits of Religion, without
efficacy of doctrine, without miracles, or finally any one mark of credibility,
that may prudently evidence it to be Christian.

Now concerning our Doctors other exception against pious good people, who seek
the patronage of Saints in time of danger or otherwise, I Will briefly give you
one instance taken out of S. Gregory Nyssen a worthy Bishop, who was present at
the first Council of Constantinople, and writ the Symbolum Fidei there; read
him I beseech you in the Oration he has de St^ Theodoro Martyr, with me, it
is in his second Tome Printed at Paris 1615. page 1011. and page 1017. Because
the impious Scythians threatened a war to the Country, Timemus afflictiones
(says S. Gregory) expectamus pericula, non long absunt scelestes Scythae
bellu^ adversus nos parturientes: We fear afflictions, we expect danger; the
wicked Scythians, are as it were, in labor for a war against us. What does the
Saint? he betakes himself thus by earnest prayer to S. Theodore a Soldier;
Intercede, ac deprecare pro patria apud communem Regem, and Dominum: Make
intercession, and pray for our country to him who is our common King and Lord.
Again; Vt miles propugna (pro nobis) ut Martyr pro conservis utere liberate
loquendi: As you are a soldier, fight for us and defend us, as a martyr, speak
freely for your f^llow servants here. Finally, a few lines after, Quod si
majori etiam opus fuerit advocatione, etc. And if more prayer be needful,
assemble together the whole quire of your brethren martyrs and jointly pray for
us. Admone Petrum, excita Paulum Joannem item, etc. Put S. Peter in mind, stir
up S. Paul, and that beloved disciple of our Lord, S. John, that these be
sollicitous for the Churches; they once wore chains, passed dangers, and
finally died. Thus S. Gregory. If therefore this worthy Bishop sought
protection and patronage of a Soldier Martyr, in danger of war, well may a
frail woman in danger of sinning become a suppliant to S. Mary Magdalen, which
our Doctor likes not of. And for Gods sake tell me, what mischief is it to
Christianity, (if Saints hear our prayers,) that a Painter have a special
devotion to S. Luke skilful in that Art, though our Doctor (no man knows why)
holds it superstition. I say if Saints hear our Prayers, and that they do so,
this very Petition made by S. Gregory to S. Theodore is my warrant, neither
Doctor Andrews, nor Chamier, nor Whitby, who vainly endeavor to make the
Oration spurious, (because they know not what else to say) shall utter so much
as a probability against it.

CHAP. XXI.
Of Saints Canonized excepted against by the Doctor. Of his untrue quotations.
Of his Mistake concerning the Multitude of Holidays.

AFter this long digression I return to my task imposed on me, and needs must
say a word of our Doctors quotations. I find in his page 132. S. Austin cited
for this excellent truth; Tutius, and incundius loquar ad meum Jesum quam ad
aliquem Sanctorum Spirituum Dei: I Will speak more safely and more cheerfully to
my Lord Jesus, then to any of the Saints or Spirits of God. And it is worthily
spoken, but where find we this? The Doctor points us to S. Austin, Visitatione
Minorum Sept. S. Aug. what this Sept. S. Aug. signifies no man knows, and less
know I where to find Visitat Minorum. Perhaps it is an error of the Printer.
However these words are in S. Austin's 9th Tome lib 2. de Visitatione
Infirmorum, (not Minorum) cap. 2. which no way exclude praying to Saints, but
manifestly suppose it. Tutius, and Iucundius clear all, and render this Sense,
It Is good and safe to pray to Saints, but our Lord Jesus is eminently above
them, and therefore more safely and cheerfully we pray to Jesus.

Page 133. he cites Cardinal Bessarion apud Bodin, undervaluing certain Saints;
and our Doctor gives you a list of them thus, S. Fingar, S. Anthony of Padua,
S. Christopher, Charles Borromeus, Ignatius Loyola, Xaverius, then deceitfully
adds, and many others, of whom, says the Doctor, Bessarion complained, that
many of them were such persons whose life he could not approve, etc. observe
here first, the Context of our Doctor, and how he cheats his Reader, whom he
would have believe, that beside many others, Bessarion reproved the life of S.
Fingar, S. Anthony of Padua, S. Charles Borromeus, S. Ignatius Loyola, and S.
Xaverius, yet these three last blessed men were not in the world when Bessarion
lived; for he quitted this mortal life Anno Domini 1472. 2. I affirm that our
Doctor shall never show out of Bessarion, that he unsaints any approved for
Sanctity by the Roman Catholic Church. S. Fingar (though some say) S. Anselm
accounted him a blessed man was never yet canonized; and I wonder what our
Doctor has against S. Christopher of whom little is known. Certainly, (for I
have run sl^ightly over some works of Bessarion) this Grecian Bishop and
Cardinal, employed in so many Embassies as we read of, troubled not himself to
cavil either with S. Christopher, or S. Anthony of Padua. 3. Our Doctor deals
not well with his Reader, for he should for Bessarions assertion have remitted
him to the Cardinals own book, and not to Bodinus. or John Pudding, a man of
Atheistical Principles, whose authority with the judicious is altogether as
little as the Doctor's. Bodinus his Republic I have, but yet cannot get a
sight of his Method. Historica to which the Doctor remits me.

Next he cites Augustinus Triumphus de Ancona affirming, that all, who are
canonized by the Pope, cannot be said to be in Heaven. And where find we this
assertion of Triumphus? in two places, answers our Doctor, viz. quaest. 14. ad
quartum, and quaest. 17. ad quartum. Observe here the Doctors ignorance; For,
(to say nothing of his unskilful omitting the Article) these two quotations ad
quartum are the Authors Objections, not his resolution. The resolution
follows, no way asserting what the Doctor says, but contrary thus: That the
Pope, in canonizing a Saint by the exterior evidence he has of his Sanctity,
cannot err; Although, says this Author, neither Pope, nor Church can know
certainly, per certitudinem causae, by the certainty of the cause, that all
canonized possess beatitude. He says, per certitudinem causae, because God,
who only endues a Soul with Charity causaliter, is only conscious, that it is
enriched with this gift. The Pope and Church know not this causaliter, but by
the effects of Charity showed to the world: Therefore says Anconitanus quaest.
14. cit. art. 4. Ad prim. dicendum, quod licet Papa non possit scire, per
certitudinem causae, etc. we say although the Pope cannot know, by the
certitude of the cause, that a Saint whom he canonizeth had Charity, yet he
knows it by effects, to wit, by works famous and spoken of him; quia probatio
charitatis, exhibitio est operis; the proofs of Charity, are good works, and
this is enough whereby he may judge, etc. Thus Anconitanus.

To what the Doctor adds of some reputed Saints for a time, and afterward
burnt for Heretics. I Answer. The Objection is frivolous, for no one
canonized, or, universally honored as a Saint by the Catholic Church was ever
thus dealt with. Though no wonder it is, that a mere cheat gain for a time an
opinion of Sanctity with men over credulous, and afterward have his vizard
pulled off, and Hypocrisy disclosed.

The Doctor ends his ninth Section page 134. with a pitiful complaint against
the multitude of Holidays in the Church of Rome, and says out of Gavantus,
that there are about two hundred Holy days in the whole year, which is an
intolerable burden to the poor labourer, that on the rest he can scarce earn
his bread, besides much superstition and licentiousness that fellows such
disorderly festivities. Answ. The ignorance of our Doctor is more then
intolerable, who neither understands Gavantus, nor the practice of our Church.
Strange it is, that he also complained not of two hundred fasting days
answerable to these holidays, much weakening the laboring man, and
consequently, that the year has more fasts and feasts in it, then days: This
later is as true, as what the Doctor tells us of two hundred holidays. Let him
therefore know, that all these holidays which Gavantus calls feasts, or are
placed in the Calender in red letters, are not days of precept, obliging poor
laborers to desist from servile work, but are styled feasts upon this account,
that the Church keeps a memory of so many blessed Saints in order with Office,
and Mass. More then the most of them hinder no manual work, nor lay any
obligation on the laboring man. Hence his argument of ease and licentiousness
accompanying these festivities is made null. Only thus much it proves, that one
may innocently smile at the Doctors skill in what he writes against.

CHAP. XXII.
Adjuration of Devils approved by the ancient Church and authority of Fathers.
The Doctor cannot except against our Catholic Exorcisms.

NOw to the Doctors 10. Section, page 135. where (God bless us) he is resolved
to be Tragical, and passionately to act against all Exorcisms, and conjuring of
Devils. For answer; I Will give him these few Considerations, which perhaps may
conjure him to silence hereafter, on this Subject.

And first, it is an eternal shame for a Doctor of Divinity to rayl with open
mouth against all Exorcism's, seeing we are ascertained, that not only Christ
our Lord empowered his own Disciples to cast out Devils, but the Ancient Church
likewise possitively prescribed a Form of Exorcism. This we have in the 4th.
Council of Carthage, celebrated in the year, 398. (and approved by Leo the
third) cap. 7. Exorcista (says the Council) cum ordinatur, accipiat de manu
Episcopi libellum in quo Scripti sunt Exorcismi, dicente sibi Episcopo: Accipe,
and commenda memoriae, and habeto potestatem imponendi manus super energumenum,
sive baptizatum, sive Catechumenum. Let the Exorcist when he is ordained, take
a book from the hand of the Bishop, wherein the Exorcisms are writ; the Bishop
saying, take this Book, and commit it to memory, and receive power to lay thy
hands upon the possessed person, whether Baptized, or Catechumen. Thus said the
Ancient Church, even when our Protestants say it was without error; yet now up
starts a new fashioned Doctor in a corner of the world brim full of anger, and
must needs vent it against these sacred rites: Exorcism's, (forsooth) with him,
are horible impiety, a Conjugation of evils, Incantations, Diabolical charms,
and what not? Well, for adjuring of Devils, and casting them out of possessed
persons, we have both the Practice, and Authority of the most Ancient Fathers
that ever lived in the Church. I Will give you a few, and, for others, remit you
to Pamelius his notes upon Tertullian de Baptismo, page (with me) 468. printed
at Antwerp, Anno 1584. daemones (says Tertullian in his Apologet, adv. Gent.
cap. 31. page 74.) id est, genios adjurare consuevimus ut illos ab hominibus
exigamus. Devils or Genii we have a custom to adjure that we may drive them
from men. Again, cap. 37. page 78. Quis autem vos ab illis, etc. who is there
that will free you from the incursions of Devils, which we without reward drive
away. And, in his Book de Praeseip. cap. 41. p. 400. He blames certain women
for using Exorcisms. Add to Tertullian a Father yet more ancient, Justinus
Martyr, in his works printed at Paris, an. 1615. Apologia prima pro
Christianis, page 45. Complures, says the Saint, daemonum intemperijs
correptos per orbem omnem, and hanc vestram vrbem, etc. You have many seized on
by Devils the whole world over, yes, and in this your City, which your
Conjurers and Witches could not help; and not a few of our men, Per nomen Jesu
Christi su^ Pontio Pilato Crucifixi adiurantes sanarunt, etc. Have by adjuring
them in the Name of Christ Jesus Crucified, cured them, have disarmed these
Devils, and cast them out of those possessed men. The like we read in S.
Justins Dialogue cum Tryphone Judaeo, (with me in the same edition page 147. (
and hodie quoque illi per nomen Jesu Christi adjurati nobis parent, etc. and at
this day, those infernal Spirits, adjured by the name of Jesus Christ, with
fear and trembling obey us. Read also S. Cyprian printed at Paris ann. 1648. ad
Demetrianum page 236. O, si audire eos velles (says the St.) and videre quando
a nobis adjurantur, and torquentur spiritualibus flagris, and verborum
tormentis de obsessis corporibus ejiciuntur, quando ejulantes, and gementes
voce humana, and potestate divina, flagella, and verbera sentientes, venturum
judicium confitentur. O Demetrian, if thou would hear, and see when those
evil Spirits are conjured by us, and vexed by our spiritual scourges, and the
torment of those words we speak, being cast out of possessed bodies, if thou
did but hear and see, when howling, and sighing like men, they feel our
stripes and lashes, and confess a day of judgment to come etc. Veni, and
cognosce, come and know these wonders to be true, which we here relate. Thus S.
Cyprian. Here are adjurations, here are spiritual scourges, here are sacred
words, here are Devils cast out of possessed bodies (howling and crying) by the
power of God at these adjurations, and speaking of words. Let the Doctor speak
out, and tell us plainly if he dares with any conscience say that all this is
nothing but Diabolical charming, and horrible impiety.

Would he please to credit me, I might tell him a true story of a certain man
who had his house miserably haunted with evil Spirits; much affliction they
gave both to his Servants and Cattle. To be short he called for a Priest, and
begged him to pray in his house, who did so; he said Mass, offered up the
Sacrifice of Christ's sacred body, and prayed very earnestly that that trouble
might cease. His prayer prevailed, cease it did. Yet more; This good man had
from a friend some of that holy earth which was brought from Jerusalem, where
our Lotd Jesus was buried, and this he hung up in his chamber to secure himself
from danger of these evil Spirits. This is the story; and will the Doctor
believe it on my word? No, he laughs at it; it smells says he, of
Superstition; that offering up of Christ's body sacrificed, and keeping that
earth should free the man's chamber from Devils, is plain Popery savouring too
much of an unbloody Sacrifice, and the doctrine of relics, etc. I grant all
(except the Superstition) and tell the Doctor, he must either credit the story,
or discredit S. Austin who relates it in his 22. book de civitate (Antwerp
print anno 1676. cap 8. page 297. The man's name was Hesperius (vir tribunitius)
a chief commander. More particulars you have in the place now cited worth
reading: if any yet desire more of the force of prayer, and Exorcisms against
Devils, let him read that ancient author Optatus Milevit. lib. 4 adversus
Parmenianum page 79. Paris print, with Albaspins notes 1631 Hoc exorcismus
operatur per quem spiritus immundus depellitur, and in loca deserta fugatur.
Exorcisms drive away Devils, and banish^ them into desert places. Thus Optatus.
And S. Gregory the great tells you of strange wonders done upon possessed
persons by B. Fortunatus Bishop, in his first book of Dialog. cap. 9. page 952.
Paris print 1571.

These truths supposed (which no Protestant can answer) I will with license
inquire of our Doctor what it is he finds fault with in our Catholic
Exorcisins against Devils? Is it the power we have from Christ Jesus to cast
them out of persons possessed, or places haunted by them? The very authority of
Fathers already alleged, and the continued favor of Almighty God to this our
age, in assisting many (within the bounds of the Catholic Church) to
dispossess innumerable possessed, proves the power, and evidenceth most
undeniably the effects of it. Known History for those wonders done in later
ages, and yet living ey-witnesses in our days, gain credit with prudent men,
and justly may conquer a greater increduty then the Doctor harbors in his
breast. All cannot be fiction nor the Authors proved liars that writ such
stories, yet more.

Does our Doctor reprehend the words we use in Exorcisms? Yes. And why? Is it
because they are adjurative? If so, the Fathers now cited are our warrant, and
will silence the Doctor. Is it because they are words unusual, and not easily
understood by all? If this offend him, I answer first; that there are more
unusual pedantick words in one Dr Pierces Sermon then in all the approved
Exorcisms of the Catholic Church; yet that Sermon is for the people, these
Exorcisms are against the Devil, who better understands the hardest term in
them, then the generality of men that Sermon. I answer 2. that in the Roman
ritual, (which we chiefly defend) not one word can be thought unusual; it is
plain Latin all a long, intelligible to the poorest Scholar. The like I say of
that Manual of Exorcisms printed at Antwerp anno 1626. which our Doctor
causelessly cavils at page 136. the like of the Exorcisms for the Dioces of
Iper, printed at S. Omers anno 1606.

Besides these I have by me two other Exorcisms, the one printed at Venice
1579. the other anno 1585. in an old Character. The book is called Sacerdotale
Romanum; toward the end of these Editions you have the Exorcism, and both
Hebrew and Greek thus in Latin Letters. Adjuro vos per nomina omnipotentis Dei,
Messiah, Sother, Emanuel, Sabbath, Adonias, I adjure you by the names, etc. And
this perhaps made our Doctor page 138. exclaim against some Exorcisms for their
false Hebrew and base Greek. Sure the good man thought that Messiah and Sother
should have been a genitive case because of Omnipotentis Dei, whereas they
relate to the precedent words per nomina; as if one should say per nomen
Jeremias adjuro, by your name Jeremy, I adjure you, never to cavil without
cause. Like cavils about Letters,, and writing Messiah without the Hebrew
twang, Sother less correctedly, etc. I omit; and tell the Doctor that a poor
Parish Priest shall do more against the Devil with this he calls false Hebrew,
and base Greek, then twenty Ministers in England with the most quaint
extemporal prayers they can make.

What else remains reprehensible in these exorcisms? The Doctor answers page
141. Superstition (a monstrous evil doubtless; Well. I Will deal plainly and
license the Doctor to make use of any definition, which, either ancient Father,
or new approved writers give us of Superstition (we will stand to his choice)
yet I Will assure him he shall never so much as touch Catholics with the least
likelihood of Superstition in their exorcisms. What Lactantius says of
Superstition lib. 4. de inst. cap. 28. initio: qui Deos precabantur, and
immolabant ut sui sibi filij superstites essent, superstitiosi sunt appellati,
concerns not exorcisms at all, and less does that known one of Cicero lib. 2.
de natura Deorum, qui pro superstiti prole nimij erant in Dijs precandis, etc.
touch them; if the Doctor therefore please, we will say, that Superstition is,
Cultus indebitus, seu vana religio. A wrong, vain, and incongruous worship,
which look's like religion, but is not. And next let us read any approved
exorcism. The prayers made there to Almighty God are Acts of Religion, and
neither wrong, nor incongruous worship. The calling on God by several names we
find in Scripture, cannot be judged by a Christian, vain or incongruous. The
reading of David's Psalms, and the Gospels of Jesus Christ is not in vain. The
adjuring of Devils is warranted by Fathers, and the power of casting them out
is given by Jesus Christ. Where then lies the danger of vain worship, or so
much as the least sign of any Superstition? If the word exorcism displease our
Doctor, we have it, (to say nothing of others) in S. Austin lib. 1. de
peccatorum meritis, and remissione cap. 34. initio and lib. 6. contra Julianum
cap 5. with an exsufflation added in Baptism. Filios fidelium (says the S.)
nec exorcizaret, nec exsufflaret, etc. The Church would neither exorcise, nor
breath on little Children, were it not to free them from the power of darkness,
and Prince of death. Let the Doctor say what he thinks of this exsufflation; if
such a Ceremony be not Superstition, none in our exorcisms can be; if the sign
of the Cross frights him, he may know, it is allowed by all Antiquity, and
Blessed S. Austin thus Tom. 4. lib. uno de catech. rudibus cap. 20. a little
after the beginning. Crucis signo infronte hodie tanquam in post signandus es,
omnesque Christiani signatur, Little ones and all Christians are signed with
the sign of the Cross. And what, besides the things now mentioned, can be
blamable in our approved exorcisms? I say approved; for, if any other, either
is, or has been extant, justly reprehensible, we defend it not. The
anathematizing the Devil by the name of Beelzebub, Satan, (or any other we have
in Scripture) is no more Superstion then to call an open Rebel, Traitor:
neither can the casting of his picture into the fire, (if any exorcist does it)
be thought an action more superstitious then to hang a Traitor up in effigy,
when his person is out of reach; hanging is for the one, burning is for the
other. I say, if any exorcism allows this, for the Roman Ritual, we chiefly
stand to, mentions no such burning.

CHAP. XXIII.
Objections against Exorcisms solved. Of the Doctors mistaken quotations.

NOw a word to two Objections of our Doctor, if these things (says he p. 142.
(meaning Exorcisms) come from God, let them show their warrants. Answ. We have
showed already. The power given by Christ our Lord to his Church for the
casting out of Devils is our warrant. The definitions of Councils, prescribing
a form of Exorcism, how to cast them out, are our warrant. The Authority of the
Gravest Fathers that ever lived, approving the conjuration of Devils, is our
warrant. Their distinguishing between the enchantments of Heathens,
Incantations, Witchery, and these pious Exorcisms, is our warrant. The practice
of the Church, and use of these conjurations in all Ages, is our warrant. The
wonders God has done by Exorcisms, (both ancient and modern Authors relate
them) are our warrant. Most assured, and certain experience in these our days,
that Devils are cast out of possessed persons, is our warrant. What then
remains but that we retort the Argument, and tell our Doctor, if after so many
convincing, manifest, and undeniable proofs, (that these Exorcisms come from
God) He unworthily decrys them, let him show his warrant, and answer my
arguments. But this he shall never do while by opening only one Cyprian, or a
Justin Martyr (to say nothing of others) I can conjure him to silence.

In the interim, I would know of our Doctor whether he thinks there are, or
have been in this our age, persons possessed of Devils? If he says no, most
manifest experience (of Devils speaking in an unknown tongue, of their violent
torturing a body, and moving it above all force of nature, etc,) prove the
contrary. Again, Anciently there were these Energumeni, and very numerous. And
why not now? are any Devils dead since that time? or less malicious now then
anciently? are men in these days better secured from them then the primitive
Christians? Toys. Nothing is probable. Therefore the Doctor must confess, if,
he will deal ingeniously, that there are sometimes these Energumeni. All cannot be
fiction that authors write of possessed persons, and if some only be true,
most deplorable is the condition of such as are truly possessed; who, destitute
of comfort (if old Papists help not) may sigh, and groan under their misery:
relief they can have none from Dr. Tailor (who opposes all Exorcisms) and as
little from his fellow Ministers in England, for few among them that ever yet I
heard of who either dare encounter a Devil in a possessed body, or if they do
it, they show themselves unlucky Exorcists, for they never give poor sufferers
any ease.

The other Objection that our Doctor has ( page 141.) is taken out of Origin.
Tract. 35. in Matthew. and it is the only thing in substance I find in this tenth
Section, though I will assure the Reader (having perused three Editions of
Origin.) that the Doctor both omits in the words he gives you, what Origin
has; and afterward, conceals what may serve for an Explication, if Origin,
deserve it, for some say he erred in this place; so Baronius ad annum Christi,
56. n. 4. in the Antwerp print 1612. others with Bellarmin incline to think
that these Treatises on S. Matthew. (as the 5th. is not) are not Origens, viz.
Bellar. de Scriptorib. Ecclesias. However I Will give you Origens own words (in
the Basil print, anno 1571.) page 187. uttered on this occasion, that the
Prince of the Jews adjured our Savior, whereupon he makes a Digression thus.
Quaeret aliquis si convenit vel daemones adjurare? Some (says he) may ask
whether it be meet to adjure Devils? Then adds, Et qui respicit ad multos qui
talia facere ausi sint, dicet, non sine ratione fieri. And he who looks on the
practice of many that dare to do so, will say, it is done not without reason
(these words our Doctor omits totally) Origin. goes on (and here is the only
difficulty) qui autem aspicit Jesum imperantem doemonibus, etc. But he that
beholds Jesus commanding Devils, and giving power to his Disciples over them,
and to heal diseases, will say; that to adjure Devils, is not according to the
power given by our Savior. Judaicum est enim. For its Judaical. Thus Origin;
And here ends our Doctor, concealing what follows immediately thus. Hoc, and si
aliquando a nostris tale aliquid fiat, simile fit ei, quod a Solomone Scriptis
adjurationibus, solent daemones adjurari, etc. This (Judaical adjuration) if
sometime any such thing be done by our men, is like that, which Devils are wont
to be adjured with, out of certain written adjurations of Solomon. Sed and ipsi
qui utuntur adjurationibus illis aliquoties nec idoneis constitutis libris
utuntur. But even they who use these adjurations at some time use not right
Books. Quibusdam autem and de Hebraeo acceptis adjurant daemonia: Taking
certain things out of the Hebrew they adjure Devils. Hitherto you have
faithfully Origens words, and his whole Context in order; which in rigor (all
circumstances well weighed) only condemn Judaical conjurations, or such Books
(not allowable) vitiated perhaps with Jewish Exorcisms. For most certain it is
that the Jews had their Exorcists; and that their power of casting out Devils
ceased at the beginning of Christian Religion, or soon after: read Acts the 19.
v. 13. Certain it is also, if we believe Josephus the Jew, lib. 8. de
antiquitate, cap. 2. (with me, folio 68. versus finem) that Solomon had his
Exorcisms composed, as some most Learned are of Opinion, after his fall into
Idolatry. These and such like adjurations Origin reproves, and not any
Christian Catholic Exorcism.

My reason is, first, that Origin contradicted not Fathers more ancient then
himself; such were Justinus Martyr, and Tertullian above cited; these adjured
Devils, therefore Origin might do so. 2. Lib. 1. contra Celsum with me (in the
Edition above named) page 637. He professedly acknowledges the power of
casting out Devils given to Christians; yes, and after he had taxed Celsus of
injustice, and open calumny, for ascribing their ejection done by Christians,
to Incantations and Sorcery. He answers thus; n. 6. Non enim incantationibus
pollere videntur, sed nomine Jesu, cum commemoratione ejus factorum; nam, his
verbis saepenumero profligati sunt daemones ex hominibus. That is, Christians
do nothing in this matter by any Charms, or Enchantments, but prevail against
Devils by naming Christ Jesus, and commemorating his glorious works. Thus these
wicked spirits are driven out of possessed persons; And truly the like we do
yet in our Catholic adjurations. 3. It is madness to think, that one so well
versed in Scripture, as Origin was, had such a horror of this word Adjuro, that
he judged it unseemly in the mouth of a Christian; for the Apostle himself
uses it, writing to the These. Epist. 1. cap. 5. v. 27. Adjuro vos per dominum
ut legatur Epistola haec. I adjure ye by our Lord, etc. And mark, it is a word
of command, (...). Yes, and the same that the Devil used against our Savior,
Mar. 5. v. 7. Adjuro te per Deum, (...), etc. I adjure thee by Almighty God.
Briefly therefore distinguish a double adjuration, the one of no Efficacy,
because either vain or Judaical; and this Origin rejects; The other is
Christian used in our Catholic Exorcisms, with the sacred Name of Jesus; and
this he approves. The Doctor may object that Origin, speaking of the High
Priest adjuring our Savior, makes this Argument; Si enim jurare non licet,
quia nec alterum adjurare licet. If it be not lawful to swear, neither lawful
is it to adjure another. I answer; This confirms all we have said hitherto in
Origens defense. For, as none can judge that so great a Doctor as Origin,
condemned all swearing, which God allows in Scripture: [ Vivit Dominus.
Jurabit Dominus. Per nomen ejus jurabis, etc.] but only such as is irreligious
and profane. So none can infer upon this proof, that he thought all adjuration
illicit; though he professedly opposed irreligious and Judaical Exorcisms. Thus
much in behalf of Origin, if these Treatises on S. Mat. be his; for Erasmus in
the preface to them, says, Neque enim Hieronimus agnoscit hoc opus. S. Hierom
acknowledges them not.

The Doctor, page 142. having done with Origin, quotes S. Chrisostom for this
sober saying, we poor wretches cannot drive away flies, much less Devils. And
remits you to the Saint, in illa verba qui credit in me major a faciet. I
answer, that S. Chrisostom may perhaps have these words, qui credit in me, etc.
40. times over in his Large and Voluminous writings; Must I therefore run over
all these Tomes, to meet with this sober saying; for most certainly it is not
where any Reader would expect to have it, I mean in S. Chrisostoms 73. hom. in
cap. 14. Joan. there are the words of Scripture, qui credit in me, etc. And S.
Chrisostoms large Explication on them; but not so much as one syllable of
either Fly or Devil, or any poor wretch unable to cast out Devils, but much to
the contrary. Hoc vestrum jam est, says the Saint, miracula operari, ego abeo.
It belongs to you (my Disciples) to work miracles, I am now on my departure.
The Chrisostom I cite is the Paris print, anno 1588. his Comments on the words
qui credit, etc. are page 293. and other Editions accord also with it, even the
Greek by Sir Henry Savil.

CHAP. XXIV.
The blessing of Water proved by Irrefragable Authority. Of Miracles done by
Holy Water. No proof against it.

THe Doctor, page 143. and 11 Section thinks with a few empty words, and a like
number of insipid jeers to unhollow such Creatures, as the most ancient Fathers
of Gods Church have reputed holy, because made so with a sacred benediction.
Such are Holy Water, the Paschal Candle, Oil, and Holy Bread, slighted by him,
without proof at all. Truly I am astonished at our Doctor (having at least)
read Bellarmin de cultu Sanct. lib. 3. cap. 7. and perused the Arguments of
this Learned Author, for the blessing of Water, Oil, etc. That he neither
affords us so much as a word of answer to the Arguments, nor yet endeavors to
gainsay them by one Syllable of Scripture, by any Authority of Councils, of
Fathers, or the Ancient practice of the Primitive Church.

Bellarmin first proves out of Scripture, that creatures are capable of
benediction; Every Creature is good, says the Apostle. 1. ad Tim. 4.
Sanctificatur autem per verbum Dei, and orationem: And is sanctified by the
Word of God, and Prayer. He shows you also out of S. Dennis, Alexander the
first, Optatus, S. Cyprian, S. Basil, and others, that Water anciently was
blessed in the Church. The like of Oil, by the Authority of S. Clement, Dennis,
and Basil. The benediction of Bread (besides the Eucharist) is taught by S.
Austin, Tom. 7. lib. 2. De peccatorum meritis and remissione, cap. 26. speaking
of the Catechumens. Et quod accipiunt, (says the Saint) quamvis non sit Corpus
Christi, Sanctum est tamen, and sanctius quam cibi quibus alimur. And what
these Catechumens take, although it be not Christ's Body, yet it is holy, yes,
and more holy then the meat wherewith we are nourished. Hence I argue, if Bread
can be hallowed, Water may; And this I prove by three irrefragable Arguments.

The first is taken out of the Ancient Synesius, Bishop of Ptolemaijs, or
Cyrene, in his book printed at Paris, anno 1633. (we have it also in
Bibliotheca Patrum) read these words in that Treatise he intitles Catastasis,
De clade pentapolitana (...), etc.
with me page 304. Ego in loco meo in ecclesia permanebo. Lustralis ante me
aquae sanctissima vasa collocabo, etc. Illic ego and sedebo vivus, and mortuus
jacebo. I Will remain in my place, that is the Church. I Will place before me the
hallowed Vessels of Water, there I Will sit alive, and ly when I am dead.

Yet more, read his 121. Epistle to Anastasius, page 258. If, says Sinesius,
the Administration of the Commonwealth resides in Bishops; these are the men
that must do justice on wickedness. Quandoquidem publicus gladius, non minus
quam lustralis aqua quae in templorum vestibulis collocatur, civitatis est
piaculum. Seeing that the public Sword no less purges a City, then Holy
Water does, that is placed in the entry of our Churches. And thus it is kept in
Churches to this day.

The second Testimony we have, is, in the more ancient Epiphanius, Tom. 2. lib.
1. contra haereses, haeresi 30. with me page 61. in the Basil print; where the
Saint tells us; that, Josephus the Jew (seeing fire, contrary to its own
nature, made unactive by Enchantment, and hindered from burning by Witchcraft)
called for water (a world of Jews being present) made the sign of the Cross
upon it, put his finger into the Vessel of the blessed Water, saying, in the
Name of Jesus of Nazareth, whom my Fathers crucified, Fiat virtus in hac aqua
ad reprobationem omnis incantationis and Magiae quam hi fecerunt. Let there be
virtue in this water, for the disolving the charms done by these men. Then,
says Epiphanius, he took some of the water in his hand, sprinkled the several
enchanted Furnaces with it. Et dissoluta sunt incantamenta, the Witchcraft
ceased, the fire burned, the people who saw the wonder, cried aloud, one God
there is, who helps the Christians, and so departed. Add hereunto, if you
please, a like Miracle done by Josephus, upon a possessed man, and with Holy
Water also. Epiphanius relates it in the precedent page 60. Joseph, says he,
having shut the doors, took water into his hands, blessed it with the sign of
the Cross, besprinkled the raging man with it, commanded the Devil in the Name
of Jesus to be gone, and the possessed party was cured. This Miracle says
Epiphanius the Jews knew, and great talk there was of it; some said, Josephus
had opened the Gazophilacium, and finding there the Name of God writ, did the
wonder by force of this Name. It was true he did the Miracle, but not as the
Jews imagined. Thus Epiphanius.

In the last place, I Will give you Theodorets Testimony lib. 5. Ecclesiast.
histor. cap. 21. in the Colen print anno 1577. page 312. where he tells you
also, how the Devil hindered fire from burning, though wood, of its own nature
combustible, was applied to it. The Charm (to be brief) was told the Pastor,
who forthwith ran to the Church, and commanded a little vessel of water to be
given him; this he put under the holy Altar, falling prostrat on the ground,
earnestly begged of Almighty God not longer to suffer this Tyranny of the
Devil, etc. prayer ended, he made the sign of the Cross upon the water, gave
it to Equitius a Deacon, commanding him withal speed, to sprinkle the
enchanted fire with it, which done, says Theodoret, demon aufugit, the Devil
ran away, the water burned like Oil, and the fire consumed the wood in a
moment. If any desire more for the blessing of water, let him read Tertull.
lib. de baptismo cap. 4. S. Ambros. lib. 2. de Sacram. cap. 5. and S. Austin
Tract. 118. in Joannem. For the blessing of Oil, and the Paschal Candle, see
Bellarmin above cited.

Let us now return to our Doctor and make my assertion good, viz. That he has
not so much as a syllable of either Scripture, Council, or Father, against the
blessing of Water. He cites page 143. S. Cyril of Jerusalem Catech. 4. Saying,
that in the Holy and Divine Mysteries of our Faith, necessary it is to do
nothing by chance or of our own heads, nor without Scripture; From whence our
Doctor must argue thus (if he proves any thing) but to bless water is one of
the Divine Mysteries of Faith, and done by chance or of our own heads, without
holy Scripture: Therefore it is unwarrantable, and an Invention of man only. To
this discourse, I answer. That it is neither one of the Mysteries of Faith,
which S. Cyril handles in the place now cited; (for he speaks there only of the
equality of the Holy Ghost with Father and Son) neither is it done by chance or
of our own heads (witness the Fathers already cited) nor without Authority of
Holy Scripture, (Sanctificatur autem per verbum Dei and orationem, says the
Apostle) nor finally is it against S. Cyril, who possitively to the Doctors
confusion, says that water may be blessed, but two leaves only before his own
quotation; Catech. 3. with me page 401. (Bibliot Patrum. Colen. print, Tom. 4.)
his words are. Nam ut illa quae in Aris offeruntur, cum natura sint pura,
invocatione daemonum impura efficiuntur: Sic contra, aqua simplex per Spiritus
Sancti, Christi, and Patris invocationem accepta virtute, sanctitatem
consequitur. As those things which are offered on Altars, (he means to Idols)
when pure in their own nature, are made impure by the invocation of Devils: So
on the contrary, simple Water is made holy, gets a sanctity by invocating the
Holy Ghost, Christ our Lord, and his Eternal Father. Had the Doctor seen this
Testimony of S. Cyril, he would never have troubled his Reader with the other
Quotation, more remote from the purpose, then York is distant from London.

Again, our Doctor excepts against S. Gregory's Dialogues, and unworthily
styles them Romantic stories, page 143. I answer; Had a frantic brain brought
forth such an expression, none would have wondered; but that a grave Divine
sl^ights these books, highly reverenced, both by the Greek and Latin Church,
cannot be tolerated. In a word, the Doctor shall never be able with any shadow
of proof, to infringe their authority. What therefore that Learned Saint says
of Blessed Fortunatus curing a lame man, etc. is as certainly true, as that the
Doctor err's in discrediting those Dialogues.

Next the good man is upon us with a jeer: They throw (says he page 143.) this
Water on sick Cows horns, on Childrens cradles, etc. Answ. And did not the
Christian Italicus take water also from blessed Hilario, and cast it on his
Enchanted stable, on his bewitched Horses, on his Chariot, on the place or
Barriers from whence he used to run? Did not the Charm or Witchery cease upon
this sprinkling of water? In so much that all cried out. Marnas victus a
Christo est. Christ has conquered Marnas. Most true it is; no less a Doctor
then S. Hierom relates the story, in vita Hilarionis (Paris print) page 323.
Our Doctor may turn to the page, and if he reverences S. Hierom, leave of his
jeering.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the Doctors dark Divinity. Of his want of Charity toward his Ancestors,
and all Catholics.

THe Doctor ends this 11. Section, page 144. with a piece of scarce
intelligible Divinity. Upon the Sacraments (says he) they are taught to rely
with so little of Moral, and virtuous Dispositions, that the Efficacy of the
one is made to lessen the necessity of the other. I answer, That every
Sacrament (except Infant Baptism) requires a virtuous disposition: Penance is
of no Efficacy without Contrition, or at least Attrition: The other Sacraments
styled Vivorum, require per se, Supernatural inherent Grace, previous to their
worthy receiving. How therefore the Efficacy of one, is made to lessen the
necessity of the other, is Divinity, too dark to be understood.

The Doctor goes on. The Sacraments are taught to be so effectual by an
inherent Virtue, that they are not so much made the Instruments of Virtue, as
the Suppletory. Answ. Still we are in a cloud. To get out on it, our Doctor must
unriddle this word Suppletory. We say thus, and speak plain Language. God, in
the operation of Sacraments, is the prime efficient cause of Grace; Christ, the
Meritorious; Sacraments the Instrumental. Now, whether they work by an
intrinsecal Virtue imprinted (as it were) on them, or are otherwise effectual,
concerns nothing Catholic Religion. Supernatural inherent Grace we receive by
them, when a soul is fitly disposed: This is our Doctrine. Yet we have more
obscure Divinity; For he tells us, we teach, that Sacraments are not so much to
increase Grace, as to make amends for the want of Grace. God only knows what he
means by this making amends for the want of Grace: I do not. Qui potest capere
capiat: We say ( without this making amends) that Grace is effectually given in
every Sacrament to that soul, that comes worthily disposed.

The Doctor in his 12. Section, page 144. talks of Idolatry, but not
understanding what Idolatry is, nor our Divines Tenets concerning the Worship
he speaks of, fights against shadows: I Will only leave him to Mr. Thorndike (a
great Divine of his own) to learn of him what Idolatry is, and how far the
Church of Rome is to be charged with it; and what the consequences of such a
charge will be. Mr. Thorndike in his just Weights and Measures, chap. 1.
discourses it at large: He says page 2. If the Pope be Antichrist, and the
Papists Idolaters, we need not seek farther for the reason of the distance, we
are to own the separation for our own act, and glory in it. He says again, page
7. If it be true, viz. That the Papists be guilty of Idolatry; we cannot
without renouncing our Christianity, hold communion with those whom we charge
with it. So that if this Section of our Doctor which charges us with Idolatry,
be true: Mr. Thorndike tells him there is no need of seeking farther for the
reason of the distance; This must be it, viz. That they could not hold
communion with Idolaters without renouncing their Christianity, and therefore
they parted; which separation they own for their own act and glory in it: Yet
Mr. Thorndike says, that if this be the best reason they can give for their
separation, they must acknowledge themselves to be the Schismatics: His own
words are, Cap. 1. page 7. line 14. For in plain Terms we make our selves
Schismatics, by grounding our Reformation upon this pretense; and again in the
same page line 29. So that, says he, should this Church declare, that the
charge which we call Reformation is grounded upon this Supposition, I must then
acknowledge that we are the Schismatics. Now that this Pretense, and this
Supposition, are the same which our Doctor in his Section pretends and supposes
us to be guilty of, viz. Idolatry, is evident by the whole Chapter now quoted;
and by the Contents of it printed before the Chapter, which end thus; They that
separate from the Church of Rome as Idolaters, are thereby Schismatics before
God: How the Doctor will answer this to his own brother, I neither know, nor
care; nor can I see how he can possibly avoid the Imputation of Schism in Mr.
Thorndik's judgment: for he believes, or else he cheats his Charge, that we are
Idolaters; if he does, he must in Mr. Thorndikes Opinion, and in all reason
make that the ground of his Separation; And if he does do so, he is a
Schismatic before God, says Mr. Thorndike. This may serve for answer to his
charge in general; His particular Instances in what we are Idolaters, are;
Worshipping of Images, says he, is a direct breach of the Second Commandment,
an act of Idolatry, as much as the Heathens themselves were guilty of, etc. Mr.
Thorndike shall answer for us again in the Book before cited, Cap. 19. in the
Contents whereof, you may read this Proposition. Reverencing of Images in
Churches is not Idolatry; In this Chapter, page 126. toward the bottom he has
these words; Whether or no having Images in Churches be a breach of the Second
Commandment, can be no more question, then whether or no to have any Images be
a breach of it; for it must forbid Images in Churches, because it forbids all
Images: etc. This and what follows in that chap. clears the having of Images in
Churches, from being a breach of the Second Commandment; Now to clear the
Reverencing or Worshipping of them from being Idolatry, read the same Chapter
on, and page 127. line 31. you shall find these words; But to the Images of
Saints there can be no Idolatry, so long as men take them sor Saints; That is
Gods creatures. Much less to the Images of our Lord; For it is the honor of
our Lord, and not of his Image. And again, line the last of this page, and page
128. Nay the Council it self (meaning the 2. of Nice) though it acknowledge
that the Image it self is honored, by the honor given to that which it
signifies, before the Image; yet it distinguishes this honor from the honor
of our Lord: and therefore teaches not Idolatry, by teaching to honor Images;
though it acknowledge that the Image it self is honored, when it need not.
This is quite contrary to our Doctors Divinity; The pious Children of the
Church of England, may believe which they please of these two great Divines;
the one is a Bishop, but the other seems the more wary man; For he makes a
cautious proposal in the 1 Chap. of his Book quoted before, page 2. line 14. It
were good, says he, that we did understand one another. And line 30. Yet it is
necessary to provide that we contradict not our selves. But our Doctor never
caring whom he understands, or who understands him, thinks it not necessary to
provide that they contradict not one another, But rashly says what comes next,
right or wrong. What he has more, page 145, 146, 147. relate chiefly, ad modum
colendi, or to the way of Worship; which touches nothing on Catholic
Religion, or the due reverence given to Images. Divines I know, dispute this
point largely, their different Opinions make no Article of Faith. Let us agree
that Images are to be worshipped in the Sense of those Fathers we cited above,
and in Mr. Thorndikes Sense; And afterward, if the Doctor please, we'll discuss
the Theological Difficulty, how they are to be worshipped. To what our Doctor
has page 148. concerning the Idolatry of worshipping Consecrated Bread and
Wine, Mr. Thorndike shall once more answer for us, who by good luck has the
very Instance of the Pagans worshipping the Sun, which our Doctor says is all
one with our worshipping the Consecrated Bread and Wine. But Mr. Thorndike I
dare say will not believe him, until he answers the beginning of his 19. Chap.
quoted before, page 125. the Contents of which at the very beginning have this
Proposition: The worship of the Host in the Papacy is not Idolatry: If our
Doctor will undertake to satisfy Mr. Thorndike, that he is mistaken in what he
here professes to teach, I presume he will oblige him highly; For he asks, page
5. line 22. of his Weights and Measures: Who will take upon him to show us,
that the worship of the Host in the Papacy is Idolatry? When these two great
Doctors are agreed which of them teaches the truest Divinity concerning this
Point, this Section may, and it may not too, require a farther Answer. Till
then we'll leave them to dispute it: It Is pity they should be parted: Cadmus
his Brood that came into the world an unnatural and extraordinary way, are a
proper Emblem of all Heretics; Their births are monstrous, and their ends as
odd. Angry men that they are, they cannot agree, but without any other help
will always (if let alone) destroy one another.

Page 150. Sect. 13. He takes on, to tell those under his Charge, how matters
stand in point of Religion, and says; that we Catholics dangerously err, yes,
and injure Faith, spoil Hope, sin against Charity: In a word we are men, that
bring Ruin to all Religion. Faith we injure, by creating new Articles; To this
we have answered in the first Chapter, that not one new Article is created by
us; though the Church, as occasion is, may more clearly explicate some old
ones, and has ever done so. We spoil, says he, our Hope, by placing it on
Creatures. Answ. Hope, good Doctor, is a Theological Virtue, and has God, as
he is our final good, for its formal Object. The finis qui is no Creature; the
possession of this infinite goodness, by a clear Vision, is; Both these, which
will make us happy in Heaven, we hope for, and I think, without offense. Which
way, the Doctors Hope tends I know not. We sin, says he again, against Charity
by damning all that are not of our Opinion. Answ. First the Doctor sins most
grievously against Charity by damning all his Ancestors, (his great great
Grandfather, and so upward for a thousand years) why? they were all old
Papists, and as he tells us, had naughty Faith, spoiled Hope, great want of
Charity, the Salutary doctrine of Repentance torn in pieces, etc. But none can
be saved with a Faith, Hope, Charity and Repentance spoiled, and worth nothing;
Therefore his Ancestors, (with thousand thousands of others) are in a sad
condition, and all damned by his doctrine. I Answ. it is a Calumny to say we damn
any for differences in Opinion. Now, if the Doctor will needs tell us what
Faith, and what Opinion is exactly in every Tenet, he goes beyond his skill,
and takes on him to teach his betters. Here is enough of his 13. Section where
little is said, and less proved.

CHAP. XXVI.
The Doctors wrongful Charge on Catholic Doctors. His weak Exceptions against
Ambiguity in Speech. His causless Cavils. His Faults and Mistakes.

Page 152. the Doctor begins his first Section thus. That in the Church of
Rome, it is publicly taught by their greatest Doctors, that it is lawful to
lie, or deceive the question of the Magistrate, to conceal their name, and tell
a false one, to elude all examinations, and to make them insignificant, and
toothless, cannot be doubted, etc. I Answ. This Charge, as it is laid out, is
most injurious. Not one amongst us says, that a lie ever is, or can be lawful
in any circumstance; it is always naught, and prohibited by the Law of God,
and nature. None say, that we may elude all examinations of the Magistrate. The
Proposition is of so vast extent ( all examinations) that it looses credit with
sober men. True it is, most grave Divines hold; that in certain cases of
danger, and other concernments, the ambiguous use of words, yes, and of mental
restriction also, is allowable; but ever without a lie, never without just
cause and Reason. Impious therefore were it, to make use of this Restriction,
in Contracts, Leagues, Promises, Vows, or Oaths, yes, and most blameable in
ordinary Conversation. But,

If a Confessor be asked by a Judge, or any body else whether a penitent
confessed such a Sin, (though confessed) does not the light of nature tell us,
the question is, if possibly, to be eluded; or, if pressed on, utterly denied
with a No, he did not hear it? What will the Doctor answer here? will he say,
yes? He betrays the Penitent, and Sacrilegiously breaks the Seal of
Confession. If he stands dumb, and says nothing, S. Austin lib* uno de
mendacio ad Consent. cap. 13, post medium, rightly observes in a like case of
danger, Tacendo eum prodimus: per nostram vel taciturnitatem homo proditur;
that by saying nothing we do as good as disclose the Secret, and tell where the
concealed man lies hid, and if so; much more does the speechless Confessor in
our case, (though he shakes his head twenty times) speaks out too plainly the
Penitents Sin.

The Doctor therefore, with his excellent use of Confession in England, and we
with ours, must of necessity find a way, not on the one Side to lie, (for this
is never Lawful) and on the other, to keep the Seal of Confession safe and
inviolable. How shall we do this? I can argue; if holy Jacob, when he
positively affirmed Genesis 27. 19. that he was his Fathers first begotten Son
Esau, (yet was not) told no lie, as many Fathers hold; well may a Priest also,
now in the case now proposed, though he positively affirms that he heard no
such Sin in Confession, when he heard it, say no: He heard it not. Jacob said
yes, that he was Isack's first begotten, yet was not, (and as we now suppose)
said it without a lie; the Priest says, No: he heard not such a Sin (when he
heard it) and this in like manner without a lie: The Parity is right every way,
if Jacob was not a liar. Be it how you will, Christ our Lord certainly spoke
Truth, when he told his Disciples Joan. 7. 8. non ascendo, that he did not
ascend to the Feast of the Jews, yet, when they went he, blessed Lord, ascended
also. Here is some ambiguity of Speech; In the vulgar translation, which I
follow, (though the Greek reads (...) nondum ascendo, and the Arabic nunc non
ascendo) and because uttered by our Savior is wholly irreprehensible.

To clear all, I ask of our Doctor what did this non ascendo, spoken by eternal
Truth signify? He will answer, that though the particle, Non, usually makes an
absolute denial (and therefore the Apostles might well think that our Lord would
not go at all to the Solemnity) yet, here it was restrained, and only denied
his visible, or manifest ascending, as may be gathered out of the ensuing
words. Non manifest, sed quasi in occulto; He went, but not openly. If this
answer may pass: I argue. The words of our Savior, non ascendo, I ascend not
when he did ascend, were true, though they had a restrained sense, and only
denied the public manner of his ascending, not known to others: Ergo, these
words of a Priest, Non andivi, I heard not such a Sin, when he heard it in
Confession, are likewise true, though they have a restrained sense and only
deny the public manner of his hearing it (in that forum) not known to others.
A Disparity here good Doctor: perhaps, He will answer, that the Judge or Tyrant
positively demands whether the Priest heard that Sin in Confession; and his
saying, No to it, is a flat lie. By the way, had the Apostles asked our Savior
whether he would ascend to the Solemnity, and he had answered, as he did, non
ascendo. No, would he have told a Lie? I am sure No. Neither did he say an
untruth, when, Mark 13. some asked him of the day of judgment, and he returned
this answer; De die illo, etc. of that day and hour none knows, not the Angels
in Heaven, nor the Son, but the Father only. Yet, most certain it is that the
Son of God knew of that day: which Truth the Fathers asserted against the
Arians endeavoring to prove, out of this very Scripture, that Christ was not
God. He knew therefore of the day of judgment, yet said, he did not know, both
are true; Let the Doctor unfold this double Sense, and we have enough for our
present purpose. Hence learn, that though a Tyrant positively ask of a Priest a
thousand times whether he heard such a Sin in Confession, the question is not
of his demand, (for it is most unjust) but whether a Priest may answer as truly,
No, I did not hear it, as Christ our Lord said, No; I ascend not, I know not of
the day; Here is the question. Most willingly would I have the Doctors answer,
if he finds a flaw in the Parity.

Were our Doctor better versed in Speculation, I might here set down the
Essential difference between a Ly, and mental Restriction. In a ly men ever
speak against their mind, for, mentiri est contra mentem ire, that is, they
judge so, and speak contrary. In mental Restriction a part only of our interior
Judgment (or as we speak in School Inadaequate) is only expres'd by Exterior
words, or signs. For example, if the Doctor preaching to his people, has this
great truth in his mind: God is not in Heaven after a Corporeal manner, and
should by accident Exteriorly say no more but thus much only. God is not in
Heaven: He does not by that half Expression thwart his Judgment, or speak
contrary to his thoughts, but only, says not fully out what he thinks. And
thus it is in mental Restriction, what is said is true, though not fully spoken
to the capacity of the Hearer. In the Ambiguous use of words, usually called
Equivocation, there is far less difficulty. Hence I infer (and it is an
Objection of our Doctor, page 153.) that if an Adultress asked whether she be
one, answers, No; she speaks no untruth, unless she will, but only says she is
none publicly proved; Or in some such like Sense. Next says our Doctor, if a
man compelled to swear to take such a one for Wife, he may secretly mean, if
hereafter she please me; And the same is of one compelled by a Thief to give
him twenty Crowns; I answer, No forced Oath extorted by compulsion, is an Oath
for want of Freedom and Liberty; and consequently not Obligatory. The case is
plain, if one should take the Doctors hand per force, and make him write thus
much. All I have said in my Dissuasive from Popery is against my Conscience;
Would he hold himself obliged to stand to his Writing?

After this he cites Vasquez, bragging I know not of what Doctrine, and where?
In 3. Tom. 4. Quest. 93. Art. 5. Dub. 13. Answ. Vasquez with me, Antwerp print,
1621. has only 4. Articles in his 93. Question, and not a syllable in his 13.
Dubium, of any bragging. In his 12. Dub. Art. 4. he treats of our present
matter; but nothing do I find there to the Doctors purpose. If he has another
Edition, let him friendly tell me. Page 154. (says he) Diana holds, That to
save a man's credit, an honest man who is ashamed to beg, may steal what is
necessary. I answer, He deals not well with Diana that speaks more moderately
thus. Vir honestus, and cui pro ratione sui status gravissimum, and maximum
dedecus esset mendicare, nec posset alia via victum sibi acquirere, videtur
posse clanculum necessaria surripere, etc. It seems that a man of credit, and
to whom it would be most heavy, and a mighty disgrace to beg, nor can by any
other means get sustenance to live (these words the Doctor conceals) it seems,
I say, that such a man may secretly take what is necessary for his sustenance.
Secus si esset infimae sortis, etc. But this holds not in case he be of a low
condition, and might without a notable loss of his honor beg, or otherwise
find necessaries. etc. Thus Diana, far of from that high Sense the Doctor sets
down. Read him in his Compendium, Rhoan print, 1644. verbo furtum. page 335. n.
18.

Page 155. the Doctor says, That it is affirmed, and was practiced by a whole
Council of Bishops at Constance, that Faith is not to be kept with Heretics:
And John Hus, and Hierom of Prague felt the mischief of violation of public
Faith, etc. Answ. An old story, and as false as old: For, first, the Council
never determined, that Faith given by Ecclesiastical power to an Heretic, is
not to be kept. Nay, it holds it self obliged to stand to such a promise;
Faithfully also complied with it in the after Councils of Basil, and Trent. Yet
more; This Council holds, that a Secular Prince or Magistrate after security
promised to an Heretic, is bound to keep it, although neither the one or other
can force the Church ('it is a distinct Tribunal) to do so. True it is that King
Sigismund who had given a safe conduct to Hus, seemed at first to feel his
Condemnation; but when he perceived the obstinacy of the man, neither relenting
after his own Princely Counsel, nor yielding to the advice of others, he did
not only condescend to punish Hus, but exhorted the Fathers Assembled at
Constance, to proceed severely against him: And why? John Hus violated the Laws
of his safe conduct shamefully, and ran away from the Council; Yet caught he
was, and committed to Prison, and had his condign punishment; His running away
made him a guilty person on a new score, and by it lost the privilege of his
safe conduct. Here you have in brief the true Story. Spondanus relates it, Tom.
2. Paris print, anno 1641. ad annum Christi, 1415. n. 45. page 216. and for
more, sends you to Joannes Coclaeus, lib. 2. and 3. Concerning Faith to be kept
with Heretics. Spondanus now cited, remits you farther to Molanus a Doctor of
Loven, to Martinus Becanus, and Hesibertus Rosweidus, all Learned men, and no
ways opposite to public fidelity given to any.

What the Doctor has, page 156. of the Pope dispensing in Oaths, when they
hinder a greater good, seems to me a childish Objection: For, do not secular
Princes daily, though a man by Law deserves death, graciously reprieve him,
when they prudently judge it better to free such a Delinquent then to have him
die? Oaths dispensable, are not of higher concernment, then life and death.

Page 158. our Doctor quotes Panormitanus, capite proposuit, de concess. praev.
n. 20. Saying, that the Pope has power to dispense in all the Laws of God
except Articles of Faith, etc. I answer. If any thing be amiss here, it is
rather Vincen: Assertion then Panormitanus, and three Limitations follow it.
The first, Intellige, de dispensatione proprie Sumpta. Understand the Doctrine
(says Panor.) of a Dispensation properly taken; which has more in it then the
Doctor is aware of. 2. Nisi interveniat, etc. Unless a mortal sin intervene, or
arise out of Gods Law. 3. In his quae, etc. In those things that are evil of
their own nature, the Pope cannot dispense. These and more the Doctor omits,
though he ought to know, we are not obliged to defend every saying of a
Canonist.

CHAP. XXVII.
The Doctors strange way of Arguing against the Exemption of Clergymen. His
unjust dealing with Emanuel Sa. His unworthy slaighting the Seal of Confession.

PAge 160. Sect. 2. He tells us of a notorious impiety owned by us in Exempting
the Clergy from the Jurisdiction of Secular Princes, both in their Estates and
persons, etc. And for this our Tenet, he cites the Canon Law (after his manner
unintelligibly) Bellarm. Suarez, and others. And what, out of this good Doctor,
is the mere relating of a Doctrine, a Confutation of it? If so, I have here set
down yours, and therefore confuted it; A weak way of Arguing. Bellarmin brings
his proofs for his Exemption of Clergymen: Where are yours to the contrary?
Suarez, defens. fidei Cathol. lib. 4. cap. 15. per totum, learnedly shows out
of Ancient Councils, the Canon and Civil Law this Exemption ratified, even in
Causes criminal. And not one Canon, or Council, have you in your Margent (often
charged with superfluous Quotations) to gainsay him. page 162. you allege that
Text of the Apostle, Let every Soul be subject to the higher Power; And so say
we also good Doctor, and tell you that Clergymen have their higher Powers, and
Seculars theirs; both respectively owe and own obedience to their Governors.
Here is all you prove. O, but S. Chrysostom says, upon this Text: Etiamsi
Apostolus sis, etc. Although you be an Apostle, an Evangelist, a Prophet, or
whosoever; you are to be subject to Supereminent Powers. I answer. Every word
is exactly true, but the Saint mentions nothing of Clergymen liable to the
Judicature of a Secular Magistrate; but rather the contrary: For says he,
Neque enim de hoc aut illo Principe sermo mihi nunc est, sed de ipsa re. I
speak not of this or that Prince, but of Subjection it self; and I say, that
every Soul is to have it; The Servant to his Master, the Wife to her Husband,
Seculars to their Prince. Yes, and I add, Clergymen also in civil Affairs, for
there is not one among us who does not profess with all candor, a dutiful
obedience to his Prince, to his Magistrate, to the Laws of the Country he lives
in; If he proves criminal in these, the Church does not patronize him, but,
when the guilt goes high, quits him, and turns him over to the secular Power
for punishment. Good civil Laws therefore and Ecclesiastical, run ever, as it
were hand in hand together; both, like two eyes of the same body look one way,
have the same end which is the peace and welfare of a kingdom: obedience to the
one yields obedience to the other, an offense against the civil Law jointly
implies an offense against the Ecclesiastical; when either Prince or Magistrate
are wrongfuly dealt with, the Pope looks not on and laughes, but condoles with
them, yes and holds himself, and his Laws injured also. Can more be desired,
if men would set passion aside, and suffer reason to say down right what is
reasonable?

Hence you may solve that weak objection of our Doctor page 161. Princes (says
he) have many times felt the evil, when so many thousand persons are in their
Kingdoms, and yet subject to a foreign power. Solve it I say, for the
Subjection they owe is in point of Spiritual jurisdiction only, whereunto
secular Princes hitherto never laid claim; and with this Subjection the Civil
Laws in Kingdoms stand still in vigor obliging every Soul to a dutiful
Obedience. I have said it now, and it is most true; that Ecclesiastical, and
civil Laws, (rightly, as we here suppose, constituted) never clash with one
another. No; Peace, Tranquillity, and perfect Union among all, is the final aim
of both; if men devoid of passion, would but rationally understand it.

The Doctors repining at the Ecclesiastical men's Estates, exempted from the
jurisdiction of Secular Princes, looks (as it is) like a vain cavil; for what
have these as Clericks, but their Tithes, (Tithes I think the Doctor will hold
of Divine Right) and the ancient liberal Benevolence of pious Christians to
enrich them? (The Doctor if a Bishop, eats yet their bread) and these blessed
Men gave their goods solely to the Church: Emperors and Princes liked well of
the Charity, and approved it; therefore we need not now dispute here, quo jure,
by what right Clergymen are exempted; it is sufficient to say, that the Donors
and Princes freed them; Yet, this Obligation follows them, as all Divines hold,
that at least they are bound in Charity to give what is superfluous to the
poor; which Charity also moves them to supply their Prince when necessity
requires it. Thus they have anciently done, and yet comply with the like duty
the whole world over. Such men, good Doctor are supposed virtuous; and believe
it, virtue does more then force. Needless therefore it is to wrong their
privileges, and wrest from them with severity what may be had in a sweeter
way. Truly I think, if the Clergy in England or Universities either, were
forced against their Privileges, and paid taxes as Secular men do every where,
they would feel it a little.

However if the Doctor likes it, let him on Gods name pay his quota, and list
himself among Seculars, for, in real Truth he is no better, his Clerkship will
not free him.

Page 162. he cites Emanuel Sa, for this abominable assertion, Aphoris. verbo
Clericus. The rebellion of a Clergyman against his Prince is not Treason,
because he is not his Princes Subject: And says, though these words were left
out of the Paris Edition, because the French men endured not the Doctrine, yet
they still remain in the Editions of Antwerp, and Collen. Answ. I have now
before me the Antwerp Edition, 1599. and have read exactly every Number or
Section under that word Clericus, (53 in all) and therefore will boldly say it,
that Sa is unworthily wronged, for he has not through these 53. Numbers, a
syllable like this Quotation of the Doctor, but rather the contrary. A Clergy
man, says he, n. 6. carrying Arms forbid by Secular Laws, may have his Armor
taken from him by the Ministers of secular Justice. Again n. 7. A Clergy man
taken in a crime, may be laid hold of by a secular Judge, and given up to the
Ecclesiastical, etc. And surely, much more may he be roughly dealt with, if
caught in the highest crime, or found guilty of rebellion against his lawful
Sovereign. I therefore tell the Doctor, such a Clergy man deserves hanging: and
that not so much as one Aphorism in Sa, will save his life.

In the last Paragraph of this Section, page 162. and 163. our Doctor is
pleased to speak of another Iniquity (so he terms it) whereof our men are
guilty. And what is it? They hold, says he, the seal of Confession so highly
of Divine right, and Sacred, that it cannot be broken to save the lives of
Princes, or the whole world. I answer they say also, that to save the lives of
Popes, of Bishops, of Prelates or the Church from ruin the seal of Confession
(made secret by God and nature) cannot be violated. What mischief then have we
more by this Doctrine against Princes and worldly Interest, than against Popes,
and the Spiritual welfare of the Church? All, God knows, are a like concerned
in the danger (if any were) though the kindness of our Doctor is for the
security of secular Princes only. More flattery believe it here, then good
Divinity.

To treat in this place of the great secrecy whereunto the seal of Confession
indispensably binds us, is neither my task, nor any way requisite. Divines have
amply done it to our hand. It is enough to tell you, how unworthily the Doctor
fleights both Seal and Secrecy in the last lines of his Section, where he
calls it a trifling Fancy of our own. A strange word in the mouth of a Doctor,
which may both justly work a distrust in the heart of any penitent, and make
confession ridiculous, even among the pious Children of the Church of England.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of the Doctors injurious Calumnies. Of his unjust Quotations.

THe Doctor, page 164. and last Section tells us, That the whole order of
Jesuits is a great enemy to Monarchy, by subjecting the Dignity of Princes to
the Pope, by making the Pope supreme Monarch of Christians, and this they
teach, says he, as Catholic Doctrine, etc. I answer. The calumny is so
enormously great, that I wonder the Doctor trembled not to write as he has
done, and disgrace himself with it: For, if ever men immovably stood for
Monarchy, both in Church and Kingdoms, they are Jesuits. To prove this
Assertion, I need no more, but only to remit you to one Learned Bellarmin (and
there is no Jesuit gainsays him) lib. 1. de Romano Pontifice, cap. 2. where he
shows both by the Authority of Ancient Philosophers, and Christian Writers,
that Monarchy, simply considered, is a better Government then Aristocracy or
Democracy: Far is he off from Calvin's spirit, that thought it intolerable
both in Ecclesiastical and Secular Government. O, but they destroy Monarchy by
subjecting the Dignity of Princes to the Pope, and making him the supreme
Monarch of Christians. I answer. Had the Doctor made some Canonists (less
considerable in their writings) asserters of this Papal power, even in
Politics, he had been more moderate: But to ascribe the Doctrine to the whole
Order of Jesuits runs beyond all bounds of Truth. Jesuits in this particular
hold with the other Catholic Doctors, and say that the Pope is the Supreme
visible Head of the Church in Spirituality, that is in Power, and jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical: Consequently is neither Lord, nor Monarch of the whole World,
nor finally has directly by Divine right any Temporal jurisdiction over
Princes. See for this Assertion, Bellar. lib. 5. de potest. pont. cap. 2, 3, 4.

Whence it follows (and Jesuits assert it) that Princes are the sole supreme
Lords, and Monarchs in their respective Dominions subject to none, if we
consider their Secular power, but to God only.

Princely dignity therefore stands unshaken, no Pope lays claim to that
Sovereignty, or meddles with it. My God! had our Protestant Ministers (as it
behoov'd dutiful Children) been as careful to preserve inviolably
Ecclesiastical Monarchy in the Church, as Popes have ever showed themselves
tender Fathers to uphold the Monarchy of Princes, the World now had not seen
what it sees, and deplores; I mean those woeful Rents and Schisms, which these
wantonizing Children have made in Christendom, while the good old Father looks
on with a heavy heart, and bemoans their folly. Know then for certain ('it is no
dispute) Protestant Ministers are the men that destroy Monarchy of Spiritual
jurisdiction, erected by Almighty God in the Church (this is their crying sin,
unpardonable without Repentance) whereunto Secular Princes never made claim,
nor can they in Justice. Let then the Pope have still the Prerogative of
Spiritual Jurisdiction over the Church ('it is his due) he seeks not for more,
our quarrels are ended. And tell me I beseech you, are not Princes better
secured in their Dignities by owning this Spiritual Power, as due to a Supreme
Pastor, who is Vigilant for their safety, and has no little sway in the world;
then to have their Princely Prerogatives called into question, debated, yes,
and judged also by a knot of fickle Puritans (as changeable as the Moon) who
now stand up defendants of Regal Power, now turn stiff Opponents, and arm
against it: Now they Crown their Monarch, now pull the Crown off his Head. Such
doings we have seen, and bewailed the Injury done to Princes. Thought, we say,
is free; Every body may think safely: but I Will at present be a little bolder
and speak out plainly. Had England in the last unfortunate Civil Wars been as
it was anciently Catholic, or owned as once it did, a due Subjection to the
Pope. None perhaps had seen so much as a Sword drawn against our Gracious
Sovereign (who now Reigns) nor his Royal Father so barbarously murdered as he
was by his own Subjects. No. For if Ecclesiastical censures had not stopped the
raging fury of those Regicides; one spark of Catholic Religion would have
mollified such hearts though made of Adamant; But what will ye? When both
Religion is bannished, and Church Discipline is held contemptible: Passion will
sway corrupt Laws, make Scaffolds, draw Swords, kill Kings. and what not?

In the next place our Doctor, page 165, and 166. enters upon this very odious
subject of deposing and killing Kings, and says we Catholics are Defenders of
both. Mariana and Santarel are produced by him for horrid things spoken. Answ.
As I hate at my heart to do so much as mention this impious Doctrine of killing
Kings, and abhor more to approve it; So, for no provocation of any, will I
speak a word ('it is forbid me) of their deposing. Though were I minded to
recriminate: that one Execrable and Tragical shedding of our late Sovereigns
blood without pity poured out in his own Palace, in the sight of the Sun, and
open view of the World (it yet draws sighs from many a heart) speaks loud
enough of a Prince more horridly deposed and murdered, then ever yet came to
the knowledge of Christians, or any Mariana once thought of. And who were the
Actors in this Abominable Tragedy? Men of a reformed Faith (and did it not in a
sudden passion, but deliberately, which aggravates the crime) while Catholics,
ever loyal to their Sovereign, looked on with weeping eyes, and heavy hearts.
Who approved, who applauded that days sinful work? Those of the same bran,
John Milton was one: witness his wicked Book against Salmatius, whose only
praise is to speak Treason in good Latin. What Doctors have we found among
Catholics since the death of our Sovereign, that either side with Milton, or
speak a syllable in defense of those Regicides? not one. All unanimously cry
shame upon them, curse, and anathematize the Fact, and say it was damnable.

Now after this so crying a Sin, to hear a Doctor harp upon the far lesser
faults of Mariana and Santarel, what is it but a weak and too splenish a
Recrimination? They said ill. Be it so (if yet Mariana said it) their Doctrine
is therefore prohibited, and lies under censure) but have they either said or
done like these now mentioned? What I say is not to touch in the least any
Protestant loyal to his Sovereign. No; but only to tell the Doctor he did not
well, to rub on old Soars in others abroad, while he has more festered Ulcers
to look on, and Lance in some of his own Brethren at home; I say in some, for
innumerable were Loyal, and those I touch not; Charity therefore might well
have told him, that the fault of a few is never to be cast on the greater part,
who were innocent and harmless.

Now concerning the Loyal fidelity both of English and foreign Catholics
toward their Prince and Magistrate (could I license this short Treatise to
grow to a greater bulk) much might be said, though indeed there is already
enough published by that learned Author of the Protestants Apology (the Book is
had in England) printed anno 1608. where, Tract. 3. Sect. 3, 4, and 5. page
658, 663, 667. You shall find the Loyalty of Catholics (if Reason, Authority
and Confession of Adversaries may have place) strongly asserted. Beside other
undeniable proofs; he observes page 662. that when Queen Elizabeth enentred the
Throne Royal, all received her with most dutiful submission. The then Catholic
Lord Archbishop and chancellor of England, in a public oration persuaded the
people to acknowledge her Majesty for their lawful Queen and Sovereign: And a
like Loyal respect she had from other Catholic Lords and Bishops, etc. But was
it so when queen Mary, that reigned before her, came to the Crown? No, says my
Author, open rebellion in open field ( Stow recounts it in his Annals, the
pages are there exactly cited) was her public welcome (and there was more of
it in her 5. Years, then in 25. of Queen Elizabeth) and private turbulent
Spirits, (witness that Dagger thrown at one Preachers head at Paul's Cross; and
a Gun shot off at another) gave her no better entertainment. Parallel here the
Receptions of these two Sovereigns, and say heartily, who were then forwardly
submissive, who, untowardly rebellious. Nay, shall I say more, parallel the
hideous, A little Book in English called Jerusalem and Babel, or the Image of
both Churches, printed at London, 1653. the 2d. Edition, will help you to make
this parallel.
horrid and out-crying Rebellion of such as have deserted their Ancient Faith,
the whole World over, with the faults of Catholics (for all are not faultless)
you shall find as great a disparity, as is betwixt a little Skirmish and a
fierce fought battle; the half drawing of a Sword, and sheathing it in the
bowels of an Innocent man. See for this Assertion the Protestants Apology,
Tract 3. Sect. 2. page 649. but chiefly in his Preface to the Reader, from page
the 10. to the end. From this most Learned and Laborious Writer, I will borrow
some few of those many Instances he has in that Preface to answer a pithless
cavil of our Doctor, p. 171. Where,

He dares not deny, but that some Calvinists and warm spirited Puritans, may
have been reprehensible ( atleast Catholics recriminate them in this point)
yet he gravely adds; That indeed they borrowed these Doctrines from Rome, using
their Arguments, making use of their Expressions, and pursuing their
Principles. Answ. And is it possible, can a Doctor talk thus? Can sober men
give credit to his Obloquy? Pray you tell me, when the Waldenses in France, the
Hussites in Bohemia, the Wicleffians in England (some make these men
Protestants) ranted and vapour'd as they did, contemned Magistrates, raised up
Rebellion, and acted so Tragically against their lawful Governors, etc. Did
Rome learn them their Lesson? did Rome teach them the Dotage, to contemn Roman
Discipline? When that Hector-rampant Zisca (the Hussites General) after the
Ravage and Violences done on his own Native Country, falling sick commanded his
skin to be pulled of his dead Carcass, and a Drum to be made of it, which the
Hussites should use afterward in Battle: Had he think yea Breve from Rome to do
this more then Scithian cruelty on himself? When Martin Luther Dogmatically
taught, That amongst Christians no man ought to be Magistrate, none Superior,
and being told that he troubled the World with his new Gospel, etc. He returned
this accursed Answer. Quereris quod per Evangelium nostrum, etc. Thou
complainest that by our Gospel the World is become tumultuous. I answer: God be
thanked for it, I would have it so, woe to me (He might have added and to my
Kate also) if things were not as they are, all in tumults. When I say such
Malice against Rome, boiled hot at his heart, and the filthy froth of his rage
ran thus out of his mouth, did Rome add fuel to that flame, or make that Vessel
of iniquity to boil as it did? Apage Nugas. It Is triffling to say so. Again,
when sneveling Calvin (to say nothing of Zuinglius) seditiously vented. That
Earthly Princes bereaved themselves of Authority, if they were against God: and
that they are unworthy to be reckoned amongst the number of men; that we may
spit in their faces (so this holy faced man speaks) rather then obey them. Did
Rome either instill such Poison into his Breast, or lay that Venom on his
pernicious Tongue? No God knows: both Rome and the Rhemish Doctors assert; that
Christians are obliged in Conscience to obey even Heathen Emperors. And worthy
Doctor Kellison, doubts not to say: That Faith is not necessary to Jurisdiction
Temporal, neither is Authority lost by the loss of Faith. See these Authorities
quoted in the Protestants Apology, Tract. 3. Sect. 5. page 668. Once more, and
I end. When bloody Beza preaching at Grenoble, with his Sword and Pistol,
exhorted the people to show their Courage and Manhood rather in butchering
Papists than breaking down their Images, was it Rome I beseech ye (then so
opposite to Popery and Images) that armed that Gallant Combatant and gave him
his Theme or Text to preach on? Was it Rome that deposed that suffering Lady
the Queen of Scots, our Sovereign King James his virtuous Mother? That deposed
Sygismond from his Kingdom in Swedland? The Temporal Lord of Geneva from his
Sovereignty? The King of Spain from a considerable part in the Low Countries?
the Emperor from many rights in Germany? Was it Rome that Licensed those
Rebels in the Netherlands, by public Writings to renounce all Obedience to
Philip their Lord and King? To ravage as they did at Gant and Antwerp, and
other places? to break down Altars, overthrow Churches, murder Monks, bannish
Bishops, make havoc of all? What can the Doctor say to these unfortunate
Tragedies? (though I have not told half of the doleful story related in the
Preface now cited) he answers in part well. We reprove the men and condemn
their Doctrine. So do we also good Sir, in case either Catholic or any offend,
and Unanimously profess with S. Barnard, Paris print, anno 1602. Epist. 170. ad
Ludovicum Regem. page 1565. Si totus orbis adversus me Conjuraret ut quippiam
molirer, etc. If the whole World should conspire against me, or move me to
attempt any thing against my Sovereign, I would fear God and not dare to offend
the King, appointed by him. For I know it is written, that who resists Power
resists the Ordinance of God, and purchases to himself damnation. Here is
our Catholic profession: Rome both thinks and speaks with us; to take off the
Doctors injurious charge laid on us in this Paragraph, I have said thus much,
never intending to cast the least aspertion on any Protestant that is Loyal to
his Sovereign.

Next the Doctor quotes Suarez lib. 6. defens. fidei cap. 6. Sect. 24. (Sa is
also cited and Scribanius, but without their places) for this assertion. An
excommunicat King may with impunity be deposed or killed by any one. Answ. He
either never read Suarez, or is unpardonably guilty of falsity. For Suarez
says expressly n. 24. that this very proposition now uttered, simpliciter
prolata falsissima est, simply spoken is most false, and gives this Reason:
Excommunication alone, and nudely considered, impowres no body to kill the
excommunicated party, nor to deprive him of his Dominions, but only debarrs him
from communication with others. Rex ergo excommunicatus etc. A King therefore
excommunicated only, if the Sentence say no more, cannot be deposed, and killed
by his Subjects or any, says Suarez. It Is true he adds a limitation, which,
because I think the Doctor well understands not, I omit to say more of. A
sufficient vindication it is to tell you, that the proposition here set down for
Suarez his doctrine is none of his, and utterly false in it self.

Page 167. after Suarez he has a bout with Bellarmin for a strange
proposition, and thus it is lib. 4. de Romans Pont. cap. 5. Secundo. Si autem
Papa erraret etc. If the Pope should err by commanding vice, or forbidding
virtue, the Church were obliged to believe, that vices were good, and virtues
evil, unless it would sin against Conscience. They are the very words of
Bellarmin, says our Doctor. Answ. they are so, but most unworthily weighed out
of their circumstances; and as they stand here alone seem to assert I know not
what mischief or error; whereas most certainly in the context of Bellarmin,
they have an excellent Sense, and prove that neither Pope nor Church can err.
Observe I beseech you, Bell. in his. above, Ac ut rem totam, says, it cannot
be that the Pope err by commanding any Vice; as Usury: or, forbidding any
virtue, as restitution: etc. This he proves first quod autem, because the
Church would not be called holy, if he did so. 2. Because, if the Pope taught
sueh a doctrine, the Church would err in Faith; for Catholic Faith assures us,
that virtue is good, and Vice is evil. Now says Bellarmin, (and here are the
misconstrued words of our Doctor) if the Pope should err, by commanding Vice,
and forbidding Virtue, the whole Church would be bound to believe amiss; which
you see does not assert any error in Pope or Church, but plainly excludes both,
and renders this Sense. Most impious it is, to think that the whole Church is
bound to believe that Vice is good, and Virtue naught: therefore, impious it is
to judge that the Pope can err in commanding Vice, and forbidding Virtue: As if
one should say, wicked it is, to hold that the whole body of Christianity
believes amiss; therefore it is impious to hold that God commands us to believe
so. In a word; the whole discourse of Bellarmin is grounded on this Principle,
that the Pope, as Pope, cannot err; and by destroying it (says this learned
Author) you may see what follows, an Universal Error or Misbelief in the
Catholic Church. This is most exactly Bellarmins Sense: and for my Assertion,
I appeal to the judgment of every Ingenuous Reader: And therefore cannot but
pity the Doctor, and most of our Protestants too, who poor men (utterly
destitute of all Antiquity) will rather play at small Game then sit out: piddle
they must, and glean in our Authors: faults, if fancied, must be found: words
wrested, Sense turned out of Sentences: The least hint serves them to
misconstrue all. Thus they proceed, though it cost them dear, an Eternal loss
of their credit.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of our Doctors failing in History. Of his blaming Popes that are blameless. A
word of his Conclusion.

OUr Doctor having now wronged Suarez, and Bellarm. sets fiercely against
Popes, and speaks of their wickedness also; but handles the matter so
confusedly that no Reader can be the wiser for any Story he tells us. He
neither names Pope, nor quotes Author for what he says, but begins thus, page
167. All the World knows what the Pope did to King Childerick of France: He
deposed him and put Pipin in his place. Answ. I think the Doctor knows not this
Story very well (therefore all the World it is like knows it not) which he
dispatches in a word, and runs slightly over. However you have it largely in
Scipion Dupleix the Kings Counselor, Tom. 1. entitled. Memoires des Gauls,
Paris print, 1627. page chiefly, 282. Les Francois ont recours au Pape
Zachary, etc. where you shall read that the French men themselves tous les
Seigneurs all the Nobles, says Dupleix, page 283. finding the great
inabilities of Childerick, and unfitness to govern a Kingdom, stood for Pipin,
petitioned the Pope upon weighty Reasons to dispense in their Oath of Fidelity
made to Childerick; the Pope condescended, but says this Author page 286. si
aucuns, etc. if any of the ancient Chronicles have attributed this great change
to the Pope, they have writ both ignorantly and barbarously: In a word, the
French men did it themselves; nor had they, (as Dupleix affirms in his title
page 285.) any necessity at all to have had any recourse to the Pope for
deposing Childerick. To take away all cavil, I rather cite a French Author,
both Counselor, and Historiographer to the King of France, then any other.
Concerning the differences between Pope Boniface the 8. and Philip le Bell, you
have a whole Book set forth by a French Author not named, nor too great a
friend to the Pope: The Title is. Histoire du differend d'entre le Pape, etc.
Paris print, 1655. Where you shall find no little Animosity in Philip, and a
paternal Condescendency in Boniface, ever ready to comply with that Prince.
Tedious it would be to tell the whole Story.

The Doctor goes on. They were Popes of Rome that armed the Son against the
Father the Emperor Henry the 4th; the Son fought against him, took him
prisoner, etc. Answ. An infinite patience is necessary to hear a Doctor talk as
this does. Most justly may we say here, the whole World knows, what a man Henry
the 4th. was, an Heretic, a Sacrilegious wretch, one given to Sodomy, says
Stephanus Alberstatensis in his Letter to Walram Bishop, which Dodechinus
relates in his Appendix to Marianus Scotus, anno 1090. page 460. A light headed
Fellow, and rash, of no Counsel, mighty bold, and of a dissolute life, who set
the Bishoprics of Germany to sale, etc. says, Even good John Calvin, lib. 4.
instit. cap. 11.. 13. his own pious and worthy Kinsman; Otho Frisingensis,
says lib. 7. cap. 11. That he was promoted, potenter magis, quam just, more
by Power then Justice, or honest Dealing. These truths supposed which no
historian questions, (excpt one lying Benno, so Gretser calls him tomo 2. in his
Apol. for Greg. the 7. p. 218. what is to be done with such a Prince? must he
revel it out? run on in his lewdness? ruin the Church? destroy Kingdoms,
injure Princes without restraint, or Ecclesiastical Censure? Let the Doctor say
heartily, whether such an ungratious Son of the Church may be tolerated,
without being curbed at all, to violate, or rather to tear out the very bowels
of that Mother that begot him, and made him Christian? Nothing can be answered
with probability, but that the Church has power to check such insolences. And,

To silence the Doctors groundless complaint, hear in a word how it was done:
Marianus Scotus is my Author, lib. 3. Cron. Aetat. 6. ad annum, 1075. page:
chiefly 454. Franck fort print, 1613. Where he first relates the Kings
wickedness, then adds. Haec and his similia nefanda and inandita Henrici Regis
flagitia, videntes and audientes fieri Catholici viri, etc. Catholic men,
constituted at that time in the Church, seeing, and hearing of such enormous
Crimes committed by King Henry, were carried on with zeal (like another Helias)
for the House of Israel, and therefore sent Messengers to Pope Alexander, and
as well by Letter, as word of mouth with sighs and grief, made their grievances
known, etc. Alexander dying, Gregory the 7th. succeeded him. Iste querimonijs,
and clamoribus Catholicorum justis adversum Henricum, and scelerum immanitatem
auditis, zelo Dei accensus, etc. This Pope Gregory having heard the just
complaints, the loud clamours of Catholics against Henry and his outrageous
proceedings, moved with zeal of God, declared him Excommunicated, chiefly for
his Simony. Thus Marianus. Where you see that the Pope deposed him not, but
only declared him an Excommunicate person; and this at the importunate
Instances, and just Complaints of the German Princes: He that desires to know
more of this unfortunate King, let him read Baronius chiefly, ad annum, 1080.
Tom. 11. where, page 532. Antwerp print, 1608. lit. D. He shall find how justly
that heavy Censure of the Church fell upon him; how he was vilified by his own
Children; forced by them out of his Kingdom, and died in misery. It was God,
says Baronius, that showed his Judgment on him; (though late) dum filios in
patrem statuit esse carnifices acerbissimos suae sententiae executores, while
he made his own Sons to be Torturers of their Father, and revengers of his just
Sentence. Our Doctor therefore both cavils, and calumniats while he talks of
Popes arming Sons against the Father, etc. And to take off more cavils, most
willingly would I have him to name that Pope (and quote his Author) that made
Charles the 5. and Francis the first of France take Arms against other Princes.
I love not, good Doctor, this running on in darkness: Produce your Authors. An
answer is ready. Yet,

Omit I cannot to say a word, of Francis Dandulus whom (says our Doctor) being
Duke of Venice, the Pope bound with Chains, and fed him as Dogs arc fed with
bones, and scraps under his Table. Answ. It would make one sick to hear this
tattle. Where read we, for Gods fake, that the Pope chained Dandulus? where,
that he fed him like a Dog, or cast him bones and scraps? where, that Dandulus
was then Duke of Venice? All is coined by the Doctor, who, as he tells his tale,
makes the Pope a Beast: Whereas, God knows, the story is quite contrary, and
Briefly thus.

The Venetians had by their wrongs and violences highly offended Pope Clement
the 5. and for a long time slighted his censures. At last (more wise) they
sought for pardon, as Spondanus recounts ad annum 1310. number. 5. Tom. 1. page
518.

This good man therefore, Francis Dandulus (no Duke then, but of the Doctors
making) yet, of note and nobility among the States, pressed them with might and
main to a due Submission. And to gain pardon for their insolences, on his own
free accord, (compelled by no Pope) he sacrificed his honor, and did as strange
an Act of humility as perhaps is read in Story. Sabellicus, an exact writer of
the Venetian affairs relates it ( Tom. 2. Basil print. Ennead. 9. lib. 7 page
791. in this manner. Eranciscus Dandulus illustri exemplo privatae pietatis in
patriam, publicae in religionem, catena ferrea collo injecta, ad ejus mensam
tam diu prostratus jacuit etc. Francis Dandulus by a rare example of special
piety toward his Country, and public for Religion, having cast an iron Chain
about his neck, went to the Popes table, and lay there prostrat so long. Donec,
expugnata Clementis ira, etc. Til, by force of his virtue, he vanquished
Clements anger, and cancelled the black ignominious note, which lay on his
Country; whence it is, says Sabellicus, that he was afterward called by the
name of Dog; yet, (witness Spondanus) was welcomed home with the applause of
all, and some years after made Prince in John's place that dyed. Here is a
difference between the Doctors story and mine; mine has nothing of scraps or
bones, or of the Popes feeding, and chaining Dandulus, etc. Pray you tell me,
if our Ministers in England, wearied out with their Schism, and Heresy (higher
crimes then the Venetians were guilty of) became, at last, seriously penitent
for both, and to satisfy how earnestly they seek for pardon, should send up
the Doctor to follow the cause, and obtain pardon at Rome: Yet more, if the
Doctor like a good Patriot, to effect what he comes for, should on his own free
choice, humble himself as Dandulus did; throw a Chain about his neck, fall
prostrate at the Popes Table, etc. Will any man say in justice and conscience
that the Pope chained him, or fed him like a Dog with scraps? Here is the right
story, if good Authors wrong us not.

What he next hints at, is indeed a known thing of our King Henry the 2.
Briefly. This Prince both sinned and repented; his sin in shedding of that
blessed Martyrs blood, S. Thomas of Canterbury was great; And, his sorrowful
repentance for the fact, was admirable and praise worthy. As all deplore the
sin, so they make the King renowned for his pious Repentance, which God
afterward blessed with a happy death. A fault then he did, none can doubt of
it; yet like a virtuous Prince submitted to any punishment, nay, sought for
more then was inflicted. But, I know not how, our Doctor has a rare gift to
aggravate a punishment, if the Pope has a hand in it, and to say nothing of
the fault: No. That must be concealed. So it is; The child is corrected by an
indulgent Father, and complains of his whipping, but never tells you why he
felt the Rod, or what he did amiss. Had the Doctor dealt ingenuously; he should
(where he ends with this scornful Ironia) Such was the piety of the Fathers in
Christendom, first have said. Such were the sins of Princes, and laid out as
well the faults, as the punishment. Besides, suppose (which yet is not proved)
that a few, among many Popes, did amiss, or transgressed by too much severity;
must therefore Popedom be decryed, and all Popes made odious? An open injustice
it is, good Doctor to revile all, whether Popes or Princes, because some only
have offended.

Page 168. He tells us of a strange paradox that Pope Clement the 5th. vented
in the Council of Vienna, making the right of Kings dependant on him (which is
an untruth, their Temporal rights depend not on him) and the Doctor for this
Assertion of Clement, cites not one Author. Page 169. He talks of Pope
Boniface the 8th.; owning himself not only Lord of France, but of all the
World. And who affirms this? Papirius Massonus, says the Doctor: And cites in
his Margent, Verb. Bonif. 8. Answ. This blind and unskilful way in quoting of
Authors (held all along by our Doctor) is more then intolerable. Know, I
beseech you, that Massonus writ 4. Books of Annals, wherein he describes the
Exploits of Frenchmen; I have his 2. Edition, Paris print. 1578. Should not the
Doctor think you (had he ever seen these Annalls) have pointed to some one of
these 4. Books? Without leaving us in darkness, with only the word Boniface 8.
which is no Title, but only found in the Index. However to unbeguile the
Reader, by help of the Index, I have perused what Massonus has of Pope
Boniface, lib 3. page 337. he describes his manners, and says, He was Learned,
but withal crafty, etc. Not a syllable there of Boniface His owning himself
Lord of France, or the World. lib. 3. page 351. He tells us, That after Philip
le Bell had oppressed the Clergy, with heavy Taxes, to maintain a War against
England, the Pope disliked it, and therefore forbad the abuse; Withal, willed
Philip not to oppress Churchmen with such Exactions. The King obeyed not;
Whereupon, says Masson, Boniface sent him a sharp Letter, and said, that all
Kings were subject to the Pope and Church, (understand in Ecclesiastical
Affairs, for the whole Context bears no other Sense) and that he had offended
against both Equity and Order of Law, by seizing on the Clergies Goods,
conferring Ecclesiastical Dignities, etc. What is here, good Reader of Boniface
owning himself Lord of France, and the whole World also? When neither France
nor the World, are not so much as mentioned; Nor any word found relating to the
Temporal Jurisdiction of Princes.

The Doctor says more: That all the Jesuits Order makes the Pope Lord of the
World, and that the maintenance of it is the Subject matter of their new Vow of
Obedience, to advance his Grandeur. Answ. Few Jesuits will read this vast
lashing out of all Reason, without smiling a little at the Doctor, and may,
most justly Vow, that he is yet to learn, what both their Doctrine, and
Institution is. I say therefore, his Assertions are utterly untrue. The Order
of Jesuits never made the Pope Lord of the World; never thought it; never
taught it; (see Bellarmin cited above:) and their 4th. Vow of Obedience No more
advances his temporal Grandeur, then the Doctors talk hurts his Spiritual
jurisdiction, that is, just nothing at all. What he next cites out of some
Canonists, is neither the Doctrine of the Church, nor good Divinity.

Page 170. he tells a fearful story of Sixtus Quintus, who in an Oration
solemnly had before the Cardinals 11. September Anno 1589. commended the Monk,
James Clement, that killed Henry the 3. of France. I Answer, first. This very
accusation, as the Doctor words it, proves nothing. For Sixtus might come mend
Clement that killed the King, though he praised him not for that impious Fact.
One may commend Doctor Tailor for some good parts, yet hold him most blamable
for his other faults, of deceit and errors. Again, who can avouch with
certainty, that Sixtus made such an Oration? Boucher, says the Doctor and one
or two more: And is this a handsome way of quoting Authors? John Boucher a
Doctor of Sorbon, Canon, and Archdeacon of Tornay, wrote several treatises and
books a part: the Ark of the Testament in folio; The Conversion of Henry the
fourth; The mystical crown of Princes; Sermons etc, and must I wander among all
these directed by one poor word Boucher, to find Sixtus his Oration asserted
authentic? 3. Suppose, Boucher, or Ancelin a vouch it authentic, we are never
the wiser, unless we have Sixtus his express words, which the Doctor cavils at:
And were that done, it will be yet doubted whether all be not a forged
business, because graver Authors, as Spondanus and Dupleix, who relate at large
the story of Sixtus and Henry, mention nothing of this Oration. See Spond. Tom.
3. ad annum 1590. and Dupliex, Tom. 4. Histoire de Henri, 3. Lastly, Cardinal
Bellarmin Apologia pro respons. Ad lib. cui titulus Triplici nedo, etc. Says
most positively. Nulla apud nos sixti Quinti extat oratio^^ and quae ab
Adversarij^ etc. There is no such Oration of Sixtus extant here; and, that
which is published by Enemies, although it deserves no credit, may yet have a
commodious Explication, as is farther read in our answer page 70, 71, 72. What
is this but to say in plain English that the Oration is Spurious, and though it
were as bad as some Adversaries make it, yet it may be without difficulty
Explicated.

Our Doctor, page 171. having done with his Dissuasive, ends, with an Use of
Exhortation to Persuade and Exhort all, as they desire to be saved, in the day
of the Lord Jesus, to decline from these horrid Doctrines. (those he means
which he charges on us) And so do I good Reader also, without half the stir
the Doctor has made about them; for they are all Monsters, of his own making.
Horrid it is, and Monstrous to Assert, as he does; That we are Enemies to
Monarchy, that we profess not a due Obedience to Princes, that the whole Order
of Jesuits owns the Pope Lord of the World, etc. Ignorance begot these
Doctrines; Fancy mishaped them in some bodies Brain; Passion brought them
forth; out they are as you see in print, ugly, and ill-favored; We utterly
dis-own them, and say they are false. The naked Truth I have declared, and
therefore exhort all, that love Christ Jesus, to decline from the Doctors
horrid mistakes. After the rest of his wordy paraenesis (not worth taking
notice of) for a farwell, he closes up all with a Behold, we set before you Life
and Death, Blessing and Cursing, Safety and Danger, etc. I answer. He has done
so indeed; but the danger (God knows) lies where he least thinks, in his own
unpardonable Errors, mis-leading simple Souls to Perdition: God prevent that he
does not too late bewail his inconsiderate venting of them; I need not preach
to the Doctor, he believes I hope already, that Death (and that Eternal) will
be the miserable portion of all those Seducers who do not timely repent, and
make themselves Members of the Catholic Church: God give the Doctor grace to
consider of this seriously and suddenly; Into this House of God (as I have
heard) he was once ready to enter; but neglecting the Grace that called him, he
is now as you see, so unfortunate as to diswade others from entering also; With
what sting of Conscience he has done this evil, God only knows; done it is,
and I suspect the worst. But the great Day of our Lord Jesus, when both he and
I must be heard to justify our selves, without farther dispute, will lay open,
Whether, he has wronged his Conscience in writing this Dissuasive, or, I
without cause have accused him of Errors. To this Impartial Judge, and most
just Tribunal, I appeal for Sentence: And shall in the Interim, earnestly pray,
as behooves a Christian, and friendly Adversary, for Doctor Taylor's Conversion.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
QVotations faulty in D. Tailors Preface to the Reader.
Chap. I. Of the Doctors ungrounded Discourse, to the wrongful charge on
Catholics for making new Articles of Faith. page 8 II. The Doctors Quotations
not true. His Errors concerning the Index Expurgatorius. His ill dealing with
Sixtus Senensis. page 15 III. The Doctors Quotations not right: prayer for the
dead proves a Purgatory. page 22 IV. The Doctors Quotations still amiss, S.
Austin, and Otho Frisingensis are abused by him. page 27 V. The Doctors Cavils
against Transubstantiation. His false quotations. His Impertinent questions and
weak Arguments. page 37 VI. Of the Doctors weak Arguments against Communion
under one kind; Of his slight impugning prayer in an unknown language. Of his
ill quotations. page 43 VII. Of the Doctors Cavils against Images. Of Antiquity
approving their Veneration. Of the Doctors ill quotations. page 47 VIII. Of the
Drs confused quotations. Of Veneration due to the Holy Cross. Of picturing the
sacred Trinity. p. 54 IX. Of the Popes Supremacy: Of the Doctors Cavils against
it. Of his false quotations. page 62 X. Of S. Gregory' s refusing the Title of
Universal Bishop. Of Fathers asserting the Pope to be Supreme Pastor. Of the
Doctors faulty quotations. page 72 XI. Of the Doctors harsh Doctrine concerning
speedy Repentance after Sin. Of his mistakes, and wronging Authors. page 83
XII. Of the Doctors Cavils against Contrition and Confession. Of his wronging
the Council of Trent and Catholic Authors. page 89 XIII. The sum of our
Doctors discourse concerning Indulgences. His two mistakes are discovered. His
Objections answered. page 100 XIV. A word more of Indulgences. Of the Drs.
mistakes in quoting Authors. Whether the prayer of a sinner avails him. Of the
Doctors harsh doctrine. page 106 XV. Of the Doctors weak argument against one
satisfying for another. Of his new Divinity, that the habit of sin is sin. Of
his worse doctrine that all sins are mortal. Of his mistakes, and charging on
Catholics what they hold not. page 114 XVI. Divines prudently follow in
innumerable cases a probable Opinion. Of the Doctors exceptions against it. Of
his mistakes. page 119 XVII. How the Doctor wrongs both the Canon Law and
Catholic Authors. Of his quotations unworthily corrupted. page 123 XVIII. Of
attention necessary in prayer. One may pray that perfectly understands not the
words of prayer. The Doctor quotes amiss, and abuses Suarez. page 137 XIX. The
Doctor yet holds on in quoting Authors amiss. His errors are discovered. page
142 XX. Of recourse had by the living to the Saints in Heaven for temporal
Necessities. S. Austin warrants this practice. S. Gregory Nissen approves it.
Of Miracles done in our Age. page 147 XXI. Of Saints Canonized excepted against
by the Doctor. Of his untrue quotations. Of his mistake concerning the
multitude of Holy days. page 154 XXII. Adjuration of Devils approved by the
Ancient Church and Authority of Fathers. The Doctor cannot except against our
Catholic Exorcisms. page 158 XXIII. Objections against Exorcisms solved. Of
the Doctors mistaken quotations. page 166 XXIV. The blessing of Water proved by
Irrefragable Authority. Of miracles done by holy Water. No proof against it.
page 172 XXV. Of the Doctors dark Divinity. His doctrine concerning the
charging of Catholics with Idolatry, weighed by Mr. Thorndikes just Weights.
The Doctor is proved a Schismatic by the Measure Mr. Thorndike makes of one.
Of the Doctors want of Charity toward his Ancestors, and all Catholics. page
177 XXVI. The Doctors wrongful charge on Catholic Drs His weak exceptions
against Ambiguity in Speech. His causless Cavils. His faults and mistakes. page
184 XXVII. The Doctors strange way of arguing against the Exemption of
Clergymen. His unjust dealing with Emanuel Sa in charging him with this
saying, the Rebellion of a Clergy man against his Prince is not Treason. His
unworthy slighting the Seal of Confession. page 191 XXVIII. Of the Doctors
injurious Calumnies against Catholics, charging them with Horrid doctrines
against Kings and Monarchy which they disown and abominate. The known carriages
of Catholics toward Princes, compared with the rebellious practices of
Protestants. The Catholics have ever been found most Loyal and Obedient to
their Kings. Of his unjust quotations. page 196 XXIX. Of our Doctors failing in
History. Of his blaming Popes that are blamless. A word of his Conclusion. page
207
Advertisement.
THe Edition of the Dissuasive made use of in this Treatise is that Reprinted
at London for Thomas Johnson, at the Key in Paul's Churchyard, 1664. in Quarto.
There may seem a defect in this Treatise by reason of a mistake of the Printer,
who using two Presses, began with one in the later part of the Copy, and not
computing right how many sheets the fore part of the Copy would make, the
numbers affixed to the Pages follow not in due order, but after page 130.
immediately follows page 137. However the Reader may please to take notice that
the Treatise is in ^e.

Faults Escaped. Thus Amended. In the Epistle. emandandum Read emendandum.
unluckily read unlucky. PAge 8. Line 1. Tough REad Though. p. 9. l. 3.
Authority r. antiquity. p. 11. l. 33. blot out 5. p. 17. l. 19. their r. this.
p. 21. l. 33. Cluadius r. Claudius. p. 34. l. 10. living. l. 20. (...) l. 25.
(...) r. sining. r. (...). r. (...). p. 35. l. 7. Com. r. Tom. p. 42. l. 25.
doubty r. Doughty. p. 45. l. 5. p. 46. l. 28. rights bl. in. r. rites. p. 47.
l. 8. rights r. rites. p. 50. marg. Athanius. l. 15. adorabant r. Athanasius.
r. adorabat. p. 61. l. 11. delating r. relating. p. 65. l. 26. said? l. 29.
more? point. said, p. more; p. 67. l. 10. S. G. p. 68. l. 15. leaves r. S. C.
r. leave p. 68. l. 10. was? p. 70. l. 9. their. l. 24. damnable p. was. r.
there. r. damageable. p. 71. l. 27. primative. p. 74. l. 5. the. ibid. then r.
primat. r. thy. r. thou. p. 88. l. 27. fin. p. 95. l. 7. supar r. sin. r.
supra. p. 102. l. 17. thsy. p. 107. l. 29. another, r. they. po. Another? p.
127. l. 4. feceret. p. 138. l. 18. even. r. secerit. r. ever. p. 141. l. ult.
68. p. 162. l. 30. increduty. r. 67. r. incredulity p. 171. l. 15. saying.
(...). l. 3. unhollow. p. saying? r. unhallow p. 174. l. 24. raging. r.
rageing. p. 209. l. 19. inandita r. inaudita.


