A PRACTICAL COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION Upon the PENTATEUCH; VIZ. These five
Books of MOSES GENESIS, EXODUS, LEVITICUS, NUMBERS, DEUTERONOMY.

Wherein The Text of every Chapter is Practically expounded, according to the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church, in a way not usually trod by COMMENTATORS;
and wholly applied to the Life and Salvation of Christians.

By Ab. Wright; sometime Fellow of St. John's College in OXFORD.

LONDON, Printed by G. Dawson, for The. Johnson, at the Golden-Key in St.
Pauls-Church-Yard. 1662.

TO THE Right Honorable The Lord Chief Justice of his Majesty's Court of
King's Bench; The Lord Chief Justice of his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas; The
Lord Chief Baron of his Majesty's Court of Exchequer; And the rest of the
Honorable Justices of the said several COURTS.
Right Honorable,
IT is not the weight and excellency of what is here presented that may plead
for so Noble a Patronage as your Lordships is: it is the Subject, not the Work;
the Text, and not the Comment that deserves both your Protection and Perusal.
For, my Lords, you have here Moses, that Grand Legislator of the Old Testament,
dedicated to you that are the reverend Judges under the New. His Laws have been
the Magna Charta of the whole World; and this small Pentateuch has proved the
groundwork for the Pandects of all Nations to build upon. In this respect
therefore, it may claim a kind of propriety and right to your Honorable
Patronage, and take the presumption to shelter it self under your grave long
Robes. Here indeed are no Controversies stated, no Law-cases judged and
determined: My Sole design and endeavors have been to make our great Lawgiver
Moses altogether Practical, and wholly applicable to the Life and Conversation
of Christians. In these sheets then you have described those Ancient Patriarcks
of Gods Church, who were also Aeconomical Judges, and so not unfitting guids
for your Honors to follow, where their steps have been straight and upright;
nay their very slips and deviations may serve to make us stand more firm, and
our treadings more steady and settled in the ways of Godliness, and Iourny
toward Heaven. But if your Lordships had rather walk by Rule than Example,
here is that Moral everlasting Rule of God himself in the Book of Exodus to
direct you: and withal that you may see how proper and convenient even a
Ceremonial Law is for Gods Church, you have a whole Book of it in Leviticus;
and this also decreed and settled after those necessary Acts of the Ten
Commandments: as if the very Moral Law it self had not been curb sufficient to
keep in a Rebellious People without some binding Ceremonies. And here, my
Lords, I must needs confess upon the sad experience of Schism under both
Testaments; that all those Laws Moral and Ceremonial have not been powerful
enough to settle the Peace of Gods Church: something was wanting to the Jews,
and is at this day to us, which under God is only able to produce that great
and glorious Work; and that is a General Council. This General Council, my
Lords, has ever been the most approved successful way of the Catholic Church
to compose her differences; and it is this also that will prevent the ruin of
our own miserably divided National Church, and frustrate the design of that
Politic Aphorism of some, that the Church of England must be ruined by the
same way that it was reformed; for (say they) it was reformed by Schism, and
it must be ruined by Schism. Now to prevent this ruin contrived by Sectaries,
I know not any way more Prudential, more blessed by God, than a General
Council; to procure this, that every Peaceful Christian (and such are your
Honors) may join the strongest Forces of his Endeavors, shall be the daily
Prayers of,

My Lords, Your most devoted Servant in all Church-Offices, Ab. Wright.

A PRACTICAL COMMENTARY UPON THE FIRST BOOK OF MOSES CALLED GENESIS.
CHAP. I.
Verse 1. THere was a Time (or something like to that) before the beginning of
Time, when God did not work, and yet was not idle. For though we grant that
there was no External work of the Godhead until the making of the World, yet
can there be no necessary illation of Idleness in the Deity: seeing it might
have (as indeed it had) actions immanent, included within the circle of the
Trinity. Just so ought it to be with every Christian, who though he does not
always perform the outward actions of Religion, yet he may always be employed
within himself in some practice of Christianity: holy Thoughts, religious
Meditations, mental Prayer, faithful Vows and Resolutions are those inward
immanent operations of a Christian, whereby he may imitate his Creator in not
working, and yet not being idle. But then when he does begin to express himself
in some outward action, let him here also follow the example of his Maker: and
whereas it is said, in the Beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth,
first the Heaven, and then the Earth; so et our actions respect chiefly
Heavenly matters, in the first place let us exercise our selves in those things
that are above; and when from those we descend to things below, let even those
Terrestrial affairs look upwards, and be fixed and terminated in Heaven: and
let all this be done by way of Creation too; let our Gifts, and Graces, and
Endowments be acknowledged to arise from nothing in our selves, and let every
faculty of our Souls be subject to Gods Will as the Creation was to his
Command, for he spoke the word and they were made: so when God speaks let us
hear, and let our will be actuated, and formed, and regulated by his voice, as
the whole World was by his Word.

Verse 2. The word (Ferebatur) in the vulgar Latin, in the English (moved)
denotes both motion and rest, beginnings, and ways, and ends. We may best
consider the motion, the stirring of the Holy Ghost in zeal, and the rest of
the Holy Ghost in moderation. If we be without zeal, we have not the motion, if
we be without moderation we have not the rest, the peace of the Holy Ghost: he
moved and he rested upon the Waters in the Creation (as the word Incubabat does
imply;) he came and tarried still upon Christ in his Baptism. He moves us to a
zeal of laying hold of the means of Salvation which God offers us in the
Church, and he settles us in a peaceful Conscience, that by having well used
those means, we are made his Children. A holy hunger and thirst of the Word and
Sacraments, a remorse and compunction for former sins, a zeal to promote the
cause and glory of God by word and deed, this is the motion of the Holy Ghost;
and then to content my self with Gods measure of temporal blessings, and for
spiritual, that I do serve God faithfully in that Calling which I lawfully
profess, as far as that Calling will admit; this peace of Conscience, this
acquiescence of having done that that belongs unto me, this is the Rest of the
Holy Ghost of the Spirit of God.

Verse 3. In the first the old Creation, God the Father said, Fiat lux, let
there be light in this greater World; in the Second the New Creation or
Regeneration of Man, God the Holy Ghost said, Fiat cognitio Dei in anima
hominis; let there be the knowledge of God in the mind of man, of man this
lesser world. God the Father said, Fiat Firmamentum, let there be a Firmament;
God the Holy Ghost said, Firmetur volunt as in bono, let the will of Man be
confirmed in that which is good. God the Father said, let the Waters be
gathered together in one place; God the Holy Ghost said, let many graces be
united in one soul. God the Father said, Fiant luminaria in Coelo, let there be
lights in Heaven; God the Holy Ghost says, let the lights of Faith, Hope, and
Charity be fixed in a believing Soul. God the Father said, Fiant volatilia, let
there be flying Fouls; God the Holy Ghost says, let there be religious
Meditations in the mind of man soaring upward. And thus in every thing the work
of our spiritual Creation is answerable to the Work of our temporal in the
beginning of the World, and the operations of the Third Person in the blessed
Trinity upon our Souls now are but as so many parallel Lines drawn from the
actions of the First Person of the same blessed Trinity upon our bodies then.

Verse 10. In this and several other Verses of this Chapter it is said, that at
the days end, God looked upon the whole that he had made, and he saw that it
was good, and at the end of the week taking a view of all his works together,
he saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was very good, Genesis 1. 31.
which shows, that after God had done his Works, he did reflect upon them, and
considered the quality and the condition of them. In imitation hereof Wise men
do wish us, that at every days end we should reflect upon our Works, and take
a view of what we have done that day, and at the Weeks end take an account of
all our doings for that space of time, and fo further as further occasion shall
require. And this enquiry or account taking of our Works, they call the
examination of our Souls or Consciences. And surely if we did observe this
rule, though we could not find our Works, as God did his Works, to be good, and
very good, but rather naught, and very naught, yet by this searching into our
Works we may without all doubt make our Works for the future much better than
they are for the present.

Verse 16. God here calls the Sun and the Moon two great Lights, because,
though there be greater in the Firmament, they appear greatest to us: those
Works of ours are greatest in the sight of God that are greatest in the sight
of men, that are most beneficial, most exemplary, and conduce most to the
moving of others to glorify God.

Verse 26. In other passages of the Creation we find a kind of commanding
Dialect with a Fiat lux, and a producat terra, let there be light, let the
earth bring forth; but in this of Adam we meet with words more particular of
deliberation and advice, Let us make man. Man a Creature of those exquisite
dimensions for matter of body, of these supernatural endowments of Soul, that
now omnipotency bethinks it self, and will consult; the privy counsel of
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost is required to the moulding and polishing of this
glorious piece; no doubt something of wonder was in projecting when a complete
Deity was thus studying its perfection; something that should border upon
everlastingness, when the finger of God was so choicely industrious: and lo
what it produced, Man the masterpiece of his design and workmanship, the great
miracle and monument of Nature, the abstract, and model, and brief story of the
Universe, the Analysis and Resolution of the greater world into the less,
having little to divide him from a Deity, but that one part of him was mortal,
and that not created so, but occasioned, miserably occasioned by disobedience.

Verse 27. When God had created all the other species of the Creation, it is
still said as the complement and perfection of each, And God saw that it was
good; but here when Man was created, there is no such Eulogy, no such
acclamation; and why? because there is no Creature but Man, that degenerates
willingly from his natural dignity: these degrees of goodness which God
imprinted in them at first, they preserve still: as God saw they were good
then, so he may see they are good still; they have kept their Talent, they have
neither bought nor sold, they have not gained nor lost; they are not departed
from their Native and Natural dignity by any thing that they have done: but of
Man it seems God was distrustful from the beginning; he did not pronounce upon
Man's Creation (as he did upon the other Creatures) that he was good; because
his goodness was a contingent thing, and consisted in the future use of his
free will.

Verse 28. In the former Verse it is said, that God created them Male and
Female, not both Male, nor both Female, but one Male, the other Female, as if
purposely for the propagation of Children; and therefore when he had created
them so, he said unto them in this Verse, Increase and multiply, bring forth
Children as other Creatures bring forth their Kind. Nor was this all the
blessing bestowed upon Man at his Creation, but God has here also joined Man
in Commission with himself in the word, Dominamini, when he gave Man power to
possess the Earth, and subdue the Creatures, and exercise sovereignty and
dominion over them. And further, God has made Man so equal to himself, as not
only to have a soul endless and immortal as God himself, but to have a body
that shall put on incorruption and immortality too, which he has given to none
of the Angels; insomuch that Man is higher than the Angels, who want that glory
that he shall have in his body.

CHAP. II.
Verse 7. AS when Man was nothing but Earth, nothing but a body, he lay flat
upon the Earth, his mouth kissed the Earth, his hands embraced, his eyes
respected the Earth, and then God breathed the breath of Life into him, and
that raised him so far from the Earth, as that only one part of his body (the
soles of his feet) touches it, nd yet Man so raised by God, by Sin fell lower
to the Earth again than before, from the face of the Earth, to the Womb, to the
Bowels, to the Grave; so God finding the whole Man as low as he found Adams
body, then fallen in Original Sin, yet erects us by a new breath of Life in the
Sacrament of Baptism, and yet we fall lower than before we were raised, from
Original into Actual, into Habitual Sins, so low as that we think we need not a
Resurrection; and this is a wonderful, this is a fearful Fall.

Verse 8. Every Earth was not fit for Adam, but a Garden, a Paradise: what
excellent pleasures and rare varieties have men found in Gardens planted by the
hands of men? and yet all the World of men cannot make one twigg, or leaf, or
spire of grass: when he that made the matter undertakes the fashion, how must
it needs be beyond our capacity excellent? No Herb, no Tree, no Flower was
wanting there that might be for ornament or use, whether for sight, or for
sent, or for taste: the bounty of God wrought further than to necessity, even
to comfort and recreation. Why are we niggardly to our selves when God is
liberal? but for all this, if God had not there conversed with man, no
abundance could have made him blessed.

Verse 9. The Tree of Life was a real Tree in Paradise, but it was not able to
give immortality: for no corruptible food can make the body incorruptible; and
if it could have given immortality, it must have had a power to preserve from
Sin, for by sinning Man became mortal; therefore it was called, The Tree of
Life, not effective, but significative, as a sign of true immortality which
Adam should have received of God if he had continued in obedience; and so also
was that other Tree called, The Tree of Knowledge, of Good and Evil, not
because it gave Knowledge, but was a Seal unto them of their miserable
Knowledge which they should get by the experience of their Transgression, which
is called, a Practical Knowledge. And yet here by the way, though God forbad
Man to eat of the Tree of Knowledge, yet not of the Tree of Life, to show that
he desired we should be Saints, not Rabbis and Doctors.

Verse 15. That which was man's Storehouse was also his Workhouse, his
pleasure was his task: Paradise served not only to feed his senses, but to
exercise his hands. If happiness had consisted in doing nothing, man had not
been employed; all his delights could not have made him happy in an idle life;
Man therefore is no sooner made than he is set to work: neither greatness nor
perfection can privilege a folded hand; he must labor because he was happy;
how much more we that we may be so? this first labor of his was as without
necessity, so without pains, without weariness; how much more cheerfully we go
about our businesses, so much nearer we come to our Paradise.

Verse 17. Here is a double comfort from these words to the Children of God;
the first consists in this, in that it was the Lord of Life that first named
death, Morte morieris, says God, thou shall dye the death. I do the less fear
and abhor Death, because I find it in his mouth; even a Malediction has a
sweetness iu Gods mouth: for there is a blessing wrapped up in it, a Mercy in
every Correction, a Resurrection upon every Death; from whence issues the other
spiritual comfort, that as God did cast upon the unrepentant sinner two Deaths
in the Text, a temporal, and a Spiritual Death; so has he breathed into us two
lives: for so as the word for Death is doubled, Morte morieris, thou shall dye
the Death, so the word for Life is expressed in the plural at the seventh Verse
of this Chapter, Chaim, vitarum, God breathed into his Nostrils the breath of
Lives of diverse lives: though our Natural life were no life but a continual
dying, yet we have two Lives besides that, an eternal life reserved for Heaven,
but yet an Heavenly Life too a spiritual Life even in this World.

Verse 18. One cause of Marriage is to avoid the inconvenience of Solitariness,
signified in these words, It is not good for Man to be alone: as if he had
said, this Life would be miserable and irksome to Man, if the Lord had not
given him a Wife to bear a share in his troubles and afflictions. Now if it be
not good for Man to be alone, then is it good for him to have a Companion; and
therefore as God created a pair of all other Kinds, so also of this. And this
was that help in the Text; in which we see that God did provide an help for Man
before he saw his own want, and while Adam slept and thought nothing, God was
working and laying out for his good, and preparing him an Helper. Showing that
Man is stronger by his Wife: for as God has knit the bones and sinews together
for the strengthening of Man's body, so has he knit Man and Woman together for
the strengthening of their Life, because two are firmer than one.

Verse 20. As Adam gave every Creature the Name according as he saw the Nature
thereof to be; so God gives every man reward or punishment, the Name of a Saint
or Devil in his purpose, as he sees him a good or a bad user of his graces.
When I shall come to the sight of the Book of Life, and the Records of Heaven;
amongst the Reprobate I shall never see the Name of Cain alone, but Cain with
his addition, Cain that killed his Brother; not Iuda's Name alone, but Judas
with his addition, Judas that betrayed his Master. God did not begin with a
Morte moriendum, some Body must dye, and therefore I will make some Body to
kill; but God came to a Morte morieris, yet thou art alive, and may live, but
if thou will rebel thou must dye.

Verse 21. This Sleep that man was cast into while his Wife was created, does
teach us that our Affections, our Lusts and Concupiscences should sleep while
we go about this Action, the choice of a Wife; for as the Man slept while his
Wife wa^ making, so our flesh should sleep while our Wife is choosing: lest as
the love of Venison wone Isaac to bless one for the other, so the love of
Gentry, or Riches, or Beauty should make us take one for the other.

Verse 22. Woman was not made of the head, and therefore must not be the head,
nor yet of the foot of man, and therefore must not be set at his foot; but the
man must set her at his heart, near the place from whence she came. She which
should lie in his bosom, was made in his bosom, and should be as close to him
as the Rib of which she was fashioned.

Verse 25. Comparatively, Adam was better than all the world beside, and yet we
find no act of pride in Adam when he was alone. When there was none in the
world but himself and his Wife, who was not another, but himself, though they
were both naked, they were neither of them ashamed. Soliture is not the scene
of pride; the danger of pride is in company when we meet to look upon one
another. Thus in Eve, her first act was an act of Pride, a harkening to that
voice of the Serpent, Ye shall be as gods. As soon as there were more than
themselves there was pride. How many have we known that have been content all
the week at home alone with their worky-day-faces as well as with their
worky-day-cloaths, and yet on Sundaies when they come to Church and appear in
company, will mend both, their faces as well as their clothes.

CHAP. III.
Verse 5. THE first Sin that ever was, was an ascending, a climing too high.
When the purest understandings of all the Angels fell by their ascending; when
Lucifer was tumbled down by his Similis ero altissimo, I will be like the most
high; then the Devil tried upon them, who were next to the Angels in dignity,
upon man how that clambring would work upon him, he presents to man the same
ladder, he infuses into man the same ambition; and as he fell with a Similis
ero altissimo, I will be like the most high, so he overthrew man with an Eritis
sicut Dii, ye shall be like gods. It seems this Fall has broke the neck of
man's ambition, and now we dare not be so like God as we should be; ever since
this Fall man is so far from affecting higher places than his Nature is capable
of, that he is still grovelling on the ground; and participates and imitates,
and expresses more of the nature of the beast, than his own. Fond man that is
thus cheated of an assurance of Immortality, by a false persuasion that he
shall be immortal: this Eritis sicut dii has damned all. The Serpent persuades
him if he does but taste, he shall be as God, when he has tasted finds himself
worse than a man, a very beast; being thus at once fooled out of his
Everlastingness, and the favor of his Maker.

Verse 7. Till man had sinned his eyes wereshut, but afterward he sees the
greatness of his sin as David did; and yet for all this he was more ashamed of
his nakedness than of his sin: and therefore he endeavors by figg-leav'd
aprons to cover his nakedness; but we read of no preparation that was made to
hide and take away the deformity of his sin: Thus many fear more to offend
because of public shame, than for any conscience of sin, as Cain rather
grieved that he was made a vagabond, than that he killed his Brother.

Verse 10. How would he that were come abroad at midnight to do a mischief
sneak away if he saw the Watch? what a damp must it necessarily cast upon any
sinner in the nearest approach of his sin if he can see God. See him before
thou sinnest, then he looks lovingly: after the sin, remember how Adam would
have sain hid himself from God: he that goes one step out of Gods sight is
loath to come into it again. That therefore thou may begin thy Heaven here,
put thy self in the sight of God, put God in thy sight in every particular
action. In all our senses, in all our faculties we may see God if we will; and
therefore Saint Augustine in his Twentieth Chapter de moribus Ecclesiae, has
collected places of Scripture where every one of our senses is called a seeing;
there is a Gustate and videte, and audite, and palpate, tasting, and hearing,
and feeling, and all to this purpose are called seeing. Let us therefore make
use of our senses, and endeavor always to see God as he always sees us; God
sees us at midnight, he sees us then when we had rather he looked off: if we
see him so it is a blessed interview.

Verse 11. Wherefore is it, may some ask, that the Word of God more than any
other Book does still speak in this singular person, and in this familiar
person, still tu, and tibi, and te, Who told thee? and have thou eaten? and so
in other places, thou must love God, God speaks to thee. Surely the Scripture
phrase is as ceremonial, and as observant of distance as any, and yet full of
this familiar word to, thou, and thine. You are to know then, that in the
Scripture God either speaks to the Church his Spouse, and to his Children, and
so he may be bold and familiar with them; or else he speaks so as that he would
be thought by thee to speak singularly to thy Soul in particular: and therefore
when thou hear his mercies distributed in that particular, and that familiar
phrase Thou and Thee, and thou know not whether he speak to any other in the
Congregation or no, be sure that he speaks to thee: but if thou can not find
that he means thee, but think that he speaks rather to some other whose
Faith and good Life thou preferrest before thine own; Do but begin to think now
of the blessedness of that man to whom thou think he speaks, and say to God
with thy Savior, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me; why art thou gone
to the other side: or why to the next on my right or my left hand, and left out
me? why speak thou not comfortably to my Soul? and he will leave the ninety
nine for thee, and thou shall find such a weight and burden, and load of his
love upon thee, as thou shall be fain almost to say with Peter, Exi a me
Domine, O Lord go farther from me, i. e. thou shall see such an obligation of
mercy laid upon thee as puts thee beyond all possibility of comprehension, much
more of retribution, or of due and competent Thanksgiving.

Verse 12. When Adam said by way of alienation, and transferring his fault, the
Woman whom thou gave me, and the Woman said, The Serpent deceived me: God
took this by way of information to find out the principal, but not by way of
extenuation or alleviation of their faults. Every Adam eats with as much sweat
of his brows, and every Eve brings forth her children with as much pain in her
Travail as if there had been no Serpent in the case. If a man sin against God,
who shall plead for him? if a man lay his sins upon the Serpent, upon the Devil
it is no plea, but if he lay them upon God, it is blasphemy.

Verse 15. Here was a heavy war denounced in this Inimicitias ponam, when God
raised a war between the Devil and us: for if we could consider God to stand
Neutral in that war, and meddle with neither side, yet were we nigh a desperate
case, to be put to fight against powers, and principalities, against the Devil:
how much more when God the Lord of Hosts is the Lord of that Host too? when God
presses the Devil, and makes the Devil his Soldier to fight his battles, and
directs his arrows and his bullets, and makes his approaches and attempts
effectual upon us. It is a strange war where there are not two sides, and yet
that is our case: for God uses the Devil against us, and the Devil uses us
against one another, nay he uses every one of us against our selves; so that
God, and the Devil, and we are all in one Army, and all for our destruction.

Verse 20. Saint Augustine proposes to himself a wonder, why the first Woman
was called at first and in her best state but Isha, Virago, which was a Name of
diminution as she was taken from the man, (for Isha is but a she-man,) and when
in her worse state, when she had sinned she was called, Eva Matter viventium,
the Mother of all living; she had a better name in her worst estate; but this
was not in respect of her sin says that Father, but in respect of her
punishment: now that she was become mortal by a sentence of death pronounced
upon her, and knew that she must dye, and resolve to dust, now says he there
was no danger in her of growing proud by any glorious title, affliction had
tamed her, and rectified her now; and thus does God sometimes bit and bridle us
by afflictions lest we be too proud.

Verse 24. See the unhappiness of man! a little forbidden fruit from the hand
of a frail Creature must dis-inherit us of eternal life, and man must be thrust
out of doors, deprived of his everlasting habitation for two pretty toys, an
Apple, and a Woman. Howsoever says Chrysostom, Death hung not on the Fruit,
but the Tempter; lamentable felicity, which at the height was but conditionary,
and then fatal.

CHAP. IV.
Verse 5. What was the occasion of this capital malice, and mortal wrath in
Cain? Abels Sacrifice was accepted, what was this to Cain? Cains was rejected,
what could Abel remedy this? O envy the corrosive of all ill minds, and the
root of all desperate actions; the same cause that moved Satan to tempt the
first man to destroy himself and his posterity, the same moves the Second man
to destroy the Third. It should have been Cain's joy to see his Brother
accepted; it should have been his sorrow to see that himself had deserved a
rejection; his Brothers example should have excited and directed him: could
Abel have stayed Gods fire from descending? or should he (if he could) reject
Gods acceptance, and displease his Maker to content a Brother? was Cain ever
the farther from a blessing because his Brother obtained mercy? How proud and
foolish is malice, which grows thus mad for no other cause, but because God or
Abel is not less good? It has been an old and happy danger to be holy:
indifferent actions must be careful to avoid offense; but I care not what
Devil, or what Cain be angry that I do good or receive it.

Verse 8. Now might Adam see the image of himself in Cain, for after his own
image begot he him; Adam slew his posterity, Cain his Brother: We are too like
one another, in that we are unlike to God; however, one would have thought that
these being Brethren, and but two Brethren, the beams of their affection should
have been so much the hotter, because they reflect mutually in a right line
upon each other; and yet behold here are but two Brothers in the world, and one
is the Butcher of the other. Who can wonder at dissentions amongst thousands of
Brethren, thousands of Christians, when he sees so deadly opposition between
two, and these the first roots of Brotherhood? who can hope to live plausibly
and securely among so many Cains, when he sees one Cain the death of one Abel?

Verse 9. No sooner does Abels blood speak to God, than God speaks to Cain:
there is no wicked man to whom God speaks not, if not to his ear, yet to his
heart: what speech was this? not an accusation, yet such an enquiry as would
infer an accusation. God loves to have a sinner accuse himself, and therefore
has he set his Deputy in the breast of man: neither does God love this more
then nature abhors it: Cain answers stubbornly, the very name of Abel wounds
him no less then his hand had wounded Abel. Consciences that are without
remorse are not without horror: wickedness makes men desperate, the murderer
is angry with God, as of late for accepting his Brothers oblation, so now for
listening to his blood.

Verse 11. There is a holy league offensive and defensive betwixt God and his
children: God shall not only protect us from others, but he shall fight for us
against them, our enemies are his enemies: Nolite tangere Christos meos, says
God, of all holy people, you were as good touch me, as touch any of them. Thus
when Cain had trespassed against God himself in this, that he would bind God to
an acceptance of his Sacrifice, God comes no farther for that, then to, Why
do thou thus? but in his murder committed upon his Brother (who was a child
of God) God proceeds so much farther as to say, Here now art thou cursed from
the Earth. When Jeroboam suffered idolatry, God let him alone, that concerned
but God himself, but when Jeroboam stretched forth his hand to lay hold on the
Prophet, his hand withered.

Verse 13. And what was the greatness of this punishment? this: From thy face
shall I be hid. It is not that God would not look graciously upon him, but that
God would not look at all upon him. Infinitely desperate are the effects of
Gods putting away a soul. And yet notwithstanding this, there does this comfort
arise from the Text, that an imputation of sin arising from our selves, may be
accompanied with error and mistaking, and we may impute that to our selves
which God does not impute. For this word which some translate here Iniquity, is
oftentimes in Scripture used for punishment as well as for sin, and so
indifferently for both, as that if we compare Translation with Translation, and
Exposition with Exposition, it will be hard for us to say, whether it can be
said, my iniquity is greater then can be pardoned, or my punishment is greater
then I can bear; and therefore we must have a care how we mis-impute Gods anger
to our selves, arising out of his punishments, his corrections and inflictions
upon us; that because we have crosses in the world, we cannot believe that we
stand well in the sight of God.

Verse 14. He that cares not for the act of his sin, shall care for the smart
of his punishment; for see this miscreant, which had neither grace to avoid his
sin, nor to confess it; now that he is convinced of sin, and cursed for it, how
he howleth, how he exclaimeth, the damned are weary of their torments, but in
vain. How great a madness is it to complain too late? he that would not keep
his Brother, is cast out from the protection of God; he that feared not to kill
his Brother, fears now that whosoever meets him will kill him; the troubled
conscience projecteth fearful things, and sin makes even cruel men cowardly.
How bitter is the end of sin, yea without end; still Cain finds that he had
killed himself more then his Brother. We should never sin if our foresight
were but as good as our sense; the issue of sin would appear a thousand times
more horrible then the act is pleasant.

Verse 15. Some think this mark was a horrible trembling and shaking of his
whole body, as the Septuagint translate who, For thou shall be a vagabond,
read, Thou shall sigh and tremble: certainly whatever it was, it was a sign of
Gods wrath, that others seeing this might fear to commit the like, and that he
might have the greater punishment in prolonging so wicked and miserable a life.

Verse 16. It appears by this that Cain stood excommunicate. For otherwise how
could Cain go out from God who was every where: so that this presence of the
Lord signifies a peculiar place dedicated to God; as the Ark, the Temple were
usually called in Scripture, The face of the Lord, Psalm 43. Exodus 23. So Jonas
fled from the presence of the Lord, i. e. from the place where the Lord had
spoken to him. This then should strike a terror into Christians, and cause them
to live in the fear of God, and in an awful respect of his Ministers, who have
the power delegated to them from God to drive obstinate sinners from his
presence, and are as that Angel with a flaming Sword to keep them out of
Paradise, and deprive them of the joys and blessedness of the life to come.

Verse 20. If the author, the inventor of any thing useful for this life be
called the Father of that invention by the Holy Ghost himself, as here Iabal
was the Father of such as dwelt in Tents; and Tabal his Brother the Father of
Music; how absolutely is God our Father, who invented us, made us, found us
out in the depth and darkness of nothing at all? he is Father, and Father of
Lights, of all kinds of Lights. He is Lux lucisica, (as Saint Augustine
expresses it) the Light from which all the Lights which we have of Nature, or
Grace, or Glory have their emanation.

CHAP. V.
Verse 1. THe Soul of man as it came from God, so it is like God: as he, so it,
is one immaterial, immortal, understanding Spirit, distinguished into three
powers, which all make up one spirit. So thou the wise Creator of all things
would have some things to resemble their Creator; the other creatures are
all body, man is body and spirit; the Angels are all spirit, not without a
spiritual composition; thou art alone after thine own manner Simple, Glorious,
Infinite. No creature can be like thee in thy proper being, because it is a
creature. How should our finite weak compounded nature give any perfect
resemblance of thine? yet of all visible creatures, thou vouchsafest man the
nearest correspondence to thee; not so much in the natural Faculties, as in
those divine Graces wherewith thou beautifiest his soul; how then should our
Souls rise up to thee, and fix themselves in their thoughts upon thee? how
should they long to return back to the Fountain of their Being, and author of
their being glorious; that so we may redeem what we have lost, recover in thee
what we have lost in our selves.

Verse 3. Adam begetting a Son in his own likeness, is not to be understood in
the shape and image of his body; but hereby is signified that original
corruption which is descended unto Adams posterity by natural propagation,
which is expressed in the birth of Seth, because it might appear that even the
Righteous Seed by nature are subject to this depravation.

Verse 22. In that Enoch first walked with God on earth, before he walked with
him in Heaven, is showed, that we must first seek Gods glory on earth, before
we can be admitted into his Everlasting glory.

Verse 24. If you will sit at the right hand of God hereafter, you must walk
with God here: so Abraham, so Enoch walked with God, and God took him. God
knows, God takes not every man that dies: God says to the rich secure man,
This night they shall fetch away thy soul, but he does not tell him who; that
therefore you may be no strangers to God then, see him now, and remember that
his last Judgment is expressed in that word, Nescio vos, I know you not: not
to be known by God is damnation; and God knows no man hereafter, with whom he
was not acquainted here.

Verse 29. Forasmuch as Lamech said of his Son Noah, This same shall comfort us
concerning our work etc. it appears that the faithful then looked for a
Comforter that should de^iver them from the Curse: for of this Comforter Noah
was a figure, Heb. 11. 7. and the Ark was a type of Baptism, 1 Pet. 3. 21.

Verse 32. Sem is here first named, though Iaphet was first born, as being
first in dignity, though not in birth; because from him, and not from Iaphet
our blessed Savior descended in a direct line. Now any relation to Christ
enableth either place or person. For let the person be never so mean if God
please to claim an interest in him, a poor Fisherman upon his Embassy is more
honorable then the Ambassador of the greatest Monarch in the world: and so
likewise for any place in the world, be it never so mean and contemptible, yet
if God please to send his Ministers to preach the Gospel, and the power
thereof, in such places they become glorious to the whole world. Thus it was
not the great circumference and populousness of Nineveh, but the preaching of
Jonah there that made it known to after-ages, nor was it the City, but the
Temple of Jerusalem, and the presence of Christ in that Temple that made it the
glory of the whole earth. It is the Christian Religion only whose Fame shall
last for ever, that is able to make both Men and Towns as famous and as eternal
as it self.

CHAP. VI.
Verse 2. THe world was grown so foul with sin, that God saw it was time to
wash it with a flood; if there had not been so deep a deluge of sin, there had
been none of the waters; from whence then was this superfluity of iniquity?
whence, but from the unequal yoke with Infidels? these marriages did not beget
men so much as wickedness; from hence religious Husbands both lost their piety,
and gained a rebellious and godless generation. Thus that which was the first
occasion of sin, was the occasion of the increase of sin: a Woman seduced Adam,
Women betray the Sons of God; the beauty of the Apple betrayed the Woman, the
beauty of these Women betrayed this holy Seed: Eve saw and lusted, so did they,
this also was a forbidden Fruit; they lusted, tasted, sinned, dyed; the most
sins begin at the eyes, by them commonly Satan creeps into the heart; that Soul
can never be at safety that has not covenanted with his eyes.

Verse 3. It is meant that God would no longer strive with them, in reproving
and admonishing them, which they regarded not; but if they amended not in short
time, within the set space, he would certainly destroy them, and therefore it
was supposed that the Ark was a building 120 years, to the end they might
repent: enough to justify Gods mercy in forbearing, and his Justice in
executing his Judgments upon sinners.

Verse 12. Man is every Creature; as it is said here, all flesh has corrupted
his ways upon the earth, though this corruption were but in man, and other
Creatures were flesh as well as man: but man is every creature, because as
Gregory says, Omnis creaturae differentia in homine, all the properties and
qualities of all other creatures, how remote and distant, how contrary soever
in themselves, yet they all meet in man. In man if he be a flatterer, you shall
find the grovelling and crawling of the Snake; and in man if he be ambitious,
you shall find the high flight and piercing of the Eagle; in a voluptuous
sensual man you shall find the earthliness of the Hogg; and in a licentious man
the intemperance and distemper of the Goat; ever lustful, and ever in a Fever;
ever in sickness contracted by that sin, and yet ever in a desire to proceed in
that sin: and thus man is every creature, and all flesh.

Verse 14. That God might approve his mercies to the very wicked, he gives them
120 years respite of repenting, verse 3. and here in this verse he gives them a
faithful Teacher. It is an happy thing when he that teaches others is
righteous: Noah's hand taught them as much as his tongue, his business in
building the Ark was a real Sermon to the world, wherein at once were taught
Mercy and Life to the Believer, and to the Rebellious destruction.

Verse 18. Doubtless more hands went to this work of making the Ark than Noah
and his Children, and yet none were saved but they; many a one wrought upon the
Ark which yet was not saved in the Ark; our outward works cannot save us
without Faith; we may help to save others, and perish our selves: what a wonder
of mercy is this that we here see! one poor Family called out of a world, and
as it were eight grains of Corn fanned from a whole Barnful of Chaff: one
hypocrite was saved with the rest for Noah's sake; not one righteous man was
swept away for company: for these few was the earth preserved still under the
waters; and all kind of Creatures upon the waters, which else had been all
destroyed. Still the world stands for their sakes for whom it was preserved;
else fire should consume that which could not be cleansed by water.

CHAP. VII.
Verse 2. THe unclean Beasts God would have to live, the clean to multiply: and
therefore he sends to Noah seven of the clean, and of the unclean two: he knew
the one would annoy man with their multitude, the other would enrich him; those
things are worthy of most respect, which are of most use. But why seven? Surely
that God that Created seven days in the Week, and made one for himself, did
here preserve of seven clean Beasts, one for himself for Sacrifice: he gives us
Six for One in earthly things, that in spiritual we should be all for him.

Verse 9. This difference is strange: I see the savagest of all Creatures,
Lions, Tigers, Bears, by an instinct from God, come to seek the Ark, (as we see
Swine foreseeing a storm, run home crying for shelter) men I see not; Reason
once debauched, is worse than bruitishness: God has use even of these fierce
and cruel Beasts, and glory by them. Even they being Created for man, must live
by him, though to his punishment: How gently do they offer and submit
themselves to their Preserver? renewing that obeisance to this Repairer of the
World, which they before sin yielded to him that first stored the World. And
thus these savage Creatures went in says the rext to Noah, not to prey, but
fawn upon him. He that shut them into the Ark when they were entered, shut their
mouths also while they did enter. The Lions fawn upon Noah and Daniel: what
heart cannot the Maker of them mollify.

Verse 10. By this is shown the Lords patience: for Noah is warned seven days
before of the Floods coming, that by his preparation and entrance, others might
be warned: and whereas God might have destroyed the World at once, it was
increasing forty days, that the World seeing every day some perish, might at
length have turned to God. And the same was Ninevehs case, yet forty days and
Nineveh shall be destroyed. Our God is a gracious, merciful, and long-suffering
God; and never strikes but he gives warning, that sinners may prevent the blow,
by Repentance and Contrition. Before Nineveh shall be destroyed, a Prophet must
be sent to give notice of that destruction, and to teach them a way how to
avoid it; and in case they should prove dull scholars, here is forty days
given to learn the lesson. And as God dealt with this great City, and with the
whole World before the Deluge, to fore-warn them of his judgments and their
own ruin; so deals he likewise with particular men: to some he gives forty
days, to others forty months; nay, forty years to repent in; even a whole life
time is to some men but a continued warning of their final destruction; and yet
they like the old World, never believe it till they feel it, mock and jear at a
Deluge until they are overwhelmed with the Flood, and perish in their own
presumptuous imaginations. So hard a thing it is to persuade sinners to believe
that God is so just, or his Judgments so infallible, or their sins so
destructive, until the Flood come, and a second Deluge, a Deluge of Fire sweeps
them away, as that first of Waters did their unbeleeving forefathers.

Verse 11. It agrees with the nature of God who is goodness, That as all the
fountains of the great deep were broken up, and the windows of Heaven were
opened, and so came the Flood over all, so there should be diluvium spiritus, a
flowing out of the holy Ghost upon all; as he promises, Effundam, I will pour
it out upon all; and diluvium gentium, that all Nations shall flow up unto him.
For this spirit, spirat ubi vnlt, breaths where it pleases him; and though a
natural Wind cannot blow East and West, North and South together, this spirit
at once breaths upon the most contrary dispositions, upon the presuming, and
upon the dispairing sinner; and in an instant can denizon and naturalize that
soul that was an Alien to the Covenant, empale and in-lay that soul that was
bred upon the Common among the Gentiles, transform that soul which was a Goat
into a Sheep, unite that soul which was a lost Sheep to the Fold again, shine
upon that soul that sits in darkness and the shadow of death, and so melt and
pour out that soul that yet understands nothing of the divine nature, nor of
the Spirit of God, that it shall become partaker of the divine nature, and be
the same Spirit with God.

Verse 16. Now that Noah and all his Guests are entered, the Ark is shut, and
the windows of Heaven opened. God first provides for Noah before the Wicked are
destroyed: of whom, many no doubt, when they saw the violence of the waves
descending and ascending, according to Noah's prediction, came wading
middledeep unto the Ark, and importunately craved that admittance which they
once denied. But now as they formerly rejected God, so are they justly rejected
of God. Ere Vengeance begin, Repentance is seasonable; but if Judgment be once
gone out, we cry too late: while the Gospel sollicites us, the doors of the Ark
are open; if we neglect the time of Grace, in vain shall we seek it with tears:
God holds it no mercy to pity the obstinate.

Verse 18. The Faith of the Righteous cannot be so much derided, as their
success is magnified: How securely does Noah ride out this uproar of Heaven,
Earth, and Waters! He hears the pouring down of the Rain about his head, the
shreeking of Men, the roaring and bellowing of Beasts on both sides of him; the
raging and threats of the Waves under him; he saw the miserable shifts of the
distressed Unbeleevers; and in the mean time sits quietly in his dry cabin,
neither fearing nor feeling evil: he knew that he which owed the Waters would
steer him, and he who shut him in, would preserve him. How happy a thing is
Faith? What a quiet safety, what a Heavenly peace does it work in the Soul in
the midst of all the endeavors of evil?

Verse 20. There is no doubt but very many hoping to overrun their Judgment,
and climbing up to the highest Mountains, looked down upon the Waters with more
hope than fear: and now when they see their Hills become Islands, they get up
into the tallest Trees; where with paleness and horror, at once, they look for
death, and study to avoid it; whom the Waves over-take at last half-dead with
famine, and half with fear. So now from the tops of the Mountains they descry
the Ark floating upon the Waters, and behold with envy that which before they
beheld with scorn. By which we may see, that he flies in vain, whom God
pursues: and that there is no way to fly from his Judgments, but to fly to
his Mercy by Repenting.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse 1. GOds Providence is here manifest, that watches not only over man,
but every particular Beast likewise. Whereby man is taught to be like his
Creator, and to regard the life of his Beast, Prove. 12. Xenocrates is commended
by Aelian lib. 13. for succouring a Sparrow that flew to him pursued by an
Hawk, and after let her go, saying, Se supplicem non prodidisse, That he would
not betray the very Bird that flew to him for safeguard.

Verse 3. Now when God had fetched again all the life that he had given to his
unworthy Creatures, and reduced the World unto its first Form wherein Waters
were over the face of the Earth, it was time for a renovation of all things to
succeed this destruction. To have continued the Deluge long, had been to punish
Noah that was righteous. After forty days therefore the Heavens cleared up,
after 150 the Waters sink down: How soon is God weary of punishing, that is
never weary of blessing! Yet may not the Ark rest suddenly. If we did not stay
some while under Gods hand, we should not know how sweet his mercy is, and how
great our thankfulness should be.

Verse 7. God does not reveal all things to his best servants: Behold, he that
told Noah an hundred and twenty years before, what day he should go into the
Ark, yet fore-tells him not now in the Ark what day the Ark should rest upon
the hills, and he should go forth: Noah therefore sends out his Intelligencers,
the Raven, and the Dove, whose wings in that vaporous air might easily descry
further than his sight: the Raven of quick scent, of gross feed, of tough
constitution; no soul was so fit for discovery; the likeliest things always
succeed not. He neither will venture far into that solitary world for fear of
want, nor yet come into the Ark for love of liberty, but hovers about in
uncertainties. How many carnal minds fly out of the Ark of Gods Church, and
embrace the present world: rather choosing to feed upon the unsavory Carcasses
of sinful pleasures, than to be restrained within the strait lists of Christian
obedience.

Verse 9. How exactly does the Soul of every man resemble this Dove? That poor
innocent Creature after it was exposed to the wide World, was in perpetual
motion, no rest to be found until it returned to the Ark: And just so is the
condition of every man; so long as we are in the World, so long we are in a
restless condition; perpetual troubles and vexations; no rest to be found until
we return unto the Ark, unto the God that sent us forth: thither must we fly,
or be overwhelmed in the Deluge of the worlds vanities, and perish for ever.
Man's Soul is Gods Turtle, Created for God, and therefore can find no rest but
in God. It may flutter up and down in the World, fly from one trouble, from one
perplexity to another, but no peace, no rest to be found until it return unto
that God who commanded it forth upon his work and employment; which causes it
to take up the complaint of the Psalmist, Oh that I had the wings of a Dove,
then would I fly away and be at rest.

Verse 11. The Dove is sent forth, a Fowl both swift and simple. She like a
true Citizen of the Ark returns, and brings faithful notice of the continuance
of the Waters by her restless and empty return; by her Olive-leaf of the
abatement. How worthy are those Messengers to be welcome which with innocence
in their lives bring glad tidings of Peace and Salvation in their mouths.

Verse 16. Ambrose and some Hebrews note, That when Noah was bid to go into the
Ark, he and his Sons are joined together, and so his Wife and his Sons Wives
likewise, chap. 6. verse. 18. but here in their coming forth, He and his Wife,
his Sons and their Wives are coupled, to show that they lived a part in the
Ark, and accompanied not together; which is most probable, though not upon this
ground, but as he farther notes, Maeroris tempus er at non laetitiae, It was a
time of Mourning, and not of Mirth: and for that he knew the Deluge came
because of the intemperancy of the other world.

Verse 18. The Ark, though it was Noah's Fort against the Waters; yet it was his
Prison also: he was safe in it, but pent up: he that gave him life by it, now
thinks to give him liberty out of it. At this Noah rejoices and believes; yet
still he waits seven days more. It is not good to devour the favors of God
too greedily; but to take them in that we may digest them. O strong Faith of
Noah that was not weary of this delay. Some man would have so longed for the
open Air after so long closeness, that upon the first notice of safety he would
have uncovered and voided the Ark; Noah stays seven days e're he will open;
and well near two months e're he will forsake the Ark; and not then unless God
that commanded to enter, had bidden him depart. There is no action good without
Faith; no Faith without a word. Happy is that man which in all things
(neglecting the counsels of flesh and blood) depends upon the Commission of his
Maker.

Verse 20. No sooner is Noah come out of the Ark but he builds an Altar: not an
House to himself, but an Altar to the Lord. Our Faith will ever teach us to
prefer God to our selves: delayed thankfulness is not worthy acceptance; of
those few Creatures that are left God must have some, they are all his: yet his
goodness will have man know that it was he, for whose sake they were preserved.
It was a privilege to those very bruit Creatures that they were saved from the
Waters to be offered up in Fire unto God: What a favor is it to men to be
reserved from common destructions, to be sacrificed to their Maker, and
Redeemer?

Verse 21. God had accepted sacrifices before, but no sacrifice is called Odor
quietis; it is not said that God smelt a favor of Rest in any sacrifice but
that which Noah offered after he had been variously tossed and tumbled in the
long hulling of the Ark upon the Waters; and this was a sacrifice in which God
himself might rest himself. For God has a Sabbath in the Sabbath of his
Servants, a Fullness in their Fullness, a satisfaction when they are satisfied,
and is well pleased when they are so: and therefore the Lord said, That he will
not Curse the Earth again, (speaking not generally of all kind of Cursing the
Earth, but only of this particular Curse by Waters*) And whereas it is added for
a Reason, for the imagination of man's heart is evil; it is not meant that God
would spare the Earth, and Beasts, because man is subject to sin, but the
Promise is made specially for man: that being he is by nature subdued to sin,
he is to be pitied, and not for every offense, according to his deserts, to be
judged; for then the Lord should continually overflow the world: moreover,
where it is said, Genesis 6. 6. That the Lord would destroy the World, because the
imaginations of their hearts were evil: it may seem strange, that the same
cause should be here urged why he would not: therefore this is here added, to
show the original of this Mercy, not to proceed from man, but Gods own favor.

CHAP. IX.
Verse 1. THere is a lawful, nay a necessary desire of being better and better:
and that not only in spiritual things (for so every man is bound to be better
and better; better to day than yesterday, and too morrow than to day;) but even
in temporal things too there is a liberty given us; nay, there is a Law, an
Obligation laid upon us, To endeavor by industry in a lawful Calling, to mend
and improve, to enlarge our selves and spread even in worldly things. And
therefore when God delivers this Commandment the second time to Noah for the
repairation of the World, Increase and Multiply, (which is not only in the
multiplication of Children, but in the enlargement of Possessions too) he
accompanies it with this Reason in the second verse. The fear of you, and the
dread of you shall be upon all, and all are delivered into your hands; which
Reason can have no relation to the multiplying of Children, but to the
enlarging of Possessions. God planted Trees in Paradise in a good state at
first, at first with ripe fruits upon them: but Gods purpose was, That even
those Trees, though well then, should grow greater. God gives many men good
Estates from their Parents at first, yet Gods purpose is, That they should
increase those Estates. He that leaves no more than his Father left him, if the
fault be in himself, shall hardly make a good account of his Stewardship to
God; for he has but kept his Talent in a Napkin.

Verse 13. That little fire of Noah which he kindled in the former Chapter,
through the virtue of his Faith purged the World, and ascended up into those
heavens from which the Waters fell, and caused a glorious Rainbow to appear
therein for his security. And here behold a new and a second rest: first God
rested from making that World; now he rests from destroying it: even while we
cease not to offend, he ceases from a public revenge. His Word was enough, yet
withal he gives a sign, which may speak the truth of his Promise to the very
eyes of men: Thus he does still in his blessed Sacraments, which are as real
Words to the Soul. The Rainbow is the pledge of our safety, which even really
signifies the end of a shower. And further, the Rainbow having two special
Colors in it, one Coeruleus and exterior, which is waterish, is a sign the
World shall not any more be drowned; the other Rubeus, which may be a sign the
World shall be consumed with Fire. Thus all the signs of Gods institution are
proper and significant.

Verse 21. Who would think after all the favors that God had shown Noah, to
have found this Righteous man lying Drunken in his Tent? Who would think that
Wine should overthrow him that was preserved from the Waters? That he who
could not be tainted with the sinful examples of the former World, should begin
the example of a new sin of his own. What are we men if we be left to our
selves? While God upholds us, no tentation can move us; when he leaves us, no
tentation is too weak to overthrow us. Behold he, of whom God in an unclean
World had said, Thee only have I found Righteous, proves now unclean when the
World was purged. The Preacher of Righteousness unto the former age, the King,
Priest, and Prophet unto the World renewed, is the first that renewes the sins
of the World which he had reproved, and which he saw condemned for sin: Gods
best Children have no fence for sins of infirmity: which of the Saints have not
once done that, whereof they are ashamed?

Verse 22. Ungracious Cham saw his Fathers nakedness, and laughed at it: His
Fathers shame should have been his, and should have begot in him a secret
horror and dejection; How many graceless men make sport at the causes of their
Humiliation? Twice had Noah given him life; yet neither the Name of Father, and
Preserver, nor Age, nor Virtue could shield him from the contempt of his own. I
fee that even Gods Ark may nourish Monsters; some filthy Toads may lie under
the stones of the Temple. And further, Cham was not content only to be a
witness of this filthy sight; he goes on to be a proclaimer of it. Sin does ill
in the eye, but worse in the tongue: as all sin is a work of darkness, so it
should be buried in darkness. The report of sin is oft-times as ill as the
Commission; for it can never be blazoned without uncharitableness, seldom
without infection: Oh the unnatural and more than Chammish Impiety of those
Sons, which rejoice to publish the nakedness of their spiritual Parents, even
to their enemies.

Verse 23. Behold here how love covers sins; these good Sons are so far from
going forward to see their Fathers shame, that they go back-ward to hide it.
The Cloak is laid on both their shoulders, they both go back with equal paces,
and dare not so much as look back, lest they should unwillingly see the cause
of their shame; and will rather adventure to stumble at their Fathers Body,
than to see his nakedness. How did it grieve them to think that they who so
often had come to their Father with Reverence, must now in Reverence turn their
backs upon him; and that they must now cloth him in pity, who had so often
clothed them in love! And which adds more to their duty, they covered him and
said nothing. This modest sorrow is their praise, and our example: the Sins of
those we love and honor we must hear of with indignation, fearfully and
unwillingly believe, acknowledge with grief and shame, hide with honest
excuses, and bury in silence.

Verse 25. God preserves some men in Judgment; better had it been for Cham to
have perished in the Waters, than to live unto his Fathers Curse. And yet how
equal a regard is here both of Piety and disobedience? Because Cham sinned
against his Father, therefore he shall be plagued in his Children; Iaphet is
dutiful to his Father, and finds it in his posterity. Because Cham was an ill
son to his Father, therefore his sons shall be servants to his Brethren;
because Iaphet set his shoulders to Shems to bear the Cloak of shame, therefore
shall Iaphet dwell in the Tents of Shem, partaking with him in blessings as in
duty. When we do but what we ought, yet God is thankful to us, and rewards
that, which we should sin if we did not. Who could ever yet show me a man
rebelliously undutiful to his Parents that has prospered in himself and his
seed.

Verse 27. If thy Child prove undutiful and refractory, do for him as Noah did
here for Iaphet. Noah had given that son of his a great deal of good Counsel no
doubt, and had persuaded him to become a lively Member of Gods Church; but
knowing well to how little purpose all this would be without Gods working upon
his heart, he falls to Prayer, God persuade Japhet to dwell in the Tents of
Shem: As if he had said, I have advised and done my uttermost to persuade thee
my Son, but all this is but lost labor, unless God put in his helping hand;
now therefore, the good Lord persuade thee. Thus do thou for thy refractory
Child, desire God to persuade him, to convince him, to turn his heart, and thou
shall see that nothing shall stand in his way, but the work shall be
accomplished; if God undertake to mend thy Son, and make him good, all his ill
conditions shall not hinder it.

CHAP. X.
Verse 1. CHam is set in the midst between Shem and Iaphet; wherein is shadowed
the condition of the Church, that ungodly persons will ever be mingled among
the faithful. The purest Grain has some Chaff mixed with it, and the purest
and most sanctified Congregations, as well in Heaven as on Earth, have had
their mixture of Reprobates. There was a Judas in that glorious Synod of
Apostles, and a Lucifer even in Heaven its self. Thus still is the Church that
Moon in the Scripture; a glorious Body, but not without her spots.

Verse 10. Nimrod signifies a Rebel, and Babel confusion: to intimate, that
Rebellion evermore begins in Confusion, Confusion in the Church, and Confusion
in the State; in the one the Laws of God are disordered, in the other the Laws
of man; Babel is still the beginning of that Kingdom where a Nimrod is the
mighty man; and where a Nimrod is the mighty man, still the aim is at a
Kingdom, though the Kingdom prove a Kingdom of Confusion: Nimrod will be great,
though his own greatness distract and confound him. And thus it fares also with
every wicked man who is a rebel against God, the beginning of his Kingdom is a
Babel likewise; his understanding is distracted, his affections are disordered,
and all his actions are out of frame, a confusion possesses both the beginning,
and end of all his ways. And to this purpose was the Psalmists Prayer against
both these Nimrods; O my God, make them like unto a Wheel; let them turn round
in all their actions, let them never be fixed and settled in their courses, but
let a giddiness, a vertigo, pursue their Designs, and let both the beginning
and end of their Kingdom prove a Babel.

Verse 25. Eber (of whom came the Hebrews, or Israelites, Exodus 1. 15.) that he
might have before his eyes a perpetual monument of Gods displeasure against the
ambitious Babel builders, calls his Son Peleg, or Division; because in his
days was the Earth divided. It is good to write the remembrance of Gods worthy
works, whether of Mercy or Justice, upon the Names of our Children, to put us
in mind of those dispensations of God; for we need all helps, such is either
our dullness, or forgetfulness. Upon this account we of this Nation have been
very zealous in conferring such Names upon our Children at their Baptism, as
might put them in mind of some part of their Christian Profession; and lest our
Children should be ignorant of the meaning of those Names, they have been of
late years interpreted; and instead of Baptizing our Children with the Names of
Timothy and Theophilus, these latter times have rebaptized even Names as well
as Children, and have Christened them Fear-God, and Love-God, and Fight a good
Fight: but how these men have imitated their Names, these late years have
sufficiently declared to the whole World.

CHAP. XI.
Verse 4. HOw fondly do men reckon without God? Come let us build: as if there
had been no stop but in their own will; as if both Earth and Time had been
theirs. Still do all natural men build Babel, fore-casting their own Plots so
resolutely, as if there were no power to counter-mand them. Let us build a
City; if they had taken God with them, it had been commendable; establishing of
Societies is pleasing to him that is the God of Order: but a Tower whose top
may reach to Heaven, is a shameful arrogance, an impious presumption; Who would
think that we little Ants that creep upon the Earth, should think to climb up
to Heaven by multiplying of Earth! But wherefore was all this? Not that they
loved so much to be neighbors to heaven, as to be famous upon earth: It was not
Commodity that was here sought, nor Safety, but Glory: Whither does not thirst
of Fame carry men whether in good or evil? One builds a Temple to Diana in hope
of glory, intending it for one of the greatest Wonders of the World: Another in
hope of Fame, burns it. He is a rare man that has not some Babel of his own
whereon he bestows pains and cost only to be talked of.

Verse 7. When God bestowed upon man his first benefit, his Making; it is
expressed thus, Let us, all us, make Man. God seems to muster himself, all
himself, all the Persons of the Trinity, to do what he could in favor of man.
So also here when he is drawn to a necessity of executing Judgment, and for his
own honor and consolidation of his servants, puts himself upon a revenge, he
proceeds so too. When man had rebelled, and began to fortify in Babel, then
says God here, Let us, all us, come together, and descendamus and confundamus,
let us, all us, go down and confound their Language and their Fortifications.
God does not give paterns, God does not accept from us acts of half Devotion,
and half Charities; God does all that he can for us: And therefore when we see
others in distress, whether National or Personal Calamities; whether Princes be
dispossessed of their National Patrimony and Inheritance; or private Persons
afflicted with sickness, or penury, or banishment; let us go Gods way all the
way. First, Feciamus hominem ad imaginem nostram, Let us make that man
according to our image, let us consider our selves in him, and make our case
his: And remember how lately he was as well as we, and how soon we may be as
ill as he; and then descendamus and confundamus, let us, us with all the power
we have, remove or slacken those Calamities that lie upon him.

Verse 8. He that taught Adam the first words, taught these Builders words that
never were. One calls for Brick, the other looks him in the face and wonders
what he means; and how, and why he speaks such words as were never heard; and
instead thereof brings him Mortar, returning him an Answer as little
understood. At first, every man thinks his Fellow mocks him; but now perceiving
this serious Confusion, their only Answer is silence, and ceasing. They could
not come together (but must of necessity be scattered) for no man could call
them to be understood; and if they had Assembled, nothing could be determined,
because one could never attain to the others purpose: No, they could not have
the honor of a general dismission; but each man leaves his Trowel and Station,
more like a Fool than he undertook it. So commonly actions begun in glory, shut
up in shame.

Verse 9. All external actions depend upon the tongue; no man can know another
mind if this be not the interpreter. Hence, as there were many tongues given to
stay the building of Babel; so there were as many given to build the New
Jerusalem, the Evangelical Church. Multiplicity of Language had not been given
by the Holy Ghost for a blessing of the Church, if the World had not been
before possessed with multiplicity of Languages for a punishment. Hence it is,
That the building of our Sion rises no faster, because our tongues are divided;
happy were the Church of God, if we all spoke but one Language: Whilst we
differ, we can build nothing but Babel; difference of tongues caused their
Babel to cease, but it builds ours.

CHAP. XII.
Verse. 1. IT was fit, That he that should be the Pattern and Father of the
Faithful should be thoroughly tried: for in a set copy every fault is important,
and may prove a rule of Error. No Son of Abraham can hope to escape
temptations, while he sees the bosom in which he desires to rest, so assaulted
with difficulties. Abraham must leave his Country and Kindred, and live amongst
strangers: the calling of God never leaves men where it finds them: The Earth
is the Lords, and all places are alike to the wise and faithful. If Chaldaea
had not been grossly idolatrous, Abraham had not left it; no Bond must tie us to
the danger of infection. But whither must he go? To a place he knew not, to men
that knew not him: It is enough comfort to a good man, wheresoever he is, that
he is acquainted with God; we are never out of our way while we follow the
calling of God.

Verse 3. When the ways of a man please God, he will be gracious to his House
and Posterity. God is so pleased with the Obedience of his People, that he will
show Mercy to such as belong to them. When God saw Noah righteous before him in
that corrupt age and generation, he made all that belonged to him partakers of
the same deliverance with himself; saying unto him, Enter thou and all thine
house into the Ark. This appears in the person of Abraham, when God had
called him out of his Country and from his Kindred, and had made a Covenant
with him to bless him, he adds, I will also bless them that bless thee, and
curse them that curse thee: And this is but the tenor of the Covenant that God
has made with all the faithful; their Faith is available both for themselves
and for others. God will be our God, and the God of our seed after us. And this
is the privilege and prerogative that the faithful have; they believe this
merciful Promise of God themselves, and thereby entitle their Children unto it.
For as a Father that purchases House or Land, gives thereby an interest unto
his Son therein; so he that lays hold on the Promise that God has made to
all godly Parents, does convey it unto his Children; so that albeit they want
Faith by reason of their years, yet they are made partakers of Christ, and
engrafted into his Body.

Verse 7. Never any man lost by his Obedience to the highest; because Abraham
yielded, God gave him the possession of Canaan: I wonder more at his Faith in
taking this possession, than in leaving his own. Behold Abraham takes
possession for that Seed which he had not, which in nature he was not like to
have, of that Land whereof he should not have one foot, wherein his Seed should
not be settled of almost five hundred years after. The power of Faith can
prevent time, and make future things present: If we be the true Sons of
Abraham, we have already while we sojourn here on Earth, the possession of our
Land of Promise: while we seek our Country, we have it.

Verse 10. Even Canaan here does not afford Abraham Bread, which yet he must
believe shall flow with Milk and Honey to his Seed: Sense must yield to Faith;
woe were us if we must judge of our future estate by our present: Egypt gives
Relief to Abraham, when Canaan cannot. In outward things Gods enemies may fare
better than his friends. Thrice had Egypt preserved the Church of God in
Abraham, in Jacob, in Christ: God oftentimes makes use of the World for the
behoof of his, though without their thanks: as contrarily he uses the wicked
for scourges to his own inheritance, and burns them; because in his good they
intended evil.

Verse 13. Hitherto has Sarah been Abraham's Wife, now Egypt has made her his
Sister; Fear has turned him from an Husband to a Brother: No strength of Faith
can exclude some doubtings: God has said, I will make thee a great Nation;
Abraham says, The Egyptians will kill me. He that lives by his Faith, yet
shrinketh and sins. How vainly shall we hope to believe without all fear,
and to live without infirmities? Some little aspertions of unbelief cannot
hinder the praise and power of Faith. Abraham believed, and it was imputed to
him for righteousness: He that through inconsiderateness doubted twice of his
own life, doubted not of the life of his Seed, even from the dead and dry Womb
of Sarah; yet was it more difficult that his posterity should live in Sarah,
than that Sarahs Husband should live in Egypt; this was above nature, yet he
believes it. Sometimes the Believer sticks at easy trials, and yet breaks
through the greatest tentations without fear.

Verse 14. Holy Job's Covenant with his Eyes in the Old Testament, should be
every Christians in the New; to look to his looks, to set a guard and sentinel
over his Eyes: for from looking comes lusting, from a lascivious glance
proceeds a lascivious act; and it is all one in Gods esteem with which part of
the body we commit adultery; so that if a man lets his Eye or his Thought
loose, and enjoyes the lust of either, he is an Adulterer before God. It was
therefore our Saviors advice, Mat. 5. If thy right Eye offend thee, pull it
out: the meaning is this, That when thou do give check to the loose
evibrations and wanton twirles of a lascivious Eye, thou do at that very time
pull out that wanton Eye from thy body, and the lustful Devil that is in that
wanton Eye from thy soul. There is great reason therefore that we should set a
strict watch over this Cinque-port of our bodies: Beauty is a dangerous bait,
and Lust is sharp-sighted. It is not safe gazing on a fair Woman: how many have
died of the wound in the Eye? No one means has so enriched Hell as beautiful
faces.

Verse 19. It is a sad case when an Egyptian shall reprove an Israelite, when a
Pharaoh shall rebuke an Abraham; and therefore all Professors of Religion
should so practice it, as the very Infidels, seeing their good works answer
their good words, may glorify their Father which is in heaven. For our Calling
as it is most eminent, so most eyed, and worst censured by all the Infidel part
of the World. If an Apostle rub but an ear of Corn on the Sabbath, it is
breaking of the day; a heathens Motes are a Christians Beams, and a Turks
indifferency is my evil; somethings being expedient in respect of the man,
which are scandalous merely for his Religion: none therefore to keep within so
strict lines both for words and deeds as the Christian; for behold, says the
Apostle, We are made a gazing stock to the world, to Angels, and to men.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse 2. ALthough the Scripture tells us, That it is hard for a rich man to
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; yet the Scripture says not that it is
absolutely impossible: Heaven gate stands open for the Rich as well as for the
Poor; for rich Abraham here, as well as for poor Lazarus in the Gospel: and as
it is true, Blessed are the Poor, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven: So it is
also as true, Blessed are the Rich, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Thus
Adam and Noah flew up to Heaven with the Monarchy of the whole World upon their
backs. The Patriarchs also (as in this Text Abraham) with much Wealth, many
holy Kings with rich Crowns and Scepters. It is not Wealth therefore as Wealth,
but Sin that is the clogg that keeps men from ascending the burden of covetous
desires being more heavy to an empty Soul than much treasure to the full; for
not the mere Possession and use of riches offends, but the affectation.

Verse 7. When the strife began between Abraham and Lot, the Scripture notes it
as a special Memorandum here, that the Canaanite was then in the Land.
Doubtless there are at this time also in our Land too many who carry
Canaanitish hearts and minds, who would; no less than the old Canaanites,
rejoice and triumph in our discords; saying among themselves, Aha, so would we
have it: But let those that have the Spirit of Abraham, learn also the Speech
and Language of Abraham; who though he was in Age, and Dignity superior to his
Nephew Lot, yet came and said unto him, I pray thee let there be no strife
between me and thee, for we are Brethren.

Verse 9. Before Abraham and Lot grew Rich, they dwelt together; now their
Wealth separates them; their Society was a greater good than their Riches: many
a one is a looser by his Wealth; who would account those things good which
makes us worse? It had been the duty of young Lot to offer, rather than to
choose; to yield rather than contend: Who would not here think Abraham the
Nephew, and Lot the Uncle? It is no disparagement for greater persons to begin
treaties of Peace: better does it beseem every Son of Abraham to win with love,
than to sway with power. Abraham yields over this right of his choice, Lot
takes it. And behold Lot is crossed in that which he chose, Abraham is blessed
in that which was left him: God never suffers any one to lose by an humble
remission of his right in a desire of Peace.

Verse 10. Wealth has made Lot not only undutiful, but covetous: he sees the
goodly Plain of Jordan, the richness of the Soil, the commodity of the Rivers,
the situation of the Cities, and now not once enquiring into the Condition of
the Inhabitants, he is in love with Sodom. Outward appearances are deceitful
guides to our judgment or affection: they are worthy to be deceived that value
things as they seem. It is not long after that Lot pays dear for his rashness.
He fled for quietness from his Uncle and finds War with strangers, by whom he
is carried Prisoner with all his substance. That Wealth which was the cause of
his former Quarrels, is made a prey to merciless Heathen; that place which his
Eye covetously chose, betrays his life and goods. How many Christians whilst
they have looked at gain, have lost themselves?

Verse 14. Gods way of appearing unto Abraham, was like our Saviors way of
appearing in the flesh to the world: until such time as there was a general
Peace over the whole Earth, our Savior would not appear amongst men; and until
such time as the strife was ended betwixt Abraham and Lot, and they two parted
friendly, God did not appear unto Abraham: God is love, and he that dwells in
love, dwells in God, and God in him, 1 John 4. 16. Where Charity is, there is
an habitation, a Temple for the Lord; and where it is not, there is a
dewlling place for the Devil: Religion is but rottenness without it, our
Devotions unsavory, our Sacrifice distasteful, and all our front of Holiness
but dross and rubbish; Therefore Christ says, If thou bring thy Gift to the
Altar, and there remembrest that thy Brother has ought against thee, first be
reconciled with thy Brother, and then offer thy Gift. Otherwise Dissension and
ill will will over-shadow the Altar, and keep the grace of God from descending:
The fountain of Love will not be laded at with uncharitable hands. Jacob will
be reconciled to his Brother before he builds an Altar; and Abraham must be at
peace with Lot, before God gives him a visit.

Verse 15. Ever is not always used for Eternity. Aristotle defines Aeternum to
be Periodus durationis cujusque rei: lib. 1. de Coelo. It is diversely used in
Scripture. First, for the continuance of the world, as the Rainbow was a sign
of Gods everlasting Covenant; that is, so long as the world continues.
Secondly, It signifies the whole time of man's life, I will sing of thy mercies
for ever, Psalm. 89. 1. Thirdly, That is called Eternal whose time is not
prefixed with man, though it be with God; as Circumcision is called an
everlasting Covenant, because it was not to be altered by man. But here some
take these words not leterally, but upon Condition; That the Land of Canaan
should so long be their inheritance as they obeyed God, according to Deuteronomy. 4.
25. As if the Lord should say (says Cajetan) Quam diu erit semen tuum, as long
as they shall be thy Seed, I will give them this Land: therefore when they
began to degenerate from Abraham, God was no longer tied to his Promise.

CHAP. XIV.
Verse 2. TO gather Armies, and to muster men to Battle is no new sign, but an
old and ancient device among the sons of men. Thus here we have mention of two
Armies; the one raised by Chedor-laomer and his Confederates; the other by the
Kings of Sodom and Gommorrah, these rebelling, the other punishing their
rebellion. Now seeing the misery of Wars has such an ancient stamp upon it,
not lately bred, but the Child of former times, say not the old days are
better than these; grow not wanton and weary of things present, to loath the
blessings we enjoy, as the manner of many is. We complain that we are fallen
into evil times, we praise the days that are past, and consider not that in
this we murmur against God, who has made all things good, and governs all
things well. The present state of things are grievous, because present troubles
are felt, and former discommodities are forgotten long ago.

Verse 12. Let us have no fellowship with evil men, or evil actions; unless we
will partake with them in the punishment. It is our Christian discretion to
forsake their company, lest we be taken in the net, and snared in their ways.
Many have sustained much danger, and endured much affliction by conversing with
evil men. Lot was never more grieved, nor less secured, than when he was even
in the very midst of Sodom. He made choice to dwell there, as the place where
he might soonest enrich himself, but he quickly repented him of his choice. He
was taken prisoner by foreign Enemies, and was in greatest danger by violence
at his own home. To communicate with the wicked is all one as if a man should
throw himself into the company of Thieves. The servants of God, which are
endued with those heavenly gifts, divine graces (which are the greatest
treasure) have a great charge about them: It concerns them therefore to take
heed, that by evil company they be not robbed and deprived of them. We should
beware of the company and conditions of men; if we count our selves happy in
the league of the wicked, we are utterly lost, and are walking in the road-way
that leads to death.

Verse 15. In regard that War it is self is lawful, it follows that the
stratagems of War are not unlawful. It is not against the Word of God to use
subtilty and policy, to lay snares and baits to entrap and circumvent the
Enemy. In all actions of War and Peace, we must deal wisely and warily. When we
live in peace and quietness, it is required of us to walk not only in a lawful,
but in a wise course; but much more in War, where the Enemy is watchful, the
snares are subtle, and the danger greater. This appears evidently both because
God commanded it, and the godly practice it. God commanded it to Joshua in the
taking of Ai, Josh. 8. 2. and it was practiced here by Abraham. True it is we
are to keep promises to all, even to our enemies. We must not promise to save
them, and then destroy them. Notwithstanding we are not bound to make known to
them whatever we speak or do; but are to conceal our intents to the end the
victory may be obtained.

Verse 16. All things that are taken in a lawful War, are not lawful plunder.
The Philistines when they got the victory over the Israelites, and had the
spoil of the field, yet there was an Ark amongst that spoil which they had
nothing to do with, and they had better have let it alone, than have meddled
with it; that did belong to the God of Israel more than to his People; and
therefore when they took away that, they took Gods Judgments and Vengeance
along with it, and they did return it with far greater joy and triumph than
they took it away. Touch not mine anointed, says God, and do my Prophets no
harm; they are Gods, and man has nothing to do with them. And therefore when
the five Kings in this Chapter had taken away Lot, one whom God would not have
touched, they not only lost him, but all the rest of their spoil; all the Goods
were brought back again for that good man's sake. If those Kings had not made
Lot their prisoner, the rest of the spoil might have been lawful prize. So
precious in Gods eyes are his Saints.

Verse 19. It is a just observation of Philo, that God only by a propriety is
styled the possessor of heaven and earth by Melchisedec in this speech of his
to Abraham: We are only Tenants, and that at the Will of the Lord; at the most
we have but jus ad rem non dominium in rem, a right to these earthly things,
not a Lordship over them; we have only a right of favor from their proprietary
and Lord in heaven, and that liable to account. Let me then charge the Rich-man
that he be not high-minded and proud of that which is none of his. That which
Law and Case-Divinity speaks of life, that man is not Dominus vitae suae sed
custos, is as true of Wealth: Nature can tell him from Seneca, that he is not
Dominus but Colonus, not the Lord, but the Farmer.

Verse 23. Solomon in his Proverbs tells us, that the blessing of the Lord
makes rich, and he adds no sorrow with it; intimating that they which grow
rich, and not by Gods blessing, but by such means as God has accursed, the
Lord does add such a deal of sorrow, and care, and vexation with it, that they
were as good or better be without it. Such riches were those that Abraham
rejected at the King of Sodoms hands in this verse; when he offered him Goods
and spoils enough to have enriched him and all his household: No, says Abraham,
I will not take so much as a thread from you: men shall never say that Abraham
was made rich, and not by Gods blessing but by the King of Sodoms means; God
shall make Abraham rich, or he will ever be poor. It is reported of one that
was a better Lawyer than an honest man, that he should say, He that would not
venture his body shall never be valiant, nor he that will not venture his soul
be rich. Let them that make no reckoning of their souls venture them at their
perils; but let all that desire contentment here, or heaven hereafter, make
their Prayers to God, and say, from such kind of Riches, Good Lord deliver us.

CHAP. XV.
Verse 1. IT is Saint Cyrils note, That as Abraham (so long as he was in his
own Country) had never God appearing to him, save only to bid him go forth; but
after when he was gone forth, had frequent visions of his Maker: So while in
our affections we remain here below in our Coffers, we cannot have the
comfortable assurances of the presence of God; but if we can abandon the love
and trust of these earthly things in the conscience of our obedience, now God
shall appear to us, and speak peace to our Souls, and never shall we find cause
to repent us of the change.

Verse 4. In the 13 Chapter God promised Abraham an innumerable Seed, but yet
heknew not whether it should be his natural or adopted seed; now the Lord
clears that doubt, and tells him it should come out of his own bowels: yet
Abraham was uncertain, Whether this Seed should be by Sarah, or another, which
is told Genesis 17. 16. So God deals his Promises not all at once, but by degrees;
by that means to cause us still to rely upon him, and continually to pray for
the performance of what we expect.

Verse 12. Not only a fear of God must, but a terror of God may fall upon the
best. When God talked with Abraham here, a horror of great darkness fell upon
him says the text. The Father of lights, and the God of all comforts present,
and present in an action of mercy, and yet an horror of great darkness fell
upon Abraham. When God talked personally and presentially with Moses, Exodus 13.
Moses hid his face, for he was afraid to look upon God. When I look upon God in
those terrible judgments which he has executed upon some men, and see that
there is nothing between me and the same judgments (for I have sinned the same
sins, and God is the same God) I cannot look upon God in what line I will, nor
take hold of God by what handle I will; he is a terrible God, I take him so;
and then I cannot discontinue, I cannot break off this terribleness, and say,
He has been terrible to that man and there is an end of his terror, it reaches
not to me. Why not to me? In me there is no merit, no shadow of merit, in God
there is no change, no shadow of change. I am the same sinner, he is the same
God, still the same desperate sinner, still the same terrible God.

Verse 16. The sins of a professing People, or Nation, are sooner ripe than the
sins of the wild world: as fruit that grows more in the Sun, is concocted and
comes to maturity sooner: and therefore it is observable, that God bears longer
with the world, yea, and in a sense deals more gently in their punishment. The
sin of the Amorites here was long many years e're it was full ripe; but Isreal's
was ripe in forty years; and seeing they were most looked upon of all the
people of the earth; therefore God will visit upon them all their iniquities,
and that to their cost, they shall more intensively feel his wrath. How dear
was Israel unto God, by how many sweet, loving, and precious appellations were
they called, his Apple, his Spouse, his Treasure, his Jewels, his Darling, and
yet cast out and abandoned by that God. Oh how should this Nation of ours hear
and fear, and do no more so wickedly, lest God make a quick dispatch, and do as
by ASIA, remove the Candle and Candlestick out of its place.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse 2. What a lively pattern do I see in Abraham and Sarah, of a strong
Faith, and a weak? Of strong in Abraham, and weak in Sarah; she to make God
good of his word to Abraham, knowing her own barrenness, substitutes an Hagar;
and in an ambition of Seed persuades to Polygamy. Abraham had never looked to
obtain the Promise by any other than a barren Womb, if his own Wife had not
importuned him to take another: when our own apparent means fail, weak Faith is
put to the shifts, and projects strange devices of her own to attain the end.
She will rather conceive by another Womb than be childless. So great is the
desire of Children.

Verse 5. Those that are most injurious, do commonly complain most of injuries;
and this both in respect of God and their Neighbor. Thus Adam when he had
committed that grand Catholic sin in Paradise, lays the fault upon God, The
Woman which thou gave me, she persuaded me, and I did eat: God gave him the
Woman as an help against temptation, and yet he upbraids God with his gift, and
charges him with the sin, when the Devil and his own weakness were the cause:
And thus Sarah in the Text complains against her Husband, when she her self had
done the injury: She gave Hagar to her Husband, and yet cries out My wrong be
upon thee. The guilty seldom accuse themselves.

Verse 9. Man's extremity is Gods opportunity; and the best seed-time for his
graces is when the soul is harrowed with a sense of sin, and the body is plowed
up with its punishments: then did Saint Lukes Prodigal think of returning to
his Father, when he knew not else whether to go: and so Hagar in the Text was
easily persuaded by the Angel to go back and submit to her Mistress when she was
humbled by affliction. Now she was under the rod, she was ready both to hear
and obey: Affliction was her best Schoolmaster.

Verse 10. Ishmael though he were not the chosen seed, yet received a goodly
temporal blessing, by which we see that these outward blessings are no signs
of eternal election: and here we may likewise observe that before this Promise
was made to her, Hagar was bid to humble her self; so we must repent ere we can
have Gods favor.

Verse 11. Affliction has a voice: and as music on the waters sounds farther
and more harmoniously than upon the Land, so prayers joined with tears. These
if they proceed from Faith, are showers quenching the Devils Canon-shot, a
second Baptism of the soul wherein it is rinsed anew, nay, perfectly cured;
as the tears of Vines cures the Leprosy, as the Lame were healed in the
troubled Waters. Now whether Hagars grief were for sin, or for the present
pressure only, I have not to say: but God is so pitiful, that he hears and
helps our Affliction as he did Hagars in this Text.

Verse 15. God presents to us the joys of Heaven often to draw us, and as
often the torments of Hell to avert us. And to this purpose Origin says aright
as Abraham had two Sons, the one of a Bondwoman, the other of a Free, but yet
both sons of Abraham: So God is served by two fears, and the latter fear the
fear of future torment is not the perfect fear, but yet even that fear is the
servant and instrument of God too. Who can so absolutely divest all sense,
says Chrysostom, but that when the whole City is in a combustion and
commotion, or when the Ship that he is in strikes desperately and irrecoverably
upon a Rock, he is otherwise affected toward God then, than when every day in
a quietness and calmness of holy affections he hears a Sermon. Gehennae timor
(says the same Father) regni affert coronam, even the fear of Hell gets us
Heaven.

CHAP. XVII.
Verse 1. IT is Gods prescript to Abraham here, Walk before me, and be perfect;
and that is when (as to allude to that known Expression) Manus ad Clavum Oculus
ad Coelum; as our hand is upon the work, so our eye must be upon God in every
thing we do; which is the ground of that uprightness, called in the Scripture
Dialect, perfection. Where you may note the difference between these three
expressions of the holy Ghost, to walk with God, after God, and before God. We
walk with God as a sweet companion, after God as a commanding Lord, before God
as an observing Judge; we walk with him as his Friends, after him as his
Servants, before him as his Children; lastly, we walk with him by an humble
familiarity, after him in a regular conformity, before him by a cordial
integrity; and this is according to Gods rule to Abraham, Walk before me, and
be perfect.

Verse 3. When God talks with us in his Word, or we talk with God in our
Prayers we cannot be too humble; you see from this text, that Abraham the
Father of the faithful fell upon his face at a conference with God, and shall
we that are his sons not fall upon our knees? Certainly were there never a
Church standing in the world, nor so much as one stone left for a Bethel
wheresoever we came to Pray we should worship; first looking up to our God and
his infinitude, with Glory be to thee O Lord; then in the Publicans dejected
posture reflecting upon the dust our original and our end, with Lord be
merciful unto me a sinner: and indeed can we presume higher than the dust when
we reverence before our Maker, or do less than hide our own faces with shame,
appearing before the glorious light of that countenance which we cannot see and
live, and which we shall one day look upon with trembling, if not now with
shame.

Verse 5. There is no Faith, where there is either means or hopes. Difficulties
and impossibilities are the true Objects of Belief; hereupon God adds to
Abraham's name that which he would fetch from his Loins, and made his Name as
ample as his Posterity; never any man was a looser by believing; Faith is ever
recompensed with Glory.

Verse 7. God has in great mercy and goodness promised to show grace and
favor, not only to the faithful themselves, but to their seed after them; and
as the mercy of God is great, so the Faith of the godly is effectual for
themselves and their Children: God will be our God, and the God of our seed
after us. If then we consider either the Promise of God to be merciful, or the
Faith of the godly to believe, in both respects we may collect and gather this
truth, That the love of God to the faithful shall so abound, that it shall come
to their posterity, like the precious Ointment poured on the head of Aaron that
ran down upon his beard and flowed to the border of his garments; or as the dew
on Hermon and Sion, which watered the valleys which were beneath them. Now
seeing that goodness has the Promise of bringing a blessing upon the families
where it is professed, it is required of us to profess and believe the Gospel,
that so we may procure a blessing upon our selves and Children. The neglect of
which brings utter ruin to Father and Child. So then godly Parents must have
a care to bring-up their Children and Families in the true Faith and fear of
the Lord, which may be a means by the blessing of God to save thy son from
death, and to deliver his soul from destruction.

Verse 11. Circumcision is a seal of the Covenant betwixt God and us, if we be
in God and God in us; if we be circumcised within, if the foreskin of our
hearts be taken away, then is the outward Circumcision a seal unto our Covenant
with God; otherwise it is a seal indeed, but a seal without a Bond, a seal
without any stipulation betwixt God and us; we are no whit privileged by it,
no more than are the Turks who yet are circumcised: which is the reason that
the Jews at this day have no benefit by this Covenant, because they are
uncircumcised in their hearts, that vail that foreskin is not taken away; and
that only is the circumcision which seals the Covenant betwixt God and us, the
Gospel-circumcision, the putting off the old Adam by that circumcision of
Christ; which is the work of the Spirit wrought by the Word upon the Soul of a
poor sinner, whereby the corruption of his nature is mortified, and himself
received into an everlasting Covenant and Communion with God.

Verse 14. In the first Covenant that God made with his People (as we see here)
That person that would not be circumcised, that soul was cut off from the
people of God; and just so in the second Covenant that God made with his
people, the Covenant of the Gospel; He that is not circumcised in heart, and
made new by regeneration, he shall have no part with the Saints in heaven, Joh.
3. 3. The wise man is not privileged by his wisdom, nor the strong man by his
strength; the King is not freed by his Crown and Dignity, nor the Priest by the
power of his Keys. For if any one enters himself in Covenant with God under
the New Testament, and hopes for benefit by that Covenant, as Abraham and his
Seed did undergo the outward Circumcision of the body, so must he the inward
Circcmcision of the heart. No Circumcision, no Son of Abraham; no Son of
Abraham, no Son of God.

Verse 17. Abraham was old e're this Promise and hope of a Son was given; and
still the older the more incapable: Yet God makes him wait twenty five years
for performance. No time is long to Faith, which had learned to defer hopes
without fainting and irksomness. Abraham heard this news of a Son and laughed,
but not as Sarah in the next Chapter, as if it were impossible. For Abraham
laughs and believes, expects and rejoices; he says not, I am old and weak,
Sarah is old and barren; where are the many Nations that shall come from these
withered Loins? It is enough to him that God has said it; he sees not the
means, he sees the promise, he knew that God would rather raise him up seed
from the very stones that he trod upon, than himself should want a large and
happy issue.

Verse 23. Abraham is not content only to wait for God, but to smart for him:
God bids him cut his own flesh; he willingly sacrifices this parcel of his skin
and blood to him that was the owner of all. How glad he is to carry this
painful mark of the love of his Creator. How forward to seal this Covenant with
his blood betwixt God and him, not regarding the soreness of his body in
comparison of the confirmation of his soul. The wound was not so grievous, as
the signification was comfortable. For herein he saw that from his loins should
come that blessed Seed which should purge his soul from all corruption. Well is
that part of us lost, which may give assurance of the Salvation of the whole;
our Faith is not yet sound, if it has not taught us to neglect pain for God,
and more to love his Sacraments than our own flesh.

CHAP. XVIII.
Verse 2. ALthough he appeared in men, yet it was God that appeared to Abraham:
though men Preach, though men remit sins, though men absolve, God himself
speaks, and God works, and God seals in those men. Again, remember that nothing
appeared to Abraham's apprehension but men, yet Angels were in his presence: And
therefore though we bind no man to believe necessarily that every man has a
particular Angel assisting him, yet know that ye do all that ye do in the
presence of Gods Angels: and though it be in its self, and should be so to us a
stronger bridle to consider that we do all in the presence of God (who sees
clearer than the Angels, for he sees secret Thoughts, and can strik imediately,
which they cannot do without commission from him) yet since the presence of a
Magistrate, or a Preacher, or a Father, or an Husband, keeps men often from ill
actions; let this prevail something with thee to that purpose, that the Angels
of God are always present, though thou discern them not.

Verse 3. And he said, My Lord: Where note, that though Christ himself were not
among these Angels, yet Abraham apprehended a greater Dignity, and gave a
greater respect to one than to the rest, but yet without neglecting the rest
too. Apply thy self to such Ministers of God, and such Physicians of thy Soul,
as thine own Conscience tells thee do most good upon thee; but yet let no
particular affection to one, defraud another in his dues; nor impair another in
his esteemation.

Verse 10. As the Angel which came to Abraham at the Promise and Conception of
Isaac, gave Abraham a further assurance of his return at Isaac's birth, I will
certainly return unto thee, and thy Wife shall have a Son: So the Lord which is
with thee in the first Conception of any good purpose, returns to thee again to
give thee a quickening of that blessed Child of his, and again and again to
bring it forth and bring it up, to accomplish and perfect those good intentions
which his Spirit by overshadowing thy Soul has formerly begotten in it. Thus
God comes to us in nature, and he returns in grace; he comes in preventing, and
returns in subsequent graces; he comes in thine understanding, and returns in
thy Will; he comes in rectifying thine actions, and returns in establishing
habits; he comes to thee in zeal, and returns in discretion; he comes to thee
in fervor, and returns in perseverence; he comes to thee in thy perigrination
all the way, and returns in thy transmigration at the last gasp. So God comes,
and so he returns to his Children.

Verse 12. In the former Chapter Abraham heard this news and laughed; and in
this Chapter Sarah hears it, and laughs too: they did not more agree in their
desire, than differ in their affection; Abraham laughed for joy, Sarah for
distrust: Abraham laughed because he believed it would be so; Sarah, because
she believed it could not be so: the same act varies in the manner of doing,
and in the intention of the doer: yet Sarah laughed but within her self, and it
is bewrayed. How God can find us out in secret sins! How easily did she now
think, that he which could know of her inward laughter, could know of her
Conception! And now she that laughed and believed not, believes and fears.
When she hears of an impossibility to Nature she doubts, and yet hides her
diffidence; and when she must believe, fears; because she did distrust.

Verse 15. Sarah thinks in this verse to cover her distrust with a Lie, one sin
with another. Thus any thing serves us for a cover of sin; even from a net that
every man sees through to such a cloud of darkness, as none but the Prince of
Darkness, that cast that cloud upon us, can see us in it, nor we see our
selves. That we should hide lesser sins with greater, is not so strange; that
in Adultery we should forget the circumstances in it, and the practices to come
to it: but we hide greater sins with lesser, with a manifold and multiplied
throng and cloud of lesser sins; all comes to an indifferency, and so we see
not great sins. As for instance, Easiness of conversation in a Woman seems no
great harm; adorning themselves to please those with whom they converse, is not
much more; to hear them whom they are thus willing to please, praise them, and
magnify their perfections is little more than that; to allow them to sue for
the possession of that they have so much praised, is not much more neither; nor
will it seem much at last to give them possession of that they sue for.

Verse 21. God does not reward or condemn out of his Decrees, but out of our
actions. Thus God sent down his Commissioners (his Angels) to Sodom, to enquire
and to inform him how things went: And thus God went down himself to enquire
and inform himself how it stood with Adam and Eve. Not that God was ever
ignorant of any thing concerning us, but that God would prevent that dangerous
imagination in every man, that God should first mean to destroy him, and then
to make him that he might destroy him, without having any evidence against him.
God goes not out as a Fowler, that for his pleasure and recreation, or for his
commodity, or commendation would kill, and therefore seeks out game that he may
kill it. God made man ad imaginem suam, to his own image: If he had made him
under an inevitable and irresistible necessity of damnation, he had made him ad
imaginem Diabolicam, to the image of the Devil, and not his own. God then
accepts or condemns man secundam allegata and probata, according to the
evidence that arises from us, and not according to those Records that are hid
in himself. Our Actions and his Records agree; we do those things which he has
decreed, but only our doing them and not his decreeing them, has the nature of
evidence.

Verse 23. Draw near to thy self as Abraham drew near to God; and admit thine
own expostulations as God did his. Let thy own Conscience tell thee not only
thy open and evident rebellions against God, but even the immoralities and
incivilities that thou do toward men in scandalizing them by-thy sins; and
the absurdities that thou committest against thy self in sinning against thine
own reason; and the uncleanness and consequently the treachery that thou
committest against thine own body; and thou shall see that thou had been not
only in better peace, but in better state, and better health, and in better
reputation, a better friend, and better company if thou had sinned less;
because some of thy sins have been such as have violated the band of
friendship, and some such as have made thy company and conversation dangerous
either for temptation, or at least for defamation.

Verse 25. So long as there lies a Certiorari from an higher Court, or an
Appeal to an higher Court, the Case is not so desperate, if the Judge do not
right: for there is a future Remedy to be hoped. If the whole state be incensed
against me, yet I can find an escape to another Country; if all the world
persecute me, yet if I be an honest man I have a supreme Court in my self, and
I am at peace in being acquitted in mine own Conscience. But God is the Judge
of all the Earth, of this which I tread, and this earth which I carry about me;
and when he judges me, my Conscience turns on his side, and comfesses his
Judgment to be right: And therefore Saint Paul's Argument Romans 3. seconds and
ratifies Abraham's expostulation here; Is God unrighteous? God forbid; how then
shall God judge the World? A particular Council may err, but then a general
Council may help to rectify that particular; the King may err, but then God in
whose hand the Kings heart is, can rectify him. But if God that judges all the
earth judge thee, there is no error to be assigned in his Judgment, no Appeal
from God not thoroughly informed to God better informed; for he always knows
all evidence before it is given. And therefore the larger the jurisdiction, and
higher the Court is, the more careful ought the Judge to be of wrong Judgment;
for Abraham's expostulation reaches in a measure to them; Shall not the Judge of
all (or of a great part of the earth) do right?

CHAP. XIX.
Verse 3. THough Lot would be a guest of Sodom, yet because he would not
entertain their sins he becomes an Host to the Angels: and indeed where could
the Angels have lodged in Sodom, if not with Lot? The houses of holy men are
full of these heavenly spirits when they know not; they pitch their Tents in
ours, and visit us when we see not, and when we feel not, protect us. It is the
honor of Gods Saints to be attended by Angels.

Verse 5. The filthy Sodomites being now flocked together, and stirred up with
the fury of Envy and Lust, dare require to do that in Troops, which to act
single had been too abominable, to imagine unnatural. Continuance and society
in evil, makes men outrageous and impudent: it is not enough for Lot to be
Witness, but he must be Bawd also; (bring forth these men, that we may know
them.) Behold! even the Sodomites speak modestly, though their acts and intents
be villainous. What a shame is it for those who profess purity of heart, to
speak uncleanly and lasciviously?

Verse 8. Lot craves and pleads here the Laws of Hospitality; and when he sees
headstrong purposes of mischief, chooses rather to be an ill Father, than an
ill Host: his intention was good, but his offer was faulty. If through his
allowance the Sodomites had defiled his Daughters it had been his sin; if
through violence they had defiled his Guests, it had been only theirs. There
can be no warrant for us to sin lest others should sin: it is for God to
prevent sins with Judgments; it is not for men to prevent a greater sin with a
less: the best minds when they are troubled yield inconsiderate motions; as
Water that is violently stirred, sends up bubbles. God meant better to Lot than
to suffer his weak offer to be accepted.

Verse 11. When men are grown to that pass that they are no whit better by
afflictions, and worse with admonitions, God finds it time to strik. Now Lots
Guests begin to show themselves Angels, and first deliver Lot in Sodom, then
from Sodom: first strike them with blindness whom they will after consume with
fire: how little did the Sodomites think that vengeance was so near them! While
they went groping in the streets and cursing those whom they could not find,
Lot with the Angels is in secure light, and sees them miserable, and fore-sees
them burning. It is the use of God to blind and besot those whom he means to
destroy: the light which they shall see shall be fiery, which shall be the
beginning of an everlasting darkness and fire unquenchable. Wickedness has but
a time; the punishment of wickedness is beyond all times.

Verse 12. If thou be a Child of God, Gods Spirit shall deal with thee as
his Angel did with Lot in Sodom. He told Lot overnight that he would burn the
City, and bad him prepare: God shall give thee some grudgings before he exalt
thy feavor, and warn thee to consider thy state, and consult with thy spiritual
Physician: Again, the Angel called Lot up in the morning, and then hastened him;
and when he prolonged (says the text) the Angel caught him and carried him
forth: because though there was no cooperation in Lot, yet there were no
resisting neither: God was pleased to do all with Lot for his temporal
preservation, and he will do all for thee too in thy spiritual.

Verse 13. One would have thought that the late plundring of Sodom should have
reformed that City from their sins: but wicked men grow worse with afflictions,
as Water grows more cold after an heat. And as they leave not sinning, so God
leaves not plaguing of them but still follows them with succession of
Judgments. In how few years did Sodom forget she was spoiled and led Captive?
If that wicked City had been warned by the Sword, it had escaped the Fire; but
now this Visitation has not made Ten good men in those Five Cities. How fit
was this heap for the fire which was all chaff? Only Lot vexed his righteous
Soul with the sight of their uncleanness: he vexed his own Soul, for who bade
him stay there; yet because he was vexed, he is delivered. He escapes their
Judgment from whose sins he escaped. Even the good Angels are here made the
Executioners of Gods Judgments: There cannot be a better, or more noble act,
than to do Justice upon obstinate Malefactors.

Verse 16. The Messengers do not only hasten Lot, but pull him by a gracious
violence out of that impure City: they thirsted at once after the vengeance
upon Sodom and Lots safety; they knew God could not strike Sodom till Lot were
gone out; and that Lot could not be safe within those Walls. We are all
naturally in Sodom; if God did not hale us out, whiles we linger, we should be
condemned with the World. If God meet with a very good field, he pulls up the
Weeds and lets the Corn grow; if indifferent, he lets the Corn and Weeds grow
together; if very ill, he gathers the few ears of Corn, and burns the weeds.

Verse 20. So say most men of their bosom sins; Lord, this sin is near to fly
unto; it is but in my bosom, and it is but a little one Lord; perchance but a
trip of the tongue, or a wanton glance of the eye, or a lustful thought of the
heart; O let me escape and abide in that sin, in that Zoar, and my soul shall
live: and he says most truly that his Soul shall live. For it is as impossible
that such a one should live without his beloved sin, as it is that he should
live without his Soul.

Verse 21. O the large bounty of God which reaches not to us only, but to
ours! God saves Lot for Abraham's sake, and Zoar for Lots sake: if Sodom had not
been too wicked, it had escaped. Were it not for Gods dear Children that are
intermixed with the World, the world could not stand; the wicked owe their
lives unto those few good, which they hate and persecute.

Verse 26. Lot at the 17 verse may not so much as look at the flame; whether
for the stay of his passage, or the horror of the sight, or trial of his Faith,
or fear of commiseration. Small Precepts from God are of importance, obedience
is as well tried, and disobedience as well punished in little as in much. And
therefore when Lots Wife did but turn back her head in this verse, whether in
curiosity, or unbelief, or love, and compassion of the place, she is turned
into a Monument of disobedience; ut praestarit fidelibus condimentum, says
Saint Augustine, that it might be a seasoning to faithful men; and teach us not
to look back, not to fall off from that calling in which we are once entered.
And now what did it avail Lots Wife not to be turned into ashes in Sodom, when
she is turned into a Pillar of Salt in the plain. He that saved a whole City
cannot save his own Wife. God cannot abide small sins in those whom he has
obliged. If we displease him, God can as well meet with us out of Sodom as in
it.

Verse 35. Though Lot fled from company he could not fly from sin: he who was
not tainted with Uncleanness in Sodom, is overtaken with Drunkenness and Incest
in a Cave. Rather than Satan shall want baits, Lots own Daughters will prove
Sodomites: those which should have comforted, betrayed him. How little are some
hearts moved with judgments! The ashes of Sodom and the pillar of Salt were
not yet out of their eye, when they dare think of lying with their own Father.
They knew whilst Lot was sober he could not be unchaste; Drunkenness is the way
to all bestial affections and acts. Wine knows no difference either of persons
or sins. By this we see likewise what a dangerous thing it is to give way to
temptation, Lot being once drunk is the more apt to fall into it again.

Verse 37. No doubt Lot was afterward ashamed of his Incestuous seed, and now
wished he had come alone out of Sodom; yet even this unnatural Bed was blessed
with increase, and one of our Saviors worthy Ancestors sprung after from this
line. Gods Election is not tied to our means; neither are blessings or Curses
ever traduced. The chaste Bed of holy Parents has often bred a Monstrous
Generation; and contrarily God has sometimes raised an holy Seed from the
Drunken Bed of Incest or Fornication. Thus will God magnify the freedom of his
own choice, and let us know that we are not born but made good.

CHAP. XX.
Verse 3. THe truth was here not only concealed but dissembled: as the Moon
has her specks, so the best have their blemishes: we are born men not Angels;
and as our composition is flesh and blood, so are we subject to the temptations
that are apt to arise from those principles of our Nature. A Sheep may slip
into a ditch as well as a Swine; only here is the difference, the one delights
in the mud, the other would fain get out of it: the righteous may fall seven
times a day as well as the wicked, but then the righteous rises as often and
repents of his sin; whereas the wicked lies down and continues in it. This
was the second time Abraham had committed this sin, and yet still continued the
Father of the faithful.

Verse 5. God had reproved Abimelech on Abraham's behalf, and now Abimelech
reproves Abraham on Gods. God told Abimelech that he had taken another man's
Wife, and Abimelech replied, That other man had told him a Lie. It is a sad
thing that Saints and Believers should do that for which they should justly
fall under the reproof of Infidels: we should rather dazzle their eyes and draw
from their Consciences at least a testimony of our innocence, as David did from
Saul's, when he said, Thou art more righteous than I my son David. The life of a
Christian should be a Commentary on Christ's life; Which of you can condemn me
of evil, said Christ to the Jews? and we that bear his Name should follow his
steps; and so carry our selves that we may not be condemned by the world. For
our profession as it is most eminent, so most eyed, and worst censured; none
therefore to keep within so strict lines as the Christian, being one ever under
monitors: for behold, says the Apostle, We are made a gazing stock to the
world, to Angels, to men.

Verse 7. The reward of sin is death says the Apostle; but what kind of death?
a double death says this text, Morte morierie; thou shall die the death, a
death complicated in its self, death wrapped in death; and what is so intricate,
so intangling as death? Who ever got out of a winding sheet? It is death
aggravated by its self, death weighed down by death; and what is so heavy as
death? Who ever threw off his Gravestone? It is multiplied by its self; and
what is so infinite as death? Who ever told over the days of death? Let
several sinners then pass this consideration through their several sins, that
as Abimelech here, so they must without Gods mercy upon every sin die the
death; and that a double death eternal and temporary, temporal and spiritual
death.

Verse 9. Adultery is called here a great sin; not only for the uncleanness and
filthiness of it, but because of the punishment that follows, and sometimes
overtakes whole Cities and Kingdoms for that sin in their Governors: as it
would have done here had not God withheld Abimelech from that sin, verse 6.
Now God keeps his Children from sinning either by instinct of his Spirit, or
the instruction of his Word, or by the guiding and guard of Angels, or by
diseases, as here.

Verse 11. Wheresoever is wickedness, there can be no fear of God; these two
cannot lodge under one roof; for the fear of God drives out evil, Ecclus. 1.
26. As therefore Abraham here argues well from the Cause to the Effect; because
the fear of God is not in this place, therefore they will kill me: So David
argues back from the Effect to the Cause, they imagine wickedness on their Bed,
therefore the fear of God is not before them. I would to God neither of these
Arguments were demonstrative; but our lives show they are. For if we feared the
Lord durst we dally with his Name, durst we tear it in pieces? Surely we
contemn his person, whose Name we contemn. The Jews have a conceit that the
sin of that Israelite which was stoned for Blasphemy, was only this, that he
named that ineffable Name Jehovah. Shall their fear keep them from once
mentioning the dreadful Name of God, and shall not our fear keep us from
abusing it. Durst we so boldly sin against God in the face if we feared him.
Durst we mock God with a formal flourish of that which our heart tells us we
are not, if we feared him?

Verse 14. Thus God comes as it were out of an Engine and helps his people at a
pinch. Abraham had brought himself into the briars, and could find no way out.
Many a heavy heart he had no doubt for his dear Wife (who suffered by his
default) and she again for him. God upon their Repentance provides graciously
for them both. She is kept undefiled, he greatly enriched; and now they are
both secured and dismissed with rewards and privileges. Oh who would not serve
such a God as turns our errors and evil counsels to our great good; as the
Athenians believed their Goddess Minerva did for them.

Verse 16. Abraham is said to be a veil of Sarahs eyes. First, That no man,
knowing her to be Abraham's Wife, should look upon her to desire her. Secondly,
It puts Sarah in mind of her subjection to Abraham, whereof the veil is a
sign, 1 Cor. 11. 10. Thirdly, Abraham was her veil, that is, her just excuse
that she did this for his cause being by him persuaded: but the former
Exposition is the better. For the following words the meaning is, that all this
was that she might he reproved, or in all this she reproved her self: so that
they seem to be the words rather of the Writer concerning Sarah, than of
Abimelech to Sarah.

Verse 18. Barrenness is a just punishment for an Incontinent life. This may be
seen in Solomon who of 300 Concubines, and 700 Wives, left but one Son
Rehoboam, and he not very wise to succeed him.

CHAP. XXI.
Verse 6. WE must rejoice in the least Mercy, how greatly then in the
greatest; our joys take their measure by our mercies. When Sarah had a Son she
said, God has made me to laugh, so that all that hear me shall laugh with me.
Her mercy in receiving a Son was so great, that it would serve a whole world to
make merry with. The man that had found his lost Sheep, laid it on his
shoulders rejoicing, (it was a pleasant burden to him) and when he came home
he called together his Friends and Neighbors, saying, Rejoice with me. As some
afflictions are so big, that all our own sorrows are not large enough to weep
and mourn over them; so some blessings are so big, that they call out more than
our own affections to rejoice over them.

Verse 9. It is not always a disparagement to be laughed at; the best may be
laughed at, the just upright man is so; holiness is under disgrace among unholy
men. Saint Paul telling this story reports it as a great example of unholy
scorn, he that was born after the Flesh, did persecute him that was born after
the Spirit, Ishmael persecuted Isaac. Moses here tells us the manner how, and
the weapon wherewith. Ishmael did not lift up his hand against Isaac (as Cain
did against Abel) but his tongue, he mocked him. Those greatest differences in
divine Heraldry of being born after the flesh, and after the Spirit, show where
the quarrel lay: it was the spiritualness of Isaac which rendered him so
obnoxious to his Carnal Brother Ishmael. Isaac was born after the Spirit; and
doubtless he showed some fruits of the Spirit, which Ishmael did not relish,
and therefore mocked him. And the Apostle gives the reason, The natural man
receives not the things of the spirit of God; for they are foolishness unto
him, 1 Cor. 2. 14.

Verse 10. Sarah speaks angerly concerning Ishmael, This son of the Bondwoman
shall not be Heir with my son: and might not God have said as roundly
concerning us, these bondslaves of sin and Satan shall not be Heirs with my
Son. But such is the goodness of our gracious God, he deals with us like the
Father of the Prodigal Child: the Son feared a sharp rebuke, and the Father
provided a dainty feast. And thus God not only pardons our indignities, but
crowns us with mercies and loving kindness. So that we may confess ingeniously
with the Prodigal Child, We are not worthy to be called thy Sons, make us as
one of thy hired servants; vouchsafe us even the least measure of thy favor,
and it is more than we can deserve or expect.

Verse 12. Let us never be ashamed to follow the counsel of such as are
discreet and godly. Neither is it greatly material who they be that give us
good counsel, whether our superiors, equals, or inferiors. For we must not
weigh so much who is the counselor, as what is the counsel. The child is
sometimes made able to advise the Father, the Servant may sometimes see more than
his Master, the Wife may sometimes give good counsel to her Husband; and it is
no dispraise or disparagement for them to hearken to their inferiors, but they
ought to receive it as a Message brought unto them from God; yea if an enemy
should persuade us to that which is good, we ought to make this benefit and
advantage of him, as to hearken to our own profit. Abraham accounted it no
reproach or reproof unto him, to obey the Counsel of his Wife, when she
persuaded him to cast out the Bondwoman and her Son; and Abraham is commanded
to listen unto it; for God said unto him, In all that Sarah shall say unto
thee, hear her voice. Away then with the pride and pevishness of all those that
take it as a discredit unto themselves to be put in mind of their duty to
others, and refuse all Counsel whereof themselves are not the Authors.

Verse 16. It fares with us for the most part as it did with Hagar; as long as
her Bread and her Bottle held out, so long she was reasonably well content; we
hear no complaint, no moan that she made; but as soon as ever these were wasted
and spent, presently she falls a crying out she was undone, she and her child
must dye, there was no other hope. Thus it fares with us, as long as our means
and moneys hold we can be pretty well content, God Almighty seldom hears of
us; but if these be exhausted and gone, we are presently out of heart: we think
there is no way but one with us, we and our children must perish, there is no
remedy; unless God open our eyes as he did Hagars, to see the fountaim of his
goodness, that is ever at hand to supply the Poors necessities, and then we are
quieted. It is an easy matter for a man to pray for his daily bread, when he
has it in his Cubbard; but when our own provisions fail us, then to rely and
rest upon the provisions of God, that is the trial of a Christians Faith. It is
an easy matter to swim in a warm Bath; but he that can hold up his head in a
dangerous Sea, when every Wave is ready to swallow him up, that is the trial of
a man's strength; so it is an easy matter to be content in a plentiful estate,
where there is no want, no lack of any thing: but for a man to be cast into a
Sea of Troubles, where so many wants like so many Waves come daily breaking in
upon him, then to hold up his head with content and confidence in God, there is
the touchstone of an undissembled Faith indeed.

CHAP. XXII.
Verse 2. ALL the injunctions of God that went before were but easy trials of
Abraham's Faith in respect of this Command; at which all the Ages of the World
have stood amazed, not knowing whether they should more wonder at Gods
injunction, or Abraham's obedience: Many years had that good Patriarch waited
for his Isaac, now at last he has joyfully received him, and that with this
gracious acclamation; In Isaac shall thy seed be called, and all Nations
blessed. Behold the Son of his Age, the Son of his Love, the Son of his
Expectation, he that might not endure a mock from his Brother, must now endure
the knife of his Father; Take thine only Son Isaac, whom thou love, and offer
him for a burnt-Offering. Never any Gold was tried in so hot a fire; who but
Abraham would not have expostulated with God? but God knew that he spoke to an
Abraham, and Abraham knew that he had to do with a God: Faith had taught him
not to argue, but obey. In an holy wilfulness he either forgets Nature, or
despises her: he is sure that what God commands is good; that what he promises
is infallible, and therefore is careless of the means, and trusts to the end.

Verse 3. In matters of God, whosoever consults with flesh and blood, shall
never offer up his Isaac to God: there needs no Counselor when we know God is
the Commander. Here is neither grudging, nor deliberating, nor delaying; his
Faith would not suffer him so much as to be sorry for that he must do. Sarah
her self may not know of Gods charge, and her Husbands purpose; lest her
affection should have overcome her Faith: that which he must do he will do; he
that has learned not to regard the life of his Son, had learned not to regard
the sorrow of his Wife. It is too much tenderness to respect the censures and
constructions of others, when we have a direct word from God.

Verse 4. It seems this good Patriarch was to travel three whole days to this
Execution; and still must Isaac be in his eyes, whom all this while he seems to
see bleeding upon the pile of wood which he carries; there is nothing so
miserable as to dwell under the expectation of a great evil. That misery which
must be is mitigated with speed, and aggravated by delay. All this while if
Abraham had repented him, he had leisure to return; there is no small trial even
in the very time of trial.

Verse 5. When Abraham went up to the great Sacrifice of his Son, he left his
Servants, and his Ass below. Though our natural reason, and humane Arts serve
to carry us to the hill, to the entrance of the mysteries of Religion; yet to
possess us of the hill it self, and to come to such a knowledge of the mysteries
of Religion as must save us, we must leave our natural reason, and humane Arts
at the bottom of the hill, and climb up only by the light and strength of
Faith. Dimitte me quia lucescit, said that Angel that wrestled with Jacob, Let
me go for it grows light. If thou think to see me by daylight, says that
Angel thou will be deceived. If we think to see this mystery of the Trinity by
the Light of Reason, Dimittimus, we shall loose that hold which we had before;
our natural Faculties, our Reason will be perplexed and enfeebled, and our
supernatural, our Faith not strengthened that way.

Verse 6. When they are come within sight of the chosen mountain, the Servants
are dismissed; what a devotion is this that will abide no witnesses? he will
not suffer two of his own vassals to see him do that which soon after all the
World must know he has done; yet is not Abraham afraid of that piety which the
beholders could not see without horror, without resistance, which no ear could
hear of without abomination. What stranger could have endured to see the Father
carry the knife and fire, instruments of that death which he had rather suffer
than inflict, the Son securely carrying that burden which must carry him?

Verse 7. If Abraham's heart could have known how to relent that question of his
dear, innocent, and religious Son, had melted it into compassion; My Father,
behold the fire and the wood, but where is the Sacrifice? I know not whether
that word, My Father did not strike Abraham as deep as the knife of Abraham
could strike his Son, yet does he not so much as think (O miserable man, that
may not at once be a Son to such a God, and a Father to such a Son) still he
persists, and conceals, and where he meant not, prophesies; My Son, God will
provide a Lamb for a burnt-Offering.

Verse 10. Abraham here lifts up his hand to fetch the stroke of death at once,
not so much asthinking by chance that God will relent after the first wound.
Now the stay of Abraham the hope of the Church lies upon bleeding under the
hand of a Father; what bowels can choose but yearn at this spectacle? which of
the Savagest Heathens that had been now upon the hill of Moriah, and had seen
through the bushes the hand of a Father hanging over the throat of such a Son,
would not have been more perplexed in his thought, than that unexpected
Sacrifice was in those briars: yet he whom it nearest concerned is least
touched: Faith had wrought the same in him which cruelty would in others, not
to be moved. He contemns all fears, and over-looks all impossibilities; his
heart tells him that the same hand which raised Isaac from the dead womb of
Sarah, can raise him again from the ashes of his Sacrifice. With this
confidence was the hand of Abraham now falling upon the throat of Isaac, who
had given himself for dead; when suddenly the Angel of God interrupts him,
forbids him, commends him.

Verse 12. The voice of God was never so welcome, never so sweet, never so
seasonable as now. It was the trial that God intended, not the fact. Isaac is
sacrificed, and is yet alive: and now both of them are more happy in that they
would have done, than they could have been distressed if they had done it. Gods
charges are oft-times harsh in the beginnings, and proceeding; but in the
conclusion always comfortable: true spiritual comforts are commonly late and
sudden. God defers on purpose that our trials may be perfect, our deliverance
welcome, our recompense glorious. Isaac had never been so precious to his
Father, if he had not been recovered from death, if he had not been as
miraculously restored as given: Abraham had never been so blessed in his Seed,
if he had not neglected Isaac for God.

Verse 13. The only way to find comfort in any earthly thing, is to surrender
it in a faithful carelessness into the hands of God. Abraham came to Sacrifice,
he may not go away with dry hands; God cannot abide that good purposes should
be frustrate. Lest either Abraham should not do that for which he came, or
shall want means of speedy thanksgiving for so gracious a disappointment;
behold a Ram stands ready for the Sacrifice, and as it were proffers himself to
this happy exchange. He that made that beast brings him thither, fastens him
there. Even in small things there is a great providence; what mysteries there
are in every (though the least) act of God.

CHAP. XXIII.
Verse 1. BEcause the years of Sarah are here distinctly numbered, and the
Hebrews read thus, and the lives of Sarah was an hundred years, and twenty
years, and seven years; the Jewish Rabbis collect, that here is commended her
beauty and her chastity: viz. that she was as fair at an hundred years as at
twenty, and as chaste at twenty as at seven; but this collection of the Rabbis
perchance is scarce warrantable from the words; yet from hence we may safely
conclude for our comfort, that the Lord does number all our years, and whether
they be few or many, he has set them down in his Book of Remembrance. For here
Sarah's days are punctually numbered; and Job in his Fourteenth Chapter
mentions months and days; how that our days are exactly determined, and
the number of months which man has to live are in the Lords hand. Wherefore
no good man need make any question but that the Lord has a care of him, and
that his life does not depend upon the skill of the Physician, but the good
pleasure of our God.

Verse 2. These words, She dyed at Hebron, bids us meditate on theformer Story.
It Is well known that at Beersheba Abimelech made a league with Abraham; the
tenure whereof was, that the one should not hurt the other. whereupon Abraham
supposing he should have set up his staff there, planted a grove: yet for all
this Sarah dies not there, but dies at Hebron certain miles distant from
Beersheba, and dies in the absence of Abraham, and happily without the
presence of her Son and acquaintance, dies in a strange place among strangers:
which may serve to comfort those whom the Lord will not vouchsafe to die in
their own Country among their nearest and dearest Friends, wanting them to
close up their dying eyes, and perform the duties and offices of love. For
though Friends be absent, yet the best Friends God and his Christ are ever
present to the faithful; and when all forsake, yet they never forsake, and
Heaven is no further from one place than another: and then in regard we are all
with Sarah and Abraham here liable to a wandering and a wavering condition,
this should hold up in us all a longing desire of Heaven, where all joy remains
and is fixed for evermore, seeing here we have no happiness, no rest, no
quietness. Here is only the valley of tears and weeping, we must look for the
happy place of joy and gladness in another World, where shall be no more
sorrow, nor crying, nor tears.

Verse 4. This Sarah that before was the desire of Abraham's eyes is now desired
to be removed out of his sight; she that before had a beauty to tempt Kings,
had not now so much left her by death, as to take her own Husband. I have read
of a fair young German Gentleman, who living, refused to be pictured, and put
off the importunity of his Friends, by giving way that after a few days burial
they might send a Painter to his Vault, and if they saw cause for it, draw the
image of Death unto the Life; they did so, and found his face half eaten, his
Midrife and Backbone full of Serpents; and so he stands pictured among his
armed Ancestors. Thus does the fairest Beauty change, and it will be as bad
with you and me as it was here with Sarah; and then what nearest Relation will
endure our company, what Servants shall we have to wait upon us in the Grave,
what officious people to cleanse away the moist cloud cast upon our faces from
the sides of the weeping Vaults, which are the longest Weepers for our
Funerals; all our Friends will then like Abraham in the Text desire to remove
us out of their sight.

Verse 8. The eye affects the heart with sorrow-occasioning objects; if sorrow
be in the eye, it will not stay long from the heart. Hence when Sarah was dead,
Abraham in this Text thus bespeaks the people among whom he dwelt, If it be in
your mind that I should bury my dead out of my sight. It did afflict the heart
of Abraham with sorrow to see the body of his deceased Wife, or the Coffin
where she lay, whom he had so entirely loved, therefore he says, Bury her out
of my sight.

Verse 9. This world is but a thorow-fare: we have no place to settle to abide
here, and therefore our first purchase of possession should be like this of
Abraham's, a place to bury in, not to build upon: Our Grave is our long and
lasting home; all our other houses are but transitory, and as short-lived as
our selves. And therefore to mind us of our mortality, it were good with the
Patriarch here to make our Sepulcher our first purchase. Upon this account when
our first Parents had made them Garments of Figg-leaves, God gave them Garments
of skins; with those they would have covered their shame, with these God did
discover their mortality.

Verse 19. Though the pomp of Funerals concerns not the dead in real and
effective purposes, yet it is the duty of the living to see their Friends
fairly Interred. For to the Dead it is all one whether they be carried forth on
a Chariot, or a wooden Beer, whether they rot upon the earth, or under the
earth, whether in a Cave, or in a Ditch. There is nothing in this but opinion,
and the decency of some to be served. Let thy Friend therefore be interred as
Sarah was here after the Laws of the Country, and the dignity of the person. It
was therefore that our blessed Savior who was ever temperate in his expense,
was yet pleased to admit the cost of Mary's Ointment upon his head and feet,
because she did it against his Burial; by which he remark't it to be a great
act of piety, and honorable to Interr our Friends according to the proportion
of their condition, and so to give a testimony of our hopes of their
Resurrection.

CHAP. XXIV.
Verse 3. ABraham would not link his Son with the wicked: he remembered what had
come of such Marriages in the Age before him; when the Sons of God took them
Wives of the Daughters of Men only for their Beauty, without regard of Religion
or honesty. Their destruction was a lesson to him; he avoided their sin by
fearing their punishment. And afterward under the Law God gave his people
express charge concerning this, Exodus 34. and the reason is there given, Lest
they make thy Sons go a whoring after their gods; a sufficient reason to
prevail as with the Jew, so much more with the Christian.

Verse 12. The necessary use of seasoning and sanctifying the first entrance
into the married estate, is by prayer to God. Abraham's servant being entrusted
with a business of that nature, commended the whole success to God by prayer;
and the Woman being sent away by her Friends, was dismissed with a blessing
upon both. Look to the first Marriage that ever was, the Lord himself knit the
knot, and confirmed it with a blessing, Genesis 1. and Gods course should be a
pattern for the following times; and to assure us withal, that when this is
left out we may well say as Christ did in another Particular concerning
Marriage, From the beginning it was not so. And good reason there is for this:
for Marriage is the Covenant of God, and if he be not called to confirm it, it
cannot prosper.

Verse 14. When Eliezer went a wooing for his young Master Isaac; the trial by
which he intended to prove a fit Wife for Isaac, was this; that if says he,
when I say to the Maid give me drink, she say again drink, and I will give thy
Camels also, she without more ado should be a Wife for Isaac; that is, if she
were gentle; not like the Woman John 4. who when Christ asked her Water, called
him Jew; How is it that thou being a Jew, ask water of one that is a
Samaritan: for though there be many sins incident to Women, yet no vice in
Women is so unwomanly as this. If Adam had been furious the matter had been
less; for he was made of Earth the Mother of Iron and Steel, those murdering
metals; but the Woman she that was made of so tender metal to become so
terrible, the weaker Vessel so strong in passion, yea to look so fair, and
speak so foul, what a contrariety is this. There was great reason sure to
compare a good Woman to a snail: not only for her silence, and continual
keeping of her house, but also for a certain timorousness of her nature, which
at the least shaking of the air shrinks back into her shell: and so ought the
Wife to do if her Husband but speak, to play all hid, and under hatches; and to
say to her Husband as Rachel to her Father, Let not my Lord be angry.

Verse 30. Laban gave this respect unto Abraham's Servant, not for his own sake,
nor yet his Masters, but for the Earrings sake, and the Bracelets. Thus many
love God for their own interest, and not his glory; in all their services they
look a squint at God, but directly at self ends; and seldom or never look at
his glory but through the spectacles of self-love. Such was Iehu's Zeal serving
God so far as he might serve himself, 2 King. 10. But this is merchandising
with God, and not obedience, to serve him for ends. I am never at the pitch of
sincerity, till I see enough in God himself without looking out of him, to have
him as my exceeding rich reward. When it comes once to this point, that the
beauties of Gods truth, and the pleasantness of his ways, and the holiness of
his will, and the equity of his Laws, are the arguments and wages that hire me
to his service, then do I serve him as I ought.

Verse 39. Here the servant leaves out the charge that was given him by
Abraham in the sixth Verse of this Chapter: Beware that thou bring not my Son
thither again, for this speech would have offended them; as though Abraham had
counted them a forlorn and wicked people. We learn then from this discreet
omission of this part of Abraham's charge, that every truth in all places, and
upon all occasions is not to be uttered.

Verse 63. It is our duty to study the Heavens, and be acquainted with the
Stars; in them the wonderful works of God are seen; and a sober knowledge in
Nature may be an advantage unto Grace. Heaven is the most considerable of all
inanimate Creatures, and more considerable than most of the animate. And
therefore some of the Rabbis tell us, that when Isaac went out into the field
to meditate, the subject of his meditation was the Stars, or the Heavens. It is
good to take field-room sometimes, to view and contemplate the works of God
round about. Only take heed of the folly of Astrological curiosities confining
the providence of God to secondary causes; avoid that, and the heart may have
admirable elevations unto God from the meditation of the Works of God. If the
Heavens declare the glory of God, we should observe what glory that is which
they declare. The Sun, Moon, and Stars are Preachers, universal Preachers, they
are natural Apostles, the World is their charge, and their words says the Ps.
19. go to the end of the earth.

Verse 65. At the first meeting of Isaac and Rebecka, he was gone out to
meditate in the fields, and she came riding that way with his Fathers man, who
was employed in making that Marriage; and when upon asking she knew that it was
he who was to be her Husband, She took a veil and covered her face, says that
story. What freedom and nearness soever they were to come to after, yet there
was a modesty, and a bashfulness, and a reservedness required before; and her
first kindness should be but to be seen. A man would be glad of a good
countenance from her that shall be his, before he ask her whether she will be
his or no: a man would be glad of a good countenance from his Prince before he
intend to press him with any particular suit: and a sinner may become to his
Miserere mei Domine, to desire that the Lord would think upon him, that the
Lord would look graciously toward him, that the Lord would refresh him with
the beams of his favor, before he have digested his devotion into a formal
prayer, or entered into a particular consideration what his necessities are.

CHAP. XXV.
Verse 8. A Braham died, says the text, plenus dierum, full of years; it is
not said so in the text of Methusalem that he died full of years, and yet he
had another manner of gomer, another measure of life than Abraham: for he lived
almost eight hundred years more than he; but he that is best disposed to die,
is fullest of years. One man may be fuller at twenty than another at seventy.
David lived not the tithe of Methusalems years, not ten to his hundred, he
lived less than Abraham, and yet David is said to have died full of years, 1 Chronicles. 29. he had made himself agreeable to God, and so was made ripe for him.
In that therefore Abraham is said here to die in a good old age, whereas for
many before him dying much elder this phrase is not used; it was not the old
age of his body, but his perfection of virtue that made a good old age. Again,
it is said in the Hebrew text, he was full, and no more: upon which reading,
because days is not in the original, the Rabbis gather that he was full, not
only of days, but of all other blessings.

Verse 21. Of all the Patriarcks, none made so little noise in the World as
Isaac; none lived either so privately, or so innocently; neither know I whether
he proved himself a better Son, or Husband. For the one, he gave himself over
to the knife of his Father, and mourned three years for his Mother: For the
other, he sought not to any Handmaids bed, but in a chaste forbearance reserved
himself for twenty years space, and prayed: Rebecca was so long barren; his
prayers proved more effectual than his seed. At last she conceives, as if she
had been more than the Daughter-in-law to Sarah; whose Son was given her, not
out of the power of nature, but of her Husbands Faith.

Verse 22. God is better to us than we would our selves: Isaac prays for a
Son, God gives him two at once: now she is no less troubled with the strife of
the Children in her Womb, than before with the want of Children. We know not
when we are pleased; that which we desire, oft-times discontents us more in the
fruition; we are ready to complain both full and fasting. Before Rebecca
conceived, she was at ease: before spiritual Regeneration there is all peace in
the Soul; no sooner is the new-man formed in us but the Flesh conflicts with
the Spirit. There is no Grace where there is no Unquietness; Esau alone would
not have striven; nature will ever agree with its self: never any Reb^cca
conceived only an Esau; or was so happy as to conceive none but a Jacob; she
must be the Mother of both that she may have both joy and exercise. This strife
began early; every true Israelite begins his War with his being.

Verse 26. So early, so primary a sin is Pride, that we see even Children
strive for place and precedence; and Mothers are ready to go to the Heralds to
know how Cradles should be ranked, which Cradle shall have the first place.
Nay, even in the Womb in this text there was contention for precedence; Jacob
took hold of his Brother Esaus heel, and would have been born before him. And
as our Pride begins in our Cradles, so it continues in our Graves and
Monuments. It was a good while in the Primitive Church before any were buried
in the Church, the best contented themselves with the Churchyards. But now
persons whom the Devil kept from Church all their lives, Separatists and
Libertines, that never came to any Church, Pride and vainglory brings to
Church after their deaths in an affectation of high Places and sumptuous
Monuments in the Church; and such as have given nothing at all to any Pious
Uses; or have determined their Alms and their Dole which they have given in
that one day of their Funeral and no farther, have given large Annuities for
new painting their Tombs, and for new Flags and Scutcheons every certain
number of years.

Verse 31. These two were the Champions of two Nations, the field was their
Mothers Womb; their quarrel precedence and superiority; Esau got the right of
Nature, Jacob of Grace. Yet that there might be some pretense of equality, lest
Esau should outrun his Brother in the World, Jacob holds him fast by the heel;
so his hand was born before the others foot. But because Esau was some minutes
the elder; that the younger might have better claim to that which God had
promised, he buys that which he could not winn: if either by strife, or
purchase, or suit, we can attain spiritual blessings we are happy: If Jacob had
come forth first, he had not known how much he was bound to God for the favor
of his advancement.

Verse 32. There was never any Meat, except the forbidden Fruit, so dear bought
as this Broth of Jacobs; in both, the Receiver and the Eater is accursed. Every
true son of Israel will be content to purchase spiritual favors with earthly;
and that man has in him too much of the blood of Esau which will not rather
die than forgo his birthright. Hence we may further learn, that if Esau were so
much to blame to fell his birthright for a mess of Pottage, which yet was to
save his life; how much more are they to blame that Ahab-like sell themselves
to work wickedness; that for a title of honor, esteem of men, or for a little
white and yellow dust, which is called Gold and Silver (mere vanities) will
sell their souls? Alas! These ticklings will turn into stings; and the torment
will be the more torment the more pleasing the sin was. 'Twill be but cold
Comfort for any man to go to Hell with Credit; or that others think him gone to
Heaven, when he feels himself in Hell.

Verse 33. Esau sold his Birthright, and with it, as the Rabbis say, Heaven
its self; whereof the birthright was a type and pledge. So Esau's sin was in
his unthankfulness for such a dignity; in limiting it to this life, in selling
it so cheap; but especially in his profane parting with a spiritual blessing
for a temporal, with the food and joy of Angels for a mess of Pottage. Such a
foolish bargain makes every impenitent person in the sale of his soul for a
thing of naught; which Christ (who only knew and paid the price of a Soul)
says, is more worth than the world. Let there be no profane person among us
as was Esau, says the Apostle, Heb. 12. And that there may not, let not men
take pleasure in pleasure, spend too much time in it. It was not simply a sin
in Esau to go a hunting; but yet the more he used the more profane he grew by
it, and came at length to contemn his birthright. God allows men to stoop to
lawful delights and recreations for their bodies sake, as the Eagle to the
prey, or as Gideons Soldiers to soop their handful, not swill their belly
full. An honest heart is where his calling is; such a one when he is elsewhere
is like a fish in the air, whereunto if it leap for Recreation or Necessity,
yet it soon returns to his own Element.

Verse 34. Esau may be as great a glutton in his Pottage as those greedy Dogs,
Isa. 56. 12. Thus the Poor may sin as much in their throat as the Rich; for men
have talem dentem, qualem mentem, such an appetite as they have affection:
there is Epicurisme in course fare, as well as dainties. An Esau's luxury is in
his mind more than his taste.

CHAP. XXVI.
Verse 1. IF the Canaanites had amended by the former Famine, this latter had
been prevented. For God takes no delight in the misery and affliction of his
Creatures. He first tries gentle means, and if those will do no good, rigid and
severe courses must be used: first he chastises us with Rods, and then with
Scorpions: if a single Famine will not humble us, that Famine shall be doubled
till we are brought low, and continued upon us so long as we continue in our
sins. So that if we be destroyed, our destruction is from our selves; and if
God does multiply his Judgments upon us, it is because that we do multiply our
sins: if man be not weary of sinning, what reason is there that God should be
weary of punishing.

Verse 7. So long as we carry flesh and blood about us, we shall be subject to
such passions as arise from that flesh and blood: Moses had his anger; Abraham
and Isaac their fear. But now these passions must be kept within their bounds,
or else they run out into sin. As here Isaac's fear was too predominant, it
made him as it had done his Father Abraham call his Wife his Sister, and in
that to lie; which sin was greater in him than in his Father, because he was
not warned by his Fathers example. Now the child of God should rather die than
lie. Nec prodam nec mentiar, said that good Bishop in St. Augustine; and that
was a brave Woman in St. Jerome, that being on the Rack, resolved and answered
the tormentor, I had rather tell the truth and perish, than lie and live. The
Chamelion is the most fearful of all Creatures; and does therefore change into
all colors to save it self: so will timorous persons. Let us therefore
fortify our hearts against this passion, that we may not fall into the sins of
the passion.

Verse 13. Isaac waxed rich because the Lord blessed him, verse 12. it is Gods
blessing that makes rich. Godliness has the promises of both lives; now the
Promises are the unsearchable riches of Christ, Ephesians. 3. 9. who is the heir of
all, and has godly men his coheirs, entailing upon them riches and honor,
life, and length of days, the blessings of both hands; and if at any time God
does deny gain to godliness, it is that it may be admired for itsself; as
having a self-sufficiency, and a hid treasure of its own. Agrain of Grace is
worth all the gold of Ophir, and a remnant of Faith of more value than the
richest Ward-Robes. Thus a Righteous man is the richest man in the World; true
piety has true plenty, and whereas the Wicked in the fullness of their
sufficiency are in straits, the Godly in the fullness of their straits are in
all sufficiency.

Verse 18. Origin extends this power far, though not very confidently;
perchance says he in every one of our souls there is this well of the Water of
Life, and this power to have power to open it: whether our souls be intended by
Origin of us as we are men, or of us as we are Christians I pronounce not; but
divide it: in all us as we are natural men there is this Well of Water of Life:
Abraham dug it at first the Father of the Faithful, our Heavenly Abraham
infused it unto us at first in Adam; of whom as we have the image of God though
defaced, so we have this Well of Water though stopped up: but then the Philistines
having stopped this Well, Satan by sin having barred it up, the power of opening
it again is not in the natural man; but Isaac diggs it again, Isaac who is
Filius laetitiae, the Son of joy; our Isaac, our Jesus he opens this Well of
Life again to all that receive him; according to his Ordinance in his Church he
has given this power of keeping open in themselves this Well of Life, these
means of Salvation.

Verse 22. When Isaac's servants had dug a first and a second Well, the
Heardsmen of Gerar contended about it, saying, the Water is ours: then his
Servants dug a third Well, and for that they strove not; therefore he called
the name of it Rehoboth, i. e. room; for now says he, the Lord has made room
for us. Thus we may say of all our comforts and mercies Rehoboth, that is,
room; but of all our afflictions that they are straits.

Verse 30. In a Feast there are two things; extraordinary provision, and
extraordinary company; both are lawful. God has given us the Creature not only
for necessity, but for delight; and it is a clear argument that such use of the
Creatures in feasting is lawful, because God has made more Creatures serving
for the delight of man, than he has made for the necessity of man. If God had
meant that men should do nothing but maintain their lives, and serve their own
necessity, so as they might go on in their places and callings, one half of the
Creatures might have been spared; but God made nothing in vain: therefore he is
willing we should use the creatures for moderate delight. Thus Abraham made a
great Feast at the weaning of Isaac, and Isaac here makes a Feast for Abimelech
and Phicol the chief Captain of his Army: and the like examples we have in
diverse other places. And our Savior Christ himself was at a Feast in Cana of
Galilee, where when Wine failed he supplied it by miracles.

Verse 31. Men may do much, and go far in the love of Gods people, and yet not
love them as they ought to be loved: they may hold an outward correspondency
with them in outward peace and neighborhood; they may live quietly by them,
and with them; be free from quarrels, suits, contentions, vexations, and
oppositions against them, and in these respects may keep fair quarter with
them, and yet for all this not love them, as Gods people are to be loved.
Abimelech and Phicol desire to live peaceably and quietly with Isaac, that
there may be an Oath and a Covenant between them; but yet these being Heathens,
could not love Isaac as a godly man should be loved; they departed from him in
peace says this verse, peace is one thing, and love is another.

CHAP. XXVII.
Verse 2. AS Isaac said here that he knew not the day of his death; so may we
say both of the time, and also of the place and manner of our death. For death
surprizeth some, as Abel when he was walking in the field, others as Uz when he
was sitting at his door; some with Jobs children at a Feast, others with the
Philistines sporting in a Theater. Thus likewise may we say of the manner of
our death; there is a natural death when a man dies, as a Lamp goes out,
because there is no more Oil to feed it; and there is a violent death, when the
soul is thrust out of doors, and the Lamp of Life not burnt, but blown out.
Iosia dies by the hurt of an Arrow, a Prophet of God by the teeth of a Lion,
Abimelech by the fall of a stone. Boast not thy self therefore of to morrow,
for thou know not what a day may bring forth; if not an end of thy sins, it
may be an end of thy life; if it bring not forth conversion, it may bring forth
confusion.

Verse 4. What has careless Esau lost, if having sold his Birthright, he may
obtain the blessing. Or what has Jacob gained if his Brothers Venison may
countervail his pottage. Yet thus has old Isaac decreed, who was not now more
blind in his eyes than in his affections. God had forewarned him that the Elder
should serve the Younger, yet Isaac goes about to bless Esau. The dearest of
Gods Saints have been sometimes transported with natural Affections; he saw
himself preferred to Ismael though the Elder, he saw his Father wilfully
forgetting Nature at Gods command, in binding him for Sacrifice; he saw Esau
leudly matched with Heathens, and yet he will remember nothing, but Esau is my
firstborn: but how gracious is God, that when we would, will not let us sin:
and so orders our actions, that we do not what we would, but what we ought.

Verse 8. That God which had ordained the Lordship for the younger, will also
contrive for him the blessing; what he will have effected shall not want means:
the mother shall rather defeat the Son, and beguile her Husband, than the
Father shall beguile the chosen Son of his Blessing. What was Jacob to Rebecca
more than Esau, or what Mother does not more affect the Elder. But now God
inclines the love of the Mother to the Younger, against the custom of Nature,
because the Father loves the Elder against the promise. The Affections of
Parents are divided, that the Promise might be fulfilled. Rebecca's craft shall
answer Isaac's partiality. Isaac would unjustly turn Esau into Jacob, Rebecca
does as cunningly turn Jacob into Esau: her desire was good, her means was
unlawful. God does oft-times effect his just will by our wickednesses; yet
neither thereby justifying our infirmities, nor blemishing his own actions.

Verse 19. Here is nothing but counterfeiting: a fained person, fained name,
fained Venison, a fained answer; and yet behold a true blessing, but to the
man, not to the means: those were so unsound, that Jacob himself does more fear
their curse than hope for their success: but Rebecca presuming upon the Oracle
of God, and her Husbands simplicity dare be his surety for the danger, his
Counselor for the carriage of the business, his Cook for the Diet; yea dresses
both the meat and the man. And now she wishes she could borrow Esau's tongue as
well as his garments; that she might securely deceive all the senses of him,
who had suffered himself to be more dangerously deceived by his affection. But
this is past her Remedy; her Son must name himself Esau, with the voice of
Jacob. It is hard if our tongue do not bewray what we are in spite of our
habit. This was enough to work Isaac to a suspicion, to an enquiry, not to an
incredulity; he that is good of himself will hardly believe evil of another;
and will rather distrust his own senses, than the fidelity of those he trusted;
all the senses are set to examine, none sticks at the Judgment but the ear:
to deceive that, Jacob must second his dissimulation with three lies in one
breath; I am Esau, As thou badst me: My Venison. Onesin entertained fetches in
another; and if it be forced to lodge alone, either departs or dies. I love
Jacobs blessing, but I hate his lie I would not do that wilfully, which Jacob
did weakly, on condition of a blessing: he that pardoned his infirmity would
curse my obstinateness.

Verse 23. Good Isaac had first set his hands to try whether his ears informed
him aright; and then feeling the hands of him whose voice he suspected, that
honest heart could not think that the skin might more easily be counterfeited
than the Lungs: a small satisfaction contents those whom guiltiness has not
made scrupulous: Isaac believes, and blesses the Younger Son in the Garments
of the Elder. If our Heavenly Father smell upon our backs the savor of our
Elder Brothers Robes, we cannot depart from him unblessed.

Verse 27. As Isaac said of his Son here, The smell of my Son is as the smell
of a field which the Lord has blessed. So the Lord of Heaven as he smelt a
savor of rest from the Sacrifice of Noah should smell from us (if we intend to
be his Sons, and Heirs of the Promise as Jacob was) the savor of Medicinal
Herbs of remorse, and repentance, and contrition, and detestation of former
sins; and the savor of odoriferous, and fragrant, and Aromatical Herbs, Works
worthy of Repentance, amendment of Life, Edification of others, and zeal to his
Glory.

Verse 32. No sooner is Jacob gone away full of the joy of his blessing, then
Esau comes in full of the hope of the blessing; and now blowing and sweating
for his reward, he finds nothing but a Repulse. Lewd men when they think they
have earned of God, and come proudly to challenge favor, receive no answer,
but Who art thou? the hopes of the wicked fail them when they are at the
highest; whereas Gods children find these comforts in extremity which they
durst not expect.

Verse 33. Both the Father and the Son wonder at each other; the one with fear,
the other with grief; Isaac trembled, and Esau wept; the one upon Conscience,
the other upon Envy. Isaac's heart now told him that he should not have
purposed the blessing where he did, and that it was due unto him unto whom it
was given, and not purposed; hence he durst not reverse that which he had done
with Gods will besides his own: for now he saw that he had done unwilling
Justice: God will find both time and means to reclaim his own, to prevent their
sins, to manifest and reform their errors.

Verse 34. Who would have looked for tears from Esau; or who dare trust tears
when he sees them fall from so graceless eyes. It was a good word here, Bless
me also O my Father: every miscreant can wish himself well. No man would be
miserable if it were enough to desire happiness. Why did he not rather weep to
his Brother for the pottage, than to Isaac for a blessing? If he had not then
sold, he had not needed now to beg; It is just with God to deny us those
favors which we were careless in keeping, and which we undervalued in
enjoying. How happy a thing it is to know the seasons of Grace, and not to
neglect them, how desperate to have known and neglected them! these tears were
both late and false, the tears of rage, of envy, of carnal desire: worldly
sorrow causes death. Yet whiles Esau howls out thus for a blessing, I hear him
cry out of his Fathers store, (Have thou but one blessing O my Father?) of his
Brothers subtilty, (was he not rightly termed Jacob?) I do not hear him blame
his own deserts. He did not see while his Father was deceived and his Brother
crafty, that God was just, and himself incapable: he knew himself profane, and
yet claims a blessing.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Verse 11. NOne of all the Patriarks saw so evil days as Jacob did; from whom
justly has the Church of God therefore taken her Name; neither were the
Faithful ever since called Abramites, but Israelites. That no time might be
lost, he began his strife in the Womb; after that, he flies for his life from a
cruel Brother to a cruel Uncle. With a Staff goes he over Jordan alone,
doubtful and comfortless, not like the Son of Isaac. In the way the Earth is
his bed, and a stone his pillow; yet even there he sees a Vision of Angels.
Jacob's heart was never so full of joy, as when his head lay hardest. God is
most present with us in our greatest dejection, and loves to give comfort to
those that are for saken of their hopes.

Verse 12. This Ladder betokens Christ, who above is God of his Father,
beneath is man out of Jacob's Loins, Ioh. 1. 51; the Angels ascending and
descending are the blessed Spirits; which first ministered to the person of
Christ, and secondly for the good of his body, namely, the Elect, Heb. 1. 14.
The Angels went up and down; none of them were seen standing still: we must
always be going forward in our Christian courses, and not think to be carried
to heaven in a feather bed, but we must climb a Ladder: if we expect to be
carried as Elias was in a Chariot, it will be a fiery Chariot.

Verse 14. Against Jacob's fourfold cross here is a fourfold comfort, a
plaster as broad as the sore, and sovereign for it: Against the loss of his
Friends, I will be with thee says God; Against the loss of his Country, I will
give thee this Land; Against his Poverty, Thou shall spread abroad to the East,
and to the West; Against his solitariness and lowness, Angels shall attend
thee, and thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth; whereunto we may add that
which surpasses all the rest, In thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth
be blessed: thy Seed shall be as the dust of the earth, and that dust of the
earth shall shine as the stars in heaven: they that trust in the Lord shall
have the blessings of both worlds; they shall be blessed here temporally, and
hereafter eternally.

Verse 15. It is a great and peculiar privilege of the Church and every Member
of it, to have God present with them, and President over them. He is not far
off from those that are his (however in time of Affliction, and in the hour of
tentation, he seems so to them) but is ever with them, and holds a gracious
hand over them. This is it which the Lord so often promises in his Word, and
truly performs to the great comfort of all his Children. This is it which the
Lord speaks to Jacob going from his Fathers house to Padan Aran, Lo, I am
with thee, etc. And God thus promises his presence, that the faithful might be
assured of his protection and defense being gathered together by his power,
without which they could not have any comfort. If he were not present with us,
he could not consider of our wants, nor succor us in our necessities, nor
refresh us with his help while we walk in the valley of the shadow of death.
Seeing therefore we have comfort to be preserved in all perils, and to be heard
in our Prayers and Requests that we make to God, we are assured and persuaded
of his continual presence amongst us for our good and safety.

Verse 17. Though the Almighty be every where, yet not every where after the
same manner, say the Schools; his presence indeed shines forth in all, but not
the same degrees of his presence; and though his glory filled both the Bush and
the space about it, yet not both alike; the one with fire, the other perchance
but with smoke: and therefore we read Exodus 3. of a place where Moses may
stand, and a place so holy whither he may not draw nigh; the first too holy for
his shoes, the last too hot for his feet. Thus also we read of Gods House made
with hands, and his House not made with hands; and to both Holiness required
for their Consecration, and an awful esteem for their Diety: Sanctified they
must because they are Gods, and Reverenced because he is in them. To witness
whose personal residence was that solemn erecting of Altars where God
vouchsafed to appear. Thus God here appeared to Jacob and strait ways his
Stone is anointed into a Pillar, and what the last night was a pillow for
himself, must now be a resting place for his God; there offering up his dues to
heaven where he had before to Nature.

Verse 20. A mean or middle estate, which is neither too eminent nor too
obscure, too rich nor too poor, above contempt below envy, is to be preferred
before the greatest: first, because it is most free from danger; as not being
so low as to be trodden upon, nor so high as to be seated in the eye of envy.
Secondly, Because it preserves us from forgetfulness of God, irreligion, and
prophanness, which accompanies prosperity, and from the use of unlawful means
to maintain our estate, and from impatiency, murmuring, and repining against
God to which we are tempted in poverty. If then our God has been so gracious
unto us as to give us a convenient competency in these outward matters, let us
reckon our lot to have fallen unto us in a pleasant ground, and that we have a
goodly heritage. And indeed our Nature desires not much. Food and Raiment are
the only necessaries for this life (I mean the preservation of it) we stand in
need of. If God will be with me says Jacob, etc. that is all which he does
require: hitherto tend all our earthly labors and industries. Oh that we were
wise to consider this, how small a debt we owe to Nature, how little would
content it.

CHAP. XXIX.
Verse 1. SO should it be with a man after his Communion with God in the
Sacrament, as it was with Jacob after his Communion here with God in Bethel;
Then Jacob lift up his feet and came into the Land of the People of the East:
He lift up his feet, he went with strength, with spirit, with cheerfulness: and
then he went, that is, after he had had that sweet fellowship with God in
Bethel, he was so cheered and refreshed with that spiritual bait, that in the
strength and force of that, he went on lively and cheerfully in his journey. So
when we have had fellowship with God in the Sacrament, in the strength of that
heavenly bait at the Sacrament, we should lift up our feet and go on
cheerfully, lively, lustily in our journey toward Heaven.

Verse 9. Masters of Families should so order the Duties of their Families,
that every one under their jurisdiction may have such an employment as is most
proper for him. Thus here Rachel kept the Sheep, while Leah had her task within
doors. God has dispensed his Gifts diversely for the common benefit. To one man
is given Knowledge, to another the gift of Utterance, to a third is given to
speak with diverse Tongues, to a fourth the Interpretation of those Tongues.
There is scarce any one but has something or other in him that is excellent
and extraordinary; some special talent to trade with, some Honey to bring to
the common hive; if he have but an heart to it. Let every man therefore
according to his several ability improve his Talent to the glory of the donor,
and the common good.

Verse 17. God has two Daughters, the younger which is Heaven, is fair and
lovely like Rachel, and courted by all; the elder is Repentance, which with
tears is bleareyed, like Leah and neglected by most: but if men ask as Jacob
for Rachel, God will answer as Laban did Jacob, It Is not the custom of the
place to Marry the Younger before the Elder; he that will not marry the Leah of
Repentance, shall never have the Rachel of Heaven.

Verse 20. Jacob thought seven years service a short time, that he might enjoy
Rachel; when his eye was upon his love, he thought seven years, and seven to
them, but a small time. Did Jacob account so many years but a small time, and
shall not we account seven days, seven hours short? Admit it be more, it is
but a short time, if we have heaven, if we have Rachel in our eye: fix our eyes
upon immortality, upon heaven, and then all tribulations will seem not only
light, but nothing; and not only short, but as if they had never been, but as
yesterday; or as yesterday is to a thousand years, to eternity.

Verse 23. After the service of an hard Apprenticeship had earned her whom
Jacob loved, his Wife is changed, and he in a sort forced to an unwilling
Adultery. His Mother had before substituted him who was the younger Son for the
elder; and now not long after his Father-in-law by the like fraud substitutes
to him the elder Daughter for the younger. God comes oftentimes home to us in
our own kind, and even by the sin of others pays us our own when we look not
for it.

Verse 26. Many things may be Customable which yet are not commendable, and
used to be done, which often were better undone. Such practice draws nearer the
Doctrine of the Pharisees than of Christ. For what was it else that the
Pharisees did so much stand upon under the tradition of the elders; and what
did they censure our Savior and his Disciples so hardly for but their
Customs; and what was it that our Savior did so deeply tax them for but the
observation of their superfluous and superstitious Customs. The Fathers and
Doctors of the Church were most plain and pregnant in this point, Veritate
manifestata cedat consuetudo veritati: for Christ said, I am the Truth; not, I
am the Custom. And in truth without this limitation and regard, if men be
carried away with the name of Custom, and will enquire no further into any
thing than what is the Custom, what has been used heretofore; much injury and
evil may be committed; Thus Laban here deceaving Jacob pretends the Custom of
the place; it was not forsooth their Custom to marry the younger before the
elder: but under that pretense he falsifies his promise, abuses his Daughter,
and deceives his Friend.

Verse 28. It is doubtful whether it were a greater cross to Jacob to marry
whom he would not, or to be disappointed of her whom he desired. And now he
must begin a new hope where he made account of fruition. To raise up an
expectation once frustrate, is more difficult than to continue a long hope
drawn on with likelihoods of performance; yet thus dear is Jacob content to pay
for Rachel even fourteen years servitude. Commonly Gods Children come not
easily by their pleasures; what miseries will not love digest and overcome? And
if Jacob were willingly consumed with heat in the day, and frost in the night,
to become the Son-in-law to Laban, what should we refuse to be the Sons of God?

Verse 31. Rachel whom Jacob loved is barren, Leah which was despised is
fruitful. How wisely God weighs out to us our Favors and Crosses in an equal
balance: so tempering our sorrows that they may not oppress, and our joys
that they may not transport us. Each one has some matter of envy to others,
and of grief to himself. Thus Leah envies Rachels beauty and love; Rachel
envies Leahs fruitfulness; yet Leah would not be barren, nor Rachel blear-eyed.
And here also we see how the Lord uses to chastise the preposterous affections
of his servants, as Jacob's love, with Rachels barrenness.

Verse 35. Leah had praised the Lord before at Rubens and Simeons birth, but
now upon the occasion of a new benefit she praises him again: which teaches
us, that as Gods Mercies are multiplied toward us, so we should increase and
go forward in giving of thanks.

CHAP. XXX.
Verse 2. THough Jacob was as tender an Husband to Rachel as she could be a
Mother of Children if she had them, yet his love kept within bounds; and he
would love his Wife so far as she loved his and her God. If Rachel be angry
with God, Jacob will be angry with Rachel; and if she inconsiderately will
advance him to Gods seat, and thrust Gods power into his hands, Jacob will make
use of it to reprove her, and condemn her by asking the question, Am I in Gods
stead, who carries the key of the Womb under his own girdle. Moses was the
meekest man on Earth, yet when Gods glory is concerned, and a rebellious people
have broke the commandments of God, Moses will break that Table of stone
wherein they were writ, and his anger will destroy part of the people, that
Gods anger may not consume them all. Now let us imitate these great examples;
and that we may be angry and not sin, let us only be angry for sin.

Verse 4. I see in Rachel the image of her Grandmother- Sarah; both in her
beauty of person, in her actions, in her success: she also will needs suborn
her handmaid to make her a Mother, and at last beyond hope her self conceives.
It is a weak greediness in us to affect Gods blessings by unlawful means: what
a proof and praise had it been of her Faith if she had stayed Gods leisure, and
would rather have endured her barrenness than her Husbands Polygamy. Now she
shows her self the Daughter of Laban; the Father for covetousness, the
Daughters for emulation have drawn sin into Jacobs bed: he offended in
yielding, but they more in soliciting him; and therefore the fact is not
imputed to Jacob, but to them. In those sins which Satan draws us into, the
blame is ours; in those sins which we move each other unto, the most fault and
punishment lies upon the tempter.

Verse 6. Here Rachel makes use of Gods name to profane it; and under pretense
of Religion would have God justify her Maids and her own sin. Many cry up that
Cause to be Gods which he never will own, and put his Name to those Writings
which at the last day shall condemn them. And indeed there has of late years
been no sin so common among Christians as to prostitue both Gods Name and his
Cause; and as that great Commander of the powers of darkness, the Devil, can
transform himself into an Angel of light; so there are no deeds of darkness so
black and ugly which have not been like their Father the Devil masked, and
veiled, and clouded even with light its self; I mean with those glorious,
heavenly, Angel-like pretenses of Religion and Conscience. Insomuch that not
only the most unchristian, but the most inhumane practices, the most unnatural
savage barbarities of this last age of the World are now avowed to be the
dictates and commands of God, that God himself (as in the text) has judged and
allowed them.

Verse 18. Leah broke the bonds of Matrimony and yet expects a reward: thus
many times men flatter themselves in their sins, and think that they are
rewarded of God when they do ill. As Micah (having made household gods, and
entertained a Levite) cries, Now I know that the Lord will be good unto me
because I have a Levite to my Priest; but he never thought he had an Idol to
his God. Thus Leah here rejoiced in that for which she should have repented,
and takes that for her hire, which God, for all she knew, intended as her
punishment. And indeed her Son Issachar (who was the hire here) was none of the
wisest, and withal a slave: and therefore in Jacobs Prophecy, Genesis 49.
compared to an Ass, and one that for his ease would submit unto any burdens,
impositions, taxes. This was a simple, low, poor spirit; and his posterity were
for the general very unworthy and vile: and yet this was the hire, the reward,
the blessing that Leah rejoiced in; as if God had approved of the sin by the
success and fruitfulness of her handmaids Womb: and this was her error of
measuring and judging of things by the success: as if God did not many times
give Children, and Honor, and Riches in his wrath, and were not many times
angry with men though they outwardly prosper. If this were not so the Turks and
some Christians too at this day were in an happy condition, who judge of the
goodness of their cause only by the success; and because they are not crossed,
that therefore they are blessed.

Verse 20. Children are a good dowry if they prove good; and though they are
always an heritage that comes of the Lord, yet they are not always the Lords
heritage: When our Children appear to be Gods heirs as well as ours, then may
we justly esteem them to be the best part of our estate, and our greatest
dowry. Otherwise they will prove but sad blessings, and such as we had better
be without; and yet all men desire them: how much rather should we cover grace,
and those things which accompany salvation; having got these we may safely and
surely say, God has endued me with a good dowry.

Verse 27. Jacob rich in nothing but Wives and Children was now returning to
his Fathers house, accounting his Charge his Wealth. But God meant him yet more
good. Laban sees that both his Family and his Flocks were well increased by
Jacobs service. Not his love therefore, but his gain makes him loath to part.
Even Labans covetousness, is made by God the means to enrich Jacob: and even
his strait Master entreats him to that recompense which made his Nephew mighty,
and himself envious.

Verse 41. In the very shapes and colors of brute Creatures there is a divine
hand which disposes them to his own ends. Small and unlikely means shall
prevail where God intends an effect. Little peeled sticks of Hazel or Poplar
laid in the troughs, shall enrich Jacob with an increase of spotted Cattle.
Labans Sons might have tried the same means and failed. God would have Laban
know that he put a difference betwixt Jacob and him; that as for fourteen years
he had multiplied Jacobs charge of Cattle to Laban, so now for the last six
years he would multiply Labans Flock to Jacob: and if Laban had the more, yet
the better were Jacobs. Even in these outward things Gods Children have many
times sensible tastes of his favors above the wicked.

CHAP. XXXI.
Verse 13. When God appeared here to Jacob upon his return from Laban, he
tells him I am the God of Bethel: by which expression he no doubt intends to
mind Jacob of the Promise, not only made there by God to him, but likewise by
him to God; for so it follows, Where thou vowedst a vow to me. God is the God
of pious resolutions as to approve of them, when made, so to look after them
how they are made good; and let me tell you, to profane that heart that is
once consecrated to God, to faulter in the execution of what is solemnly
resolved in Gods service, is a fetching the Sacrifice from the Altar, and will
certainly bring the coal of fire along with it. Had thou never put in for the
title of a Friend or votary, with an O God my heart is ready to do thy will,
thou had not been perfidious, though profane; but by breaking thy promise
thou addest the guilt of unfaithfulness to that of disobedience, and thy sin
becomes beyond measure sinful.

Verse 18. I know not whether Laban were a worse Uncle, or Father, or Master:
he can like well Jacobs service, not his wealth: as the wicked have no peace
with God, so the godly have no peace with men; for if they prosper not, they
are despised; if they prosper they are envied. This Uncle, whom Jacobs service
had made his Father, must now upon his wealth be fled from as an enemy. Jacob
knew his churlishness, and therefore resolves to be rather unmannerly, than
injured: well might he think that he whose oppression changed his wages so
often in his stay, would also abridg his Wages in the parting. Now therefore he
wisely prefers his own estate to Labans love. It is not good to regard too much
the unjust coffeehouse of worldly men, and to purchase unprofitable favor,
with too great loss.

Verse 24. The Lord has a negative voice upon the motion of all Creatures; he
commands the Sun and it rises not. It is a royal prerogative that the Lord
commands the Sun to rise; but that the Lord has a power to stay the Sun from
rising, lifts up his prerogative to the highest. In all disputes about Power,
he is resolved to be greatest who has the negative voice, which checks and
gives a super sedeas to all others; this is the prerogative of God, he can stay
the motion of the Sun, and of man. The Sun dares not do his Office to the day,
nor the Stars to the night, if God say no. Thus also he stops man in his
nearest preparation for any action. When Laban pursued Jacob with hard thoughts
against him, and strong resolutions to deal harshly with him, the Lord gave a
negative voice, Take heed that thou speak not to Jacob either good or bad: when
God commands, Laban shall not have the use of his own tongue.

Verse 29. As God sometimes said to Satan, Afflict the body of Job, but save
his life; so God says still to bloody wretches who are the Limbs of Satan, the
bodies of such and such are in your hands, the estates of such and such are in
your hands, but save their lives; the life of a man is never at the mercy of a
Creature, though it be a common speech of men when they have a man under them,
now I have you at my mercy; though some bragg as Laban did here to Jacob, it is
in the power of my hand to do you hurt; yet God often checks them, as he did
Laban, from so much as speaking hurt. Creatures though full of Love, cannot
speak good, and though full of malice, they cannot speak bad if God forbid:
then much less can they do us hurt, and least of all hurt our lives, if God
withold.

Verse 32. Though Jacob when he fled from his Father-in-Law Laban, were free
enough himself from the theft of Laban's Idols, yet it was dangerously
pronounced of him with whomsoever thou find thy Idols, let him not live: for
his own Wife Rachel had stolen them; and Caro conjux; thy Wife thy self thy
weaker part may insinuate much sin into thine actions, even when thy spit is at
strongest, and thou in thy best confidence. Only thus these two cases may
differ; Rachel was able to cover those stolen Idols from her Fathers finding
with that excuse the custom of Women is come upon me; but thou shall not be
able to cover thy stolen sins with saying the infirmity of man is come upon me,
I do but as other men do.

Verse 37. When controversies arise, the rule of love bids us refer our
differences to the determination of Brethren. In the first and best times men
did not presently run to Law; and call one another before the Judge; they had
daies-men, and Umpires to determine matters between them. To bring every matter
to the Judgementseat when possibly a Brother or a Friend, might take up the
matter is a transgression against the Law of Love. We should rather labor
after reconcilements, than Suits in Law; which are a cause not only of trouble
and expense, but of great breaches and heart-burnings among Friends and
Brethren; it is rare if a man wrongs not his Soul by seeking the rights of his
credit or estate.

Verse 41. The children of this World are wise in their Generations, omitting
no manner of means to bring their purposes to pass. We may observe by continual
experience the nature of ungodly men; they are subtle and cunning in their
kind, they watch their ways and times to fit them, to work out their wicked
devises and inventions. Thus did Laban deal with Jacob, changing his mind,
revoking his bargains, altering his wages, and murmuring at his prosperity. Now
seeing this is the nature of the enemies of the Church, this should on the
other side teach us to deal wisely and warily with them, lest we be snared and
circumvented by them; we are set as upon an hill, we are placed as upon a
Stage; if we profess Christ Jesus, a small spot will be seen in our garment. It
behooves us therefore to be wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doves; the wisdom
of our enemies is joined with wickedness, our wisdom must be mixed with
godliness. Their wisdom is a circumventing by laying of snares, our wisdom must
be to be circumspect in avoiding of snares.

Verse 55. Behold! Laban follows Jacob with one Troop in this Chapter, and in
Chapter 23. Esau meets him with another, both with hostile intentions: both go
on till the utmost point of their execution, both are prevented ere the
execution. God makes fools of the enemies of his Church, he lets them proceed
that they may be frustrate, and when they are gone to the utmost reach of their
tether, he pulls them back to their task with shame: Lo now Jacob is left by
Laban with a kiss: of the one he has an Oath, tears of the other, peace with
both; who shall need to fear man that is at league with God.

CHAP. XXXII.
Verse 1. THe Rabbis note that Jacob knew these Angels to be the same which he
saw ascending and descending the ladder: and whereas Jacob is not said to meet
them, but they to meet Jacob, therein appears the dignity and pre-eminence of
the Saints, whom the Angels are ready to attend.

Verse 9. Strong desires are importunate, and will improve every interest for
the obtaining of what is desired. What we cannot carry upon our own interest,
we labor to carry upon any other more prevailing name and interest. Jacob here
moves the Lord in his prayers by the remembrance of his Fathers Abraham and
Isaac; O God of my Father Abraham, and God of my Father Isaac. Jacob did not
pray to his Father Abraham, but he made use of his Fathers Name as a motive in
prayer; and though all names and interests are swallowed up in the name and
interest of Jesus Christ, as to the deserving a grant of what we pray for; yet
we may argue and plead with God in prayer for the Churches sake, yea for our
own Childrens sake, that God would do us good, that we may be further
instrumental for their good.

Verse 10. When a poor Soul considers what God has done for him, in admitting
him into communion with himself to eat bread at his table continually, he cries
out even weeping for admiration as Mephibosheth did, 2 Samuel 9. What is thy
servant that thou should look on such a dead dog as I am, and when he
considers from what a low to what an high estate God has brought him, he says
as Jacob here, I am less than the least of all thy mercies, and when Christ
tells a Soul that he will make him a King and a Priest to God, he humbly says
as Saul to Samuel; am not I a Benjamite of the smallest of the Tribes of
Israel, yea it says as Elizabeth said to Mary the blessed Mother of our ever
blessed Jesus, when she heard the Salutation that the Babe (the heart of a true
Believer) leaped within her, and she spoke, Blessed art thou; whence, O whence
is this to me, that the Mother of my Lord, (Oh says the Soul that my God)
should come to see me, even me, poor worthless me; it fares with such a Soul as
with the Disciples, Luke 24. Jesus stood in the midst and said, Peace be unto
you, and they were terrified and affrighted; but he said, Why are ye troubled?
it is I, behold my hands and my feet, and they believed not for joy and wondered.

Verse 11. It is like that Esau prepared himself to be revenged of Jacob, as
may appear by Jacobs prayer and fear here, which was not without cause: whereby
the power of God is also set forth, that could in the very way change that
purpose of Esau: and withal Jacob shows in this his weakness and infirmity;
that although looking to Gods promise, he had confidence, yet turning himself
to the present danger he feared; and here, while Jacob prepared himself by war,
prayer, and gifts to satisfy his Brother he does well; for though God has
promised us deliverance, we ought to use all good means, and working, under
Gods providence.

Verse 12. Prayer is not only a bare manifestation of our mind to God, by such
a suit or petition; but in Prayer there is or ought to be an holy arguing with
God about the matter which we declare; which is a bringing out, and urging of
reasons and motives, whereby the Lord may be moved to grant what we pray for:
and this is clear from this example of Jacob in this Chapter.

Verse 24. When we are most retired from the World, then we are most fit to
have and usually have most communion with God. David shows us divine work when
we go to rest; the bed is not all for sleep; commune with your own hearts upon
your bed, and be still, Psalm. 4. be still and quiet, and then commune with your
hearts, God will come and commune with them to, his Spirit will give you a
loving visit. When Jacob fearing the rage of his Brother, had put himself into
the best posture and defense he could, and had sent his Wives and Children over
the River, the Text says that he was left alone; which is not to be
understood, as if his company had left or deserted him; Jacob's solitariness
was not passive, but effective; he having disposed of all his Family, withdrew
himself, and stayed alone; and what then? then he had a Vision indeed; then
there wrestled a man with him till the breaking of the day: he spent not the
night in carping and caring what should become of him to morrow; no he retires
to pray for a blessing upon his former cares, and a blessing he obtains.

Verse 25. What a wonder is here? Jacob received not so much hurt from all his
enemies, as from his best Friends; not one of his hairs perished by Laban or
Esau, yet he lost a joint, by the Angel, and was sent halting to his Grave; he
that knows our strength, yet will wrestle with us for our exercise, and loves
our violence and importunity, O happy loss this of Jacob; he lost a joint, and
won a blessing: it is a favor to halt from God; yet this favor is seconded
with a greater. He was blessed because he would rather halt, than leave ere he
was blessed. If he had left sooner he had not halted, but then he had not
prospered; that man shall go away sound but miserable, that loves a limb more
than a blessing. Surely if Jacob had not wrestled with God, he had been folid
with evils, how many are the troubles of the righteous!

Verse 30. Holy men even in this life have a sight of the face of God: the Soul
of a Believer has interviews with God; God and he do often look one another in
the face. Wheresoever the Saints are except in cases of desertion, the place
may be called (as Jacob here called this where he wrestled with God) Peniel,
that is, the face of God; yet not in that sense fully in which Jacob calls it
so; he called it the face of God, because he had seen God face to face. We can
call it so only (ordinarily) because we see his face. It is one thing to see
the face of God, another thing to see God face to face; the former is the
common privilege of Saints in this life, the latter is the privilege of but
some Saints, and those rare ones, to have it here.

Verse 31. At death God wrestles with his people, laying hold on their
Consciences by the menaces of the Law. They again resist this assault by laying
hold upon God in Christ by the Faith of the Gospel; well assured that Christ
has freed them from the curse of the Law, by being made a curse for them on
the Cross. God yields himself overcome by this re-encounter, but yet touches
their thigh, takes away their life: howbeit, this hinders not the Sun of Life
Eternal to arise upon them.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Verse 4. VArious and miraculous are the means which God uses to deliver his
People from their Enemies; sometimes he divides them, and sets the Churches
enemies one against another: so he did for Gideon's small Army to the
Midianites mighty Host, setting every man's Sword against his fellow; sometimes
he changes their minds, and turns the stream of their affections. Thus was
Esau's heart mollified toward Jacob, who instead of a devouring enemy becomes
an embracing friend, and meets him with kisses, to whom he had intended blows.
Indeed what Solomon says of the Kings heart is true of all men's, That they are
in the hands of the Lord as the Rivers of Waters, and he turns them
wheresoever he will: No wonder then if sometimes he mollifies the Obdurate,
qualifies the Malicious, and melts the Frozen Hearts of Wicked men into Love
and Compassion toward his Servants.

Verse 5. Children are the blessings of the Lord, nay, they are part of his
inheritance. Children are an heritage of the Lord, says the Psalmist, and the
fruit of the Womb is his reward: they are special blessings. Children (as it is
to be observed) are a resemblance of our immortality, because man revives
again, lives anew (as it were) in every Child: he is born again (in a civil
sense) when others are born to him. There are some who count their Children but
Bills of Charges, but God puts them upon the account of our Mercies. And
therefore how holy and piously does Jacob speak here concerning his Children;
These (says he) are the Children which God has graciously given thy Servant.

Verse 9. The carnal minded man looks no further than this world; and if he can
get but his Chests and his Barns filled, thinks he may say with Esau here, I
have enough Brother; and that he may sing a Requiem to his Soul with that rich
man in the Gospel, Soul, take thine ease, thou have Goods laid up for many
years; when God in the mean time is not thought upon, without whom there can be
no true fullness, no sincere abundance. Let us therefore accustom our selves to
find out God in the Creature, and in all our gettings, in all our preferments,
in all our studies; and then be we as covetous as we will, as ambitious as we
can, we shall be sure to have enough; for God will be abundantly sufficient to
us for all. God is treasure, and God is honor enough. Would thou have all
this World, would thou have all the next World too? Plus est qui fecit Coelum
and Terram, says a Father; he that made Heaven and Earth is more than all
that, and thou may have all in having him.

Verse 10. Wicked men cannot be so ill as they would. That strong Wrestler
against whom Jacob prevailed, prevailed with Esau, and turned his wounds into
kisses. An Host of Men came with Esau, an Army of Angels met Jacob. Esau
threatened, Jacob prayed. His prayers and presence have melted the heart of Esau
into love. And now instead of the grim and stern countenance of an Executioner
Jacob sees the face of Esau as the face of God. Both men and Devils are
stinted; the stoutest heart cannot stand out against God. He that can wrestle
earnestly with God, is secure from the harms of men. Those minds which are
exaspearated with violence, and cannot be broken with fear, yet are bowed with
love: when the ways of a man please God, he will make his enemies at peace
with him.

Verse 11. If we want this Worlds good, let us not be discouraged; God
oftentimes recompenseth the want of earthly blessings with great abundance of
heavenly graces. This Christ declares in Rev. 2. I know thy works, and
tribulation, and poverty, but thou art rich. He makes them rich in Knowledge,
in Faith, in Obedience, and Joy in the holy Ghost. He blesses them with inward
comfort, and with peace of Conscience that passes all understanding. He gives
them patience in trouble, meekness of spirit, and an holy contentation, to
sustain the weight of their affliction: and albeit they bear a gracious
burden, yet he has eased them of a greater, the burden of their sins, which
in Christ they feel to be lightened and remitted. This the Apostle testifies,
We are as dying, and yet behold we live; as having nothing, and yet possessing
all things. This is that Jacob persuaded his own heart, and told it to his
Brother, God has showed mercy unto me, and therefore I have all things: for so
it is in the Original, not I have enough, (as it is in our English Bibles) but
I have all. Esau had much, but Jacob had all, because he had the God of all.

Verse 13. A Conscientious Minister should follow Jacobs example in this verse,
and so order their flocks as he did his. They must have an eye to the weak ones
of their Congregations, and so to respect all, as they over-drive none. He must
so Preach as his people are able to hear, and not always as he is able to
Preach. He must divide, and chew, and masticate his Matter and his Doctrines as
Nurses do their Childrens meat, and speak to the shallowest Capacities of his
Hearers; else he shall be a Barbarian to them, and they to him. And as in their
instruction, so likewise in their reproofs and correction, they must have a
care of the little Ones, of the tender Lambs of Christ's flock, and deal gently
with them. A Venice-glass must be otherwise handled than an Earthen-pitcher;
some must be rebuked sharply, severely, but of others we must have compassion,
making a difference, Jude 22.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Verse 1. CHristians should of all others be very shy of the occasions of evil,
and take heed of the Wine when it is red in the glass, and have an eye to their
eye when they look on a Maid. Dinah out of a gadding curiosity must needs visit
the Daughters of the Land; and while she goes to see the Daughters, the Son
saw her, visamque cupit, and having seen her he took her, having taken her he
lay with her: the report whereof coming to Jacobs Sons they were grieved; being
grieved they were wroth; being wroth they meditate revenge; meditating revenge
they speak deceitfully; having deceived they slew; having slain they spoil.
See how great a fire a little matter kindles, what great evils issue from
small beginnings: take heed then of these beginnings.

Verse 3. Shechem in this verse bewrays a good nature even in filthiness; he
loves Dinah after his sin, and would needs Marry her whom he had defiled.
Commonly Lust ends in loathing. Ammon abhors Tamar as much after the act, as
before he loved; and beats her out of doors, whom he was sick to bring in. But
Shechem would not let Dinah fare the worse for his sin. And now he goes about
to entertain her with honest love, whom the rage of his Lust had dishonestly
abused. Her deflouring shall be no prejudice to her, since her shame shall
redound to none but him, and he will hide her dishonor with the name of an
Husband. Those actions that are ill begun, can hardly be salved up with late
satisfactions; whereas good entrances give strength to the proceedings, and
success to the end.

Verse 4. I find but one only Daughter of Jacob; who must needs therefore be a
great Darling to her Father; and she so miscarries that she causes her Fathers
grief to be more than his love. As her Mother Leah, so she has a fault in her
eyes, which was curiosity. She will needs see and be seen, and whiles she does
vainly see, she is seen lustfully. It is not enough for us to look to our own
thoughts, except we beware of the provocations of others. If we once wander out
of the Lists that God has set us in our Callings, there is nothing but danger:
her virginity had been safe had she kept home; or if Shechem had forced her in
her Mothers Tent, this loss of her virginity had been without her sin, now she
is not innocent that gave the occasion. Her eyes were guilty of the temptation:
only to see is an insufficient warrant to draw us into places of spiritual
hazard. If Shechem had seen her busy at home, his love had been free from
outrage; now the lightness of her presence gave encouragement to his inordinate
desire. Immodesty of behavior makes way to lust, and gives life unto wicked
hopes.

Verse 14. The two old men, Jacob and Hamor, would have ended the matter
peaceably, but youth commonly undertakes rashly, and performs with passion. The
Sons of Jacob think of nothing but revenge, and which is worst of all begin
their cruelty with craft, and hide their craft with Religion. A smiling malice
is most deadly, and hatred does most rankle the heart when it is kept in, and
dissembled. We cannot give our Sister to an uncircumcised man; here was God in
the mouth, and Satan in the heart. The bloodiest of all Projects have ever wont
to be colored with Religion; because the worse any thing is, the better show
it desires to make; and contrarily the better color is put upon any vice the
more odious it is: for as every simulation adds to an evil, so the best adds
most evil: themselves had taken the Daughters and Sisters of uncircumcised men;
yea, Jacob himself did so; why might not then an uncircumcised man obtain their
Sister? Or if there be a difference of giving and taking, it had been well if
it had not been only pretended. It had been an happy ravishment of Dinah that
should have drawn a whole Country into the bosom of the Church; but here was a
Sacrament intended not to the good of the soul, but to the murder of the body.

Verse 15. Simeon and Levi, when they meditate their revenge for the Rape
committed upon their Sister, when they pretended Peace yet they required a
little blood, they would have the Shechemites Circumcised; but when they had
opened a Vein, they made them bleed to Death; when they were under the soreness
of Circumcision, they slew them all. Gods Justice required blood likewise, the
blood of his Son; but that blood is not spilt as was the blood of these
Shechemites, but poured from that Head to our Hearts, into the Veins and Wounds
of our own Souls. In the Circumcision and Passion of our Savior there was
Blood shed, but no Blood lost.

Verse 23. It was an hard task for Hamor and Shechem not only to put the knife
to their own fore-skins, but to persuade a multitude to so painful a condition.
Now to bring this about, as the Sons of Jacob dissembled with them, so they
dissemble with the people; Shall not all their flocks and substance be ours?
Common profit is pretended when as only Shechems pleasure is meant. No motive
is so powerful to the vulgar sort as the name of Commodity; the hope of this
makes them prodigal of their skin and blood; not the love to the Sacrament, nor
the love to Shechem: sinister respects draw more to the profession of Religion
than Conscience; if it were not for the Loaves and Fishes, the train of Christ
would be less. But the Sacraments of God mis-received, never prosper in the
end. These men are content to smart, so they may gain.

Verse 25. Now that every one lies sore of his own Wound, Simeon and Levi rush
in armed, and wound all the Males to death: Cursed be their Wrath for it was
fierce, and their Rage for it was cruel. Indeed filthiness should not have been
wrought in Israel; yet murder should not have been wrought by Israel. If they
had been fit Judges, which were but bloody Executioners, how far does the
punishment exceed the fault. To punish above the offense, is no less injustice
than to offend. One offends, and all feel the revenge: yea, all the innocent
suffer that revenge, which he that offended deserved not. Shechem sins, but
Dinah tempted him. She that was so light as to wander abroad alone only to
gaze, I fear was not over-difficult to yield: and if having wrought her shame,
he had driven her home with disgrace to her Fathers Tent, such tyrannous lust
had justly called for blood: but now he craves, and offers, and would pay dear
for but leave to give satisfaction: to execute rigor upon a submiss offender is
more merciless than just: or if the punishment had been both just and
proportionable from another, yet from them which had vowed Peace and Affinity,
it was shamefully unjust. To disappoint the Trust of another, and to neglect
our own promise and fidelity for private purposes, adds faithlessness unto our
cruelty.

Verse 30. Who would have looked to have found this outrage in the Family of
Jacob? How did that good Patriarch, when he saw Dinah come home blubbered and
wringing her hands, Simeon and Levi sprinkled with blood, wish that Leah had
been barren as long as Rachel. Good Parents have grief enough though they
sustain no blame for their Childrens sins. What great evils arise from small
beginnings. The idle curiosity of Dinah has bred all this mischief. Ravishment
follows upon her wandering, upon her ravishment murder, upon the murder spoil.
It is holy and safe to be jealous of the first occasions of evil, either done
or suffered.

CHAP. XXXV.
Verse 1. HEre God pulls Jacob by the ear as it were, and minds him of his Vow
which he had well-nigh forgotten: but God looked for performance, and would not
let him be quiet till he had made good what he had promised. Most men's practice
proclaims, that, having escaped the danger, they would willingly deceive the
Saint. Deliverances commonly are but nine days wonder at most, and it is ten
to one that any Leper returns to give praise to God. If any thing does rouse up
our hearts to thankful remembrance of former Mercies, it must be the sense of
some present misery: as here Jacob was in a strait and fright; his Sons had
troubled him, the Country was ready to rise upon him and rout him out; and now
God takes this opportunity (for we are best when at worst) and gently minds him
of what was his duty, and would be for his safety.

Verse 5. The Lord has a Negative voice upon the motion of all Creatures. We
see an instance of this here; when Jacob and his Family journied, the terror of
God was upon the Cities that were round about them, and they did not pursue
after the Sons of Jacob: they had a mind to pursue and revenge the slaughter of
the Shechemites, but God said Pursue not; and then they could not pursue, they
must stay at home. Thus also when his People the Jews were safe in Canaan, he
encourages them to come up freely to Worship at Jerusalem; by this assurance,
No man shall desire thy Land when thou shall go up to appear before the Lord
thy God. God can stop not only hands from spoiling, but hearts from desiring.
Our appetite whether concupiscible or irrascible are under his command, as well
as our actions: we should consider this to help our Faith in these times. The
Sword is in motion among us, even as the Sun; and the Sword seems to have
received a charge to pass from the one end of the Land to the other; yet a
counter-mand from God will stop the Sword from going on; If he speak to the
Sword, the Sword shall wound no more.

Verse 10. Thy name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel. That is, not
only, or not so much Jacob as Israel. Both which Names he had given him of
striving and struggling. All Gods Israel are Wrestlers by Calling, and as good
Soldiers of Jesus Christ must suffer hardship. Nothing is to be seen in the
Shulamite but as the appearance of two Armies maintaining civil broils within
her; the Spinit warreth against the Flesh, and the Flesh against the Spirit.
Wherefore we have more than need to take unto us the whole Armor of God, and
to strengthen our selves with every piece of it. At no place must we lie open,
for our enemy is a Serpent; if he can but bite the heel, he will transfuse his
venom to the heart and head.

Verse 19. We see here how Jacob is tried with a new cross, deprived of his
Crown, his Stay, his Comfort, his Wife. Which is writ for our instruction, to
teach us that Gods Children must not look to live at ease in this life. They
must not Prophecy of Peace to themselves, That there shall be no leading into
Captivity, and no complaining in our streets. They must not dream that they
shall be always carried on Eagles wings, but their dreams must be of
Willow-trees by the Waters of Babel, of afflictions and crosses: a Christian
must be a daily cross-bearer: which made this Patriarch in another place say,
Few and evil have the days of my Pilgrimage been. The Child of God, a Son of
Jacob, must not think to walk in plain and easy paths to heaven; but must
climb hard, it is all up-hill; the way lies inter Epauleum and Magdalum, as
the Septuagint read the text, Exodus 14. 2. that is, by turreting and towering,
turning and winding, as Origin Expounds it; Never any went to Heaven with dry
eyes.

Verse 22. Jacob's life was a continual warfare. First Rachel, the comfort of
his life, dies; and when, but in her travel, and in his travel to his Father?
Then his Children, the staff of his age, wound his Soul to the death. Reuben
proves incestuous, Judah adulterous, Dinah ravished, Simeon and Levi
murtherous. Er and Onan stricken dead, Joseph lost, Simeon imprisoned; Benjamin
the death of his Mother, the Fathers right hand, endangered; himself driven by
Famine in his old age to die amongst the Egyptians, a people that held it an
abomination to eat with him. Thus many are the troubles wherewith the Lord
tries his Children. And if that God with whom he strove, and who therefore
strove for him, had not delivered his soul out of all adversity, he had been
supplanted with evils, and had been so far from gaining the name of Israel,
that he had lost the name of Jacob. Now what Son of Israel can hope for good
days, when he hears his Fathers were so evil. It is enough for us if when we
are dead we can rest with him in the Land of Promise. If the Angel of the
Covenant once bless us, no pain, no sorrows can make us miserable.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Verse 1. DEmosthenes (that great popular Orator) was wont to hugg himself as
he went in the streets, to hear the Common People say as he passed by, This is
Demosthenes, There goes the great Orator: but it can be no Joy, nor Credit for
any man to be pointed at and stigmatized by the People for an infamous person.
This is Edom, is no Commendation though Registered in the Book of God; no
happiness for Esau to find his Name in Scripture in the Book of God, unless he
could find it also in the Book of Life. It had been happier for Jeroboam and
Judas if their Names might have been forgotten, than to be remembered under
those ignominious Characters of Judas the Traitor, and Jeroboam that made
Israel to sin. The wicked though they think to get them a Name, and to that end
lay Plots to keep it up, and protect both it and themselves; yet their Names
shall either rot and perish, or if they be remembered, it shall be only (as his
was that burnt the Temple of Diana) as a Curse in the Nation wherein they live,
as the public firebrarnds and incendiaries, the common plague, ruin, and
desolation of their Country.

Verse 6. Esau no doubt was as strong, if not stronger than Jacob, yet fled
before his face; surely there was something in it more than the power of Jacob
that daunted Esau, and something more than ordinary appeared in Jacobs face,
from which Esau fled; there was a divine Majesty seated there, and with this
Esau was not acquainted; and therefore it struck a terror into him and made him
fly: and all this not without a special Providence of God to make room for the
right Heir. Canaan was the promised Land, but not for Esau; he had sold his
Birthright, and with that the Promise which was annexed to it: the Land
flowing with milk and honey was too good for him that valued a mess of Pottage
above the Blessing of the firstborn. A Jacob only, one blessed of God, was to
inherit that Country which should afterward be blessed by the Son of God: the
Holy Land was no inheritance for an Esau, a profane person.

Verse 20. Esau was by Marriage allied to this Seir; for he took Aholibamah,
the Daughter of Anah, to Wife, verse. 2. and yet the Posterity of Esau were so
unnatural as to drive their own Kinsmen out of their Country, Deuteronomy. 2. 12. No
ties either of Blood, or Friendship, or Nature, or Religion, are able to hold
wicked men, when Ambition, or Covetousness drives them on: the Sons of Esau
value not their nearest Relations; an Estate to them is of far greater esteem
then Kindred or Friends, then either their Brother, their Father, or their God
himself.

Verse 31. As Esau was the firstborn, so he was the first King likewise; and
good reason the Elder Brother should wear the Crown before the younger;
especially since Jacobs Portion was not so much a temporal Crown as an eternal.
For though Jacob by Gods Decree was to have the blessing, yet not the
inheritance of the firstborn: temporal Estates or Dominions are not entailed
to Grace, neither can the Children of God, as such, challenge to themselves the
power and authority of other men; as their King, so their Kingdom is not of
this World. And therefore let Esau Reign, and Edom have Kings, while Jacob is a
Slave, an Israel under and Egyptian Captivity; yet Jacob shall Reign at last,
and that for ever; and Israel have a King whose sovereignty shall spread over
the whole World, and endure longer than it: the Scepter shall not depart from
Judah until Shilo come, no nor then neither; for his Kingdom is an everlasting
Kingdom, and his Dominion endures throughout all Generations, Psalm. 145. 13.

Verse 43. When Edom (in the 31 verse of this Chapter) was a King, then was
Israel a Slave; but here when Edom was a Duke, Israel was a King: which
instructs us not to look at the beginning of Gods Providence, but the end and
design of it: Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that
man is Peace, says the Psalm. 38. 37. And therefore let the wicked, how
prosperous, how secure, how merry soever they be, remember this in the midst of
their joy, that their Master the Devil gives them pleasant entrances into their
ways, but reserves the bitterness for the end of their journey; and on the
contrary let the Righteous, how sad, how contemptible, how dejected soever they
be, remember this in the midst of their tears, that God their Father invites
them to the worst Dish at first, and sweetens their conclusion with pleasure;
and let them assure themselves, that though the first handful that God gives
them in their voyage to the Land of Promise be a Wilderness of Briars and
Thorns, and the first Waters that they must drink in that Wilderness, be Waters
of Marah, the bitter water of their own tears; yet in the end of their journey
they shall overflow with the milk and honey of Canaan, the Land of eternal
peace and happiness.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Verse 2. I Marvel not that Joseph had a double Portion of Jacobs Land, who had
more than two parts of his sorrows: none of his Sons did so truly inherit his
afflictions, none of them was either so miserable, or so great; suffering is
the way to Glory. I see him not a clearer Type of Christ than of every
Christian: because we are dear to our Father and complain of sins, therefore
are we hated of our carnal Brethren; if Joseph had not meddled with his Brothers
faults, yet he had been envied for his Fathers affection; but now malice is met
with envy. There is nothing more thankless and dangerous than to stand in the
way of a resolute sinner. That which does correct and oblige the penitent,
makes the wilful mind furious and revengeful.

Verse 4. Hence we may learn how inconvenient a thing it is for Parents to be
partial in their love to their Children; and withal that it is no marvel that
brethren fall out for Goods and Land, when Joseph's brethren hated him for a
Coat. We may further also consider from this place, how few men judge
themselves happy or unhappy according to what they are, but by comparing
themselves with others: where all go naked, none are ashamed. Many augment
their misery by seeing others more happy; and yet think themselves happy when
they see others more miserable. We many times gather our sorrows from others
joys, and our joys from others sorrows. We bless our selves when we see them
below us; and yet think all we have to be no blessing, when we look on them
that are above us. Lord, let not me think my good the less, because others have
more; or my evil the more, because others have less: but let me learn in all
estates to be content, and to welcome the Will of God let it come how it will.

Verse 19. What meant Joseph in the beginning of this Chapter to add unto his
own Envy by reporting his Dreams. The concealment of our hopes and abilities
has not more modesty than safety. He that was envied for his dearness, and
hated for his intelligence, was both envied and hated for his Dreams. Surely
God meant to make the relation of these Dreams a means to effect that which the
Dreams imported. We men work by likely means, God by contraries. The main
quarrel was, Behold this Dreamer comes! Had it not been for his Dreams, he had
not been sold; if he had not been sold, he had not been exalted. So Joseph's
state had not deserved envy if his Dreams had not caused him to be envied.
Full little did Joseph think when he went to seek his Brethren, that it was the
last time he should see his Fathers House. Full little did his Brethren think
when they sold him naked to the Ishmeelites, to have once seen him in the
Throne of Egypt: Gods Decree runs on, and while we either think not of it or
oppose it, it is performed.

Verse 20. In an honest and obedient simplicity Joseph comes to enquire of his
Brethrens health, and now may not return to carry news of his own misery:
whiles he thinks of their welfare, they are plotting his destruction; Come, let
us slay him. Who would have expected this cruelty in them which should be the
Fathers of Gods Church: he looked for Brethren, and behold murderers: every
man's tongue, every man's fist was bent against him. Each one strives who shall
lay the first hand upon that changeable Coat, that was dyed with their Fathers
love, and their envy.

Verse 24. It was thought a favor that Reubens entreaty obtained for him that
he might be cast into the Pit alive to die there. And now they have stripped him
naked, and haling him by both arms as it were, cast him alive into his Grave.
So in pretense of forbearance, they resolve to torment him with a lingering
Death: the savagest Robbers could not have been more merciless: for now besides
(what in them lies) they kill their Father in their Brother. Nature if once
degenerate, grows more monstrous and extreme than a disposition born to
cruelty. And now what stranger can think of poor innocent Joseph crying naked
in the desolate and dry Pit (only saving that he moistened it with tears) and
not be moved? Yet his hard-hearted Brethren sit them down carelessly with the
noise of his Lamentation in their ears to eat Bread, not once thinking by their
own hunger what it was for Joseph to be famished to death.

Verse 28. Whatsoever they thought, God never meant that Joseph should perish
in that Pit; and therefore he sends very Ishmeelites to ransom him from his
Brethren: the seed of him that persecuted his Brother Isaac shall now redeem
Joseph from his Brethrens persecution. And now when Joseph had comforted
himself with hope of the favor of dying, behold death exchanged for bondage:
how much is servitude to an ingenuous Nature worse than death? For this is
common to all, that to none but the miserable. Judah meant this well, but God
better. Reuben saved him from the Sword, Judah from Famishing: God will ever
raise up some favorers to his own amongst those that are most malicious. How
well was this favor bestowed? If Joseph had died for hunger in the Pit, both
Jacob and Judah and all his Brethren had died for hunger in Canaan. Little did
the Ishmeelitish Merchants know what a treasure they bought, carried, and sold,
more precious than all their Balms and Myrrhs. Little did they think that they
had in their hands the Lord of Egypt, the Jewel of the World: why should we
contemn any man's meanness, when we know not his destiny.

Verse 32. One sin is commonly used for the vail of another: Joseph's Coat is
sent home dipped in blood; that whiles they should hide their own cruelty, they
might afflict their Father, no less than their Brother. They have devised this
real Lie to punish their old Father for his Love with so grievous a Monument of
his sorrow.

Verse 33. When Jacob saw the Coat of his Son Joseph, It is my Sons Coat (says
he) but an evil Beast has devoured him: So Christ will say to us at the day of
Judgment, This is the face and figure of a man, but an evil Beast has devoured
my image. The Drunkard has lost the Image of God, and laid a Swine in the room
of it. The Covetous has lost the Image of God, and laid a ravenous Wolf in the
room of it. The Adulterer has lost the Image of God, and laid a Goat or an
Horse in the room of it. The Crafty and Contentious person has lost the Image
of God, and laid a Fox and a Dog in the room of it.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Verse 2. I Find not many of Jacobs Sons more faulty than Judah, who yet is
singled out from all the rest to be the royal Progenitor of Christ, and to be
honored with the dignity of the Birthright; that Gods Election might not be
of Merit but of Grace: else, howsoever he might have sped alone, Thamar had
never been joined with him in this line. Even Judah marries a Canaanite; it is
no marvel though his Seed prosper not: and yet that good Children may not be
too much discouraged with their unlawful propagation, the Fathers of the
Promised Seed are raised from an Incestuous Bed: Judah was very young, searce
from under the rod of his Father, yet he takes no other counsel for his
Marriage but from his own eyes, which were like his Sister Dinahs, roving and
wanton: what better issue could be expected from such beginnings. Those proud
Jews that glory so much in their Pedigree and Name from this Patriarch, may
now choose whether they will have their Mother a Canaanite or an Harlot.

Verse 7. Even in wicked and sinful Courses oft-times the birth follows the
belly. Iudahs eldest Son Er is too wicked to live; God strikes him dead ere he
can leave any Issue, not abiding any Sience to grow out of so bad a stock:
notorious sinners God reserves to his own vengeance. He does not inflict
sensible Judgments upon all his enemies, lest the wicked should think there
were no punishment abiding for them elsewhere; and again he does inflict such
Judgments upon some, lest he should seem careless of evil. It were as easy
for him to strike all dead as one; but he had rather all should be warned by
one; and would have his enemies find him merciful, as well as his Children just.

Verse 9. Onan sees the Judgment of his Brother Er, and yet will follow his
sins Every little thing discourages us from good, nothing can alter the heart
that is set upon evil. Er was not worthy of any love; but though he was a
miscreant, yet he was a Brother; Seed should have been raised to him; Onan
justly leeses his life with his seed, which he would rather spill than lend to
a wicked Brother. Some duties we owe to humanity, more to neerness of blood.
Ill deservings of others can be no excuse for our injustice, for our
uncharitableness.

Verse 11. Judah has lost two Sons, and now does but promise the third, whom
he sins in not giving: it is the weakness of Nature rather to hazard a sin than
a danger; and to neglect our own duty for wrongful suspicion of others: Though
he had lost his Son in giving him, yet he should have given him: a faithful
man's promise is his debt, which no fear of damage can dispense with. But
whereupon was this slackness? Judah feared that some unhappiness in the bed of
Thamar was the cause of his sons miscarriage; whereas it was their fault, that
Thamar was both a widow and childlesse: those that are but the patients of
evil, are many times burdened with suspicions; and therefore are ill thought
of, because they fare ill: afflictions would not be so heavy if they did not
lay us open unto uncharitable conceits.

Verse 14. Now Thamar seeks by subtilty that which she could not have by award
of justice; the neglect of due retributes drives men to indirect courses;
neither know I whether they sin more in righting themselves wrongfully, or the
other in not righting them. She therefore takes upon her the habit of an
harlot, that she might perform the act. If she had not wished to seem a whore,
she had not worn that attire, nor chosen that place. Immodesty of outward
fashion or gesture bewraies evil desires: the heart that means well will never
wish to seem ill; for commonly we affect to show better then we are: many
harlots will put on the semblances of Chastity, of modesty, never the contrary.
It is no trusting those which do not wish to appear good.

Verse. 15. Judah esteems her by her habit, and now the life of an harlot had
stirred up in him a thought of lust; Satan finds well that a fit object is half
a victory: Who would not be ashamed to see a Son of Jacob thus transported with
filthy affections? At the first sight he is inflamed, neither yet did he see
the face of her whom he lusted after. It was motive enough to him that she was
a woman; neither could the presence of his neighbor the Adullamite compose
those wicked thoughts, or hinder his unchaste acts.

Verse. 20. That sin must needs be impudent that can abide a witness: yea so
has his lust besotted him, that he cannot discern the voice of Thamar, that he
cannot foresee the danger of his shame in parting with such Pledges; there is
no passion which does not for a time bereave a man of himself. Thamar had
learned not to trust him without a pawn; he had promised his Son to her as a
Daughter, and failed, now he promised a Kid to her as an harlot, and performs
it: Whether his pledge constrained him or the power of his word, I enquire not:
Many are faithful in all things save those that are the greatest and dearest:
If his credit had been as much endangered in the former promise, he had kept it.

Verse. 23. Now Thamar has requited Judah, She expected long the enjoying of
his promised Son, and he performed not; but here he performs the promise of
the Kid, and she stays not to expect it. Judah is sorry that he cannot pay the
hire of his lust, and now fears least he should be beaten with his own
staff, least his Signet should be used to confirm and seal his reproach,
resolving not to know them, and wishing they were unknown of others. Shame is
the easiest wages of sin, and the surest, which ever begins first in our
selves. Nature is not more forward to commit sin, then willing to hide it.

Verse. 24. Three months has Iudahs sin slept, and now when he is securest, it
awakes and bates him. News is brought him, that Thamar begins to swell with her
conception, and now he swells with rage, and calls her forth to the flame like a
rigorous Judge, without so much as staying for the time of her deliverance;
that his cruelty in this justice should be no less ill, then the injustice of
occasioning it. If Judah had not forgotten his sin, his pity had been more
then his hatred to this of his Daughters: how easy is it to detest those sins
in others which we flatter in our selves.

Verse. 26. Thamar did not deny the sin nor refuse the punishment, but calls for
that partner in her punishment which was her partner in the sin: The Staff,
the Signet and the Handkerchief accuse and convince Judah; and now he blushes
at his own sentence, much more at his act; and cries out, She is more righteous
then I. God will find a time to bring his Children upon their knees, and to
wring from them penitent confessions: and rather then he will not have them
soundly ashamed, he will make them the Trumpets of their own reproach. Yet does
he not offer himself to the flame with her, but rather excuses her by himself.
This relenting in his own case shamed his former zeal. Even in the best men
nature is partial to its self: it is good so to sentence others frailties that
yet we remember our own, whether those that have been or may be.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Verse 5. HE that is mourned for in Canaan as dead, prospers in Egypt under
Potiphar, and of a slave is made a Ruler. Thus God meant to prepare him for a
greater charge, he must first rule Potiphars house then Pharaohs Kingdom: his
own service is his least good; for his very presence procures a common
blessing: a whole family shall fare the better, for one Joseph. And thus houses
and cities and nations are blessed for the righteous sake.

Verse 7. Joseph's virtue was not looked upon alike by all eyes: his fellows
praise him, his Master trusts him, his Mistress affects him too much: prima
adulteri oculorum tela sunt secunda verborum, first she casts her eyes upon him
and then sollicits him, all the spite of his brethren was not so great a cross
to him as the inordinate affections of his Mistress. Temptations on the right
hand are now more perilous and hard to resist by how much they are more
plausible and glorious. But the heart that is bent upon God knows how to walk
steadily and indifferently between the pleasures of sin and the fears of evil.

Verse 9. Joseph saw this pleasure would advance him, he knew what it was to be
a Minion of one of the greatest Ladies in Egypt, yet resolves to Contemn it. A
good heart will rather lie in the dust then rise by wickedness: how shall I do
this and sin against God. He knew that all the honors of Egypt could not buy
off the guilt of one sin, and therefore abhors not only her bed but her
company. He that will be safe from the acts of evil must wisely avoid the
occasions.

Verse 12. If the Devil meet thee in an object of temptation as the Devil met
Joseph in Potiphars wife, yet if thou do not adhere to this Devil, dwell upon
a delightful meditation of that sin; if thou do not fuel and foment that
sin, assist and encourage that sin by high diet, wanton discourse, other
provocation; if thou with Joseph here do throw away these garments of thy
sin, the clothes that keeps thy sin warm, thou shall have reason on thy side,
and thou shall have grace on thy side, and thou shall have the history of a
thousand that have perished by that sin on thy side; even Spittles will give
thee soldiers to fight for thee by their miserable example against that sin;
nay perchance sometimes the virtue of that woman whom thou do solicit will
assist thee, and by these and such like helps and assistances thou shall be
able to fly from that sin, that Devil, that did pursue thee, as Joseph did
from Potiphars wife.

Verse 18. This is the second time that Joseph was stripped of his garment;
before in the violence of envy, now of lust; before of necessity, now of
choice; before to deceive his Father, now his Master; for behold the pledge of
his fidelity which he left in those wicked hands is made an evidence against
him of that which he refused to do: therefore did he leave his cloak because
he would not do that which he is accused and comdemned because he left it: what
safety is there against great adverseries, when even arguments of innocence are
used to convince of evil. Lust yielded unto is a pleasant madness; but it is a
disperate madness, when it is opposed. No hatred burns so furiously as that
which arises from the quenched coals of love.

Verse 19. Potiphar was here too credulous, and before he examined Joseph
condemns him. It was therefore a very good rule of Epicharmus, be not light of
belief, try before you trust, hear both parties before you condemn either.
Wisdom would that as men should not be over censorious; (this man blasphemeth
say they of our Savior) so neither over credulous as the giddy headed
Galatians were to their seducing Doctors, I wonder that ye are so soon removed,
Gal. 1. 6. It is a singular folly to take men's bare authority as in matters of
Fact (with Potiphar here) so in matters of faith (with the Galatians there.)

Verse 20. Doubtless Joseph denied the fact, but he dare not accuse the
offender: there is not only the praise of patience but oft-times of wisdom
in unjust sufferings: he knew that God would find a time to clear his innocence
and to regard his chaste faithfulness. And now no-prison would serve him but
Pharaohs. Joseph had lain obscure and not been known unto Pharaoh if he had not
been cast into Pharaohs dungeon: the afflictions of Gods Chrildren turn ever to
their advantages. For no sooner was Joseph a prisoner, then (as we read in the
next verses) a Guardian of the prisoners. Trust and honor accompany him
wheresoever he is, in his Fathers house, in Potiphars, in the Jayl, in the
Court, still he has both favor and rule.

CHAP. XL.
Verse 3. FIrst see here the slippery estate of Courtiers, to day in favor, to
morrow in disgrace: hence the Turks have a proverb, that great men are but
Statues of glass; and Plutarch wittily compares great men to Counters, which
now stand for a thousand pounds, and anon for a farthing. Secondly, whereas the
second verse tells us that Pharaoh was wroth, and this third verse, that he
clapped the Baker and Butler in prison without any examination so far as we
read; this will teach us that anger is an ill counselor; and as smoke in a
man's eyes hinders sight, so does rash anger the use of reason. It is reported
of Alphonsus King of Arragon, that vexed with his Cup-bearers stubbornness, he
drew his dagger and run after him, but before he came at him he threw away his
dagger, lest he should catch him and kill him in the heat of his anger: an
example to be followed by all Christians.

Verse 8. Dreams are either natural or supernatural. Natural dreams are not
much to be regarded. Diviners and dreamers we are forbid to hearken unto, Ier.
27. 9. that use there is of them in Physic to discern our temperatures, in
divinity our beloved sins. Supernatural dreams are sent by God and his Angels;
and that either to comfort us, as Mat. 2. 19. or to chasten us, and fright us
as here. Such fearful dreams cause a bad sleep and a worse waking. And
therefore, Job in his 7 chap. and 15. verse, made choice of strangling rather
than such dreams. Hippocrates tells us, that many have been so afrighted with
dreams and apparitions, that they have hanged themselves, leaped into deep
pits, or other wise made themselves away. Let those that either have not been
so terrified, or so tempted, or so deserted of God, bless him for that mercy.

Verse 11. It is just in the Sacrament as it was in the dreams of Pharaohs
Butler. The clusters of the Vine brought forth ripe Grapes and Pharaohs cup was
in his hand, and the Butler took the Grapes and pressed them into Pharaohs cup.
The Sacrament is as a Vine set before us, full of clusters of ripe Grapes, and
these Grapes full of juice, Christ with all his fullness offered to us in the
Sacrament. Now our care and course should be to have the liquor and blood of
these Grapes poured into the cup of our hearts. How may that be done now? as
Pharaohs cup came full'd; he took the Grapes and pressed them and crushed them
into Pharaohs cup, and so the cup was filled. So must we take these Grapes and
press and crush them, we must squeeze forth the liquor of them. That we do when
faith is actuated and is set on work in the use of the Sacrament: Actuated
faith takes these Grapes and presses them, and wrings out of the Sacrament that
which fills our hearts.

Verse 13. Pharaohs Butler and his Baker went both out of prison in a day; and
in both cases Joseph in the interpretation of their dreams calls that (their
very discharge out of prison) a lifting up of their heads, a kind of
preferment: death raises every man alike so far as that it delivers every man
from his prison, from the encumbrances of his body; both Baker and Butler were
delivered of their prison, but they passed into diverse states after, one to
the restitution of his place, the other to an ignominious execution. Of thy
prison thou shall be delivered; whether thou will or no thou must die: fool
this night thy soul may be take from thee; and then what thou shall be to
morrow prophecy upon thy self by that which thou have done to day.

Verse 16. He desired an interpretation of his dream; not because he had a mind
to be instructed thereby, but for that he expected some good as well as the
Butler: so some have a regard to the preaching of the word, not for conscience
sake, but only seeking thereby their own ends, which if they miss they go
away as the young man in the Gospel, sad, Mark 10.

Verse 23. The Cup Bearer here admires Joseph in the Jayle, but forgets him in
the Court: how easily does our own prosperity make us both forget the
deservings and miseries of others. But as God cannot forget his own, so lest of
all in their sorrows. For after two years more of Joseph's patience, that God
which caused him to be lifted out of the former pit to be sold, did call him
out of the dungeon to honor, and of a miserable Prisoner made him Ruler of
Egypt. How happy is it with good men that they have a God to remember them,
when they are forgotten of the World.

CHAP. XLI.
Verse 14. SO long as God is with Joseph he cannot but shine in spite of men:
the walls of that dungeon cannot hide his virtues, the Irons cannot hold them.
Pharaohs Officers are sent to witness his graces, which he may not come forth
to show without a Miracle: for God now puts a dream into the head of Pharaoh:
he puts the remembrance of Joseph's skill into the head of the Cup Bearer, who
to pleasure Pharaoh not to requite Joseph, commends the Prisoner for an
Interpreter: he puts an interpretation into the mouth of Joseph; he puts this
choice into the heart of Pharaoh, of a miserable Prisoner to make him the Ruler
of Egypt.

Verse 35. When we have enough for to day, it is but honest prudence to lay up
for to morrow. The poor contemptible Ant gathers that food in harvest that
may serve her for the Winter. It is good for a man to keep somewhat by him, to
have something in store against a rainy day. A good saver makes a well doer; is
a Dutch proverb. Care must be taken that our layings out be not more than our
layings up. Let no man here object that of our Savior, Care not for to morrow:
there is a care of diligence and a care of diffidence, a care of the head, and
a care of the heart; the former is needful, the latter sinful.

Verse 40. Worldly men may advance, dignify, and honor Gods People; and yet
not love them as godly men should be loved. Besides Gods sanctfying Graces,
there are oft-times in Gods Children (as here in Joseph) other gifts of
wisdom, prudence, learning, fidelity, skill and activity in secular
employments: all which may gain them great respect in other men's hearts. So
Pharaoh here honored Joseph, and we see his ground in the foregoing verse. So
many a master loves a godly Servant, not because he is a good man, but because
he is a good Servant: this is selflove, they love them because they love
themselves; such men are for their profit and advantage, and for their turns;
and therefore out of a selflove and selfrespect, love and respect them. That
their love of them is not for their godliness appears by this, because though
there were not one dram of grace and godliness in them, yet for their other
abilites they should be no less dear unto them then now they are with all
their graces.

Verse 44. Behold how one hour has changed Joseph's Fetters into a chain of
Gold, his Rags into fine Linen, his Stocks into a Chariot, his Jayl into a
Palace, Potiphars Captive into his Masters Lord. He whose Chastity refused the
wanton allurements of the Wife of Potiphar, has now given him to his Wife the
Daughter of Potipherah. Humility goes before Honor, serving and suffering are
the best Tutors to Government. How well are Gods Children paid for their
Patience; how happy are the Issues of the Faithful! never any man repented him
of the advancement of a good Man.

Verse 46. There is mention made here of Joseph's age: first, that by this it
may be gathered how long Joseph was a Servant in Egypt. Secondly, his age is
expressed, that it might appear what wonderful Graces he had received at those
years, of Chastity, Patience, Wisdom, Policy, and Government. Thirdly, by this
President of Joseph made a Governor at thirty, we see that at this age a man
is fit for public employment. David at that age began to reign, Ezekiel
prophesied, Christ and John the Baptist began to preach.

Verse 56. Pharaoh has not more preferred Joseph, then Joseph has enriched
Pharaoh: If Joseph had not ruled, Egypt and all the bordering Nations had
perished. The providence of so faithful an Officer has both given the
Egyptians their lives; and the Money, Cattle, Bodies, Lands of the Egyptians to
Pharaoh. Both have reason to be well pleased, the Subjects owe to him their
Lives; the King his Subjects and his Dominions: The Bounty of God made Joseph
give more than he received. It is like the seven years of plenty were not
confined to Egypt; other Countries adjoining were no less fruitful: yet in the
seven years of famine Egypt had Corn when they wanted. See the difference
betwixt a wise prudent frugality, and a vain ignorant expense of the benefits
of God. The sparing hand is both full and beneficial, whereas the lavish is not
only empty but injurious.

CHAP. XLII.
Verse 2. GOod Jacob is pinched with the common famine. No piety can exempt us
from the evils of neighborhood. No man can tell by outward events which is the
Patriarch and which the Canaanite. Neither does his profession lead him to the
hope of a miraculous preservation. It is a vain tempting of God, to cast our
selves upon an immediate provision, with neglect of common means: His ten Sons
must now leave their Flocks, and go down into Egypt to be their Fathers
Purveyors. And now they go to buy of him whom they had sold, and bow their
knees to him for his releif, which had bowed to them before for his own life.

Verse. 9. It was no small joy to Joseph to see this late accomplishment of his
ancient dreams, to see the Suppliants (I know not whether more brethren or
enemies) grovelling before him in an unknown submission. He that was hated of
his Brethren for being his Fathers Spy, now accuses his brethren for common
Spies of the weakness of Egypt. He could not without their suspicion have come
to a perfect intelligence of his Fathers estate and theirs, if he had not
objected to them that which was not. It is more safe in cases of inquisition to
fetch far about; and it is wisdom sometimes to conceal our knowledge that we
may not prejudice truth.

Verse. 16. It now does Joseph good to seem merciless to his Brethren, whom he
had found wilfully cruel; to hide his love from them, which had showed their
hate to him; and to think how much he favored them, and how little they knew
it. And as sporting himself with their present misery, he pleasantly imitates
all those actions reciprocally unto them, which they in despite and earnest had
done formerly to him; he speaks roughly, rejects their persuasions, puts them
in hold, and one of them in bonds. The mind must not always be judged by the
outward face of actions. Gods countenance is oft-times severe, and his hand
heavy, to them whom he best loves: many a one, under the habit of an Egyptian,
has the heart of an Israelite: And here that Joseph might seem enough (and
indeed too much) an Egyptian, Joseph swears heathenishly: How little could his
Brethren suspect, that this oath could proceed from the Son of him that swore
by the fear of his Father Isaac? How often have sinister respects drawn weak
goodness to disguise its self even with sins.

Verse. 18. The only best curb to restrain from evil, and spur to incite to
good, is the fear of God. All honesty flows from this holy fear. And therefore
it is a Problem in Aristotle, why men are credited more than other creatures,
the answer is, Man only reverenceth God, therefore you may trust him, therefore
you may commit your self to him. He that truly fears God is like unto Cato,
of whom it is said, he never did well that he might appear to do so, but
because he could do no otherwise. You need not fear me, said Joseph, here to
his Brethren, for I fear God, and so dare do ye no hurt.

Verse. 21. As they formerly hardened their hearts against the pitiful
complaint of their Brother Joseph; so they confess to be just, that now their
suit and petition was not heard: And then in that they said one to another, we
have verily sinned, we see the admirable effect of affliction, which brings a
man to the knowledge of his sin, and so to repentance: And further when they
came to this repentance, none of them transferres the sin from himself, neither
does any of them discharge any of the rest of that sin; they all take all; they
say one to another, we, all we, are verily guilty, and therefore is this
distress come upon us, upon us all: National calamities are induced by general
sins; and where they fall, we cannot so charge the Laity as to free the Clergy;
nor so charge the People as to free the Magistrate. Let us therefore never say
that it is aliena ambitio, the immoderate ambition of a pretending Monarch that
indangers us; that it is aliena perfidia, the falsehood of perfidious
Neighbors that has disappointed us; that it is aliena fortuna, the growth of
others who have shot up under our shelter that does overtop us; they are
peccata nostra, our own pride, our own wantonness, our own drunkenness, that
makes God shut and close his hand toward us, withdraw his former blessings from
us, and then strike us with that shut, and closed, and heavy hand, and multiply
calamities upon us.

Ver. 24. No Song could be so delightful unto Joseph, as to hear them in a late
remorse condemn themselves before him of their old cruelty toward him, who was
now their unknown Witness and Judge. They had heard Joseph's deprecation of
their evil with tears, and had not pitied him; yet Joseph does but hear their
mention of this evil which they had done against him, and pitties them with
tears: He weeps for joy to see their repentance, and to compare his safety and
happiness with the cruelty which they intended, and did, and thought they had
done.

Verse 28. Simeon is left in pawn, in Fetters; while the rest of Jacobs Sons
return with their Corn, with their paying nothing for their Provision but their
labor; that they might be as much troubled with the beneficence of that
strange Egyptian Lord, as before with his imperious suspicion. Their wealth was
now more irksome to them than their need: And they fear God means to punish
them more in this superfluity of Money than in the want of Victuals, (What is
this that God has done to us?) It is a wise course to be jealous of our gain,
and more to fear than to desire abundance.

Verse 38. All temporal things are troublesome: if they be good, it is trouble
to forgo them; and when we see that they must be parted with, either we wish
that they had not been so good, or that we had never enjoyed them; as some did
of St. Augustine when he died: If they be evil, their presence is troublesome;
and still we wish, either that they were good, or that we were eased of them.
Good things are troublesome in the event, and evil things in the use; they in
the future, because they shall come to an end, these in the present, because
they do continue. Oh that men would look to things that are eternal, for they
are good here, and will be better hereafter.

CHAP. XLIII.
Verse 1. THis Land where the Famine now was, was Canaan, Gods own Inheritance,
the Land which he had promised should flow with Milk and Honey, yet here was a
Famine, and at that time when his own Children, his Israel, and the first the
very best of those Children dwelt in the Land. Gods own People must want when
his Enemies the Egyptians had enough and to spare. From whence we may learn,
that neither Gods Love, nor his disaffection is to be judged by the things of
this world: Outward appearance is an ill sign to try the favors of God by;
for his Face, his outward appearance was most grim, most severe against his own
Son; our blessed Savior, who drunk a more bitter Cup from the hand of his
Father (against which he prayed, Father, if it be possible let this Cup pass
from me) than that of Gall and Vinegar, which was offered him by the Jews. Let
therefore the wicked, the Egyptians, the Enemies of Gods Church, how
prosperous, how secure, how plentiful soever their condition may seem to be in
this life, remember this in the midst of their jollity; that their Master the
Devil gives them pleasant entrances into his ways, but reserves the bitterness
for the end; we may say of their plenty as we use to say of some ill tasted
meat or drink, the prosperity of the wicked has a scurvy tang with it, an ill
come off. On the other side let Gods Israel, his Children, how sad, how
dejected, how much soever in want they seem to be, remember this in the midst
of their misery, that though the first handsel that God gives them in the Land
of Promise be a Famine, yet in the end they shall overflow with the Milk and
Honey of Canaan.

Verse 3. Benjamin was the beloved Son of his Father, and so is Christ; no
seeing the face of God unless we bring our Benjamin, our beloved Brother along
with us. And therefore whatever intercourse we have with God, we must have
Christ with us. We must not offer Sacrifice without the High Priest; Let us
offer nothing to God without Christ: There is no appearing before God, no
commerce between God and us untll we be reconciled in Christ, in whom we must
offer all our Sacrifices and endeavors. We must not then own an absolute God
in our devotions, we must not think of making any addresses to God, but as he
is reconciled in Christ, and at peace with us in Christ, and so our Persons,
and Prayers, and all shall be accepted in the Person of Christ, who is the true
Mercy-seat, the beloved Benjamine, in looking upon whom God frees us from the
curse of the Law.

Verse 9. Christ descended lineally from Judah, who in this particular of
suretiship was a type of Christ: For as Judah here did engage to his Father
Jacob for his Brother Benjamin, so did our blessed Savior to his Father for
us, and was our Security for the payment both of our debt and duty, both for
our sins and our obedience. And as Christ was our Surety to God for the
discharge of our debt (the Security and Debtor in Law are reputed as one
Person) so he is Gods Surety to us for the performance of his Promises. Christ
was the Surety of the first Covenant to pay that debt, of the second Covenant
to perform the Duty.

Verse 11. Old Jacob that was not used to simple and absolute Contentments,
receives the blessing of seasonable provision, together with the affliction of
that heavy message, the loss of one Son, and the danger of another; and knows
not whether it be better for him to die with hunger, or with grief for the
departure of that Son of his right hand. He drives off all till the last;
protraction is a kind of ease in evils that must come. At length (as no plea is
so importunate as that of Famine) Benjamin must go; one evil must be hazarded
for the redress of another. What would it avail him to see whom he loved
miserable? How injurious were the affection to keep his Son so long in his eye,
till they should see each other die for hunger. And therefore the ten Brothers
do now return into Egypt with double money in their Sacks, and a Present in
their hands; the danger of mistaking is required by honest minds with more than
restitution. It is not enough to find out our own hearts clear in suspicious
actions, except we satisfy others.

Verse 12. If this were an oversight, then restitution was necessary; we must
not any ways defraud or overreach our Brother. Whatever you would that men
should do unto you, so do unto them, said our Savior, Matthew. 7. 12. If we
would not have others wrong us, why should we wrong them, that former saying of
Christ's must be the general rule of direction in common conversation and mutual
interdealings one with another. That is the royal Law, the Standard of all
equity in this kind, according to which we must converse with all men.

Verse 23. Joseph's Steward would never have spoken so reverently of the God of
the Hebrews, but that he was so taught of Joseph, who was careful to instruct
his family in the right way. So did Abraham, Genesis 18. 18. and Jacob, Genesis 34,
and so should we.

Verse 34. Now has Joseph what he would, the sight and presence of his
Benjamin, whom he therefore borrows of his Father for a time, that he might
return him with a greater interest of joy. And now he feasts them whom he
formerly threatened, and turns their fear into wonder: all unequal love is not
partial; all the Brethren are entertained bountifully, but Benjamin has a
fivefold portion: By how much his welcome was greater, by so much his pretended
theft seemed more heinous: For good turns aggravate unkindnesses, and our
offenses are increased with our obligations.

CHAP. XLIV.
Verse 1. FIll the men's sacks with food as much as they can carry, said Joseph
here to his Steward; look how they came prepared with sacks and Beasts, so they
were sent back with Corn; the greater and the more sacks they had prepared, the
more Corn they carried away; if they had prepared but small sacks and a few,
they had carried away the less. A prepared heart is a vessel that shall be
filled at a Sermon or the Sacrament. Now the more or less the heart is
prepared, the greater or lesser the vessel, according to the size and capacity
of the vessel shall it be filled. Fill such men's hearts with special blessings,
with virtue from Christ, with the comfort of the holy Ghost, says the Lord at
a Sermon, or the Sacrament; fill them with special food as full as they can
hold, as much as they can carry. Let us be careful to prepare our hearts to the
purpose. The larger is our preparation, the larger is our vessel; the larger
our vessel, the larger our dole at a Sermon or Sacrament. If we carry not away
as much as we would it is our own fault, that by preparation we did not furnish
our selves with a larger vessel.

Verse 4. This blind Nature saw to be the sum of all sins, ingratum dixeris,
omnia dixeris. Some vices are such as Nature smiles upon, though frowned at by
Divine Justice, not so this. Philip King of Macedon caused a Soldier of his
that had offered unkindness to one that had kindly entertained him, to be
branded in the forehead with these two words, hospes ingratus. Unthankfulness
is a Monster in Nature, a Solecisme in Manners, a Paradox in Divinity, a
parching Wind to dry up the Fountain of further favor. Benjamins fivefold
Mess was no small aggravation to the theft here laid to his charge.

Verse 12. The Graces which God finds in us are like the silver which Joseph
found in Benjamins sack, of his own putting in. For our will herein is like the
lower Sphere, quae non nisi mota movet, moves not unless it be first moved.
Why should we then be loath to acknowledge to have all our ability of doing good
freely from God, and immediately by his grace, when as even those faculties of
Nature, by which we pretend to do the offices of Grace, we have from God
himself too. For that question of the Apostle involves all, What have thou that
thou have not received? Thy natural faculties are no more thine own, than the
Grace of God is thine own. But as thy body conceived in thy Mothers womb could
not claim a soul at Gods hand, nor wish a soul, no nor know there was a soul to
be had: so neither by being a man endued with natural faculties can thou
claim Grace, or wish Grace; nay those natural faculties, if they be not
pretincted with some infusion of Grace before, cannot make thee know what Grace
is, or that Grace is. To a Child rightly disposed in the womb God does give a
soul; to a natural man rightly disposed in his natural faculties God does give
grace, but that soul was not due to that Child, nor that grace to that Man.

Verse 14. If I am bereaved of my Children (says Jacob here) I am bereaved.
Which was spoken by him, not rashly or desperately, as if he cared not what
became of himself, but through the obedience of Faith in sacrificing his will
unto Gods. And this is according to that Petition in the Lords Prayer, Thy will
be done in Earth as it is in Heaven. A godly Man says Amen to Gods Amen, and
puts his fiat and placet to Gods: As one said, He could have what he would of
God. Why? How was that? Because whatever was Gods will, that was his. And thus
to submit unto Gods will is to serve him with a true heart, a heart truly and
entirely given up to God, delighting to do his will, and therefore well
content to wait, or, if God see good, to want what it most desires, be it
Health, or Wealth, or Wife or Children; being ambitious rather that Gods will
should be done than our own, and that he may be glorified though we be not
gratified.

Verse 16. This iniquity which God is said here to find out, is not to be
referred to this present Accusation, whereof they were not guilty but to their
former trespass committed against Joseph, as they in like manner confessed,
Genesis 42. and by this we should learn to look to God in our afflictions, whereof
we see no evident cause.

Verse 17. How easy is it to find advantages where there is a purpose to
accuse? Benjamins sack makes him guilty of that whereof his heart was free.
Crimes seem strange to the innocent; well might they abjure this fact with the
offer of bondage and death: For they which carefully brought again that which
they might have taken, would never take that which was not given them. But thus
Joseph would yet dally with his Brethren, and make Benjamin a Theif that he
might make him a Servant, and fright his Brethren with the peril of that their
charge, that he might double their joy and amazedness, in giving them two
Brothers at once: Our happiness is greater and sweeter when we have well feared
and smarted with evils.

Verse 23. Joseph's Steward like a good Man speaks comfort and life unto these
fainting dis-spirited Patriarchs: He knew there was a war in their
Consciences, and therefore he brings peace unto their afflicted spirits. To
break the bruised reed, to greive one that is in the agony of his soul, to
strike the breath out of a man's body who is giving up the Ghost, is cruelty
upon cruelty. And therefore it was the complaint of Saint Cyprian against the
Persecutors of Christians in his time, In servis Dei non torquebantur membra
sed vulnera, they laid stripes upon stripes, and laid wounds upon sores, and
tortutured not so much the members of Gods Servants, as their bleeding wounds.

CHAP. XLV.
Verse 1. When Judah had seriously reported the danger of his old Father, and
the sadness of his last complaint, compassion and joy will be concealed no
longer, but break forth violently at Joseph's voice and eyes. Many passions do
not well abide witnesses because they are guilty to their own weakness. Joseph
sends forth his servants that he might freely weep. He knew he could not say I
am Joseph without an unbeseeming vehemence.

Verse 4. I am Joseph: never any word sounded so strangely as this in the ears
of the Patriarchs. Wonder, doubt, reverence, joy, fear, guiltiness, struck them
at once. No marvel if they stood with paleness and silence before him; looking
on him and on each other: the more they considered, the more they wondered; and
the more they believed, the more they feared. For those words, I am Joseph,
seemed to sound thus much to their guilty thoughts; you are murderers, and I
am a Prince in spite of you: my power and this place give me all opprotunities
of revenge; my glory is your shame, my life your danger, your sin lives
together with me. But now the tears and graicous words of Joseph have soon
assured them of pardon and love, and have bidden them turn their eyes from
their sin against their brother, to their happiness in him, and have changed
their doubts into hopes, and joys. Thus actions salv'd up with a free
forgiveness are as not done; and as a bone once broken is stronger after well
setting; so is love after reconcilement.

Verse 5. Let us remember this in all oppressions we meet with, that they fall
not upon us without divine providence. What Eliphaz says of affliction in
general, is true of oppression in particular, it comes not forth of the dust,
neither does it spring out of the ground. And this truth was confirmed by
Joseph in this text; who though sold by his envious brethren into Egypt, yet
says, that God had sent him into Egypt. David being railed upon by Shimei,
said, God had bid him curse; and Job being robbed by the Sabeans, said, God had
taken away: thus also concerning the Iseraelites bondage under the Egyptians,
the Psalmist says he turned their heart to hate his people, and deal subtly
with his servants. Let us not therefore with the foolish dog, bark at the
stone, but rather look at the hand acknowledging God in all.

Verse 8. God so orders and disposes the actions of men as seems best for his
glory: as Joseph spoke here to his Brethren, when he discovered himself to them
in Egypt, whether they had betrayed and sold him; now it was not you that sent
me hither but God: they sent him thither instrumentally and enviously, but it
was God that sent him thither providentially and graciously; it was his power
and wisdom which ordered that dispensation sweetly, else his Brethren had
made foul work of it; or they sent him thither to make him a slave that was
their design, but God sent him thither to make him a Prince and Ruler, to make
him a Preserver of Egypt and of his own family too, as he speaks at the end of
this verse, he has made me a Father to Pharaoh, and Lord of all his house, and
a Ruler throughout all the land of Egypt.

Verse 11. Although the fifth Commandment was not then writ in stone, yet it
was sufficiently engraved on the Table of Joseph's heart, honor thy Father and
thy Mother, and surely one part of his honor is to provide for them in case of
want, which was Joseph's particular care in this text, to nourish and cherish
his father as a man nourishes his little ones, says the Hebrew, lovingly and
tenderly. This the Apostle commends to us, 1 Timothy 5. 4. as a thing not only
good before men but acceptable before God. Epominondas rejoiced in nothing more
then that he had lived to cheer up the hearts of his aged Parents by the
reports of his victories. Aristotle cap. 6. de mundo, tells us that when from
the hill Etna there run down a current of fire that consumed all the houses
thereabouts; in the midst of those fearful flames the River of fire parted its
self, and made a kind of lane for those who ventured to rescue their aged
Parents out of the jaws of death.

Verse 21. Joseph is here as bountiful as his Brethren were formerly cruel.
They send him naked to strangers, he sends them in new and rich liveries to
their father; they took a small sum of money for him, he gives them great
treasures; they sent his torn coat to his father; he sends variety of costly
raiment to his father by them; they sold him to be the load of Camels, he sends
them home with Chariots. It must be a great favor that can appease the
conscience of a great injury. Now they return home rich and joyful, making
themselves happy to think how glad they should make their father with this
news.

Verse 26. Good old Jacob did never hope that Egypt should have afforded such
provision as this, Joseph is yet alive: this was not food but life to him. The
return of Benjamin was comfortable; but that his dead son was yet alive after
so many years lamentation was tidings too happy to be believed, and was enough
to endanger that life with excess of joy which the knowledge thereof doubled.
Over excellent objects are dangerous in their sudden aprehensions. One grain of
that joy would have safely cheered him, whereof a full measure overlayes his
heart with too much sweetness. There is no earthly pleasure where of we may not
surfeit; of the spiritual we can never have enough.

Verse 28. Jacobs eyes revive his mind, which his ears had thus astonished.
When he saw the Chariots of his son be believed Joseph's life and refreshed his
own. He had too much before so that he could not enjoy it: now he says I have
enough, Joseph my son is yet alive: they told him of his honor, he speaks of
his life; life is better then honor. To have heard that Joseph lived a servant
would have joyed him more, then to hear that he died honorably. The greater
blessing obscures the less. He is not worthy of honor that is not thankful
for life. Yet Joseph's life did not content Jacob without his presence (I will
go down and see him ere I die) the sight of the eye is better then to walk in
desires; good things pleasure us not in their being, but in our enjoying. Thus
did Jacob rejoice when he was to go out of the land of promise to a foreign
Nation for Joseph's sake; being glad that he should loose his country for his
son. What shall our joy be? who must go out of this foreign land of our
pilgrimage to the home of our glorious inheritance; to dwell with none but our
own in that better and more lightsome Goshen, free from all the encumbrances of
this Egypt, and full of all the riches and delights of God.

CHAP. XLVI.
Verse 2. GOd has not used one means alone, but diverse to speak unto the
world; either by Angels, or by the cloud, or between the Cherabims, or by Urim,
or by Dreams, or by Visions. To this purpose there is a rule set down, Number. 12.
if there be a Prophet of the Lord among you I will be known to him by a Vision,
and will speak to him by a dream; and to this rule we might add sundry examples
out of Scripture as of Jacob here, of Samuel, of Daniel, of John; all declaring
that God used to declare many things by Visions to his Servants, and to others
when it pleased him: that so by this means he might have the revelation of his
will appear to be only his, and not of themselves. For however it pleased the
Lord to deal with his servants, and what way soever he used to signify his
good pleasure, in all these cases he imprinted in the minds and hearts of them
to whom he showed himself certain notes and evident tokens, whereby they might
expressly and clearly know that it was his doing, that so they should challenge
nothing to themselves but ascribe all unto him.

Verse 3. Cause of fear Jacob might see sufficient: but God would not have him
look downward on the rushing and roaring streams of misery that run so swiftly
under him and his posterity, but steadfastly fasten on his power and providence,
who was his God and the God of his father. He loves to perfect his strength in
our weakness: as Eliah would have the Sacrifice covered with water that Gods
power might the more appear in the fire from heaven.

Verse 4. God says to Jacob here, I will go down with thee into Egypt; and I
will also surely bring thee up again. God goes down with a good man into the
grave, and will surely bring him up again. When? the Angel promised to return
to Abram and Sarah for the assurance of the birth of Iaac acording to the time
of life, that is, in such time as by nature a Woman may have a child; God will
return to us in the grave acording to the time of life; that is, in such time
as he by his gracious decree has fixed for the Resurrection. And in the mean
time no more than the Godhead departed from the dead body of our Savior in
the grave, does his power and his presence depart from our dead bodies in that
darkness.

Verse 6. Jacob being not willing to be a burden unto Pharaoh more then needs
must, brings down all his Estate into Egypt. Though the Famine forced the
Patriarch to be beholding to Pharaoh for bread, yet he would not be Engaged to
him for meat. And therefore took his Cattle along with him; and although he
could not bring down his house into Goshen, yet he carried his goods. It is an
happiness so to live with others as not to be beholding, but rather helpful
than burdensome. When the Prophet desired a cake of the widow in the days of
famine, he rewarded her with a barrel of meal, which outlasted that famine, and
rather then he will be a burden to the poor Woman, a miracle shall relieve her.

Verse 27. Well may the Rabbis say, that these seventy souls were as much as
the seventy Nations of the world, when Moses tells us Deuteronomy. 10. 22. that whereas
their fathers went down into Egypt with seventy souls, now Jehovah had made
them as the Stars of heaven for multitude; and this too by miraculous ways and
means. As for instance, when this Israel of God was shackel'd (perchance for
their forefathers selling Joseph to be a slave) with the Irons of Egypt; where
their burdens were turned into bondage, and their bondage into blood, their
souls also being ever on the rack of continual fear and suspense, lest their
bodies might be thrown into the same brickhils they had built, and become the
fire to harden their own handiwork; Yet here how did God tie up Pharaohs hands
with plagues, turning their poisons into cordials, and their enemies malice to
their greatest improvement; in that he made them grow under their burden; and
propagate through that inhumane destruction of the Male fruit of their body. So
able is God to raise his Church from a small number to an infinite, from
seventy persons to the Stars of heaven, or the sand on the Seashore for
multitude.

Verse 29. The height of all earthly contentment appeared in the meeting of
these two; whom their mutual loss had more endeared to each other. The
intermission of comforts has this advantage, that it sweetens our delight more
in the return, then was abated in the forbearance. God does oft-times hide away
our Joseph for a time, that we may be more joyous and thankful in his
recovery. This was the sincerest pleasure that ever Jacob had, which therefore
God reserved for his age. And if the meeting of earthly friends be so
unspekably comfortable, how happy shall we be in sight of the glorious face of
God our heavenly Father, of that our blessed Redeemer; whom we sold to death by
our sins, and which now after that noble triumph has all power given him in
Heaven and Earth.

CHAP. XLVII.
Verse 3. IT is fit that every one that lives in a Commonwealth should labor
in that Commonwealth, and bring some benefit, some honey to the common hive,
unless he will be cast out as a drone. Pharaoh would hardly have suffered even
Joseph's own Brethren to have lived idly under his jurisdiction; and therefore
his first question here was, What is your Occupation? At Athens every man gave
an yearly account to the Magistrate, by what Trade or course of life he
maintained himself; which if he could not do he was banished. Take ye the evil
and unprofitable servant (said our Savior) and cast him into utter darkness;
away with such a fellow from off the earth which he has burdened; for he is
no more missed when gone then the parings of ones nails. Those therefore that
have a talent, a trade to live on, must improve that talent, must follow that
trade, whereby the world may be the better, and not think to come hither merely
as Rats and Mice, only to devour victuals, and to run squeaking up and down.
These are Ciphers, or rather Excrements in humane Society. In the sweat of thy
brows thou shall eat thy bread, was the old Sanction. Even Paradise that was
Man's Storehouse, was also his working house. They bury themselves alive, that,
as body-lice, live on other men's sweat and labors, and it is a sin to relieve
them.

Verse 4. These plain dealing men did not desire to live at Court, though their
Brother was the chief Favorite, but in Goshen; which as it was next to the
Land of Canaan, so was it most fit for their Cattle. These honest religious
Patriarks chose rather a poor Shepherds life in Gods service, then to ruffle
it as Courtiers out of the Church. So did Moses afterward and David, Psalm. 84.
10. and the poor Prophet that died so deep in debt, and good Micaiah, and those
that wandered about in sheepskins and goat skins, Heb. 11. who happily might
have ruffled in silks and velvets if they would have strained their
Consciences. Origin was contented to be a poor Catechist at Alexandria, every
day in fear of death, when he might have been with his fellow Pupil Photinus in
great authority and favor, if not a Christian. God takes it kindly when men
will go after him in the Wildernefs, in a Land not sown, Ier. 2. 2. that is,
choose him and his ways in affliction, and with self-denial.

Verse 6. Those that are ingenious and industrious in their calling, shall be
preferred and had in esteem by great men. How much more then does it concern
Christians to improve their Talent, that they may be accepted and preferred by
God. That Servant in Saint Luke that had improved his pound to ten pounds, was
made Lord over ten Cities, and he that had increased it but to five pounds, had
authority but over five Cities: As every one had traded so he was rewarded, and
had a different degree both of Grace and Glory. Let all men therefore according
to their several abilities improve what they have to Gods Glory and the good of
others, and then they may be sure they shall improve it for themselves, and
their own both good and glory.

Verse 9. Man's life is but a sojourning, it is but a Pilgrimage, said Jacob
here, and but the days of his pilgrimage neither, every one of them quickly at
an end, and all of them quickly reckoned. Thus also did the rest of the
Patriarchs count themselves but as Strangers and Pilgrims in the earth, and
thereby declared that they sought a Country, Heb. 12. 14. Here we have no
continuing City; first no City, no such large Being, and then no continuing at
all, it is but a sojourning. Here we are but viatores, Passengers, Wayfaring
men; this life is but the highway, and thou can not build thy hopes here;
nay to be buried in the highway is no good mark, and therefore bury not thy
self, thy labors, thy affections upon the world.

Verse 22. However Infidels and Idolaters were destitute of the knowledge of
the true God, yet they accounted it a special duty to honor the Priests of
their Groves and Altars, and persuaded themselves that they should never
receive any blessing at the hands of their Gods, unless they honored those
that were esteemed as his Servants. Thus Moses witnesses, that when Pharaoh,
during the Dearth and Famine that was in Egypt, had received all the Money,
bought all the Cattle, and purchased all the Land of the People, to supply
their necessity and save their lives, yet he would not buy the Priests Land,
but sustained them for their Office sake. And are Idolaters and Infidels thus
bountiful in the maintaining of their Priests? How then should this serve to
reprove our dullness and backwardness in the true worship of the Eternal God.
How many are there that live in the bosom of the Church, and profess the true
Religion, who yet to maintain a learned Minister, that is able to save their
souls, repine and grutch to give sixpence a quarter. What a shame is it for
those whom the Lord has blessed with abundance, that they should spend all on
their backs and bellies, on Hawks, or Hounds, or Whores; and nothing at all to
the Glory of God, the comfort of their fouls, and help of their Brethren.

Verse 28. Just so many years as Jacob had nourished Joseph in Canaan, did
Joseph nourish Jacob in Egypt; repaying his Fathers love to the utmost penny.
These were the sweetest days and freest from trouble, that ever the good old
Patriark saw. God reserves his best to the last. Mark the perfect man, and
behold the upright, says the Psalmist, for (be his beginning and middle never
so troublesome) the end of that man (his after-end at least) shall be peace: A
Goshen he shall have either here or in Heaven, and a Peace both in this world
and the next; the peace of Conscience here, and the peace that passes all
understanding hereafter.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Verse 1. Jacob have I loved, said God; and yet this Beloved of God was under
many troubles and afflictions in his life, and visited with sickness before his
death. And all this does very well agree with the dispensations of Gods
Providence. For whom the Lord loves he chastens, and scourges every Son whom
he receives. Afflictions are Christ's Love Tokens. When Ignatius came to the
wild Beasts, Now, says he, I begin to be a Christian. Omnis Christianus
crucianus, every true Christian must take up his Cross and follow his Savior.
It is reported of an ancient Doctor of the Church, lying upon his sick bed, and
being asked how he did, and how he felt himself, he pointed to his Sores and
Ulcers (whereof he was full) and said, Hae sunt gemmae and pretiosa ornamenta
Dei, These are Gods Gems and Jewels, wherewith he decketh his best friends, and
to me they are more precious than all the Gold and Silver in the world.

Verse 3. It is not enough to relate Gods Mercies to us in the lump, and by
wholesale, but we must instance in the particulars both to God and men, upon
every occasion, setting them down one by one, and cyphering them up, as David's
word is, Psalm. 9. 1. I will praise thee O Lord, and I will show forth (or sum
up) all thy mavelous works. When Moses in Exodus met with his Father in Law,
he reckoned all the particular Mercies that God had done for Israel, in Egypt,
and at the Red Sea, he omitted none. The truly thankful keep an Ephemerides, a
Calender, and Catalogue of Gods gracious dealings with them, and delight to
their last to recount and sum them up. We should be like Civit-boxes, which
still retain the scent when the Civit is taken out of them.

Verse 7. Jacob makes mention of Rachels burial, to put Joseph in mind, that
Rachel forsook her Fathers house to live in Canaan, so to stir him up much more
to leave Egypt, which was not his Country; as also that he might have a greater
desire to the place of his Mothers Sepulcher.

Verse 14. Jacob feeling with his hands which was the Elder and bigger, (for
the words are, he caused his hands to understand) on purpose laid his right
hand on Ephraim in way of pre-eminence; which shows that God bestows his
Gifts without respect of persons, as also it prefigureth the calling of the
Gentiles instead of the Jews, who were as the elder Brother. 3. From this we
may deduce an evident truth in experience, that Gods dispensations toward the
Righteous and the Wicked in this life, are like Jacobs dealing here with
Joseph's Sons, cross and strange: For as he laid his right hand on the Younger,
and his left on the Elder, so does God oft-times, for the present, distribute
with his left hand crosses to the good, and with his right favors to the bad:
And not only in a literal sense, as our Savior speaks, He makes the Sun to
shine, and the Rain to fall upon the just and the unjust, but in a metaphorical
sense he causes the Sun of Prosperity to shine upon the Unjust, and the Rain
of Adversity to fall upon the Just.

Verse 15. When a Curse falls upon the Children the Father is cursed; as in the
Blessing of the Children tht Father is blessed. Thus Joseph brought his two
Sons, Manasseh and Ephraim, to his aged Father Jacob, that they might receive
his Blessing, who laying his hands upon their heads blessed Joseph, says the
Text, and said, God before whom, etc. and then it follows, The Angel which
redeemed me from all evil, bless the Lads. Now as Jacob in blessing the
Children of Joseph blessed Joseph himself; so Noah, Genesis 9. in cursing the
Children of Cham cursed Cham himself. Valerius l. 1. has observed concerning
the Tyrant Dionysius, that though he escaped free and untouched in person from
the vengeance which his sacrilegious wickedness deserved, yet his Sons were
involved in so much misery, that in them, he being pas^ feeling, suffered, and
being dead paid dearly for his stolue dainties. The light of Nature as well as
Scripture tells us, that evils falling on posterity are reckoned upon the
Fathers score. And thus as it is with Curses, so likewise with Blessings, upon
the same account, and for the same reason, though they are conferred upon the
Children, yet the Fathers memory is blessed and honored by them.

Verse 17. It is dangerous to follow men blindfold (how seeing soever those men
are) but it is safe and our duty to follow God blindfold, how seeing soever we
think our selves to be. We must not be displeased as Joseph was here with his
Father Jacob. When we see God laying his right hand upon Ephraim; and his left
upon Manasseh doing things cross to our thoughts; much less may we take upon
us to direct the hand of God, as Joseph would Jacobs, where we please. The Lord
knows, as Jacob answered Joseph, what he does, and it becomes us to acquiess in
what he does, though we know it not. And though God turn Kingdoms upside down,
though he send great afflictions upon his own People, and make them a reproach
unto the Heathen, though he give them up unto the power of the Adversary, and
make all their enemies to rejoice, yet no man may say unto God, Why do you
thus? his Works are unsearchable. It is beyond the line of the Creature to put
any question, a Why or a Wherefore about thr Work of the Creator. Shall the
thing formed say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus? Has not
the Potter power over the Clay?

Verse 21. This good Patriarch that had before wrestled with an Angel, did not
now fear to wrestle with Death; and therefore speaks of it without the least
fear or consternation of spirit. It was no more betwixt Jacob and Death, but,
Behold I die. He knew he was to change his Place indeed, but not his Company,
Death was to him but the daybreak of eternal brightness, it was but (as that
Martyr said) winking a little, and he was in Heaven immediately. Why then
should this sad toil of Mortality dishearten us, why should we be so foolish,
as to fear that which is the Port which we ought one day to desire, never to
refuse. And therefore some have welcomed Death, some met it in the way, some
baffied it in persecution, sickness, torments, knowing it to bethe end of a
temporal Misery, and the beginning of an everlasting Joy.

CHAP. XLIX.
Verse 6. GOdly men are not at all pleased with the way of the wicked, how much
soever they thrive in it. Job had said much of the Greatness, Riches, and Glory
of the Wicked, but says he, However the counsel of the wicked is far from
me, Chap. 21. the ways of the godly and wicked differ as much as their ends;
and their counsels are as distant as their conclusions will be. Every good man
says of the counsel and ways of the wicked, how prosperous soever, as Jacob
said of his Sons, Simeon and Levi, O my soul come not thou into their secret.
Let me be far from their secret, far from their Cabinet Counsel, and close
Committees, O my soul come not thou into their secret. Blessed is the man that
has not walked in the counsel of the ungodly. The further we keep from their
counsel, the nearer we are to blessedness.

Verse 7. Many times Man though forbidden curses, then it is his Sin, and he is
Satan's Minister for evil against his Brother. Yet in some cases to curse is
Gods Command and our Duty, and then we are Gods Ministers for wrath against the
Wicked. Thus when the Patriarch Jacob was upon his deathbed, and bed of
blessing, yet he pronounced a Curse upon the rage and anger of his two Sons
here, Simeon and Levi. Now in all lawful cursings we must observe these two
Rules. First, to aim the Curse at the destruction of the Sin, not the Sinner.
Secondly, where the Sinner appears incorrigible, yet to desire the clearing up
of Gods Justice in punishing, not the punishment its self. To curse any thing
or person passionately is infirmity; to curse any thing or person maliciously
is gross impiety.

Verse 8. What difference the Holy Ghost is pleased to put here betwixt
sinners, when yet the sins of those men were in a manner equal. Reubeus Incest
in the fourth verse was punished with a Curse, and the like sin of Iudahs is
pardoned, and in a sort prospers. If this sin had not cost Judah many a sigh,
he had no more escaped his Fathers Curse, then Reuben did. I see the difference
not of sins but men: Remission goes not by the measure of the sin, but the
quality of the sinner; yea rather the Mercy of the Forgiver. Blessed is the man
(not that sins not, but) to whom the Lord imputes not his sin.

Verse 10. This Hebrew word Shilo is derived from Shalah, which signifies
security and safety. So that Christ is Shilo, that is, he in whom all persons
may securely trust: You may sit down in safety in Christ, and rest your souls
for ever; he is Shilohs our Lord Protector, our Savior. And the Hebrews use
the same word to signify the fleshly Mantle in which the Infant is wrapped in
the Mothers belly, because the Infant lies there quietly and securely, it is
out of fear, and has no thought of any danger, but lies securely out of
harms way.

Verse 18. Gods Children upon the discovery of his glory and that happiness of
the next Life, are filled with longing desires after God and those Enjoyments.
Lord I have waited for thy salvation, said Jacob: he speaks this upon his
deathbed, as that he had been looking for all his life; as if that were the
account of all his actions in the World, and the Story of his whole Life. I
have longed, for thy salvation, said David. All desires are summed up in
longing. There is a strong desire in the Saints to see and enjoy God in his
Ordinances. Now if there be so great and so longing a desire to see the Lord
through these Mediums, and in these Glasses, how much more to see him
immediately face to face? How would that desire swallow up all our desires in
glory? And indeed we could not abide in Glory with any other desire but that.
The Saints are described in their present state by this Periphrasis, such as
love the appearing of Christ, as if they loved nothing else. What then will
Christ be to them when he shall appear. They who love Christ whom they have not
seen, how will they love Christ when they see him.

Verse 23. God sometimes seems an Enemy to his faithful Servants. For one to be
before God as a Butt, continually shot at, what other interpretation can sense
make of it but this, that God looks upon him as an Enemy. Jacob said of Joseph
here, The Archers have sorely grieved him, and shot at him. Joseph was the
common Mark of his Brethrens Envy. But in this case, as it is said of Joseph,
when his Brethren came to him he made himself strange to them: Joseph was of a
meek and loving disposition, and therefore like a Player upon a Stage he only
acted the part of a rigid Master or Governor; thus many times the Lord takes
upon him the posture of an Enemy, and forces a frown upon a poor Creature, whom
he loves and delights in with all his heart; he makes him as his Mark to shoot
at, whom he lays next to his heart. Besides, observe from hence further, that
God takes the most eminent and choicest of his Servants for the choicest and
most eminent afflictions. Thus Joseph was made the White here that the Archers
shot at. Joseph was the most eminent for Grace and Goodness of all his
Brethren, he was the most remarkable man for Grace and Holiness, therefore he
must be the Mark.

Verse 27. Tertullian will have this Text have relation to St. Paul; Paulum
mihi etiam Genesis repromisit: I had a Promise of Paul in Moses, says that
Father, then when Moses said Jacob blessed Benjamin thus, Benjamin shall ravin
as a wolf, etc. that is, at the beginning Paul shall scatter the Flock of
Christ, but at last he shall gather and reunite the Nations to his service. As
he had breathed threatenings and slaughters against the Disciples of the Lord,
so he became os orbi sufficiens, a mouth loud enough for all the world to hear:
And as he had drawn and sucked the blood of Christ's mystical Body, the Church,
so in that proportion that God enabled him to, he recompensed that damage by
effusion of his own blood, and then he bequeathed to all posterity his
Epistles, which are as St. Augustine calls them, ubera ecclesiae, the Paps, the
Breasts, the Udders of the Church, and which are as that cluster of Grapes of
the Land of Canaan which was born by two. For here every Couple, every Pair may
have their load, Jew and Gentile, Learned and Ignorant, Man and Wife, Master
and Servant, Father and Children, Prince and People: and thus was the spoil in
the Text divided.

CHAP. L.
Verse 2. BUrial, and Christian Burial, and solemn Burial, are all Evidences
and Testimonies of Gods Presence. God forbid we should conclude or argue an
absence of God from the want of solemn Burial, or Christian Burial, or any
Burial. But neither must we deny it to be an evidence of his Favor and
Presence, where he is pleased to afford these. So God makes that the seal of
all his Blessings to Abram, that he should be buried in a good old age. God
established Jacob with that Promise, Genesis 46. that his Son should have care of
his Funerals: And here Joseph does command his Servants the Physicians to
embalme him when he was dead. To the same purpose also of Christ it was
promised, that he should have a glorious Burial. Isa. 11. and therefore Christ
interprets well that profuse and prodigal piety of the Woman that poured out
the Ointment upon him, that she did it to bury him. And so shall Joseph of
Arimathea be ever famous for his care in celebrating Christ's Funerals. If we
were to send a Son or a Friend to take possession of any place in Court or
foreign parts, we would send him out in the best equipage: Let us not grudge
therefore to set down our Friends in the Antichamber of Heaven the Grave, in
as good a manner as without vain-gloriousness and wastfulness we may.

Verse 10. Solemn and appointed mournings are good expressions of our dearness
to the departed Soul of our Friend, and of his Worth and our value of him, and
it has its praise in Nature, in Manners, and in public Customs. Let thy
Friend therefore be Interred after the Manner of the Country, and the Laws of
the Place, and the Dignity of the Person. For so Jacob here was buried with
great solemnity and public mourning; and Devout men carried Stephen to his
Burial, making great lamentation over him. And indeed that man is esteemed to
die miserably, for whom no Friend, no Relative sheds a tear, or pays a solemn
sigh. I desire to die a dry Death, but am not very desirous to have a dry
Funeral: Some Flowers sprinkled on my Grave would do well, and a soft shower
to turn those Flowers into a springing memory, or a fair rehearsal, that I may
not go out of my doors as servants carry out the entrails of Beasts.

Verse 12. Jacob on his Deathbed bound his Sons by oath to interre him in a
prescript solemnity. And indeed those solemn Rites which we strew on the
Funerals of our deceased Friend are no effect of courtesy but debt: And
therefore those dispositions are little below barbarous, which snarle at a
moderate sorrow and decent interrment of the Dead. He then that in a wayward
Opinion shall disallow of either, may well deserve the honor of Iehoiakims
Funeral, the burial of an Ass. Had not our Savior his clean Linen, his sweet
Ointment, his new Sepulcher?

Verse 13. This was a religious Providence the Patriarchs had in purchasing a
possession place for their burial; and Posterity kept it up a long time, even
to superstition, thinking their bones never at rest till they were laid in the
Sepulcher of their Fathers. Which honorable way of Interrment in these
tympanous and swelling times of ours, were a good means to preserve our Names
from rottenness, if our Lawsuits, and Pride, and Riot have left so much of a
devoured Inheritance as will serve the Dimensions of a dead Body.

Verse 15. The guilty Conscience can never think its self safe: So many years
experience of Joseph's Love could not secure his Brethren of remission: Those
that know they have deserved ill, are wont to mis-interpret favors, and think
they cannot be beloved. All that while his Goodness seemed but concealed and
sleeping Malice; which they feared in their Fathers last sleep would awake and
bewray its self in revenge. Still therefore they plead the Name of their
Father, though dead, not daring to use their own. Good meanings cannot be more
wronged than with suspicion: It greives Joseph to see their fear, and to find
they had not forgotten their own sin, and to hear them so passionately crave
that which they had.

Verse 17. Forgive the trespass of the Servants of thy Fathers God. What a
conjuration of pardon was this? What Wound could be either so deep or so
festered as this Plaster could not cure. They say not, the Sons of thy Father;
for they knew Jacob was dead, and they had degenerated, but, the Servants of
thy Fathers God. How much stronger are the bonds of Religion than of Nature! If
Joseph had been rancorous this Deprecation had charmed him, but now it resolves
him into tears.

Verse 19. They are not so ready to acknowledge their old offense, as he to
protest his Love; and if he chide them for any thing it is for that they
thought they needed to entreat; since they might know it could not stand with
the fellow servants of their Fathers God to harbor maliciousness, to purpose
revenge. Am not I under God? And fully to secure them he turns their eyes from
themselves to the Decree of God, from the Action to the Event; as one that
would have them think there was no cause to repent of that which proved so
successful. And from hence we learn also, that even late confession finds
forgiveness. Joseph had long ago seen their sorrow, never but now heard he
their humble acknowledgement; Mercy stays not for outward solemnities. How
much more shall that Infinite Goodness pardon our sins, when he finds the truth
of our repentance.

Verse 20. Be sin what it will be in the nature of it, yet my sin shall conduce
and cooperate for my good. So Joseph said here to his Brethren, You thought
evil against me, but God meant it unto Good; which was not only good to Joseph,
who was no partaker in the evil, but good even to them who meant nothing but
evil. And therefore as Origin said, etsi novum, though it be strangely said,
yet I say it, that Gods anger is good: so said St. Augustine, audeo dicere,
though it be boldly said, yet I must say it, many sinners would never have been
saved if they had not committed some greater sin at last than before; for the
punishment of that sin has brought them to a remorse of all their other sins
formerly neglected.

A PRACTICAL COMMENTARY UPON THE SECOND BOOK OF MOSES CALLED EXODUS
CHAP. I.
Verse 5. ALL the Souls that came out of the loins of Jacob into Egypt with
him, were but seventy Souls; of which little Flock God made such an increase,
as the Egyptians grew afraid of it; God so providing to fulfill his Promise
touching their inerease, Genesis 22. 17. So assuredly true are all other of Gods
Promises, and therefore think of what you will, your Faith and Comfort shall
not fail you. That sweet Promise, That at what time soever a sinner repents of
his sin, God in mercy will forgive him; it shall never fail. God may as soon
cease to be God, as cease to be true in any thing that he has spoken. So both
for this Life and that to come we have Gods Word; and no more than he failed
Abraham in multiplying of his Seed, will he fail us in any Promise. Only we
must tarry Gods time, and hasty minds must learn humble patience.

Verse 7. The rising of Houses and Families is from the Lord, who blesses
where he pleases with increase of Children, and makes a name spread; as
likewise dries up and cutteth off, as he pleases, others. Which ought to make
us cease from envy where we see increase, and stay rash judgment where we see
decrease; for it is the Lords work. But then whereas it may be collected from
the former verse, that this wonderful increase was not till after Joseph's
death, it will afford us this observation, that what was here figured in Joseph
was fulfilled in Christ. For before Christ died few believed in him, but after
his Death and Resurrection the true Israelites increased and multiplied
exceedingly throughout the whole World.

Verse 9. Gods Favor bestowed in Mercy where he likes is still an eyesore to
evil men, matter enough for them to grate their teeth at, and to cause them to
enter into Plots and Conspiracies against them. The Eye of Envy looks ever
upwards, who is above, who rises, who prospers, and is as much greived at
the good of another as at the harm of its self.

Verse 10. Although this Counsel favored wholly of blood, yet it is covered
with the vizard and die of Wisdom. So still is the Devil like himself, and
ever in his colors; the Proud man is Neat, the Covetous man Provident, the
Drunkard a good Fellow, and here the bloody minded Egyptians are politic and
wise.

Verse 12. As God afflicted them with another mind then the Egyptians (God to
exercise them, the Egyptians to suppress them) so causes he the event to
differ. Who would not have thought with these Egyptians, that so extreme misery
should not have made the Israelites unfit both for generation and resistance.
Moderate exercise strengthens, extreme destroys Nature: That God which many
times works by contrary means, caused them to grow with depression, with
persecution to multiply; how can Gods Church but fare well, since the very
malice of their Enemies benefits them? Oh the sovereign Goodness of our God,
that turns all our Poisons into Cordials: Gods Vine bears the better for the
pruning hook.

Verse 16. The stronger the Isarelites grew, the more impotent grew the malice
of their Persecutors: And since their own labor strengthens them, now tyranny
will try what can be done by the violence of others; since the present strength
cannot be subdued, the hopes of succession must be prevented. Women must be
suborned to be Murderers, and those whose Office is to help the birth must
destroy it. It Is true, there was less suspicion of cruelty in that Sex, but
yet more opportunity of doing mischiefs. The Male-Children must be born and die
at once; What can be more innocent than a Child, that has not lived so much as
to cry, or to see light? It is fault enough to be the Son of an Israelite: the
Daughters may live for bondage, for lust, a condition so much, at the least,
worse than death, as their Sex was weaker. O mavelous cruelty, that a man
should kill a man for his Sexes sake: Whosoever has loosed the raines unto
cruelty is easily carried into incredible extremities.

Verse 17. The fear of God teaches the Midwives to disobey an unjust Command;
they well knew how no excuse it is for evil, I was bidden: God said to their
hearts, Thou shall not kill; this Voice was louder than Pharaohs! I commend
their obedience in disobeying; I dare not commend their excuse; there was as
much weakness in their Answer, as strength in their Practice; as they feared
God in not killing, so they feared Pharaoh in dissembling: Oft-times those that
make conscience of greater sins are overtaken with less. It is well and rare
if we can come forth of a dangerous Action without any Foil; and if we have
escaped the storm that some after-drops wet us not.

Verse 19. It is dangerous to conclude an Action to be good, either because he
that did it had a good purpose in doing it, or because some good effects
proceeded from it. The Midwives Lie here in the behalf of the Israelites
Children, was a Lie and a Sin, however God out of his own Goodness found
something in their piety to reward. I should not venture to say as he said, nor
yet venture to say that he said well, when Moses said, Forgive this sin, or
blot me out of thy Book; nor when St. Paul said, I could wish that my self were
separated from Christ for my Brethren. I would not, I could not without sin, be
content that my name should be blotted out of the Book of Life, or that I
should be separated from Christ, though all the World besides were to be
blotted out and separated if I stayed in.

Verse 21. Who would not have expected that the Midwives should be murdered
for not murdering? Pharaoh could not be so simple to think these Women trusty,
yet his indignation had no power to reach to their punishment. God prospered
the Midwives, who can harm them? Even the not doing of evil is rewarded with
good. And why did they prosper? Because they feared God; not for their
dissimulation, but their pity. So did God regard their mercy, that he regarded
not their infirmity. How fondly do men lay the thank upon the sin, which is due
to the virtue: True Wisdom reaches to distinguish Gods Actions, and to ascribe
them to the right Causes; pardon belongs to the lie of the Midwives, and
remuneration to their goodness, prosperity to their fear of God.

Verse 22. That which the Midwives will not, the Multitude shall do; it were
strange if wicked Rulers should not find some or other Instruments of violence:
All the people must drown what the Women saved. Cruelty did but smoke before,
now it flamed out, secret practicing has made it shameless, that now it dare
proclaim tyranny. It is a miserable State where every man is made an
Executioner; there can be no greater Argument of an ill Cause than a bloody
Persecution, whereas Truth upholds her self by Mildness, and is promoted by
Patience: This is their Act, what was their Issue? The People must drown their
Males, themselves are drowned; they died by the same means by which they caused
the poor Israelitish Infants to die. God would have us read our sins in our
judgments, that we might both repent of our sins and give Glory to his Justice.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 2. NO doubt when Iochebed the Mother of Moses saw a Man-child born of
her, and him beautiful and comely, she fell into extreme passion to think that
the Executioners hand should succeed the Midwives. All the time of her
conception she could not but fear a Son, now she sees him, and thinks of his
Birth and Death at once, her second pangs and throws are more grievous than her
first. The pains of travel in others are somewhat mitigated with hope, and
countervail'd with joy that a Man-child is born; in her they are doubled with
fear; the remedy of others is her complaint: Still she looks when some fierce
Egyptian would come in and snatch her new born Infant out of her bosom, whose
comeliness had now also added to her affliction: And therefore when she can no
longer hide him in her Womb, she hides him in her House, afraid lest every of
his cryings should guide the Executioners to his Cradle. And if thus careful
are earthly Parents of their Children, how transcendent think you is the care
that God (our heavenly Father) takes of all those that are his?

Verse 3. What did the Father all the while, that the Scripture still
mentions the Mother, saying, she did thus and thus? Truly, likely it was he
was amazed, and stood as a man at his wits end, not seeing what to do; The
Woman, enabled by God, was the better Man at this time. Thus sometimes in the
weaker vessel Gods strength is more seen, and he does enable them now and then
for that purpose. The knowledge of this should yield them a fit regard, and Men
may not ever disdain to follow them, by whom they see God sometimes does work.
Remember Pilates Wives advice; Have not thou to do with that just Man.

Verse 4. No tyranny can forbid her to love him whom she is forbiddento keep,
her Daughters Eyes must supply the place of her Arms. And if the weak
affection of a Mother were thus effectually careful, what shall we think of
him, whose Love, whose Compassion is (as himself) infinite? His Eye, his Hand,
cannot but be with us, even when we forsake our selves: Moses had never a
stronger protection about him, no not when all his Israelites were pitched
about his Tent in the Wilderness, than now, when he lay sprawling upon the
waves: No water, no Egyptian can hurt him. Neither Friend nor Mother dare own
him, and now God challenges his custody. When we seem most neglected and
forlorn in our selves, then is God most present, most vigilant.

Verse 5. From hence we may learn first, that there is no Rock more sure, nor
Refuge more comfortable (when man's power fails) than Gods gracious Providence.
Secondly, how able God is to dispose of men's courses, otherwise than at the
beginning they intended. For this Lady purposed only to walk and wash her, but
God had a work of Mercy to do by her. Thirdly, where are they that talk of
Fortune? What more casual in man's eye than this Ladies walking that way; yet
you see it was no Fortune; but disposed wholly by the Providence of God, for
the life of the Child, the joy of his Parents, and the deliverance of the
Israelites. Lastly, we see plainly how man's counsel cannot hinder that which
God has determined shall come to pass. Moses must live and become a Deliverer
unto Israel, do Pharaoh what he can: And though many poor Infants were cast
away to prevent his fear, yet that very Infant, which must effect what he so
much feared, is preserved alive in despite of him; yea nourished up by his own
Daughter in his own bosom. The like to this we have in the New Testament, the
parallel Example of Herod and those Infants; where our Savior is the Antitype
of Moses, and was preserved in the common slaughter of Infants to deliver his
People from an eternal slavery, as Moses was preserved to deliver the
Israelites from a temporal.

Verse 9. Moses his Sister finding the Princess compassionate, offers to
procure a Nurse, and fetches the Mother; and who can be so fit a Nurse as a
Mother. She now with glad hands receives her Child both with authority and
reward She would have given all her estate for the life of her Son; and now she
has a reward to nurse him. The exchange of the name of a Mother for the name
of a Nurse has gained her both her Son and his education, and with both a
recompense. Religion does not call us to a weak simplicity, but allows us as
much of the Serpent as the Dove; lawful Policies have from God both liberty in
the use, and blessing in the success.

Verse 11. Moses went forth and looked on the burdens of Israel. What needed
Moses to have afflicted himself with the afflictions of others? Himself was at
ease and pleasure in the Court of Pharaoh. A good heart cannot endure to be
happy alone, and must needs, unbidden, share with others in miseries. He is no
true Moses that is not moved with the calamities of Gods Church. To see an
Egyptian smite an Hebrew, it smote him, and moved him to smite. He has no
Israelitish blood in him, that can endure to see an Israelite stricken either
with hand or tongue.

Verse 13. Here Magistrates may learn constancy and continuance in their care
for their People. For it is not enough one day to come and see how all goes, as
when they first enter upon their Office; but even the second day they should do
the same, and so day by day, as occasion serves, during the time of their
charge.

Verse 14. The man that complains here was he that offered the injury; none so
ready to except and exclaim as the Wrong-doer, the Patient replies not: And now
the first Adversary is forgot, and he that would have made them Friends is the
only Enemy; as it often happens, to the parter of a Fray, the Reconciler has
the most blows. A clear Glass for all eyes to see the reward many times given
to peaceable men, when they endeavor to unite their jarring Brethren. But this
must be no discouragement to Moses; for God will reward him, although his
Brother thought that friendly office not worth thanks. Nay this very upbraiding
Israelite shall save Moses his life. For if this man's tongue had not cast him
in the teeth with blood, he had been surprised by Pharaoh, ere he could have
known the fact was known: Now he grows jealous, flies and escapes; no Friend is
so commodious in some cases as an Adversary.

Verse 15. God has always one place of refuge or other for his Servants to
fly unto. If Judea be dangerous for the Child Jesus, in Egypt he shall find
safety; and again, if Egypt threaten death to Moses, Midian shall preserve him,
and improve him likewise. For God by forty years exile fitted Moses for further
light and advancement. Much he had learnt in Egypt, but more in Midian. There
is no doubt but he had good Schoolmasters in Pharaohs Court, but his own
affliction was his best. Moses had never been so illuminate a Doctor, nor so
excellent a Ruler afterward, if he had not been first humbled here.

Verse 17. Moses when he may not in Egypt, he will be doing Justice in Midian.
In Egypt he delivers the oppressed Israelite, in Midian the wronged Daughters
of Iethro. A good Man will be doing good wheresoever he is; his Trade is a
compound of Charity and Justice. But who would have thought in this present
condition as Moses was, so cast down with his own complaints, that he would
have had any feeling of others; yet how hot is he upon Justice? No adversity
can make a good Man neglect good Duties; he sees in the oppression of the
Shepherds the image of that other he left behind him in Egypt: The Maids
(Daughters of so great a Peer) draw water for their Flocks, the inhumane
Shepherds drive them away; rudeness has not respect either to Sex or
condition. If we lived not under Laws this were our case; Might would be the
measure of Justice; we should not so much as enjoy our own water.

Verse 22. It seems by this Text that Moses his affection was not so tied to
Midian that he could forget Egypt. He was a Stranger in Midian: What was he
else in Egypt? Surely either Egypt was not his Home, or a miserable one; and
yet in reference to it he calls his Son Gershom, a Stranger there. Much better
were it to be a Stranger there than a Dweller in Egypt. How hardly can we
forget the place of our abode or education, although never so homely. And if he
thought of his Egyptian Home, where was nothing but bondage and tyranny, how
should we think of that Home of ours above, where is nothing but rest and
blessedness.

Verse 23. This is a Comfort to the Godly, as likewise it should be a Warning
to all Oppressors of Gods Children; they shall die and be packing, and shall
not continue to deal cruelly with Gods Inheritance. The rod of the ungodly
lights upon the Faithful, but the Lord has said, it shall not rest and dwell
upon them. But however it was but just with God to let them sigh by reason of
their bondage. Such sobs of sorrow were but due to them that rejected and would
not see what God offered them of ease. A singular Warning to beware the
rejection of Gods Mercy when it is offered; for such a refusal has ever a sure
punishment attending upon it. Forty years ago God offered them deliverance by
Moses, which when they refused they were plagued with forty years more of
slavery. But yet at length, when they sighed, God heard that very sorrowful
breathing. Sweet Father, so it is ever with thee just to correct, but gracious
to give over; not ever offended, but in due time entreated, pitiful, loving,
and of endless mercy.

CHAP. III.
Verse 1. THat great men may not be ashamed of honest Vocations, the greatest
that ever were have been content to take up with mean Trades. The same Moses
that in the former Chapter was a Courtier, is in this verse a Shepherd. The
contempt of honest Callings in those which are well born, argues Pride without
Wit. How constantly did Moses stick to his Hook, and yet a man of great Spirit,
of excellent Learning, of curious Education, and if God had not called him off,
he had so ended his days. In the mean time, how had he learned to subdue all
ambitious desires, and to rest content with his obscurity! so he might have the
freedom of his thoughts, and full opportunity of holy Meditations, he
willingly leaves the World to others, and envies not his proudest Acquaintance
of the Court of Pharaoh. He that has true worth in himself, and familiarity
with God, finds more pleasure in the Deserts of Midian, than others can do in
the Palaces of Kings.

Verse 2. This manner of appearing may occasion us to remember how God uses to
apply himself to the purpose and intent of his appearing. Isai. 6. 1. He is
said to appear like a Judge, because as then the judgment of Ifrael drew near.
At the Baptism of Christ it pleased the Holy Ghost to appear like a Dove,
because that form might show the innocence and mild nature of our Savior: And
now here like a Bush burning, but not consumed, that it might declare the
present state of his People in Egypt, and the condition of his Church unto the
Worlds end.

Verse 5. In this appearance God meant to call Moses to come, yet when he is
come inhibits him (Come not hither.) We must come to God, but we must not come
too near him. When we mediate of the great Mysteries of his Word, we come to
him; we come too near him, when we search into his Counsels. The Sun and the
Fire say of themselves, come not too near; how much more the Light which none
can attain unto. We have all our limits set us, and very good reason for it:
For the Waves of the Sea had not more need of bounds than man's presumption.
Moses must not come close to the Bush at all; and where he may stand he may not
stand with his shoes on. This Command was significant. What are the shoes but
worldly and carnal affections? If these be not cast off when we come to the
holy Place, we make our selves unholy: How much less should we dare to come
with resolutions of sin: This is not only to come with shoes on, but with
shoes bemired with wicked filthiness; the touch whereof prophanes the Pavement
of God, and makes our presence odious.

Verse 6. God could not describe himself by a more sweet Name than this; I am
the God of thy Father, and of Abraham, etc. yet Moses hides his face for fear:
If he had said, I am the Glorious God that made Heaven and Earth, that dwells in
Light inaccessible, whom Angels cannot behold; here had been just cause of
terror. But why was Moses so frighted with a familiar compellation. God is no
less awful to his own in his very Mercies; Great is thy Mercies that thou
may be feared. For to them no less Majesty shines in the Favors of God than
in his Judgments and Justice. The wicked heart never fears God but thundering
or raining fire from Heaven, but the good can dread him in his very sunshine;
his loving Deliverances and Blessings affect them with awfulness. Moses was the
true Son of Jacob, who when he saw nothing but visions of Love and Mercy, could
say, How dreadful is this place?

Verse 7. If we would have our grief seen and helped, we must endeavor to
become Gods People. For then sighing and groaning in our several afflictions,
as these did, we may be sure in due time to find our comfort as they found. We
may hence also learn, that affliction does not show that the party is disliked
of God, (as the Devil often suggests to men and women in trouble) for God
calls these Israelites his People, which yet were plunged in the depth of
misery and affliction.

Verse 11. This should teach every one of us humility, and to say with Moses,
Who am I, Lord, that thou should thus and thus think of me choose me, and
take me to that place that I have no strength to manage, and which thousands of
my Brethren are fitter for than I am. This also may put us in mind of the
weighty calling of Ministers. For is it such a matter to strive with Pharaoh
for Bodies and temporal servitude, and is it nothing to fight with the Devil
for Souls and freedom from eternal slavery.

Verse 14. See a sweet comfort in all our fears, even his Name, I AM. Noting,
that as he has been to penitent sinners, so ever he will be without any
change. If I call upon him, and depend upon him, I AM is his Name, and I may
not doubt of him, he is no Changeling, but the same for ever.

Verse 16. When any new thing is to be published that concerns any change in
Church or Commonwealth, we must acquaint the Magistrates, Rulers and
Governors with it, to approve our Commission and matter unto them, with all
Modesty, Humility, Fear and Care of Order and Unity, and then with their
consents and assistance unto the People and Multitude. This is a right course,
and this shall have a Blessing from the Author of it, as here it had, Then
shall they obey thy voice, verse 18.

Verse 18. See again, and still most carefully note it, how God regards
Government. For now Pharaoh must be used as was fit for his place (he being the
King of that Land in which they were) wicked Pharaoh, I say, must not be
disorderly dealt with by such as live under his Government, although Strangers
and not his natural Subjects, how much then by natural Subjects? But he must be
gone unto with all duty, and acquainted with their desire with all reverence,
that neither themselves may be judged factious, neither others by their
examples moved to any disorder. And therefore they must acquaint him with the
Author of their desires, not their own heads lusting after liberty or novelty,
but the Lord God.

Verse 21. All hearts are in the hands of God, even as the Rivers of Water, and
that he turns them hither and thither at his pleasure. He can make them love,
hate they never so much. Yea, he can make them so love, that fruits from thence
shall flow to his People of their love. Be they Jewels of Silver or Raiment,
they shall grant it, and send it, give it, or lend it, with so willing a mind
as the party taking needs to wish.

CHAP. IV.
Verse 3. THe heart of man is like the Rod of Moses, as long as he held it in
his hand it remained a Rod, but when he threw it to the ground it turned
instantly into a Serpent, nay a Dragon the Prince of Serpents (as Philo the Jew
says:) so the heart of man, as long as there is fast hold of it; as long as
Man is the Possessor, God the Guardian, it continues still an heart, but if our
boistrous unruly sins once throw it to the earth, it changes instantly to be a
Serpent. From whence all carnal and earthly-minded men may learn, whose
Consciences at the reading hereof tell them, that their hearts are turned into
Serpents and Vipers by their sins, and are now crawling on the earth in their
lustful designs, to stretch forth a hand of sorrow, a hand of true repentance
to take them up again, in what shape soever they appear. For he that was
exalted on the Cross, as the Serpent in the Wilderness, shall turn those
Serpents into Hearts again, their Gall and Poison into Innocence, their Sting
of Death into Issues of Immortal Life.

Verse 4. Sin is a Serpent, and has a deadly sting in the tail of it, even the
sting of Death; For the sting of death is sin, says St. Paul: Now as a man
would fly from a Serpent, so let him fly from sin. But if thou have taken this
Serpent into thy hand, rest not till like Moses Serpent it be turned into a Rod
again to scourge thy Soul, till a true sense of thy sins, and of Gods Wrath due
unto thee for the same, bring thee to a serious repentance and contrition, to a
spiritual loathing and abhorrency of those sins; that so thou may never cast
thine eye back upon them, but with a new and a particular detestation, thou
may never enter into meditation of those sinful passages of thy former life,
but with shame and horror of soul, and that every solemn review of those days
of darkness and unregeneration may make the wounds of our remorse to bleed
afresh.

Verse 7. When Moses plucked his hand out of his bosom it was leprous, and
again when he plucked it out it was white; to show that the actions of our
hands receive their denomination from the bosom, the heart; according to that
saying of the Father, Tantum habent virtutis aut vitii actiones quantum habent
voluntatis.

Verse 12. He that is singled out to any service of his God, for the advantage
of his Israel, must not give back or waver, but go boldly on. If a willing
obedience second his Command, God promises to assist, I will be with thy
mouth, and teach thee what thou shall say, was Gods Promise here to Moses; and
it was his Sons to the Apostles, Mat. 10. 19. Take no thought how or what ye
shall speak, for it shall be given you in that hour what ye shall speak. As if
he had said, be not anxious about matter or manner of your Apology for your
selves; ye shall be supplied from on High, both with Invention and Elocution;
you shall have your help from Heaven: For it is not you that speak, says our
Savior in the next verse, but the Spirit of your Father that speaks in you;
who borrows your mouth for the present to speak by. It is he that forms your
speeches for you, dictates them to you, fills you with matter, and furnishes
you with words. Fear not therefore your rudeness to reply; there is no mouth
into which God cannot put words: And how often does he choose the Weak and
Unlearned to confound the Wise and Mighty, as he did Balaams Ass to confute
his Master.

Verse 20. Husbands see from hence the heart of a good man to have his Wife and
Children with him: Wives and Children see their duty to be followers willingly
of their Husbands or Fathers calling even into any Country. And when I look at
Moses his Rod, methinks I see little David marching cheerfully with his Staff
and Scrip against huge Goliath. Good Lord, what Weapons were those against him
then in man's eyes? Or this Staff now in Moses hand against Pharaoh? But God is
the same both here and then and for ever, strong in weakness, and able to match
a Kings Scepter with a Stick, or a Staff, or a Stone, or a word in the hand or
mouth of one sent and appointed by him.

Verse 22. Gods Church is to him as a Man-child to the Father, yea as the
Firstborn, which commonly is loved most tenderly, and in greatest honor. Now
think with your selves how you could endure to stand and look upon an abuse
offered to your Firstborn, and then think of Gods Love to his Church, whose
affection as much excels yours as God excels man. Now as tender Fathers
for the good of their Children suffer them to lie in prison, and to be schooled
many ways by want and affliction, and yet in the midst of all have an eye to
them, a love to them, and a settled purpose to help them, when a love may be
known a love, and a good a good. So our God knows his times and turns, and our
wants perfectly, fitting the one to the other most mercifully, that both our
corruption and his goodness may best appear to the greatest benefit unto us. He
may see us humbled, and schooled, and tamed, but undone and cast away for ever,
he cannot endure it, he will not suffer it.

Verse 24. I do not so much marvel, that Iethro gave Moses his Daughter, (for
he saw him valiant, wise, learned, nobly bred) as that Moses would take her; a
Stranger both in blood and Religion. The choice had like to have cost him dear
in this verse: His Wife stood in his way for Circumcision, God stands in his
way for Revenge. Though he was now upon Gods Message, yet might he not be
forborne in this neglect. No circumstance, either of the dearness of the
Solicitor, or of our own engagement, can bear out a sin with God. Those which
are unequally yoaked may not ever look to draw one way: True Love to the Person
cannot long agree with dislike of the Religion. He had need to be more than a
Man that has a Zipporah lying in his bosom, and can have true zeal in his
heart. Learn further from hence all unquiet Women, what your ignorance and your
obstinacy brings your Husbands unto, though they be, as Moses, holy and
virtuous; they cannot serve God aright for you, they cannot do what God
requires, but you break their hearts, you cool their zeal, you turn them out
of the way, and in the end you bring them to a fearful danger of Gods
destroying them.

Verse 26. That which Zipporah should have esteemed as a signal Mercy to her
Child, she interprets as a Judgment, and that very Covenant of God (of which
Circumcision was the seal) which she should have received with the greatest
return of thanks, was entertained with disobedience, both toward her Husband
and her God. Thus ignorant and unthankful people mis-interpret and repine at
the Dispensations of Gods Providence, and that which God designs for a Mercy
and a Blessing to them, they take it as a Judgment and a Curse. It is good for
me that I was afflicted, faith David; Yet how many are there in the World, that
think otherwise, and would choose rather to be out of the Covenant than be
circumcised, to perish hereafter, than be afflicted here.

CHAP. V.
Verse 1. PHaraoh raged before, much more now, that he received a Message of
dismission; the Monitions of God make ill men worse; the Waves do not beat nor
roar any where so much as at the Bank, which restraines them; Corruption when
it is checked grows mad with rage; as the vapor in a Cloud would not make that
fearful report if it met not with opposition. A good heart yields at the
stillest Voice of God, but the most gracious Motions of God harden the wicked:
Many would not be so desperately settled in their sins if the World had not
controlled them. How mild a Message was this to Pharaoh, and yet how galling?
God commands him that which he feared. He took pleasure in the present
servitude of Israel, God calls for a release: If the Suit had been for
mitigation of labor, for preservation of their Children, it might have carried
some hope, and have found some favor: But now God requires that which he knows
will as much discontent Pharaoh, as Pharaohs cruelty could discontent the
Israelites. How contrary are Gods Precepts to man's mind? And indeed as they
love to cross him in their practice, so he loves to cross them in his
Commands before, and their Punishments after.

Verse 4. Moses talks of Sacrifice, Pharaoh talks of Work. Any thing seems due
Work to a carnal mind saving Gods Service; nothing superfluous but religious
Duties. Christ tells us, there is but one thing necessary, Nature tells us, there
is nothing but that needless: Moses speaks of Devotion, Pharaoh of Idleness. It
has been an old use, as to cast fair colors upon our own vicious actions, so
to cast evil aspersions upon the good actions of others. The same Devil that
spoke in Pharaoh speaks still in our Scoffers, and calls Religion Hypocrisy,
conscionable Care Singularity. Every Vice has a title, and every Virtue a
disgrace.

Verse 8. Wicked men have no eyes often to see the true causes of a thing, but
most apt and ready to devise a false. Let a man or woman be grieved
extraordinarily with the burden of their sins, and with groans and sighs
travail under the bitterness of it: What say the Wicked? Oh it is Melancholy,
and the body must be purged. Festus imagines Paul mad, when he speaks the
words of Truth and Soberness, Act. 26. 24. And that much learning made him mad,
when Learning is Wisdom, and makes wise. Yea, Heli himself mistaketh Anna, a
virtuous Woman, and deemeth her to be drunk, when ravished in her holy feeling
she was crying to God in fervent Prayer, 1 Samuel 2.

Verse 11. The nearer that God draws to his Church and Children to do them
good, the more the Devil rages in and by his Members against them. Remember
that example in Mar. 9. 26. How the foul Spirit, being commanded to depart,
rent and tare the party more and worse than ever before. We cannot leave any
sin wherein we have continued, but by and by we shall be discouraged, sometimes
with threats, sometimes with show of perils and losses that may ensue. But
stand, and shrink not, and say in your heart, now, now, is my God at hand, for
now I see and feel the Enemy made to oppress me if he could.

Verse 13. Note here how the Law works without the Gospel, even roughly and
sharply, and rigorously. For do this, do this, and finish, finish the work, is
still the voice, whereby sin and the Devil rages as here Pharaoh does. For
sin, etc. Romans 7. 8, 9, then cries the true Israelite. O wretched man that I
am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death, verse 24. Blessed
therefore be the Lord for his sweet Gospel, which helps all this rigor, and
gives us comfort and deliverance in his Son.

Verse 16. While possible tasks were imposed there was some comfort; their
diligence might save their backs from stripes: but to require tasks not
feazible is tyrannical, and does only pick a quarrel to punish; they could
neither make straw nor find, yet they must have it. Do what may be, is
tolerable, but do what cannot be, is cruel. Those that are above others in
place must measure their commands not by their own wills, but by the strength of
their inferiors. The task is not done, the Taskmasters are beaten, the
punishment lies where the charge is, they must exact it of the people, Pharaoh
of them. It is the misery of those that are trusted with Authority, that their
inferiors faults are beaten upon their backs.

Verse 21. See the condition and lot of faithful Ministers in this wretched
world. First the King, and now their Brethren accuse them for doing their duty.
While all is well, good is the Minister; but when the cross comes, he and his
doctrine away with that, and away with him; as Ier. 44. 16, etc. now mark their
reason: For then had we plenty, etc. this is the stay of the multitude, and
this is the line they measure all things by, their prosperity in worldly
matters, and immunity from trouble and affliction any ways.

CHAP. VI.
Verse 5. MIserable man remembers and hears his Friends when they are in
prosperity, but if adversity come, neither hearing nor seeing them, but a
proud, scornful and bitter forgetting. The Lord is not so; but when we are at
the worst, then he remembers us, then he hears our groans, and sighs, and
pitying helps, to our unspeakable comfort.

Verse 7. The end of all deliverance, and of all Benefits received from God,
is, that we should be his People, and that he might rule in us, and over us.
Wherefore see how careful we should be always to answer this our calling, and
never to be found unmindful of such favors. For if this plainer manifestation
of his Goodness to the Jews, were a just cause to stir them up to thankfulness,
how much more should his manifestation of himself to us in his own Son, move us
to an eternal care to please him? And then more particularly, that he should
accept me for one of his people. O what can I say for such a Love, but beseech
him ever to make me thankful.

Verse 8. As long as our hearts hold this persuasion of God, that he is the
Lord, so long we must rest assured, that he can perform his Promise, in mercy
made to us, be the difficulties never so many. What then is thy Case? Are thy
sins numerous and great? Remember he is the Lord, and play not Cains part, to
say, they cannot be forgiven: Are thine Enemies bitterly bent against thee, he
is the Lord, and therefore can stop and stay them at his pleasure. Are their
infirmities many, he can heal them, he is the Lord. Are thy Children untoward
and unkind, he can change them, he is the Lord. Lastly, whatever greives thee
remember this, that God is the Lord, and shall ever be the Lord, and shall ever
be thy Lord to care for thy woes and relieve them: Only believe.

Verse 9. It is often a penalty laid upon the contemners of Gods Grace, that
cleaving altogether to the external favors of this life, they taste not comfort
in any affliction; whereas the Godly the more they are pressed down by God, the
more vehemently they sigh unto God, and look to his Promises with Patience and
Hope. This also may teach Gods Ministers not to be cast down and discouraged if
their words be not hearkened unto and regarded, since so worthy a man as Moses
found this measure. The World will be the World, crooked and perverse, froward
and unkind, though we break our hearts for their good.

Verse 10. Before Moses was bid to go to the People, and now to Pharaoh; so is
there never any time for men of place and public function to be idle. Now they
must defend the oppressed and wronged, now they must comfort, now they must
chide. See here likewise the bottomless Mercies of the Lord, who though he
might justly have cast off this People, that would not hearken to his Words and
Messages, yet he does not, but still continues to have mercy on them,
according to that of Psalm 103. 13.

Verse 20. It is a wonder that Amram the Father of Moses would think of the
Marriage Bed in so troublesome a time, when he knew he should beget Children
either to slavery or slaughter: Yet even now in the heat of this bondage he
marries Iochebed: The drowning of his Sons was not so great an evil as his own
burning, the thraldom of his Daughters not so great an evil as the subjection
unto sinful desires. He therefore uses Gods remedy for his sin, and refers the
sequel of his danger to God. How necessary is this imitation for those that
have not the power of containing. Perhaps we would have thought it better to
live childless; but Amram and Iochebed durst not incur the danger of a sin to
avoid the danger of a mischief.

Verse 30. Behold, I am of uncircumcised lips. None in all Egypt was comparably
fit for this Message. Which of the Israelites had been brought up a Courtier, a
Scholar, Learned, Wise, Valiant, Experienced. The more fit any man is for
whatsoever Vocation, the less he thinks himself; forwardness argues
insufficiency. Once before Moses had taken upon him, and laid about him, hoping
then they would have known, that by his hand God had meant to deliver Israel;
but now when it comes to the point he cries, I am of uncircumcised lips. Gods
best Servants are not ever in an equal disposition to good Duties. It is our
frailty, that those Services which we are forward to aloof off, we shrink at
near at hand. How many of us can bid defiance to Death, and suggest answers to
absent temptations, which when they come to us we fly off, and change our note,
and instead of action pretend excuses.

CHAP. VII.
Verse 1. GOD has made one man able to do the Offices of God to another, in
procuring his Regeneration here, and advancing his Salvation hereafter. Neither
has God determined that power of assisting others in the character of the
Priesthood only, but he has also made the Prince and the secular Magistrate a
God, that is able to do the Offices and the Works of God, not only to the
people, but to the Priest himself to sustain him, yea, and to countenance, and
favor, and protect him too in the execution and exercise of his Priestly
Office. As we see in the first plantation of those two great Cedars, the
Secular and Ecclesiastical Power (which that they might always agree as
Brethren, God planted at first in those two Brethren, Moses and Aaron) there,
though Moses were the Temporal, and Aaron the Spiritual Magistrate, yet God
says here to Moses, I have made thee a God to Pharaoh (and not only to
Pharaoh) but Aaron thy Brother shall be thy Prophet; for as he says, Exodus 4.
Thou shall be to him instead of God. So useful, so necessary is man to man, as
that the Priest, who is of God, incorporated in God, subsist also by Man.

Verse 3. Concerning this hardening of Pharaoh, some understand it by
permission, i. e. God suffered him to be hardened, as we say in the Lords
Prayer, Lead us not into temptation, i. e. suffer us not to be lead. Greg.
Moral. 31. cap. 12. says, Non duritiem contulit, sed exigentibus ejus meritis
nulla infu sa timoris sensibilitate mollivit; he did not impose hardness, but
his merits so deserving, he softened him not by any infused sense of fear. This
should ever work in us care and zeal to crave at Gods hands fleshy hearts,
which may tremble at his Judgments and taste his Mercy, saying with Samuel,
Speak on Lord, thy Servant hears; and with David, O my God, I am content to
do it, yea thy Law is within my heart.

Verse 10. Pharaoh was now from a staff of protection and sustentation to Gods
People, turned to a Serpent that stung them to death; God shows himself in this
real Emblem doing that suddenly before him, which Satan had wrought in him by
leisure. And now when he crawles and hisses threatening peril to Israel, he
shows him how in an instant he can turn him into a senseless stick, and make
him, if not useful, yet fearless. The same God which wrought this, gave Satan
leave to imitate it in the next verse. The first Plague that God meant to
inflict upon Pharaoh was delusion. God can be content the Devil should win
himself credit, where he means to judge, and holds the honor of a Miracle well
lost, to harden an Enemy.

Verse 12. Here we may see the end of Falsehood and Error at the last, Truth
shall devour it in Gods good time, for great is truth and prevails. Truth may
be oppressed for a time, God so pleasing, either to punish or try his People,
but finally suppressed it shall not be; God being stronger than all his
Enemies, Moses than all Enchanters, shall disperse all dusky Clouds, bringing
his glorious Truth out to bear sway again at his good pleasure.

Verse 17. This Plague God brought upon them, for the Children which were
drowned, and the River thus turned into blood complained to God for that
slaughter. We may further note an increase of terror in this Miracle above the
former of the Serpents, to signify, that where milder means will not serve,
God both can and will add sharper and heavier. He increases his crosses from
Goods to Body, from Body to Mind, from our Selves to our Children, and still
makes us abound with more want in greater and sharper measure, that we may
repent and return, if not, in the end he can destroy us with misery that never
shall have an end.

Verse 20. First, God begins his Judgments with Waters. As the River Nilus was
to Egypt, instead of Heaven, to moisten and fatten the Earth, so their
confidence was more in it than in Heaven. Men are sure to be punished most and
soonest in that which they make a corrival with God. This change also of the
Waters into blood was an image of their future destruction. They were afterward
overwhelmed in the Red Sea, and now beforehand they see the River red with
blood.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse 3. What an Army is here against such a Prince. God could have made use
of Men or Angels. But here he will confound the pride of such a conceited King
by an Host of Frogs, rather than by either of the other. The Lord by
contemptible and base things will cast down our high looks if we swell against
him: and of this he would have all high minds at this day to make use unto
humility before they find it too late.

Verse 7. Gods Adversaries seek often to impugn the Truth by the self same
means whereby he does teach it. As if Scripture be alleged, Satan will do the
like, Mat. 4. If the true Prophets use a Sign, then will Zedekiah make him
horns too, and say, When went the Spirit from me to thee, 1 Kings 22. 11. all
which God does suffer to draw us to true and sound knowledge, without which we
cannot stand, but shall be shaken to and fro with doubts and fears most unfit
for Believers, Col. 1. 23.

Verse 8. Let this Comfort Gods Ministers in the midst of all contempts, that
God is able to force the wicked to the acknowledgement of him and them. In
their extremities they shall acknowledge our Callings, justify our Love, and
wish our Prayers. Thus many (who at other times regard not Ministers) either
going to Sea, or to Battle, or being fick or vexed at home, will send and seek
for the Prayers of Gods Ministers. And what is this but a sign of Gods
omnipotent hand over all Pharaohs whatsoever, and that he can revenge our
contempts, and give our truth and careful walking in our places a due regard
and reverence when he will with them and in them. But here it may be demanded,
Why did Pharaoh call now for Moses and Aaron rather than in the former Plague?
Why, because this Plague touched him nearer than the former. When the Rivers
were Blood he might have Wine to drink, and so not feel the smart of that
Plague. Whence we see, that howbeit other men's harms should affect us, yet
unless the Lord touch our selves we are dull and dead without sense. Which
certainly makes God reach us a blow many times, when otherwise he would spare
us; did we make but use of other men's miseries.

Verse 10. Wicked men do not only defer their Duties from day to day, but put
over others also that offer good things unto them. As for instance; if a
Preacher tender his service this Sunday, he is told, the next will be far
more fit, and if he come the next Sunday, then is either the Master from home,
the Gentlewoman sick, the Weather too hot or cold, or some such thing, that be
Moses never so ready, yet Pharaoh is not ready, but to morrow, to morrow is
still the Song, till the Lord strike, and all morrows end in their eternal
torment.

Verse 14. The Lord could have taken the Frogs quite away; but this was done to
show the truth of the Miracle, that they were Frogs indeed, and no
Enchantments, thereby to meet with the unbelief of the King and his Courtiers.
And thus by one means or other the Lord will evermore deliver his Truth from
false surmises, his faithful Ministers from false imputations, and write the
wickedness of carnal men upon their faces to their own confusion.

Verse 15. See the corruption of our Nature if God work not: No sooner is the
Rod off, but wretched man falls to his old sins again. When we are sick or
distressed any way, we pretend Repentance, we pray, we cry, we vow. But
forasmuch as all rises from Fear and not from Love, it vanishes as soon as
the Fear is past, and the Devil returns with seven worse than himself, making
our end more odious than ever our beginning was.

Verse 17. It had been as easy for the Lord to have turned the dust into Lions
and Bears, and Wolves, but that rather he chose to confound pride by weakness,
and a rebelling humor by so base a Creature. Then secondly let us consider,
that if God can make so vile a Creature too strong for a Kingdom, what
resistance can I a single man make against Gods wrath, if I pull it upon me by
my sins. His wrath can arm all the Creatures in Heaven and Earth against me,
and yet the least of them is far above my power, as you see here.

Verse 18. The Devil is powerful when God will suffer him, but when God will
restrain him what can he do? Add this to the story of Job, to the story of the
Heard of Swine in the Gospel, and from such places let us take comfort against
our spiritual Enemy; for we see his weakness, and the brideling hand of God at
all times upon him.

Verse 19. The wicked, who for a time make show as if God were on their side,
in Gods good time shall be forced to acknowledge the contrary, to his Glory,
and the great Comfort of his Church and Children. For what did these Magicians
in effect say, but that this which was now done passes our Skill, and albeit
the Creature be vile and base, yet is the Power of God such over us and our
Art, that we cannot do the like, but give him the Victory, and acknowledge our
selves sinful, weak, and wicked men.

Verse 23. Whenever we are free from any calamity which happens to others,
it is not by our own Policy, but by that gracious separation which the Lord
makes. How may we run into particulars. Others sickly, we healthy; others in
prison, we at liberty; others in blindness, we in light; others slandered, we
not touched; others crossed in their Children and Friends, we comforted. O
blessed God, what a separation is this? How ought we to be thankful to thee for
it.

Verse 28. Worldly minded men will be content to tolerate Religion, so it might
still be joined with their profit: But if it be contrary to that, O how bitter
then, how hard to endure it? For these Jews wholly to depart from Egypt was not
for Pharaohs profit, for from their labors he had great gain, and therefore by
no means may they go out of his Land to sacrifice to their God, but in the Land
he is content to endure it, so he may be freed from those Plagues that were
upon him; Or if needs must be that they must go out of the Land, yet not far in
any case.

CHAP. IX.
Verse 14. GOD punishes sinners first with one Rod, then with another, and if
these single chastisements will not serve, then will he go to many Plagues,
heaping Wrath upon Wrath, and Plague upon Plague, yea he will lay even all his
Plagues upon us at once, as he here speaks, to our utter confusion, as also it
is, Deuteronomy. 28. 15. Secondly, God calls them here his Plagues, so that neither
fortune nor chance rules Rods and Crosses laid upon us, but these still are
Gods, laid on and taken off at his pleasure.

Ib. Upon the heart, that is, inwardly and deeply: to smite us in arms, hands,
legs, is grievous unto us, but when sorrow is laid upon the heart, it stingeth
indeed and most bitterly, as Prove. 17. 22. and 15. 13. Now the best way to
prevent this doleful sorrow of heart, laid on by an angry God, is to take our
sins to heart betimes.

Verse 23. Whether we be hindered or furthered by weather, let us cast up our
eyes to Heaven, for it is the Lord still that rules these things, and by his
Will they come and go. Nature is his Servant, and the Devil his Rod, neither of
them working but as he appoints.

Verse 24. Fire was mingled with Hail, to teach, that Gods Judgments shall not
be single, but even one upon the neck of another, until we be either humbled or
destroyed. Who would think it possible, that any Soul should be secure in the
midst of such variety of Judgments. To what a height of obduration will sin
lead a man, and of all sins incredulity. Amongst all these Storms Pharaoh
sleeps till the voice of Gods mighty Thunders and Hail mixed with Fire roused
him up a little.

Verse 28. Pharaoh here as one betwixt sleeping and waking starts up a little,
and says, God is righteous, and I am wicked; Moses pray for us; and presently
lays down his head again. God has no sooner done thundering than he has done
fearing. All this while you never find him careful to prevent any one evil, but
desirous still to shift it off when he seeks it, never holds constant to any
good motion, never prays for himself, but carelessly wills Moses and Aaron to
pray for him, never yields God his whole Demands, but higleth and dodgeth like
some hard Chapman that would get a release with the cheapest. Wheresoever mere
Nature is, she is still inconstant in all her purposes, sensible of present
evil, and improvident of future good.

CHAP. X.
Verse. 2. AS this teaches us the end of Gods Works and Wonders, so the Duty
and Office of all Christian Parents and Governors, even to teach their
Children, and charge carefully and zealously by them and in them to know the
Lord, as also Deuteronomy. 6. 6. thus is God himself the Author of that catechizing
and instructing of Youth which is so much neglected in our days.

Verse 3. The drift of all Crosses and Afflictions in this life is to bring
down the swelling pride of our sinful hearts, that yiedling God what is due to
him, we again may from him reap mercy and forgiveness to our endless comfort.
Never forget this saying to King Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34. 27. Because thine heart
was tender, etc.

Verse 7. So old is the Accusation, which to this day remains among wicked
persons, ascribing unto Religion and the Professors thereof whatsoever evil
happens among men, be it Death, Sickness, Wars, Famine. Thus Ahab tells Elias,
that it was he that troubled Israel, by whom indeed all Israel had a Blessing
if they had known it. But to prove the contrary, read Genesis 18. 32. Houses and
whole Kingdoms have been saved but for one righteous man dwelling therein, as
Joseph, Daniel, and the like.

Verse 8, and 9. Observe Satan's Malice here against Gods Church and Service,
if they cannot wholly destroy it, hurt it and hinder it, then in part, as far
as they can, they will do it. Secondly, By the answer of Moses note on the
other side, that we must not yield an inch to these plots and fetches of the
wicked, but zealously must stand to the full observance of all Gods Will,
according to his Commandment, and not according to the fancies either of
others or of our selves. Where the Lord dispenses not, we must not dispense,
where all are bound to depart out of Egypt, we must not capitulate for some to
go and some to stay. Families should think upon this, where the Husband goes to
Church but not the Wife, the Father but not the Son, the Servant but not the
Master. Moses would not do thus here, but knowing all to be bound, requires
all.

Verse 23. This was most wonderful: The houses of the Egpptians and Israelites
joining as it should seem one close to another, as ours in these days do. For
else why was that sign given to the destroying Angel, Exodus 12. 23. If all the
Israelites had dwelt by themselves, and had not been mingled with the
Egyptians? How able then is our God may we think, who can thus make a
separation betwixt his Children and the wicked, when he executed wrath, though
they be in one Field, in one House, in one Bed together, yet he can choose the
one and refuse the other. Fear we not then in the time of Plague, or War, or
other public Calamity, left we should perish with the wicked hand over head,
but remember this place; and say in your heart with comfort, O Lord I know thou
can make a separation in this calamity, as thou did in that calamity
betwixt the Israelites and Egyptians, therefore I beseech thee save me from
this Sword of thine, and let the light of thy Mercy shine about my dwelling, as
thy cheerful light did about the Israelites.

CHAP. XI.
Verse 1. THis ever was and ever will be Gods course, first by gentle means to
entreat, then in the end by Power and Judgment to compel, when the former
course will not serve. In the old World, when the People would not be reformed,
the Lord said, His Spirit should no longer strive with man, meaning in lenity
and gentleness, as until then it had done, but now he would bring upon them one
Plague more, as here upon Egypt, and this was the Flood, Genesis 6. 17. When Sodom
and Gomorah would not be warned by any ways of Mercy used by a gracious God
unto them many years, then that one Plague more of Fire and Brimstone came from
Heaven. Thus also the Lord deals with us: First he entreats us by his Word the
mildest way that can be: Then if this will not serve, the Lord comes nearer and
lays upon us his easier crosses, and then greater. Our Friends grow unkind,
our Servants unfaithful, our Children undutiful, our Estate wastes, and our
Health is changed to Sickness. And if all these work not upon us, then the Lord
goes to his Quiver, and takes out a strong Arrow to shoot at us, as the
sweating Sickness, the devouring Plague, which shall sweep the Land clean from
such rebelling Spirits.

Verse 3. As the wicked stand in awe of God often, and outwardly profess
affection to him, yet do not subject themselves to his Will; so are his
Servants honored also of men with an inward conceit of them that they are
honest men, when yet their Doctrine will not be yielded unto. Thus does God
inwardly imprint their own damnation in their hearts.

Verse 5. No Honors or Riches, no Friends or Strength, no Pomp or Port in this
World may defend from God, but he will smite all Degrees, and therefore let all
Degrees profit by it.

CHAP. XII.
Verse 4. CHrist is not divided into diverse Houses and Families, Kingdoms and
Countries, but he does unite and gather diverse Houses and Nations to make one
Church, even as here many did eat one Lamb. We may not divide the Lamb, but we
must gather our selves to the Lamb; and that is the true Church where People
are so gathered.

Verse 6. This keeping of it from the tenth to the fourteenth day, served to
prepare their hearts to the right eating of it, being a remembrance before
their eyes those four days before; and also to prefigure unto us with what
meditation and preparation we ought to come to the eating of the true Passover
in the blessed Sacrament, whereof this same was but a shadow. Secondly, the
fourteenrh day this Lamb was offered, because then the Moon being at full, and
rising in her full light when the Sun was set, thereby might be shadowed, that
the Church, usually signified by the Moon, rises with light in great fullness
after the setting of the Sun, the Death of Christ.

Verse 7. This shows the effect and virtue of Christ his blood, the true
Paschal Lamb, ever to save from the destroying Angel as many as shall be
sprinkled with it, that is, should make particular application of it to
themselves. For it is not the blood without sprinkling will help: Christ died
for all sufficiently, but not effectually, because all take not hold of, and
apply Christ's death to their souls.

Verse 32. Pharaoh desires to be blessed of those men, who but even now were
odious in his eyes. The same God can also pull down the hearts of the proudest,
and make them as glad of a Ministers Prayers, as they have maliciously opposed
themselves against him.

Verse 34. Egypt was never so stubborn in denying passage to Israel, as now
importunate to entreat it. Pharaoh did not more force them to stay before, then
now to depart, whom lately they would not permit now they hire to go. The
Israelites are equally glad of this have. Who would not be ready to go, yea to
fly out of the house of bondage. They have what they wished, there was no
staying for a second invitation. The loss of an opportunity is many times
irrecoverable. The love of their liberty made the burden of their Dough light:
Who knew whether the variable mind of Pharaoh might return to a denial, and
after all his stubbornness repent of his obedience. It is foolish to hazard,
where there is certainty of good offers, and uncertainty of continuance.

Verse 36. The Egyptians rich Jewels of Silver and Gold were not too dear for
the Israelites whom they hated; how much rather had they need to send them away
wealthy, then to have them stay to be their Executors. Their love to themselves
obtained the enriching of their Enemies; and now they are glad to pay them well
for their old work, and their present journey. Gods People had stayed like
Slaves, they go away like Conquerors with the spoil of those that hated them,
armed for security, and wealthy for maintenance.

Verse 37. A most wonderful increase from seventy Souls, which were all that
came into Egypt, and most effectually it shows us how able the Lord is to
increase his Church, notwithstanding all the malice of Man and Devil whatsoever.

Verse 38. These followed the prosperity hoped for in the Israelites, who they
saw were not touched with the Plagues of Egypt, and rightly set forth what
after fell out, and ever will, that Christ shall be followed of many for the
Loaves, and his Gospel embraced for the prosperity and peace that often he
vouchsafes unto it.

Verse 41. This may comfort us in our spiritual fears and conflicts, that
certainly the Lord will never fail in any Promise, but even days and hours of
comfort fit for his Children, as they are known to him, so are they observed of
him most graciously and most precisely. Why then, must I needs tie the Lord to
my time, to my will, or else I shall speak or think amiss, that the Lord has
forgotten and forsaken me, and all that the Devil, my sworn Enemy, suggesteth
is true?

CHAP. XIII.
Verse 4. THe Month Abib in the Text is the same with our April; when the day
lengthning, and the Sun ascending, each things begins to revive: To show that
by the true Passover Christ Jesus not only is our time and all other things
sanctified, but also that we should, in fresh remembrance of that benefit of
our Redemption, all our days and years be thankful to our gracious Redeemer,
and acknowledge, that by his Death true Life and reviving is sprung up unto
mankind.

Verse 8. Children are to be carefully catechized and informed, that they may
know the mind of the Lord betimes. For Parents are not only to nourish their
Children, but to nurture and instruct them; this latter is as necessary as the
former: They that nourish their Children only, what do they more than brute
Beasts? Let Parents therefore labor to mend that by Education that they have
marred by Propagation, else they are Parricides, and not Parents.

Verse 17. This is a singular testimony of Gods fatherly care over our
infirmities, in not suffering us to be further tried than in him and through
him, we shall be able to endure, and at last to overcome also, 1 Cor. 10. 12.
let a troubled Soul ever think upon this. Your weakness is known unto God, what
you can bear, and what you cannot, what will lead you to the Land of Promise,
and what will make you turn back to Egypt. Secondly, in that the Lord would not
suffer them to pass by the Philistims, least they should start back, and so
sin greivously against him: What if in like sort he prevent my sinning, and
your sinning against him, by taking away from us such things as he in his
Wisdom knows would be the occasions of evil to us if we had them, as Riches,
Friends, Power, Health of Body, Peace of mind, and the like. But could not God
have stayed them from returning, although they had gone the nearer way? Cyril
in Exodus answers, God does not work all things as he can, but sometimes does
avoid evils after the manner of men, therein teaching us to do the like,
namely, by using means even then when most plainly we have God our helper.

Verse 18. This may teach us wariness and circumspection in our Vocations, ever
reckoning of the Enemy in this our holy March toward the Land of Promise.

Verse 21. Consider in the Cloud how it not only directed the way, but was
spread, as the Psalmist says, for a Covering, namely, against the heat of the
Sun, comfortably cooling and refreshing them. Remember also how the afflictions
of this World are in the Gospel noted by the heat of the Sun, and be you
assured, that ever against these heats the Lord in his good time will send you
defense and comfort, as 2 Cor. 1. 3. the last words put us in mind, that in
traveling toward the spiritual Canaan we must not rest, but labor forward
continually. The Children of this World are often looking back toward Egypt,
and often pitch down their Tents so in this Wilderness, that they are loath ever
to take them up and to remove. But the Sons of God say within themselves, We
have here no abiding City, and fixing both eye and heart on their heavenly
house, they journey on still both day and night in true piety and obedience
till they come thither.

Verse 22. Let this ever assure your fainting hearts, that Gods Providence
cooling and comforting, shining and lighting, guiding and directing his little
Flock, shall never be taken away from any member of it, but ever be present
with us both by day and night, to the eternal praise of his Goodness, and
unspeakable comfort of our souls. And further you may observe from hence the
admirable Wisdom of Gods Providence, that sits and sorts out his Mercies for
his Children, and makes every Favor and Blessing proper for every necessity.
He that afterward led the Wisemen by a Star, led Israel here by a Cloud: That
was an higher Object, therefore he gives them an higher and more heavenly
Conduct; this was more earthy, therefore he contents himself with a lower
representation of his presence: A Pillar of Cloud and Fire; a Pillar for
firmness, of Cloud and Fire for visibility and use. The greater light
extinguisheth the less, therefore in the Day he shows them not Fire, but a
Cloud: in the Night nothing is seen without light, therefore he shows them not
the Cloud, but Fire: The Cloud shelters them from heat by Day, the Fire digests
the rawness of the Night. The same God is both a Cloud and a Fire to his
Children, ever putting himself into those Forms of gracious Respects that may
best fit their necessities.

CHAP. XIV.
Verse 2. WE must not fear in every adversity before we see the end, but
reason thus with our selves. Lo here I am distressed on every side, as the
Israelites were at the red Sea, and it is the Providence of God, that I should
be thus, as it was his will that they should pitch in that place. But do I know
the Lords meaning, and what he will do? And therefore I will patiently wait his
blessed Will, not murmuring as the Israelites did, but comfortably assuring my
self, that one way or other the Lord will give Issue to his Glory and my Good;
and deliver me also as he did these Israelites.

Verse 3. When the destruction of the wicked is at hand, the Lord offers them
some bait or other to put them on. So was Ahab drawn to his end with a desire
to recover Ramoth Gilead which once was his, the bait allured him, the wrath of
God slew him, 1 King. 22. So were Senacherib and the Assyrians, baited with
former success, with their multitude and the smalness of Hezekia's number: But
how gloriously did the Lord deliver his, and destroy them that boasted.

Verse 5. How quickly the wicked repent them of their good, but seldom or
never of their evil, for to let them go was good, and yet they repented, but to
pursue after them was evil, and yet they repented not. Many such there be in
these days, who grieve at an hour spent in the Church, but never of days and
years spent in sin. Secondly, observe that when we are once delivered out of
spiritual Egypt, then does the Devil muster up his Chariots and Horsemen. He
cannot abide to loose his Servants, so his we were, and he has lost us, and
his we must be again, if by all his strength he can possibly gain us. A Land
that flows with Milk and Honey may not be inherited without resistance. Out
of Egypt we may be delivered, but from following persecutions we shall not be
quite freed. Think of that Devil in the Gospel, who when he must needs depart
and loose his possession, did rend and tear the poor party most miserably, Mar.
9. 26.

Verse 13. In all spiritual Conflicts say thus with your self: O my soul fear
not, though Satan thrust sore at thee, and seek thy destruction, but look unto
him that is mightier than all Hell, believe his Promises, believe his Word, and
the Egyptians whom thou have seen to day thou shall never see again, that is,
those frights and those fears, Enemies to thy peace, thou shall never be
troubled with them any more, but God shall so drown them in the red Sea of
Christ's blood, that they shall never hurt thee. The Lord shall fight for thee,
O my Soul, therefore stand still and wait upon him.

Verse 14. A Silence before, a not praying, has not always a fault in it,
because we are often ignorant of our own necessities, and ignorant of the
dangers that hang over us; but a silence after a benefit evidently received, a
dumb ingratitude is inexcusable. Thus when Moses says here to his People, The
Lord shall fight for you, etc. Moses means you shall not need to speak, the
Lord will do it for his own glory, you may be silent. There it was a future
thing; but the Lord has fought many battles for us; he has fought for our
Church against Schisms and Heresy, for our Land against Invasion, for every
soul against Presumption, or else against Desperation; Dominus pugnavit and nos
filemus.

Verse 15. See the force of Prayer, though it be but in groans of your heart,
it even cries in Gods ears it pierces the Heavens, and pulls down comfort,
See likewise the duty of all faithful Servants of God to go forward, as here is
said to the Israelites, notwithstanding Seas before us, Hills about us, and
whatsoever it may be that is against us, leaving all to the Lord, who knows
his own purpose, and will manifest the same in his good time. Forward, forward,
says God here, Speak to the Children of Israel that they go forward, But why
did Moses cry thus in his heart to God when it was revealed to him, what should
be the end of the Egyptians? Because neither Promises nor Revelations hinder
Gods Children from using ordinary means, but do rather stir them up more and
more to beg and crave the performance and effect of them.

Verse 22. If you look at the Waters on either side you may see the condition
of Gods Children in this World, beset on the right side with a Flood of
Prosperity, and beset on the left side with a flood of Adversity: And yet
through a true Faith walking through both, and hurt by neither, they arrive on
the other side safely, when by either of these many others are destroyed: pray
then for this Faith.

CHAP. XV.
Verse 1. It Is a good form of giving thanks, when every particular person out of
his own feeling says, I, I, good Lord, do yield unto thy Majesty my bounden
thanks, for my self and for my Brethren, for my self, and for thy whole Church,
and so every one feeling, and every one thanking, the Lord is praised of all,
as his Mercy and goodness reach to all. Thus David, Psalm. 118. 28. I, I again
in my own person, and with my own heart, and with my own tongue. So here, I
will sing, when they were many thousands.

Verse 5. They sank as a stone, that is, without all recovery and help. For a
stone swimmeth not out, being cast in, but goes to the bottom, and there
abides. Fearful and very fearful was their destruction, to the terror of all
those that shall persecute the Church of God and his People,

Verse 6. Not our Virtue, not our Merits, not our Armies or men of Might. Gods
Servants do never rob him and cloth themselves, but with Moses here they give
all to God, where indeed it is due, and say with David, Not unto us, O Lord,
not unto us, but to thy Name give the praise.

Verse 7. In that they are said to have risen against God, when they rose but
against his People, observe the Union between God and his Church, even such, as
who so touches the one touches the other. For he that touches you, touches
the apple of mine eye, Zach. 2. 8. And Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me; me
in my members, and by my members.

Verse 9. The same ambition and covetousness that made Pharaoh wear out so many
Judgments will not leave him till it has wrought out his full destruction.
All Gods Vengeances have their end, the final perdition of his Enemies; which
they cannot rest till they have attained. Pharaoh therefore and his Egyptians
will needs go fetch their Bane instead of their Victory: They bragged of their
Conquest beforehand, and gave Israel either for Spoil or Bondage. But the Sea
will show them, that it regards the Rod of Moses, not the Scepter of Pharaoh;
and therefore in the next verse, as glad to have got the Enemies of God at such
an advantage, shuts her mouth upon them. Extraordinary favors to wicked men
are the forerunners to their ruin.

Verse 19. As the Act of the Egyptians for drowning the Israelitish Children
was cruel, Chap. 1. so is their own issue and punishment but just here. The
People must drown their Males there, themselves are drowned here; they died by
the same means, by which they caused the poor Israelitish Infants to die: That
Law of Retaliation which God will not allow to us, because we are
fellow creatures, he justly practices on us. God would have us read our sins
in our judgments, that we might both repent of our sins, and give Glory to his
Justice.

Verse 20. In common Duties due to God none must sit out. The deliverance
concerned both Sexes, and therefore both Sexes were to thank God for it, Man
and Wife must join and agree together, to honor him that saves them. Joseph
will go up to Jerusalem according to the Law, and Mary his Wife will go with
him. No division, no difference betwixt them in Gods matters. If the one owe a
Duty, the other thinks she does so too, and with one heart, according to one
rule, they both worship God, and so come home.

Verse 24. A fitter course it had been for a People so taught with passed
Favors, to have assured themselves of future helps in Gods good time, and with
Patience and Faith to have expected the same. Remember, said our Savior, how
many baskets full of broken meat were taken up, and never to fear any want
where such a powerful God is. To remember what God has done for me, and to
make it an argument both of my Prayer and Hope with David, Psalm. 4. 1. and with
Job, chap. 13. 15.

Verse 25. Such virtue was in the Wood, given to it by God: first, that he
might manifest by this means his Love and Goodness to us much more, when he
makes all his Creatures serve to our Health and Good, and so to stir us up to
true thankfulness unto him for it. Secondly, that he might teach us thus not to
abuse those his Creatures, which with so excellent Virtues and Qualities are
created for us to do us good. Thirdly, that we might learn by this means not to
contemn second causes and means, by abusing, through presumption, the holy
Doctrine of Gods Providence. For When God himself is pleased to use these
Instruments, who are we that we should reject them.

Verse 27. Thus comes Comfort after Sorrow, and Plenty after Scarcity: And
surely the Trials of the Church, or of any particular Member therein, shall
have a joyful end, and though they be never so many, yet the Lord delivers
out of them all; who would not trust then in such a God, and tarry his time
that never fails.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse 1. THe time is named, the fifteenth day, to let us know, that their
ingratitude was so much the more detestable, by how much the remembrance of so
great and wonderful a deliverance from their Enemies was more fresh in memory
being so late. Therefore let us think in the morning of our safety by Gods
Mercy all the night, and at night of our safety all the day, which unless I be
thankful for, I must needs be a great Offender, seeing it is not possible to
plead forgetfulness in such fresh and new things.

Verse 3. The Gospel is welcome to many at the first, and they greatly rejoice
in it, but when either trouble grows for it, or they are restrained by it
from their accustomed sins of Swearing, Drunkenness, Sensuality, Covetousness,
and such like, then they wish they had never been troubled with such preaching,
and all Gods Mercy is returned to him with great unthankfulness, as here it was
of these murmuring Israelites. And thus likewise in Matches and Marriages, O
what impiety is in many, many times cursing the parties, and almost cursing God
that gave them such a Match, when yet at the beginning all was well, and every
body pleased. Secondly, this murmuring of the Israelites may show us what is
the course of too many in the world, even to prefer the Fleshpots of Egypt
before the Land of Canaan, and bellies full of Bread before a blessed
Deliverance out of cruel bondage, that is, Earth before Heaven, and the Joys
of this World before those of the next. Such were those in Ier. 44. 16, 17, 18.
who measured Religion by plenty and scarcity, judging that best which brought
most profit, and that worst wherein there was any want.

Verse 4. God is not tied to ordinary Means, nor our maintenance to the Fruits
of the Earth. The Ravens shall both find Meat and bring Meat to Eliah if God
command, and a little Oil shall continue running till many Vessels are full, if
he so please. Jacob was provided for in that extreme Famine, Genesis 47. 11. and
Gold was brought to Mary and Joseph from far when they little thought on it,
Mat. 2. 11. Lift up your thoughts therefore above the course of Nature when you
think upon God, and although you have neither Bread nor Money, nor the whole
Land any Corn, yet past Hope take hold on Hope, and leave God to himself.

Verse 8. Murmuring against Gods Ministers is murmuring against God: They have
not cast thee away but me away, 1 Samuel 8. 7. And he that despises you
despises me, said Christ, Luke 10. 16.

Verse 16. As God does something for his part toward our maintenance, so
likewise must we do something on our parts. He will give Manna, but we must go
out and gather it. He will provide Meat, and Money, and Cloth, and whatever is
good for us, but we must labor in some honest Vocation, and so come by these
things. Corn he will give to the Husbandman, but conditionally, that he plow
and sow. Idleness he will not endure.

Verse 18. God does here restrain the covetous, who are never satisfied, and
withal comfort his own Children, who have not such heaps. For what has the
greatest Raker that lives among us but a subsistence, and has not the poorest
man as much? God will make my little stretch out to an Omer, that is, to
enough, and his much shall be no more do what he can.

Verse 21. We must take time while time serves. We have a Morning, and we have
an Evening; our able Youth and good Health is our Morning, our Age and sick
estate is our Evening. Spend not the first vainly, and you shall not want in
the last. Work in the Morning, and we shall eat the fruit of our labors when
the Evening of Age and Sickness comes. Gods Blessings are not at our election,
to have them when we will, but when we seek and he bids, then we shall find.
His Manna is ready if we come in time, but if we linger till we list, he has
his Sun to melt it away, and it is gone.

Verse 24. It corrupted not. No more shall any Goods you get and gather with
the Will, and good liking, and Commandment of God, that is, truly, and
lawfully, and with a good Conscience, but the Lord shall bless that basket and
that store to you whilst you live, and to yours when you are gone.

CHAP. XVII.
Verse 2. LEt us in all our wants set our Faces the right way, and look to
Heaven not to Earth, to God not to Man. And let us not follow these Israelites,
who when they wanted Water did not cry unto God, but fly upon Moses with an
unfitting speech, as though Moses were God to create Fountains and Springs.
Thus did Rachel come upon her Husband, Genesis 30. 1. and so always does corrupt
man, possessed with impatiency, take a wrong course, leave God and run to man,
and speak according to his rage, without due consideration of man's ability and
power. Only therefore to God we must go in our wants. For there is the Treasury
and bottomless Storehouse of all Comforts. Ask there, seek there, knock there,
and you have a Promise, Mat. 7. 7. but run to the Creature and you have none.

Verse 4. Rely not upon the multitude, nor hunt after the peoples applause. Do
not the Scriptures show us how reverently the Pharisees sent unto John, Mat.
11. 18. and yet after affirmed him to have a Devil, whereupon said our Savior,
he was, etc. Ioh. 5. 35. thus all credit is but for a season with worldly men,
and with the common People. To day a man, to morrow a beast; to day none
better, to morrow none worse; to day a God, to morrow a Devil. Christ and his
Apostles found this measure, as well as Moses in the Text, ready to be stoned
by those that even now, when the Sea was divided, honored him as a God. You
can never give any people so many causes to stick unto, as he did give this
people to cleave unto him, and yet they failed.

Verse 6. No evil in man can drive God from his Promise. And therefore when the
Devil shall suggest, that thou art not worthy of Mercy, that thou art so great
a sinner God cannot spare thee, therefore trouble him not, hope not in him, for
there is no Mercy for such a one; answer, that thou do not rely upon thine
own merit, that thou do confess all that he says of thy unworthiness to be
most true, but tell him withal, that thou do look at Gods Promise and
consider his Truth, and that thou do find here and every where, that no evil
in man can make him evil by breaking his Promise, and that therefore thou may
not despair.

Verse 8. As the Israelites could not travel to the earthly Canaan, but they
must fight with Amaleck in the way, no more can we travel to our heavenly
Canaan without fighting with Amaleck, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil are
fierce Amalekites, and they must be fought with and overcome, as Amaleck was,
or else we shall never see Canaan. Poverty, Sickness, Crosses by Children,
Slanders, with infinite more, are Amalekites, and they stop you in your way to
Canaan, so that without buckling with them you shall not pass.

Verse 9. We may observe in this the antiquity of Musters and a warrant for
them: All did not go here, but some, and those chosen out by a Muster, and view
taken by Joshua: We may take notice likewise how full of honor and credit it
ever was in these cases to be chosen; which if so, then certainly men should
not run away and hide themselves as soon as they hear of a Muster toward, as
heretofore they did.

Verse 11. If we receive not what we pray for at first asking, we raint and
cease praying straight, not remembering how often we use a Medicine for the body
before we can be whole. Let us therefore amend this fault in our Prayer
hereafter, and never forget the force of true and godly Prayer. While Moses
held up his hands, that is, continued praying, so long the Israelites, whom he
prayed for, prevailed, but when he gave over the Enemy prevailed. Thus will it
be in your case, and my case, and all others that be troubled.

Verse 12. This heaviness of Moses hands may teach us the weakness of all flesh
in Christian exercises. We cannot hold out and continue as we ought, hut
heaviness and dullness will steal upon us, and seek to cool us and hinder us.
The help that Aaron and Hur performed unto him, tells us the benefit of
Christian Company in such holy exercises, and the needful duty of praying for
him that prays for us, that God would be with his Spirit, that is, strengthen
him, and quicken him, and aid him, so to pray and continue his Prayers, as the
end may be to his Glory and our Comfort.

Verse 14, and 15. All this has use to tell us how careful we must be in
keeping a Register in our hearts of Gods Mercies and Favors toward us in our
selves, in our Friends, in our Country, in our Magistrates, and Ministers, or
any way. Examples in this kind are numerous, as of Deborah, Judith, Hester,
Anna, Mary, and that cleans'd Leper that returned to give thanks, the
Israelites when they passed over the red Sea, all these built Altars in their
hearts for Gods Favors, by being truly and fervently thankful.

CHAP. XVIII.
Verse 9. THe hearty joy that was in Iethro when he heard what God had done for
Israel, shows us the right affection of a Child of God when God is merciful to
his Church, or to any Member thereof. He envieth not, he grudgeth not, much
less speaks ill, but with a very loving joy he is glad, and blesses the
name of the Lord for it.

Verse 10. After our deliverance from any affliction or danger, there remains
nothing on our part but to bless God for that Deliverance. Thus when the
Israelites were safe on the shore, and saw their dead Enemies come floating
after them upon the billows, they did not cry more loud before than now they
sung. Not their Faith but their Sense teaches them now to magnify that God
after their deliverance, whom they hardly trusted for their deliverance; and
thus Iethro here blesses God for the deliverance of his People. Even Nature
taught the very Gentiles what both they and Gods own People ought to return for
Mercies. And indeed a whole Christians life is divided into praying and
praifing; if we begin with Petitions, we commonly conclude with Thanksgivings.
Thus by an holy craft we insinuate into Gods Favor, driving a trade betwixt
Earth and Heaven, receiving and returning, importing one Commodity, that of
Mercies, and transporting another, that of Thansgiving.

Verse 19. In this excellent man Moses Iethro his inferior by far finds a just
fault: which tells us, that no man is perfect in all things, but may receive
counsel even from a meaner person. And let Moses Modesty in yiedling make our
spirits humble in like occasions, where God dwells it will be so, and Pride
is a sure sign of an ill Heart. The Head scorns not the Foot, and the very Foot
is careful for the Head.

Verse 22. When the Lord said to Rulers, Ye are Gods; he means not; that they
should be like the Epicures idle God, which sat in his Throne, and let all
inferior matters alone, as too base for his eyes. Nay rather the Lord would
have Judges like himself, who does not only weigh Mountains and Hills in his
Balance, but the very dust of the Earth, and sands of the Sea; and therefore
he sets down Judgment for small matters in this verse. And as he says in
Deuteronomy, Vengeance is mine; so in the Proverbs he descends lower, and
lays claim to the Balance, and tells us, that all the weights of the bag
are the work of the Lord: And who are weaker and lower than the Fatherless, the
Widow, and the Poor; and yet all Judges have the Lords Letters commendatory in
their behalf, the tenor whereof is this, Do right to the Poor and Fatherless.

CHAP. XIX.
Verse. 7. GOD might have imposed upon them a Law per-force; They were his
Creatures; and he could require nothing but Justice. It had been but equal,
that they should be compelled to obey their Maker: Yet that God which loves to
do all things sweetly, gives the Law of Justice in Mercy, and will not
imperiously command but craves our assent for that, which it were rebellion not
to do. How gentle should be the proceeding of fellow creatures, who have an
equality of being with an inequality of condition, when their infinite Master
requests where he might constrain! God will make no Covenant with the
unwilling, how much less the Covenant of Grace, which stands all upon Love. If
we stay till God offer violence to our will, or to us against our will, we
shall die Strangers from him. The Church is the Spouse of Christ, he will enjoy
her Love by a willing Contract, not by a Ravishment; the obstinate have nothing
to do with God, the title of all Converts is a willing people.

Verse 9. This shows how careful great Ones should be to grace and countenance
the Ministers of the Word before the People, to the end their words may have
more weight with their Hearers, and their service and pains do more good. But
now it is far otherwise with too many. For great men must show their
greatness in disgracing the Lords Prophets, and meaner men show their malice in
spreading false rumors of them.

Verse 10. Those Garments must be washed which should never wax old, that now
they might begin their age in purity, as those which were in more danger of
being foul than bare. The danger was neither in their Garments nor their Skin;
yet they must be washed, that they might learn by their clothes with what Souls
to appear before their God. For little would neatness of Vestures avail them
with a filthy Soul. The God of Spirits looks to the inner man, and challenges
the purity of that part which resembles himself; Cleanse your hands you
sinners, and purge your hearts ye double minded.

Verse 14. We are all by our corruption most unfit profitably to hear the Word
of God, unless we be sanctified and prepared thereunto by the Spirit of God.
And therefore we ought to make ready for so holy a work by all due care
beforehand, and to purge our hearts from all cares, troubles and impediments
whatsoever. The Word of God is not to be handled with unclean hands, neither
will enter into unclean hearers.

Verse 16. A good way to make a profitable hearer is, first to shake him and
throw him down in himself. For then assuredly the Word enters more powerfully,
and he has a more excellent touch, then without such humbling he would have
had: Remember how St. Paul was thrown down, Acts 9. 4. Surely such rushings and
shakings, and spiritual frightings in Conscience has the Lord his gracious
meaning in, to beat us down in our selves, that we may more carefully hearken
unto him. In sickness, in prison, in poverty, in trouble, men have other ears
than they have in prosperity.

Verse 21. Curiosity in matters forbidden is odious unto God, and therefore
ver. 12. there were bounds put to the Mount, to show, that God would have every
man content with that which it pleases him to vouchsafe him of revelation and
knowledge. The Lord has revealed his Will in his Word, and beyond those limits
we must not go, having no ear to hear where he has not a mouth to speak.
Secondly, we learn here how profitable the presence of a Magistrate is, to make
people keep order. For surely men are mavelous apt to transgress, and
therefore again and again they must be admonished by Moses. Give Laws never so
good, and let there not be a Governor to see the execution of them, and it is
too clear what little good such Laws do.

CHAP. XX.
Verse 6. THere is no judgment that God executes but Mercy is mingled with it:
go over any that were executed since the beginning of the World, still there
was Mercy in it: but there is Mercy often manifested where there is no
Judgment in it. Here is the difference, Judgment is never entire but there is
some Mercy in it; Mercy is always entire, and there is no mixture of Judgment
at all in it. See the effects in regard of extent, God says, he will punish to
the third and fourth Generation, the Fathers upon the Children; that is a long
time, but it is nothing to his Mercy, I will show Mercy, says God here, to
thousands of Generations. A thousand Generations is longer than the World shall
last. For there were but forty two Generations from the Creation to Christ: A
hundred Generations is like to be longer than the World shall last, yet God
will be merciful to thousands of Generations, if it last so long, or if not, he
will be so for ever. A large Periphrasis to set forth the Mercy of God.

Ver. 18. Here you may learn the difference between the Law and the Gospel. The
Law fearing and frighting, shaking and shivering the heart of man, beats down
his pride, and makes him cry with the Prodigal Son, I am not worthy, I am not
worthy, O Father, to be called thy Son, Luke 15. 19. Yea it makes him stand
afar off with the poor Publican, and smite his breast in true feeling of his
sin, and to beseech God for Mercy to a Sinner: But now the Gospel cheereth and
comfort, helps and heals, and sweetly allureth to come in all joyful
assurance of Mercy, by him who has fulfilled the Law for us, and taken away
the curse of it, Heb. 12. 18, etc.

Verse 20. There is a fear acceptable to God, and yet has in it a trembling,
an horror, a consternation, an astonishment, an apprehension of Gods
dereliction for a time. The Law here was given in thundering and lightning, and
the people were afraid. How proceeds Moses with them? Fear not, says he, for
God is come to prove you, that his fear might be before your eyes. Here is a
fear not, that is, fear not with despair, nor with diffidence, but yet
therefore that you may fear the Law: For in this place the very Law its self
which is given to direct them is called fear; as in another place God himself
is called Fear, Genesis 31. (as he is in other places called Love too) Jacob swore
by the fear of his Father Isaac, i. e. by him whom his Father Isaac feared.

Verse 24. God who was never visible to mortal eye, was pleased to make himself
presential by substitution of his Name, that is, in certain places he has
appointed that his Name shall be called upon; and by promising and imparting
such Blessings, which he has made consequent to the invocation of his Name,
has made such places to be a certain determination of some special manner of
his presence. For Gods Name is not a distinct thing from himself; not an Idea,
and it cannot be put into a place in literal signification; the expression is
to be resolved into some other sense: Gods Name is that whereby he is known, by
which he is invocated, that which is the immediate publication of his Essence:
And because God is essentially present in all places, when he makes himself
present in one place more than another, it cannot be understood to any other
purpose, but that in such places he gives special Blessings and Graces; or that
in those places he appoints his Name, that is, himself specially to be
invocated.

CHAP. XXI.
Verse 6. THe boaring of his ear was a sign of obedience, and figuratively
admonished that Servants must not be deaf, but quick, and ready, and willing,
to hear what is commanded them. And spiritually, that if we be the Lords
Servants, he boreth by his holy Grace our Ear, that is, he makes us have Ears
to hear his holy Word, not to cast it behind our Backs, and stop our Ears
against it; but with Care, and Zeal, and Love we hearken to it as Men and Women
whose Ears he has opened and bored.

Verse 14. Although the worst men will make use of Gods Altar for their
advantage, and many will cling fast to it in their extremity, who in their
welfare regarded it not; yet the Altar of God must be no Sanctuary for
presumptuous Murderers. And indeed what have bloody hands to do with the holy
innocent Altar of God: Miserable Murderers, what help can ye expect from that
sacred Pile: Those Horns that were sprinkled by the blood of Beasts abhor to
be touched by the blood of Men: Gods Altar is for the expiation of sin by
blood, not for the protection of the sin of blood. And this was Ioabs Case, 1
Kings 2. who fled to the Horns of the Altar, and told Benaiah that he would die
there, but young Solomon was so well acquainted with this Law of God, that he
sticks not at the killing of Ioab even there. For he knew Ioabs Murders had
not been more presumptuous then guiltful; and therefore he sends Benaiah to
take away the Offender both from God and Men, from the Altar and the World.

Verse 15. God does not say, he that kills Father or Mother shall be killed
for it, but he that smites, so that not so much as a blow is to be given to
Parents upon pain of death, no not with the tongue may we smite them: so great
is the honor of Parents before God, and so sharp a Judge is God against all
abusers of them.

Verse 17. He that curses Father or Mother shall surely die, says Moses here;
and he that is but stubborn toward them shall die, says the same Prophet,
Deuteronomy. 21. 18. The dutiful love of Children to Parents is so rooted in Nature,
that Demosthenes says, That it is against the impressions, and against the Law
of Nature, for any Child ever to love that man that has done execution upon
his Father, though by way of Justice. And this natural Obligation is not
conditioned with the limitations of a good or a bad Father, Natura te non bono
patri sed patri conciliavit, says that little great Philosopher Epictetus,
Nature has not bound thee to thy Father, as he is a good Father, but merely as
he is a Father.

Verse 24. The Light of Reason and Nature given us of God teaches, that what
measure we mete, it is just we should receive even the like again. Neither did
Christ repeal this, Mat. 5. but only condemned the abuse of this Law, according
to private affections, and for the nourishing of private revenge by private.

CHAP. XXII.
Verse 9. THe Cause shall be brought before the Judges, says our English
Translation, but in the Hebrew it is, before the Gods. For Magistrates in the
Scripture are called Gods. First, by Analogy, says Theodoret, as resembling
God by having the power of Life and Death. Secondly, by Participation, says
Saint Austin: for as Stars participate their light from the Sun, so do Rulers
their Authority from the Supreme Majesty. Thirdly, by Deputation from God,
whose Vicegerent they are, and to whom they must be accountable for their evil
administration. Magistrates then, being in the place of God, and entrusted with
his Power, must have a care that they represent not God to the World as a
corrupt, crooked, and unrighteous Judge. As they are invested with his Name,
let them endeavor to express his Nature, to be both just and merciful.

Verse 11. In all Oaths God is the chief Witness, as in all Judicatures he is
the chief Judge: and therefore it is called here, the Oath of the Lord: first
because God is called in as the chief Witness and Avenger. Have a care
therefore what thou swearest: for thou art in the presence of thy Creator, who
can strike thee both dumb and dead. He that made thy Mouth made it for his
Glory; and if thou turnest that Glory into a Lie, know that God will be sure to
avenge his own Oath, and his own Glory. Secondly, it is called the Oath of God
in this Text, because it is taken in his presence. For God is Present and
President by a particular Providence, as Lord Paramount, and chief Magistrate,
higher than the Highest. And therefore the Ethiopian Judges do ever leave the
chief Seat of Judicature empty; as being Gods Place, where he stands or
sits himself to behold the Actions and Affections of the Court, and to pass
a Censure as well upon the Judge as the Prisoner or Witness.

Verse 16. Every Marriage before it be knit should be contracted, as it is
here, and in Deuteronomy. 22. 28. which stay between the Contract and the Marriage was
the time of longing for their Affection to settle in; because the deferring of
what we love does kindle the desire; which if it came easily and speedily unto
us, we set less by it. Therefore we read, that Joseph and Mary were contracted
before married. In the Contract Christ was conceived, in the Marriage born,
that he might honor both Estates.

Verse 29. Thou shall offer to me, says God, the first of thy ripe fruits and
of thy liquors, as our Translation has it. The word in the original is
Lacrimarum, and of thy tears. The first tears must be offered to God for sin.
The second and third may be to Nature and Civility, and such secular Offices.
But (it is St. Chrysostomes Exclamation) will any wash in foul Water for sore
Eyes? Will any man embalm the Carcass of the World, which he treads under foot,
with those tears which should embalm his Soul? Did Joseph of Arimathea bestow
any of the Perfumes (though he brought a superfluous quantity for one body)
upon the body of either of the Theives.

CHAP. XXIII.
Verse 1. IF to give the hearing be in some sort to put to the hand, surely to
have itching ears, to hear evil Reports of our Christian Brethren with delight
and contentment, to believe them is to put to the hand much more. Yet what so
common in our Mouths, as I am not the Author, I am not the first Raiser, I
heard it, I have my Author. God that made this Law against receiving, knows
that hearing goes before receiving, and if not receive, then not hear, not
believe, not report to others.

Verse 2. If this may not be done in civil Matters, much less may it be done
in Religion and matters of Faith. The words are plain, Thou shall not follow a
multitude to do evil, therefore a multitude may err and do evil; Neither
decline after many to overthrow truth, therefore a multitude may overthrow
truth. And how then can it be a Rule to guide my Conscience by, either in Civil
or Ecclesiastical matters.

Verse 4. Gods Actions are general and particular, general to all men,
particular to his Friends: So must ours be. As therefore by his general Action
he suffers the Sun to shine upon the bad as well as good, so must we extend
our Love, which is the common Bond of Mankind, as well to our Enemies as to our
Friends, by which common Love all hurting of the Bodies or Goods of our Enemies
is forbid. Again, as God has his special Action to his Friends and his Church,
namely, sanctification; so must Friendship, which is our special Action, reach
its self to such only as are of the Household of Faith. For although we must
love with that general Love all Mankind, Turks, Pagans, yet to such may we not
be Friends and Familiars, but must beware of inward and usual conversation,
with them that hate God and all his Graces. This distinction tells you the
meaning of Mat. 5. 44. Love your enemies.

Verse 5. Estne Deo cura de bobus, is the Apostles Question, Has God care of
Oxen, other men's Oxen? how much more of his own Sheep. And therefore if thou
see one of his Sheep, one of thy fellow Christians strayed into sins of
infirmity, join him with thine own Soul in thy Prayers to God. Relieve him, if
what he needs be spiritual, with thy Prayers for him, and relieve him, if his
wants be of another kind, according to his Prayers to thee. Why should not he
that is made of the same blood, and redeemed with the same blood as thou art,
why should not he prevail with thee so far as to the obtaining of an Alms,
when some fellow servants of thine has had that interest in God, as by his
intercession and Prayers to advance thy Salvation? wilt not thou save the life
of another man that prays to thee, when perchance thy Soul has been saved by
another man that prayed for thee.

Verse 6. In the third verse God commanded, That the poor man should not be
spared for pity. Here now he enjoyneth, That a poor man should not be wronged
in respect of his poverty: such equal steps would God have Judgment to walk in.

Verse 11. Blessed is the man that provideth for the poor, the Lord shall
deliver him in all his trouble, Psalm 41. 1. This is proved in the Widow of
Zarepta, who fed the Prophet, and never suffered in the midst of that Famine, 1
Kings 17. When I was hungry you fed me, says Christ, Mat. 25. 35. Me, I say,
in the poor with you, to whom what you did you did it to me, and so I take it,
and will bless you for it both here and hereafter.

Verse 19. You must not sees the kid, etc. to show, that we must not use that
to the destruction of any Creature, which was intended for his preservation.

CHAP. XXIV.
Verse 3. IT is better not to promise than not to keep promise, the people of
the Jews were signified by the Locusts, which suddenly leap up, and forthwith
fall down to the earth again. They did as it were leap up, when in words they
promised to do all things which the Lord had said, but they fell to the earth
again, when in their deeds they denied the same. Let us therefore always weigh
our weakness, and accordingly frame our promises: for as we see in this people,
we may purpose well that which we cannot so well perform.

Verse 12. It is not many weeks since Israel came out of Egypt, in which space
God had cherished their Faith by several Wonders; yet now he thinks it time to
give them Statutes from Heaven as well as Bread. The Manna and Water from the
Rock (which was Christ in the Gospel) were given before the Law; the Sacraments
of Grace before the legal Covenant. The Grace of God preventeth our obedience;
therefore should we keep the Law of God, because we have a Savior. O the Mercy
of God, which before we see what we are bound to do, shows us our remedy if we
do it not: How can our Faith disanul the Law, when it was before it? It may
help to fulfill that which shall be, it cannot frustrate that which was not. The
Letter which God had written in our fleshly Tables, were now (as some that were
carved in some Barks) almost grown out; he saw it time to write them in dead
Tables, whose hardness should not be capable of alteration: He knew that the
stone would be more faithful than our hearts.

Verse 14. Ministers, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, are not to leave their
charge without Deputies. When Moses here ascended he left Aaron and Hur with
the people, that whosoever had any matter might come to them: So watchful and
faithful was Moses in his place, that without just cause he is not absent, and
then he leaves able Deputies.

Verse 16. Moses ascending was not admitted to God till after six days, to
teach all men patiently and reverently to tarry Gods leisure and gracious
pleasure for any matter of his Will to be revealed to them, not curiously
searching, but humbly waiting for the thing we seek, being fit for us. At the
end of six days God called to Moses. So will the Lord have a comfortable time
for all those that wait for him, they shall see and hear at last what he will
say unto them. But then they must come to God in the Cloud, that is, in the
humanity of Christ, whereof this Cloud was a Figure. For without him there is
no access to God, and by him we come and that boldly.

Verse 17. God appears here like a consuming Fire in the eyes of the Children
of Israel, but to them whom he drew to him he appeared as a pleasant Sapphire,
verse 10. Just so to carnal men, and to such as are his, called by his holy
Spirit, there is a great difference of him, the one seeing with fear and
trembling, the other seeing feeling and tasting Joy and Comfort.

Verse 18. Moses was with God forty days and nights without any repast. That
God that sent the Quails to the Host of Israel, and Manna from Heaven, could
have fed him with dainties if he had so pleased. But there is no life to the
life of Faith; Man lives not by bread only: The Vision of God did not only
satiate but feast him. What a blessed satiety shall there be when we shall see
him as he is, and he shall be all in all to us: Since this very frail Mortality
of Moses was sustained and comforted but with representations of his presence.
Here again, I see Moses the Receiver of the Law, Elias the Restorer of the Law,
Christ the Fulfiller of the Law, all fasting forty days. Abstinence prepares
best for good Duties. Full bellies are fitter for rest. Hence solemn Prayer
takes ever fasting to attend it, and so much the rather speeds in Heaven, when
it is so accompanied. Its good so to diet the body that the soul may be fatned.

CHAP. XXV.
Verse 2. THis Offering shows, first, that it is the duty of Gods Servants to
bestow part of such things as God blesses them withal toward the maintenance
of Gods Spiritual Temple erected with Us, and among Us, by the Preaching of his
Word, the Administration of his Sacraments, and all other Offices of the
Ministry, to the Salvation of our Souls. Secondly, That our Goods are not ours
to waste at our Wills, but God looks to be honored with them, employed to
good purposes. Lastly, in seeking this Offering, to erect an External Worship:
we see that God will be worshipped outwardly also with our Bodies, as inwardly
with our Spirits, for they are both the Lords.

Verse 3. In the variety and several kinds of what was offered, you have
shadowed out unto you the difference of Spiritual Gifts and Graces given by God
to Men, for the building up of his Spiritual Temple or Sanctuary in your
hearts, and such as God has given, such must they offer, and such shall be
accepted of God; to teach us to despise in no man, what God himself accepts,
and despises not. In Man's Body the sovereignty is in the Head, the Eyes and
Ears, and yet cannot the Eye say to the Foot, I have no need of thee, 1 Cor.
12. 21. the greater may not despise the less, nor the less murmur against the
greater.

Verse 7. They offered their Earrings and Jewels, which were Ornaments unto
them, teaching us in this, that nothing ought to be so dear unto us which we
cannot find in our hearts to bestow willingly to the Service and Honor of God;
these things that served for superfluity before, now serve for Gods Tabernacle.
Even so should our Bodies that have been Wanton and Sinful, serving Sin, serve
the Lord in his Holy Fear; and such humane Learning as has served Error, may
be applied to Religion, and Gods service.

Verse 9. In the Service and Worship of God our Devices and Inventions must
have no place, but carefully and precisely we must ever serve him according to
his own pattern and Prescription left us in his Holy Word, as Deuteronomy. 4. 12. and
Numb. 15. 38. and the Apostle, Col. 2. 23. delivered nothing but what he
received.

Verse 10. The wood whereof the Ark was made was Shittim-wood, a durable and
lasting Wood, not subject to Worms and Corruption as other Wood is; so
representing the humanity of Christ, whose Body in the Grave felt no
Corruption, as other Men's flesh and bodies, neither was subject to sin.

Verse 20. The Cherubim was a name of Love and Favor, and therefore his Wings
were stretched over the Mercy-seat, to show us we should be ready to cover the
infirmities, especially of the Church, and Churchmen; and Constantine
professed, that should he see a Bishop committing Adultery, he would rather
cover it with his own Cloak, then any should be offended.

Verse 21. The Mercy-seat was appointed to be a Covering for the Ark, where the
Law of Moses lay, and this Mercy-seat was a figure of Christ, who hides and
covers us from the wrath of God, and from the accusation of the Law: for
without Christ shall no flesh be justified. Our first Parents having sinned,
covered themselves with Fig Leaves: and many Christians think to cover
themselves with the Fig Leaves of their own Merits; but Christ only is the
cover of the Ark when the Law accuses, to whom whosoever does fly, and in whom
whosoever does trust, being justified by Faith, they have peace with God
through him, Romans 5. 1. and the Mercy-seat was placed above the Altar, to show
that Gods Mercy is over all his Works.

Verse 22. The two Cherubims represented the Two Testaments, and from between
these two Cherubims God spoke, so does Christ still by the two Testaments, the
Old and the New, the Law and the Gospel, the Prophets and Apostles, and so will
he speak still to the end. Otherwise we must not now expect: Revelations and
Dreams, Visions, and Miracles are ceased; and if they will not hear Moses and
the Prophets, Neither will they believe, though one should rise from the dead
and come unto them.

Verse 38. This is a great comfort to Ministers, and to all the faithful people
of God, that although my Gifts are not such as to set me high in the
Tabernacle, yet am I not therefore utterly unprofitable, or unfit, or rejected
of God, but I may be among the meanest vessels of the Sanctuary, and of the
Church: if I may be but as the snuffers or snuff-dishes, as a Doorkeeper, as a
Besom, as an Ash-pan, even this shall please me, and herein will I rejoice,
thanking my God that he has looked upon me in that measure; the body has
diverse members, and all good, and made by God; the Church has diverse degrees
of Believers, and all beloved of God; so if you be one in any place, blessed be
God for it, your joy shall be Eternal also and Incomprehensible.

Verse 40. From hence you may see the Assistance and the Power that Example
has in Instruction. This was Christ's Method in the Gospel, Quid ab initio, how
was it from the beginning, do as has been done before. So here it was Gods
Method to Moses for the Tabernacle, look that thou make every thing after the
pattern that was showed thee in the Mount; and the same was Gods Method for the
Creation its self; for though there were no World that was Elder Brother to
this World before, yet God in his own Mind and Purpose had produced and lodged
certain Idea's and forms, and patterns of every piece of this World, and made
them according to those preconceived Forms and Idea's. Lastly, this was Gods
way likewise through the whole Scripture: for there are no Books in the World
that do so abound with this Comparative and Exemplary way of Teaching, as the
Scriptures do; no Books in which that word of Reference to other things, that
sicut is so often repeated; do this and do that sicut so as you see such and
such things in Nature do; and sicut so as you find such and such Men in the
Stories of Gods Book to have done.

CHAP. XXVI.
Verse 31. OUr Corruption is the only way to our Incorruption, and our
Mortality to our Glory: our Flesh being that Vail that keeps us from entering
into the Holiest of Holies. To this purpose (as a Type of this) in the
Tabernacle which Moses made, there was a Vail hanged up between the Holy Place,
and the Holiest of Holies; this Vail was made up of four substances, blew Silk,
and Purple, and Scarlet, and fine Linen; which says St. Jeremy, did represent
the four Elements of which our Flesh consists; such a Vail was afterward in
the Temple at Jerusalem; which at the Death of our Savior was rent from the
top to the bottom, so that the People might then, and not till then have beheld
the Sanctum Sanctorum: so when our Flesh, this Vail that keeps us from
beholding the Invisibility of the Blessed Trinity, shall be rent and torn in
pieces by Death, we then shall behold the glory of that Trinity, and never till
then.

Verse 37. As in the outward Vail of the Tabernacle there were Sockets of
Brass, (as you read in this Verse) and in the inward of Silver; so God does
adorn for the most part that which is within. A Man may seem to be as hard as
brass, with the outward custom of Sin, yet he may sound with the Confession of
Sin like Silver within: and therefore we must have a care how we pass our
Censures upon our Brethren; and that we be not like those wildfire Tongues
that do Condemn when they consider the outward Fact, and no more, not the
Circumstances of the Fact which may lesson it; not the Intention, which might
be well propounded, though a Fault in the Action it self; nor the Cause, nor
the Evil Company, nor that it was done after a vehement. Tentation, or done by
reason of some Violence offered, or such a Circumstance as does excuse a Tanto
though not a Toto.

CHAP. XXVII.
Verse 3. AS here were diverse Instruments belonging to the Altar and the
Tabernacle, and all for Use and Employment: so does the Church of Christ
consist of diverse Members, and those Members are endowed with several gifts and
graces, but all for the Edification of the Church. For wherefore has this
Christian quickness of Wit, that depth of Judgment, this heat of Zeal, that
power of Elocution, this man Skill, that Experience, this Authority, that
Strength, but that all should be laid together for the raising of the common
stock, and put forth for public advantage. As therefore no true Christian is
his own man; so he freely lays out himself according to the measure of his
several Gifts and Graces, for the universal benefit of all his fellow members.
How rich therefore is every Christian Soul that is not only furnished with its
own Graces, but has a special Interest in all the excellent Gifts of all the
most eminent Servants of God through the whole World. Surely that Man cannot be
poor while there is any special Wealth in the Church of God upon Earth.

Verse 7. The Staves on which the Ark was to be carried, were to be ever ready
in the Rings of the Ark upon all occasions of remove. We have here no
continuing City, says the Apostle; we have no place of Residence, no fixed
Habitation in this Life: and therefore we must be ever prepared to take up
these Tabernacles of our Bodies, and be gone. We have but a short time to live,
and even that short time is uncertain, and never continues in one stay, but
flies away like a shadow, and is cut down as a flower, He then that would dye
well, must always look for Death, every day knocking at the gates of the
Grave, and then the gates of the Grave shall never prevail upon him to do him
mischief. This also will help to confine our hopes, and cut short our designs,
and fit our endeavors to the small portion of our shorter Life. And as we must
not trouble our Enquiry, so neither must we Intricate our Labor with what we
shall never Enjoy; we must not dispose of Ten Years to come when we are not
Lords of to morrow, nor discompose our present duty by long and future designs;
such which by casting our Labors to Events at distance, make us less to
remember our Death standing at the door. But rather let us make use of this
instant; for this instant will never return again; and yet it may be this
instant will secure the fortune of a whole Eternity.

Verse 20. When God received lights into his Tabernacle, he received none of
Tallow, the Ox has Horns; he received none of Wax, the Be has a Sting; but
he received only lamps of Oil. And though from many Fruits and Berries they
pressed Oil; yet God admitted no Oil into the service of the Church, but only
of the Olive, the Olive the Emblem of Peace.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Verse 3. THis shows that Mechanical Arts and Trades are not found out by Men
without the direction of Gods Spirit. Many men do condemn Goldsmiths,
Jewellers, or Lace-Weavers, Perfumers, and such like, as though they served
only for Vanity and Excess, when indeed they be the works of God, I mean their
several Skils and Fruits of his Spirit, as here we see. If any man abuse them,
it is the fault of man, not of the skill: and what may not be abused?

Verse 15. Matter not clothed in handsomness of words is but dusted Treasure,
and like some Gardens where there is fatnessof Earth, no Flower. The
Breast Plate of Judgment which Aaron wore was made with Imbroidered Works: and
in the Ephod there were as well diversities of colors, as of Riches, Blew
Silk, and Purple, and Scarlet, and fine Linen. That then of Epiphanius is
worthy both to be remembered and imitated, whose works were read of the simple
for the words, of the Learned for the matter.

Verse 21. This may remember a good Minister how dear unto him his Flock and
People should be, even graven as it were in his breast, and eve^ in his mind to
profit them by all the means he may that they may be saved. It notes also the
love of Christ to his Church, and every member of it; who bears us not only
in his Arms as a Nurse, or on his Shoulder as a strong Man, but upon his Heart,
and in his Heart as a most kind God, Isai. 49. Can a mother forget, etc.

CHAP. XXIX.
Verse 6. IT was not without some mystery that in the Robes of Aaron there was
a Crown set upon the Mitre, moralizing a possible conjunction at least of
Minister and Magistrate in one person. The Crown and the Mitre were together
then, but yet the Crown was upon the Mitre; there is a power above the Priest,
the Regal power, not above the function of the Priest, but above the person of
the Priest.

Verse 12. This shadowed that the Preaching of the Gospel concerning the Blood
and Passion of Christ should be published and sounded through the four corners
of the World, even over the whole Earth: and the rest of the Blood thou shall
pour at the foot of the Altar, noting how the Blood of Christ, though in its
self sufficient for all, yet becomes not helpful to all, but is unprofitably
poured out for many, as this here was at the foot of the Altar, through their
own unbelief, treading under feet that most precious Blood.

Verse 13. That so men might learn to give unto God their best service and Duty
most thankfully, ever confessing that all fatness, that is, all Comfort,
Prosperity, and Joy comes from him as from the Fountain, and is due to him as
his own from all men. But now the very worst is thought good enough for God,
our worst Corn, our worst Calf, our worst Lamb, and too often neither good nor
bad; is this to burn the Fat upon the Altar of the Lord.

Verse 20. By the Ear was noted obedience: to signify that the Priests from
whom others should draw Example, should themselves be obedient to Gods Word in
all things, and first hear, then speak. Obedience was ever acceptable to God,
Psalm. 40. 6. next the Thumb is touched with Blood, to teach that we must not
only be Hearers, but Doers of the Word, joining Works to Faith, and a Holy Life
to a sound Belief. And the right Thumb, not the left, to signify that our
Works must be right, commanded by God, not invented by us. To the like end was
the right Toe sprinkled with Blood, that they might so remember to walk worthy
their vocation; and usually by the Foot in Scripture is both Action and
Affection noted. My feet had almost slipped, said David, meaning both Action and
Affection.

Verse 29. The same garments continued, although the Priest by Mortality
changed, and so was signified that our High Priest, not mere Man, but God and
Man is one, and his Righteousness our blessed garment remains to Father, Son,
and Sons Son to the Worlds end in them that fear him, and by a true Faith
believe in him.

CHAP. XXX.
Verse 1. THe Altar of Incense was of Wood covered with Gold, figuring so
Christ in both his Natures, the Wood his Humanity, the Gold his Divinity; the
Deity yielding Glory and Majesty to his Manhood, as the Gold adorned and
beautified the Shittim Wood.

Verse 2. The square form of this Altar represents the firm stability of
Christ, who cannot be overthrown. The Crown about it the regal Dignity of
Christ, and of all those that are ingrafted to him. For we are Kings and
Priesis in him and by him.

Verse 7. The sweet Incense notes all Duties and services which the People of
God do to him by his appointment, and that they smell sweet before him as the
Incense, and are accepted of him: But particularly the Prayers of the faithful,
for so David, Psalm. 14. 2. expounded it. The burning of this Incense upon the
Altar, which was a figure of Christ, shadowed out that in Christ and for Christ
only our Prayers are in force with God, and therefore by him they ought to be
offered unto God.

Verse 9. Prayers either made to others, then to God in the name of Christ, or
for unlawful things, are strange Incense, and therefore not to be offered unto
God. No Saint nor Creature was shadowed by the Altar of Incense but Christ, and
therefore let them take heed that will pray to others, and make others present
their desires to God.

Verse 12. To number People in a Land is lawful, and if you think of David, why
he was plagued for so doing, surely it was not for that he numbered the People,
but because he did it in a pride and confidence in man's strength. But here
neither Pride, nor Wealth, nor other such e^ds were respected, but obedience
was aimed at, and that they should profess themselves thus Gods People, and
themselves his Tributaries, and so be ever strongly comforted in his protection.

Verse 15. This was a personal Tribute imposed to testify obedience to God,
and therefore equally was paid, to signify, that God is no respecter of
persons, but the poor are as dear to him (doing his Will) as the rich, we are
all the Lords, the price of our redemption is one, the precious blood of that
immaculate Lamb Jesus Christ.

Verse 16. In worldly matters the rich may go before us, but in matters
belonging unto God, his Worship and Service, we ought to be as forward as the
rich. For you see here, that the maintenance of the Ministry was not posted
over to Princes and great men only, but even private men also must join in this
work. For if he be born to inherit Heaven, he must think himself born to
maintain the means that lead us unto Heaven. Our Sheep and Cattle we provide
for, because they labor for us and feed us, what hearts then should we have to
see them comfortably maintained that labor for us in a far higher sort, and
feed us with a much better food.

Verse 21. We must not meddle with holy things with unwashen hands, that is,
with profane Hearts, Tongues and minds, as they do that read the Scriptures,
not to guide their lives, but to maintain table Discourses, drawing the
Scriptures to their Judgments, and not framing their Judgments according to
the Scriptures. These washings again in the Law had a further reach, being used
in Faith even to the inward washing of the Spirit, whereof they were true
Sacraments to the Believers So David, Wash me, O Lord, and I shall be clean,
that is, inwardly, inwardly, O Lord, by thy blessed Spirit from my sins.

Verse 23. This holy and most excellent Oil was a figure of the Holy Ghost,
without whom nothing is pure, nothing sweet. All things were anointed
therewith, Priest, Ark, Table, Candlestick, to teach, that all the exercises of
Religion are utterly unprofitable without the inward working of the Holy Ghost
in our hearts.

CHAP. XXXI.
Verse 3. BY this is manifest, that the skill of any Handi-craft is not in the
power of men, but comes by the Highest. And by this we are taught to use all
those Gifts well, whereby we are enabled to discharge our particular Callings;
that they may serve for the Glory of God, and the good of his Church: and those
that in their Callings use fraud and deceit, or else live inordinately; do most
unthankfully abuse the Gifts of God, and dishonor the Spirit of God the Author
of their Gifts.

Verse 6. God here joyneth Aholiab with Bezaliel in the work of the Tabernacle,
that by this means it might be the more complete. If there should be any fault
in Bezaliels work Aholiab might mend it, and if there should chance to be any
error in Aholiabs performance Bezaliel might correct it; that so by the care
and circumspection of these two able Workmen nothing might be omitted. And as
it was thus under the Law, so was it under the Gospel; the Work of Christ's
Church, as well as Moses Tabernacle, must be performed by pairs. Therefore
Christ sent out his Apostles to preach the Gospel by couples, two and two
together. Two are better than one, says Solomon. For first, if they fall, the
one will lift up the other, that which is stronger shoreth up the weaker. One
man may be an Angel to another, in regard of comfort and assistance, nay a God
to another, as Moses was to Aaron. Secondly, if two lie together then they have
heat, heat of Zeal and good Affection. When Silas came Paul burnt in spirit,
Acts 18. warm he was before, but now all of a light fire as it were. The Enemy
is readiest to assault when none is by to assist, and much of our strength is
lost in the loss of a faithful Friend.

CHAP. XXXII.
Verse 1. O The ingratitude of that giddy multitude, a man would have thought
they would have wept out theit eyes, and sighed their hearts in sunder for such
a man as Moses, such an Instrument of God and Good to them, such a Deliverer,
so famous a Governor, so dear to God, so familiar with God, and so graced and
honored by God: And yet how contemptuously they speak of him, when they say,
this Moses, this Moses. And therefore by this example let all wise Ministers
never rely upon the multitude but upon the Author of their Calling, joy in
their obedience to him, rest upon his gracious acceptance, and leave the world
to be a World full of unthankfulness to all degrees of well Deservers.

Verse 3. Aaron demanded their golden Earrings, thinking they would not have
given them. For in the East Countries such Earrings were Ornaments, and the
pleasures of Women. But he was deceived; so pleasing to our corruption is
Idolatry and Superstition, that we spare no cost to set that forward. And
indeed their Idol was their Jewel.

Verse 6. Those Sacrifices were such as God had appointed, but now diverted
from their use, and therefore nothing less than pleasing unto God. Which
shows, that although we use the same words in our Prayers, and do the same
things that the Scripture appoints, if they differ from right, as these
Sacrifices did here, we pull down Gods Wrath upon us instead of his Blessing.

Verse 7. The Lord calls them Moses People, whereas they were the Lords People,
and by his mighty Arm delivered, not by Moses his strength. Thus does the Lord
ascribe to his Ministers what his Power works by them, that so they may be
encouraged in their pains, and the People know to love them, hearing God
himself say, that they be their People.

Verse 8. Note the word, and also the manner, if the Lord keep us not in his
true obedience, and send us good Guides. To fall away from God is fearful, but
quickly to be turned aside is an amplification of the fault, and makes it
greater.

Verse 10. This shows the incomprehensible loving kindness of God toward such
as truly fear and serve him, making them in his Goodness so powerful with him,
that they are to him (as it were) bands to tie him, and avail against him, that
he cannot execute his anger against Offenders, unless they will suffer him, and
as it were, stand out of the way. Thus in Genesis 18. 19. when Sodom was to be
destroyed, said God, for so many, and so many, I will not do it. Thus also
Ezekiel. 22. 30. I sought for a man, etc. as if God had said, might I have found
but one to stand in the gap against my wrath, even for that one I would have
shown Mercy. Let this therefore comfort you, that if for other men's sins a true
Moses be such a stop to God, that he will not punish them, think then, what
force have your own sighs and groans for your own sins before him? Can he
strike you holding up your hands for Mercy, and looking upon him with warry
eyes, humbled in the dust before him, and for his dearest Sons sake, in whom he
is well pleased, begging pardon.

Verse 11. Who knows what Judgments godly Governors turn away by their earnest
Prayers to God for their People. Which should work in us all Love, and
Obedience, and Duty to them, and make us day and night pray for the continuance
of them.

Verse 21. In matters concerning Gods Glory we must rebuke our nearest Allies,
no place for Affection. The Lord has placed the Commandments in the
Decalogue, and the Petitions in the Lords Prayer, which concern his Honor,
before those which concern our selves, to teach us, that we ought to prefer his
Glory before all worldly things, yea even life it self if it come in question,
Mar. 10. 37. Thus did Moses also, ver. 32. prefer Gods Glory, which would
appear in saving of his People, before his own salvation, which is far more
than this temporal life.

Verse 31. Moses doubleth in this Chapter the foulness of their fault, calling
it a great Sin, and a grievous sin; so teaching us not to extenuate faults
before God if you sue for Mercy, but to set them out in their true colors,
that Mercy may the more appear.

Verse 34. Magistrates and Ministers may not desist from their Duties for the
Peoples frowardness, but indevouring to the uttermost to reform them, they must
go on though they perish, and even in their so perishing they shall be a sweet
Savor to the Lord.

Verse 35. Very grievous is the sin of Idolatry, that not for Moses his so
earnest Prayer may be freed wholly from all further punishment, though in part
the Lord yields as he did, ver. 14.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Verse 8. A Sound and upright heart with God will ever in the end procure
honor, however for a time contempt may be showed, for God will honor them
that honor him, it is his Word, and it shall never fail. Would God then, men
would be moved to seek honor this way by the Favor of God and not of men. For
God can make men rise up to you, that have formerly little regarded you, as
here he did to Moses, the People now (that he was in favor with God)
reverenced him, whom before they spoke very lightly of, saying, This Moses, we
know not what is become of him.

Verse 13. Moses desires of God, that he would show him his Ways, his
Dealings, his Proceedings with Men, that which he calls after his Glory, how he
glorifies himself upon Man; God promises in the next verse, that he will show
him all his Goodness: God has no way toward Man but Goodness, God glorifies
himself in nothing upon Man but in his own Goodness. And therefore when God
comes to the performance of this Promise in the next Chapter, he shows him his
Way, and his Glory, and his Goodness, in showing him that he is a merciful God,
a gracious God, a long suffering God: And (as the Hebrew Doctors note) there
are thirteen Attributes specified in that place, and of all these thirteen
there is but one that tastes of Judgment (that he will punish the sins of the
Fathers upon the Children) all the other twelve are merely Mercy. Such a
proportion has his Mercy above his Justice.

Verse 18. When God had promised Moses, in this Chapter, to send an Angel to
show the People their way, Moses said to God, See, thou say lead this people
forth, but thou have not showed me whom thou will send with me. God had told
him of an Angel, but that satisfied not Moses, he must have something showed to
him, he must see his Guide, and therefore, said Moses, will thou be pleased to
show me thy Glory? Shall we see any thing? Now they did see that Pillar in
which God was, and that Presence that Pillar showed the way. To us the Church
is that Pillar, in that God shows us our way. For strength it is a Pillar, and
a Pillar for firmness and fixation. But yet the Church is neither an equal
Pillar, always fire, but sometimes Cloud too: The Church is more or less
visible, sometimes glorious, sometimes eclipsed; neither is it so fixed a
Pillar as that it may not admit changes in some places; fixed indeed in respect
of Fundamentals, but yet a moveable Pillar for things indifferent and arbitrary.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Verse 1. GOds Ministers by preaching and crying unto men, may, as it were, hew
their stony hearts, that is, prepare them for writing, but only the Lord must
write in them by the finger of his blessed Spirit, and no man can make any
thing enter without him, Paul may plant, etc. but God gives the increase.
Secondly, as God did not write before the stones were hewed, so no more assure
your self will he ever in your heart set any good if you contemn the outward
hewing and preparing of you by the Word in the Ministry of his Servants.
Thirdly, by the former Tables broken, and these new made, some have thought to
be figured the abrogation of the Law, and establishing of the Gospel, our old
corruption, which must be broken, and our new Regeneration, which must come in
place.

Verse 8. The greater manifestation of God and his Truth is vouchsafed unto us,
the more ought we to humble our selves and be thankful, worshipping that God
which so mercifully deals with us. Again, when God gives signs of his
presence let us make have to him, and not suffer him to pass away while we are
hindered with this and that. God gives signs of his Presence in the Word
preached, in the Sacrament, in my heart by good Motions: O let him not pass
away; but make have, as Moses here did, bow down and worship,

Verse 9. God in the former verse had promised to be gracious, and in this
Moses falls to prayer: to show us, that the Promises of God kindle Prayer.
Wherefore use (when you are dull to pray) to meditate upon the Promises of God,
general, particular, so many, so sweet, so full of power to inflame a heart
half dead, and when you feel the fire kindle, then pray; it will flame out at
last.

Verse 13 It is you in the singular; to signify, that public things were to
be done by public persons, the Altars here were to be pulled down by Moses.
But for private matters private men may do them, as Jacob purged his own House
of his Wives Idols. Private men to meddle with public matters is dangerous.
Paul came to Athens and found an Altar, yet he threw it not down. Therefore
beware of false Spirits, that will rashly write of Reformation without tarrying
for the Magistrate. So every man may be a Magistrate, and the sweet society of
man with man turned to blood and slaughter. Some yet are too mild, and they
tell us Idolatry must be first taken out of the heart by true teaching. It Is
true, teaching must go before, but what then? is therefore the Magistrates work
excluded? No: For are not the sins also of the second Table to be taken out of
the heart by teaching? and yet I hope the Magistrate may concur with
teaching, and punish Theives and Murderers. Much more then in the first Table
touching Gods Honor and Service.

Verse 29. Modest men are not carried away with knowledge of their own gifts,
but are, as it were, ignorant of them. In matters of Alms the Lord says, Let
not your right hand know what your left hand does.

Verse 30. To note first, that Ministers Faces, that is, their outward actions
and words, which appear to men, should glister and shine, So let your light
shine, that men may see your goodworks. Secondly, to shadow, that the Law which
Moses now represented is only bright and shining in the Face, a mere outward
Justification before men, whereas the Righteousness of Christ is all glorious
within and without. Thirdly, to teach, that the Law lightneth the Conscience,
which is as the Face of the inward man, making it see and know sin, but it
lightneth not the Mind by Faith to save from sin, Christ only does this by his
Spirit: Therefore says the next verse, the people feared and durst not
approach: The Law ever striking a terror into the hearts of them that behold
their sins in it and by it. Such a Fear there is in Guiltiness, such Confidence
in Innocence. When the Soul is once cleared from sin it shall run to that Glory
with Joy, the least glimpse whereof now appales it, and sends it away in
terror.

Verse 35. Nihil in lege gloriosum, habet Moses praeter solam faciem. His hands
were leprous by putting them into his bosom, his feet also had no glory, he
being bid to put off his shoes, and so by that Ceremony was to deliver the
Spouse unto another. But in the Gospel he appeared in the Mount with Christ,
totus glorificatus, this shows the pre-eminence of the Gospel before the Law.
The Latin reads, and facies ejus erat cornuta, but this is for the mistake of
our Hebrew word Keren, an Horn, for Karan, to shine, Tostatus says the meaning
of the Latin is, emittebat radios sicut cornua. This also shows the
righteousness of the Law, only a shining of the Face, that is, of the external
Works before men. The Vail over Moses signifies the blindness of the Jews,
that when Moses is read they understand not the end of the Law.

CHAP. XXXV.
Verse 1. IF God had not been Friends with Israel he had not renewed his Law.
As the Israelites were wilfully blind if they did not see Gods anger in the
Tables broken: So could they not but hold it a good sign of Grace, that God
gave them his Testimonies. There was nothing wherein Israel out-stripped the
rest of the World more than in this Privilege, the pledge of his Covenant the
Law written with Gods own hand. Oh what a Favor then is it where God bestows
his Gospel upon any Nation. That was but a killing Letter, this is the Power of
God to Salvation. Never is God thoroughly displeased with any People where that
continues. For like as those which purposed love, when they fall off, call for
their tokens back again; so when God begins once perfectly to mislike, the
first thing he withdraws is his Gospel.

Verse 21. It is a very great blessing to have an importunate Conscience to
stir us up in all good Duties. Such a Conscience regards not what pleases
us, but what is good for us, that it looks too, and that it persuades too,
and that it urges. This blessing had these willing Israelites in the Text, who
gave freely to the building of the Tabernacle. Observe here, their Heart, that
is, their Conscience stirred them up: ye have Bracelets, ye have Rings, offer
them, says Conscience, to further this pious Work in hand: their Spirit made
them willing; their faithful Friend in their bosom Conscience overcame them
with Arguments and strong persuasions. This then must needs be a great
Blessing, to have such a faithful Conscience; it will make a man part with all
his Lusts, Pride, Self-love, Covetousness, carnal Delights, for Gods Glory, and
our own true Good.

Verse 22. When God was once reconciled to his People in the Wilderness, after
their sin in setting up the golden Calf, in the thirty second Chapter of this
Book, to testify their great joy and thankfulness, they brought stuff more
than enough to the building of the Tabernacle. Even the Women brought their
Bracelets, and Earrings, and Tablets; glad they had any thing of price to
dedicate to God, and to seal up their thankfulness for this re-admittance into
his Love and Favor. The new Converts, Acts 19. lost fifty thousand pieces of
Silver in the burning of their Books to gain Christ; all their curious Arts and
Authors were not to be valued with one verse of the Gospel. Matthew at his
Conversion made a Feast like a King for Christ: Saint Lukes Centurion, when
once he became a Proselyte, built a Synagogue; thinking it a happy purchase to
gain eternal Habitations by a temporal Mansion.

Verse 30. Bezalel being well descended of the honorable Tribe of Judah, and
Aholiab not so well, but from a meaner Tribe, the Tribe of Dan, it affords us
this observation, that God bestows not his Gifts ever according to Birth, but
makes them in Virtue equal, whom earthly respect and humane descent have made
very unequal. Neither does he yield them praise for Birth, but for Gifts and
Graces of his Spirit in themselves, and for a singular ability to teach others.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Verse 2. THough these two learned Artizans were inspired by God, whose Spirit
was their Master, yet they were called by Moses. Ministers must have an outward
as well as an inward Call, and must be sent by man before they presume to
preach the Word of God. No man might come uncalled to the King of Persia upon
pain of death. What then shall we think of such as come without a Call to the
King of Heaven. Christ would not let the Devil preach him, Mark 1. Quia extra
vocationem, (as one well notes) because he had no calling to such an Office.
Ministers are Ambassadors, and it is Treason to enter upon an Embassy before
commanded by our Prince. And therefore to be a man's own ordainer (as Basils
word is) to clap down into Moses Chair upon a vain Enthusiasme, is profane
presumption, and uot to undertake our Office but invade it; being so esteemed
by God, as may appear by that fearful Irony to the false Prophets, I sent them
not, yet they run; run, knowing nor why nor whither; like Ahimaaz in Samuel;
and at length, like him, they can tell no tidings.

Verse 6. What large Endowments were bestowed upon the Church by our devout and
liberal Predecessors; insomuch that Laws were fain to restrain the bounty of
those Contributions: But now the Church may cry with the Prophet, my leanness,
my leanness. What a shame this is amongst Christians, that Sacrilege should
crowd in with Religion: Why should our better knowledge find us less
conscionable. O injurious Zeal of those men, that think the Church cannot be
holy enough unless she beg. It was said of old, that Religion bred Wealth, and
the Daughter eat up the Mother. I know-not, if the Daughter devoured the
Mother, I am sure the men of these times would devour both Daughter and Mother.
When Moses built the Tabernacle, we read here, he was fain to withold the
People from giving, they were so forward; but now would God we could stay their
hands from robbing the Tabernacle. There are many who call for a learned
Ministry in every Parish, yet still keep to themselves that which should
maintain this Learning and this Minister. A strange perverseness to desire no
Benefice may be without cure, and yet to require a cure without a Benefice.

Verse 7. In the building of this Sanctuary the stuff the People brought was
sufficient, nay too much, says the Text: Men may do and over-do, if they rely
upon their Works, and think to merit Heaven by their Actions. Master, said they
in St. John, chap. 6 28. what shall we do that we may work the works of God? We
would still be working, weaving a Web of our own Righteousness; spinning a
Thread of our own to climb up to Heaven by; that we might say, I will have
Heaven as mine own purchase: but let us take heed of that; and learn to be in
duty in respect of performance, and yet out of duty in respect of dependence;
let us do all Righteousness, but rest in none, rely upon none but only the
Righteousness of Christ.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Verse 1. THe Ark was a Chest or Cabinet, wherein the Tables of the Law, the
Covenant betwixt God and his People was kept; and just so big every way this
Ark as was the Mercy-seat, verse 6. to show, that Gods Covenant is answerable
to his Mercy, and his Mercy to his Covenant. Get therefore into Covenant with
thy God, and endeavor to keep that Covenant, and then thou may rest sure of
his Mercy, and his Gaace, but neither of these belong to those that are without
the Covenant: For as the Mercy-seat was no larger than the Ark, so neither is
the Grace of God than the Covenant. And as the Ark and Mercy-seat were never
asunder, so God is near to all that call upon him in Truth.

Verse 6. This Merey-seat in the Hebrew signifies a covering, or coffering up
of our sins; the appeasing of an angry God by Christ, who is our Propitiation
or Mercy-seat, according to Romans 3. 25. We are justified by Jesus Christ, whom
God has set forth to be a propitiation for our sins, through faith in his
blood; that is, to cover and coffer up our sins, in allusion to this Text and
the ninth verse; where the Ark covering the two Tables within it, and the
Mercy-seat covering the Ark, and the Cherubims covering the Mercy-seat and one
another, showed Christ covering the Curses of the Law; in whom is the ground of
all Mercy.

Verse 8. These Cherubims here were to represent the holy Angels attending upon
God, waiting his Commands, and looking intentively into the Mystery of Christ,
especially that part of the Mystery which concerns our Redemption; as the
Cherubims did here into the Mercy-seat. And they are said to be made out of the
matter of the Propitiatory, to show, that the very Angels have their
establishment in and by Christ: So that if they need Mercy how much more do we?
If their faces are continually bent upon a Savior, how can we look off? It Is
true, the Angels were not redeemed by Christ; but yet they are under Christ as
a head of Government, of Influence, of Confirmation, though not of Redemption.

Verse 9. This represents the consent of the Old and New Testament, in both
which there is but one Truth, and one Doctrine; the Old having his face toward
the New, and the New also looking toward the Old. For what is the Old
Testament but the New obscure? And what is the New Testament but the Old made
plain? And both the Old and New look upon Christ, who is the true Mercy-seat,
the Seat of Mercy; they being saved in the Old Testament by believing Christ
should come, and we being saved in the New by believing he is come.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Verse 1. While the Church of God was in a journeying condition, a small Altar
and a slender Sacrifice were sufficient; but in Solomon's time the Altar was
four times as big as this here, and the Sacrifice was multiplied. God looks
upon the condition of his Servants, and will be content with what they are able
to perform. When the Church is in persecution, a Grot or Cave of the Earth may
pass with God for a Temple, and a Turfe of the same Earth for an Altar, and
Gods Presence in such holes shall be as eminent, as in the Temple of Jerusalem,
when that Temple was in its greatest Glory. But when God shall please to
restore his Church to Peace and Plenty, then God does expect that our returns
of Duty should be answerable to such Blessings; that as our Peace and
Prosperity is more than it was, so should our service and Worship of God exceed
in a due proportion.

Verse 8. A good Prince does the Office which Moses his Glasses did at the
brazen Sea in the Temple. For he shows others their spots, and in a pious and
unspotted life of his own shows his Subjects their deficiencies. And to make an
higher use of Moses his Glass than to see a King in; the whole Creation is
that Glass, wherein we may see the King of Kings, even our God himself. Scarce
can you imagine a vainer thing (except you will except the vain lookers on in
that Action) than the Looking-glasses of Women, and yet Moses brought those
Looking-glasses to a religious use, to show them that came in the spots of
dirt, which they had taken by the way, that they might wash themselves clean
before they passed any further. There is not so poor a Creature but may be thy
Glass to see thy God in. The greatest flat Glass that can be made, cannot
represent any thing greater than it is. If every Gnat that flies were an
Archangel, all that could but tell me, that there is a God, and the poorest
Worm that creeps tells me that. If I should ask the Basilisk, how came thou by
those killing Eyes, he would tell me, thy God made me so; and if I should ask
the slow worm, how came thou to be without Eyes? he would tell me, thy God
made me so. The Cedar is no better a Glass to see God in than the Hysop on the
Wall. All things that are, are equally removed from being nothing, and
whatsoever has any being is by that very Being a Glass, in which we see God,
who is the Root and the Fountain of all Being.

Verse 22. The work of the Tabernacle was performed, not according to the Will
and pleasure of Man, but God; not as Bezaliel and Aholiab thought fit, though
they were knowing Men, and great Artizans, nor yet as Moses would have it, but
says the Text, as the Lord commanded Moses. In matters of concernment about
Gods Service and Worship, who so fit to command and prescribe as God. Men are
but Men, and therefore may err. The holy Patriarchs in the Old Testament were
holy Men, yet they strayed into some sinful Actions; the holy Fathers in the
Primitive Church were holy Men, yet they strayed into some erroneous Opinions:
and therefore neither the one nor the other can be an infallible Warrant for
us. If God command Moses, Moses may command us. Neither Temple, nor Sacrifice,
nor Priest are of our own contriving, any invention of Man, but prescribed and
founded by God himself.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Verse 10. IN all which rows we may observe these seven things. First, the
shining of the stones, pointing to the Purity of Christ and his Church.
Secondly, their price of great value and worth, signifying, at what price
Christ valued his Church at. Thirdly, their place or situation; they are set in
the Pectoral, and Aaron must carry them on his Heart, signifying, that Christ
has as much care of his Church, as if it were enclosed in his Heart; lets out
his Blood to make room in his Heart for them. Fourthly, their number twelve,
implying, that with Christ is plentiful Redemption. Fifthly, their order, they
stood in a comely Quadrangle: Christ has stablished a comely Order in his
Church, and we must keep our ranks. Sixthly, the Figure being foursquare,
signifying, the stability and firmness of the Church: Satan and all Deceivers
shall not pick one stone out of Christ's Pectoral. Lastly, the quantity; as all
the Names of Israel were gathered into a narrow compass; so Christ shall gather
together into one all the dispersed Sons of God, and present them before God,
as the most beautiful and precious parts of the World.

Verse 23. The care that was here taken to preserve the Ephod that it should
not rent, serves to teach us our Duty, and that we are to use all
circumspection and diligence to keep Schisms and Divisions out of the Church.
For to break the Unity of the Church, is to divide, to cut asunder the very
Veins and Sinews of the mystical Body of Christ. And therefore Saint Paul does
conjure his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1. 10. by the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ,
that they speak one and the samething, and that they be perfectly joined
together, in one mind and in one judgment. I or Schisms do disjoynt Men, they
shake them out of their Senses, and fright them out of their Wits. Beware
therefore, says the same Apostle, of the Concision, Phil. 3. 2. that is, of
those that make Divisions, and cut the Church into little pieces, and sucking
Congregations. Christ's Coat was seamless, and his Dove but one. And upon this
account the Primitive Christians were famous for their unity: As the Curtains
of the Tabernacle were joined together by Loops, so were they by Love; and as
the stones of the Temple they were so close cemented together, that they seemed
to be all but one stone, to have all but one mind and one soul.

Verse 26. It is the Duty of Ministers to live their own Sermons, to be
fruitful as well as painful Preachers, and to teach as well by their Life as
Doctrine. Not like him, of whom it was said, that when he was out of the
Pulpit, it was pity he should ever go into it, and when he was in the Pulpit,
it was pity he should ever come out of it. Every good Ministers six days
should be a Commentary on the seventh, and his own life in the week days
should be the use of that Doctrine he delivers upon the Lords day. For which
reason it was, that the Predicants of old were called Operari^, quia opere
magis quam ore praedicarent, because they should preach no less by their
Actions than their Sermons, and send forth a savor unto life, as well by their
Lives as their Doctrines. And this is to have the Priests Garment fringed about
with a Bell and a Pomegranate: to show they must be neither dumb Dogs, nor
stinking Weeds; but lead the People as well with the sweet scent and savor of
their Actions, as the sound of their Words.

CHAP. XL.
Verse 13. MOses that is appointed here to anoint and consecrate others was
never anointed and consecrated himself; that so we might learn not to value
external Sacraments or Signs by the Dignity of the Minister, but by the
Ordinance of God. Again, that the invisible Grace is of force without the
visible sign when God will have it so, as in Moses here: but then withal we
must know, that this was an extraordinary Command of God to Moses, who was then
Gods Vicegerent, or Vicar General, and therefore what he did God did. And
certainly God, who is the Author of all order, may prescribe the form and
manner of it.

Verse 16. Observe how often from this to the two and thirtieth verse is
repeated as the Lord commanded Moses, and see how sweet commanded Obedience is.
Were it as acceptable to God to be served with inventions, never would these
repetitions be made. Beware therefore of these ways: and in very reason
conclude, that if you expect from your Servant your Commands to be fulfilled
according to your will, much more may God expect the same obedience from you.

Verse 32. Those that dispense Gods Ordinances, that wait upon his Altar, must
come with clean hands and a pure heart. Holiness becomes every man well, but
best of all public persons; and that not only for example of good, but liberty
of controlling ill. The Snuffers of the Sanctuary made to purge others must be
of pure Gold themselves, and the Priest that is to purify and cleanse the
Congregation, must be first washed himself. But now suppose the Priest be
unclean, be vicious (and who can say he is not so?) must ^he People
notwithstanding seek the Law at his mouth, follow his Doctrine? Yes certainly.
For what if the Sacrificer be unclean, is the Offering so? Scripture is
Scripture though the Devil speak it.

Verse 34. That thus he might grace that outward place now appointed for holy
Assemblies to serve him, and so to the Worlds end teach how great account all
People ought to make of their Churches and Church-meetings.

Verse 36. The Children of Isreal's Journey to Canaan was through the Wilderness
of Arabia: Their Guides were a Pillar of Cloud by day, and a Pillar of Fire by
night. The manner of their Journey was this: When the Pillar moved they moved,
when the Pillar stood still they stood still. By all which a further matter,
namely, the regiment of Christ over his Church is signified. Every one of us is
as Passengers and Travelers to an heavenly Canaan, and in this Journey we are
to pass through the desert Wilderness of this World. Our Guide is Christ
himself, figured by the Pillar of Fire and Cloud, because by his Word and
Spirit he shows us how far we may go in every Action, and where we must
stand, and he goes before us as our Guide to life everlasting.

A PRACTICAL COMMENTARY UPON THE THIRD BOOK OF MOSES CALLED LEVITICUS
CHAP. I.
Verse 4. THE party bringing the Sacrifice did by this sign, of laying on his
hand, etc. acknowledge that he himself deserved to die, but by the Mercy of God
he was spared, and his desert laid upon the Beast. Secondly, that it is not
enough to believe, that Christ was to die for sin, but he must lay his hand
upon Christ, i. e. lay upon him all his iniquities by the hand of his Faith,
apply Christ to himself, and believe that he died for his sins, my sins, your
sins, being the only Propitiation for sin. Thirdly, this laying on the hand
showed, that men bringing Sacrifices to God, should rather sacrifice their
exorbitant affections than those Beasts.

Verse 5. The reason why God tied them to a place, and not suffered them to
sacrifice where they pleased, was, that by this means they might be kept from
using any unlawful manner in their Sacrifices, which they might have done if in
every place at their pleasure they might have Sacrificed. The same reason is
now for our set public places of Gods Worship, where the people are to perform
their Duties to God after one manner, not allowed at their will every one to
have a several place, lest private places should breed private Fancies, Errors,
and Heresies in the Church.

Verse 6. This was to teach the Party that offered the Sacrifice to offer up
himself to the Lord flayed and without skin, that is, without all counterfeit
and hypocritical shows, without all earthly, vain, and proud Confidence in
himself, or any Works or Worth whatsoever in him, but naked and bare, to
present himself to his God with a single and faithful heart, boasting of no
Desert, but humbly craving Mercy and Pardon for Christ's sake the true Sacrifice.

Verse 17. This was a great comfort to the poorer sort of Offerers; for thus
are they assured, that although they were not of ability to Offer unto him Oxen
and Sheep, yet were they as dear to him as those that could so do, and their
Sacrifice of Pigeons or Turtles yielded as sweet a savor. And thus gracious
will God ever be; even two Mites of a poor Widow shall be accepted, and a
little Spice, or Goats-hair, or what my power is to bring unto him shall be
received. For it is not the Gift, but the Heart of the Giver that God looks
upon and respects; and thus the poor Widows Mite could weigh but little very
little with God, but the Heart weighed heavy; and so her Heart being put to her
Mite, gave it weight above the greater (but far more heartless) largesses of
the Pharisees.

CHAP. II.
Verse 6. THis Offering thus parted and sprinkled with Oil, signified the
Graces of Gods Spirit, where with Christ was fully anointed within and without
above his fellows. For they were only singly anointed, either as Kings, or as
Priests, or as Prophets: but Christ was a thrice Sacred anointed Person; a
Prophet to teach us by his Word, a Priest to purge us by his Blood, a King to
guide us by his Spirit. And this threefold Office of our Savior was really
represented by the Oil wherewith he was anointed; For first, Oil is said in
the Psalms to make a cheerful countenance, and thus does Christ as a Prophet
make not only a cheerful Countenance, but a cheerful Heart and Soul by
Preaching the glad Tidings of Salvation. Secondly, Oil does supple and cure
Wounds, and so does Christ as a Priest the Wounds of our Souls and Consciences
with that precious Ointment of his Blood. Thirdly, Oil will still be the
uppermost of all Liquors; so likewise Christ as a King, is above Men and
Angels, has the Sovereignty over all the Creation.

Verse 11. By this Rule of having no Leaven, they were taught the purity of
Christ's Doctrine, and the Holiness of his Life; his Doctrine so pure, that it
makes others pure, John 15. 3. and his Life so pure, that not only his false
Accusers could fasten no fault upon him, but by his Innocence, he appeased Gods
Wrath for our Impurity. Secondly, it taught the Church that after Christ's
Example they ought to be free from both these, to wit, false Doctrine, and ill
manners; not Teaching if they be Teachers any corrupt Matter, nor believing and
holding if they be no Teachers any absurd Untruths.

Verse 13. Salt was required in the Sacrifice to figure out Christ, who indeed
is the true Salt, that seasoneth us and all our Works, or else neither we nor
they please God. Sin has made us unsavory to God, and till this Salt be
sprinkled over us, we have no access to him, nor savor with him. And further,
by Salt here we may understand Mortification, and holy discretion, or sincerity
of Doctrine and Discipline, whereby the Saints are seasoned and preserved from
the putrefaction of Sin and Error; and being preserved themselves, they
preserve others. For as Salt keeps Flesh from putrefying, so do the Saints of
the World; and are therefore sprinkled up and down (here one and there one) to
keep the rest from stinking.

CHAP. III.
Verse 3. THE Fat that was upon the Inwards was offered, and yet the Inwards
themselves, in particular the Heart was not offered. For the Heart and Brain
were never Offered in Sacrifice, because they are the Fountains and secret Arks
wherein lurks all Iniquity. And yet though the Heart be not given, yet hearty
Thanks must be given to God, such as comes not from the Roof of the Mouth, but
the Root of the Heart, the most inward part and bottom of our Souls.

Verse 4. Some have judged the pleasures of the Flesh to be here shadowed,
which of a true Child of God are to be killed and slain as Sacrifices were, and
mortified. Others looking at the phrase of Scripture, which usually notes by
the word Fat the best things, have thought that herein was figured how Men
ought to offer unto God ever of their best, as Numb. 18. 12. and Psalm. 81. 16.
but now in the Tithes and Duties do you give the best? do you offer the Fat? He
that lives licentiously all his Youth, and intends to offer unto God his Old
Age, when for debility of Body he can do no more harm, does he offer unto God
the Fat or the Lean, the Best or the Worst? Lastly, because this Fat that was
to be offered was an Inward thing, and not an Outward; others have thought that
thereby was figured how careful we must ever be to offer unto God our Inwards,
without which no External Duty can or will please God. The Lord says David,
Loves truth in the inward parts, and his Sacrifice is a troubled spirit, a
broken and a contrite heart within, not a pale face, a down look, many outward
sighs that are heard of men.

Verse 17. The Lords prohibition of Fat did teach them to use a modest,
moderate, and fitting Diet; Blood also was forbidden them, that so they might
learn to take heed of cruelty, and to show mercy and loving kindness in all
their Actions and Behaviors. Gods People must neither be Carnal nor Cruel; but
their Souls must show mercy as their Heavenly Father is merciful, and their
Delight must be not inluxurious, and high-feeding Dishes, but in the Marrow,
and Fatness, and Sweetness of Gods Ordinances.

CHAP. IV.
Verse 3. WHen you read that the High Priest had need sometimes to offer for
his Negligences and Ignorances; you see how plainly it was taught to that
People that the High Priest was not the true High Priest, which should make
perfect satisfaction unto God, but another was to be expected, even Christ
Jesus.

Verse 6. By this sevenfold sprinkling, the grievousness of sin is noted,
according to that in Genesis, he that slays Cain shall be punished
sevenfold, that is grievously. Wherefore this seven times sprinkling of the
Blood shows, that every sin with God deserves seven punishments, that is sharp
and great punishment, if God should deal with us in Justice, and not in Mercy.

Verse 7. The Blood was put on the Horns of the Altar of sweet Incense, to
signify that no Prayer can pierce unto God, but in and by the Blood of Christ.

Verse 12. The whole Bullock was to be burnt, being a sin-offering; to teach
men to burn all their sins, and not to divide them; as we do when we say I will
amend my Drunkenness, but I cannot leave my Swearing; but we must all our sins,
and willingly keep none, lest but one being wilfully still delighted in, burn
us wholly in Hell for ever. When Moses with the Israelites was to depart out of
Egypt, and Pharaoh would have had them leave their Cattle behind them, saving
what they intended to Sacrifice; answer was made, they would not leave one hoof
of a Beast behind, Exodus 10. 26. and so deal you with your Sins, leave not one
hoof of Sin behind, no one sin, no part of a Sin, that is, by wittingly,
willingly, and boldly continuing in it, otherwise free from Sin in this Life we
cannot be.

Verse 13. A multitude of Offenders excuses no offense, but if even the whole
Congregation should sin through Ignorance, yet a Sin-Offering must be offered
by them all, and their number yields no excuse. Secondly, In this phrase hid
from the Eyes, you may see the state of many a Man and Woman doing evil. The
matter is hid from their Eyes in Gods anger, and all-be-it they lie at the Pits
brink of Damnation, and Destruction, yet they see it not, feel it not, are not
troubled with it: because indeed they never sit and take an account of
themselves and their Works. The godly do this at last, and therefore in the
next Verse there is a time of Knowing to them as there was of hiding.

Verse 17. The Priest here used a sevenfold sprinkling of Blood upon the
Altar, and we observe a sevenfold shedding of Blood in Christ: in his
Circumcision, in his Agony, in his fulfilling of the Prophecy, Isai. 50. 6. I
gave my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair, and in his Scourging, in his
Crowning, and in his Nailing, and lastly in the piercing of his side; these
seven Channels has the Blood of thy Savior found. Pour out the Blood of thy
Soul; Sacrifice thy stubborn and Rebellious Will seven times too; seven times,
that is every day of the week, and seven times every day, for so often a Just
man falls; and then how low must that Man lie at last, if he fall so often,
and never rise upon any fall; and therefore raise thy self as often, and as
soon as thou fallest.

Verse 27. In all Sacrifices where Blood was to be offered, the Fat was to be
offered too. If thou will Sacrifice the Blood of thy Soul, Sacrifice the Fat
too. If thou give over thy purpose of continuing in sin, give over the memory
of it, and give over all that thou possessest unjustly and have corruptly got
by that sin, else thou keep the Fat from God, though thou give him the Blood.

CHAP. V.
Verse 2. WE are not ever clean when we see not any uncleanness: for our fault
may be hid from us, and we not ware of it; and therefore David prays for his
secret sins; but still it remains an Uncleanness though we be blind, and it
will destroy us if we see it not in time. Upon our Garments we endure no manner
of Uncleanness, not a little Mote but we brush and beat it off. Yet our Bodies
and Souls are unclean, and we see it not, we go not about to see it, but use
all the means we can to put it out of our sight by sports, Company, and the
like. Nay we hate him that will rub us that way, and we avoid the place where
sin is reproved.

Verse 4. Let this reform our rash Swearing in our common Talk, and our foolish
Vowing of things neither lawful, nor in our power. And think with your self
whether they err not greatly that think, what they have rashly sworn and vowed,
they must needs keep, when you see here God would have them offer a
Sin-offering for their rashness, and not add more sin unto it by performing
their rash Vows.

Verse 7. Thus gracious is God to his poor People, to whom he appoints small
offerings, framing his Law to their powers, and so giving them most sweet and
true comfort of his Love to them, as also in accepting of their little as well
as of the greater Sacrifices of Richer Persons.

Verse 11. Oil signifying gladness, and Incense a sweet savor; The Lord by
this Ceremony shadowed how hateful a thing it is, and all that commit it, till
the Lord be reconciled to them again: He has no joy in us, neither yield we
any sweet savor. And as he joyeth not in us, so should not we joy in our
selves. For if we do, we pour Oil into our Sacrifice contrary to the Law, and
we think our smell is as Incense to God, pleasing and acceptable, when he
abhorres us and all our Works. The Lord loves a sorrowful sinner adorned with
sackcloth and ashes, and they that so weep shall laugh.

Verse 15. How little this false and unjust dealing with Gods Ministers is
regarded with many in these days, who knows not, and they are never troubled
for it, much less do they purpose either restitution or amendment. But the day
will come when it will smart, this Law of God having its enduring equity, and
God in other places professing that this robbing of his Servants is the robbing
of him, Mal. 3. 8. for so he takes it and so will punish it.

CHAP. VI.
Verse 5. GOD is never pleased with any thing that is ours whilst we retain and
keep that that is not ours; unless we make restitution of what we have unjustly
taken away, that very day we offer, our Oblations are abominations.

Verse 7. The Priest must ever make the Atonement, so ever signifying, that not
in the Sacrifice but in the Priesthood was the matter. Now in that Priesthood
was typified Christ's Office. And therefore as then no Sacrifice pleased but as
offered by the Priest, so at this day nothing of ours, as Prayer and the like,
avails, but in Christ and by Christ our only and eternal High Priest. Again,
the Text says, Before the Lord the Atonement shall be, thereby overthrowing
the wicked error of them that affirm a civil purgation only of sin by those
Sacrifices, and not any spiritual Promise in them. Because so those Sacrifices
should no ways have served to breed and strengthen Faith in Man touching his
spiritual Estate, whereunto indeed they wholly aimed.

Verse 12. This Fire which God first kindled, was not to be as some momentary
Bone-fire, or a sudden and short Triumph, nor as a domestical Fire, to go out
with the day, but it was given for a perpetuity, it must neither die nor be
quenched; God as he is himself eternal, so he loves permanency and constancy of
Grace in us: If we be but a flash and away God regards us not; all Promises are
to perseverance. Sure it is but an elementary Fire that goes out, that which is
Celestial continues. It was but some presumptuous heat in us, that decays upon
every occasion. But yet he that miraculously sent down this Fire at first will
not renew the Miracle every day by a like supply: It began immediately from
God, it must be nourished by means. Fuel must maintain that Fire that came from
Heaven, God will not work Miracles every day: If he have kindled his Spirit in
us, we may not expect he shall every day begin again; we have the Fuel of the
Word and Sacraments, Prayers and Meditations, which must keep it in for ever.
It is from God that these helps can nourish his Graces in us; like as every
flame of our material Fire has a concourse of Providence; but we may not
expect new infusions: rather know that God expects of us an improvement of
those habitual Graces we have received.

Verse 13. First, by this he figured the death of Christ from the beginning of
the World, and by this shadow they were led to believe, that although as yet
Christ was not come in the Flesh, nevertheless the fruit of his Death belonged
to them, as well as to those that should live when he came, or was come: for
this Fire was continual, and went not out, no more did the fruit of his Passion
fail to any true Believer, even from the beginning, but they were saved by
believing that he should come, as we are now by believing that he is come.
Secondly, this shows that God is ever ready to accept our Sacrifices, ever
ready to hear us and forgive us, but we are slow and dull, and come not to him
as we ought. Thirdly, no other Fire might be used but this, and so they were
taught to keep to Gods Ordinances, and to fly from all inventions of their own
heads. Lastly, this fire thus kept with all care taught them, and still may
teach us, to be careful to keep in the Fire of Gods holy Spirit, that it never
die nor go out within us. The Fire is kept in with wood, with breath, or
blowing, and with ashes; so is Gods Spirit kept in by an honest Life, as by
wood, by true sighs of unfeigned Repentance, as by Breath or blowing, and by
meek Humility, as by soft ashes.

Verse 16. In the Holy Place only and not else where must they eat it, to
signify, that only in the Church is the benefit of Christ to be had, and not
out of the Church: the Branch bears not Fruit but in the Vine, and the Vine
is only in the Vineyard.

CHAP. VII.
Verse 8. Why God should think of so small and base a thing as the skin, some
may ask the reason. And it is first to confirm our Faith in his Providence,
that he will never forget us, and leave us destitute of things needful and good
for us, seeing we are much better than the skin of a brute Beast, whereof yet
he has care and thought. Secondly, this shows that sweet and comfortable care
that the Lord then had, and still has of the Ministry, that it should not be
defrauded of the least thing allotted to it. And therefore harden not your
heart against God, against Law, against Right and Truth; accustom not your
hearts to cover your Neighbors due, your hands to purloin it by fraud, or take
it by strength; it is theft, spiritual theft, sacrilege, your house receives
stolen Goods, and the Wrath of God may happily shake the foundation of it for
such a sin, and you in yours, or you and yours be punished.

Verse 13. Here Leaven is admitted of, which before was forbid: Leaven
therefore is taken in a good sense as well as in an ill. Thus the Apostles are
resembled to a little Leaven that leaveneth the whole lump, they being sent out
of God into the unleavened World, by preaching to leaven it clean through. And
there is a Leaven of the new Nature accepted, as there is a Leaven of the old
Nature rejected. For look how the Leaven makes the Bread savory, and strong,
and wholesome, look also how it makes it rise and heave up, which otherwise
would be sad and heavy; So does Gods regenerate Spirit change us, make us
savory, and all our Duties pleasing to God; and we rise up, our Hearts and
Souls are heaved up in all love, in thankfulness to him that in Mercy has so
looked upon us.

Verse 15. A Ceremony used to signify, that public Feasts should not be
superfluously continued and kept long under the color of Religion. For God
loves not idle banqueting and prodigal spending, although he allow graciously
what is fit for the occasion. Secondly, this was done in wisdom by God, least
if the flesh should have smelt by longer keeping, Religion might so have been
vile in the eyes of fickle persons.

Verse 18. We may learn by this, that the taking hold of Christ is not to be
deferred and put off, but speedily and quickly to be done, whilst time serves,
and opportunity is offered. For behold, says Christ, to day, and to morrow, I
cast out Devils, and the third day, Luke 13. that is, a short time I have yet
to go on with my Ministry, and then I shall be slain. More particularly every
Man and Woman may be said to have three days. The first of Youth till Age
come, the second of Age till Death come, and in these two days there is Mercy
offered, but the third day is after Death, and then there is no help; as here
on the third day no Offering was accepted, but the sin remained unpardoned, and
not forgiven.

Verse 30. The bringing of the Sacrifice with his own hands, and not sending it
by others, taught Humility and Duty to God, taught that every one must live by
his own Faith, and not by another.

Verse 34. The shaking of it to and fro four ways, East, West, North, and
South, shadowed the spreading of that lifting up of Christ, that is, of Christ's
Death and Passion throughou^ all the World by the preaching of the Gospel.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse 2. THe Lord precisely appointed Priests, and would not leave it to every
man to perform this Office, to signify, that not any man butthe-man Christ
Jesus could appease Gods Wrath, satisfy his Justice, and take away the sins of
the World. This could not be figured out better than by secluding all the Host
of Israel from this Office, and choosing but Aaron and his Sons, as Types of
Christ, that so by such an Ordinance, the Majesty, Authority and Property of
Christ's Office might be resembled and shadowed.

Verse 5. Nothing but Gods Commandment does Moses offer unto them. For he well
knew, Gods Will only in his own House must be the Rule. Our own heads were
never the best heads to follow; and for God he knows our mould too well to
give that swinge unto us.

Verse 13. Aarons Sons were a figure of the Church, which by Faith eats also
of the Sacrifice of Christ being made partakers of his Merits as well as the
Priests. Their Garments figured out the Graces and Gifts, wherewith the
Believers in Christ are adorned and beautified, casting away the Works of
Darkness, and putting on daily more and more the Deeds of Light, Romans 13. 12.

Verse 30. Upon Aarons Sons Moses did but sprinkle the anointing Oil, which
was said to be poured upon Aaron, verse 12. So plainly showing, that in Christ
the Spirit should be without measure, and upon his Servants in measure, we all
receiving of his fullness, according to his good Pleasure, some more some less.

Verse 35. By this is signified that watch, which all our life time is noted by
the seven days we keep in avoiding sin, and working righteousness, as the Lord
shall enable: which indeed may be called the watch of the Lord, being a holy,
Christian, and happy watch. The seventh day we shall be free, fully sanctified
and delivered from this vail of misery, to keep an eternal Sabbath in Heaven to
our endless comfort.

CHAP. IX.
Verse 7. IN that Aaron was here commanded to offer as well for himself as the
People, he was herein a figure of Christ, not that Christ had any sins of his
own, but that ours were so laid upon him, and he so made satisfaction to God
for them as they had been his own. Surely, says the Prophet, Isai. 53. 4. he
has born our infirmities, etc. that is, we judged him evil, as though he were
punished for his own sins, and not for ours.

Verse 22. Thus does God bless us in Christ, in whom all the Nations of the
World are blessed: First, with the Blessing of Reconciliation to himself,
reputing us now just for his Son Christ. Secondly, with the Blessing of his
Spirit, whereby we walk in his Calling, being guided thereby in the same.
Thirdly, with the Blessing of Acceptance of all our Works, though full of
imperfection and weakness. And last of all with this great Blessing, that all
adversity becomes a help to us to draw us to Heaven, and Eternal Rest.

Verse 24. That God which showed himself to Men in fire when he delivered his
Law, would have men present their Sacrifices to him in fire: and this fire he
would have his own, that there might be a just circulation in this Creature: as
the Water sends up those vapors which it receives down again in Rain. Hereupon
it was that fire came down from God to the Altar; that as the charge of the
Sacrifice was delivered in fire, so God might signify the acceptance of it in
the like fashion wherein it was commanded. The Baalites might lay ready their
Bullock upon the Wood; but they might sooner fetch the blood out of their
Bodies, and destroy themselves, than one flash out of Heaven to consume the
Sacrifice.

CHAP. X.
Verse 2. NAdab and Abibu were two of Aarons Eldest Sons, which after their
Father, should have succeeded him in his place: yet there is no Mercy with God
to stay his Judgment when they will not be Ruled by his Word. No Prerogative
therefore shall save any Man from Wrath if he offend, but the Elder shall
suffer no less than the Younger, the Rich as well as the Poor, there is no
regard with God of these things.

Verse 3. He howled not out with any unseemly cries, neither uttered any words
of Rage and Impatience, but meekly stooped to Gods will, kissed the Rod, and
held his peace. If thus Aaron in so great a Judgment, how much more we when
our Friends dye naturally, sweetly, and comfortably: so that we may boldly say
we have not lost them, but sent them before us, whether we hope also to follow.

Verse 5. That which the Father and Brother may not do, the Cousins are
Commanded: Dead Carcasses are not for the presence of God; his Justice was
shown sufficiently in killing them: they are now fit for the Grave, not the
Sanctuary: neither are they carried out naked, but in their Coats. It was an
unusual sight for Israel to set a linen Ephod upon the Beer; the Judgment was
so much the more remarkable, because they had the badg of their Calling upon
their backs. Nothing is either more pleasing unto God, more commodious to Men,
then that when he has executed Judgment it should be seen and wondered at; for
therefore he strikes some that he may warn all.

Verse 12. This is added to comfort and strengthen the shaken Hearts of Aaron,
and his living Sons; who might by this strange punishment have been driven into
doubt, whether ever the Lord would be pleased that they should meddle again
with the Sacrifices: and we see therein a gracious God, who makes not his
Promises void to all for the faults of some. We must therefore cleave to our
Calling, and even so much the more painfully go forward therein, by how much we
see others punished for ill doing; be taught therefore, and schooled, but never
be discouraged and feared from imposed Duty.

Verse 20. In that Moses admitted of a reasonable excuse, we may learn to abhor
Pride, and to do the like. Pride I say which scorneth to hear what may be said
against the conceit we have once harbored. A modest man does not thus; and
therefore holy Job had an Ear for his Servant, and his Maid, and did not
despise their Judgment, their Complaint and Grief, when they thought
themselves evil entreated by him.

CHAP. XI.
Verse 2. LEarn from hence our Duty, to depend upon the Word and Will of God in
all things, yea even in our Meat, and how careful likewise we ought to be to
seek cleanness of Body and Soul before that God who expects it in our very Diet.

Verse 3. This typified a difference of Men and Women in the World, some clean,
and some unclean; for they that have a true Faith, and a good Life, by
meditating in the Word, are such as divide the Hoof, and chew the Cud, and they
are clean; but such as do neither, or but one, are unclean; as he that
believes in God, but lives not well; or he that lives in an outward honesty,
but believes not rightly. They again may be called clean, dividing the Hoof,
who do not believe in great or in gross, but discern and distinguish things; as
Christ and Moses, Nature and Grace, not believing every Spirit, but trying the
Spirits whether they be of God or no. John 4. 1. For chewing the Cud, they may
be said to do it, and so to be clean, who meditate of that they hear, lay it up
in their Hearts, and practice it in their Conversations.

Verse 5. By the Coney are figured out such Men as lay up their Treasures in
the Earth, because the Conies digg and scrape, and make their Berries in the
ground; whereas we are taught to lay up our Treasure in Heaven, Mat. 6.

Verse 6. The Hare is a very fearful Creature, and therefore is the type of
fearful Men and Women despairing of Grace, and shrinking from God: such persons
are unclean, and excluded the Kingdom of God, Rev. 21. 8.

Verse 7. The Swine never looks up to Heaven, but has his mouth ever in the
Earth, and Mire, caring for nothing but his Belly, nourished only to be killed:
for his Death has use, his Life has none. A good Caveat for the Rich
miserable Wretches of the World, who never profit any till they dye. A Knife
therefore for the Hogg, that we may have what is useful in him; and Death for
such Wretches, that the Commonwealth may have use of theie Baggs.

Verse 14. By the Goss-hauk is shadowed forth Men that Prey upon their weaker
Brethren, and Neighbors. By the Vulture, Men that delight in Wars and
Contention. By the Ravens, unnatural Parents that forsake their Children,
unkind Friends which shrink away, Ill Husbands that provide not for their
Families. By the Ostrich painted Hypocrites, and Carnal Men that have fair
great Feathers, but cannot fly. By the Seamew that lives both on Land and
Water, such as will be saved both by Faith and Works, such Ambodexters as the
World has store of, that carry two Faces under a Hood, Fire in one hand, and
Water in the other.

CHAP. XII.
Verse 2. THis serves to Confute that gross Error of Pelagius, denying the
propagation of sin from Parents to Children; but if the Birth were clean, the
Mother by the Birth should not be unclean; as this purification did shadow that
she was God would therefore have all Men know what they are by Nature, and what
by Grace through the Remedy provided, Christ our only Righteousness and Purity.
Also that God had rather have them never enter into the Church, than to enter
with Corruption unsorrowed for, and uncared for.

Verse 4. Although this Ceremonial Law of Moses be abrogated and gone, yet
honesty of Nature, and modesty in Womankind is neither abrogated, nor gone.
Therefore even still we retain in the Church a lawful and laudible custom
among Women, that they should stay a time after Childbirth to gather strength
in their Houses, and then come to Church to give God Thanks. And this is
nothing but a needful thing in regard of weakness, a modest Ceremony in regard
of Woman-hood, and a Christian Duty in regard of Comfort and Mercy received, to
come to Church; there thankfully to acknowledge Gods great mercy to them, in
both giving them safe deliverance, and blessing them with Children to their
Comfort.

Verse 5. There is no sin in Marriage if it be not abused, but because this is
rare, therefore after Women were delivered, God appointed them to be purified,
showing that some stain or other does creep into this Action, which had need to
be repented; and therefore when they prayed, (1 Cor. 7. 5.) St. Paul would not
have them come together lest their Prayer should be hindered.

Verse 8. The Sacrifice was indifferent, whether Turtles or Pigeons. Turtles
that live solitarily, and Pigeons that live sociably were all one to God. God
in Christ may be had in an active and sociable life, denoted in the Pigeon, and
in the solitary and contemplative life set out in the Turtle. Let not
Westminster despise the Church, nor the Church the Exchange; God in Christ may
be had in every lawful Calling. And then the Pigeon was an Emblem of fecundity
in Marriage, and the Turtle may be an Emblem of chaste Widdow-hood, for I think
we find no bigamy in the Turtle: but in these Sacrifices we find no Emblem of
an unnatural, or of a vowed barrenness, nothing that countenances a vowed
Virginity to the dishonor or undervaluing of Marriage.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse 2. THis prefigured the holy Priesthood of our blessed Savior, who does
see and handle, and touch, regard, and heal all our Spiritual spots, as these
Priests dealt here with this bodily Infection; so that if we be unclean we
cannot deceive him. Away therefore with our Figg-leaves, for they cannot cover
us: if I be a Swearer, an unclean Liver, a Drunkard, an envious person, or the
like, I am a Leper, a spiritual Leper, and Christ is Judge whom I cannot mock;
he will never say I am clean till indeed I be so, and so without amendment of
Life I must out of the Host, out of the Church and number of his Chosen, to dye
for ever in my Impurity.

Verse 45. So careful was God to have unclean persons known and discerned from
others in those days. And we may take occasion also to wish that with us also
in these days all bold and presumptuous mis-livers being most unclean before
God and all good Men, were distinguished from them that hate their wickedness
by some such open marks as these were, to the end that others might avoid them,
and they themselves be stricken with some shame to amendment of Life, and
saving of their Souls. Allegorically these things in the Leper shadowed the
state and condition of all wicked men in this World. As the rent Clothes, that
they are vile and odious before God; his bare head, that in Christ their head
they have no Portion, but are deprived of him; his Lips or Mouth covered, that
such graceless persons cannot open their Mouth before God in any Prayer to be
heard; his shutting out of the Camp, that such are to be Excommunicate from the
number of the Faithful, and are deprived of the Heavenly Inheritance.

Verse 50. Before thou condemn thy Brother, put thy hand into thine own bosom,
as Moses did, and tell me if it be not leaprous with that sin which thou
condemnest in thy Brother: and therefore Cause the Priest should not give rash
Judgment, the Leaprous was shut up seven days. We must not be hasty to
condemn others: nay youmay reason further with your self thus; that if in a
matter thus subject to the Eye, as these Sores were yet God would have no
haste, but a stay for seven days before Judgment should be given that the
Party was unclean; O how more does he abhor have in pronouncing of the Hearts
and Thoughts of our Friends and Neighbors, which are not seen nor subject to
an easy Censure. A wise gatherer of Grapes gatheeth only the ripe and good
Grapes, and medleth not with the four and ill Grapes, so a good Christian
notes men's Virtues, and speaks of them when a Fool will be meddling with
their imperfections.

CHAP. XIV.
Verse 2. THe Law of the Leper here was, that he should be brought unto the
Priest, men come not willingly to this manifestation of themselves, nor yet are
they to be brought in chains, by a necessity of an exact enumeration of all
their sins; but to be led with that sweetness, with which the Church proceeds
in appointing sick persons, if they feel their Consciences troubled with any
weighty matter, to make a special confession, and to receive absolution at the
hands of the Priest: and then to be remembered, that every coming to the
Communion is as serious a thing as our transmigration out of this World, and
that we should do as much here for the settling of our Conscience, as upon our
Deathbed

Verse 3. That it is still the duty of all Faithful Ministers to go to the sick
to see them and consider their estate toward God, ministering comfort to them
in due season, whilst their hearing is good, their understanding good, and
their memory good. And I would God, that they that are sick had more care to
send for their Ministers in due time, and the Ministers, when they know it, to
go, and with all care and diligence to labor with them while time serves.

Verse 6. By the two Sparrows, says Theodoret, the cleansed person was put in
mind to offer unto God both Soul and Body a living Sacrifice. The Sparrow slain
might teach him the necessity of Mortification in the Body, which indeed is an
earthen vessel, the killing of it over pure Water, that nothing more works
this Mortification than the pure Water of Gods Word contained in the
Scriptures; and that by the blood of Christ we are truly cleansed and set at
liberty, as here the live Sparrow dipped in the blood of the slain Sparrow is
set free.

Verse 7. This sevenfold sprinkling might happily shadow an earnest and
tontinued meditation of Gods Goodness to him that thus was comforted, and not
for a day or two and then no more. Surely our thoughts of Mercy vouchsafed to
us are ever too short and transitory, and therefore seven sprinklings are
little enough to teach us our duty herein. God of his Mercy so sprinkle us over
and over, that we may ever remember his kind Goodness toward us a thousand
ways.

CHAP. XV.
Verse 3. OUr Nature, whether running or stopped, is unclean: We have
uncleanness, corruption in us, though it does not show it self, and this is
Original Sin, called here our uncleanness, and by Saint Paul, Romans 7. Sinful
sin; so evil in its self, that it could not have a worse Epithete given it than
its own name: called also by the same Apostle in the same Chapter, The body of
death, a dead body or carcass, to which we are tied; as noisome every whit to
our soul, as a dead body to our senses; and as burdensome as a withered arm
or mortified limb, which hangs on a man as a lump of lead. Now some remnants of
sin God has left in us, to clear to us his justifying Grace by Christ's
Righteousness: And this also will make the Saints seem nothing in their own
eyes, even when they are filled brim full with Grace and Glory in another World.

Verse 12. So contagious a thing is sin, that it defiles the very visible
Heaven and Earth; which therefore must be purged at the last day with a Deluge
of Fire, because they were not made clean by a Deluge of Water; as here the
earthen Pot which was but touched by an unclean person was broken, and the
wooden Vessel scoured and rinsed in water. How therefore ought we to fly from
sin, when even the touch of an unclean person defiles a man? And if the
Garment spotted with the flesh be so contagious, how mortal must the life and
conversation of such a man needs be to the Soul.

Verse 13. When you read thus often of Water, cleave not to the Element or
Creature of Water, but remember Saint John, 1 John 5. 6. tells you, that Jesus
Christ came by Water and Blood; and it is he only that washes away our spots,
and saves us from our sins; and by the offering of the Turtles it was plainly
figured, that not in themselves, but in some others they must be made clean
from all their impurities.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse 2. IN that Aaron was forbidden at all times to enter into the Holiest of
Holies, we may learn, that even Ministers as well as other men are not rashly
to enter into all the things of God, but to stand in reverence of some
Mysteries, either dealing not at all, or very advisedly and sparingly with
them, as their nature requires.

Verse 3. When we appear before God, we must come with a Sin-offering, that is,
come with an humble acknowledgement, as this Sin-offering figured, that thou
art a sinner, confessing it to God with a greived heart, and bring Jesus Christ
in thy soul with thee, offering him by thy true Faith to God his Father, as a
sure safety for all sinners against deserved wrath and punishment.

Verse 4. We must be clothed with Christ's Righteousness, as with this holy
linen Coat, if we ever find acceptance with God. For to that end Aaron did
change his Garment, to show, that he sustained another person who was holy, he
himself being but a man subject to imperfection and sin. Now if Aaron might not
enter but in such sort, how much less might the People appear at any time
before God, but in Christ, and by Christ, shadowed in all these Sacrifices.

Verse 21. When confession was made over the Head of the Scapegoat, what
diversity of words were used, as all iniquities, all trespasses, all sins. Why
so many words? but to teach, that confession of sins must not be light and
formal only, but earnest, vehement, hearty, and zealous. And indeed never can a
Child of God satisfy himself herein, but still wishes he could more bewail
his sins, and more earnestly express with words what his Soul feels in this
behalf; saying, as I heard a dying woman once say, O Sir, I am sorry, and
sorry, that I can be no more sorry.

Verse 31. God would name his Sabbath according to the nature of it; and
Sabbath is rest. It is a rest of two kinds, our rest, and Gods rest. Our rest
is the cessation from labor on those days, Gods rest is our sanctifying of
the day. For so in the religious sacrifice of Noah, Genesis 8. when he was come
out of the Ark, God is said to have smelt, odorem quietis, the savor of rest.
Upon those days we rest from serving the World, and God rests in our serving
of him.

CHAP. XVII.
Verse 4. THe Reasons of the severity of this Law were: first, because it
served for the preservation of the Ministry which God had ordained, and that
every Man should not be his own Priest. Secondly, Because thus they were
taught, that all Worship of God ought to be guided and directed by his Word and
Commandment, and not by the private wills of Men. And if you say that Samuel
offered in Mizpeh, 1 Samuel 7. and Elias in Mount Carmel, 1 King. 18. and so
neither brought the Sacrifice to the door of the Tabernacle; you must answer
your self thus, that all this in these Men was extraordinary, and we may not
follow extraordinary matters without some such personal and special Vocation,
as no doubt they had; for we do not live by Examples, but by Laws.

Verse 6. The burning and broiling of Beasts, and the sprinkling of their Blood
upon the Altar, could of themselves yield no sweet savor; but thereto was
added Wine, Oil, and Incense by Gods appointment; our Prayers as from us would
never please; but as Indicted by the Spirit, and presented by Christ, they are
highly accepted in Heaven. Christ is the Incense, the perfume of all our
Sacrifices: and therefore if ever we intend that our Sacrifice, either of
Praise, or Prayers, should carry a sweet savor along with it, it must be
offered up in and by Christ: for he is Gods Benjamin, the Son of his Love, in
whom alone God is well pleased. Upon which account it is, that the Catholic
Church does evermore conclude her Prayers with this Expression, Through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Verse 10. The Lord by this Law would teach Men to abstain from Murder, and
Bloodshed, the Blood of Man being Vehiculum animae vitalis; for the Vital
Spirits which yield unto Man through his whole Body heat, motion, and action,
are begotten of Blood by the power of the Heart, and therefore Man's life, and
the life of every other Creature is said to be in the Blood, according to that
of the Poet, Purpuream vomit ille animam. Secondly, Because the Lord had
ordained Blood to be used in the Atonement made for Sins, as a plain figure of
the Blood of Christ the only able Sacrifice to purge and wash away our Sins and
Offenses, therefore he would have Blood regarded as an holy thing, and not used
by Man as other Meats might be.

CHAP. XVIII.
Verse 2. THis Expression, I am the Lord your God, is often repeated to draw
attention, and beget Authority. For consider, first it is thy Lord, thy Master
that speaks; he whose House is the World, and all the Creatures his Servants,
shall we not then listen when this our great Master shall speak. Secondly, it
is thy God that speaks, the Eternal Creator of Heaven and Earth; he who has
made all, preserves all, and can as easily destroy all again; he who is the
All-seeing God, that looks upon thee in thy privare Closet, in thy bolted
Chamber, under thy drawn Curtains; that sees all thy secret villainies, and
stolen Embraces, all thy wicked Plots and Contrivings; and shall we not then
hear and fear him? What running and striving would there be who should come
first, if a King, or some great Lord should call. O let not the Lord of Lords,
and King of Kings call so often, and thou slight and neglect it; but rather say
with Samuel, Speak Lord, for thy servant hears; speak Lord to my Ears that
they may hear, speak to my Memory that it may retain, speak to my Heart and
Affections that they may be obedient, speak to my Life and Conversation that it
may be answerable to thy Word; then shall thy servant hear aright, and not
before.

Verse 18. If any Man think of some Marriages of holy Men in Scripture,
contrary to these Rules, let him remember that we now live by Laws, and not by
Examples. What God then either approved or tolerated, let us neither rashly
condemn, nor unadvisedly follow, but obediently tarry within the Precincts of
the Law of Nature. And again, in these Cases let it ever be remembered, as good
reason it should, not only what is lawful, but what also is convenient and fit
to be done. For many things are lawful which are no way yet expedient, but most
unfit in regard of some Circumstances.

Verse 21. Every notorious sin committed by any of Gods people, is a
profanation of his Name, that is, it causes the Name of God to be profaned
and blasphemed by others, to stink among the ungodly. Those that make a
profession of Religion, profane Gods Name no way so much, as by consulting and
shaming their profession by a scandalous Conversation, such as becomes not the
Gospel of Christ. Good men count sin to be the greatest smart in sin, as being
more sensible of the wound they therein give the glory of God, than of any
personal punishment.

Verse 25. From this Verse to the end of the Chapter may be seen the penalty of
breaking these Laws of a pure God, as in the beginning you see the profit of
keeping them. Learn then, that not foreign Foes only may bring a Land to
Desolation and Destruction, but much sooner and soarer these homebred
Impurities; which if a godly Magistrate, Master, or Father keep down, they
procure the safety of the Land or house, more than if they resisted Violence
with Arms. To vomit out her Inhabitants, and to spew out her people, are terms
of great vehemence with God; and therefore most great should Man's fear be lest
he should provoke him to such vengeance.

CHAP. XIX.
Verse 9. A Worthy Law to teach us both what care the Lord has of the Poor,
and what care we must have. But when God commanded something to be left in the
Field for them, his meaning was not that they should have nothing out of the
Barn; but the Lord willed here precisely somewhat to be left in the Field,
because he knew our Corruption, which more hardly parts with a thing already
housed, and brought in, then when it is yet abroad in the Field. And therefore
to meet with this hardness, and to provide the better for them, he commands a
care in the Field before it come in, and yet expects the other too as need
requires.

Verse 11. The Law against Stealing has an Explanation here added, Neither
deal falsely, nor lie one to another: as if he should have said, mistake not
the matter of Stealing, neither judge better of your selves than there is
cause; but know it ever for a truth, that although you break no Houses, nor rob
upon the way, yet if you deal falsely one with the other in buying and selling,
or any way; and lie one to another by affirming it cost so or so, or by denying
any thing committed to your credit and custody, assure your self you are a
Thief, and guilty of the Eight Commandment.

Verse 14. It was ever esteemed a barbarous Cruelty to insult over a man's
Imperfections. By the Deaf are also meant men and Women absent, who though they
could hear being present, yet being not there, they are Deaf, and hear not.
Such should not be Cursed, that is, Evil spoken of, because they are not
present to hear and answer. By the Blind also are meant such as are ignorant
and unskilful in any thing, as an ignorant Buyer, Learner, Trader, before whose
Eyes you may not lay a stumbling block, deceiving them either by false
Doctrine, bad Life, Craft, Cunning, or the like For as pitiful, or more, is
the blindness of Mind as the blindness of Body; and therefore any ways to abuse
the one or the other by stumbling blocks, is hateful, and damnable.

Verse 15. Though a New Opinion may seem a poor Opinion, able to do little
harm, though it may seem a pious and profitable Opinion, and of good use, yet
if it stand in Judgment, and pretend to be an Article of Faith, thou shall not
spare it, thou shall not countenance this Opinion upon any Collateral Respects,
but bring it to the only trial of Doctrines, the Scriptures. And as for
Opinions, so likewise for Sins, thou shall not pity the Poor in Judgment;
when thou call thy self to Judgment, and thy Conscience to an Examination,
thou shall not pity any sin, because it pretends to be a poor sin, either poor
so as it cannot much endanger thee, not much incumber thee, or poor so as that
it threatens thee with Poverty, with Disability to support thy State, or
maintain thy Family, if thou entertain it not. Many times I have seen a Suitor
that comes in Forma pauperis more trouble a Court, and more importune a Judge
than greater Causes, or greater Persons; and so may such Sins as come in Forma
pauperis either way.

Verse 18. Because we are apt to say upon Injuries received, I will not avenge,
but sure I will remember them, forgive I may, but never forget, therefore it is
said here, neither shall thou be mindful of a wrong against the Children of thy
people. Remembering then you see is condemned as well as Avenging, and therefore
it concerns us both to forgive, and forget, or else the Lord will forget us out
of his Book of Life.

Verse 19. With diverse Seeds they sow their Ground which follow diverse
Doctrines in Religion. And Linnen-Woolen Garments are forbidden, either because
the Gentiles used them, to whom God would not have his People like, or to note
how hateful to God a fantastical head is carried about with new Toys and
Fashions. He that is a Papist here, and a Protestant there, he that takes part
with both sides in a Quarrel, or Plea of Law, is a Lindsy-woolsy Christian.

Verse 23. This restrained covetousness in the Jews, and taught them how God
hates scraping all to a Man's self for his time, and caring nothing for
posterity. Secondly, it shows how little worth the Fruits of Youth usually are,
either to the Church, or Commonwealth, till years have bred strength of
Judgment, and made them both see and do what is profitable.

CHAP. XX.
Verse 5. LEt us have a care how we kindle Gods wrath against us, either by our
own Sins, or by winking at, and suffering in others what we are able to amend;
for the Lord has here vowed to set his Face against such persons to cut them
off, and their Families also with them, although the Magistrate wink and will
not see what the Lord has commanded him to see and punish. Yea the Lord
himself will be revenged both of Doer and Sufferer, be he Father, Husband,
Master, Magistrate, or whosoever bound by place and Office to look to such
things, and to reform them.

Verse 9. That gives them but an ill word or look; for Saepe vultu laditur
pietas. The Eye that mocketh at his Father, says the Wiseman, Prove. 30. or
despises to obey his Mother; that looks upon her with disdain, as an old
withered Fool, as the Hebrew reads, The Ravens of the valley shall pick it out,
and the young Eagles shall cat it. God takes notice of the offending Member,
and appoints a punishment for it. Now they are Cursed with a witness, whom the
Holy Ghost thus Curses in such Emphatical manner, in such Exquisite terms. Let
wicked Children therefore look to it; and know that a proud and paltry look
cast upon a Parent, is a breach of Piety punishable with Death. Let them also
think of those Infernal Ravens and Vultures that shall torment them in Hell,
and continually feed upon their Souls.

Verse 10. Because Marriage was appointed a remedy against Fornication,
therefore the Law of God inflicted a sorer punishment upon him, which did
commit uncleanness after Marriage than upon him which was not Married, because
he sinned although he had the remedy of sin, like a rich Thief which steals
and has no need: So Deuteronomy. 22. 22.

Verse 25. Ye shall make this difference between the clean and unclean Beast,
says God. First, because ye may be at my appointment for your very meat, as
who am chief Lord of all. Secondly, that there may be a difference between you
and all other People. Thirdly, that ye may be taught to study purity, and know
that the very Creatures are defiled by man's sin: It is hard to deal in the
World and not be defiled with the corruption that is in the World: And
therefore we are taught by this Law to abstain from the communion of unclean
and wicked men, in whom are found the malignities and evil properties of all
other Creatures.

CHAP. XXI.
Verse 17. THis was done to preserve the Dignity of the Priests Calling in that
infancy of the Church, which otherwise might have come into contempt, together
with the holy things, for the contemptible show of the Priest. Yet thus much we
may learn by it further, that if these infirmities of body, which they could
not help, made them unfit then to be Priests, may not now wilful impiety, being
a blot in Soul and Mind, disable a man from being a Minister to God in his own
Conscience, although he have the outward calling of men.

Verse 18. Blind is he, who wanting light from above is wholly drowned and
overwhelmed with the darkness of this World. Lame is he, who seeing whither he
should go, yet is not able, through weakness of understanding, to get thither,
but faints and fails, stumbleth and trippeth in his going, and comes short
of his right end. By a flat nose may be noted a weakness in Judgment and
Discretion, because the nose discerns good savours from ill, as the mind
should also do things fit and unfit. In the Canticles 7. 4. among the praises
of the Spouse it is said, her nose is like a tower in Lebanon, because by
Judgment she discerns afar off temptation and evils coming as out of a Tower.

Verse 20. The scab is a foulness arising of an itch, and spreading broader and
broader if it be not looked into; and thereby is set down the vice of
Covetousness, which first begins with an itching desire, and afterward for
want of looking to, spreads to a great foul Vice, deforming any man, but most
unseemly in a Priest, who ought to be clean. L^^^ly, by him that has his
stones broken are noted such, as, though they do not act, yet have ever in
their minds lewd and unclean thoughts, whereby they are so desperately carried
away, as pure, and clean, and holy meditations can take no place.

Verse 22. Albeit blemished persons might not stand at the Altar, yet were they
allowed to eat the Sacrifices, and to be in the Congregation; shadowing unt
ous, that the Church, although blemished, nevertheless is admitted to the
communion and participation of those things which Christ by his eternal
Sacrifice has obtained for us. And although some one or other infirmity may
justly disable thee for such a place, either in Church or Commonwealth, yet
from a place with the Elect, either here or for ever, it shall not hinder thee;
No nor ten thousand blemishes, if thou art grieved for them, and fighting
against them, do take hold of thy spotless Savior, as thy help and safety
against them all.

CHAP. XXII.
Verse 6. NOne but those that were clean might eat of the holy Things; nay
those that did but enter into the Tabernacle being unclean, were threatened with
death by God. Now what should this solemn preparation under the Type put us in
mind of, but the true and inward preparation required still of us in the
Antitype; that is, to teach us, that we ought carefully to sanctify, prepare
and purify not our clothes and external parts, but our hearts from all sin and
impurity, before we presume to approach into the presence of God, either to eat
of Christ our spiritual Passover, or to hear and receive his most holy Word.
And certainly the neglect hereof is the very cause why that Sacrament, which is
to some the Bread of Life, is to others the Bread of Condemnation; and that
Word of God, which is to some the Savior of Life unto Life, is to others the
Savior of Death unto Death.

Verse 19. A good Work without the heart is but a glorious sin: for not so much
the things themselves as the affections of men are considered of God. One may
have a free mind in poverty, and a sparing mind in riches; so it is not the
Work but the Mind. Thus the Lord regards not so much the thing done, as the
heart and mind of him that did it. If we build only on the Work, we have no
better evidence to show for our salvation then the Devils and Reprobates. Not
the Work then, but the Heart is that that will stand and go for current: to
show this the Lord would have a free will Offering among all the rest of his
Sacrifices; hereby showing, that the heart must be joined with obedience; nay
so much did the Lord regard the Heart, that he would not admit of any Gift for
the building of the Temple, but what came from a free will.

CHAP. XXIII.
Verse 2. IN that they were called the Feasts of the Lord, men are taught in
them to seek and attend such things as belonged to God, and not their own
business, pleasures and sports. And in the fourth verse they are called holy
Convocations; think therefore in your Conscience whether gadding and rioting be
holy exercises, and meet for an holy Convocation. To this end they are still
called in the Christian Church Holy days, to put us in mind of the right use
of them.

Verse 3. It is the Sabbath of the Lord in all your dwellings. Wherefore says
St. Augustine, learn that no place priviledgeth thee to break Gods Law: but as
being a sinner, whithersoever thou go thou carriest the yoke of sin; so
being the servant of God in all places obey his Will.

Verse 5. O mavelous accordance betwixt the two Testaments! in the very time
of their delivery there is the same agreement which is in their substance. The
ancient Jews kept our Feasts, and we still keep theirs. The Feast of the
Passover is the time of Christ's Resurrection, then did he pass from under the
bondage of Death. Christ is our Passover, the spotless Lamb, whereof not a bone
must be broken. And so likewise the very day wherein God came down in Fire and
Thunder to deliver the Law, even the same day came also the Holy Ghost down
upon the Disciples in fiery Tongues for the propagation of the Gospel. The
promulgation of the Law makes way for the Law of the Gospel: No man receives
the Holy Ghost but he that has felt the terrors of Sinai.

Verse 10. This being but one single sheaf that God demanded, it might strike
their hearts with a pious sense of his Goodness, that gives so much and takes
so little, that gives without measure, and takes by measure, yea by a very
small measure. So let it still profit us to this day: for even now also we
receive much and give little, would we give that little thankfully and
cheerfully, what a comfort would God take in it? Though he need none of our
Goods, only seeking to exercise our obedience and love.

Verse 11. This shaking of the sheaf before the Lord taught them to
acknowledge, that the blessing of new Corn every year comes neither from the
fertility of the ground, nor the labor and industry of man, but from the Lord.

Verse 14. This Feast having its time assigned, they could not enter upon their
Harvest before it was full ready; which by this time it would be, unless they
would either reap before they offered this first sheaf, or offer it before the
day appointed. And so you see it had an use to restrain ill Husbands, and to
make them more careful that old Corn might be kept till new came. A gracious
God that will so care for sinful Man.

Verse 24. Some think that this Feast was instituted for a remembrance of the
pardoning of that grievous Idolatry committed by erecting and worshipping the
Golden Calf; others, that they might learn holy Assemblies to be appointed by
the voice of God; and if they then when they heard these Trumpets blow might
think God called for them to the meeting, why should not we now, having our
Bells for their Trumpets, think God calls for us to the Assemblies of the
Faithful, when we hear them ring in our Ears. Surely I know a feeling heart
does, and therefore cannot be quiet without going. And upon this account this
Feast might be a figure; showing how Christ by the preaching of the Gospel, as
by a loud Trumpet, should be spread over the World, and our Salvation by him.
In regard whereof the Prophets bids the Ministers lift up their voices like
Trumpets, Isai. 58. 1.

Verse 34. The use of this Feast was to remember the Jews of their Estate when
they had no Houses, but lived in Tents, or Tabernacles and Booths; as also to
preach unto them the Doctrine afterward delivered by the Apostle, That here we
have no abiding City, but should reckon of our Honses as of Tabernacles for a
time. And might we not heretofore remember upon our Feasts our state past under
cruelty and bondage, our wars and Dissentions in this Land, the fall of our
Friends, and the change of many Houses, our Imposions and Taxes, and in a word,
very many Miseries and Calamities; laying them to those then present times,
wherein we enjoyed Truth and Liberty of Conscience without either death or
danger; what a change was this to a Man that knows and feels the blessing.
Let us therefore do what we ought to do, and what the Jews did, thank God most
heartily for the change, and beseech him to restore us such times, that in
peace we may live, in peace dye, and in peace that never ends live with him
for ever.

Verse 37. These Feasts you may see were in remembrance for the most part of
some benefits and mercies of God; and therefore plainly teach us what a due
duty from us to God it is to remember carefully and thankfully his loving
favors showed to us at any time upon any occasion. Thus the stones were
commanded to be set up by Joshua 4. 6, 7. for a sign to the Jews, that when
their Children should ask their Fathers, etc.

CHAP. XXIV.
Verse 2. IN these times of Shadows and Figures those Lights signified, that
while they were thus used, the true Light was not yet come, by which all true
Believers should be delivered from the darkness of Death. And further, this
Light was a figure also of true Doctrine, which ever must shine in the Church
of God. The Oil Olive which they are commanded to bring, must be pure likewise,
to show, that that Doctrine must have no mixture of Man's devices, but be pure.

Verse 10. Though the Father of this Offender was a stranger, an Egyptian, yet
God would not spare him; how much less then his own people, I mean Christians
by Father and Mother, Baptized in his Faith, brought up in his fear, hearers of
his Word, and Professors of it. Secondly, Though this Man committed this fault
in his anger, yet God spared him not; how then do we excuse our Offenses by our
Anger, saying it was in my wrath I said so, or did so.

Verse 11. This Blaspheming was Cursing the other by the Name of God; such as
our fearful and Damnable Phrases are, Gods Curse light on thee, the Plague of
God take thee; which kind of Speaking is not only a breach of the Second Table
concerning the love to our Neighbor, but a breach also of the First Table, by
taking Gods most Holy Name in vain; and then to use God in your Revenge, and to
make him a party, or an Executioner of your Rage, wishing that he may Curse and
Plague where you will, (he being all Mercy, all Goodness, all Justice,) O what
an increase of your sin is this!

Verse 12. This grievous Offender is not winked at by them that heard him,
neither yet punished by them that had no Authority, out of a color of Zeal;
but he is orderly and by a right Zeal carried to Moses the Magistrate, and his
offense opened there. Moses again, (although such a man) yet will do nothing
hastily in Judgment, and especially touching Life, but he will be advised by
God, and in the mean time commits him to Ward.

Verse 14. By this Ceremony of putting their hands upon his Head, the Lord made
the Witnesses careful what they said; for it taught them, that if they bare
false Witness, then were they guilty of the Blood of him so shed: but if they
spoke truly, then as he that offered a Sacrifice by laying his Hand upon the
head of it, did cast his sins upon the Beast; so they by that Ceremony laid his
Blood upon his own head, and they remained clear and blameless; yea the whole
Congregation by such Execution of Justice is cleansed. So that when Phineas had
slain the wicked Person, it is said he turned the wrath of God from the Land,
Numb. 25. and the killing of the wicked is called Victima Dei, the sacrifice of
God, Isai. 34. Ier. 46.

Verse 16. When the Lord will have the whole Congregation to stone him, he
makes trial of the zeal of all, and teaches all to concur with the Magistrate
in love and liking of Justice, and in furthering of it so far as belongs to
every man's place. Whereas now a days we have such Factious and corrupt humors
in us, out of which issue out such dislikes, and bad censures of Magistrates as
grieve them, hinder Justice, and provoke God to that which will smart if he be
not the more merciful.

Verse 22. This restrained that pride which otherwise might have been in the
Jews, and shows the common care of God for all men as well as for the Jews.
This indifferency is a blessed virtue to be learned from our God. For surely we
are altogether partial if God guide us not. Thus if other Men's Children,
Servants, or Friends hurt ours, fire and sword for them; but if ours hurt them,
no such matter: all must be boulstered out, or bought out, or born out, and
Justice may not be done. Again, among our own, one Child must be Crucified, and
another not touched; one made a Saint, another a Devil.

CHAP. XXV.
Verse 7. THis resting of the Land every seventh year, put them in remembrance
of that sin which cast out all out of Paradise, and brought men to labor, and
the Earth to need it. Whereas if we had stood, the Earth should have yielded of
its self Fruits and Profits, as in some sort they might see by the seventh
year. Again, it shadowed out the true Sabbath and rest in Heaven, where shall
be no labor, and yet no lack, but all comforts and joys imaginable.

Verse 9. Upon which blowing it had the Name of Iubilee, (Iubilaeus a Iobel
quod significat buccinam.) This year was an excellent figure of that true
Iubilee and freedom which was conferred upon us by Christ. For this Jewish
Jubilee was proclaimed by Trumpet; so is the Christian freedom by the Trumpet
of Preaching the Gospel. In that Jubilee no debts were demanded, and such
things as grew of themselves were common; so in the Christian Jubilee is
freedom proclaimed by Christ, Satan has no power to demand what by sin we ow
him, either Soul or Body, and all the graces of God which grow of themselves,
i. e. are freely bestowed upon us, are common in Christ to all, there being
with him no respect of persons, but all accepted that fear him, and work
righteousness. Of this freedom speaks, Isai. 61. 1. Thirdly, in that Jubilee of
the Jews there was a returning to their Lands which were alienated from them;
so by this Christian Jubilee we return to our old Paradise again from whence we
were cast out by sin, even that Paradise of Heaven, from which we shall never
be removed any more.

Verse 21. In this verse the Lord meets with an objection of some men that
might happily say, what shall we eat the seventh year; and answers, I will send
my blessing upon you in the sixth year, and it shall bring forth fruit for three
years. Let this verse then strengthen your Faith against all objections of
Flesh and Blood made from natural reasons. For if God be able, even then when
the earth is weakest, having been worn out with continual tillage five years
together, to make the sixth year bring forth a triple blessing; what
unseasonable weather? what barrenness of Land? what any thing shall make a man
despair of Gods providence for things needful? Again, can God be thus strong
when the Land is weak? why then cannot he be, or why will he not be strong in
my weakness, in your weakness, and in every man's weakness, that trusts and
leans upon him. For when we are weakest, then is he strongest, and his power is
best seen in our weakness. Away then fear and diffidence, I will trust in him,
drawing an Argument with David from my weakness to move him to strengthen me,
Heal me O Lord, for I am weak, Psalm 6. 2. My weakness shall drive me to thee,
not from thee, and I will tarry thy good leisure; Lord strengthen me, Lord
comfort me in all Temptations and afflictions.

Verse 43. Let us take notice from this custom of the Jews concerning
Servants, that although Moses his Law in these particulars has his end for
form, yet the equity still binds in these things, and the estate of servants
under the Gospel brought and bought out of spiritual Egypt and bondage of sin
by Christ, may not be worse than it was under the Law, when you see they might
not be cruelly ruled and dealt with. To this end the Apostles Exhortation
tends, Ephesians. 6. 9.

CHAP. XXVI.
Verse 5. CAlamities that last long are light, and if they be heavy, they are
short; both ways there is some intimation of some ease. But God suffers not
this impenitent sinner to enjoy that ease, God will lay enough upon his Body to
kill another in a week, and yet he shall pant many years under it. As the way
of his Blessing is here, Your vintage shall reach to your threshing, and your
threshing to your sowing; so in an Impenitent sinner his Fever shall reach to a
Frenzy, and his Frenzy to a Consumption, his Consumption to a Penury, and his
Penury to a wearing and tyring out of all that are about him, and all the sins
of his Youth shall meet in the anguish of his body.

Verse 12. Behold, what need we care whether we go while we carry the God of
Heaven with us? he is with us as our Companion, as our Guide, as our Guest. No
impotency of Person, no cross of Estate, no distance of Place, no opposition of
Men, no gates of Hell can separate him from us: he has said it, I will not
leave nor forsake thee; shall we think he cannot fare ill that has money in his
purse; and shall we think he can miscarry that has God in his heart. How shall
not all comfort, all happiness accompany that God, whose presence is the cause
of all blessedness. He shall counsel us in our Doubts, direct us in our
Resolutions, dispose of us in our Estates, prosper us in our Lives, and in our
Deaths Crown us.

Verse 16. God does not begin with a Morte moriendum, some body must dye, and
therefore I will make some body to kill, but God came with a Morte morieris,
yet thou art alive, and may live, but if thou will rebel thou must dye. So
here God did not call up Fevers, and Pestilence, and Consumptions, and Fire,
and Famine, and War, and then make Man that he might throw him into their
mouths; but when man threw down himself, God let him fall into their mouths.
Had I never sinned in wantonness, I should never have had Consumption; nor
Fever, if I had not sinned in riot; nor Death if I had not transgressed against
the Lord of Life.

Verse 44. Some are of an opinion that these words were fulfilled in the
Captivity and Deliverance out of Babylon. But the Jews persuade themselves that
this promise of regard, when they should be in the Land of their Enemies, is
not yet accomplished. But whether so or not, we may very well apply this
promise to a true penitent sinner, who shall ever be respected upon his
Conversion; albeit he neglected the time of Grace offered. Yet this is no
imboldning to presume, but a comfort when Repentance is true.

Verse 45. The ways of Gods delivering penitent sinners are diverse, and to be
observed that we err not. For some upon their sorrow God not only receives to
favor and mercy, but also delivers them out of their present affliction. So
did he Manasses the King, 2 Chronicles. 33. whose sin upon his Repentance he not
only forgave, but released him out of captivity, and brought him into his
Kingdom again. Others he receives into favor, and forgiveth their sin, but
yet suffers to fall by their outward affliction. So did he to the penitent
Thief upon the Cross, he received him into Paradise, but saved him not from the
Temporal Death. The due remembrance of this is a great comfort against the loss
of Friends in Wars, and Plagues, and the like calamities, when others escape
and do well. Let us therefore cleave fast unto God, believe his Mercy, fear his
Justice. So whatsoever happens unto us shall happen for our good one way or
other.

CHAP. XXVII.
Verse 8. IT is in thy power to vow or not to vow; but having vowed a thing
lawful and possible, it is not in thy power (though never so poor) to dispense
with thy Vow: Indulged thou may be, but not Exempted. If thou have vowed
rashly, that rashness must be repented of; but the vow, if lawful, must be
performed without delay or diminution to the utmost of our power. It Is true, we
are no where in Scripture expressly commanded to Vow, but having vowed, we are
expressly commanded to keep that Vow. That of David, Vow, and perform to the
Lord, is not a pure precept says one, but like that other, Be angry and sin
not, where Anger is not commanded, but limited: so neither are we simply
commanded to Vow, but having voluntarily vowed, we may not defer to pay it to
our power, be we never so poor; Delays are taken for Denials, Excuses for
Refusals. And therefore every upright conscientious votary, as he looks that
Gods promises should be made good to him, so he is careful to make good what he
has Vowed to God: and this because Gods Covenant is of Mercy, ours of
Obedience; and if we expect that God should be All-sufficient to us, we must be
altogether faithful to him.

Verse 28. From this and other Texts, which show what large provision was made
for Gods Priests under the Law, we may note; that if such a plentiful
maintenance were allowed by God to his Ministers of the First Table, then
certainly as great a portion at the least does belong to the Ministers of the
Second Table. For it is certain, that as we under the Gospel are more bound
unto the Lord in all Duties of Thankfulness since the Messiah exhibited, than
they under the Law to whom he was only promised; and as in the same respect the
Ministry of the Gospel far excels the Priesthood of the Law: so the portion
which is due from us to God, and from him to his Ministers, ought to be
answerable, at least little inferior.

Verse 33. There can no one instance be given out of the Word of God, either
that Gods people paid, or that God accepted for the Tenth, some other thing,
money, or money worth, less in value than the Tenth; and when our Savior,
speaking of the Pharisees which Tith'd their Mint, Annis, Cummin, said, This
they ought not to have left undone; he signifies not obscurely that the manner
of Tithing in Kind, and without Diminution even for those smaller things much
more, for the greater was in use until his time, and was a manner of Tithing
just and lawful. And how precise God was in this point, we may not obscurely
gather by this, that he prohibited any man so much as to change the Tith, a
good for a bad, or a bad for a good, without a penal augmentation of it.

A PRACTICAL COMMENTARY UPON THE FOURTH BOOK OF MOSES CALLED NUMBERS.
CHAP. I.
Verse 1. SInai was a place where were many Bushes and Briars; here they
received the Law both Moral and Ceremonial; which like Briars and Brambles
pricked and pierced the Consciences of Evil doers, and by this means drove them
to Christ, who was clouded and shadowed forth under the Ceremonies of that Law;
for the Ceremonial Law was Christ under a Type. And this Law was given four
hundred and thirty years after the Promise made to Abraham, not to disanull the
Promise, but to advance it, Gal. 3. 17. and that guilt being discovered, and
every mouth stopped, we might pass from Mount Sinai to Mount Syon, from the Law
to the Gospel, and might acknowledge the riches of Free Grace and Mercy in Jesus
Christ.

Verse 5. As this Book of Moses bears the Title of Numbers; so a great part
of it is spent in numbering of the People; to assure us that God has numbered
those that are his, he keeps the tail of them, and none are hidden from him,
none escape his knowledge and sight. From whence we learn, that the Lord
knows perfectly who they are that are his, both what their numbers, and what
their Names are. Are we then in trouble and persecution? are we accounted silly
Men, obscure, base, and unregarded? do we live as contemptible persons to the
men of this World; let not this trouble or grieve us, dismay, or discomfort us;
but rather let us lift up our heads, assuring our selves that although men turn
themselves from us, yet God looks upon us, and though they seek to root out
our Names from the Earth, yet he will know us, and call us by our Names.

Verse 19. It is required of all Gods Servants to perform obedience to Gods
commands; when ever God speaks unto us, we must hear and obey his voice. Noah
received a Commandment from God to build the Ark; many hindrances might have
staid him, and sundry inconveniences might have stopped him, and infinite dangers
might have terrified him from that enterprise; as the greatness of the Ark, the
labor of the building, the Taunts of the Wicked, and an hundred of such like
troubles might stand in his way, yet Noah over-looked them all. By Faith Noah
being wrrn'd of God, moved with reverence prepared the Ark, Heb. 11. 7. which
shows that whenever God has a mouth to open, and a Tongue to speak, we must
have an Ear to hear, and a Heart to obey whatsoever is enjoined us.

Verse 46. This may seem very strange unto us, that so small an handful of
seventy Souls should multiply so greatly in the space of 216 years: but herein
we are to consider, the truth of God joined with his power, who because he is
true of his Word, and able of his power, performed that to his people which he
promised long before to their Fathers. God had promised to Jacob, that he would
make him a great Nation, Genesis 46. and here it was performed. All the promises
of God are Yea and Amen, and shall in our time be accomplished to his Children.

CHAP. II.
Verse 1. Who can better order an Army than the Lord of Hosts, and who more
fit to lead his people into the Land of Canaan, than he that brought them out
of the house of bondage? and he alone it is that does here marshal the Camp of
Israel, order the Militia of his People, and make them as an Army terrible with
banners. Terrible and full of Majesty, either to draw Hearts, or to daunt them.
God is both the Van and Rear in the Churches Army, The Lord will go before you,
and the God of Israel will be your reward. So that although Satan muster up all
his Forces, Tyrants, Heretics, and the like, that invade the Church, and
assault her on all sides, yet they shall find her invincible. Many a time have
they afflicted me from my youth, may Israel say, but they have not prevailed
against me, Psalm 129. the Church is invincible, and only the Church: Athens
took upon her of old to be so, and Venice of late boasts the like; but time
has confuted the one, and may soon do the other; when the Church shall stand
firm, because founded on a Rock.

Verse 3. God providing here for the good of his People, appoints Officers
and Magistrates over them, and leaves them not to themselves, which would have
been the occasion of much contention. Every Tribe had his certain Captain and
Leader designed by God who is the God of order: and therefore gives to his
People Rulers to fight their Battles, and to guide them in order and Godliness.
Faithful Magistrates are needful for Church and Commonwealth, who are not only
a portion among Believers, but the chief parts and stay of them in well-doing,
both in Peace and War.

Verse 10. Reuben was the Eldest Son of Jacob, and to him as the Firstborn the
Birthright did belong; and yet we see verse 3. that Judah was placed before
him; thus does God sometimes show himself a just Judge in punishing sin, and
yet withal, a merciful Father to Reuben in his Posterity: for whereas he had
deserved to be raced out of the number of Gods people, because of his Incest:
yet God allowed Reuben here the second place among the Tribes: So that
all-be-it he was punished justly, he was punished gently. Thus God deals
evermore: he will punish sin, but he will do it in mercy, not in severity;
gently, not rigorously; for Correction and not seeking the ruin of his
Children.

CHAP. III.
Verse 1. THere is a Natural Generation, and there is a Moral or spiritual
Generation, my Father begets me the first way, and my God or my Teacher the
second way. Thus here Moses did Regenerate what Aaron had begot, he was a
Father by his directions and instruction, when Aaron was only by Nature. The
word delivered by Gods Minister, for our spiritual Birth and Education is not a
dead letter, an empty sound as some would have it: for together with the Word
there goes forth a Regenerating power, the exhortations thereof are operative
means of Sanctification; as when God said, Let there be light, or Christ said,
Lazarus come forth. The Spirit makes the seed of the Word profitable and
generative. And hence Ministers are called Fathers; as Moses here was Father to
Aarons Children, who are therefore called his Generation.

Verse 4. When God had formerly sent his fire from above, and commanded the
continuance of that fire; for Nadab and Abihu to fetch profane Coals to Gods
Altar, could savor of no less than presumption and Sacrilege: when we bring
zeal without knowledge, mis-conceits of Faith, carnal Affections, the devices of
our will worship, superstitious devotions unto Gods service, we bring common
fire to his Altar; these Flames were never of his kindling: he hates both
Altar, Fire, Priest, and Sacrifice. And now behold ^he same Fire that consumed
the Sacrifices before, consumes the Sacrificers. It was the sign of Gods
acceptance in consuming the Beast; but whiles it destroyed Men the fearful
sign of his displeasure. By the same means God can bewray both love and hatred.
And here one might have thought, that being but young Men, and not yet warm in
their Function, both Age and Inexperience might have excused them: but no
pretenses can bear off a sin with God. That no man may hope the plea either of
Birth, or Youth, or of the first Commission of Evil, may challenge pardon; I
see here young Men, Sons of the Ruler of Israel, for the first offense struck
dead.

Verse 13. The Firstborn are said to be Gods by several Rights. First, by
right of Redemption: he that is saved is not his own, but his that saved him;
He has saved us from our enemies, that we might serve him, Luke 1. 74. Christ
has therefore broke the Devils yoke from off our Necks, that we might take
upon us his yoke that is easy, and his burden that is light; serve we must
still, but after another manner, as the Israelites did when freed from the
Egyptian bondage, Yet thou shall keep this service, says Moses, Exodus 12. 25.
Secondly, the firstborn are Gods by right of dilection, as usually best
beloved, that together with our Children he might draw to himself the best of
our affections. Thirdly, by right of Sanctification, they were saparated they
were sanctified to the Lord to wait on his Altar; to show that singular things
are expected of all that draw nigh unto God in any duty, but especially in the
office of the Ministry. Those that stand in the presence of Princes, must be
exact in their carriage. God appointed both the weights and measures of the
Sanctuary to be twice as large as those of the Commonwealth; which implies
that he expects much more from those that serve him there, than he does from
others.

CHAP. IV.
Verse 9. A Type of Christ who is light Essential, and gives light to every
man that comes into the world, to every man the light of Reason; to his own a
supernatural light to know Heavenly things; an affecting transforming Light,
which shall change us into the same Image with himself from glory to glory; as
the Pearl by the often beating of the Sunbeams upon it becomes Radiant; which
will make us walk as the children of Light, like so many Crystal glasses, with
a light in the midst of each, which appears throw every part of them; and in
respect of this light, every Created understanding in its highest abilities is
at the most (but as Aeschilus says of Fire stolen by Prometheus,) a beam of
that Light Essential.

Verse 19. Aaron and his Sons must appoint the Cohathites their several
Offices, and show them what part every particular person must bear; that the
wrath of God do not break in among them: and this consideration of the wrath of
God ready to come upon offenders, ought to increase their care to do the duty
that God requires. Holy things must be handled Reverently, Religiously.
Whatever matters of God we meddle withal, whether it be Hearing of his Word,
or Receiving of the Sacrament, or Calling on his Name, we are to be careful to
do them with all possible Care and Reverence. Hence it is that Christ wills
us to be careful; not only what we hear, Mark 4. but also how we hear, Luke 8.
18. We must regard not only the matter that is delivered, but the manner how it
is received; for as much as we may hear the Word, and yet sin in our hearing.
Whenever therefore we have to do in any part of Gods Worship, let us come in
Humility and Lowliness, let us approach near him with a broken Heart, with a
Con^rite Heart, and with an Humble Soul, falling down flat before his
footstool, and Worshipping toward his Holy Temple.

Verse 22. Moses in this and the following Verses repeateth sundry points set
down in the former Chapter; to teach us that it is lawful for Ministers to make
repetition of things formerly taught, and to deliver the same points and parts
of Religion again and again; not thereby to ease themselves, or maintain
Idleness, but for the benefit of the Church: for first Men are commonly dull in
Hearing, weak in Remembering, slow in practicing; and therefore have need that
the same things should be often pressed upon them. Secondly, Repetition works
a deeper Impression in us, and serves to beat it into the Conscience as well
as the Understanding.

CHAP. V.
Verse 6. AS every Sin is a violation of a Law, so every violation of a Law
reflects upon the Lawmakers. It is the same offense to Coin a penny and a
Piece; the same to counterfeit the Seal of a Subpaena, as of a Pardon. The
second Table was writ by the Hand of God as well as the first; and the Majesty
of God as he is a Lawgiver is wounded in an Adultery, and a Theft, as well as
in an Idolatry, or a Blasphemy. It is not enough to consider the deformity and
the foulness of an Action so, as that an honest Man would not have done it; but
so as it violates a Law of God, and his Majesty in that Law: The shame of Men
is one bridle that is cast upon us. It is a moral obduration, and in the
Suburbs next door to a spiritual obduration to be voice-proof, censure-proof,
not to be afraid nor ashamed what the World says. He that relies upon his
Plaudo Domi, though the World hiss; I give my self a Plaudite at home, I have
him at my Table, and her in my bed, whom I would have, and I care not for
Rumor; he that rests in such a Plaudite, prepares for a Trajedy, a Trajedy in
the Amphitheater, the double Theater, this World, and the next too. Even the
shame of the World should be one bridle; but the strongest is the other to
consider that every such sin is a violation of the Majesty of God.

Verse 8. What is given to the Priest is given to the Lord, for he is the Lords
receiver. Tithes then are due to the Ministers of Christ that lives, because
due to Christ: and thus Abraham paid Tithes to Melchisedec as a Priest and Type
of Christ; and Melchisedec Tith'd Abraham by the same Divine Right whereby he
blessed him: the Minister therefore of Christ blessing the People according to
his Office, may also receive Tithes of them; and indeed who should receive them
for Christ, but those that are in Christ's stead. But now a days neither Christ
can receive his due, nor the Minister his; too many both deny what is due to
Christ as God, and to the Priest as a man, not allowing him so much as is fit
for his natural sustenance. It was long since (and may still be so) a just
Complaint, that many dealt by their Ministers as Carriers do by their Horses,
they laid heavy burdens upon them, and then hung Bells about their necks: hard
work, and good words they shall have, but easy Commons, and slight wages: as
if they were of the Camelions kind, and could live by the Air.

Verse 15. The Husband here is to bring his suspected Wife to the place and
means of her Trial. If every Woman suspected might be put away, many Men
growing weary of their Wives, would readily entertain any the least flying
report, and thereupon take occasion to be Divorced from them. Upon this it is
Gods Ordinance here, that no innocent person should be oppressed in Judgment,
and that none at the private pleasure of any should be condemned before their
Trial. Every man must hold up his hand at the Bar before he be pronounced
guilty. No person is to be condemned upon suspicion only, or presumption, or
bare surmize: for were it enough to be accused, innocence it self could not
escape. So that it is not sufficient to Condemn a man, or to accuse him for
guilty, to be suspected. Suspicion is an another man's heart, or Head, and
therefore we cannot always avoid Suspicion, except we had the Government of
their hearts and heads. We must be careful to avoid the fault, though we cannot
the shame, take heed of the sin, though we cannot prevent the suspicion.

CHAP. VI.
Verse 3. THese Nazarites were diligently to employ their time about the study
of the Law, and therefore as diligently to keep themselves from Wine, and
strong Drink, which would make them forget the Law. Drunkenness causes
forgetfulness (hence the Ancients feigned Bacchus to be the Son of
Forgetfulness) and stands in full opposition to Reason or Religion: when the
Wine is in the wit is out. Seneca says, That for a man to think to be Drunk,
and yet to keep his right Reason, is to think to drink rank poison, and yet not
to dye by it. And upon the same ground it was with this here in the Text, that
the Disciples of Christ, those Nazarites of the Gospel were enjoined by our
Savior, Luke 21. to take heed that they were not overcharged with Surfeiting
and Drunkenness. Even the Disciples themselves had in them the common poison of
Nature, and so were obnoxious even to the most reproachful evils. Let the best
Ministers of the Gospel therefore, the severest Nazarites have a care of this
Evil. A full belly makes a foul heart, and what sin may it not produce in the
best unless God prevent: for the rankest Weeds grow out of the fattest Soil.

Verse 4. The Nazarite here was not only to abstain from Wine, but also from
the very kernel and husk of the Grape. He that would keep clear from great
transgressions, must make a Conscience of all, and avoid not only the gross
scandalous stains and blemishes of his Christian profession, but the very first
blushes and appearances of evil. As the Spider in the midst of her Web shrinks
at the least noise that shakes her work, and retires presently from the danger;
so should the perfect Convert shrink at the least noise, whispering, and
murmuring of Sin, he should fly the first address and complement of the Devil
in a Temptation, the sight, the roof, the air of Rimmon, and not bow down with
Naaman, though to be leaned upon only.

Verse 20. The Breast and shoulder of the Wave-offering belonged to the Priest,
to teach him to serve the Lord with all their hearts, their dearest affections,
intimated by the Breast, and with all their might and strength typified in the
shoulder: and whereas it is here called the Heave-shoulder, this signified the
heaving of Christ upon the Cross; and the heaving up of our heatts to God for
so great benefits.

Verse 23. A set form of Prayer is lawful to be used, whether publicly in the
Church, or privately in the Family: and this is most strongly inferred from
hence, if we consider the persons to whom this Commandment was given. For this
solemn form was set not for the simple sort, or the most ignorant among the
people, but it was appointed to be pronounced by the Priests, and that too not
in a corner, but in the Tabernacle of the Lord before many witnesses. If any
were able of themselves to conceive a Prayer, certainly they were the Priests
of the Lord, whose lips must preserve knowledge, Mal. 2. 7. and yet are they
both allowed and prescribed to follow a set form in blessing the people. And so
likewise at their marching forward, and at their standing still there were set
forms enjoined, Numb. 10. 35, 36.

CHAP. VII.
Verse 8. THe service of the Gershonites was not so much as the service of the
Sons of Merari; and therefore Moses does here proportion the assistance
answerable to the service; two Wagons, and four Oxen to the Sons of Gershon,
but double the number to the Sons of Merari, because their service was double
to the others, and their carriage as much more. God knows what every one of his
Children is able to bear, and therefore proportions the burden to the Back;
none of his shall be oppressed, though pressed out of measure; afflicted they
may be, and that in an high nature, but never brought to despair: left for a
time, but not forsaken for ever. Joseph may be shot at, Genesis 49. 23. but he
cannot be shot through: His bow did abide in strength, and the arms of his
hands were made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob, verse 24. and
thence his safety. He used his Bow against his Enemies as David did his sling
against Goliath; who slung, as if he had wrapped up God in his sling.

Verse 13. No quantity was here prescribed, because it was a Free Will
offering; only it must be fine, no Bran in it; to show the puriry of Christ's
Sacrifice, and of our services through him, by means of the Oil of his Spirit,
and Incense of his Intercession.

Verse 19. In these words, as before, and in the words following, we see what
is offered, Silver and Gold; they spare nothing, they bring the best they have.
Neither do they bring the best in a sparing manner, but they deal bountifully
and liberally. Which teaches us to serve God with the choicest and chiefest
things we have, and that in a large and liberal manner. We read, Exodus 36. that
the people were so forward for the building and furnishing of the Tabernacles,
that the Workmen complained the People brought too much. How far are we from
this in our days? The people bring more than enough for the work of the Lord.
O that we might come but one degree behind them, that it might be said our
people bring enough. The Israelites thought they never brought enough, we think
we never bring too little; they offered more than they were commanded; we bring
no more than we are compelled and constrained to bring. They offered with a
glad and cheerful heart, we will do no more than the Law urges, or not so
much. They brought of the best, we think the worst good enough for God, and his
Service, and Ministers.

Verse 24. The Spirit of God thinks it not sufficient to set down what was
offered in the general, but takes notice of every man's particular offering; to
teach us first, that we should apply these Examples to our selves, and if we
pass over one of them without regard, yet we should take hold of the next.
Secondly, to assure us that no man shall have that forgotten to the utmost of
his praise, who is any way forward in doing good, because God will honor them
that honor him, 1 Samuel 2. All the good works of Gods children done to the
setting forth of his glory, the advancement of his Worship, or the good of his
Saints, shall be punctually reckoned up and rewarded: and as their deeds are
here registered in the Book of God, so the Doers of them are registered in the
Book of Life.

CHAP. VIII.
Ver. 3. THe Lamps were placed over against the Candlestick, which was over the
Table in the Tabernacle; and typified the Law of God enlightening the Church and
People of God. For the Commandment is a Lamp or Candle, whereof there is no
small use when Men go to Bed, or rise betimes. He that has the Word of Christ
richly dwelling in him, may lay his Hand upon his Heart, and say as one dying
did, Hic sat lucis, here is plenty of light. Under the Law all was in Riddles,
Moses was veiled: and yet that saying was then verified, Et latet, and lucet;
there was light enough to light Men to Christ, the end of the Law.

Verse 10. There was Imposition of Hands upon the Levite under the Law, and why
not then upon the Minister under the Gospel. Certainly the Ceremony is
significant, or else it had not been used by Gods people of the Old Testament,
nor yet by us that are his People of the New. And thus much it may import: when
the Reverend Man lays his Hand on thy Head, remember thou art then manumniz'd
from all secular ties, and sequestered no less from the callings of the People
than their vices; thou art then brought before the Lord, as it is in the Text,
and dedicated wholly to his Service; and certainly the Holy impression of
Episcopal Hands set on from above is such an Elixar, as by contraction, if
there be any disposition of goodness in the baser metal, it will render it of
the property.

Verse 14. The Levites are here said to be Gods after a more peculiar and
special manner than the rest of the People were. For though all the
Congregation is Holy even as the Levites, all the People of God sanctified as
well as his Priests (which was the saying of Corah and his Accomplices, and it
was true,) yet they were not sanctified to the same degree of Holiness with the
Priests; but they sicut populus as Gods people, these Sicut Aaron as his
peculiar servants; they are holy it is true, but these Holiest of Holies. Hence
it was, that when the Law kept ordinations, certain pieces of the Sacrifices
were put into the Priests hands, and now instead of that a Bible into ours; not
only as a Rule to direct, but as a sacred Witness of that profession into which
we are by a Divine hand invested.

Verse 17. All the firstborn of the Children of Israel are mine, says God
here; so they were from the beginning: but here is noted a continuance of this
Ordinance, when it is said, That he sanctified the firstborn to himself, what
time he smote every firstborn in Egypt. Now the firstborn are said to be Gods
by a singular right, by right of Redemption; because he Redeemed them, he saved
them, he delivered them from the house of bondage; and he that is saved is not
his own, but his that saved him. And so the firstborn here were Types first of
Christ, who was the firstborn among many brethren, Romans 8. 29. To whom
therefore we must give the honor of his first Birthright; all our sheaves
must veil and bow to his sheaf. Secondly, of Christians, Those firstborn whose
Names are written in Heaven, Heb. 12. 23. who are dear to God, as his
firstborn.

CHAP. IX.
Verse 3. THe Paschal Lamb was taken up the Tenth day, but not Sacrificed until
the fourteenth; that they might so kill the Passover, as first to sanctify
themselves, and prepare their Brethren. For which cause also it was a received
Tradition among the Jews, that during those four days the Lamb was tied to
their Bed-posts, to put them in mind of what they were to do; and then in the
Evening they eat it, which signified that Christ came and was offered up in the
Evening of the World, in the last days says the Apostle, God sent his Son,
Heb. 1. 2. In the last hour, 1 Ioh. 5. when all lay buried in darkness, in the
Even-tide of our sin and death.

Verse 6. It appears that these good men, that were shut out from this part of
Gods service by reason they were defiled by touching a dead body, were much
grieved and troubled in mind that they were barred from the Passover; and
therefore make earnest complaint to Moses for the separation, desiring to be
eased and relieved by him. From whence we are taught, that it is a great cause
of sorrow and grief to Gods dear Children, when they are by any just occasion,
or the hand of God upon them, withheld and kept back from the parts and
exercises of his Worship. This was the ground of David's complaint in the
Psalms, where he makes the condition of the Sparrow and Swallow to be better
than his, which might come nearer to the Altar of God than he. But on the other
side, Carnal and Worldly men lament bitterly for earthly losses and troubles,
but never trouble themselves for the loss of spiritual things. Nay they are
vexed and tormented as if they were upon the rack, that they are constrained to
come so often to the Word, to the Sacrament, to the House of Prayer: they cry
with them in Amos, When will the Sabbath be done? Amos 8. 5. and with those
other, When shall we depart out of Syon? it is time we be gone.

Verse 11. The Israelite here were to eat the Passover with unleavened Bread,
with soundness in point of Faith, and sincerity in point of practice, to watch
carefully against corruption in Life and Doctrine: which should teach us to be
punctual in our preparation to, and participation of the Christian Passover, to
abstain and purge our selves from the leaven of malice and wickedness, for a
little leaven leaveneth the whole lump: one spoonful of Vinegar will soon tart
a great deal of sweet Milk, but a great deal of Milk will not so soon sweeten
one spoonful of Vinegar. The Israelites likewise were to eat the Passover here
with bitter herbs: to teach, that looking upon Christ, whom they have pierced,
men should be in bitterness, and feel what an evil and bitter thing sin is;
being ready to suffer hardship with Christ, though he should feed us to the
full with bitter herbs, and make us drunk with Wormwood; so that at last we be
rewarded with the Milk and Honey of an Eternal Canaan.

Verse 17. This Cloud was their guide and conduct in all their ways; when it
moved they moved, and when it stood still they rested: which should teach thee
in all thy ways to acknowledge and look up to God, and he shall direct thy
paths. As God carefully chose out the Israelites way in the Wilderness, not the
shortest, but yet the safest for them; so will God do for all those that make
him their guide. The Athenians had a conceit that their Goddess Minerva turned
all their evil Counsels into good unto them; and the Romans thought that their
Visibilia (another Heathenish Deity) set them again in the right way when at
any time they were out. All this, and more than this is undoubtedly done by the
true God, for all that commit their ways unto him for direction and success.
Lo this is our God says the Psalmist, for ever and ever, he will be our guide
even unto death, Ps. 48. 14.

CHAP. X.
Verse 2. SEeing these silver Trumpets served for the Camp, and the
Congregation, to assemble and remove, and that the power of making them is
committed to Moses, who has the sole prerogative to call and dissolve
Assemblies about public affairs; we learn that it belongs to Kings and
Princes, as their proper Right to gather together, and to dismiss such as are
gathered together. Every one has not authority to draw multitudes together: we
must have lawful and orderly Assemblies. In Egypt without Pharaoh no man might
lift up his hand or foot, Genesis 41. Secondly, it reproves those that being
summoned by the sound of these Trumpets, i. e. called together by a lawful
Magistrate, refuse to come; this was the sin of Corah and his Accomplices. And we
know their fearful punishment for that sin. In the natural body the beginning
of all motion is from the Head, and so it ought to be in the Body Politic.
Thirdly, This reproves those that assemble before they are called; Corah and
his Confederates would not assemble when they were called; these assemble
before they be called; the other were too slow and dull, these are too quick
and nimble-headed. So then all must keep their places and standings; they must
come when they are called; and they must be called before they come.

Verse 10. As the Priests here were to sound their silver Trumpets at their
solemn Feasts, for a monument of spiritual gladness before the Lord; so must
Ministers of the Gospel publish the glad-tidings of the Gospel, Speak to the
heart of Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished, her sin
is pardoned, Isai. 40. 2. Make the people hear the joyful sound, that they may
walk in the sense of Gods presence, and in the light of his countenance, which
is joy of the Holy Ghost; and upon this account it was, that this and other
Musical Instruments used in Gods service (as part of the Jewish Pedagogy) were
types of that spiritual joy which we Christians should express in holy duties,
no less than if we heard the most exquisite Music. There should be continual
Music (habitual joy) in Gods Children, who are the Temple of the Holy Ghost:
Therefore it was that the Royal Prophet sings, Blessed is the people that know
the joyful sound, Psalm 80 15. that can discern and feel the comfortable sound
of Gods Word, the free use of his Ordinances; serving God with cheerfulness,
and giving him thanks with exaltation of heart, and rapture of Spirit.

Verse 31. Why does Moses so earnestly desire this Hobab to be their guide in
the way, was not the All-seeing Eye of God sufficient, had not he promised to
conduct them, and had they not the pillar of Cloud to go before them? most
true: yet humane helps, when they may be had, and God offers them to our hand,
may not be neglected. The using of lawful means does not oppose or afront the
providence of God; who, it is true, can work without means, but yet we must
attend unto his will, and not stand upon his naked power without his will.

Verse 35. It is a great encouragement to know the forms that the Saints
prevailed with God of old, that God accepted such Prayers at their hands: he
that accepted them then, if we send them by the same Spirit, will accept them
now. And therefore it is, that we have mention upon Record of the Prayers of
Abraham; of Jacob, of Moses here and in other places, of David, of Hezekiah,
and diverse others. To what end and purpose? but that we might thereby learn to
fit our selves with words, to attain a habit of Prayer by studying these forms.
For which reason also it was, that in the Old Testament for all duties of piety
and Religion, there were forms set. For the blessing of the People there was a
form set, Numb. 6. In time of Repentance and Humiliation the Prophet sets them
a form, Joel 2. and so here when the Ark removed, there was a form for that
Sacrifice; Arise, O Lord, and let thine Enemies be scattered; and when the Ark
stood still, Return O Lord to the many thousands of Israel.

CHAP. XI.
Verse 4. THe thirst of Israel is well quenched, and now they complain as fast
for hunger: the other mutiny for Water was of some few Malcontents; this was
of the whole Troop. Not that none were free, Caleb, Joshua, Moses, Aaron,
Miriam, were not yet tainted. Usually God measures the state of any Church or
Country by the most; the greatest part carries both the Name and Censure. Sins
are so much greater as they are universal: so far is evil from being
extenuated by the multitude of the guilty, that nothing can more aggravate it.
With men commonness may plead for favor, with God it pleads for Judgment.
Many hands draw the Cable with more violence than few. The leprosy of the
whole Body is more loathsome than that of the part.

Verse 5. Contentation is a rare Blessing, because it arises either from a
fruition of all Comforts, or a not desiring of some which we have not. Now we
are never so bare as not to have some benefits; never so full as not to want
something. God has much ado with us, either we lack Health, or Quietness, or
Children, or Wealth, or Company, or our selves in all these. We remember when
we sat by the fleshpots of Egypt, and did eat freely of their Cucumbers, and
Melons, and Leeks, and Onyons. Every Mind remembers and affects that which is
like its self. Carnal minds are for the fleshpots of Egypt, though bought with
servitude; spiritual are for the presence of God, though Redeemed with Famine;
and would rather dye in Gods presence, than live without him in the sight of
delicate and full dishes.

Verse 8. The same hand that rained Manna into the Israelites Tents, could have
Rained it into their Mouths or Laps; God loves we should take pains for our
spiritual food. Little would it have availed them that the Manna lay about
their Tents, if they had not gone forth and gathered it, beaten and baked it.
Let Salvation be never so plentiful, if we bring it not home, and make it ours
by Faith, we are no whit the better. If the work done, and means used had been
enough to give life, no Israelite had dyed: their Bellies were full of that
Bread whereof one Crum gives life, yet they dyed many of them in displeasure.
As in Natural, so in Spiritual things, we may not trust to means: the Carkals
of the Sacrament cannot give life, but the Soul of it, which is the thing
represented.

Verse 9. The meat of these Israelites was strange, but nothing so strange as
their Bread; from the first day that their Manna fell till their settling in
Canaan, God wrought a perpetual miracle in this food, a miracle in the place;
other bread rises up from below, this fell down from above, neither did it ever
Rain Bread till now; yet so did this Heavenly shower fall, that it is confined
to the Camp of Israel: a miracle in the quantity, that every morning should
fall enough to fill so many hundred thousand maws, and mouths. A miracle in the
Composition, that it is sweet like Hony-Cakes, round like Corianders,
transparent as dew. A miracle in the quality, that it melted by one heat, by
another hardened. A miracle in the difference of the fall, that (as if it knew
times, and would teach them as well as feed them) it fell double in the Evening
of the Sabbath, and on the Sabbath fell not. A miracle in the continnance and
ceasing; that this shower of Bread followed their Camp in all their removals,
till they came to taste of the bread of Canaan, and then withdrew it self; as if
it had said, ye need no miracles now you have means.

Verse 18. God tells the Jews here that they had wept in his ears; God had
heard them weep, but for what, and how? they wept for Flesh: there was a
Tincture, a deep die of murmuring in their Tears. Christ goes as far in the
passion, in his agony, and he comes to a passionate deprecation in his tristis
anima, and in this, Si possibile, and his Transeat calix. But as all these
Passions were sanctified in the root, from which no bitter Leaf, nor crooked
Twigg could spring; so they were instantly washed with his veruntamen, a
present and a full submitting of all to Gods pleasure, yet not my will O
Father, but thine be done.

Verse 22. When our own provision fails, then not to distrust the provision of
God, is a noble trial of Faith. Shall our flocks and herds be slain, cries even
Moses. Whereas he should have said, God who stopped the mouth of the Sea that
it should not devour us, can as easily stop the mouth of our stomach: he that
commanded the Sea to stand still and guard us, can as easily command the Earth
to nourish us; he that made the Rod a Serpent, can as easily make these stones
Bread. Why do we not wait on him whom we have found so powerful? Now they set
the Mercy and Love of God upon a wrong Last, while they measure it only by
their present sense. While we see our daily Bread on our Cubbord, we believe,
let God withdraw his hand, no fight, no trust.

CHAP. XII.
Verse 1. What is this I see? is not this Aaron that was Brother in Nature,
and by Office joint Commissioner with Moses! and is not this Miriam the Elder
Sister to Moses, which laid her Brother in the Reeds, and fetched his Mother to
be his Nurse? both Prophets of God, both the Flesh and Blood of Moses. And does
Aaron repine at the honor of him who gave himself that honor, and saved his
life, when he had sinned so grossly in making the Calf. Does this Miriam repine
at the prosperity of him whose life she saved? But now Envy had so blinded
their Eyes, that they could neither see this privilege of Nature, nor yet the
honor of Gods choice. Miriam and Aaron are in mutiny against Moses. Who so
holy as sins not? What sin though never so unnatural, that even the very best
can avoid without God? Again, who can look for love and prosperity at once,
when holy and meek Moses finds enmity in his own flesh and blood? rather than
we shall want, a man's Enemies shall be those of his own house. Authority cannot
fail of opposition, if it be never so mildly swayed; that common makebate the
Devil will rather raise it out of our own bosom. To do well, and hear ill, is
Princely.

Verse 2. Seditions do not ever look the same way they move; Wise men can
easily distinguish betwixt the visor of actions, and the face. The Wife of
Moses is mentioned, his superiority is shot at. Pride is likely the ground of
all sedition. Which of their Faces shined like Moses? which of them received
the Law twice in two several Tables from Gods own hand? and yet they dare say,
Has God spoken only by Moses? they do not deny Moses his Honor, but they
challenge a part with him. And yet how unfit they were: one a Woman whom her
Sex debarred from Rule; the other a Priest, whom his Office sequestered from
Earthly Government. Self-love makes men unreasonable, and teaches them to turn
the glass to see themselves greater, others lesser than they are. It is an hard
thing for a man willingly and gladly to see his equals lifted over his head in
worth and opinion. Nothing will more try a man's grace, then questions of
Emulation. That man has true light, which can be content to be a Candle before
the Sun of others.

Verse 3. Carry a meek spirit along with you in all your actions. When Christ
rode as King to Jerusalem, he rode meek, meek: those that would accompany
Christ to his Kingdom, must be of the same spirit their King is of* Moses never
failed but once, and it was then when he lost this meek spirit, Numb. 20. 10.
Expounded Psalm. 106. 32. They angered him at the waters of strife; so that it
went ill with Moses for their sakes: for what reason, see verse 23. Because
they provoked his Spirit, so that he spoke unadvisedly with his lips. God is
oft-times in the small and still voice, when neither in the whirlwind, nor the
Earthquake, nor the fire, 1 King. 19. 11, 12.

Verse 4. God might have spoken so loud that Heaven and Earth should have heard
it, so as they should not have needed to come forth for audience: but now he
calls them out to the Bar, that they may be seen to hear. It did not content
him to chide them within doors; the shame of their fault had been less in a
private rebuke, but the scandal of their repining was public. Where the sin is
not afraid of the light, God loves not the reproof should be smoothered.

Verse 10. It was time to look for a Judgment when God departed: so soon as he
is gone from the Eyes of Miriam, the Leprosy appears in her face; her foul
Tongue is punished with a foul Face. Since she would acknowledge no difference
betwixt her self, and her Brother Moses; every Israelite now sees his face
glorious, hers leaprous. Deformity is a fit cure of pride. Because the venom
of her Tongue would have eaten into the Reputation of her Brother, therefore a
poisonous Infection eats into her flesh. Now has Moses and Miriam need to wear
a vail; the one to hide his glory, the other her deformity.

Verse 15. The Israelites are stayed seven days for the punishment of Miriam;
the sins of the Governors are a just stop to the people; all of them smart in
one, all of them must stay the leisure of Miriams recovery. Whosoever seeks the
Land of Promise, shall find many lets: Amalek, Og, and the King of Canaan met
with Israel: these resisted, but hindered not their passages, their sins only
stay them from removing. Afflictions are not crosses to us in the way to Heaven
in comparison of our sins.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse 2. THe basest sort of men are commonly held fit enough for
Intelligencers; but Moses by the Commandment of the Lord, chooses forth the
best of Israel, such as were like to be most judicious in their enquiry, and
most credible in their Report. Those that ruled Israel at home, could best
descry for them abroad; what should direct the body but the Head? Men can judge
but by appearance. It is for him only that sees the event, ere he appoint the
means, not to be deceived. It had been better for Israel to have sent the Offal
of the multitude. By how much less the credit of their persons is, by so much
less is the danger of seducement. The error of the mighty is armed with
Authority, and in a sort commands assent; whether in good or Evil, Greatness
has ever a train to follow it at the heels.

Verse 6. Amongst those twelve Messengers which our second Moses sent through
the Land of Promise, there was but one Judas; but amongst those twelve which
the former Moses addressed thorough the same Land, there is but one Caleb: and
yet those were chosen out of the meanest, these out of the Heads of Israel. As
there is no society free from some corruption; so it is hard if in a community
of men there be not some faithfulness.

Verse 27. Forty days they spent in this search, and this cowardly belief in
the search shall cost them forty years delay of the fruition; who can abide to
see the Rulers of Israel so basely timorous. They commend the Land, the Fruit
commends its self, and yet they plead difficulty; their shoulders are laden
with the Grapes, and yet their hearts are overlaid with unbelief. It is an
unworthy thing to plead hardness of atchieving, where the benefit will more
than requite the endeavor. Our Land of Promise is above; we know the Fruit
thereof is sweet and glorious, the passage difficult. The giantly Sons of Anak,
the powers of Darkness stand in our way. If we sit down and complain, we shall
once know that without shall be the fearful, Rev. 21. 8.

Verse 30. Joshua was silent, and wisely spared his Tongue for a further
advantage: only Caleb spoke. I do not hear him say, who am I to strive with the
multitude? what can Joshua and I do against ten Rulers? it is better to sit
still, than to rise and fall: but he resolves to swim against this stream, and
will either draw Friends to the truth, or Enemies upon himself. True Christian
fortitude teaches us not to regard the number or quality of the Opponents, but
the Equity of the Cause: and cares not to stand alone and challenge all comers:
and if it could be opposed by as many worlds as men, it may be overborn, but
it cannot be daunted. Whereas popularity carries weak minds, and teaches them
the safety of Erring with a multitude. Caleb saw the giantly Anakims, and the
walled Cities as well as the rest, and yet he says, Let us go up and possess
it: as if it were no more but to go and see, and Conquer. Faith is courageous,
and makes nothing of these dangers that daunt others.

Verse 31. See the idle Pleas of Distrust; we are not able, they are stronger.
Could not God enable them? was he not stronger than their Giants? had he not
promised to displace the Canaanites to settle them in their stead? how much
more easy is it for us to spy their weakness, than for them to espy the
strength of their adversaries? when we measure our spiritual success by our own
power, we are vanquished before we fight: he that would overcome must neither
look upon his own arm, nor the arm of his Enemy, but the mouth and hand of him
that has promised, and can perform: who are we flesh and blood with our breath
in our Nostrils, that we should fight with Principalities, Powers, spiritual
wickedness in heavenly places? the matter is too unequal, we are like
Grasshoppers to these Giants. When we compare our selves with them, how can we
but despair? when we compare them with God, how can we be discouraged? he that
has brought us into this field has promised us victory. God knew their
strength ere he offered to commit us.

Verse 33. It is very material with what Eyes we look upon all subjects. Fear
does not more multiply Evils, than Faith deminisheth them; which is therefore
bold because it either sees not, or contemns that terror which fear represents
to the weak. There is none so valiant as the Believer. Well might these
Israelites have thought, were not the Amalekites stronger than we, were not
they armed, we naked. Did not the only hand of Moses by lifting up beat them
down? Whence had the Anakims their strength, but from him that bids us go up
against them? but now their fear has not left them so much reason as to
compare their adversaries with others, but only with themselves. Doubtless
these Giants were mighty, but their fear has stretched them out some Cubits
beyond their stature. Distrust makes our dangers greater, and our helps less
than they are, and fore-casts ever worse then shall be, and if evils be
possible, it makes them certain.

CHAP. XIV.
Verse 5. IT had been time for the Israelites to have fallen down on their
faces, and have said, go to God for us in your Prayers, go before us in your
directions: but now on the contrary, Moses and Aaron fall on their faces to
them, and sue to them that they would be content to be conducted. Had they been
suffered to depart, they had perished: Moses and his few had been victorious:
and yet as if he could not be happy without them, he falls on his face to them
that they would stay. We have never so much need to be importuned, as in those
things whose benefit should make us most importunate. The sweetness of Gods
Law, and our promised glory is such, as should draw all hearts after it; and
yet if we did not sue to Men (as for life) that they would be reconciled to
God, and be saved, I doubt whether they would obey, yea it were well if our
suit were sufficient to prevail.

Verse 10. Though Moses and Aaron entreat upon their faces, and Joshua and
Caleb persuade and rend their Garments, yet they move nothing. The obstinate
multitude grown more violent with opposing, is ready to return them stones for
their prayers. Such has been ever the thanks of fidelity and truth; crossed
Wickedness proves desperate, and instead of yielding seeks for Revenge. Nothing
is so hateful to a resolute sinner as good Counsel. We are become Enemies to
the World, because we tell them truth.

Verse 13. It was not so much Israel that Moses respected, as God in Israel. He
was thrifty and zealous for his Maker, and would not have him lose the glory of
his mighty deliverances; nor would abide a pretense for any Egyptian Dog to
bark against the powerful work of God; then the Egyptians shall hear it. If
Israel could have perished without dishonor to God, perhaps Moses his hatred
to their unbelief would have overcome his natural love, and he had let gone
alone; now so tender is he over the Name of God, that he would rather have
Israel escape with a sin, then Gods glory should be blemished in the opinions
of Men by a just Judgment. He saw that the Eyes and Tongues of all the World
were intent upon Israel: he knew how ready the World would be to miscontrue,
and how the Heathens would be ready to cast imputations of Levity, or impotence
upon God; and therefore says, Then the Egyptians will hear it. Happy is that
Man that can make Gods glory the scope of all his actions, and desires; nor
cares for his own welfare, nor fears the miseries of others, but with respect
to God in both.

CHAP. XV.
Verse 20. THe substance of this Law was to teach them from whence they enjoyed
their Land, their Corn, their Wine, and their Dew, and all that they possessed,
to wit, by the mere gift and blessing of God. Whatever we possess, by the sole
gift of God we possess it. Of whom shall we receive our Food, if we seek it not
at Gods hand; if the Child want Food and Raiment, to whom shall he go but to
his Father? and as we have our meat from God, so we must eat and drink as in
the presence of God. And if we did but seriously think upon this truth, that
God is present with us at our Tables, that he sits down, and rises with us, it
would teach us more sobriety and moderation than is commonly used at our meals.
It is therefore our duty whatever we have received, whether it be little or
much, to employ it to good uses. We must take special care not to abuse Gods
gifts, or wrong any his Creatures we enjoy; in as much as in wronging them we
wrong God himself the giver of them.

Verse 38. This Fringe was to put them in mind of the Commandments of the
Lord, to do them, as you may read in the following verse; and therefore were
termed Philacteries, i. e. Conservatories, so called, because by the use of
them the Law was kept in remembrance. God had charged the Jews to wear these
borders for this end; as also to bind the Law to their hands, and before their
eyes; wherein (as St. Jerome and Theodoret well interpret it) God meant the
meditations and practice of his Law; but they like unto the foolish Patient,
which, when the Physician bids him take such a Prescript, eats up the paper;
they rested in the fringe and not in the garment; in the Ceremony, not in the
Law. For if these Jews could but get a list of Parchment upon their left arm
next their heart, and another scroll to tie upon their forehead, and four
corners of Fringe, or (if these be denied) a red thread in their hand, though
they might say with Saul, 1 Samuel 16. Blessed be thou of the Lord, I have
fulfilled the command of the Lord.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse 1. I See the Levites not long since drawing their Swords for God and
Moses against, the rest of Israel; and that Fact wins them both praise and
blessing: now they are the forwardest in the rebellion against Moses and Aaron,
men of their own Tribe. There is no assurance of a man for one act: whom one
sin cannot fasten upon, another may; yea the same sin may find a repulse one
while from the same hand which another time gives it entertainment: and that
yeildance loses the thank of all the former resistance. It is no praise to
have done once well unless we continue. We see here likewise that outward
privileges of Blood can avail nothing against a particular calling of God.
These Reubenites had the right of the natural primogeniture; yet do they vainly
challenge pre-eminence where God has subjected them. If all civil honor flow
from the King, how much more from the God of Kings; his hand exalts the poor,
and casts down the mighty from their Throne; the man that will be lifting up
himself in the pride of his heart from under the foot of God, is justly trodden
in the dust.

Verse 2. There cannot be conceived an honor less worth emulation than this
principality of Israel: a people that could give nothing, a people that had
nothing but in hope; a people whom their leader was fain to feed with Bread and
Water; which paid him no tribute, but of ill words, whose command was nothing
but a burden; and yet this dignity had drawn together in a mutinous way 250
Captains of Israel. What wonder is it, that the Ten-Rulers prevail so much with
the multitude, to dissuade them from Canaan; when three Traitors prevailed thus
with 250 Rulers, famous in the Congregation, and men of renown: one man may
kindle such a fire as all the World cannot quench. One Plague Sore may infect a
whole Kingdom: the infection of evil is much worse than the act. It is not like
those Leaders of Israel could err without followers. He is a mean man that
draws not some Clients after him. It has been ever a dangerous policy of
Satan to assault the best: he knew that the multitude (as we say of Bees) will
follow their Master.

Verse 3. Moses and Aaron you take too much upon you, was the cry of a Jew
once, and so it is still by many now a days, who would manacle and confine
them only to an Ecclesiastic power, and divest them quite of any civil
Authority, though Moses had both, according to St. Aug. in 98 Psalm. and David
also places Moses among the Priests, Ps. 99. 6.

Verse 5. Moses argues not for himself, but appeals to God, neither speaks for
his own right, but his Brother Aarons; he knew that Gods immediate service was
worthy to be more precious than his Government. Good Magistrates are more
tender over Gods honor than their own, and more sensible of the wrongs offered
to Religion than themselves. And Moses took the best course to appeal to God.
It is safest to trust God with his own cause. If Aaron had been set up by
Israel, Moses would have sheltred him under their Authority: now that God did
immediately appoint him, his patronage is sought whose the Election was. We may
easily faulter in the managing of Divine affairs, and so our want of success
cannot want sin: God knows how to use, how to bless his own means.

Verse 9. As there was a difference betwixt the people and Levites, so betwixt
the Levites and Priests. The God of order loves to have our degrees kept.
Whiles the Levites would be looking up to the Priests, Moses sends down their
Eyes to the people. The way not to repine at those above us, is to look at
those below us. There is no better remedy for ambition, than to cast up our
former receipts, and so compare them with our deservings, and confer our own
Estate with Inferiors: so shall we find cause to be thankful that we are above
any, rather than of envy that any is above us.

Verse 12. Moses has chid the Sons of Levi for mutinying against Aaron, and so
much the more, because they were of his own Tribe: now he sends for the
Reubenites, which rose against himself; they come not, and their Message is
worse than their absence. Moses is accused of Injustice, Cruelty, Falsehood,
Treachery, Usurpation, and Egypt it self shall be commended rather than Moses
want a reproach. Innocence is no shelter from ill tongues, Malice never regards
how true an accusation is, but how spiteful.

Verse 15. Now it was time for Moses to be angry, they durst not have been thus
bold, if they had not seen his mildness. Lenity is ill bestowed upon stubborn
natures; it is an injurious sencelesness not to feel the wounds of our
reputation. It well appears Moses is angry, when he prays against them. He was
displeased before, but when he was most bitter against them, he still prayed
for them: but now he bends his very prayers against them; Look not to their
Offering: there can be no greater revenge, than the imprecation of the
righteous; there can be no greater judgment than Gods rejection of their
services. With us men, what more argues the dislike of the person, than the
turning back of his present? What will God accept from us if not Prayers?

Verse 22. The same Tongue that prayed against the Conspirators, prays for the
people: as lewd men think to carry it with number; Corah had so far prevailed,
that he had drawn the multitude to his side. God the avenger of Treasons would
have consumed them at once; Moses and Aaron pray for the Rebels; although they
were worthy of Death, and nothing but Death could stop their mouths; yet their
merciful Leaders will not buy their own peace with the loss of such Enemies. O
rare and imitable mercy! the people rise up against their Governors, their
Governors fall on their faces to God for the people; so far are they from
plotting revenge, that they will not endure God shall revenge for them.

Verse 27. Moses had well hoped that when these Rebels should see all the
Israelites run from them as from Monsters, and should hear that direful
Proclamation of Vengeance against them, (howsoever they did before set a face
on their Conspiracy, yet now) their hearts would have misgiven. But lo these
bold Traitors, stand impudently staring in the door of their Tents, as if they
would outface the revenge of God; as if Moses had never wrought miracle before
them; as if no Israelite had ever bled for rebelling: those that should perish
are blinded. Pride and Infidelity obdures the heart, and makes even Cowards
fearless.

Verse 31. In Dathan and Abirams case God may seem to proceed apace toward
Execution, but yet it had all these pauses in arrest of Judgment, and these
reprieves before Execution. First, When Moses had information of their factious
proceedings, he falls upon his face before God, and laments, and deprecates in
their behalf, verse 4. he calls them to a fair Trial and Examination the next
day, verse 5. and they say, We will not come, verse 12. and again which implies
that Moses cited them again, we will not come, verse 14. and Moses went up to
them again, and the Elders of Israel followed, and all prevailed not, and then
Moses comes to pronounce Judgment, verse 29. and after, and yet not presently
after the Judgment Execution followed, verse 31. thus still God goes his own
way to speak before he strikes, to lighten before he thunders, to warn before
he wounds.

Verse 41. Here instead of Praying, these Israelites murmur; instead of praying
to God, murmur against Moses. What have the righteous done? It is the hard
condition of Authority, that when the multitude fare well, they applaud
themselves; when ill, they repine against their Governors. Who can hope to be
free, if Moses and Aaron escape not? Never any Prince so merited a people; he
thrust himself upon the Pikes of Pharaoh's tyranny; he brought them from a
bondage worse than death; his Rod divided the Sea, and shared life to them,
death to their pursuers. Who would not have thought these men so obliged to
Moses, that no death could have opened their mouths, or raised their hands
against him: yet now when their fellows are justly punished of God, they murmur
against Moses. No marvel if we deal so with men, when God receives this measure
from us. One year of Famine, one Summer of Pestilence makes us overlook all
the blessings of God; and more to mutiny at the sense of our evil, than to
praise him for our varieties of good. O God, I have made an ill use of thy
mercies, if I have not learnt to be content with thy Corrections.

CHAP. XVII.
Verse 1. HOw desirous was God to give satisfaction, even to the obstinate!
there is nothing more material than that men should be assured their spiritual
guides have their commission and Calling from God: the want whereof is a
prejudice to our success. It should not be so; but the corruption of Men will
not receive good, but from due Messengers.

Verse 2. Before Gods calling all men are alike: every Name is alike written in
their rod; there is no difference in the letters, in the wood; neither the
characters are fairer, nor the staff more precious; it is the choice of God
that makes the distinction: so is it in our callings of Christianity; all are
equally devoid of possibility of Grace, all equally liveless, by Nature we are
all Sons of wrath: If we be now better than others, who separated us? we are
all Crab-stocks in this Orchard of God, he may graft what Fruit he pleases upon
us; only the Grace and effectual Calling of God makes the difference.

Verse 5. Before God wrought miracles in the Rod of Moses; now in the Rod of
Aaron. As Pharaoh might see himself in Moses his Rod; who of a Rod of Defense
and protection, was turned into a venomous Serpent: so Israel might see
themselves in the Rod of Aaron. Every Tribe, and every Israelite was of himself
as a sear-stick without life, without sap; and if any one of them had power to
live and flourish, he must acknowledge it from the immediate power and gift of
God.

Verse 6. These 12 Heads of Israel would never have writ their Names in their
Rods, but in hope they might be chosen to this dignity. What an honor was this
Priesthood whereof all the Princes of Israel are ambitious? If they had not
thought it an high preferment, they had not so much envied the Office of Aaron.
What shall we think of this change? Is the Evangelical administration of less
worth than the Levitical? while the Testament is better, is the service worse?
how is it that the Great think themselves too great for this employment? how is
it that under the Gospel men are disparaged with that which honored them under
the Law, that their ambition and scorn meet in one subject?

Verse 7. These 12 Rods are not laid up in several Cabinets of their owners;
but are brought forth and laid before the Lord. It is fit God should make
choice of his own attendants. Even we Men hold it injurious to have servants
obtruded upon us by others. Never shall that Man have comfort in his Ministry
whom God has not chosen. The great Commander of the World has set every Man
in his station: to one he has said, Stand thou in this Tower and watch; to
another, Make thou good these Trenches; to a third, Digg thou in this Mine. He
that gives, and knows our abilities, can best set us on work.

Verse 8. This Rod was the Pastoral staff of Aaron, the great Shepherd of
Israel: God rectifies his approbation of his charge by the Fruit. That a Rod
cut off from the Tree should blossom it was strange; but that in one Night it
should bear buds, blossom, and Fruit, and that both ripe and hard, it was
highly miraculous. The same power that revives the dead Plants in Winter in the
Spring, does it here without Earth, without Time, without Sun; that Israel
might see, and grant it was no reason his choice should be limited, whose power
is unlimited.

Verse 10. The same God which by many transient demonstrations had approved the
calling of Aaron to Israel, will now have a permanent memorial of their
conjunction, that whenever they should see this relick, they might be ashamed
of their presumption and infidelity. The Name of Aaron was not more plainly
writ in that Rod, than the sin of Israel was in the Fruit of it: and how much
more Israel finds Rebellion beaten with this Rod, appears in the following
Complaint, Behold we are dead, we perish. God knows how to extort glory to his
own Name from the most obstinate gainsayers.

CHAP. XVIII.
Verse 20. IF the Lord himself be Aarons portion, and his Inheritance, why
should not Aaron content himself, though he have no other Inheritance among the
People. And if the Lord be the portion of Gods Children, who are his Royal
Priesthood, why should not they rest well contented, although they want an
inheritance inthe things of this World? and why may not every Child of God as
well as the Sons of Levi say? God himself is my portion, and God all-sufficient
in himself, is all-sufficient unto me. God gave me to my self, and God gave
himself to me. God the Father gave his Son to me, God the Son gave himself to
me; and God the Holy Ghost gave his Seal to assure that gift to me, and shall I
not be content? God the Son received all things from the Father for me, that in
him and through him, and with him I might receive all things from the Father,
and why should I not content my self with him, without whom all things are as
nothing.

Verse 31. The end of the gifts and oblations under the Law, was not that God
had reserved these things for his own spending, but for the use and
sustentation of his selected Servants; that so being always to have Ministers
of his own, he might have also of his own Goods to feed and maintain them. This
I take to be clear from Gods own words in this Chapter; for having set his mark
upon diverse things, calling them, My Gifts and my Offerings, he adds, These
have I given to the Sons of Levi for the service they do me in the Tabernacle,
verse 21. And it is your wages which I give you for your service, in this
verse: which words plainly show, that God would that such as attend him, should
receive their maintenance as his pay, and not as man's. Whereupon he says not
to the people, you shall give them your offerings, for the service they do you;
But I have given them my Offerings for the service they do me; as if he should
say, these things are mine, not yours, to me you shall pay them, that as mine,
not as yours, they may receive them, and so I may pay them with my own hands,
and of my own Goods, and not they to serve at others cost.

CHAP. XIX.
Verse 2. This red Heifer was the type of Christ crucified, who as (a Father
says) was Candidus sanctitate, rubicundus passione, white and ruddy; white in
his Innocence, and red in his Passion. And this Heifer must be without spot and
blemish; our Savior was free from all sin, the spot of Original, and the
blemish of Actual Sin. It must be a Heifer likewise on which never came yoke.
Christ never bore the yoke either of sin or slavery: he offered up himself, he
was a willing Sacrifice, he was not fore'd and drawn to it. It is true, there
was a necessity of our Saviors Death, but it was a necessity of immutability,
(because God had so decreed it, Acts 2. 23.) not of Co action. He dyed
willingly, therefore when he gave up the Ghost, he cried with a loud voice;
which shows his life was not then spent, he might have kept it longer if he
would. Lastly, this Heifer was to be brought by the people, at the common
charge, because for the common good. All the Congregation must get them a
bloody Savior.

Verse 5. The burning of the Heifer with the Garbage and Dung could yield no
sweet savor, but thereto was added Cedar-wood, and Hysop by Gods appointment,
and then there was a savor of rest in it. Our Prayers as from us would never
please; hut as indicted by the Spirit, and presented by Christ, they are highly
accepted in Heaven. Nay our sins were so odious to God, that even Christ
himself, when burnt up with the fire of his Fathers wrath, had no savor in him
in respect of our sins: but by the everlasting Spirit, whereby he offered up
himself without spot to God, he was a full Sacrifice of sweet smelling Incense
to purge offenses: for the Spirit of God gave both value and virtue to his
Death, both to satisfy and to sanctify.

Verse 9. The gathering of the ashes is the applying of the merits of Christ,
and laying hold on the mysteries of his Kingdom. The laying up of the ashes
imports, that the Christian accounts Christ merits his chief Treasure. The
clean place is the clean heart: without the Camp, notes that the Gentiles were
strangers to the Commonwealth of Israel. These ashes kept for the Congregation,
show the fullness of Christ's merits for all his people. When he says, It is to
make a water of separation, it notes, that our Sins separate betwixt us and our
God; but now in Christ Jesus we who sometimes were far off, are made nigh in
his blood, Ephesians. 2. 13.

CHAP. XX.
Verse 1. ALl Israel murmured when they wanted Bread and Flesh, and yet all
Israel departed into the desert of Zin at Gods command. The very worst men will
obey God in something, none but the good in all. He is rarely desperate that
makes an universal opposition to God. It is an unsound praise that is given a
man for one good action. It may be safely said of the very Devils themselves,
that they do something well, they know, and believe, and tremble. If we follow
God, and murmur, it is all one as if we had stayed behind.

Verse 2. Those begin to distrust Gods providence in this verse in their
necessity, that in the former were ready to follow his guidance in their
welfare. It is an harder matter to endure in extreme want, than to obey an hard
Commandment. Sufferings are greater trials than actions. And God will have his
thoroughly tried; he puts them to both, and if we cannot endure both, to follow
him into the Wilderness of Zin, and then to thirst in Rephidim, we are not
sound Israelites. God set them on purpose to this dry place, he could as well
have conducted them to another Elim, to convenient waterings: or he that gives
the waters of all their Channels, could as well have derived them to meet
Israel; but God does purposely carry them to thirst. It is not of necessity
that we fare ill, but of choice. It is all one with God to give us health as
sickness, abundance as poverty; the treasure of his riches has more store
than his Creature can be capable of; we should not complain if it were not good
for us to want.

Verse 3. I looked to hear when they would have entreated Moses to pray for
them, but instead of entreating they contend, and instead of Prayers, chide and
murmur. If they had gone to God without Moses, I should have praised their
Faith: but now they go to Moses without God, I hate this stubborn Faithlesness;
to seek to the second means, with neglect of the first, is the Fruit of a false
Faith. But why do these mutiners say, O that we had dyed as our Brethren did
before the Lord? and before whom do ye dye O ye fond Israelites, if you must
perish by thirst? God carried you forth, God restrained his creatures from you,
God is still present with you; and yet you say, while you are to dye for want
of Water in the presence of God, O that we had dyed before the Lord. These
Israelites loved their lives well enough. I heard how they screek'd while they
were in danger of the Egyptians, and yet now they say, O that we had dyed.
Although life be naturally sweet, yet a little coffeehouse makes us weary.
It is a base cowardliness, as soon as ever we are called from the Garrison to
the Field, to think of running away. Then is our fortitude worthy of praise,
when we can endure to be miserable.

Verse 4. Why brought ye us up hither, say the Israelites? when they should
have said, God has led us hither; this should have been a contentment able to
quench any thirst. If Moses out of ignorance had misguided us, or we changeably
fallen upon these dry deserts, though this were no remedy of our grief, yet it
might be some ground of our complaint. But now the Counsel of so wise and
Merciful a God has drawn us into this want; and shall he not as easily find
the way out? It is the Lord, let him do what he will; there can be no more
forcible motive to patience, than the acknowledgment of a Divine hand that
strikes us.

Verse 6. It was no Expostulating with an unreasonable multitude: Moses and
Aaron run straight to him, that was able at once to quench their thirst, and
their fury, they went from the Congregation to the door of the Tabernacle. It
is the best way to trust God with his own Causes, when men will be intermedling
with his affairs, they undo themselves in vain. We shall find difficulties in
all great enterprises: if we be sure we have begun them from God, we may
securely cast all events upon his providence which knows how to dispose, and
how to end them.

Verse 11. Out of a stone Water cannot be drawn but by miracles, though it be
twice stricken; as Moses here stroke the Rock twice, yet the water came by the
miraculous power of God, and not by Moses second stroke. Though God strike
twice, thrice, man will not weep. Though inward terrors strike his Conscience,
and outward diseases strike his body, and calamities and ruin strike his
Estate, yet he will not confess by one tear, that these are Judgments of God,
but natural accidents; or if Judgments, that they proceed not from his sin,
but from some decree in God, or from some purpose in God to glorify himself by
thus afflicting; and that if he had been better he should have fared never the
better, for Gods purpose must stand.

CHAP. XXI.
Verse 4. IT was their way that makes them repine, they were fain to go round
about Idumea, the Journey was long and troublesome. They had sent entreaties to
Edom for License of passage the next way reasonably submisly: it was churlishly
denied them. Esau lives still in his posterity, Jacob in Israel; the Combat
which they began in Rebecca's room is not yet ended. So long as there is a
World, there will be opposition to the chosen of God: they may come at their
peril; the way had been nearer, but bloody; they dare not go it, and yet
complain of length. If they were afraid to purchase their resting place with
War, how much less would they their passage. What should God do with impatient
Men? they will not go the nearest way, and yet complain to go about. He that
will pass to the promised Land, must neither stand upon length of way, nor
difficulty. Every way has his Inconveniences, the nearest has more danger,
the farthest has more pain; either or both must be overcome if ever we will
enter the rest of God.

Verse 5. Aaron and Miriam were now past the danger of their mutinies; for want
of another match they join God with Moses in their murmurings: though they had
not formerly mentioned him, yet they could not fever him from Moses in their
Insurrection: for in the causes of his own Servants he challenges even when he
is not challenged. What will become of thee O Isral, when thou make thy Maker
thine enemy. Impatience is Cousin to Frenzy; this causes men not to care upon
whom they run, so they may breath out some Revenge. How often have we heard men
that have been displeased by others, tear the Name of their Maker in pieces? he
that will Judge, and can confound, is fetched into the Quarrel without Cause.
But if to strive with a mighty man be unwise, and unsafe, what shall it be to
strive with the mighty God. And what was the ground of this murmuring? Our Soul
loat heth this light bread. This Heavenly Bread was unspeakably delicious, it
tasted like waters of Honey, and yet even this Angels food is cuntemn'd. He
that is full despises an Honeycomb. How sweet and delicate is the Gospel! not
only the Fathers of the Old Testament, but the Angels desired to look into the
glorious mysteries of it, and yet we are cloyed. This supernatural Food is too
light, the bread-corn of our humane reason, and profound discourse would better
content us.

Verse 6. These men when the Spies had told them news of the Giants of Canaan,
a little before had wished, Would God we had dyed in the Wilderness. Now God
has heard their Prayers, what with the Plague, what with the Serpents, many
thousands of them dyed. The ill wishes of our impatience are many times heard.
As those good things are not granted which we pray for without care, so those
evils which we pray for, and would not have, are often granted. The ears of God
are not only open to the Prayers of Faith, but to imprications of Infidelity.
It is dangerous wishing evil to our selves, or ours; it is just with God to
take us at our word, and to effect that which our Lips speak against our Heart.

Verse 7. Now the people are glad to seek to Moses unbidden. Even heretofore
they have been wont to be sued to and entreated for, without their own
entreaty; now their misery makes them importunate. There needs no Solicitor
where there is sense of smart. It were pity men should want affliction, since
it sends them to their Prayers, and Confessions. All the persuasions of Moses
could not do that which the Serpents have done for him. O God thou see how
necessary it is we should be stung sometimes, else we should run wild, and
never come to a sound humiliation; we should never seek thee if thy hand did
not find us out.

Verse 8. The Israelites being stung with Serpents, erected a Serpent in the
Wilderness. Serpens momordit, Serpens curavit, the Philistines being plagued
with Emeroids, offered Emeroides unto the Ark. They that gave their Jewels to
the making of a Calf, did afterward bestow them on the Lords Tabernacle. And
Mary Magdalen who was wont to send forth alluring beams into the eyes of her
Paramours, now the same Eyes send forth a deluge of Tears.

CHAP. XXII.
Verse 1. MOab and Midian had been all this while standers by, and lookers on:
If they had not seen the pattern of their own ruin in their Neighbors; it had
nevet troubled them to see the Kings of the Amorites, and Bashan to fall before
Israel. Had not the Israelites Camp'd in the Plains of Moab, their Victories
had been no Eyesore to Balack. Wicked men never care to observe Gods
Judgments till themselves be touched: the fire of a Neighbors House would not
so affect us, if it were not with the danger of our own: Secure minds never
startle till God come home to their senses.

Verse 4. The Midianites join with the Moabites in Consultation, in Action
against Israel: one would have thought they should have looked for favor from
Moses for Iethro's sake, who was both a Prince in their Country, and Father in
Law to Moses: and either now, or not long before was with Israel in the
Wilderness. Neither is it unlike but that Moses having found forty years
harbor among them, would have been (what he might) inclineable to favorable
treaties with them; but now they are so fast linked to Moab, that they will
either sink or swim together. Intireness with wicked consorts, is one of the
strongest Chains of Hell, and binds us to a participation both of sin and
punishment: an easy occasion will knit wicked hearts together in conspiracy
against the Church of God.

Verse 6. Their Errand is Divelish, (Come curse Israel) that which Satan could
not do by the Sword of Og and Seon, he will now try to effect by the Tongue of
Balaam. If either strength or policy would prevail against Gods Church, it
could not stand. And why should not we be as industrious to promote the glory
of God, and bend both our hands and heads to the causes of the Almighty? When
all helps fail Moab, the Magician is sent for: it is the sign of a desperate
Cause to make Satan either our Counselor, or Refuge.

Verse 9. I should wonder to hear God speak with a false Prophet; if I did not
know, it has been no rare thing with him, (as with men) to bestow words where
he will not bestow favor. Not the sound of the voice of God, but the matter
which he speaks argues love: he may speak to an Enemy; he speaks peace to none
but his own. It is a vain bragg, God has spoken to me; so may he do to
Reprobates, or Devils; but what said he? Did he say to my Soul, I am thy
Salvation? has he indented with me, that he will be my God, and I shall be
his? I cannot hear this voice, and not live. God heard all the Consultation and
Message of these Moabites; these Messengers could not have moved their Foot or
their Tongue, but in him; and yet he which asked Adam where he was, asks
Balaam, What men are these? I have ever seen that God loves to take occasion of
proceeding with us from our selves, rather than from his own immediate
prescience. Hence it is that we lay open our Wants, and confess our sins to him
that knows both, better than our own hearts, because he will deal with us from
our own mouths.

Verse 12. The reward of the divination had easily commanded the Journey and
Curse of the Covetous Prophet, if God had not stayed him. How often are Wicked
men Cursed by a Divine hand, even in those sins which their Hearts stand to. It
is no thank to lewd men that their Wickedness is not prosperous. Whence it is,
that the World is not overrun with Evil, but from this, that Men cannot be so
ill as they would.

Verse 15. Where Wickedness meets with power, it thinks to command all the
World, and takes great scorn of any repulse. So little is Balack discouraged
for one refusal, that he sends so much the stronger Message, more Princes, and
more Honorable. O that we could be so importuuate for our good, as Wicked Men
are for the compassing of their designs! a Denial does but whet the desires of
vehement Suitors. Why are we faint in Spiritual things, when we are not denied,
but delayed?

Verse 22. We that see only the outside of Balaam, may wonder why he that
permitted him to go, afterward opposes his going; but God that saw his Heart,
perceived what corrupt affections carried him: he saw that his covetous
desires, and wicked hopes grew the stronger, the nearer he came to his end: an
Angel is therefore sent to withold the hasty Sorcerer. Our inward disposition
is the life of our actions, according to that does the God of Spirits judge us,
whiles men censure according to our external motions. To go at all when God had
commanded to stay, was presumptuous; but to go with a desire to Curse, made the
act doubly sinful, and fetched an Angel to resist it. It is one of the worthy
employments of good Angels to make secret opposition to evil designs: many a
wicked act have they hindered without the knowledge of the Agent. It is all one
with the Almignty to work by Spirits and Men; it is therefore our glory to be
thus set on Work: to stop the course of evil either by disswasion or violence
is an Angelical service.

Verse 28. That no man may marvel to see Balaam have visions from God, and
utter Prophecies from him; his very Ass has his Eyes opened to see the Angel,
which his Master could not, and his mouth opened to speak more reasonably than
his Master. There is no Beast deserves so much wonder as this of Balaam, whose
common sense is advanced above the Reason of his Rider, so as for the time the
Prophet is brutish, and the Beast Prophetical; who can but stand amazed at the
Eye, at the Mouth of this silly Creature? for so dull a sight it was much to
see a bodily object, that were not too apparent; but to see that Spirit which
his Rider discerned not, was far beyond Nature. To hear a Voice to come from
that Mouth which was used only to bray, it was strange and uncouth; but to hear
a Beast whose Nature is noted for incapacity, to out-reason his Master a
professed Prophet, is in the very height of Miracles. Yet no heart can stick at
these that considers the dispensation of the Almighty in both. Our Eye could no
more see a Beast, than a Beast can see an Angel, if he had not given this power
to it: and if his power can make the very Stones to speak, how much more a
Creature of sense: we may wonder we cannot distrust, when we compare the act
with the Author, which can as easily Create a Voice without a Body, as a Body
without a Voice. There is no Mouth into which God cannot put words: and how often
does he chose the weak and unwise to confound the Learned, and Mighty.

Verse 32. I hear the Angel of God taking notice of the cruelty of Balaam to
his Beast: his first words to the unmerciful Prophet are in expostulating the
wrong. We little think it, but God shall call us to an account for the cruel,
unmerciful usage of his poor mute Creatures. He has made us Lords, not
Tyrants: Owners, not Tormentors; he that has given us leave to kill them for
our use, has not given us power to abuse them at our pleasure; they are so our
Drudges, as that they are our Fellows by Creation. It was a sign the Magician
would easily strike Israel with a Curse, when he wished for a Sword to strike
his harmless Beast. It is ill falling into those hands whom Beasts find
unmerciful.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse 1. WHo can doubt whether Balaam were a false Prophet, who sees him
Sacrificing in the Mount of Baal? had he been from the true God, he would
rather have said, Pull me down these Altars of Baal, then build me here seven
others. The very place convinces him of falsehood and Idolatry: and why seven
Altars? what needs all this pomp, when the True God never required but one at
once, as himself is one? Why does the false Prophet call for no less than
seven? as if God stood upon numbers; as if the Almighty would have his power
either divided, or limited. Here is nothing but a great and magnificent
pretense of Devotion. It has been ever seen, that the false Worshippers of God
have made more pompous shows, and fairer flourishes of their Piety and Religion
than the true.

Verse 3. Now when Balaam sees his seven Bullocks, and seven Rams smoking upon
seven Altars, he goes up higher into the Mount (as some counterfeit Moses) to
receive the answer of God. But will God meet with a Sorcerer? Will he make a
Prophet of a Magician? O Man, who shall prescribe God what Instruments to use?
he knows how to employ not only Saints and Angels, but Wicked Men, Beasts,
Devils, to his own glory: he that put words into the mouth of the Ass, put
words into the mouth of Balaam; the words do but pass from him; they are not
polluted because they are not his; as the Trunk through which a Man speaks is
not more Eloquent for the speech that is uttered through it. What a notable
Proclamation had the Infidels wanted of Gods favor to his people, if Balaam's
Tongue had not been used? how many shall once say, Lord, we have Prophesied in
thy Name; that shall hear, Verily I know you not.

Verse 28. What madness is this in Balaam, that hopes to change success with
places? as if God were not the same every where. Neither was that bold
forehead ashamed to importune God again in that wherein his own Mouth had
testified an assurance of Denial. The reward was in one of his Eyes, the
Revenging Angel in another: I know not whether for the time he more loved the
Bribe, or feared the Angel: and whiles he is in this distraction, his Tongue
blesses against his Heart, and his Heart curses against his Tongue; it angers
him that he dares not speak what he would, and now at last; rather than lose
his hopes, he resolves to speak worse then Curses: the fear of Gods Judgments
in a Worldly Heart, is at length overcome with the love of gain.

CHAP. XXIV.
Verse 11. THose that are themselves transported with vanity and ambition,
think that no Heart has power to resist these Offers. Balam thought he had
struck the business when he had once mentioned Promotion to great Honor.
Selflove makes him think that all the World would be glad to run a madding
after his bait. Nature thinks it impossible to contemn Honor and Wealth; and
because too many Souls are thus taken, cannot believe that any would escape.
But let Carnal Minds know there are those that can spit the World in the face
and say, Thy Gold and Silver perish with thee: and that in comparison of a good
Conscience, can tread under foot his best proffers like shadows as they are,
and that can do as Balaam said, verse 13. What the Lord says that will I speak.

Verse 20. What was this sin of the Amalekites, for which God threatens, That
they shall perish for ever? It was that (according to Interpreters) mentioned
Exodus 17. Remember how Amalekmet thee by the way, and smote the hindmost of
you; this Sin slept all the time of the Judges, yet so soon as Israel had a
King, and that King settled in peace, God gives charge to call them to an
account, 1 Samuel 15. As we use to say of Winter, so may we say of Gods
Judgments, They never rot in the Sky, but shall fall, if late, yet surely, yet
seasonably. There is small comfort in the delay of Vengeance, while we are sure
it shall lose nothing in the way by length of Protraction.

Verse 24. Balaam here Prophesies of the rising and falling of great Princes,
and Empires: they had their Heads lifted up on high, and were advanced to the
greatest honor, but suddenly they came tumbling down, and all their glory lay
in the dust; From whence we learn, that great Men, and mighty Princes suddenly
decay, and come to nothing; they are in a moment cast down and left destitute,
when they little think of it. Neither can we marvail at this change of the
Places and Estates of the Sons of Men, seeing it is the Lords doing, and the
work of his right hand. The Lord lifts up and pulls down according to his
own will and pleasure, who makes the highest Tide to have the lowest Ebb.

CHAP. XXV.
Verse 4. AS the sins of great Men are exemplary, so are their punishments.
Nothing procures so much credit to Government, as Impartial Executions of Noble
Offenders. Those whom their sins have debased, deserve no favor in the
punishment. As God knows no Honor, no Royalty in matter of sin, no more may
his Deputies. Contrarily, Connivence at the outrages of the Mighty cuts the
sinews of any State. If good Laws turn once to Spiders webs which are broken
through by the bigger Flies, no hand will fear to sweep them down.

Verse 8. Now the sin is punished the Plague cease. The revenge of God sets
out ever after the sin; but if the revenge of Men which commonly comes later,
can overtake it, God gives over the Chase. How often has the infliction of a
less punishment avoided a greater. There are none so good Friends to a State as
courageous and impartial Ministers of Justice: these are the Reconcilers of God
and the people, more than the Prayers of them that sit still and do nothing.

Verse 25. The Daughters of Moab come into the Tents of Israel, and have
captived those whom the Amorites and Amalekites could not resist. Our first
Mother Fve bequeathed this Dowry to her Daughters, that they should be our
helpers to sin, the weaker Sex is the stronger in this Conquest. Had the
Moabites sent their subtilest Counselors to persuade the Israelites to their
Idol Sacrifices, they had been repelled with scorn; but now the beauty of their
Women is over-eloquent and succesful. That which in the first World betrayed
the Sons of God, has now betrayed Gods People. It had been happy for Israel if
Balaam had used any Charms but these. As it is the use of God to fetch glory to
himself out of the worst actions of Satan; so it is the guise of that Evil-one
to raise advantage to himself from the fairest pieces of the Workmanship of
God. No one means has so enriched Hell as beautiful Faces.

CHAP. XXVI.
Verse 9. THey were indeed famous in regard of their places, but they became
Infamous and Ignominous by their Sin and Punishment. Irreligion and Impiety
make Men reproachful, of what account and estimation soever they be; be they
never so Rich, Noble, and Renouned in the World: how famous and excellent in
the World, Countries and Cities be; yet this is certain, that Sin makes all
Persons and Places infamous and dishonorable, (let London apply this to her
self) as it appears afterward in this Chapter, verse 61. We see this further
in many Examples; Cain is noted and marked of God for his execrable parricide
unto all posterity Judas that betrayed his Master, is called the Son of
Perdition, John 17. and is as it were burnt in the shoulder with the letter R,
and marked out for a Reprobate, and left upon Record to be a Devil, John 6. 70.
that all which hear of it might fear, and learn to hate his sins.

Verse 10. Corah kindled the fire, the two hundred and fifty Captains brought
sticks to it; all Israel warmed themselves by it; only the Incendiaries perish.
God and Moses knew to distinguish betwixt the Head of a Faction, and the train,
though neither be faultless; yet two hundred and fifty Ringleaders are plagued,
the other forgiven. Gods vengeance when it is at the hottest, makes differences
of Men. We may collect from this Verse likewise, that all the Elements are at
Gods service. For we find here two sorts of Traitors; the Earth swallowed up
the one, the Fire the other: and as before in this Book Nadab and Abihu brought
fit persons, but unfit fire to God; so these Levites bring the right fire, but
unwarranted persons before him; Fire from God consumes both. It is a dangerous
thing to usurp sacred Functions. The Ministry will not grace the Man, the Man
may disgrace the Ministry; and shall be signally punished for it, as Corah and
his fellow-Rebels were here, who were made a sign, says the Text. Death is
the just Heir of the least sin; but some evil Doers God does not put to Death,
but also hangs them up in Gibbets as it were, for public notice and
admonition. Those that are famous in their sin, shall be famous in their
punishment.

Verse 14. This Tribe of Simeon is of a smaller number in respect of the other
Tribes; and the reason is to be taken out of the last History recorded in the
former Chapter: where we find that one of the Princes of the Tribe of Simeon
being accompanied with many others of that Tribe, committed a most shameful act
among his Brethren, and brought in a Midianitish Harlot into the Host in the
sight of Moses. Whereby it came to pass, that the greatest number of that Tribe
perished with him in that grievous Plague; for it was reason that they which
did partake with him in the sin, should communicate together in the punishment.
Which may teach us, that it is a very hard thing to avoid and break off our
society with Wicked Men; and reproves all such as enter into league with such
persons; they even offer their hands and feet to be bound as it were with
chains, and they become afterward as Prisoners and Vassals to them.

Verse 33. Zelophahad the Son of Heber, had no Sons, but all Daughters, says
this Text; and yet these Daughters had a share with the rest of Gods people in
the Land of Promise, as we may read in the next Chapter. And therefore let the
French defend their Salike Law as they can, there is very good reason that
Women should not lose the right of Inheritance. For Women are the second
edition of the Epitome of the whole World; witness Artemisia, Blandina,
Zenobia, in whom besides their Sex, there was nothing Woman-like or weak; as if
(what Philosophy speaks) the Souls of those Noble Creatures had followed the
temperament of their Bodies, which consists of rarer rooms, of a more exact
Composition than Man's does, and (if place be any privilege) we find theirs
built in Paradise, when Man's was made out of it: besides in Jesus Christ there
is neither Male nor Female, but all are one, (Souls have no Sexes) and
whosoever are Christ's, are heirs to the Promise.

Verse 54. God provideth sufficiently for all his People; every Man has his
portion assigned him of God upon the Earth. It is his will and pleasure that
all should have their measure of earthly things, not some to have all, and some
nothing at all, but all to have some part, and that part to be enough. God
would have no Beggar in his Israel; when the Lord sent down Manna, and fed his
people with Angels food, all the Host from the highest to the lowest had
enough. They that gathered much had nothing over, and he that gathered little
had no lack, Exodus 16. Now if God be thus careful to feed our bodies, it is
much more reason that we should seek at his hands the nourishment of our Souls.
This is the voice of Faith, the other the voice of Nature. Nature will tell us
when we want provision for the body; but it is the Office of Faith to tell us
when we want food for the Soul. Therefore says Christ, First seek the Kingdom,
Mat. 6. 33.

Verse 59. Amram here took to Wife Iochebeb, which was his own Aunt, as is
clear from Exodus 6. 20. the Law against Incest was not then given, nor the
state of Israel then settled; and therefore it was no sin in him: for where
there is no Law there can be no sin. But what shall we say to our modern
Sectaries, whose practicing of Incest is now avowed publicly in print: they
shame not to affirm, that those Marriages are most lawful, that are betwixt
persons iu blood. The prohibition of degrees in Leviticus, are to be
understood, say they, of Fornication, not of Marriage. I see here what noonday
Devils do now in this unhappy Age, walk with open face amongst us.

Verse 61. Because Nadab and Abihu were the Sons of Aaron, this made God the
more to stomach, and the rather to revenge this Impiety. God had both pardoned
and graced their Father; he had honored them, of the thousands of Israel,
culling them out for his Altar: and now as their Fathers set up a false God, so
they bring false fire unto the true God. If the Sons of Infidels live Godlesly,
they do but their kind; their punishment shall be, though just, yet less: but
if the Children of Religious Parents after all Christian nurture shall shame
their Education; God takes it more hainously and revenges it more sharply. The
more bonds of duty, the more plagues of neglect. Again, if from the Agents we
look to the act it self; set aside the Original descent, and what difference
was there betwixt these fires? both looked alike, heated alike, ascended alike,
consumed alike: both were fed with the same material Wood, both vanished into
smoke; there was no difference but the Commandment of God. If God had enjoined
ordinary fire, they had sinned to look for Celestial: now he commanded only the
fire which he sent; they sinned in sending up Incense in that fire which he
commanded not. It is a dangerous thing in the service of God to decline from
his own institutions: we have to do with a power which is wise to prescribe his
own Worship, just to require what he has prescribed, powerful to revenge that
which he has not required.

CHAP. XXVII.
Verse 13. AFter many painful and perilous enterprises, now is Moses drawing to
his rest; he has brought his Israelites from Egypt through the Sea and
Wilderness, within the sight of their Promised Land, and now himself must take
possession of that Land whereof Canaan was but a Type. When we have done that
we come for, it is time for us to be gone. This Earth is made only for Action,
not for Fruition: the services of Gods Children should be ill rewarded if they
must stay here always. Let no man think much that those are fetched away that
are faithful to God, they should not change if it were not to their preferment.
It is our folly that we would have good men live for ever, and account it a
hard measure that they were. He that lends them to the World, owes them a
better turn than this Earth can pay them. It were injurious to wish that
goodness should hinder any man from Glory.

Verse 14. But what is this I hear? displeasure mixed with love? and that to so
faithful a servant as Moses? he must but see the Land of Promise, he shall not
tread upon it; because he once long ago sinned in distrnsting. Death, though it
were to him an entrance into glory, yet shall be also a chastisement of his
Infidelity. How many gracious services had Moses done to his Master? yet for
one act of Distrust he must be gathered to his Fathers. All our obediences
cannot bear out one sin against God; how vainly shall we hope to make amends to
God for our former Trespasses by our better behavior; when Moses has this sin
laid in his dish, after so many and worthy testimonies of his fidelity; when we
have forgotten our sins, yet God remembers them, and (although not in anger
yet) calls for our Arrerages. Alas what shall become of them with which God
has ten thousand greater quarrels, that amongst many millions of sins have
scattered some few acts of formal services. If Moses must dye the first death
for one fault, how shall they escape the second for sinning always? Even where
God loves he will not wink at sin; and if he do not punish, yet he will
chastise: how much less can it stand with that eternal Justice, to let wilful
sinners escape Judgment.

Verse 16. Moses that was so tender over the welfare of Israel in his life,
would not slacken his care in Death. He takes no thought for himself, (for he
knew how gainful an exchange he must make,) all his care was for his charge.
Some envious natures desire to be missed when they must go; and wish that the
weakness or want of a Successor may be the foil of their memory and honor.
Moses is in a contrary disposition; it suffices him not to find contentment in
his own happiness, unless he may have an assurance that Israel shall prosper
after him. Carnal minds are all for themselves, and make use of Government only
for their own advantage; but good hearts look ever to the future good of the
Church above their own, against their own.

Verse 18. Moses did well to show his good Affection to his people, but in his
silence God would have provided for his own: he that called him from the sheep
of Iethro, will not want a Governor for his chosen, to succeed him; God has
fitted him whom he will chose. Who can be more meet than he whose Name, whose
Experience, whose Graces might supply, yea revive Moses to the people. He that
searched the Land before, was fittest to guide Israel into it, he that was
endued with the Spirit of God, was the fittest Deputy for God: but O the
unsearcheable Counsel of the Almighty! aged Caleb and all the Princes of Israel
are passed over, and Joshua the servant of Moses is chosen to succeed his
Master. The eye of God is not blinded either with Gifts, or with Blood, or with
Beauty, or with strength; but as in his Eternal Election, so in his temporary,
he will have mercy on whom he will. And well does Joshua succeed Moses; the
very acts of God of old were allegories: where the Law ends, there the Savior
begins; we may see the Land of Promise in the Law; only Jesus the Mediator of
the New Testament, can bring us into it. So was he a Servant of the Law, that
he supplies all the defects of Law to us: he has taken possession of the
Promised Land for us, he shall carry us from this Wilderness to our rest.

Verse 22. I do not hear Moses repine at Gods choice, and grudg that this
Scepter of his is not hereditary, but he willingly lays hands upon his Servant
to consecrate hm for his Successor. Joshua was a good man, yet he had some
sparks of Envy: for when Eldad and Medad Prophesied, he stomack'd it: he that
would not abide two of the Elders of Israel to Prophecy, how would he have
allowed his Servant to sit in his Throne? What an example of meekness besides
all the rest, does he here see in this last act of his Master? who without all
murmuring assigns his Chair of State to his Page. It is all one to a gracious
heart, whom God will please to advance: Emulation and Coffeehouse are the
affections of Carnal minds. Humility goes ever with Regeneration; which teaches
a man to think (what ever honor be put upon others) I have more than I am
worthy of.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Verse 3. ALl Sacrifices under the Law did as it were lead us by the hand to
Christ, and point him out with the finger, who is the end of the Law, Romans 10.
he is both the Altar and the Sacrifice; he is the Lamb of God that takes away
the sins of the world; as therefore these Lambs were offered in the morning and
evening; so was Christ from the beginning of the World unto the end thereof; he
is the Lamb slain from the beginning of the World, Rev. 13. and as this daily
Offering was twice performed, so we have daily need of Reconciliation, that his
Blood should be continually applied unto us by Faith, and as we daily sin
against him, so we must have daily recourse unto him for remission of sins.
Again, this daily Sacrifice imports the daily Sacrifice of Prayer, which we
ought to offer to God, as our daily service due unto him: and this for many
Reasons. First, we have many sins. We provoke God every day, and therefore are
taught in the Lords Prayer, daily to pray for Forgiveness. Secondly, We have
daily wants, and therefore it is our duty daily to bewail them, and daily to
crave the supply of them, both temporal and spiritual blessings, for Body and
Soul. Thirdly, We have daily dangers. Every Creature if God give us over, is
able to work our destruction; therefore our only safety stands in Prayer, and
begging Gods assistance. Fourthly, We have daily Temptations, Bodily and
Ghostly, arising from the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; and therefore says
our Savior, Watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation, Mat. 26. So then
this Morning and Evening Sacrifice should direct us how and when to Worship
God; we must remember him in the Morning and Evening, he must be the first and
last in our thoughts, we must begin the day, and end it with him.

Verse 9. Every day in the Week ought to be the Christians Sabbath, wherein he
is to perform some duties or other of Religion; but every Seventh Day should be
a double Sabbath, wholly taken up in the Service and Worship of God. When our
whole work must be to beravish'd in Spirit; doing no Work but such as whereby
we either bless God, or look to receive a Blessing from him; none but such as
wherein we would the Lord should find us at his coming; which Lactantius says,
Will be on the Sabbath day. And therefore the Jews called the Sabbath, the
Queen of days; blessing the Lord at its coming in, and going out; that God
might have both the first and the last Fruits of the day.

Verse 26. Here is handled the Feast of Pentecost, or of Weeks, to give God
thanks after the gathering of the Harvest. For in as much as God has not only
set us in this World, but supplies and feeds us in it, so that we live by his
bounty and liberality; it was his will that the Jews should keep a yearly Feast
to him, to give him thanks, that hereby they might acknowledge all the year
after that they were sustained by his hand. Secondly, These first Fruits
figured out Gods Church, which is a people separated unto him from the rest of
the World. For as the first Fruits were separated from the rest of the heap
unto God; so is the state of the Church called and culled out of the World unto
his service.

CHAP. XXIX.
Verse 1. THis Feast of Trumpets was to be a Feast of remembrance of Gods
manifold mercies received in the Wilderness, that thereby they might stir up
themselves to be united to God; and may serve to stir us up to return unto God
Praise and Thanksgiving with joyfulness of heart for all his benefits;
according to that of Psalm 81. 1, 2. Make a joyful noise unto the God of Jacob.
Take a Psalm, and bring hither the timbrel: blow up the Trumpet in the
New Mood: so David having experience of Gods goodness toward him in many
preservations, composed the eighteenth Psalm as a testimony of his thankfulness
for his deliverance from his Enemies. And although this Feast is passed away
and abolished by the coming of Christ, yet this remains, that we our selves
should serve for Trumpets. For as the Temple being destroyed, we must be
spiritual Temples unto God; so the Trumpets being taken away, every one of us
must be spiritual Trumpets, i. e. we should rouse up our selves from the World,
and the vanities thereof. Our Ears are so possessed with the sound of earthly
things, and our Eyes so dazzled with the pleasures of the flesh, that we are as
deaf and blind men that can neither hear nor see what God says unto us,
wherefore we must not look till there be a solemn holy day to call us unto the
Church, there to keep a Feast of Trumpets, but it must serve us all the days
of our life, as a spur to cause us to return to God.

Verse 7. The Jews were here to afflict their Souls with voluntary sorrow for
their sins for the whole year, and so dispose themselves to obtain pardon and
reconciliation. For whereas in their private Sacrifices they durst not confess
their capital sins for fear of Death due to them by the Law; God graciously
provided and instituted this yearly Sacrifice of Atonement, and afflicting
their Souls for the sins of the whole people, without particular acknowledgment
of any. After the same manner the Lords Supper is with us a day of Atonement,
or afflicting of our Souls; for the Passover must be eaten with four herbs.
And further we may observe from hence, that this day of afflicting their Souls,
was to be immediately before the Feast of Tabernacles, verse 12. they were to
be kept in sorrow five days before they might keep their Feast of joy: which
Feast signified the spiritual joy and gladness of the Saints, that are redeemed
by Christ, all their life long. We must first look upon him whom we have
pierced, and weep for him, before we can receive any comfort by him. We must
afflict our Souls for his Passion, before we shall partake of the joy of his
Resurrection.

Verse 12. This Feast was called the Feast of Tabernacles, because during the
days of this Feast they were to live in Tents and Tabernacles; it being a
memorial of Gods preserving them in the Wilderness, where was no house for them
to rest in; and from hence we may learn, that it is a duty belonging to all to
remember the days of their troubles, and afflictions, from which God in great
mercy has delivered us. We are ready to forget our former condition when God
has given us rest; and therefore God would have his own people year by year to
depart out of their Houses, and dwell in Tents; that thereby they should call
to mind both where they were, and where they had been; that although they now
were at rest and ease in the Land of Canaan, yet they had not always been so;
for God had carried them upon Eagles wings, and preserved them after a
miraculous manner in the Wilderness.

CHAP. XXX.
Verse 2. When a man vows he vows unto the Lord, and therefore if he breaks
it, he sins against the Lord. Who expects he should have kept touch with him;
and accordingly will punish such a vow-breaker; for he has* not lied unto men,
but unto God, Acts 5. As God is true says St. Paul, 2 Cor. 1. 18. our word
toward you was not yea and nay, but yea and Amen. For the Son of God, etc.
Why? what is all this to the purpose may some say? yes, very much. For it
implies that what a Christian does promise to men, (much more to God) he is
bound by the earnest penny of Gods Spirit to perform; he dares no more alter
and falsify his word than the Spirit of God can lie. And as he looks that Gods
promises should be made good to him, so he is careful to pay what he has vowed
to God; seeing Gods Covenant is of mercy, ours of obedience; and if we expect
that God should be all sufficient to us, we must be altogether faithful to him.

Verse 8. The power and authority of the Husband over the Wife is very great:
for all be it the Wife be at liberty to vow in the Lord when her Husband is
dead, yet while he lives, he has power to disanul her vows, The Husband is the
head of the Wife, as Christ is the head of his Church, Ephesians. 5. to rule, to
defend it, to provide for it; therefore as the Church is in subjection to
Christ, so ought the Wife to be to her Husband. And therefore it is the duty of
all Wives to acknowledge their duty, and to yield without striving subjection to
their Husbands. It is also the duty of Husbands, seeing Authority is committed
unto them over their Wives to love them tenderly, even as Christ loved his
Church, Ephesians. 5. It is his duty likewise to dwell with his Wife, 1 Pet. 3. 7.
and why to dwell together? but that the Husband should yield to his Wife these
four things: First, Good Example. Secondly, Instruction. Thirdly, Maintenance.
And lastly, Employment in her Calling for his good, and his Families.

Verse 9. It is in our own power to vow or not to vow; but when we have vowed,
it is not in our power to break it. Vovere nusquam est praeceptum (says
Bellarm. l. z. de Mona.) for as for that of the Psalm 76. 11. Vow, and perform
to the Lord your God, is not Purum praeceptum, (says Mr. Cartwright,) a pure
Precept; but like that in the New Testament, Be angry and sin not; where anger
is not-commanded, but limited. So neither are we simply commanded to vow; but
having voluntarily vowed, we must not break it, nor yet may we defer to pay it.
Delays are taken for Denials, Excuses for Refusals. We must therefore come off
with our vows roundly and readily, as those Zech. 5. 9. that had wings, and
wind in their wings. Are not the nine Lepers condemned by Christ for their
negligence and unthankfulness? Luke 17. God loves a cheerful giver.

CHAP. XXXI.
verse 2. WE must first do our work, and then God will pay us our wages;
first, fight our good fight against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, (which
is to avenge our selves of the Midianites in the Text,) and then God will give
us the Crown of Glory. Avenge the children of Israel of the Midianites, says
the Lord here, and afterward Thou shall be gathered to thy people, to that
great Panegyris, the General Assembly, and Church of the firstborn in Heaven;
to that glorious Amphitheatre, where the Saints shall see and say, Look yonder
is Peter, and that is Paul: we shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
have communion with them, not only as godly men, but as Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob.

Verse 8. Balaam pretended an have homeward, but he lingered so long that he
left his bones in Midian. How justly did he perish by the Sword of Israel,
whose tongue had insensibly slain so many thousands of them. As it is usually
said of the Devil, that he goes away in a stench, so may it truly be said of
this Prophet of his: according to the fashion of all Hypocrites, his words were
good, his actions abominable; he would not Curse, but he would advise, and his
Counsel is worse than a Curse; for his Curse had hurt none but himself, his
Counsels cost the blood of four and twenty thousand Israelites. He that had
heard God speak by Balaam, would not look for the Devil in the same mouth; and
if God himself had not witnessed against him, who could believe that the same
tongue that uttered so Divine Prophesies, should utter so vilanous and cursed
advice? Hypocrisy gains this of men, that it may do evil unsuspected: but now
he that heard what he spoke in Balaac's ear, has berayed and Condemned his
Counsel and himself.

Verse 15. The Women were they that had caused Israel to sin, and therefore it
was dangerous to save them, left they might entice Israel to sin the second
time. If we would avoid the sin, we must have a care to fly the Temptation. If
we would not commit the act of Uncleanness, we must not keep company with
unclean persons; we must stand a loof, and keep at a distance from all
occasions of sin. And therefore to pray Lead us not into temptation; and yet to
run upon the occasion of sin, is to thrust our finger into the fire, and then
pray that it may not be burnt: a good man dare not come near the train, though
he be far off the blow; he will not dare to play near the hole of the Asp, lest
he slip into it. He will not dally with the Devil; knowing full well that sin
is very infinuative; and that the old Serpent, if he once get in his head, will
quickly wind in his whole body.

Verse 16. This policy was fetched from the bottom of Hell. It is not for lack
of desire that I (says Balaam to Balaac,) Curse not Israel; thou do not more
wish their destruction than I do thy Wealth and Honor: but so long as they
hold firm with God, there is no Sorcery against Jacob; withdraw God from them,
and they shall fall alone, and Curse themselves; draw them into sin, and thou
shall withdraw God from them. There is no sin more plausible than Wantonness;
one Fornication shall draw in another, and both shall fetch the anger of God
after them. Send your fairest Women into their Tents, their sight shall draw
them to Lust, their Lust to Folly, their Folly to Idolatry, and now God shall
curse them for thee unasked. Where Balaam spoke well, there was never any
Prophet spoke more Divinely; where he spoke ill there was never any Devil spoke
more desperately: ill Counsel seldom succeeds not: Gods seed falls often out
of the way, and roots not, but the Tares never likely miss.

Verse 31. It is worth the observation, to consider that before the death of
Anron, Moses and Aaron are joined together, so after his Death, Moses and
Eleazer, the Magistrate and the Minister; as the hand and eye are in the body.
Then does the Church and Commonwealth flourish when these two go hand in hand;
and on the other side, they go to wrack when they are separated, and draw
several ways.

Verse 35. The greatness of the Victory that God gave his people here, appears
by the distribution of the people, and reservation of the Women that had not
known Man, which escaped the edg of the Sword. Learn hereby first, that the
Iniquity of a People or Nation makes the Lord to destroy them, and lay them
waste, sometimes by the Sword of the Enemy (as in this place) and sometimes by
other Judgments. Secondly, that the eyes of Gods providence are upon all men,
and all their ways, in that he destroies multitudes, and Nations, as well as
single persons. Which may serve to reprove those that magnify themselves
against God; thinking to prevail and escape for their multitudes sake. Thirdly,
This admonishes every Country, City, and Nation, if they would enjoy their
Lands and Goods in peace, they must seek to be at peace with God; and if they
would not have destruction come upon them from God, let them not draw it upon
themselves by their sins.

Verse 49. There lacks not one man of us, say they here, therefore we have
brought an oblation. It was a great blessing of God to overcome the Enemy, and
obtain the Victory; but thus to overcome, and to have such a Victory, required
an extraordinary Thanksgiving. As men ought to return thanks to God for all his
blessings, so they ought for extraordinary Blessings to return extraordinary
Thanks. As in extraordinary visitations it is our duty to use extraordinary
humiliation; so when God shows us extraordinary mercy, we must be thankful
accordingly: Hezekiah returned great thanks for his great Deliverance, Isai.
38. We must therefore consider what blessings we have received from God, that
so we may render what thankfulness we owe him; else his Blessings will be
turned into Curses, and his Mercies into Judgments.

CHAP. XXXII.
Verse 5. THis was an unseasonable demand of these Men at this time; but
Covetousness had blinded their eyes that they could not see what was fit for
them to ask; and therefore were afterward the first of the Children of Israel
that were carried away Captive, 1 Chronicles. 5. 25. After the same manner it befell
Lot, who looking after the goodness of the Plains of Sodom, more than the
goodness of the People, preferred that place in his choice, and was carried
away Prisoner for it, Genesis 14. Thus God will not pass by the sins of his
dearest Children without a sensible check. These Reubenites and Gadites for
affecting the first choice, had soon enough of it. Strong affections bring
strong afflictions, as hard knots require hard wedges. Earthly things court us
that they may cut our throats: these Hosts welcome us to our Inn with smiling
countenance, that they may dispatch us in our Beds. Beware therefore of the
Worlds cutthroat kindness.

Verse 18. Reuben and Gad were the first that had an Inheritance signed them,
yet they must enjoy it last: so it falls out often in the Heavenly Canaan, the
first in title are last in possession. They had their lot assigned them beyond
Jordan; which though it were then in peace, must be purchased with their War:
that must be done for their Brethren, which needed not be done for themselves:
they must yet still fight, and fight foremost, that as they had the first
Patrimony, they might endure the first encounter. I do not hear them say, this
is our share, let us sit down and enjoy it quietly, fight who will for the
rest: but when they knew their own Portion, they leave Wives and Children to
take possession, and march armed before their Brethren till they have conquered
all Canaan. Whether should we more commend their Courage, or their Charity?
others were moved to fight with hope, they only with love: they could not win
more, they might lose themselves; yet they will fight both for that they had
something, and that their Brethren might have. Thankfulness and Love can do
more with Gods Children than desire to merit, or necessity: no Israelite can,
if he might choose, abide to sit still beyond Jordan, when all his Brethren are
in the field.

Verse 23. When God is searching, it is high time for us to search our selves.
It is sad, when God is searching for our sins, if we are not searching for them
too; and it is more sad, if when God comes to search for our sins, we be found
hiding our sins. These are searching times, God is searching, let us search
too; else we may be sure as Moses tells the people of Israel here, Our sins
will find us out. They who endeavor not to find their sins, shall be found by
their sins; our Iniquity will enquire after us, if we enquire not after it. But
what if Iniquity enquire after us? What? if Iniquity enquire after us, it will
find us, and if Iniquity find us, Trouble will find us; yea if Iniquity find us
alone without Christ, Hell and Death will find us. If Iniquity find any man, he
has reason enough to say unto it, (what Ahab said to Eliah without reason)
Have thou found me O mine enemy? the best of men have reason to look out what
evil is in them, when God brings evil upon them, or wraps them up in common
evils. They who have no wickedness in them to cast them under Condemnation, yet
have sin enough in them to make them smart under Correction.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Verse 8. THis is that place where the Israelites after three days journey
found the bitter Waters. The long deferring of a good, though tedious, yet
makes it the better when it comes. Well did the Israelites hope that the Waters
which were so long in finding, would be precious when they were found. Yet
behold they are crossed not only in their desires, but their hopes; for after
three days travel, the first Fountains they find are bitter Waters. If these
Wels had not run pure Gall, they could not have so much complained. Long thirst
will make bitter Waters sweet; yet such were these springs, that the Israelites
did not so much like their moisture, as abhor their relish. I see the first
handsel that God gives his People in their Voyage to the Land of Promise, is
thirst and bitterness. Satan gives us pleasant entrances into his ways, and
reserves the bitterness to the end; God invites us to our worst at first, and
sweetens our conclusion with pleasure. O my Savior, thou did drink a more
bitter Cup from the hands of thy Father, than that which thou refused'st of the
Jews; or than that which I can drink from thee.

Verse 9. God taught his People by actions as well as words. This entrance
showed them their whole Journey; wherein they should taste of much bitterness,
but at last through the mercy of God sweetened with much more comfort, and for
one Fountain of bitter Water, they should have no less than twelve of sweet. Or
did it not represent the Israelites rather in their Journey? in the Fountains
of whose Hearts were the bitter Waters of manifold corruptions, yet their
unsavory Souls are sweetened by the more abundant Graces of Gods Spirit. O
blessed Savior, that Fountain of Water and Blood which issued from thy side,
that is, the application of thy Sufferings is enough to sweeten a whole Sea of
bitterness. I care not how unpleasant a portion I find in this Wilderness, if
the power and benefit of thy precious Death may season it to my Soul.

Verse 14. Bread they had from Heaven, but wanted Water. Our condition here in
this World is a condition of singular indigency: we are ever wanting somewhat
or other.

Verse 42. Among the several stations which the Israelites made through the
Wilderness, one was Punon or Phinon, which as one of the ancient Fathers
observes, signifies silence, or sparingness of Speech; upon which he makes
this useful Application; Let us be careful to take up our station here
sometimes, while we are travailing through the Wilderness of this World. It may
he our wisdom to pitch in silence. The hand is well employed while we stop the
mouth with it from broaching and maintaining that which is evil, or from
opposing that which is good.

Verse 53. They were to be driven out, because their Iniquity was now full;
they were as an Harvest ready for the sickle, or as a Vine for the Wine Press;
so were they ready for the Vintage of Gods wrath, which now came upon them to
the utmost; the sin of these Canaanites filled the Land with filthiness from
corner to corner, it overspread it as a deluge, turned it into the same nature
with its self; as Coporas which will turn Milk into Ink, or Leaven which
turns a very Passover into pollution. And therefore God rooted them out, and
caused their Land when it could bear them no longer, to spew them forth. Sin is
filthiness in the abstract, St. James calls it, James 1. 21. The stinking filth
of a pestilent Ulcer, the superfluity and garbage of naughtiness, and therefore
must be thrown upon the Dunghill. It is no better than the Devils excrement, fit
for nothing but the draught. It sets his limbs in us, and draws his Picture
upon us. For Malice is the Devils eye, Oppression is his hand, Hypocrisy his
cloven foot. Great ^^^s do greatly pollute; and therefore God does greatly
punish them.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Verse 3. THe Land of Promise was called Canaan of Canaan, the Son of Cham, who
with his posterity dwelt therein: and this is now bounded that they might
inherit all that God had given them, and divide no more than was given them.
This teaches us that God sets bounds unto all men's possessions: they must take
no more, nor usurp and presume any further than he has given. Which condemns
all encroaching and usurpation one upon another, in Kingdoms and Lordships, as
well as private possessions; when men cannot be content with their own, but
will stretch their power and jurisdiction further: God has made them great,
but they seek to make themselves greater; he has set them bounds, but they
will know no bounds. So that from hence we may gather, that the Wars which are
taken in hand upon ambition, and enlarging of the bounds of their Empire only,
are a despising of God, a shedding of innocent blood, and a perverting of that
order which he has set in Nature, and Nations.

Verse 13. The consideration of the nearness of Gods mercies should encourage
and imbolden every one to be constant and courageous that we faint not in the
last act; this made Moses say here, This is the land which ye shall inherit; he
does as it were point it out with the finger, and bids them lift up their
Eyes, and behold the goodness which God had promised to their Fathers. For as
the consideration of Judgment at hand, and lying at the doors, ought to move
terror and astonishment, so when we behold the mercies of God before our eyes,
which are not prolonged for many years, it ought to inflame us with an holy
zeal and desire to see the accomplishment of the same.

Verse 15. Consider here the state of the Church of Israel as it now stood; and
in this the state of Christ's Church to the end of the World. Some were at rest,
others were to pass further, some had their Inheritance, and some had none;
some had Towns and Cities to dwell in, and some were yet left to the wide
World, and were to wander further. Some had much, and others little or nothing
at all: and the reason of this is, because God will never have those that have
plenty and abundance to be without objects, upon which to show mercy; That his
gifts may be tried that he has given them; as also to teach us that we should
not settle our selves here, nor make the Earth our Heaven, but that we should
seek for another life, where shall be no want, no misery, no necessity, but God
shall be all in all.

CHAP. XXXV.
Verse 3. LEt us provide for Gods Ministers, if not richly and plentifully, at
least commodiously and competently, and not inconveniently and needily; that so
they may wholly attend their Ministry, and not for necessity sake entangle
themselves in secular affairs. And that God expects these things of us, his own
dealing Dictates; who when he did demand an allowance for himself to maintain
his Priests and Levites withal; albeit they were one of the least Tribes, yet
it was so much as in all probabilities did far exceed all other Tribes
Revenues; and the same in such sort both for their own habitation, and for
their Household provision and keeping of their Cattle for use and service about
them, was as commodious and fit as to any of the rest. And that in very deed
these things are not too much, the very Estate of the Ministers duly considered
from reason will soon yield and confirm.

Verse 8. The Levites were to have their Glebe-land out of the Israelites
possession, according to the several abilities of each Tribe. They that had
many Gities were to give many, and those that had few, accordingly. All were to
contribute, and this not as an Alms, but as a right. And this upon very good
ground and reason. For if Alexander could say, That he owed more to Aristotle
that taught him, than to Philip that begot him; if another could say that he
never could discharge his Debt to God, to his Parents, to his Schoolmaster;
how deeply then do men stand obliged to their spiritual Fathers and Teachers in
Christ. And I would to God that this Age would but think upon this truth; and
not think that all is well saved that is withheld from the Minister. Too many
think it neither sin nor pity to beguile the Priest. But God is not mocked,
neither will he be robbed by any, but they shall hear, Ye are cursed with a
Curse, Mal. 3. 8. Even with Shallum's Curse, Ier. 22. 13, 14. that used his
Neighbors service without Wages, and would sacrilegiously take in a piece of
Gods window into his own.

Verse 30. Yet if this one be a faithful witness, says Aristotle, one faithful
witness in some cases may suffice; in private offenses howsoever. And that our
Savior speaks of such, Mat. 18. 16. St. Basil and others are of opinion, If
thy Brother a Jew shall trespass against thee being a Jew, right thy self by
degrees: First deal with him Fraternally, tell him his fault betwixt thee and
him alone, Verse 12. Secondly, deal with him legally, take with thee one or two
Witnesses more, Verse 16. Thirdly, deal with him Jewishly, tell the Church,
complain to the Sanhedrim, Verse 17. Fourthly, if he shall neglect to hear
them, deal with him Heathenishly, i. e. let him be unto thee as an Heathen and
a Publican, make benefit of the Roman power; let Caesar's Justice end the
difference between you.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Verse 2. THe Fathers of the Children of Gilead came not to Moses in contempt,
or with a commotion, as if they meant to gain that by force which they could
not obtain by favor; but they bear themselves lowly and dutifully, as became
them to the Magistrate, when they say, The Lord commanded my Lord; and again;
my Lord was commanded. It is the duty of all Inferiors to Reverence their
Superiors in gesture, in word and in deed; because Superiors bear the Image of
God, and are to their inferiors in Gods place, as Moses was to Aaron, when God
said, Exodus 4. Thou shall be unto him instead of God. And therefore we see the
place of subjection is not an unlawful Calling; and that Christianity does not
abolish Magistracy, and Civil Authority, but rather ratify and establish it.

Verse 6. Marriage is not to be enforced upon any, either by the Magistrate or
Parents, Genesis 24. 57. 1 Cor. 7. 39. For this were to exeercise Tyranny over our
Children. For as Children are to have the consent of their careful Parents, and
not to dare to bestow themselves without their advice; so likewise Parents
ought to have the consent of their Children, and not bestow them upon others
against their wills: for that were to lay an evil foundation, and to fill the
House with jars and dissentions, and their Children with misery; who will beg
with better will where they like, than live without love in abundance.

Verse 8. Every Daughter shall be a Wife unto one of the Family; which teaches
us, that however the marrying of many Wives was practiced among the Patriarks,
and people of God, yet this is the Law of Nature, that one man should have one
Wife, and not Wives. But the main point we learn from hence, is, That the
Inheritance of the Children of Israel must remain and continue in one and the
same Tribe. Now if it be the Ordinance of God that every man keep his proper
Inheritance; then certainly distinction of Inheritance is agreeable to his
Word. We are taught likewise from this Text, that Parents should provide for
their Daughters as well as Sons, and not to leave them to the wide World,
especially in these our days, wherein more enquiry is made after what they
have, than what they are, and what Goods are without them, than what good
qualities are within. Nature teaches, that if any Member be weak, it is
chiefly to be strengthened; the Woman is the weaker, and therefore needs to
be supported.

Verse 10. These Daughters of Zelophehad obey the Judgment of Moses, and marry
in their Tribe: teaching us at this day to rest in the determination of the
Magistrate, and not to run from Court to Court only in malice, and a
contentious spirit, till we have enriched others, and beggared our selves.
There may be sometimes an use of Appeal, or going about again upon better
light; but let not reasons be pretended, when they are not to satisfy our
malice or revenge. For God sees; and he being the God of peace, will ever show
his dislike of Quarrelling and Contention.

A PRACTICAL COMMENTARY UPON THE FIFTH BOOK OF MOSES CALLED DEUTERONOMY.
CHAP. I. Verse 22.
I Cannot but wonder at the Counsel of God. If the Israelites had gone to
Canaan without enquiry, their confidence had possessed it; now they send to
espy the Land, sixty thousand of them never lived to see it: and yet I see God
in Numbers 13. enjoining them to send; but enjoining it upon their instance.
Some things God allows in Judgment; their importunity and distrust extorted
from God this occasion of their overthrow. That which the Lord moves unto
prospers; but that which we move him to first, seldom succeeds. What needed
they doubt of the goodness of that Land, which God told them, did flow with
Milk and Honey? what needed they doubt of obtaining that which God promised to
give? When we will send forth our senses to be our Scouts in matter of Faith,
and rather dare trust men than God, we are worthy to be deceived.

Verse 27. Now was Moses in danger of losing all the cost and care that ever he
bestowed upon Israel: his people are already gone back to Egypt in their
hearts, and their bodies are returning. O ye rebellious Hebrews, where shall
God have you at last? Did ever Moses promise to bring you to a fruitful Land
without Inhabitants? to give you a rich Country without resistance? are not the
Graves of Canaan as good as those of Egypt? What can ye but dye at the hands of
the Anakims? can ye hope for less from the Egyptians? is there less hope from
the Enemies that shall be, when you go under strong and expert Leaders, than
from the Enemies that were, when ye shall return masterless? feeble minds when
they meet with Crosses they looked not for, repent of their good beginnings, and
wish any difficulty rather than that they find. How many have pulled back their
foot from the narrow way, for the troubles of a good Profession?

Verse 28. It had been happy for Israel, if Caleb's Counsel had been as
effectual as good: but how easily have these Rulers discouraged a faint-hearted
people. Instead of lifting up their Ensigns, and marching toward Canaan, they
set them down and murmur. I fear if there had been ten Calebs to persuade, and
but two faint Spies to discourage them, those two Cowards would have prevailed
against those ten Solicitors; how much more now ten oppose, and but two
encourage. An easy Rhetoric draws us to the worse part; yea it is hard not to
run down the Hill. The faction of evil is so much stronger in our nature than
that of good, that every least motion prevails for the one, scarce any suit for
the other.

Verse 34. That God which was invisibly present whiles those Israelites sinned
when they have sinned shows himself glorious and full of power. They did not
believe before that he was able to bring them into that good Land of Canaan,
now they shall believe but never enter. They might have seen God before that
they should not sin, now they cannot choose but see him in the height of their
sin, unusually terrible, that they may with shame and horror confess him able
to defend, able to revenge. The help of God uses to show its self in
extremity: he that can prevent evils, conceals his aid till dangers be ripe;
and then he is fearful, as before he seemed connivent.

Verse 37. What a weary life did Moses lead in these continual successions of
Conspiracies? What did he gain by his troublesome Government, but danger and
despite? Who but he would not have wished himself rather with the sheep of
Iethro, than with these Wolves of Israel? but as he durst not quit his
Shepherds crook without the calling of God; so now he dare not his Scepter
except he be dismissed of him that called him; no troubles, no oppositions can
drive him from his place: we are too weak if we suffer men to chase us from
that station where God has set us. But what was this noted sin here that
deserved Gods anger? Israel murmured for water. God bids Moses take the Rod in
his hand, and speak to the Rock to give Water; Moses instead of speaking and
striking the Rock with his voice, strikes it with his Rod: here was his sin an
overreaching of his Commission; a fearfulness and distrust of the effect. His
Rod he knew was approved for miracles, he knew not how powerful his voice might
be, therefore he did not speak but strike, and strike twice for failing. It is
a dangerous thing in Divine matters to go beyond our warrant: those sins which
seem trivial to men are heinous in the sight of God: Any thing that savours of
infidelity displeases him more than some other crimes of morality. Yet the
moving of the Rod was but a diverse thing from the moving of the Tongne, it was
not contrary; he did not forbid the one, but he commanded the other: this was
but across the stream, not against it; where shall they appear whose whole
courses are quite contrary to the Commandments of God?

CHAP. II.
Verse 5. IT is God that assigns every Man his Quarters here upon Earth, and
cuts us out our several conditions, appointing the bounds of our habitation.
This should make us rest contented with our own lot, and not murmur at other
men's; though they be of the Seed of Esau; for they have a right to their
Inheritance from God as well as we have for ours. Even the most Wicked have
Earthly things given them by the Almighty, and therefore it is a rigor to say
they are Usurpers. As when a King gives a Traitor his Life, he gives him Meat
and Drink that may maintain his life; so it is with Wicked Men in respect of
God; they shall not be called to an account at the Last Day for possessing what
they had, but for abusing that possession. As for the Saints who are Heirs of
the World with faithful Abraham, and have a double portion, being Heirs of this
World and the next too; though here they be held to strait allowance, let them
live upon Reversions; and consider that they have right to all, and shall one
day have Rule of all. Wilt not thou rest content, unless God set down the
Vessel to thee as to St. Peter, with all manner of Beasts of the Earth, and
Fowls of the Air? must you needs have first and second Course? It is a very
hard thing to have Earth and Heaven too. God did not turn you out of one
Paradise, that you should here provide you of another. Earth is a place of
bondage and banishment to all Gods Children.

Verse 6. Money supplies all wants, and gives a satisfactory answer to
whatsoever is desired or demanded; and although about Money there is much
noise, and great complaint; yet Money answers all, it effects all. What great
designs did Philip bring to pass in Greece by his Gold? the very Oracles were
said (...), to say as Philip would have them. The Hebrew, or rather Chaldee
word used for Money, Ezra 8. 27. signifies to do some great Work; because Money
is the Monarch of the World; and therein bears most mastery. Among Suitors (in
Love and Law especially) Money drives the business and bargain to an upshot.

Verse 27. So should a Christian bespeak the World; Let us pass through thy
Country; we will neither touch nor taste of thy Dainties, but go by the Kings
high way, that good old way, that God has scored out unto us; we will neither
turn to the right hand nor to the left, but keep an upright and an even course,
until we arrive at the Land of Promise, the Kingdom of Heaven.

Verse 30. He durst not trust them; as fearing what so great an Army once got
in might do; they are not usually so easily removed. God had also hardened his
heart, that he might come forth to fetch his own destruction. Judgment need
not go to find wicked Men out, they run to meet their ruin. Those whom God
intends to deliver over to destruction, shall have both their heart and their
head hardened; their heart against the motions of Gods Grace, and their Head
against the motions and Dictates of their own reason.

CHAP. III.
Verse 1. THe Enemies of Gods Church are not consumed in a moment, but wasted
and consumed by the providence of God by little and little. True it is, God is
able to bring them all to nothing at once with the breath of his mouth; but it
is his pleasure to waste and consume them by degrees one after another. As here
after Sihon was overthrown, we see another Judgment of God upon another Enemy
of the Church: and this God does, because by them he may try the Faith, and
exercise the patience of his Servants. No marvel if others be oftentimes
deceived in us, and are ignorant of the secrets of our Souls, seeing we our
selves know not thoroughly our selves, until we have ended and endured trial.
For such we are indeed as we are in the time of Temptation. Wherefore it is
necessary that so long as we live in this World, we should be kept in a
continual exercise of Faith, of Prayer, of Repentance, of obedience. This was
likewise done to plague the Israelites, when at any time they should sin
against God: and therefore the Nations were left among them to be as snares in
their paths, whips in their sides, and thorns in their eyes, because they
transgressed the Covenant that God had made with their Fathers, Ps. 81. 13.

Verse 2. Among other means of working Faith in God, and resting our selves in
his Promises, the blessed experience and comfortable proof which we have had of
Gods mercies toward us in former times, is one of the chiefest to cause us to
trust in him, and evermore to call upon him in our necessity. This is confirmed
unto us in David's faithful behavior, going to encounter with the uncircumcised
Philistim, 1 Samuel 17. 34, etc. Whereby it appears how the Prophet strengthens
his Faith by the experience that he had in times past of Gods helping hand:
nothing doubting but that the same God that had preserved him from the jaw of
the Lion, and the paw of the Bear, would keep him in this single Combat with
that Champion that defied Israel.

Verse 26. Upon one single transgression God passes the sentence of
restraining Moses with the rest from the Promised Land; Now he performs it:
Since that time Moses had many favors from God; all which could not reverse
this decreed castigation: that everlasting Rule is grounded upon the very
Essence of God; I am Jehovah, I change not. Our purposes are as ourselves,
fickle and uncertain; his are certain and immutable: some things which he
reveals, he alters; nothing that he has decreed.

Verse 28 It is no small happiness to any State, when their Governors are
chosen by Worthiness, and such Elections are ever from God; whereas the
intrusions of Bribery, and unjust favor, and violence; as they make the
Commonwealth miserable, so they come from him which is the author of
Confusion: woe be to that State that suffers it, woe be to that person that
works it; for both of them have sold themselves, the one to servitude, the
other to sin.

CHAP. IV.
Verse 2. SUch add to Gods Book as wrest it, and rack it; making it speak that
which it never thought, causing it to go two miles, where it would go but one;
knawing and tawing it to their own purposes; as the shoemaker wretches the
upper Leather with his teeth. Tertullian calls Marcian the Heretic Mus
Ponticus, from his arroding and knawing the Scripture to make it serviceable to
his Errors. And too many of these kind of Mice have we at this day in this
Nation, who wrest Texts of Conscience into Factions, Texts of Obedience into
Rebellion; ravishing Scripture to force out Doctrines for their own ends, and
then emptying their rancor by turning them to uses.

Verse 8. By Statutes here we may understand the Moral Law, by judgments the
Judicial, which was fitted to the temper and disposition of the Jews: like as
Solon being asked whether he had given the best Laws to the Athenians?
answered, the best that they could suffer. And certain it is that Moses spoke
here (as ever) most Divinely and like himself, or rather beyond himself; the
end of a thing being better (if better may be) than the beginning of it; as
good Wine is best at last, and as the Sun shines most aimiably when it is going
down. This Book of the Law it was that the King was to write out with his own
hand, Deuteronomy. 17. 18. that it might serve as his Manual. This was that happy Book
that good Josiah lighting upon (after it had long lain hid in the Temple)
melted into tears at the menaces thereof, and obtained of God to dye in peace,
though he were slain in War. This only Book was that pretiously purling
Current, out of which the Lord Jesus our Champion chose all those three smooth
stones, wherein he prostrated the Goliath of Hell in that sharp encounter; Mat.
4.

Verse 11. God would have Israel see, that they had not to do with some
impotent Commander that is fain to publish his Laws without noise in dead
Paper, which can more easily enjoin than punish, to descry than execute, and
therefore before he gives them a Law, he shows them that he can command Heaven,
Earth, Fire, Air, in revenge of the breach of that Law: that they could not
but think it deadly to displease such a Lawgiver, or violate such dreadful
Statutes; that they might see all the Elements examples of that obedience which
they should yield unto their Maker. Now this fire wherein the Law was given, is
still in it, and will never out. Hence are those terrors which it flashes in
every Conscience that has felt remorse of sin. Every Man's heart is a Sinah,
and resembles to him both a Heaven and Hell. The sting of Death is Sin, and the
strength of sin is the Law.

Verse 12. That they might see he could find out their closest sins, he
delivers his Law in the light of fire; that they might see what is due to their
sins, they see fire above to represent the fire that should be below them; that
they might know he could waken their security, the thunder and louder voice of
God speaks to their hearts. That they might see what their Hearts should do,
the Earthquakes under them. O Royal Law, and mighty Lawgiver. How could they
think of having any other God that had such proofs of this? How could they
think of making any resemblance of Him whom they saw could not be seen, and
whom they saw, in not being seen, infinite? How could they think of disobeying
his Deputies whom they saw so able to revenge? How could they think of killing,
when they were half dead with the fear of him that could kill both Body and
Soul? How could they think of the flames of Lust that saw such fires of
vengeance. We Men that so fear the breach of Humane Laws for some small mulcts
of Forfeiture, how should we fear thee O Lord, that can cast Body and Soul
into Hell.

Verse 24. If the Law as we read before was given in Thunder and Lightning, how
shall it be required; if such were the Proclamation of Gods Statutes, what
shall the Sessions be? O God, how powerful art thou to inflict vengeance upon
sinners, who did thus forbid Sin? and if thou were so terrible a Lawgiver,
what a Judge shall thou appear? what shall become of the breakers of so fiery a
Law. O where shall those appear that are guilty of the transgressions of that
Law, whose very delivery was little less than Death. If our God should exact
his Law but in the same rigor wherein he gave it, sin could not quit the cost:
but now the fire wherein it was delivered, was but terrifying, the fire wherein
it shall be required, is consuming. Happy are those that are from under the
terrors of the Law which was given in Fire, and in Fire shall be required.

Verse 29. It is a kind of denying the Infiniteness of God to serve him by
pieces, and rags: God is not infinite to me if I think a discontinued service
will serve him. It is a kind of denying the unity of God, to join other Gods,
pleasure or profit with him; he is not one God to me if I join other Associates
and Assistants to him. It is a kind of diffidence in Christ, as if I were not
sure that he would stand in the favor of God still, as though I were afraid
that there might rise a new Favorite in Heaven, to whom it might concern me to
apply my self, if I make the balance so even as to serve God and Mammon: if I
make a complemental visit of God at his House upon Sunday, and then plot with
the other Faction, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil all the Week after.

CHAP. V.
Verse 1. IT is not enough for us to Learn the Law, but we must keep it and do
it; we must lay it up in our hearts as well as in our heads, and practice it
also in our lives and Conversations. For not the hearers, but the doers of the
Law shall be justified, Romans 2. 13. Too too many in this Rotten Age wherein we
live are Speakers, not Workers; as if Ostende re fidem, St. James his, Show thy
Faith by thy Works, were Ostendere to stretch the Jaws to show our Faith by
strong Protestations. But this must not be a work of the mouth, but hand: If a
Man question thee of Faith, spare thy Lips, and let thy Life make answer. If
words might be credited, if a bare profession of the Gospel might be believed;
no Man would want Faith; every one would cry with the blind Man in the Gospel,
Lord I believe; what Mouth would not make one Lie for its Master. Unless I see
said Thomas of Christ's rising; so unless I see and feel thy Faith, I will not
believe. If we are good Trees, by our Fruit men shall know us, Mat. 7. By our
Fruit; not by our blossoms of good purposes, or our leaves of good profession,
but by the Fruit of our actions.

Verse 9. Parents are hence admonished to take heed of sinning against God,
lest they be found unmerciful, unnatural, and hard hearted to their Children.
Wicked Parents do what they can to make their Children miserable, even while
they are projecting to make them great and happy. Tertullian treating of this
point, supposes that God aimed at this in giving the Law, when he threatened to
punish the iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children, etc. this says he, God
spoke in reference to the hardness of their Hearts, that if no other argument
would move them, to observe Gods Laws, yet mere compassion to their own
Children might do it. All Parents have a natural love to their Children. So
that they who have not a spiritual principle moving them to forebear sin,
because they love God, and delight in his Law; may yet be moved by a principle
of natural affection to avoid those sins; for which by Name God tells them he
will surely afflict and punish their Children.

Verse 22. God was ever wonderful in his Works, and fearful in his judgments,
but he was never so terrible in the execution of his will as now in the
promulgation of it. Here was nothing but a Majestical terror in the Eyes, in
the Ears of the Israelites, as if God meant to show them by this how fearful he
could be. Here was the Lightning darted in their Eyes, the Thunders roaring in
their Ears, the Trumpet of God drowning the Thunderclaps, the voice of God
out-speaking the Trumpet of the Angel; the Cloud enwrapping, the Smoke
ascending, the Fire flaming, the Mount trembling, Moses climbing and quaking,
paleness and Death in the face of Israel, uproars in the Elements, and all the
glory of Heaven turned into terror. In the destruction of the first World there
were Clouds without fire. In the destruction of Sodom there was fire raining
without Clouds; but here was Fire, Smoke, Clouds, Thunder, Earthquakes, and
whatsoevermight work more astonishment than ever was in any vengeance inflicted.

Verse 26. The living God is an ancient and usual Title of the Almighties, and,
as I live is an usual Oath of Gods; neither do I remember any thing besides his
Holiness, and his life that God swears by. When Moses asked Gods Name, he
described himself by, I am. He is, he lives; and nothing is, nothing lives
absolutely but he; All other things by participation from him. In all other
things, their life and they are two; but God is his own life, and the life of
God is no other than the living God: and because he is his own life, he is
Eternal. For nothing ceases to be but by a separation of life; and nothing can
be separated from its self; for every separation is a division of one thing
from another: most justly therefore is he which is absolute, simple, eternal in
his being, called the living God.

CHAP. VI.
Verse 2. WE must first bear an aweful respect to the Divine Majesty, a
reverential fear, and from this principle of Fear we shall be brought to obey
God in every part and point of duty: Do this, and live for ever. Do it in an
Evangelical way I mean; for we can do it now no otherwise. Wish well to exact
obedience as David does, Psalm 110. 4, 5. O that I could keep thy Commandments
accurately, and woe is me that I cannot: and then be doing as thou can; for
affection without endeavor is like Rachel, beautiful but barren. Be doing I
say at every thing as well as at any thing, Fear God, and keep all his
Commandments says Moses here: thou must not be funambulus virtutum (as
Tertullians phrase is) one that goes in a narrow tract of obedience; no, thy
obedience must be universal extending to the compass of the whole Law; and then
Beati sunt qui praecepta faciunt, etiamsi non persiciunt, says St. Augustine,
they are blessed that do what they can, though they cannot but underdo, that do
what they can, though they cannot do as they ought. Fear God then, and keep all
his Commandments; all of them to the utmost of thy power, and the assistance
of Gods grace. The Book of Ecclesiastes begins with All is vanity, and ends
with Fear God, and keep his Commandments: that which troubles us, Solomon
calls vanity; that which is necessary he calls the fear of God. From that to
this should be every Man's Pilgrimage in this World; we begin at Vanity, and
never know perfectly that we are vain, till we come to fear God and keep his
Commandments.

Verse 3. I observe here an excellent connection betwixt the service required,
and the reward promised. God has no intent to be served by his Creatures for
naught: if the service be but once hinted, Hear O Israel, and observe to do it;
the reward is expressed in terminis, It shall be well with thee, and thou shall
increase and multiply. Gods Precepts are still waited upon by Promises. Yea his
precepts are but subservient to his Promises. God commands that he may promise,
and would have obedience that he may perform blessedness to the Creature. It is
true, there is nothing that man can bestow upon God, but might be exacted upon
a bare Command; and yet God adds the Promise, when he presses the Precept; and
that he might win Man, he is fain to bait the Hook when he would catch the
Fish, and to hang the Promise upon the Precept, that so Man might be made his
own.

Verse 5. God cannot abide that we should serve him with a double Heart, an
heart and an heart, that is hypocritically. Neither that we should serve him
with half an heart, that is niggardly and unwillingly; to serve God, and not
with the whole heart is a base dodging with God. If the Heart were not Gods, it
were too much to give him a part of it; but now that he made this whole heart
of ours, it is but reason he should be served with all of it. Those serve God
not with all the heart, whose bosom is like Rachels tent, that has Teraphim,
Idols hid in the Straw; or rather like a Philistines Temple, that has the Ark
and Dagon under one roof; those that have let down the World like the Spies
into the bottom of the well of their heart, and cover the mouth of it with
Wheat; I mean that hide great oppressions with small Beneficences; those which
like Solomon's Curtizan cry Dividatur, and are willing to share themselves
betwixt God and the World.

Verse 8. God has charged the Jews here, to bind the Law to their hand, and
before their Eyes: wherein as Jerome and Theophylact well interpret it, he
meant the meditation and practice of the Law; they in the mean time like the
foolish Patient, which when the Physician bids him take such a Prescript, eats
up the Paper, if they could get but a List of Parchment wherein the Law was
writ to tie upon their arm and forehead, thought they might say with Saul,
Blessed art thou of the Lord, I have done the Commandment of the Lord. Men now
adays like those Jews care only to seem Christians; and if they can get Gods
livery on their backs, and his Name in their mouths, they outface all
reproofs. How many are there, who if they can keep their Church, give Alms, bow
their Knee, say their Prayers, and once a year receive the Sacrament think they
may say in their heart, I have enough my Brother; but be not deceived, if long
Devotions, sad looks, hard pen ances, bountiful Alms would have carried it
without the solid substance of Religion, the Scribes and Pharisees had never
been shut out of Heaven.

CHAP. VII.
Verse 9. WE may be sure that whatsoever God has promised to his Church, (and
whatsoever God has done upon the Enemies of his Church heretofore, those very
performances to them, are promises to us of the like succors in the like
distresses) he will perform, reperform, multiply performances thereof upon us.
Therefore is God called here, The faithful God: for that faithfulness implies a
Covenant made before (and there enters his mercy that he would make that
Covenant) and it implies also the assurance of the Performance thereof, and
there enters his faithfulness. So he is called by St. Peter, 1 Pet. 4. a
faithful Creator; he had an eternal gracious purpose upon us to Create us, and
he has faithfully accomplished it. And so Gods whole Word is called so often,
so very often a faithful Witness, an evidence that cannot deceive nor mislead
us.

Verse 13. There is no Man but he has more about him in his present
engagements and obligations to God, than he will be able to answer in his best
services, though he should live out his Eternity here; and then add a
Christians Reversions to his present Possessions, and it may be read running,
that God is not beholding to the Creature for any work or service that is done
to him; and yet God is pleased here to promise these Israelites, that he will
bless the fruit of their Womb, and the fruit of their Land, if they will
hearken to his Judgments, and keep his Commandments. But then withal,
observe from hence, that God first hints the service, and then expresses the
reward. First, he says in the foregoing Verse, If you will hearken to my
judgments, and keep them; and then he grants the reward in this verse; I will
bless the fruit of thy Womb, and of thy Land. God will stand upon his own
Prerogative, and his Prerogative is to be served first and simply. Though God
will not be served for naught, and therefore makes large Promises; yet he will
not be served because of the Promise, but because of the Precept, and therefore
that goes first. It is the Devil that makes bargains with his Servants to hire
them to serve him, Mat. 4. 9. but though God makes many and large promises to
those that serve him, yet he never makes any bargains with them; and therefore
in all the obedience that is done to God, the Christian must first eye the
Command, and then the Promise. It is not denied but I may look upon the Promise
as a motive, as an encouragement, as an obligation, as an occasion to duty and
obedience, but not as the end, and cause, and ground of my obedience. I may
have respect unto the recompense of the reward with Moses, Heb. 11. 26. but to
seek Christ because of the Loaves, is to respect the Loaves more than Christ,
or as much as Christ, and that is rotten.

Verse 15. A healthy body is the reward of piety; and he that endeavors to
keep Gods Commandments, God will keep from him all sickness (says the Text.)
Fear the Lord, and depart from evil, and it shall be marrow unto thy bones,
Prove. 3. thou shall be in good plight both for the outward and inward man; thy
bones shall be full of marrow, and thy Breasts full of Milk, thy spirit also
lively and lifted up in the ways of the Lord. For as without marrow in the
bones, no part of Man, no not that which is of greatest value and force is able
to do any thing; so the strength which Gods faithful Servants receive from him,
is as Marrow which strengthens the Bones, and makes them apt to do good
things. And as a Man that has his bones filled with marrow, and has abundance
of good blood, and fresh spirits in his body, he can endure to go with less
clothes than another, because he is well lined within; so it is with a heart
that has a great deal of the fear of God, he will go through difficulties, and
troubles, and diseases, though outward comforts fail him.

Verse 18. As some Schoolmasters have used that Discipline to Correct the
Children of great Persons, whose personal Correction they find reason to
forbear, by Correcting other Children in their Names, and in their sight, and
have wrought upon good Natures that way; so did Almighty God correct the Jews
in the Egyptians. For the ten Plagues of Egypt were as Moses december verba, as
the Ten Commandments to Israel, that they should not provoke God. Every
Judgment that falls upon another should be a Catechism to me.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse 1. ALl the commands (says Moses here) that I command you this day,
shall ye observe to do them, that you may live and multiply. We may look at
Gods reward of our obedience as the scope and aim of it, 2 Cor. 4. 18. though
not our highest aim; for that must evermore be the glory of God: for otherwise
it is an argument of a base and an unworthy Spirit to serve for ends. If it
were no more, but in the service of the State, it is most odious and
distastful. For a Captain to fight that he may divide the spoil, or for a
Minister to comply with Covenants and Engagements that he may save his own, or
creep higher, it is hist at by all honest Men; and therefore much more to serve
the great God for ends, is an abomination not to be named among Christians. It
is Merchandising with God, and not obedience to serve God, that I may serve my
self. I am never at the pitch of sincerity, till I can see enough in God
himself, without looking out of him to have him (as he was to Abraham, Genesis 15.
1.) My exceeding rich reward. When it comes once to this Kue, that the beauties
of Gods truth, and the pleasantness of his ways, and the holiness of his will,
and the equity of his Laws are the Arguments and the Wages that hire me to this
service. I may cry out with David, I have found that which my Soul longs for;
for as sin is punishment enough unto its self, though there were no other
punishment; and to do evil were Hell sufficient, if there were no Hell to come
after; so to do good is reward and Heaven enough unto its self if the Heart be
gracious.

Verse 3. God is a most free Agent, neither will he be tied to the terms of
humane Regularities: it is enough that he knows and approves the reasons of his
own choice and commands. Once in forty days and nights shall Eliah eat, to
teach us, what God can do with little means, and but once, to teach us what he
can do without means: Once shall the Prophet say, Man lives by Bread; and but
once, Man lives not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God.

Verse 5. As a loving Father never beats his Child but for a Fault; so
neither does God chasten us without a Cause: our sins are the Cause which
furnish Gods whip. But then withal, this will comfort those Children of God
that are afflicted; is any Child of God either impoverished with Losses, or
visited with Sickness, or struck with Sores, or oppressed with heavy burdens,
or grieved with Death of Friends, or affrighted with terrors of Conscience? let
him lay this Text to his Heart, and it will either cure his Malady, or at least
make it sufferable, yea and comfortable unto him. For in his greatest extremity
let him thus think with himself, it is God that smites me, can I resist his
power? must I not obey his Will? Again God chastens me as a Father; he inflicts
with grief, moderateth with Love, guides with Fatherly providence what he
orders me to suffer; Shall I refuse Nurture, and show my self a Bastard, and
no Son? had I rather he should leave me to my self to follow my own courses,
according to the bent of my corrupt Nature, with a purpose to deprive me of his
Glory, and dis-inherit me of his Kingdom? He Disciplineth all his Children; am
I better than the rest? and all this he does in love, and shall I take that ill
that is sent to me in love? but you will say, Does God take pleasure in the
afflictions of his Children? No, Castigat quos amat, non tamen amat castigare,
he chasteneth whom he loves, yet he loves not to chasten: but this he does to
purge our Corruptions, and improve our Graces.

Verse 14. Not the mere possession and use of Riches offends but the
affectation; the fault hangs not upon Riches, but upon that which Idols them,
the Heart. And therefore Moses gave here a strong Caveat to the Israelites,
that when their Flocks and Herds increased, their silver and their gold was
multiplied, they should be ware lest their Hearts were lifted up, and so they
should forget God. Those sublunary Creatures raise not distraction in us, so we
make them not our Center, if we rest not in them, if we can look through them
to the giver; and therefore there is no doubt but we may entertain Riches not
only as a Servant, but a Friend, but by no means as a Lord. There is virtue in
the true use of them, if there be a qualification in our desires.

CHAP. IX.
Verse 10. THere was never so precious a Monument as the Tables written with
Gods own hand. If we see but the stone which Jacobs head rested on; or on which
the foot of Christ did once tread, we look upon it with more than ordinary
respect: with what eye should we have beheld this Stone, which was hewed and
written with the finger of God. Any Manuscript scroll written by the hand of a
famous Man, is laid up amongst our Jewels; what place then should we have
given to the handwriting of the Almighty? That which God has Dictated to his
Servants the Prophets, challenges just Honor from us; How does that deserve
Veneration which his own hand wrote immediately? Prophesies and Evangelical
Discourses he has written by others, never did he write any thing himself but
these Tables of the Law; neither did he ever speak any thing audibly to all
mankind but it; the Hand, the Stone, the Law were all his. By how much more
precious this Record was, by so much was the faolt greater of defacing it.

Verse 12. God sends down Moses to remedy this sin: he could as easily have
prevented as redressed it. He knew Moses came up, what Israel would do ere he
came down: like as he knew the Two Tables would be broken ere he gave them. God
most wisely permits and ordains sin to his own ends, without our excuse. And
though he could easily by his own hands remedy evils, yet he will do it by
means, both ordinary, and subordinate. It is not for us to look for any
immediate redress from God, when we have a Moses, by whom it may be wrought:
since God himself expects this from Man, why should Man expect it from God.

Verse 14. Now might Moses have found a time to have been even with Israel for
all their unthankfulness, and mutinous Insurrections; Let me alone, I will
consume them, and make thee a mighty Nation. Moses should not need to solicit
God for Revenge, God solicites him in a sort for leave to revenge: who would
look for such a word from God to Man, Let me alone? as yet Moses had said
nothing; before he opens his mouth, God prevents his importunity, as
foreseeing that holy violence which the requests of Moses would offer to him.
Moses stood trembling before the M^^esty of his Maker, and yet hears him say,
Let me alone. The mercy of our God has as it were obliged his power to the
Faith of Men: the servent Prayers of the faithful hold the hands of the
Almighty. As I find it said afterward of Christ, that he could do no miracles
there, because of their unblief; so now I hear God, (as if he could not do
execution upon Israel, because of Moses Faith) say, Let me alone that I may
consume them.

Verse 17. I see here that forty days talk with God cannot bereave a man of
passionate infirmity: he that was the meekest upon Earth, in a sudden
indignation abandons that which in cold Blood he would have held faster than
his Life. He forgets the Law written when he saw it broken; his zeal for God
has transported him from himself and his duty to the charge of God. He more
hates the golden Calf wherein he saw engraven the Idolatry of Israel, than he
honored the Tables of Stone, wherein God had engraven his Commandments; and
more longed to deface the Idol, than he cared to preserve the Tables. Yet that
God which so sharply revenged the breach of one Law upon the Israelites, checks
not Moses for breaking both the Tables of the Law. The Law of God is spiritual:
the eternal breach of one Law is so heinous, that in comparison of it God
scarce counts the breaking of the outward Tables a breach of the Law. The
goodness of God winks at the errors of honest zeal, and so loves the strength
of good affections, that it passes over their infirmities.

Verse 19. God had promised Moses to make him a great Nation, Verse 14. but
this satisfies not Moses, unless Israel may be so too; and therefore he prays
for them here, that the Lord would not destroy them. The more a man can leave
himself behind him, and aspire to a care of community, the more spiritual he
is: nothing makes a man so good a Patriot as Religion. But oh the sweet
disposition of Moses fit for him that should be familiar with God! he saw they
could be content to be happy and merry without him, he would not be hapyy
without them. They had professed to have forgotten him, he seeks to pray for
them. He that will ever hope for good himself, must return good for evil unto
others.

Verse 21. Although Moses did here stamp and burn their Idol, yet I do not hear
any of them say he is but one man, we are many, how easily may we destroy him,
rather than he our God. It is our act, and we will maintain it; here was none
of this but an humble obeisance to the basest revenge that Moses shall impose.
God has set such an impression of Majesty in the face of lawful Authority,
that Wickedness is confounded in its self to behold it. Besides, sin has a
guiltiness in its self, that when it is seasonably checked, it pulls in his
head, and seeks rather an hiding place than a Fort.

CHAP. X.
Verse 1. ISrael recovers the favor of renewing the Tabernacles, but with an
abatement; Hew thee two Tables. God made the first Tables: the matter, the form
was his; now Moses must show the next. As God created the first Man after his
own Image; but that once defaced, Adam begat Cain after his own; or as the
first Temple raised, a second was built, yet so far short, that the Israelites
wept at the sight of it. The first works of God are still the purest: those
that he secondarily works decline in their perfection. It was reason that
though God had forgotten Israel, they should still find they sinned. They might
see the footsteps of his displeasure in the differences of the Agent.

Verse 2. When God had told Moses before, I will not go before Israel, but my
Angel shall lead them; Moses so noted the difference, that he rested not till
God himself undertook their conduct: so might the Israelites have noted some
remainders of offense, whiles instead of that which his own hand did formerly
make, he says now, Hew thee: and yet these second Tables are kept reverently
in the Ark, when the others lay mouldred in shivers upon Sinah: like as the
repaired Image of God in our Regeneration, is preserved, prefected, and laid
up at last safe in Heaven, whereas the first Image of our created innocence is
quite defaced: so the second Temple had the glory of Christ's exhibition, though
meaner in frame. The merciful respects of God are not tied to glorious
outsides, or the inward worthiness of things or persons: he has chosen the
weak and simple to confound the wise and mighty.

Verse 4. God did this work by Moses; Moses hewed, and God wrote: our true
Moses repairs that Law of God which we in our Nature had broken; he receivesit
for us, and it is accepted of God, no less than if the first Characters of his
Law had been entire. We can give nothing but the Table, it is God that must
write in it. Our hearts are but a bare board till God by his finger engrave his
Law in them: yea Lord, we are a ^^^gh Quarry; hew thou us out, and square us
fit for thee to write upon.

Verse 12. God forbids us not here a love of the Creature, proportionable to
the good that that Creature can do us: to love Fire as it warms me, and Meat as
it feeds me, and a Wife as she helps me. But because God does all this in all
these several instruments, God alone is centrically, radically, directly to be
loved; and the Creature with a love reflected and derived from him.

Verse 17. St. Peter took his Text, Acts 10. 34. from this Text of Moses: where
because the words are not the same with these here in precise terms; we find
just occasion to note, that neither Christ in his Preaching, nor the Holy Ghost
in penning the Scriptures of the New Testament were so curious as our times in
citing Chapters and Verses, or such distinctions, no nor in citing the very
words of the places. There is a sentence cited thus indeffinitely, Heb. 4. 4.
It is written in a certain place, without more particular note: and to pass
over many, if we consider that one place, Isai. 6. 10. and consider the same
place as it is cited six several times in the New Testament, we shall see that
they stood not upon such exact quotations, and citing of the very words, as we
do now adays.

Verse 20. It is a reverential fear of God as of a Father that is here
required; causing us first to have high and honorable conceptions of God in
our hearts; sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and let him be your dread
and your fear, Isai. 8. 13. Secondly, making all honorable mention of him with
our mouths; whether we speak to him, or of him. Presume not in a sudden
unmannerliness to blurt out the Name of God, much less to blaspheme it, and
bore it through with hideous Oaths and Imprecations. To speak evil of ones
Father was Death by Plato's Law, as well as by Gods Law; and Suidas testifies
of the same Plato and other Heathens, that when they would swear by their
Jupiter, out of mere dread and reverence of his Name, they forbear to mention
him, breaking off their Oath with (...), as those that only dared to owe the
rest to their thoughts. Thirdly, Walking before him in the whole course of our
lives with an holy bashfulness, being evermore in the sense of his presence,
and light of his countenance, In the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of
the Holy Ghost, as those Primitive Christians, Acts 9. 31.

CHAP. XI.
Verse 6. THis Element was not used to such Morsels. It devours the Carcasses
of men, but bodies enform'd with living Souls never before. To have seen them
struck dead upon the Earth had been fearful; but to see the Earth at once their
Executioner and Grave, was more horrible. Neither the Sea nor the Earth are fit
to give passage: the Sea is moist and flowing, and will not be divided for the
continuty of it; the Earth is dry and massy, and will neither yield naturally,
nor meet again when it has yielded. Yet the Waters did cleave to give way unto
Israel for their preservation; the Earth did cleave to give way to the
Conspirators in Judgment: both Sea and Earth did shut their jaws again upon
the Adversaries of God.

Verse 9. Hence some Lutherans have concluded, that God has not determined the
set period of man's days; but that it is in Man's power to lengthen or shorten
them, But is there not a time appointed for Man upon the Earth, Job 7. 1. there
is certainly. our bounds are prescribed us, and a pillar set by him who bears
up the Heavens, which we are not to pass. Stat sua cuique dies, (says the
Heathen Poet) our last day stands though all the rest run. It is said of the
Turks, that they shun not the company of those that have the Plague, but
pointing to their foreheads, say, it was writ there at their Birth when they
should dye; and therefore Job describing the shortness of man's Life, and
withal, that his days are determined, compares them to the days of an
hireling, For with an Hireling we agree to work with us for a certain time, and
usually by the day, whence they are called Day-labourers. It imports then that
the time of man's life is short, and set, for Hirelings are appointed to an
hour. Fifteen years just, and no more were added to Hezekiah's life, Isai. 38.
5. our very hairs are numbered, much more then our days.

Verse 11. What ever the Egyptians fancy of their River Nilus, both their
River, and our Rain too are from above; there is not any of the Creature, not
so much as our mere Water, but we receive it from Heaven. God bottleth up the
rain says Job, and pours it on the earth, when God pleases to turn the mouths
of these bottles downwards. This is a great miracle, that whereas Water is
fluid, and bears downward, yet now that God thus binds up these heavy
vapors, and keeps them in those Vessels of the Clouds as thin or thinner than
the liquor that is contained in them (as a strong Man in a Cobweb) till brought
by the Winds wheresoever he pleases, they drop upon the Earth by little and
little to make it fruitful; this is a wonderful work of God, and should bring
us to the knowledge of his Power, Wisdom, and Goodness.

Verse 12. We read in natural story of some Creatures, Qui solo oculorum
aspectu fovent ova, Plin. l. 10. c. 9. which hatch their Eggs only by looking
upon them. What cannot the Eye of God produce and hatch in us. The Eye of the
Lord upon me makes midnight noon, and St. Lucies St. Barnabies day, and the
Winter's the Summers Solstice; what a cheerful Spring, what a fruitful Autumn
has that Soul that has the eye of the Lord always upon her? The eye of the
Lord sanctifies, nay more than sanctifies, glorifies all the Ecclipses of
dishonor, makes Melancholy Cheerfulness, Difidence Assurance, and turns the
jealousy of the sad Soul into Insallibility. Upon the people of Israel Gods
eye shined in the Wilderness, his eye singled them in Egypt, and in Babylon
they were sustained by his Eye.

Verse 19. Fathers should look upon their Children as Gods heritage, and labor
to make them Sons of God, and Heirs of Heaven; they must desire and endeavor
to become natural as well as spiritual Fathers to their Children, by teaching
and instruction from their very Infancy. For when Children are able to learn
any thing that is bad, then certainly it is high time to teach them something
that is good; when they can stammer out an Oath, or lisp toward blasphemy, then
it is high time to teach them their Catechism, and instruct them in the
Principles of Religion. And therefore the Holy Ghost has composed certain
Abcedarian Psalms, according to the order of the Hebrew Alphabet; that Children
might learn an Alphabet of Godliness, and Parents teach them the Elements of
Religion as well as of Learning; such Psalms are 25. 34, etc.

CHAP. XII.
Verse 1. THe difference between Divinity and other Sciences, is; that it is
not enough to learn, but we must observe and do it: as lessons of Music must
be practiced; and a Copy not read only, but writ and followed. The practical
Christian is the best Christian, Man goes forth to his work and to his labor
till the evening, says the Psalm. 104. 23. he must ever more be doing,
following his honest employment, in his particular place and calling, whether
Manual or Mental, eating his Bread either in the sweat of his brow, or his
brain. And as it is with Man in his Civil, so likewise in his Spiritual
Calling; he must arise from the bed of sin, and go forth out of himself, out of
his Lusts and sinful affections, as out of his House, to his work and to his
labor, working out his salvation with fear and trembling, until the Evening,
till the Sun of his Life be set.

Verse 7. There is no one duty almost in both Testaments, more pressed than
this of rejoicing before the Lord, and the contrary is complained of, and
sorely threatened, Deuteronomy. 28. 47. and therefore it is declared here as a
recompense of all their charge and pains, Ye shall feast before the Lord with
joy, this was the sweetmeats of the Feast; other dainty dishes there might be,
but this was the Banquet. This made those good Souls, Ps. 84. 7. go bodily on
from strength to strength; though they took many a step, yet their comfort was,
that they should everyone of them in Syon appear before the Lord, and then
thought their pains, though never so great, well bestowed; though they then saw
Gods face but obscurely in the dark glass of the Ceremonies. What then should
not we suffer to see God clearly in his Ordinances.

Verse 8. The words are not, you shall not do ill in your own Eyes, but you
shall not do that which seems good; good I say, and I pray you mark it, you
shall not do that, but shall keep you to my Commandment. Be it never so good
then in my conceit, that is, be my meaning never so good, it will not excuse.
The time will come says Christ, that whosoever kills you will think that he
does God good service. What then shall his so thinking excuse his bloody
murder? What ill meant Joshua when he wished Moses to forbid those that
Prophesied? Micha's Mother, when according to her Vow she made her Sons two
Idols? the Disciples of Christ when they forbad Little Children to come unto
him? Peter's meaning had no hurt in it, when he bad Christ to pity himself,
and when he forbad him to wash his feet, yet you know no good intent was
accepted in these cases.

Verse 14. God will not take any of thy pretended Superogations for Sacrifices
or Worshipping, but will be served after his own way, and according to his own
Prescriptions; and therefore he says in the former Verse, Take heed that thou
offer not thy burnt-offerings in every place that thou see; as if he had
said, I will be worshipped according to that which I have commanded thee, and
not after thine own fancy. Because indeed that God (the very reason and cause
of all things) has his end in all whatever he ordains. For to direct all
Nations to the Sacrifice of his only Son alone, he would have but one Temple,
but one Sanctuary, and one Altar; whereas thou do darken and confound his
meaning by thy multitude of High Places and Altars.

Verse 32. God accepts of no service but such as he commands. You shall not do
every one that which seems right in his own eyes, says the Holy Ghost in the
beginning of this Chapter; but ye shall do whatsoever I enjoin you, says the
same Spirit in this Verse. Our service is limited to that which God likes.
Saul thought that Sacrifice had been service, but God liked better of his
obedience. Uzza supposed he had done but his duty in holding up the Ark which
was like to fall, but God taught him that it was far otherwise. The Scribes and
Pharisees thought themselves the only men that served God, because of their
long Praying, much Fasting, etc. But who required these things at their hands?
said Christ.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse 2. WHat Moses speaks of false Prophets, may be spoken of all bewitching
sins with pleasure or profit: If a Dreamer of Dreams have given thee a sign,
and that sign come to pass; if a sin have told thee it will make thee rich, and
it has made thee rich; if this Dreamer draw thee to another god, if this
profit draw thee to an Idolatrous, i. e. to an habitual love of that sin, (for
Tot habemus recentes Deos quot vitia, says St. Jerome) yet though this Dreamer
be thy Brother, thy Son, how near, how dear, how necessary soever this sin be
unto thee, Non misereberis, says Moses, Thine eye shall not pity that
Dreamer, etc. and so of this pleasurable or profitable Sin, Non misereberis,
thou shall not hide it, but pour it out in confession; Non misereberis, thou
shall not pardon it, no nor reprieve it, but destroy it for the practice
presently; not Misereberis, thou shall not turn out the Mother and retain the
Daughter, not leave the sin, and retain that which was sinfully got, but divest
all, root, and body, and Fruits, by confessing to God, by contrition in thy
self, by restitution to men damnified.

Verse 3. As the Spider in the midst of her Cobweb feeling the least touch that
shakes her work, retires instantly from the danger; so should the perfect
Convert shrink at the least noise, whispering and murmuring of a Temptation, he
should avoid the very Complement, and first Address of the Devil, and the very
sight, the discourse, the air and breathing of his instruments. It is not safe
to hear them, or hold Discourse with them; lest they insinuate and infect us as
the Montanists did Tertullian, and Acasius the Heretic did Anastasius a Bishop
of Rome, who sought to rectify him. For such men's words are softer and
smoother than Oil, and yet in the end prove sharper than drawn swords, says
the Psalmist; they pretend healing and Cordials in their Discourse, when the
poison of Asps is under their Lips; Heaven and Salvation is in their mouth,
when nothing but Hell and Destruction in their Heart. They are like Eagles,
that sore aloft toward Heaven, not for any love of Heaven, but that they may
spy their Prey the sooner, and seize upon it the better.

Verse 6. We must rely upon, and praise, and bless God alone. For can we rely
upon Man? upon what Man? upon Princes? we have seen them unking'd, and unmanned
too, both their Crowns and their Lives taken from them. Will thou rely upon
great Persons in favor with Princes? have we not seen often that the
Bed-Chambers of Kings have back doorsinto Prisons, and that the end of that
Greatness has been but to have a greater Jury to condemn them? Will thou rely
upon the Prophet, he can teach thee; or upon thy Brother, he does love thee; or
upon thy Son, he should love thee; or the Wife of thy bosom, she will say she
loves thee; or upon thy Friend, he is as thine own Soul? yet Moses here puts a
case, when thou must depart from all these, not consent, no not conceal; not
pardon, no not reprieve, Thou shall surely kill him, says Moses, even this
Prophet, this Brother, this Son, this Wife, may incline thee to the service of
other gods; that Prophet by what Name or Title soever he be called; that
Brother how willingly soever he divide the Inheritance with thee; that Son how
dutiful soever in civil things; that Wife, how careful soever for her own
honor, and thy Children; that Friend, how free soever of his favors, and of
his secrets, that inclines thee to other gods, or to other service of the true
God then is true.

Verse 14. Men must be swift to hear, slow to speak, that is, to censure and
pass sentence. Athanasius passes for a Sacrilegious person, a profane wretch,
a bloody Persecuter, a blasphemer of God, and was so condemned before he was
heard by that Pseudosynodus Sardicensis; and therefore God does command the
Israelites here that they should enquire diligently, before the Judgment
should pass upon the offenders, even in such matters as concerned his own
Worship; he would not have so much as that preserved from Idolatry without
strict enquiry, and search whether the thing was certain that such an
abomination was wrought among them. A rash precipitant course in matters of
Judgment has saved many a guilty person, and condemned as many innocent.
Follow therefore Gods method, enquire before you Judge, know the cause before
you pass the sentence.

CHAP. XIV.
Verse 1. FRom hence we may observe how careful the Lord is, not to have his
people imitate the fashions of the Gentiles, for fear one thing should draw on
another, and in the end, even Idolatry and false Worship. We in these days are
wholly given to Foreign Fashions, the Lord in mercy save us from foreign sins,
oppression, tyranny, and Massacrees, and continue his Gospel and Peace upon us,
preventing and confounding their designs, that craftily endeavor the
supplanting both of Church and State under the color of policy and safety.

Verse 2. The people of the Jews were an holy people unto God with a federal
holiness, which yet without an inherent holiness in the heart and life, will
profit a man no more then Dives in the flames that Abraham called him Son, or
Judas that Christ called him Friend; an empty title yields but an empty comfort
at last. Let us therefore endeavor an inward holiness, to bear his mark, his
Seal, his Covevant upon our heart: then shall we be indeed (as it is in the
Text) a chosen Generation, a picked people, the dearly Beloved of Gods Soul;
such as first he chose for his love, and then loves for his choice; we shall be
his peculiar people, his people of purchase (as it is in the Septuagint) such
as comprehend as it were all Gods gettings, his whole stock that he makes any
great reckoning of; and upon the same account we are said to be Kings and
Priests unto God; First Kings, to rule in Righteousness, to Lord it over our
Lusts, to triumph over all our spiritual Adversaries, being more than
Conquerors through him that loved us, and laid down his lise for us, that we
might reign and live eternally. And surely if Kings are doubly bound to serve
God, both as Men and Kings; what are we for this spiritual Kingdom? Secondly
Priests, to offer up to him the personal Sacrifice of our selves, the verbal of
Praise, and real of Alms.

Verse 8. There was never any surer evidence of the cleanness of a Creature
among the Jews, then that it was permitted to be Sacrificed, or to be killed
and eaten; the Lamb and the Turtle emblems of Innocence, and Charity, and other
Christian Virtues, were daily slaughtered and devoured; while the Swine, and
all the uncleaner Creatures were denied that favor, placed under a kind of
Anathema, or excommunication-sentence, of such it was not lawful no not to eat:
and thus it must be expected in the Antitype, that all the heat of the
Satanical impression, all the fire of a furious zeal, the fatal sentence to be
Sacrificed and devoted, should fall upon Lamb-like Dove-like Christians; it
being constautly the portion and the prerogative of the best Men to be under
the Cross, to have their hundredfold of good things in this world with
persecutions, Mark 10. 30.

Verse 12. When Moses shows here what Fowls are unclean; you may note the
great mercy of God, in that most of these unclean Fowls are indeed odious to
our Nature, and we eat them not; whereas he might have restrained his People
from those that they loved and liked; so good is God in all things, and careful
not to lay heavy burdens upon us. Some good Fowls are yet restrained, that Men
might learn Temperance and obedience, for Gluttony and excess we are very prone
unto. Some have considered the nature of every Fowl, and labored from that to
learn something for amendment; as for instance, by the Eagle that mounteth
high, they have noted mounting aspiring minds to be a fault, and to make Men
unclean. By the Gossnauk, Men that prey upon their weaker Brethren and
Neighbors, and gripe them so as they kill them and undo them. By the Vulture,
Men that delight too much in Wars and Contention; and so of the rest. But in
the general, you must even take it so that God stood not so much upon these
Ceremonies, as to teach his people hereby inward truth, and cleanness of heart,
ever fit for such as are Gods people: at this therefore we must carefully aim
to be holy as God is holy.

CHAP. XV.
Verse 1. EVery Seventh Day the Jews rested from their labors; every Seventh
Year the Ground rested; and every Seventh Seventh was the Jubilean Sabbath; at
which all Debts were remitted, Prisoners released, Morgages restored to the
right Inheritors. The great and eternal Sabbath comprehends all these; that is,
the Year of Grace, that blessed Jubilee, wherein all true Israelites, all the
faithful people of God shall be discharged from all their engagements, as well
of sin, as for sin: God shall forgive us all our Debts, all our Trespasses; how
much more then should we forgive those that trespass against us. For Judgment
without mercy shall be to them that show no mercy; there is but an hairs breadth
betwixt him and Hell, that has not his sins pardoned in Heaven, such is the
case of every one that does not forgive his offending Brother, Mat. 18. 35. or
that says, I will forgive the fault, but not forget the matter, or affect the
person; men must forbear one another, and forgive one another as Christ forgave
them; and that if any man have a quarrel against any, for else what thanks is
it? the glory of a Man is to pass by an infirmity. It is more comfortable to
love a Friend, but more honorable to love an Enemy; if thou reserve in thy
mind any piece of the wrong, thou provokest and daily pressest God to reserve
for thee a piece of his wrath, which burns as low as the nethermost Hell.
Neither will it help any to do as Latimer reports of some in his days; who
being not willing to forgive their Enemies, would not say their Pater Noster at
all; but instead thereof took our Ladies-Psalter in hand: because they were
persuaded, that by that they might obtain forgiveness of their sins of favor,
without putting in of so hard a condition as the forgiveness of their Enemies
into the bargain.

Verse 3. Those that are without the Covenant are also without the mercy of
God; Christ will never pardon those for whom he never died; their sins only
shall be blotted out of Gods Book, whose Names are written in it. Christ is the
covering or propitiation of his peoples sins, be they never so many, and never
so great; as was sweetly shadowed of old by the Ark covering the Law, the
Mercy-seat covering the Ark, and the Cherubims over them, both covering one
another, in allusion whereunto, Blessed (says David) is the man whose
transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered, Psalm 32. 1, 2. But then you
must remember that all this covering of this Law, and this Mercy-seat, and
these Cherubims had relation unto the people of God, (which were then the
Jews,) no other Nation had any of these types; and as the types did not, so
neither did the Antitype belong to them: our Savior was no covering to their
sins, no discharger of their Debts: they were all of the number of these
Forreiners in the Text; they were at the Creditors mercy to be cast into
Prison, and from thence not to depart till they had paid the utmost farthing.
But now there is no exacting from them, no Condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus, says St. Paul, Romans 8. 1. Non una Condemnatio, not one
Condemnation. There it none in Heaven, God does not Condemn them; none on
Earth, their own hearts and conscience does not condemn them; no Word, no
Commandment, no Threatening. But now an unbeliever shall have a double
Condemnation; one from the Law which he has transgressed, another from the
Gospel which he has despised: as a Malefactor, that is Condemned and dead in
Law, despises and rejects his Princes pardon. But now it is quite otherwise
with those that are in Christ Jesus: the Law cannot condemn them, because they
have appealed; the Gospel cannot, because they have believed.

Verse 11. The Poor are here called Our poor, as well as Our Brethren; to show
that our compassion and love should be as ready for them, as for our nearest
Relations; and these Poor says this Text, shall never cease out of the Land,
to try and exercise our liberality, yea our Justice, as the Syriack calls it,
for our Alms are due unto the Poor, either by the Law of Equity, or of charity.
For there is a debt of Love, Romans 13. that we must be ever owing, and ever pay;
and as we say of thanks, thanks must be still given, and still held as due, so
must this debt of Love. Quicquid Clerici habent, pauperum est (said St. Jerome)
which is true in a sense of others as well as Ministers, the Poor (Gods Poor
and our Poor such as are Aged and impotent) are the owners of that we have, we
are but Stewards and dispensers of Gods bounty to his necessitous servants: now
if our Receipts be found great, and our layings out small, God will cast such
Bills back in our faces, and turn us out of our Stewardship: they are fools
that fear to loose their Wealth by giving, but fear not to loose themselves by
keeping it.

Verse 21. Whatever Beast was offered up and sacrificed to the Lord, must be
without blemish, neither lame nor blind (says the Text.) And certainly if the
Sacrifice were to be without blemish, much more is the Priest; who was styled
holy to the Lord from a twofold holiness, the one of his Life, the other of
his Person. For all Sanctity is not inward, nor is all perfection, that of the
Soul. Gods holy one must be his fair one too, without blemish, no less in body
than in mind. Thus under the Law no monstrous issue, no blind seer might offer
the bread of his God, Lev. 21. and shall the Evangelical ministration be worse
served than the legal; while the Sacrifice is more noble shall the Priest be
less? only the fattest in the Heard, the fairest in the Flock were the
oblations of the Law, and shall the poorest of the Tribe, the most deformed of
all the issue be the Offerings of the Gospel? the Lords house is no Hospital;
neither the Sacrifice nor the Priest must be admitted unsound and imperfect.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse 16. LEst Men should altogether neglect the service of God, here is an
injunction given from the Lord, that all the Males should go up to the Temple
three times a year, still to keep them in use and love of the Church; albeit
they dwelled a great way off. Where you may observe, that although the Law
reached but to the Males, (because God graciously considered that the Women
might be with Child, or Nurses, and not able to come;) yet godly Women when
they were able, and had no impediment, would go up also with their Husbands;
such a zeal had they to the House of God. So went up Hannah with her Husband;
so went up the Blessed Virgin to Jerusalem every year, at the Feast of the
Passover; both of them when there were gross and foul Corruptions. For when
Hannah went up, what read we of the Sons of Heli? and when Mary went up, the
Scribes and Pharisees were in their Ruff; yet they went up to teach us not to
fall out with God for Men's faults, nor to absent our selves from Church and
Church exercises; because all things are not perfect in the Ministers.

Verse 19. Gifts and Rewards put out the Eyes of those that saw clearly before,
and stop the Ears of those that could hear before, and shuts up the mouth of
those that could speak before. If then the receiving of Bribes, and taking of
Gifts be a setting of Justice to sail; if they have force to pervert and
corrupt not only such as are lewd and lime-finger'd to draw Presents unto
themselves, but the wise and righteous; then we must acknowledge them to be
dangerous Temptations; this Moses teaches the Judges and Officers which were
to be chosen in their Cities; Thou shall not wrest the Law, etc. neither let
them say, though I take Rewards, I will never swerve from Justice, for that is
to presume vainly of thine own strength, and to give the Spirit of God the lie
that speaks the contrary. Now seeing that Gifts and Rewards offered be as
baits laid up to ensnare the Soul, let us refuse them in the first place; and
next let us follow after the best Gifts, which may further the Salvation of the
Soul. Those indeed are good Gifts which make the possessors of them better, and
which in the day of trouble and hour of Temptation, shall minister more true
comfort and peace than all earthly and transitory things, which end in
corruption.

CHAP. XVII.
Verse 13. IT is the duty of a Child of God to fear the Judgments of God. We
should fear the Judgments of God whilst threatened, and only heard of: what
though we see them not? what though we feel them not? what though we are not
the persons intended in them, or to be smitted by them? yet the report of them
as directed against others, should make us tremble. Now if we are to fear God
for his Judgments when they are but threatened, then certainly we are to fear
him much more for his Judgments inflicted. And therefore in the old Law here
when Judgments were executed, it is said, they shall hear and fear, and do no
more presumptuously; they shall fear what had been already executed upon
offenders, and so fear to offend. Moses here shows what all ought to do, not
what all did upon the appearances of Judgment, and the execution of Divine
wrath upon high Transgressors.

Verse 17. Here the King is commanded not to multiply Wives: and that upon very
good ground: for if one Woman undid all Mankind, what marvel is it if many
Women may undo one. And Satan has found this bait to take so well, that he
never changed it since he crept into Paradise. How many have we known whose
heads have been broken with their own Ribs. In the first World the Sons of God
saw the Daughters of Men, and took them Wives of all that they liked; they
multiplied, not Children, but Iniquities: Balaam knew well if the Dames of Moab
could make the Israelites Wantons, they should soon make them Idolaters: all
lies open where the Covenant is not both made with the Eye, and kept.

Verse 20. Learn to fear the Lord, (says the Holy Ghost in the former Verse)
that thy heart be not lifted up above thy Brethren. The best counterpoison
against Pride is to get the heart seasoned with the fear of God; for the fear
of the Lord is to hate evil, as Pride, Arrogance, Prove. 8. 13. Joseph truly
feared God, and therefore hated not only gross Evils (as Adultery) but close
Evils, as Pride and Arrogance; It is not in me, God shall give Pharaoh an
answer, Genesis 41. as he insinuates himself by this dutiful comprecation, so he
extenuates his gifts, that he may give the glory to God. So St. John Baptist
was full of the fear of the Lord, and thereby of Humility. For these two go
coupled, Prove. 22. 4. and so close, that there is no Copulative in the
Original; for thus it runs in the Hebrew, By humility the fear of the Lord are
riches, and honor, and life. What Riches the Baptist had I know not; but for
honor, that hand of his that he thought not worthy to unloose the latchet of
Christ's shoe, Christ thought worthy to be laid on his head in Baptism. There
are that say, that for his humility here on Earth, St. John is dignified with
that place in Heaven from which Lucifer fell; who told them that I know not;
but this I know, that he that humbles himself shall be exalted, Luke 4. 11.

CHAP. XVIII.
Verse 1. YOu have here in this Verse the reason wherefore Tithes ought to be
paid to Gods Ministers. We must give to God, what? the things of God; why?
because they are Gods, they do properly belong unto him as his own possession;
they are a peculiar Inheritance, or special portion reserved to himself. So
that although he has given the Earth to the Sons of Men; yet these like a
chief Rent to a Landlord, or a certain Tribute to a King, were always excepted
and reserved; they were the Lords Inheritance: and when men began wickedly to
alienate the same, and usurp upon his sacred Right, then his re-claim and
re-seizure thereof condemns the usurpers of downright theft, Mal. 3. Is it so
then that these things are Gods; it is therefore but equity to pay them to God:
for equity requires, and Justice bids, that we give to every one his own:
on the other side to withold them, or to take them, or any part of them from
God is injury, because so the right owner is wronged; more, seeing the owner of
these things is not man, but God; it is impiety, yea it is sacrilege, the
highest and the horriblest sin in that kind that can be.

Verse 15. Christ as a Prophet teaches spiritually, and powerfully:
spiritually; the Word and the Spirit go both together: the word is but a dead
letter in its self further than the Spirit goes along with it, according to
that of John 6. 63. If the Spirit goes with the Word, then the Word proves
Spirit and Life: the Spirit works freely in the Preaching of the Gospel, the
Word is but an instrument in the hand of the Spirit by which it works. Then
Secondly, Christ as a Prophet teaches powerfully; therefore the Gospel is
called The power of God unto salvation, and he is said, Mat. 7. to teach as one
having Authority: his word had a commanding power and authority over their
Spirits. Whenever Christ comes to preach to thy Soul, he will come with
power; he will make a separation between thy soul and thy sins, he will pluck
thee off from thy base lusts, and cursed practices, as once he did Paul: and so
will Christ deal with thy Soul, who ever thou art that cleavest as close to thy
sins as thy skin to thy flesh, he will fetch thee off from those by his
powerful Preaching.

CHAP. XIX.
Verse 4. ALl sins then are not equal, neither are all to be alike punished,
as by Draco's Laws they were in a manner; which Laws are said to be writ not
with Ink, but blood, because they punished every Peccadillo almost with blood.
There are difference in sins, and must be so in their punishments. He that
hates his Neighbor, and smites him that he dies, thine eye shall not pity
him, verse 13. let him dye without mercy, let no man mediate for him, lest he
draw upon the Land guilt of Blood, and hinder the Manslayer from Repentance.
But in case a Man kill his Neighbor ignorantly, here is a City of refuge to
fly unto that he may live. And here in an Evangelical sense, Christ is our City
of Refuge, to whom if we fly when we are pursued by the guilt of an evil
Conscience, we shall live; none can take us out of his hands: if we be in
Christ the Rock, Temptations and Oppositions, as Waves, dash upon us, but break
themselves.

Verse 14. How heinous a sin this is, appears by this strict prohibition given
by God himself, backed with a Curse, Chap. 27. and that Curse seconded with a
Woe by the Prophet Isaiah. A vice so injurious, that it was odious to the
Heathen; and therefore the Romans condemned the meaner sort who were guilty of
it to the Metal houses, and banished the better sort with the loss of the
third part of their Estates: so that I cannot but wonder with what face our
Anabaptists assert a Community of Goods; I grant the Primitive Christians had
all things common, but that was (...) not (...) in regard of use, not right,
and that by voluntary consent, not necessary command: the truth is, that moral
prohibition of stealing must be abolished, and the Evangelical precept of
Charity is needless, if either men might not erect bounds of their possession,
or others might lawfully remove them at pleasure.

Verse 15. To blame then are those that proceed upon every idle surmize,
supposition or report; and here it is further to be noted, that three manner of
persons can make no credible Witness or Information. First, Adversaries; for
evil will does never speak well. Secondly, Ignorant men, and those without
judgment: for he must be both a wise man, and an honest man that ought to be a
Witness: for else if he be a wise man, and not an honest man, he is a Knave;
and again, if he be an honest man, and no wise man, he may be a fool; and
therefore he is to be both wise and honest that is to be a Witness. Thirdly,
whisperers and blowers in men's ears, that will spue out in hugger-mugger more
than they dare a vow openly. To all such we must turn the deaf Ear, the
Talebearer, and the Tale-hearer are both of them abominable to God, Psalm 15.
what matter therefore soever is established, must be established at the mouth
of two or three Witnesses that are both honest and wise.

Verse 20. They shall fear with a reverential fear, from which will spring
sincere service, Aliorum perditio tua sit cautio, let other Men's destruction be
your Caution, which is in the Psalmist expression to wash our feet in the Blood
of the Wicked, Psalm 59. 10. when the Righteous seeing the ruin of the Wicked,
shall become more Cautious. And certainly worthily are they made examples that
will not take them. The fearful judgments that fall upon others, should be a
terror to us. It is a just presage and desert of ruin not to be warned.

CHAP. XX.
Verse 8. ALl the Lords Soldiers that fight his Battles, and inroll their
Names in his Muster-book, must be men of stout courage, and valiant men at
Arms, as they that go about a good Work; he receives none into his Camp that
are faint-hearted, which are not able to encourage themselves, but discourage
others. Hence it is that the Lord charged the Heralds at Arms to make
Proclamation in the audience of the people; Whosoever is afraid and
faint-hearted, etc. God would have Wars made in his Name, and therefore he
would have Soldiers go to them without fear. If a man be afraid, it is a sign
he has no trust in God, for he has power to overcome fearfulness. This serves
to reprove all those, who wanting the virtue of Valor, and this gift of
magnanimity, do betray themselves, and yield to most unequal conditions, and
make an agreement upon dishonorable terms. When Benhadad the King of Aram
laid siege to Samaria, and sent unto Ahab, saying, Thy silver and thy gold is
mine, Ahab stooped and submitted himself unto him, saying, My Lord, according
as thou have said, I am thine. But our trust and confidence must be in God, and
then we shall not fear what man can do unto us.

Verse 12. The people of God may lawfully make Wars both offensive and
defensive against their enemies. Thus when Amalek fought with the people of God
in Rephidim, Moses said to Joshua, Choose us out men, and go sight Amalek, so he
discomfited Amalek and his people with the edg of the Sword. Many other
testimonies might be brought, and many other examples alleged, to teach us
that it is lawful to gather an Host, to put on Armor, to guird our selves
with the Sword, and to join in Battle with our Enemies. Those then that are
called to be Soldiers, must learn from hence, not to be feeble and
faint-hearted, but to be bold as in the work of the Lord. True Religion does
not weaken the hearts of Men, and make them Cowards. For first it teaches and
informs the Conscience, that the cause of the War is good, just, and
warrantable by the Word of God; without which knowledge in the heart, how ugly,
how foul, how cruel a thing is the effusion and shedding of Blood? Secondly, as
true Religion establishes the Conscience touching the lawfulness of War, so it
teaches them to commit themselves and their lives into the hands of God as to
a faithful keeper, and to be persuaded if they Conquer, they conquer to the
Lord; if they be wounded and fall, they fall and dye unto the Lord.

CHAP. XXI.
Verse 6. THe Jews were much used to outward Washings, and vainly imagined that
those were sufficient to cleanse them throughout. And here the washing of their
hands over the Heifer, was as much as to say, the guilt of innocent Blood does
no more stick to my Conscience, than the filth now washed off does to my
fingers. But what Pharisaical washing is this to purify the hands, and pollute
the heart; O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, wash thy heart from wickedness, says the
Prophet, Ier. 4. And cleanse your hands you sinners, was the Apostles
Exhortation, James 4. but withal, Purify your he arts ye double-minded; and
this for many reasons; For First, God and Nature ever begin at the heart; it is
the first thing that lives, and the last that dies, and therefore it is the
first the Devil gives assault to, and the last that he gives over. Secondly,
Were there never a Devil, the heart has an ill Spirit of its own to trouble
it, and had we neither hands, eyes, nor feet, our hearts would find the way to
Hell, and therefore there is great reason we should look to purge and cleanse
that: for if this Spring, this Fountain be clean, the streams that flow from it
will be so too.

Verse 12. Secular Learning is not so Heathenish, but it may be made Christian,
as this Captive in the Text was not such an Infidel, but she might become a
Convert and part of the Israel of God. Aristotle, and Plato, and Seneca are not
of such a Reprobate sense as to stand wholly excommunicate in the Christian
Church. For Aristotle's Metaphysics may help to convince an Atheist of a God,
and his Demonstrations prove Shiloes advent to a Jew. And therefore though (it
is true) the Scripture was ever the Levites predominant Element, yet if you
will make him a perfect mixed body, the Arts also are to be necessary
Ingredients. And upon this account, when Adrian the sixth, in his Tract De vera
Philosophia, cries down humane Learning with a noise of Fathers, yet he
concludes, Utilem esse scientiam Gentilium, dummodo in usum Christianum
convertatur, that to shave and pare the captive Woman, and then Espouse her,
was ever held lawful Matrimony.

Verse 13. The Wicked Man's Wine is best at first, the good Man's at last: the
Devil deals by the one as Iael by Sifera, speaks them fair at first till he
has lulled them a sleep in security, and then he involves them in misery. But
God does by his Children as the Hebrew was to do by the captive Woman in this
Text, which he had a desire to Marry: at first he appoints us a time of
Mourning, but afterward he vouchsafes us the fruition of himself in glory. The
freshest Rivers of Carnal Pleasure shall end in a salt Sea of despairing Tears;
whereas the wettest Seed-time of a pious Life, shall end in the Sun-shining
Harvest of a peaceful Death. In a word, the Transgressor, how pleasant soever
his beginnings be, his last end shall be dolorous; but the upright how
troublesome soever his Life be, his death shall be joyous, For the end of that
man is peace, Psalm 37.

CHAP. XXII.
Verse 1. IF thou must not suffer thy Brothers Ox or his Ass to go astray, much
less may thou suffer his Soul; but thou must endeavor in all Christian
wisdom and meekness to reduce it from the dangerous precipeces both of sin and
error. Thou must pull thy Brother out of Hell, as the Angel pulled Lot out of
Sodom, as ye would save a drowning man, though ye pulled off some of his hair
to save him. Neither must we of the Gospel be merciful only to our Brother, but
also to our Enemy. This is an hard task you will say, but hard or not hard, it
must be done, be it never so contrary to our foul nature. We must seal up our
love to our Enemies by all good expressions, which are to be referred to these
three heads. First, We must bless them, speak kindly to them, and of them, they
must have our good word. Secondly, We must do good to them, i. e. be ready to
help and relieve them upon all occasions. Thirdly, We must pray for them, that
God would pardon their sins, and turn their hearts. This was our Saviors
precept (to love our Enemies) and the same also was his practice. He melted
over Jerusalem (the slaughterhouse of himself and his Saints) and was grieved
at the hardness of their hearts. Next (for Words,) he prayed, Father forgive
them: and for deeds, he not only not called fire from Heaven, or Legions of
Angels against them; but did them all good for Bodies and Souls; for he healed
Malchus ear, washed Judas his feet: like that good Samaritan, he was at pains
and cost with them. Now if we would be Christ's Disciples, we must follow his
example; do good not to our Brethren only, but also to our very Enemies.

Verse 10. This and the following Verses forbid all mixture and Toleration in
Religion, we must keep our selves to one God, and serve him, and none with him.
If Baal be God, follow him (says Eliah, 1 King. 18.) and if the Lord be God,
follow him; how long will ye hault between two Opinions? It is a
foul-imperfection to hault, yet more shameful long to hault, most of all
between two ways, and miss them both. To be inconstant in Civil matters, which
are in their own Nature inconstant, is weakness. But in Religion, which is
always constant, and one and the same to be unsettled, is the greatest folly in
the World; for he that is not assured of one Religion, is sure to be saved by
none. And there fore it is very strange to me that in this glorious light of
the Gospel now among us (which we so much boast of) we should see so many Bats
flying, which a Man cannot tell what to make of, whether Birds or Mice. These
are Plantanimals, like the wonderful sheep in Muscovy, Epicens; they are
Amphibia animalia, Creatures that sometimes live in the Waters, sometimes on
the Land; Monsters bred of unlawful conjunctions which should not see the Sun.
Now if the Image of this vice be so horrid and odious in Nature, what shall we
judge of the vice its self in Religion? I am sure that God can away with any
sort of sinners better than these: for these he threatens to spew out of his
mouth, Rev. 3. 16. as we therefore tender the Salvation of Body and Soul, let
us take heed of this plowing with an Ox and an Ass in the Text of this
Laodicean temper in Religion: if we ever look to be saved by our Religion, we
must save and preserve it entire and unmixt: for God is a jealous God, and will
not give any part of his glory to another.

Verse 12. Upon these Fringes was some parcel of the Law written, that so
looking upon them, they might be put in mind of Gods Commandments, which
should teach us, that all sorts both young and old, of what condition soever
are enjoined to know the Doctrine of the Scriptures, and the will of God
revealed in them; and this because ignorance is the ground of error, The
natural man perceives not the things that be of God: so then being of our
selves blind, and wanting the light of the Word, we must needs go astray; hence
it is that Christ says to the Sadduces, Ye err not knowing the Scriptures,
Mat. 22. and then again, the want of Knowledge is the cause of sundry fearful
judgments, Spiritual and Temporal, inward and outward; for as Ignorance is the
cause of sin, so it is the cause of judgment the reward of sin. If we care not
to know God, but neglect the means of Knowledge, no marvel if we be punished.

Verse 19. God will not suffer his Children to be evill-spoken of unjustly; but
will both clear them from the scandal, and punish it. God will so Oil their
good Name, that infamy shall not stick on it. Dirt will stick upon a Mud-wall,
but not upon Marble: and therefore say, thou be aspersed and denigrated by the
Calumnies and contumelies of black Tongues, and thou lie under them for a time
as the Earth does under the darkness of the Night; yet as the morning suddenly
arrising drives away that darkness, so God shall clear up thy wronged
innocence; and as the Moon wadeth out of a cloud, so shall thou get out of all
thy troubles in this kind, or any other. It shall be with thee as it was once
with Cato, (whom Seneca calls the lively Picture of Virtue) who was two and
thirty times openly accused in Court, and as many times cleared and absolved.

CHAP. XXIII.
Verse 7. THe relation of Flesh and Blood should be a strong tie among
Christians, and all Men indeed; but we find the quite contrary. For the
difference of Brethren are of all others most irreconcilable; whether they be
Brethren by Race, or Grace. And for the first of these, see it exemplified in
Cain, and Abel, Esau and Jacob: for thus it is written in nature, that those
that loved most dearly (if once the Devil cast his Club between them) they hate
most deadly; and as for Brethren by Profession (and that of the true Religion
too) you shall meet with many divisions, and those prosecuted with a great deal
of bitterness. No War breaks out sooner, or lasts longer than that among
Divines, or about the Sacrament; a Sacrament of Love, a Communion, and yet the
occasion by accident of much dissension. Great care therefore must be taken
that Brethren break not Friendship, or if they do, that they unite and piece
again as soon as possible, for remember (says the Text) he is thy Brother, and
therefore to be born with, though unkind and injurious.

Verse 9. Seeing War is a lawful Ordinance of God, it teaches us to use it
lawfully, and to behave our selves uprightly when we go unto it. So soon as War
is proclaimed, and the Trumpet sounded, all Laws for the most part keep
silence, and equity is buried; there is no mean or measure observed; every Man
thinks he may do what he list. Hence it is that the Lord gives these Precepts
to his People, When thou go out with an host against thine Enemies, etc.
Where Moses teaches, that we must not bear our selves in War, as if all things
were lawful, nor give our selves a lawless liberty to be carried headlong into
all Wickedness: when we are come into the Field, and there stand against the
Enemy, we must not think we have a pardon purchased to fall into all outrage
and villainy. For whose are the Battles that we fight? who is it that gives the
Victory? If we look for any blessing from God, we must have the more care to
serve him faithfully, and depend upon him religiously. Profane and ungodly men
must not be listed in his Army. The Lord will be the greatest Enemy unto such,
and they have more cause to stand in fear of him, than of all their Enemies
besides.

Verse 14. Seeing God is ever in his Church, it is our duty to behave our
selves in all our actions, as in his presence. It behooveth us to set him
always before us, and to know how that he continually walks among us. If the
Child were always in the sight of his Father, the servant of his Master, the
Subject of his Prince, they would not have an unseemly gesture, a disordered
action; how much more does it stand us upon to look to all our ways that we
offend not before the Majesty of God, in whose presence we stand. When the
Minister Prays and Preaches, when the people attend and hearken, we must know
that God looks upon us. This is that use which Moses sets down here in giving
directions to the people, that they should have a place without the host, etc.
the truth of which Ceremony leads us as it did them to a further matter, and
teaches us that we must be an holy people to God in soul and body, and to take
heed of defiling our selves with sin; we must all of us learn to purge our
selves from such foul and filthy Corruptions, if we will have God to rule and
be resident among us.

Verse 18. Some understand this Text literally and Grammatically, according to
that expression of the Prophet, Isa. 66. 3. He that sacrifices a Lamb as if he
cut off a Dogs neck. Others take it metaphorically, of impudently shameless
sinners, that blush not to commit Uncleanness in the sight of the Sun: these
shall never enter into Gods House, the Kingdom of Heaven. The Irish air will
sooner brook a Toad or Snake to live there; than Heaven will brook a sinner. It
was not permitted to a Dog to enter into the Acropolis, (which was the chief
Tower or Temple at Athens) for his heat in Venery, and ill savor, says
Plutarch. Goats likewise says Varro, come not there; unless for Sacrifice once
a year; upon the same account no filthy Dogs, or nasty Goats shall ever enter
into Heavens Tower. The Panther smells well among Beasts (whom thereby she
draws about her) not so among Men. God and the Saints loath what the Wicked
love and delight in; as the Panther does in man's excrements.

CHAP. XXIV.
Verse 9. THat is, commanded her to be shut up seven days: and it was fit for
all parts, Miriam should continue some while Leaprous. There is no policy in a
sudden removal of just punishment. If the judgment had been at once inflicted
and removed, there had been no example of terror to others: unless the Rain so
fall that it lie and soak into the Earth it profits nothing. If the judgments
of God should be only as Passengers, and not So journers at least, they would
be no whit regarded.

Verse 15. The hireling has earnest thoughts upon his Reward; his Reward is in
his Eye, which is the reason here given why his Wages should not be withheld:
poor Man he has been working all day, and he has had his heart upon his
Wages, the hopes of that gave him some relief and ease in going through his
hard task and service, therefore thou shall not keep it from him. But is not
this a Sin in the Servant to set his heart upon his Wages; is not the charge
given, Psalm 62. If riches increase, set not thine heart upon them; there is a
great difference between these two Texts. For this word here notes the lifting
up of the Soul, so we read in the Margin of our Bibles, but in the Psalm (where
he speaks of the Covetous rich Man) the word imports the setting down or
settling of his heart upon it. A poor Man has but a little, and his Wages it
may be is above him; his Wages possibly is more than he is worth; therefore he
lifts up his mind to it, as a thing he reaches upward for; but a Rich man
who has abundance let us his heart down, he croucheth and broodeth upon the
Creature. A godly poor man looks up to his Reward, and fetches his Bread from
Heaven; a covetous Rich man looks down to his Reward, and takes his Bread from
the Earth. A godly man is above all earthly things, and yet he lifts up his
mind to receive them; a mere natural Man is below earthly things, and yet he
descends that he may receive them. The things which both receive are the same,
but the conveyance and the derivation differ always as much as Heaven and
Earth, sometimes as much as Heaven and Hell.

Verse 16. If it be here demanded how it may stand with Gods justice, and this
Text, to punish the Son for the Father. I answer, That outward temporal evils
are in the nature sometimes of a Curse, sometimes of a Cure, and accordingly
God deals. For sometimes he punishes a bad Father in a bad Son, and then it is
not a cross only, but a Curse to both; so God punished Pharaoh in his
firstborn. Sometimes he punishes a good Father in a good Son, and then it is,
though a cross, yet a cure to both; so punished he David in his young Child.
Sometimes he punishes a good Father in a bad Son, as he did David in Absalom,
and then it is a cure to the Father, but a curse to the Son: sometimes he
punishes a bad Father in a good Son, thus he punished Jeroboam in his Son, and
then it is a curse to the Father, but a cure to the Son.

CHAP. XXV.
Verse 17. IN the Israelites passage out of Egypt, God would not lead them the
nearest way by the Philistines Land, lest they should repent at the sight of
War; now they both see and feel it. God knows how to make the fittest choice of
the times of evil; and withholds that one while which he sends another, not
without a just reason why he sends and withholds it. And though to us they
come ever as we think unseasonably, and at some times more unfitly than others;
yet he that sends them knows their opportunities. Who would not have thought a
worse time could not have been picked for Isreal's War than now; in the
feebleness of their Troops when they were weary, thirsty, unweaponed; yet now
must the Amalekites do that which before the Philistines might not do; we are
not worthy, not able to choose for our selves.

Verse 18. How cowardly and how craftily was the skirmish of Amalek! they do
not bid them battle in terms of War, but without noise or warning come stealing
upon the hindmost, and fall upon the weak and scattered Remnants of Israel.
There is no looking for favor at the hands of malice: the worst that either
force or frand can do, must be expected of an Adversary; but much more of our
spiritual Enemy, by how much his hatred is deeper. Behold this Amalek lies in
ambush to hinder our passage into our Land of Promise, and subtly takes all
advantages of our weaknesses. We cannot be wise or safe if we stay behind our
Colors; and strengthen not those parts where is most opposition.

Verse 19. God holds it no derogation from his Mercy to bear a Quarrel long
where he hates: he whose anger to the vessels of Wrath is everlasting, even in
temporal judgment revengeth late: the sins of his own Children are no sooner
done, and repented of, then forgotten; but the malicious sins of his Enemies
stick fast in an infinite displeasure: it is not in the power of Time to raze
out any of the Arrerages of God: we may lay up wrath for our Posterity: happy
is that Child therefore whose Progenitors are in Heaven, he is left an
inheritor of Blessing, together with Estate, whereas wicked Ancestors loose the
thank of a rich Patrimony, by the Curse that attends it. He that thinks because
punishment is deferred, that God has forgiven, or forgot his offense, is
unacquainted with Justice, and knows not that Times makes no difference in
Eternity.

CHAP. XXVI.
Verse 13. What was given here to the Poor, the Fatherless, and Widow, was
given according to Gods command, because he had enjoined it should be so; which
instructs us that the work of Alms-deeds is not a Free Will Offering, left to
our selves to be done or undone, as we think fit; but it is our duty, and we
are bound to do it, if able. And this is further proved from 1 Timothy 6. 17.
Charge the rich, that they be rich in good Works. It is the Rich man's charge,
precept, and duty. It is not left to their free choice to do good if they
please, but it is laid upon them as their charge and duty, they must do good
Works, and woe be to them if they do not. And the reason of this is, because
God has not made them Owners, but Servants, and Servants not of their own
Goods, but the Givers; not Tre^surers, but Stewards and Almoners. Which should
exhort men to go on and glory in this Office of Stewardship; especially when
they shall consider that the praise of a Steward is more to lay out well, than
to have received much; knowing that well done faithful servant, Mat. 25. is a
thousand times a sweeter note, than Soul take thine ease, Luke 12.

Verse 15. God that bids us to give one another good measure, and running over,
does look not to be pinched and scantled at our hands, as if we counted all too
much that he or his are to receive. How he likes such dealings, his Law will
teach us, wherein oftentimes he requires that his Offerings be of the best
without blemish. Add to this the solemn protestation which God required here at
every Man's hands, what time he made his account. When thou have made an end of
Tything (says God) Verse 12. then thou shall say, I have not eat thereof in my
mourning for any necessity whatsoever, nor suffered ought to perish by putting
it to any profane usage, or carelessly testing it to be spoiled, but have
hearkened to the voice of the Lord my God, and done after all that thou in this
case have commanded me. Look down therefore from thy holy habitation, even from
Heaven, and bless me. God will have him know he must look no otherwise to be
blessed of God, and made to prosper in all that he had, but according as God
knowing the secrets of all hearts, did know that he had dealt truly and justly
with God and his Ministers in this point.

Verse 18. Seeing God may be in the mouths of many, where he is not in the
heart, we learn from hence to join to our outward profession true
Sanctification, and inward holiness of Conversation. True Profession brings
with it true Godliness. For all such as have this honor given unto them to be
the People of God, and his precious inheritance, must be an holy people. Thou
have set up the Lord this day to be thy God, and the Lord has set thee up this
day to be a precious people unto him. Let us therefore not content our selves
to have God in our mouths, but labor to be sincere; and first of all, to look
to our hearts: he that looks to have good Fruit of his Trees, looks to the
Roots; he that would have clear Waters in the Channels, looks to the
Fountains; so if we cleanse our ways in Gods sight, this is the right order to
be observed, to begin first to cleanse the heart.

CHAP. XXVII.
Verse 15. THe People here were commanded to say Amen to every branch of the
Curse: because though it be the lowest way of obedience to obey in regard we
believe the truth and certainty of the Curse, yet it is an high act of
obedience to believe it; for Satan is as busy against our Faith in the
threatenings, as he is against our Faith in Promises. This unbelief opens the
way to the committing of sin, and sweetens sin while we are committing it: and
therefore the Holy Ghost would have us in the first place to say Amen to the
Curse, that so we might not say Amen to the Sin.

Verse 17. How heinous a thing this is appears by the Curse annexed to it by
the Holy Ghost. O therefore beware of this Caninus appetitus, this Dogg-like
greediness to swallow up all we can; if Dives is Tormented, Quia cupide
servavit sua. What shall be his portion, Qui avide rapit aliena? if those
Fists, which too closely keep their own, shall be cut off, what shall become of
those hands that are opened to grasp other men's Estates: we see all Creatures
know and keep their bounds, fishes the Water, Beasts the Earth, Birds the Air,
let men learn of them; but especially let them remember that if it be a sin
with an Anathema to remove our Neighbors, what is it to alienate the Churches
bounds? O take heed of a sacrilegious surfeit, a disease so perilous that envy
its self cannot wish a worse to an Enemy. (...) i^ Lord Burleigh gave advice to
his Son, that he should build no great House upon any Impropriation, well
knowing it would be built upon a sandy foundation; surely for the spoils of the
Church, private Families, yea the whole Nation mourns.

Verse 24. Those that are cursed in this Verse are such as go about and make
ba^e between Man and Man; those Incendiaries that carry Tales, that whisper
against their Brethren, and smite in secret buzzing into men's ears false and
scandalous reports to engender strife. These are an accursed Generation of
people, the mouth of God curses them, and his Soul abhors them, Prove. 6.
Besides, as they stand accursed of God, men must curse them too as you see
here. God gives all his people leave to Curse such a one, Cursed be he that
smites his Neighbor in secret (that backbites him and speaks evil of him in a
corner slily, so to work him out of the good opinions of others) and all the
people shall say Amen. Lo this is the wretched state and condition of all such
as breed bate and dissentions between party and party; Heaven and Earth concur
in a Curse against them.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Verse 2. THough strangers may have some portion of Temporal blessings, yet the
right of Inheritance belongs to the Sons of God; Riches and Honors, delights
and pleasures, life and length of days, Seed and Posterity are entailed on
such as are truly believing, and fear the Lord; and however the ungodly may lay
some claim unto them, and that by some kind of right from God (as a sustainer
of his Creatures) yet can he not enjoy them with any great comfort, as wanting
the best title through the want of Christ.

Verse 6. Between these two are contained all the labors and undertakings of
this people; by their going forth is meant the beginning of their labors, and
by their coming in is meant the end and conclusion of their labors; so that
beginning and ending when they set their hands to a business, and when they
took their hands from a business, they should be blessed, that is, they should
have a through blessing upon all their labors. Thus does God bless his people
in their goings out, and coming in, at their birth, and at their death, and
through all the actions and traverses of their lives.

Verse 15. The same blessings and Curses are repeated here that are recorded,
Lev. 26. and this most effectually to move any heart that has grace. Wherefore
it is requisite that as God repeats the same again, so we should read and
meditate of it again and again, that it may powerfully persuade us to be wise,
and take time while time serves, to turn unto the Lord, while his arm is
stretched out to receive us. This Verse also, and indeed the whole Chapter may
assure us that sin will have plagues first or last; and therefore when they
happen, complain of sin and not of God; remembering that there is no reason at
all that we should grieve that God that will not hear us, when we our selves
will not hear God. Or why sigh we, that God will not look down to the Earth,
when we our selves will not look up to Heaven. We can despise his precepts, and
yet we think much that he should despise our Prayers. We beat our Servants if
they offend us, being but men as they are; and may not God then beat us for our
faults, he being our Creator, and we but dust. Thus make use of these Curses,
and instead of them, God ever give us for Christ's sake his blessings both
Temporal and Eternal, both of this World, and also of that better to come.

Verse 23. How often have we seen the same Field both full and famishing? how often
the same Waters safe, and by some irruption or new tincture hurtful. Howsoever
natural causes may concur; Heaven and Earth, and Air, and Waters follow the
temper of our souls, of our lives, and are therefore indisposed because we are
so. He turns the Heavens into brass, says this Text, and the Earth into
iron. And so, Psalm. 107. He turns the Rivers into a wilderness, and
water-springs into a dry ground, for the wickedness of the Inhabitants.

Verse 31. If sorrow be in the eye it will not stay long from the heart; And
therefore the Lord here threatens his People thus, in case of disobedience,
Thine ox shall be slain before thine eyes: And verse. 67. he shows what
Convulsions and Divisions of spirit, the Visions of the Eye would bring upon
them. The fear of the Heart and the sight of the Eye, are near adjoined. The
sight of the Eye caused the fear of the Heart, and both were as concauses of
those distracting thoughts and wishes there, of hasting the morning to the
evening, and again suddenly reducing back the evening to the morning. Unless
sorrow be hid from the Eyes, it can hardly be kept from the Heart. It is an
usual custom, if a man be but let blood, to bid him turn away his head if he
be faint-hearted, for the sight of his blood will make his heart faint; and so
from more gashly spectacles, men commonly turn away their faces, which is to
keep sorrow from their sorrow, and so from their Hearts.

Verse 47. As there is no affliction, so there is no outward blessing can
change the Heart, or bring it about unto God: Abundance, as you see here, does
not draw the heart unto God, yet Satan, when he came before the Lord, Job 1.
would infer that it does, asking God the Question, Does Job serve God for
naught? which might well be retorted upon Satan himself; Satan why did not
thou serve God then? Thou did once receive more outward blessings from God
then ever Job did; the blessedness of an Angel: Yet that glorious Angelical
estate wherein thou wast created, could not keep thee in the compass of
obedience, thou did rebel in the abundance of all blessings, thine own
apostasy refutes thine error, in making so little of Jobs obedience, because
he had received so much, and confirms the truth of this Text, that it is not
Abundance that makes Gods People serve him.

CHAP. XXIX.
Verse 4. WE see no further than God gives us light, and so far as he leads us
we go right, if he withdraw we turn aside, and quickly wander from the way of
truth and righteousness. Thus Moses speaks here, of the many signs and
wonders which God wrought in the midst of that People, which they did not
understand. Why, what was the reason? Moses tells us expressly, The Lord had not
given them an heart to conceive, etc. They had sensitive Eyes and Ears, yea,
they had a rational heart, or mind, but they wanted a spiritual Eye to see, a
spiritual Ear to hear, a spiritual Heart to apprehend and improve those
wonderful works of God; and these they had not, because God had not given them
such Eyes, Ears, and Hearts. Wonders without Grace cannot open the Eyes fully,
but Grace without wonders can: And as man has not an Eye to see the wonderful
works of God spiritually, until it is given, so much less has he an Eye to
see the wonders of the Word of God till it be given him from above.

Verse 12. This has been the practice of Gods Children in Scripture, to
consecrate themselves to God by Vow or Covenant, Thus Moses here, after he had
given the Law to the People, causes them to enter into Covenant for the
performance of it: Nor is it without singular reason that godly men have taken
this course, that hereby they might be the more strongly obliged to God, and
God to them. There is indeed a sufficient obligation in Gods Precepts, to
require our obedience, but when to his Precepts we add our own Promise, it is
so much the more engaging. True it is, the Creatures natural Obligation to his
Creators Command is so great, that in its self it is not capable of addition,
but yet our voluntary Promises serve to inflame our Luke-warmnesse, and stir up
our backwardness to obedience. Indeed a religious resolution is as the putting
of a new rowel into a spur, which makes it the sharper, the twisting of
another thread into the rope, whereby it is the stronger: And hence it is that
as God in condescension to our weakness, has annexed an oath to his Promises,
not to make them firmer in themselves, but to confirm us the more; So godly
men in consideration of their own dullness, adjoyn their Promises to Gods
Precepts, not to strengthen their force in enjoining, but to quicken themselves
the more in observing.

Verse 18. Nothing is more bitter then sin, and therefore compared here to gall
and wormwood; Lest there be among you any root that bears gall, and wormwood,
i. e. least any person among you should commit this wickedness, (namely
Idolatry) which will be as distastefull to God as gall is to man, and which
will be as bitter as gall to the man who commits it, whether we consider the
bitterness of repentance if it be pardoned, or the bitterness of pain if he
(persisting in it impenitently) be punished.

Verse 29. When secret things are revealed unto us of God, we ought to
endeavor to learn them, to understand them, to publish them, and speak of them
to others. Whenever God has a mouth to speak, we must have an ear to hear.
Therefore Moses says, Secret things belong to the Lord, but the things
revealed belong unto us and to our children: Which may serve to reprove all
such as refuse to look into these revealed things of God, but dwell in
blindness and ignorance: Of this sort are the greatest number of Christians,
they are wise enough to look into their own profit, but they care not for the
wisdom that is of God, they are brought up in the Church, but know not the
Doctrine of the Church; whereas, being brought up in the School of Christ they
must every day be profiting and going forward.

CHAP. XXX.
Verse 2. THere is no returning without hearing, nor hearing without believing,
nor believing to be believed without doing. Returning is all these, therefore
where Christ says, that if those works had been done in Tire and Sidon, Tire
and Sidon would have repented in sackcloth and ashes. In the Syriack
translation of saint Matthew, we have this very word Subah, they would have
returned in sackcloth and ashes. And so likewise in the 80. Psalm, Turn us
again O Lord, says David, and we shall be saved: There goes no more to
salvation but such a turning. So that this returning of the Lord is an
operative, an effectual returning, that turns our hearts and eyes, and hands,
and feet, to the ways of God, and produces in us repentance and obedience.

Verse 3. At what time soever man repents of his sins from the bottom of his
heart, at that very time God will repent of the judgment he intended against
that man: And thus here, when Gods People should be carried away captive into
any strange Land, if then in their captivity they would turn unto God, God
would immediately turn unto them; For, the only reason why God does not repent
of the evil of punishment, is because we do not repent of the evil of sin,
the only reason why God delays to turn away his wrath, is because we delay to
turn unto him. We cry, How long Lord, how long, when will thou have mercy upon
England? and God calls, How long, O England, how long, when will you turn unto
me with all your heart, when will it once be? Jer. 13. I appeal to your
consciences that read this, is it fit God should cease fighting against you by
the sword, before you cease fighting against him by your sins, but if ye would
turn unto God, let me assure you, the very same day that you turn, God will
turn; You have Scripture for it. Hag. 2. 18. nay let me tell you, the very
minute that you begin to repent, God will repent, Ier. 18. 7, 8. At what
instant I shall say to a nation, etc. as a personal repentance is a means to
obtain a personal salvation, so a national repentance is a means to obtain a
national salvation, at that very instance that thou turnest from thy sin, God
will turn from his anger and have compassion on thee.

Verse 10. The Decrees of God are not all of them absolute, but many of them
conditional; If thou will hearken unto the Lord thy God and keep his
Commandments says the Text, then the Lord will bless thee, and rejoice over
thee for good, etc. And though this condition be not always expressed, yet it is
to be understood of course, there are some Promises absolutely expressed in
Scripture, but yet made upon condition, and so to be understood; as some
threatenings are made upon condition of impenitency, so are some promises upon
condition of obedience; Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be destroyed, Jonah
3. 4. the Threatening seems to be absolute, and definite, yet to be understood
with this reserve, unless Nineveh repent. So for Promises, though Gods decree
concerning Elies house, seemed to be most absolute, I said indeed that thy
house should walk before me for ever, 1 Samuel 2. yet that God intends a
condition is most plain, because God adds the condition, verse 30. of that
Chapter, so that you see whether God does threaten a Judgment, or promise a
Mercy to his People, all is upon Condition; that is the steer, the rudder, that
guides all.

Verse 12. Who shall go unto heaven for us? Who but the Son of man which is in
heaven; Who but those that have in some measure the knowledge of God in Christ,
which is life eternal, heaven before hand, let there be therefore continual
ascentions thither in our hearts, let us lift up hearts and hands to God in
heaven, and He will shortly send his chariots for us, as Joseph did for his
Father, and convoy us thither. In the mean space, how should we every day take
a turn or two with Christ upon mount Tabor, get up to the top of Pisgath with
Moses, and take a prospect of heaven; turn every solemnity into a school of
Divinity, say as one said, when he heard a good consort of music, what music
may we think there is in heaven? This, this is the principal end, and most
profitable use of all the Creatures, when they become ladders and wings to us
to mount up to heaven.

CHAP. XXXI.
Verse 2. WE heard before the sin of Moses and Aaron, speaking unadvisedly with
their lips, and striking the rock doubtfully with their hands, and therefore
the Lord does here punish Moses, and deny him entrance into the promised Land,
Thou shall not go over Jordan, from which we are taught, that, God chastises
his own Children, sinning against him; thus when David had committed that grand
complicated sin in the matter of Uriah, by murder and adulterey; though he
were a man after Gods own heart, yet the Lord raised evil against him out of
his own house, the sword of the enemy departed not from his house, and his own
wives were defiled in the sight of the Sun. Now God does thus chastise his
Children least they sinning with the men of this world, should be condemned
with them, for as in punishing us he respects his own justice, so also our own
good, and the great profit which thereby is brought unto us, for if we should
always enjoy health and liberty, peace and plenty, we should kick against the
Almighty, and bitterly esteem the Rock of our Salvation. Wherefore affliction
is as the messengers of God, to call us back from sin, to wean us from this
World, and to kindle in us a desire of the World to come. Gods afflictions are
our remembrancers, and his corrections our instructions. And besides we must
needs confess from hence, that great is the wrath and anger of God for sin,
seeing he punishes it so sharply and sincerely in his own children, whom he
has engraven as a signet on the palm of his hand, and whom he tenders as the
apple of his own eye.

Verse 3. Whereas it is said here, that Joshua should go over before the
people, as the Lord had said; we are taught that Magistrates have their calling
and hold their places immediately from God, for the good of the people. Solomon
was set in his throne by God himself, not by the high Priest or the People, and
it is said of David, that God chose him from the Sheepfold to feed his people,
Jacob and Israel his inheritance, Psalm. 18. The same likewise was spoke of Saul
a wicked King, the Lord has anointed thee to be governor of his inheritance,
1 Samuel 10. So then Kings hold of God in chief, and not of men; and upon this
ground they are to give up their accounts to God only and not to man. For as
they are next and immediate unto God, and inferior to none but him; so for all
their actions they shall reckon with him: and if you object that of, 1 Pet. 2.
13. Where the People calls it an ordinance of man; I answer the Magistrate is
so called, not because men are the authors of it, or may dissolve it; but
first, because men do execute it and not God, or the Angels; secondly, because
it is ordained for the use, benefit, and profit of men, it is ordained for men.

Verse 10. In this seventh year it was not lawful to require debts, but some
differance of opinions men have touching this: some say, their debt was clean
lost; others say no, but for that year deferred and forborne, after demanded
lawfully, and paid willingly; which is more likely, for as much as those
pollitick l^ws of God were not ordained of God to overthrow justice, but to
preserve it, and direct it in a commendable and fit manner among men, now it is
justice to let every man have his own, and there was good reason wherefore that
debt should be forborne this seventh year, because that year there was notillage
to make money of, a right and true application of this may every feelling heart
make in these Cities and Towns, where it shall please God to lay his sore
visitation of plague, or any other infection; thereby stopping the trade
whereby every man was enabled to get for his maintenance, and the discharge of
such that were due from him to others, God forbid but that mercy should be
found toward their brethren, in those that look for mercy at Gods hand; when
men cannot receive money, they cannot pay, and no dishonest meaning, making the
stop: but only the Lords hand staying trade, who will be rigorous in such a
case, when the earth rested, and there was no tillage to raise money by, you
see the mercy of Gods law here; and is it not all one when trade cease? let
your bowels then show whose children you are; if the Image and superscription
of God be upon you, surely you will show mercy, and give some set time to your
Creditors, that mean truly, read what God says Isaiah 58. 3. etc. and remember
he is the same God still.

Verse 19. God by Moses made the Children of Israel a Song, because as he said,
howsoever they did by the Law, they would never forget that Song, and that Song
should be his witness against them. Therefore would God have us institute
solemn memorials of his great deliverances that if when those dales come about
we do not glorify him, that might aggravate our condemnation.

CHAP. XXXII.
Verse 11. THE words spoken here of God himself are thus applicable to his
Ministers; first, the Eagle stirs up her nest, the Preacher stirs and moves,
and agitates, the holy assertions of the Congregation that they slumber not in
a sencelessenesse of that that is said; and then as it is added here, she
flutters over her young, the Preacher makes a holy noise in the conscience of
the Congregation; and when he has awakened them by stirring the nest, he casts
some claps of thunder, some intimidations in denouncing the judgments of God,
and he flings open the gates of heaven, that they may hear and look up, and see
a man sent by God with power to infuse his fear upon them; so she fluttereth
over her young; but then as it follows there, she spreads abroad her wings,
she overshaddowes them, she enwraps them, she arms them with her wings, so
that no other terror, no other fluttering but that which comes from her can
come upon them: The Preacher does so infuse the fear of God into his Auditory;
that first, they shall fear nothing but God, and then they shall fear God but
so as he is God; and God is mercy, God is love; And the Minister shall so
spread his wings over his people, as to defend them from all inordinate fear,
from all diffidence and distrust in the mercy of God, which is farther expressed
in the next clause, She takes them and bears them upon her wings: When the
Minister has performed all the former acts of his calling, then he sets them
upon the top of his best wings, and shows them heaven, and God in heaven
raining down his blood into their emptiness, and his balm into their wounds,
and preparing their seat, where he stands soliciting their cause at the right
hand of his Father.

Verse 35. In this we have a first and a second lesson: First, that since
revenge is in Gods hands, it will certainly fall upon the malefactor, God does
not mistake his mark; and then since revenge is in his hands no man must take
revenge out of his hands, or make himself his own Magistrate, or revenge his
own quarrel: And as we, we that are Christians have our author Moses here that
tells us this, the natural man has his secular author, Theocritus, that tells
him as much, reperit Deus nocentes, God always finds out the guilty man. In
which the natural man has also a first and second lesson too; first, that
since God finds out the Malefactor he never scapes; And then, since God does
find him at last, God sought him all the while; though God strike late yet he
pursued him long before, and many a man feels the sting in his conscience, long
before he feels the blow in his body. That God finds and therefore seeks, that
God overtakes and therefore pursues, that God overthrows and therefore resists
the wicked; is a natural conclusion as well as a divine.

Verse 40. Where was God now when he lifted up his hands to heaven? here, here
upon earth with us in his Church, for our assurance and our establishment,
making that protestation, denoted in his lifting up his hands to heaven, that
he lived for ever, and that therefore we need fear nothing.

Verse 50. How familiarly does Moses hear of his end, it is no more betwixt God
and Moses, but Go up and die. If he had invited him to a meal it could not have
been in a more sociable compellation; no otherwise then he said to his other
Prophet, Up and eat. It is neither harsh nor news to Gods children to hear or
think of their departure; to them death has lost his horror through
acquaintance; they have so often thought and resolved of the necessity and of the
issue of their dessolution, that they cannot hold it either strange or
unwelcome. He that has had such entire conversation with God, cannot fear to
go to him: Those that know him not, or know he will not know them, no marvail
if they tremble.

Verse 51. It might have been just with God to have reserved the cause to
himself, and in the generallity to have told Moses, that his sin must shorten
his journey; but it is more mercy then justice that his Children shall know why
they smart; that God may at once both justify himself, and humble them for
their particular offenses. Those to whom he means vengeance, have not the
sight of their sins till they be past repentance. Complain not that God
upbraids thee with thy old sins, whosoever thou art, but know, it is an
argument of love; whereas, concealment is a fearful sign of a secret dislike
from God.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Verse. 2. THough it be not a difficult matter to impose upon the sense and
judgment of men, with whom tin may pass for silver; it is not so with the
judge and searcher of the heart, he soon discovers our adulterate coin, by that
silver touchstone of his law, he that created the light and darkness, must
needs know both, he sees the exterior Acts, thy light before men, he vieweth
the hidden vaults and recesses of that mind, the darkness of thy heart,
therefore his law here is called a law of fire, he pleads in flames, by this
fire he examineth thy dissembled humilation and repentance, thy solemn
devotions, the stubble and trash of thy performances.

Verse 8. In this Chapter Moses, blessing the twelve Tribes, gives to each a
benediction proper and peculiar to its self. All but Levi in this Text were for
temporal ends, and their Legacies are answerable; Moses gives them as much as
they care for: Zebulun and Issachar shall be filled with the Treasures of the
Sea and Land, and that is enough to stop their mouths. Benjamin shall be blessed
with repose and security, and heel gladly sit down with that. But now it is not
wealth, nor ease, nor honor that best suits with the Ephod: All worldly
blessings are jewels of too low a price, too faint a blaze and luster to be set
there: And therefore of Levi it is said, here let thy Thummim and thy Urim be,
upon thy holy one. That, that is conferred upon Levi must be divine and
heavenly. Urim and Thummim, Perfection and Illumination, and both must proceed
from God after a peculiar manner; and therefore it is said in the Text, thy
Urim, and thy Thummim, and thy holy One. And so it is not our own perfection,
nor innate holiness, nor our own illumination or private spirit, neither is
this holy One, one of our own making, any invention of man, but an Order
founded by God himself.

Verse. 9. Though God do not call us as he did Abraham to offer up our
Children, yet he requires us sometimes to neglect both Children, and parents,
and all natural relations for his sake; and surely in such a case, Piet as est
impium esse pro Domino, It is piety toward God to be unnatural to our friends;
Our blessed Savior has told us, He that loves Father or Mother more then me,
is not worthy of me, Mat. 10. Another Evangelist uses a more harsh expression,
he that comes to me, and hates not all these, Luke 14. Strange that love its
self should require hatred; but yet just, not in an absolute, but comparative
sense, we must not love Father or Mother more then him, yea, when their desires
come in competition with his will, we must hate them for him; we must say with
Levi here, nesio vos, I know ye not; trampling under foot all natural
relations, which would hinder us from obedience to divine inventions.

Verse. 27. God is with his Children as Christ was with Peter, when ready to
sink into the Sea, stretching forth his hand to uphold him, the Lord is with
us, says the Psalmist, and what follows, the God of Jacob is our refuge;
divine presences exempt not from, but is a refuge in the storm; to this
purpose, Moses expression here is yet fuller, a man's hand put under the chin
keeps him from sinking into the water, much more can the arms of a God uphold
us in troubles, and therefore these two are fitly joined together; Fear thee
not for I am with thee, I will strengthen thee, yea I will help, yea I will
uphold thee with the right hand of my Righteousness; Isa. 41. 10.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Verse. 4. GOd was to the Jews in general as he was to his principal servant
amongst them, Moses, he saw the Land of Promise, but he entered not into it; the
Jews saw Christ, but embraced him not: Abraham saw his day and rejoiced, they
saw it, i. e. they might have seen it, but wincked at it. Iudaei habuere jus
mendicandi, says a Father, The Jews had a license to beg; they had a Brief
and might gather, they had a Covenant and might plead with God; but they did
not, and therefore though they were inexcusable for their neglect of the light
of nature, and more inexcusable for resisting the light of the Law, yet that
they and we, might be absolutely inexcusable if we continued in darkness, after
that God set up another light, the light of the Gospel.

Verse. 6. As God would not suffer Moses his body to be seen when it was dead,
because then it could not speak to them, it could not instruct them, it could
not direct them in any duty, if they transgressed from any; so God himself
would not be spoken to by us, but when he speaks himself in his word; where he
is dumb we must be so too; and therefore though there are decrees in God, yet
they speak not to us at all, till God himself exemplify them in the execution
of them, we must not then busy our selves in an overcurious and impertinent
inquisition after the unrevealed decrees of God, but content our selves with
those writings in which he has declared and manifested himself to us.

The End of the Five Books of Moses.

