IMPRIMATUR;
Junii 19. 1689. Guil. Needham, R. R. in Christo Pat. ac D. D. Wilhelmo
Archiep. Cant. a Sacr. Domest.

THE DOCTRINES OF THE Resurrection AND THE REWARD to COME, Considered as The
Grand Motives to an HOLY LIFE. Discoursed of, from 1 Cor. XV. 58.

BY The late Pious and Learned JOHN WORTHINGTON, D. D.

LONDON, Printed for Awnsham Churchill, at the Black-Swan in Ave-Mary-Lane.
1690.

To the Honorable Sir PAUL WHICHCOT Knight and Baronet.
SIR,
IAm emboldened by the singular Virtues and other worthy Endowments I have been
an Admirer of in You, to make choice of Yourself to be the Patron of the
following Discourse. And the Law of Gratitude commands me likewise, to take
this occasision of making a thankful Acknowledgment of the many Favors, which,
as unworthy as I have been of them, I have received from you.

As to this Treatise and its Author, Silence best becomes me in regard of the
near Relation I bear to him. Only this I would suggest, That since he had not
prepared it for the Press, that Accuracy and Exactness ought not to be looked
for in it, which otherwise might be expected: But I doubt not, 'twill have the
Approbation of all good men, as a Discourse well adapted to the Promoting and
Furtherance of true Piety. And that it may be successful to this best of Ends,
is the Hearty Prayer of,

SIR, Your most Obliged Kinsman And Humble Servant, John Worthington.

A DISCOURSE ON 1 Cor. XV. 58.
Therefore, my beloved Brethren, be ye Steadfast, Unmovable, always Abounding
in the work of the Lord, for as much as you know that your Labor is not in vain
in the Lord.
THESE words are a most just Inference from that great Fundamental Truth of
another State, another Life after the Death of this Body, a reward and blessed
Immortality after this present Life; which grand important Truth the Apostle
does assert, largely confirm, and illustrate in this Chapter; and that in
opposition to those that denied the Doctrine of the Resurrection, or of any
other Life besides this present Life; as appeared by that wicked Speech of
theirs, mentioned in Verse. 32. Let us Eat and Drink, for to Morrow we shall
Die; that is, Let us live in pleasure, be merry and delight our Senses, let us
take our fill of the good things of this World; for to Morrow we Die, for
within a little while we shall be taken out of this World, Death will come 'ere
long and seize on us, and then there will be an end of us. This is at large and
in very lively expressions described in the Book of Wisdom, where wicked Men
are brought in speaking out the inward Atheism of their Hearts, Chap. 2. 6, 7,
8, 9. Come on, let us enjoy the good things that are present, and let us
speedily (or earnestly, (...)) use the Creatures like as in Youth. Let us fill
our selves with costly Wine and Qyntments; and let no Flower of the Spring pass
by us. Let us Crown our selves with Rose-buas before they be withered. Let none
of us go without his part of our Voluptuousness (or jollity) let us leave
Tokens of our joyfulness in every place. All this is a larger account of that,
briefly expressed by the Apostle, Let us Eat and Drink. And as it follows, for to
Morrow we Die; so upon the like consideration do these in Wisd. 2. encourage
themselves to a Sensual Life, Verse. 1. Our Life is short; Verse. 5. Our time is
a very shadow that passes away; and after our end there is no returning. And
the like in Verse. 2. 3, 4. But let the Sensual ones, those that are
Atheistically disposed, talk at this rate, and rejoice in their Youth; let them
walk in the ways of their Hearts, and in the sight of their Eyes; let them mock
at the Righteous, and account his Life Madness, (Wisd. 5. 4.) They shall one
day know, That verily there is a reward to the Righteous, and doubtless there
is a God that judges in the Earth; The Righteous shall live for evermore,
their reward is with the Lord, and the care of them is with the most High; they
shall receive a Glorious Kingdom and a Beautiful Crown from the Lords Hand,
(Wisd. 5. 15, 16.) or as the Apostle here, their Labor is not (shall not be)
in vain in the Lord.

The Words may be easily resolved into these Propositions.

1. Christians must be Steadfast, well-grounded and rooted in the Faith,
Established in the Truth.

2. Christians must be Immovable in the Profession of the Truth, particularly
in the Profession of the Faith of the Resurrection and a Life to come.

3. Christians must always Abound in the work of the Lord.

4. Christians have good ground to be assured that their Labor shall not be in
vain in the Lord. They that abound most in God's work, in the Labors of
Religion, may persuade themselves that they shall not lose their Reward, their
Labor is not lost, is not fruitless; but shall certainly be rewarded.

In speaking to which Propositions, we shall not need to seek for Proof
elsewhere then in the Text: For the following Proposition does fully and
pertinently prove the former, as thus. Christians must be Sted fast, for else
they cannot be Immovable. Christians must be both Steadfast and Immovable, for
else they will not, they cannot be Abounding always in the work of the Lord.
Christians must Abound in the work of the Lord, for their Labor will not be in
vain in the Lord.

PROPOSITION I.
Christians must be Steadfast, well-grounded and rooted in the Faith,
Established in the Truth.

That the Soul be without knowledge, it is not good, says Solomon, Prove. 19 2.
Here is a Litotes, not good, i. e. it is a sad and miserable condition. But in
Heb. 13. 9. It is a good thing that the Heart be established with Grace; that
is, in the Gospel, be grounded in the Truth of the Gospel (which is frequently
called (...), Grace, in the New Testament) in opposition to the Mosaical Law,
which is here described by Meats, and in Chap. 9. 10. it is said to stand only
in Meats and Drinks and diverse Washings, etc.

It is S. Paul's advice to Timothy, Hold fast the form of sound words which
thou have heard of me, 2 Timothy 1. 13. The word (...) is a short form or draught,
a summary, no long and tedious business for the Memory, nor made up of many
Nice and subtle Speculations: The main Substantials of Religion lie in a little
room; they should be delivered briefly, and in an easy and evident way; not
clogged with obscure and intricate Notions, with unnecessary or doubtful
Opinions; sound or wholesome words and Doctrine, and what that is, is plain in
1 Timothy 6. 3. where wholesome words, and the Doctrine which is according to
Godliness are the same: That Doctrine which is proper and powerful to beget and
to increase a Godlike disposition and Life, this is sound Doctrine, and it
makes sound and healthful Christians: Being well digested, it makes strong Men
in Christ, it strengthens the Heart, it makes the Soul lively and cheerful,
able to Run a Race, the Race set before us, it mends the Constitution and
Complexion of the Soul.

It was the commendation of the believers at Rome, that ye obeyed from the
Heart that (...), form of Doctrine delivered unto you, or unto which ye were
delivered up, (...), Romans 6. 17.

It becomes Christians to be ready to give an Answer to him that asks a
Reason of their hope and Faith which they profess, 1 Pet. 3. 15.

They should be knowingly Religious, 1 Cor 14. 20. Be not Children in
understanding: howbeit in Malice, (...), in wickedness, be ye Children (as to
innocence and harmlesness) but in understanding be Men.

Reason, Christians must be Steadfast, for else they cannot be Unmovable.

There can never be Erected and Reared up a firm and lasting Structure of
Religion, except a good and sure Foundation be first laid. In Building, that
which requires the first and exactest care, is the Foundation and Groundwork;
if that be not well ordered, the Builder Builds in vain, does as good as
nothing. The Foolish Man that Built his House upon the Sand. (as it is Matthew.
7. 26.) is said to Build without a Foundation, ( Luke 6. 49.) the Sand was a
fluid and uncertain bottom, nothing could be fastened to it, as good as no
Foundation at all: And therefore it was no wonder that the House Built upon the
Sand fell immediately, ((...), says Luke) when the Rain, Floods and Winds beat
upon the House: As on the contrary, the House which the Wise Man Built, was
unmovable, the Winds and Floods could not shake it, (says Luke) because it
was well Built upon a sure Foundation, for it was Founded upon a Rock, (say
Matthew and Luke) he Dug deep, says Luke, till he came to a Natural Mine of
Stone, a Rock; and his Structure was sure and firm, it fell not, but held out,
though it was assaulted by the Rain, and Winds, and Floods; by which Three
Words, are meant all sorts of difficulties and trials in this Life, that try
the strength and reality of our Christian Profession: Rain and Hail falls with
violence upon the Roof and upper part: Winds try the sides of the House, the
Walls: The Floods, and rushings of Water, Torrents and Land-floods, caused by
the immoderate Rain, try the lower parts; (so that the House was tried every
way, how sure and firm it was) yet it fell not, but stood unshaken and
unmovable, for it was Founded upon a Rock. The House Built by the foolish Man,
might to the Eye seem a fair and goodly Building, and as well Built as the
other; the formal Christian may make a fair show, and his outward Profession
may have the praise of Men (as our Savior speaks of the vain glorious
performance of several Duties in Religion, Matthew. 6.) but when Afflictions and
Temptations came, the difference between these Two Buildings (though when all
was quiet and calm, they seemed so like and equally exact) easily appeared: The
Wise Builder's House stood, his Structure of Religion was firm and lasting: But
the mere outward Profession of the other, the Foolish Builder's House, fell
immediately when the Rain came, and the Winds blew, and the Floods beat
vehemently upon it; and great was the fall of it; it made a great show while it
stood, and it made as great a noise when it fell: The fall was the more
notorious, by how much the former Profession was more specious.

The same Truth [ That we must be Steadfast and well grounded in the Faith, else
we cannot be Vnmoveable] may be Illustrated from another Similitude, in the
Parable of the Seed and Sower. Mark 4. 16. we Read of some that receive the
word, (...), immediately, and (...), with gladness: So Herod heard John Baptist
gladly, (...), (nay, further) and did many things, Mark 6. 20. Some things he
did, and not a small some, yet he was but partial in Obedience; his Herodias he
would not part with, his peccata in delicijs; in some less beloved Sins he
would Reform. So they in Ezekiel. 33. 31, 32. heard with gladness.

But even these that with gladness, with some gust and affection, receive the
Word immediately, when Affliction or Persecution arises for the Word's sake,
immediately they are offended. Observe the double immediately here.

They for a while believe, (says Luke Chap. 8. 13.) and in time of Temptation
fall away.

What Is the Reason of all? See it in Mark 4. 17. They have no Root in
themselves, and so endure but for a time. They were not rooted, grounded and
settled in the Faith; and being not Steadfast, they could not be Immovable.
There may be such Outward Christians as may receive the Word immediately with
some kind of affection, yet such sudden flashes and motions and appearances of
good affections are not to be trusted to; nor are they from thence to think
highly of themselves.

See an Example in Luke 4. When Christ was Preaching in a Synagogue at Nazareth
(the place of his Education) they all in the Synagogue did bear him Witness,
and wondered at the Gracious Words which proceeded out of his Mouth, Verse. 22.
and yet on a sudden, presently after, the same persons, all they in the
Synagogue, were filled with wrath, and rose up and thrust Christ out of the
City, and led him to the brow of the Hill, that they might cast him Headlong,
Verse. 29. Such an uncertain, slight and inconsiderable a thing is all that
affection, that is begot by a slight, superficial and formal knowledge.

Before I conclude this, I shall only add, That to be unmovable or
unchangeable, fixed and settled, is not simply and necessarily a praiseworthy
quality and disposition, but only as the matter and object thereof is, as the
things are wherein we are unmovable. Gal. 4. 18. It is good to be Zealously
affected in all good things. To turn from Error to Truth, from Evil to Good,
is Virtue and Praise; and an happy change. Whereas to persist, to be stiff and
unmovable in an Opinion and Tenet, after strong Reason to the contrary, and
all because it has been their Opinion and way, is a fault, and that no small
one; it argues a great self-love, self-seeking, and undue affection to their
own praise or profit, and a greater regard to their Credit, then to Truth it
self.

Nor is it Virtue or Praise to be unmovable as to all External indifferent
things; for the Apostle Paul himself, for the promoting a greater good, was not
so strictly tied up and confined in his own Spirit to these lesser things of an
indifferent Nature, but he put himself into all shapes (yet so as to keep from
what was sinful) and became (as far as lawfully he might) all things to all
Men, that he might by all means' save some, and win them unto Goodness. It was
not out of Ambition or Love to the World, but out of a serious regard to the
good of others, and that he might be in a capacity, and have the fairer
advantages to promote the Interest of Christianity among Jews and Gentiles,
that he denied himself the use of his Christian Liberty, and framed himself to
the observance of certain Mosaical and Jewish Rites, as on the contrary he
behaved himself otherwise among the Gentiles, 2 Cor. 9. 20.

PROPOSITION II.
Christians must be unmovable, particularly in the Profession of the Faith of
the Resurrection, and a Life to come.

BE NOT MOVED,

1. By any hardships and troubles from the World.

The Apostle that here exhorts Christians to be unmovable, was so himself; as
he speaks of himself, Acts 20. he knew that bonds and afflictions did abide and
wait for him, But none of these things move me (says he, Verse. 24.) Neither
count I my life dear unto my self; so that I might finish my Course with joy:
And having thus bravely quitted himself, he could say with Triumph a little
before his Death, I am now ready to be offered, (...), I am already poured out,
I am as it were Wine (for a Libamen or Drink Offering) poured out upon the
Sacrifice; The time of my departure is at hand; I have fought a good fight, I
have finished my Course, I have kept the Faith; and therefore he had a Holy
confidence, that God the Righteous Judge (as the Judge or Rewarder in the
Grecian Games did adjudge the Crown or Prize which hung over the Goal to the
Conqueror) would give to him the Crown of Righteousness, as the reward for
behaving himself well in his Christian Combat, 2 Timothy 4. 6, 7, 8.

The same Apostle in Romans 8. fortifies and encourages believers against
afflictions and hardships upon this score, that they should reckon and make
account, that the Sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared
with the Glory which should be revealed; bear no proportion with the Glory to
come. For if sufferings be laid in one Balance, and the Glory or Reward in the
other, the Glory will far outweigh them. For,

1. The sufferings or afflictions are but Momentary, for a Moment, (...), 2
Cor. 4. 17. and (...) of the time now, of this (...) but the Glory is Eternal,
an Eternal weight of Glory. And Verse. 18. The things which are seen are
Temporal, or Temporary, (...), but the things which are not seen (the things of
the other World) are Eternal.

2. The sufferings and difficulties here are but light, our light affliction;
but the Reward to come is a weight of Glory, (...); and therefore it is far
beyond, and beyond compare does exceed, the sufferings; yea a far more
exceeding, (...), a super superlative weight of Glory. Such forms of Speech use
not to be met with in other Authors (either Philosophers, Poets or Orators) for
they never had such great things, such high and excellent objects to think and
speak of, as the Holy and Heavenly Apostle, who had another perception of
things Heavenly and Divine, and who was caught up into the Third Heaven or
Paradise, and there heard words unspeakable.

Nay further, The sufferings and hardships which the better sort of Men meet
with in this World, should rather fortify in them the belief and hope of a
Resurrection and Glorious Reward, then any way abate it; for Verily there is a
Reward to the Righteous: If Lazarus has evil things here, he shall have his
good things hereafter, and infinitely better then those good things which Dives
had here, as the evil things Lazarus had here were nothing to the evil (those
worse) things that Dives was to feel hereafter.

It Is not possible that the better sort of God's Creation, his best Servants,
his friends and faithful ones, should always be in a Calamitous condition; that
there never should be a difference between them that fear God, and them that
fear him not. What? Shall it never be better with those that Love God, and
whofe serious care is to please him and obey him, who endeavor to be like him,
purifying themselves as he is pure? Shall it never be better with them then
commonly it is in the World, where they suffer for Righteousness sake?

Shall it never be worse with the wicked, who live in Enmity against God and
Disobedience, who live after their own Lusts and own Will, who make no
Conscience of their ways, but respect themselves wholly, their profit,
pleasure, interest, etc. and love not God nor their Neighbor, but are only
lovers of themselves, not caring how they Rebel against God, and Oppress Men?
Certainly it is easy to infer hence, There is a God who will Judge the Earth,
and a time coming when it shall be well with the Righteous.

2. Be not moved by the Allurements of the World, the Blandishments of this
present Life, the Tentations of Pleasure or Profit, any Worldy or Fleshly Lusts
whatsoever.

The Glory and Lusters of the World, Honors and Greatness, the Pleasures of
the Sensual Life, Softness and Ease, these and the like have a very bad
influence upon the Minds and Hearts of Men, upon their apprehensions and
affections; they are apt to enfeeble and darken the Notions of a future State
and Life.

Prosperitas effaeminat virtutem fidei, says Tertullian.

The good Seed of Truth (as also good Principles and Purposes) is stifled and
made unfruitful by the Thorns, which in the Parable of the Seed and Sower are
said to be the cares of this World, the deceitfulness of Riches, and the Lusts
of other things, Mark 4. 19. Luke adds, the pleasures of this Life: These
Worldly and Fleshly Lusts call Men off from what is Spiritual and the things
above, fasten and nail them down to the Earth; unqualifie Men for either
apprehending or relishing what is Heavenly and Spiritual.

Sensual Men that provide for the Flesh to fulfill the Lusts thereof, are very
untoward and unfit to frame an Idea (a right Notion) of what is Spiritual.

The more a Christian lives Godly, Soberly and Righteously in this present
World, the more easily will he apprehend the things of the World to come: To
such a one the things which are Eternal and concern the Life to come, are more
clear.

The more thou art purged from all inordinate desire to the things of this
World, and the less Earthly and Sensual thou art; the better thou will conceive
what is Heavenly, the better thou will apprehend the State of the Life to come.

The more thou art Spiritualized, Spiritually-minded (and to be so is Life,
Romans 8.) the more thou live a Life worthy of thy Soul, and art not enslaved
to thy Body, the Sense, to this outward World; the more thou live a Lise of
Purity, Temperance, Humility and Sobriety; the better thou will conceive of
what is Spiritual and Immaterial, of Life and Immortality.

Immersion (or a being sunk) into the Body, Sensuality eagerly pursued (as if
there were nothing higher, nothing better then what is common to Man and Beast)
as also those more dry and seemingly cleaner sins, viz. Earthly-mindedness,
Anxious cares and busy endeavors about geting and increasing, and keeping
much of the things of this outward World; a Spirit of Earthy self-seeking
Policy, an Ambitious Spirit after Glory and the Splendours of Titles and
Places; these and the like make Men that they cannot Relish or Taste (so neither
clearly apprehend) what is Heavenly and Spiritual, they cannot receive the
things of God. Such Sensual Epicureans, and also Worldlings, are great
Strangers as to Heaven, so to any clear and full apprehensions of what is
Spiritual and Immortal. Of such there is this account in Wisdom 2. 21, 22.
Their own wickedness has blinded them; as for the Mysteries of God they knew
them not, nor discerned they a Reward for blameless Souls.

Men must live better Lives, if they would know these things as they ought to
know.

3. Be not moved by the Apostasy and falling away of others.

That some even in the Apostles times were moved and fell away from the
Steadfast Belief and Profession of this grand Fundamental Truth [ the
Resurrection and Life to come] appears by some passages in S. Paul's Epistles.

Three are mentioned by Name, Hymenaeus, Philaetus and Alexander, who as they
are said concerning Faith to have made Shipwreck, 1 Timothy 1. 19. and (in 2 Ep.
2. 18.) to have Erred concerning the Truth, particularly that great Truth and
Article of the Resurrection and any future State or Life, (for they said, that
the Resurrection is past already) And thus as they, were far from being (...)
and (...), Steadfast and Immovable, so did they unsettle others and cause them
to back-slide, overthrowing the Faith of some, Verse. 18. For their words (their
Speech or Discourse, (...)) did Eat, or spread, as a Canker or Gangrene, their
wicked Principles did spread and corrupt many, Verse. 17. and therefore the
Apostle bids Timothy to shun, to look to and avoid them, Verse. 16.

That which the Apostle did fear and warn the Christians of in those times, is
still very seasonable; and it is strange that many, who are otherwise shy and
wary, are not aware of the Devils cunning and devices.

It is the great Policy of the Devil to amuse the World with things of less
moment and consequence, and about these things to provoke the Zeal, inflame the
Passions and Choler of Men, and heighten differences about things either more
obscure, or less necessary, and that into such heats, as if the whole Stress of
Religion or Salvation were to be laid upon such or such Notions and Opinions,
as if the Kingdom and Honor of Christ and Glory of God were mainly concerned
herein: And all this the Devil is so busy at, that so some more dangerous
principles might be more secretly and undiscernably conveyed and spread amongst
Christian Professors; viz. such principles as tend clearly to the advancing of
his Kingdom of Sin, to the bringing in and cherishing of all ungodliness and
unrighteousness, to the eating out and consuming of any good principle left in
the Conscience, which testifies for God; in a word such as tend to the
corrupting of good Manners, to the debauching of the World, such as strike at
the Fundamentals of Religion and Christian Life, (as Gnosticism, Sidducism,
Atheism do) that these may be more secretly conveyed and spread in the World.

Is it not matter of just wonder, That amidst the many animosities and eager
contentions and bitter strifes amongst Christians about the Externals or
Extra-essentials of Religion (for which they Un-saint and Un-christian one
another) that they are so little sensible of that Gnosticism, that Sadducism,
that Atheism that has grown and spread in the Christian World?

But to speak more particularly, such Doctrines and Notions as these, [ That
the Soul is extinguished and perishes with the Body; That there is no other
State or Being but in the World; That there is no Angel nor Spirit, no
Immaterial or Spiritual Being, nothing but Body or Matter; That there is no
Resurrection, no Judgment to come, and therefore no Punishment or Reward
hereafter (which Doctrines are the Leaven of the Sadducees of old, and the
modern Sadducees; Sour and unwholesome Sadducism) as also those corrupt
Doctrines, viz. That nothing is intrinsecally good or evil; That Religion is
only a Politic device, a trick of Politicians to keep People in awe.]

These Doctrines and Opinions, as well as those that deny there is a God, (as
the Atheists do) or, if there be a God, That he sees no sia in such who conceit
themselves to be his People, to be nearly allied to him (as the Gnostics of
old, and the Ranters of late) That Men may be free to any thing: Such Doctrines
and Principles as these tend clearly to the advancing of the Kingdom of Sin and
Satan, to the bringing in and cherishing of all ungodliness, etc.

And therefore there is good Reason for the Apostles advice, That every serious
Christian that minds the Salvation of his Soul, would take heed and flee such,
keep at a distance from Men of such corrupt minds, and beware of the Leaven of
the Sadducees. And if others go a Whoreing after such Doctrines pleasing to
Flesh and Blood, if others Apostatize and fall away from the Truth, yet (as S.
Peter speaks) do ye beware lest ye be led away with the Error of the wicked,
and fall from your own Stedfastness, 2 Ep. 3. 17.

Reason. Christians must be Steadfast and Immovable in the Belief and
Profession of the Truth, those great things of the Christian Faith, the
Resurrection and Life to come; Because else they cannot, they will not be
always Abounding in the work of the Lord.

Clear and strong persuasions of the Resurrection of the Dead and of a future
State, are a Root and Principle full of sap and lise, and Holiness is the
kindly Fruit thereof. Whereas on the contrary, the denial of the Resurrection
and Judgment to come, is the principle of sin and disobedience, and opens the
way to all manner of wickedness. They that banish out of their Minds all sense
of a future State, will (instead of abounding in the work of the Lord) abound
in every evil work; all that being taken away which only is able to lay a
powerful restraint upon the unbridled Lusts of Men.

And here I may Appeal to the experience and observation of discerning and
serious persons; Let it be considered and observed whether those that can
hardly imagine, or cannot conceive any thing but Body, Flesh and Matter, those
that slight the Notion of Spirit, Immaterial and Immortal Substance; Whether
the Commandments of God are not grievous, and Religion a burden something to
them, whether it be not more desirable to them, to be Epicuri de grege porci,
to wallow in the Mire of sensuality, then to be of Christ's little Flock, to
follow Christ in innccency and purity of Life and universal obedience; although
perhaps some of the more crafty Epicureans may have some care to live
inoffensively, that so they may keep out of danger of the Laws, and keep up a
Reputation in the World for their advantage, and they may abstain from some
sins for their Bodies sake, to keep themselves in Life and health.

Both the Apostles Peter and Jude, and other Apostles (says S. Jude in Verse.
17.) did in their Epistles foretell, that in the last times should come
Scoffers, walking after their own Lusts, (2. Pet. 3. 3.) after their ungodly
Lusts (so says Jude, Verse. 18.) And what the Apostles did fear and forewarn
of, is come to pass: Such Mockers as these are even to this Day to be found,
and where Christianity is Professed: But observe the Character of these Men, they
are such as have a mind to walk after their own ungodly Lusts, such as would
not be restrained from the forbidden Fruit, such as would gratify their
self-will, and would live as they list; to these Men, the Doctrine of the
Resurrection and Judgment to come, is very unpleasing; and therefore they Scoff
at it and oppose it withal their might.

But as we are to shun them, their Principles and their Practices, so let it be
our care to shun the giving any occasion or advantage to them. For know that
Men may condemn Atheism and Sadducism in words, and yet by their Lives and
Conversations give great advantage and countenance thereto: Both Atheism and
Sadducism (...) steal nourishment and advantage from the Lives and Practices of
those who seem to be far removed from them

As for Atheism; the (...) presenting God and (...) (...) foolishly, the
attributing to God what is unworthy of God, what is most unlike God, and that
fair Idea of him represented in the Holy Scriptures; the attributing to him the
very imperfections of sinful Man: The Representing him in such a way as is not
consistent with his Infinite Goodness and Mercy, his Holiness and his Justice.
And again, Men's Professing that they know God, and yet denying him in their
Works (as the Apostle speaks Tit. 1. 16.) their so living in the World, as if
there were not in them any powerful and real sense of God's all-seeing and pure
Eyes, nor of his Justice and Righteousness: This is that which has given too
much advantage to the spreading and strengthening of Atheism.

And for Sadducism, which slights the Notion of Spirits or Immaterial Beings,
and denis the Existence of Souls after their Separation from this Earthly Body,
and dis-believes the Doctrine of a future State, of Glory and a reward in
Heaven, of Misery and punishment in Heli. How are the Modern Sadducees and
Epicureans the more hardened and confirmed in these their Notions, by
considering that Men generally mind Earthly things, their Belly is their God,
they mind and seriously take care for the things on Earth, and do but little
relish and set their affections on things above. They see also that generally
Men (who Profess to believe a future Reward and Punishment) seem not much to be
sensible of any Danger to the Soul by Sin, nor much to be affected with the
Hellish Misery that is threatened: For most Men are very secure, and manifest
but little watchsulness over themselves, and little care to break off from Sin,
to subdue their Passions, to mortify their Lusts and inordinate Affections:
All which may seem to argue that they do not heartily Believe what they
Profess, and that they have no such thoughts of the danger of Sin hereafter, as
Men have of the danger to their Life by drinking a Cup of deadly Poison.

Nor do they seem to be much Sensible of the future Reward and Felicities of
Heaven, the happiness of another State: For they are generally unwilling to
leave this present World, and it is very unpleasing to them to think that they
must Die. They do not seem to account Heaven their home and Country, and
themselves to be but Pilgrims and Strangers in this World: Their hopes of such
a Glorious State do not seem so much to enravish and strongly affect their
Spirits as the hopes of some outward accommodation or enjoyment would do, which
would tickle, and overjoy them and transport them to excess, when possessed: And
the hope of obtaining these outward things does engage them to far greater
endeavors then the hopes and expectations of Heaven, and the Reward to come,
do usually put Men upon; which indeed are but slight, and formal, and very
cold, if compared with the other, and far from a worthy seeking of the Kingdom
of Heaven, and as becomes those that believe there is a Glorious Reward there
to all Eternity.

Thou therefore that say there is a God, do thou in works deny him? Do
thou live without God in the World? Do thou Mis-represent him, and so report
of him as to make him like to sinful Men? Or short of Men in those things
wherein he requires they should imitate him?

Thou that say there is a Resurrection and Life to come, a Reward and
Punishment, Heaven and Hell: Do thou so live as one that looks after no other
Portion, Consolation and Reward then what is in this Life? Art thou swallowed
up in the cares and ambitions of this World, hasting to be Rich and Great in
the World? And art thou immerst and sunk in the pleasures of this World, so as
not to relish the things above?

Be it therefore your care to make it appear by your Life and Spirit, your
Conversation and Disposition, that you are Steadfast and Unmovable in these
Fundamentals of Christian Religion; that so living agreeably to these Truths,
ye may be the Children of the Resurrection and counted worthy to obtain that
World, the World to come, Luke 20. 35.

Learn therefore to Die to this present World, as S. Paul was Crucified to the
World, and the World to him. To die to this World here, to leave it in
affection, makes the Physical Death, the going out of this World less strange
and less uneasy. Count your selves to be but as Pilgrims and Strangers here,
and therefore as Pilgrims abstain from Flesbly Lusts which War against the
Soul, 1 Pet. 2. It is remarkably said of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob (who
confessed themselves to be Strangers and Pilgrims on the Earth, or the Land of
Canaan ( Heb. 11. 13.) and accordingly behaved themselves in all Points as
such, Sojourning in the Land of Promise as in a Strange Country (Verse. 9.) that
they that say such things (say and do, for it was not a mere Verbal Profession)
they declare plainly (or make it appear, (...)) that they seek a Country, even
a better Country, that is, an Heavenly ( Verse. 14. 16.) Accordingly do ye so
live, be so affected, that ye may plainly declare and make it appear to others
that ye seek and desire a better Country, a better Inheritance, a better
Portion at the Resurrection of the just; and accordingly prepare for it.

Let not the word [ Heaven] be in your Mouths only, but let it be in your
Hearts. Let us do the Will of God on Earth as it is in Heaven, and then we
shall make it appear, that the Kingdom of God is come, is come into us.

But if thou art swallowed up in the cares and ambitions of this present World,
making have to be Rich and Great, loving and seeking only thine Ease and
Pleasure, and a Soft Life; if thou art either overjoyed or over grieved at the
abundance or want of Earthly things, as if thy Hope, thy Portion and
Consolation were in this Life; Do thou live as becomes one that is Steadfast
and Immovable in the belief of a better Life, the Life to come?

Nor do they think so worthily as they ought of that future Reward and Glory,
that think it so easily attainable, as by a Deathbed Repentance.

Nor do they who would seem better, think so honorably of it, who from some
Outward performances in Religion, or some partial obedience, would flatter
themselves that they are the Heirs of that Kingdom; whereas their dispositions
are wholly unsuiteable to that State, and unfit for converse with the Spirits
of just Men made perfect. These make that Glorious Reward to come, all that
great and rich Prize to be but a mean and cheap thing, who think they shall
have it, and win the Crown, though they have not overcome, and though they do
not earnestly strive for the mastery over their Lusts and corruptions, and are
not temperate in all things, nor keep under their Body and bring it into
subjection to the Law of their Mind. Certainly it would argue more Humility in
them, and more Wisdom (as being the safest course) to think more of Inward
Preparations for that Heavenly State, that their Minds might be purified and
wrought into a temper suiteable to it, that they might be made meet for the
Inheritance in Light; then to flatter themselves into an hope and conceit that
such great Glory and Happiness should be cast upon them for some lip-labor in
Religion, for outward Sanctimonious shows, for External performances, while in
the mean time they so little mind that which is the due and necessary
preparation of their Souls for such enjoyments.

Although this Reason be sufficient to persuade Christians to be Steadfast and
Immovable in the Belief and Profession of this Truth; Yet I shall here
superadd four Reasons, the more to confirm it, and persuade them.

1. It is a main Fundamental Truth of the Gospel, and indeed, one of the First
Principles of Religion. Accordingly the Apostle speaks in 1 Cor. 15. 3. I have
delivered to you first of all, (...) principally, or as that which is to be
counted amongst the first and principle Articles of Christianity.

That God is a Rewarder of those that seek him diligently, is one of the First
things to be known and firmly embraced ( Heb. 11.) without which belief all the
motions in Religion will be very weak and slow.

But if the Joy be set besore a Christian, he will then run with patience and
perseverance the Race that is set before him, and endure the Cross (as Christ
did, Hebr. 12.) and despise the shame: As the Apostles rejoiced that they were
counted worthy to suffer shame for the Name of Christ, Acts 5. 41. that is, for
Teaching and Preaching Jesus Christ, as it is in Verse. 42. sor Teaching the
People, and Preaching through Jesus the Resurrection from the Dead, at which
the Sadducees (being then in Power) were grieved (Acts 4. 2.) and filled with
indignation or envy, Chap. 5. 17.

If there be a Prize to be received at the end of the Race; and this Prize a
Crown of Life and Glory, incorruptible, unfading (1 Cor. 9. 25. 1 Pet. 1. 4.)
not like those corruptible and withering Crowns and Garlands made of Oaken
leaves or Olive-branches, but this made of the leaves of the Tree of Life in
the Paradise of God; there will then be wrestling and striving, and (the better
to prepare and enable for the winning of it) a being temperate in all things, a
keeping under of the Body and bringing it into subjection; as the Apostle tells
the Corinthians who well knew the sitness of those allusions, the Isthmian
Games being Celebrated here, in that Isthmus or Neck of Land on which Corinth
was Built.

So great an Insluence and Power has the due consideration of the Recompense
of Reward to the raising and animating of a Christian to the greatest
Atcheivements!

To conclude this particular, we may observe that the Author of the Epistle to
the Hebrews (Chap. 6. 1.) in that short Institution consisting of Six Articles,
which Christians were first to be acquainted with, mentions these Two, viz. The
Resurrection of the Dead, and Eternal Judgment, when God the Righteous Judge of
all the Earth shall dispense Eternal Rewards ( undefiled Rewards, as the phrase
is, Wisdom. 4. 2.) to those that Believe and Obey, and Eternal Punishments to
every Soul that does Evil Tribulation and Anguish, Indignation and Wrath to
them that obey not the Truth, but obey Unrighteousness, Romans 2.

It may be fit also to observe, That this Truth of the Resurrection and a
future State is called the Gospel, 1 Cor. 15 1. and the Truth, and the Faith,
in 1 Timothy 1. where it is said of Hymenaeus and Alexander, who denied the
Doctrine of the Resurrection and Life to come, that (...), concerning the
Faith, of or in the Faith, they have made Shipwreck; and in 2 Ep. chap. 2. it is
said of Hymenaeus and Philaetus, that they have erred concerning the Truth,
(the Faith and the Truth, by way of Eminency) and in 1 Timothy 1. 20. they are
said to Blaspheme; and therefore for these their Principles destructive to
Religion, to all honesty and godliness, and to a good Conscience the great
Apostle delivered them up to Satan.

One thing more we may observe, That the Doctrine of the Resurrection (as being
a Truth of great Importance and Influence in Christianity) was from the first
by Christ himself and his Apostles strongly asserted and professed against the
Sadducees, and against those false Christians that fell from this Truth: And
the so early falling away and revolting from this Truth (one of the Truths of
Christianity which was so soon and first of all departed from) was an ill Omen
and Prognostic of that wickedness which followed after. The Apostles (after
Christ was Ascended) took great care to preserve and promote this Truth: And
therefore when Judas was fallen from his Apostleship, and one was to be chosen
into his room; What Is the work he was to be chosen to? It is thus described in
Acts 1. 22. -- Must one be Ordained to be with us a Witness of his (that is, of
Christ's) Resurrection; and not only of his, but of ours through him. S Peter
and S. John Preached through Jesus the Resurrestion from the Dead, Acts 4. 2.
And both these are largely insisted upon (and no part of the Christian Faith
more largely elsewhere) in 1 Cor. 15. If there be no Resurrection of the Dead,
if we rise not, Christ is not Risen: And if we Rise, Christ is Risen. If Christ
be not Risen, we are yet in our Sins, Verse. 17. We may observe also that all
the four Evangelists are very particular and full in the History of Christ's
Resurrection, upon which ours does depend.

2. This great Truth and Doctrine of the Resurrection and Life to come (an hope
more then in this Life) is worthy to be embraced, and that we should be
Steadfast and Immovable in it, because it is a Truth and Doctrine of sweet and
strong Consolation, full of strengthening Joy, the most Sovereign Cordial and
Restorative, when our Flesh and Heart may begin to fail through either inward
or outward griefs.

And therefore not without great cause our Savior Christ repeats this four
times in one of his Sermons (John 6.) I will raise him up at the last Day,
Verse. 39, 40, 44, 54. where it is repeated as being a Truth full of comfort and
encouragement.

And further it is observable, That the Resurrection, with the Appendant Glory
and Reward in the World to come, is called in Scripture more then once The
Hope. Acts 23. 6. says S. Paul, Of the Hope and Resurrection of the Dead I am
called in question: Which words [ of the hope as being no new, no other thing,
are omitted in Chap. 24. 21. where that former Speech of his is mentioned again
and referred to.

See this also in Acts 24. 15. and more fully in Acts 26. 6, 7. which will
clear that in Acts 28. 20. For the hope of Israel (that is, for asserting the
Resurrection) I am bound with this Chain. And hence it is, that Christians, who
believe that Jesus died, and rose again, and that those who sleep in Jesus (die
in the Lord) will God bring with him: they are not to sorrow concerning them
which are asleep, as others which have no hope, no such knowledge and assurance
of a Glorious Resurrection and Reward to come; and therefore the Apostle having
treated hereof, might well conclude, Wherefore Comfort ye one another with
these words, 1 These. chap. 4.

In Titus 2. 13. are mentioned together the blessed hope and glorious
appearance of our Savior Jesus Christ, which they may look for with comfort
who are wrought upon by the Grace of the Gospel to live Godly, Righteously and
Soberly in this present World, as it is in the foregoing words.

The Primitive Christians thought it the most welcome Morning-Salutation,
(...), The Lord is risen.

Of Mary Magdalene and the other Women that had the first notice by an Angel of
Christ's Resurrection, it is said, that they went from the Sepulcher with great
Joy (Matthew. 28. 8.) to tell it to his Disciples as they Mourned and Wept,
(Mark. 16. 10.)

S. Paul did Die daily, Fought with Beasts at Ephesus, was in Jeopardy every
hour (as he speaks in 1 Cor. 15.) Now what did comfort and encourage him in all
this? It was this, That the dead should rise.

But there is one famous Instance for the further Illustrating of this
particular, which I may not omit; and it is, that of the Seven Brethren with
their Mother, mentioned in 2 Maccab. Chap. 7. to which that passage in Hebr.
11. 35. does clearly refer, where it is said, Others were tortured ((...)) not
accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better Resurrection. In the
Story it is said, that they were Tormented with Scourges and Whips, Verse 1.
Their Tortures are called Extreme Tortures, Verse. 42. (as appears by the
description of some of them in Verse. 3, 4, 5, 7, 10, 13.) and all this they
suffered unto Death at the hands of Antiochus Epiphanes (that Monster of
Cruelty) because they would not Transgress the Law in eating Svines Flesh,
Verse. 1. They might have been delivered, if they had yielded to do it; Nay,
Antiochus exhorted the Youngest Brother with words, and also assured him with
Oaths, that if he would yield, he would make him both a rich and an happy Man,
and also take him for his friend, and trust him with Affairs, Verse. 24. Now
what was it that did make them Steadfast and Unmovable unto the last, what was
it that did comfort them in the midst of all their bitter pains, what was it
that did animate and fortify them against all the either allurements or
terrors which the King did try them with? It was clearly this, The hope and
belief of a Resurrection to Everlasting Life after the Death of the Body. And
this does evidently appear by Six Passages in the Story.

The first is, the Second Brother's Speech to Antiochus (in Verse. 9.) Thou like
a Fury take us out of this present Life, but the King of the World shall
raise us up, who have died for his Laws, unto Everlasting Life. And this he is
said to speak, when he was at the last gasp.

A second Passage is that Speech of the Third Brother (in Verse. 11.) who said
Courageously, These (meaning the Members of his Body, his Tongue and his Hands,
which he held forth Manfully, Verse. 10.) These I had from Heaven, and for his
Laws I despise them, and from him I hope to receive them again.

A third Passage is the Fourth Brother's Speech, which is more full, (in Verse.
14) It is good, being put to Death by Men, to look for hope from God, to be
raised up again: As for thee, thou shall have no Resurrection to Lise. And this
will explain the Speech of the Youngest, which is,

The fourth Passage (in Verse. 36.) Our Brethren who now have suffered a short
pain, are dead under God's Covenant of Everlasting Life.

A fifth Passage is the Speech of the Mother, who was Mavelous above all, and
worthy of Honorable Memory; for being filled with (...), Courageous Spirits,
she exhorted every one of her Seven Sons, and stirring up her Womanish Thoughts
with a Manly Stomach, she said unto them (in Verse. 23.) Doubtless the Creator
of the World, will also of his own Mercy give you Breath and Life again, as you
now regard not your own selves for his Laws sake.

A sixth Passage is her Speech to her Youngest Son, who was most of all Tempted
by Antiochus to accept deliverance, and it was this (in Verse. 29.) Fear not the
Tormentour; but being Worthy of thy Brethren, take thy Death, that I may
receive thee again with thy Brethren. This is part of her Excellent Speeches to
her Sons, and an Illustrious proof of her great Faith and Hope as to the Life
to come; For when she saw her Seven Sons Slain within the space of one Day,
(...), she bare it with a good Courage, because of the hope that she had in the
Lord; as it is expressed in Verse. 20. and last of all, aster the Sons, the Mother
Died, Verse. 41.

Thus we see by this admirable Instance how this Noble Mother and her Sons,
rather then Transgress one Commandment of God, forbidding to Taste Swines Flesh,
suffered the most Exquisite Tortures with a Magnanimous Patience, despised
their Bodies, (Verse. 11.) regarded not their own selves for his Laws sake,
(Verse. 23.) offered up their Bodies and Lives for the Laws of their Fathers,
(Verse. 37.) loved not their Lives to Death (as it is said of the faithful in
Apocal. 12.) reproched, or disdained, disesteemed, their Lives unto Death,
((...), as it is said of Zibulon and Napthali, Judge. 5. 18.) or as it is in
Hebr. 11. would not accept of deliverance, which was offered to them.

And that which enabled them thus to choose rather to die gloriously was this,
That they might obtain a better Resurrection, a Resurrection to Life, which the
Fourth Brother plainly told Antiochus that he should not have ( Chap. 7. 14.) a
Resurrection far more acceptable to them then to be delivered from their
present sufferings, and to have their Life prolonged and respited for a while
upon Earth upon the terms offered, to live a little time and a moment longer,
as the phrase is Chap. 6. 25.

And the same Spirit of Faith has no less shined out in the faithful Martyrs
of Jesus under the New Testament, who loved not their Lives unto Death,
(Apocal. 12.) who did bear in their Bodies the dying of the Lord Jesus (2 Cor.
4.) in Weariness and Painfulness, in Watchings often, in Hunger and Thirst, in
Fastings often, in Cold and Nakedness, in Stripes and Imprisonments, (as S.
Paul says of himself, 2 Cor. 11.) and were faithful unto Death; not accepting
of deliverance upon the terms of scattering a little Incense upon the Altar, or
putting a little Incense into the Censors. And all this they suffered willingly,
as being mindful of that of our Savior's, I will raise thee up at the last Day
(Jo. 6.) or that in Apocal. 2. 10. Be thou faithful unto Death, and I will give
thee a Crown of Life.

Consider therefore (O faithful Christian) and often consider the great
encouragement and strong consolation, that it stored up in this Fundamental
Doctrine of the Resurrection and Life to come. If thy Body lie in a Dungeon, in
cold Irons, and perish here; Yet it shall be raised up and sit upon a Throne.
If it be Ioden with Chains; it shall hereafter put on Robes of Glory, and be
Clothed with the Royal Apparel. What though thou be here (as Christ was)
Crowned with Thorns, yet hereafter thou shall have a better Crown then a Crown
of Gold, then the Richest Crown that ever any King or Emperor did wear. What
though wicked Men Eat the Flesh of Gods People, as it is in Micah. 3. 3. yet
their Flesh does rest in hope, Psalm. 16.

To conclude this second Particular, I might observe, That the Doctrine of
Christ's Resurrection (upon which ours does depend) is full of the greatest
comfort and encouragement: For as he was delivered (to death) for our Offenses,
so he rose again for our Justification, Romans 4. 25. His Resurrection did
evidence his Death to be an acceptable Sacrifice to God, and availeable to the
making of Atonement and Expiation of our Sins. For had it been otherwise, had
not Christ our Surety fully satisfied, had he not done and suffered all that
God required at his hand to the making Atonement for our Sins; God would not
have loosed the Bands, or Cords of Death, in raising him up again, but he
should have been holden fast by Death ( Acts 2. 24) and still detained in the
dark Prison of the Grave; he had not been taken up into Heaven, and Seated at
God's Right Hand: But his being raised from the Dead, and received up into
Glory, and his Interceeding there in the Virtue of his Death, and presenting
his Sacrifice in the behalf of all who truly believe and repent, are evident
proofs of the acceptableness of his Sacrifice, and that God was well pleased,
and fully satisfied, and that Christ had fulfilled all that God required of him
to make Reconciliation for Iniquity (Dan. 9.) The Apostle therefore in Romans 1.
4. says, that Christ was declared (or demonstrated) to be the Son of God, by
the Resurrection from the Dead. And this (if duly considered) makes much for
comfort and strong consolation unto all sincere Christians: Hence that of the
Apostle (in Romans 8. 34) Who is he that Condemns? It is Christ that died, yea
rather, that is Risen again, who is even at the Right Hand of God, who also
makes Intercession for us.

3. This Doctrine of the Resurrection and Life to come is such as properly and
powerfully tends to, and engages a Christian to the greatest Self-purification,
to all manner of Purity, inward and outward, in Soul and in Body, to the
cleansing of himself from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit; which is to
perfect Holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7. 1. And because it makes so much
for the Advancement of Holiness and Purity in Heart and Life, it is most worthy
to be firmly Believed and Professed.

Accordingly its said, in 1 John 3. 3. He that has this hope (the hope of
seeing God as he is, Verse. 2.) purifies himself even as he is pure: He
endeavors after the greatest Self-purification, as knowing that only the pure
in Heart shall see God, who is Purity it self, Holy, Holy, Holy, as it is
thrice repeated in Apocal. 4. 8. but in some Greek Copies Nine times These two
are therefore joined together [ we shall be like him, and we shall see him as
he is. The Soul must first become like unto God in Purity and Holiness, before
it is capable of seeing God as he is, of enjoying him and having any near and
blissful Communion with him. The only means to behold the Face of God, is to
behold it in Righteousness, and Purity, and Holiness; and such a Christian
shall be satisfied, when he awakes from the sleep of Death, with God's
likeness. It was to this purpose well observed by Plotinus, one of Origen's
Scholars (in Ennead. 1. lib. 6.) (...). Let every one that would see God (who
is Holy, and Pure, and Good, the Original and Fountain of all Beauty, and
Excellency, and Goodness, (...)) make account first to become God-like; his
Soul must first be purified as ever he would hope to see and enjoy God.

And now as the Soul sets it self in good earnest upon Self-purification, as
that which is a necessary Preparation for the enjoyment of God; and as it
prospers in its sincere and earnest endeavors to purge and cleanse it self
from all that within which is contrary unto God; by the same degrees and
proportion, (...), (as Hierocles to. wards the end of his Comment upon
Pythagoras his Golden Verses, speaks of the great privileges of a Purified
Soul) it revives, and becomes more lively, active and vivacious, is more
collected within it self, and is filled with Divine Strength and Power: Now it
is that the Locks of Samson are grown again ( Judge. 16.) and the Strength which
went and was gone from the Soul by its yielding to the Blandishments and
Softnesses of the Sensual and Animal Life (that most dangerous and enveigling
Delilah) is returned again: Now it is that the Wings of the Soul grow again and
better, (...), and it moves more freely, being delivered from what did hitherto
clog and stop (...) its Heavenly slight and Journey upwards.

There are some indeed (and they not a few) who seem to acknowledge this Belief
and Hope of the Resurrection and Life to come, who yet do only reach to a
slight and superficial Purity, in outward appearance, answerable to their
slight and superficial knowledge of this Grand and Important Truth, such as was
that knowledge of the Pharisees. The Power of Sin within is stronger and more
operative then the Form of Godliness without; and be the Form never so Glorious
to the Eyes of Men (as the Pharisaick Purity was very Specious and taking with
the vulgar in our Savior's time) yet there is little security, no confidence
concerning such Men, but that they will shamefully prejudice the Truth and the
Religion Professed by them: For they all this while under this disguise do
Cherish, and Foment, and make much of diverse Lusts and Pleasures (which they
serve, Titus 3. 3.) and such Sins as are most gainful: These are uncrucified,
alive and strong, for they have all Provision made for them ( Romans 13. ult.)
and are ready to break out when there are Tempting occasions; and hereby the
Name of God is Blasphemed (1 Timothy 6. 1. Romans 2. 24.) and by Christians of this
Temper is the Holy Doctrine of the Gospel, the way of Truth, evil spoken of, 2
Pet. 2.

But where there is the Power of Godliness within, there will also be the Form
of Godliness without, and a better Form then that mere external Righteousness
which the Spiritual Pharisees boast of, who would make a fair show in the
Flesh, as the Apostle speaks, Galat. 6. When Christians have Purified their
Souls in obeying the Truth through the Spirit, (as S. Peter speaks in 1 Ep.
Chap. 22.) there is no doubt but this inward Purity of the Soul will be
emproved to the Purity of the Body, the Purity of outward conversation. There
is the greatest security concerning their ordering the outward conversation
aright, whose Hearts are Purified, and where there is a living Fountain and
Principle of Holiness within: For as the Heart is, so will the words and
actions be, Matthew. 12. 35. It was therefore absolutely the best Counsel and the
right Method for Self-purification, which our Savior delivered, Matthew. 23. 26.
Cleanse first that which is within, that the outside may be clean also. That
the Streams be Pure and Chrystalline, it is necessary that the Spring and
Wellhead be clear. Purity in Heart is Purity in the Spring, Purity in Actions
is Purity in the Streams.

God requires Self-purification as to both; Clean Hands and a Pure Heart, Psalm.
24. 4. The Cleansing of the Hands and the Purifying of the Heart, Isa. 4. 8.
where the Hands, as being the most active parts of the Body, and the
Instruments most used for action are put for all the Members of the Body, and
denote all outward actions which are visible to others, the outward visible
Course of Life and Conversation.

And as God requires both the Inward and Outward Purity, and the Doctrine of
the Resurrection obliges a Christian to the Inward, so likewise to the Outward,
that of the Body: He that longs and waits for the Redemption of the Body (Romans
8. 23.) he that hopes for a Glorious and Spiritual Body, believing that it
shall be raised in Power to such Purity and Glory, must needs infer from hence
that it becomes him to possess his Vessel (his Body) in Sanctification and
Honor, and not in the Lust of Concupiscence, or Passion of Lust, (...), as the
Greek has it: That so the Body may be in a fit and capable condition of being
raised to Eternal Life, an Incorruptible and Heavenly State. And therefore the
Apostle Paul (in 1 Cor. 6.) where he has many Arguments to persuade to
Chastity, and to discountenance Uncleanness, argues from Christ's Resurrection
and from ours, Verse. 14. God has raised up the Lord, and will also raise up us
by his own Power. As we believe and expect that God will raise up our Bodies,
and that to an Incorruptible, Spiritual, Pure and Undefiled State, as he raised
up the Body of Christ to such a one, and so we shall bear the IMage of the
Heavenly, the last Adam, the Lord from Heaven (for as is the Heavenly, such are
they also that are Heavenly, 1 Cor. 15. They shall have such a Body as Christ
now has) it becomes us to keep our Bodies Undefiled, and in a State of Purity
here on Earth. And in Verse. 15. Know ye not, that your Bodies are the Members
of Christ? Shall I then take the Members of Christ, and make them the Members
of an Harlot? God forbid.

4. The fourth and last Argument to persuade to a being Steadfast and
Immovable in the belief of the Resurrection and Life to come, is taken from
the excellent properties and effects of this Doctrine, so adequate to the
several needs and exigencies of a Christian here, and furnishing him with such
considerations as may be greatly helpful to him in the several Trials and
Exigencies he may meet with in this World. As particularly.

1. This Doctrine firmly and heartily entertained, begets in Holy Souls the
greatest Equanimity and Contentedness of Spirit, in opposition to the
disturbing and wasting Cares and Ambitions, which other Men have experience of.
For the Lord is at hand, and therefore let your Moderation be known unto all
Men, Phil. 4.

Your Moderation,] in the largest and most comprehensive Sense of the word;
Moderation as to the desires and pursuits of Worldly things, the (...) things
of this Life, (1 Cor. 6.) or (...) (1 Jo. 3. 17.) Worldly Goods: For how
Indecorous is it for that Christian to be Anxious or Eager about the getting
and having much of this World, who looks and hopes for the better and enduring
Substance in Heaven, (Heb. 10.) who expects Treasures of Glory and Goodness,
which Christ has to bestow on his faithful Servants; and these are not far
off, the Lord is at hand to dispense them; and 'ere long thou shall taste and
see how good and gracious the Lord is.

Moderation] as to the great things of this World; for how little and mean are
these things to that Crown and Kingdom which the Righteous Judge will give?
What are they, what is the Glory of this World and the Glory of Men, to the
Glory of God (Jo. 12. 43.) the Reputation with God himself, the Honor that
comes from God only (Jo. 5. 44.) that Glory and Honor with which God will
reward the patient Continuance in well doing? Romans 2.

2. It begets a sober Cheerfulness and Joy in them. To such it is said, Rejoice
in the Lord always, and again I say Rejoice, Phil. 4. and this Joy is
accompanied with the forementioned Equanimity and Contentedness of Spirit; for
if our delights and satisfactions be (as they should be) in God, he will give
us what is best for us to have, either in kind what we desire, or else that
which he knows to be better, and is more fit for us to desire and have. Delight
thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of thy Heart, (Psalm.
37. 4.) Whereas if our delights be placed chiefly in other things which we
desire, its better we should not have them; or if we have what we desire, God
may give it us in Judgment: As it is said in Psalm. 77. 29. He gave them their
own desire; they were weary of Manna, and slighted it: They would have Flesh;
and for Manna he gave them Quails: But while their Meat was in their Mouths,
the Wrath of God came upon them, etc.

But the sober cheerfulness and joy (we speak of) arising from the belief of
the Resurrection, this together with a due Moderation and Equanimity, is a safe
repast, and is greatly availeable to the health and well being even of the Body
in this State, as the Doctrine of the Resurrection assures of a better, an
Heavenly and Spiritual Body hereafter.

3. It secures us against the most winning and dangerous Tentations and
Allurements of this present World; as it did Moses in Pharaoh's Court, who when
he was come to Years, refused to be called the Son of Pharaoh's Daughter,
choosing rather to suffer affliction with the People of God, then to enjoy the
pleasures of Sin for a season, etc. (Heb. 11.) The Instance is remarkable, and
what is here said of him, is fit to be a little more considered.

Moses when (...), when he was grown big, a grown Man (not a Novice, not a
Child; nor when Old and Doting, not when Weak and Decrepit, and unfit to taste
the pleasures of the Court, as Aged Barzillai speaks of himself, 2. Sam. 19.
35. but) Moses in his Ripe Years and settled Strength, being then full Forty
Years Old, Acts 7. 27. This Moses refused to be called the Son of Pharaoh's
Daughter. Thermutis (that was her Name, as Josephus relates) Pharaoh's only
Daughter, and much beloved of him, that saved his Life, and caused him to be
Nursed, and afterward took care for his Ingenuous Education, in all the Wisdom
and Learning of the Egyptians, (Philo Jud. in his de vita Mosis, says, she was
at great Charges in procuring Men from Foreign Parts to Instruct him.) She
took him for her Son (Exodus 2. 10. Acts 7. 21.) Intending him to Inherit her
Father's Kingdom: She that took him (when an Infant) out of this Ark of
Bull-Rushes, where he was laid, would have set him in the Throne, Adopting him
for her Son. But he refused to be called her Son, and consequently to be the
Heir of a Kingdom; he rejected the offer of a Throne and Kingdom, the hopes of
the greatest Dignity upon Earth; and chose the Cross rather then Crown; or if a
Crown, he would rather have a Crown of Thorns then a Crown of Gold, he chose
rather to suffer affliction with the People of God, then to enjoy the Pleasures
of Sin for a season, or (to render it more closely to the Greek) to have the
Temporary enjoyment of Sin, (...). He chose rather to be in the Wilderness,
then in the Court; yea in that great and terrible Wilderness, wherein were
Fiery. Serpents and Scorpions, and drought, where there was no Water, (as it is
described, Deuteronomy. 8. 15.) He chose rather to endure the hardships of the
Wilderness, then to enjoy the Delicacies and Pleasures of the Court, to live
there in all ease and softness, to enjoy the Delights and Sensual satisfactions
which Courts afford, to have Riches, and Honors, and Dignities, and the great
things and outward Glory of this World, which others so much scramble for; to
have these, and what he would (if Egypt could afford it) heaped upon him; all
this would have flowed in upon him, if he would have been willing to be Adopted
by Pharaoh's Daughter for her Son. And besides his own Personal Worth and
Accomplishments, the unordinary Amiableness of his Person, the Excellency of
his Parts emproved by the best Education, the singular sweetness of his Spirit
( Meek and gentle above all Men upon Earth, Numb. 12. 3.) would have won and
gained him all Love and Respects and Venerations, and the good Words and
Applause of all; and made him more capable of gratifying and pleasing himself,
and emproving the advantages which the Court-life might afford. But for all
this, he chose rather to suffer affliction with the People of God, and as it
follows in Verse. 26. He esteemed the reproach of Christ (for Christ is meant by
the Angel that did lead them and keep them in the way, and brought them to
Canaan) greater Riches then the Treasures in Egypt, of which Wealth and Power
he had been Possessed, had he been content to go for the Son of Pharaoh's
Daughter.

But what was it that enabled him to do all this, to deny himself at such a
rate as this, that he was worthy to be famed for the most Self-denying Man (as
he was for the most Meek Man) upon Earth? It was his Faith: Heb. 11. 24. By
Faith Moses when he was come to Tears, refused to be called the Son of
Pharaoh's Daughter. He did it not out of Sullenness, or in a Pet or Humor, but
deliberately, and upon choice, and upon the best reason and ground, the hope of
the Reward to come; and it was Faith that enabled him to Eye it.

This is the Account given in Verse. 26. For he had respect unto the Recompense
of the Reward, (...). The expectation of better Treasures in Heaven, a better
Crown then what Thermutis could have helped him to, a better Kingdom then that
in Egypt; the expectation of better pleasures, and a more happy condition
hereafter, infinitely above the Temporary delights of Sin, the pleasures of Sin
for a Season, for a little while in this World, which if he had given up
himself to, he had lost those purer and permanent pleasures at Gods Right Hand;
The belief of better things that he should be Heir of, if he approved himself
as a Son of God, then he could ever be Heir of in Egypt, if he were called the
Son of Pharaoh's Daughter; This was it which enabled him to do all this, and to
suffer all the hardships and difficulties he met with, which were not few nor
small.

Grotius interprets (as the Socinians do) (...) to be the Possessing of Canaan,
the Land Promised to their Fathers. But the word being used in the foregoing
Chap. Verse. 35. for the Heavenly Reward, where it follows what is said in Verse.
34. A better and an enduring Substance (or being) in Heaven, we may well here
also understand it in the same Sense. But had it been only an Earthly Canaan
that Moses had respect to, we may hence argue; If an Earthly Inheritance, which
is uncertain, and short (as our Life is) and not secured from troubles and
crosses, could thus far affect Moses, and prevail with him to do and suffer all
this, and secured him against the Tentations of the Court, and made him to
choose Piety with afflictions, rather then Pleasures accompanied with Sin; How
much more should the Heavenly Inheritance, the Land of the Living (as Heaven
may be better called so then Earth, as being the Land and Country of the Living
to Eternity) how much more should the upper Canaan (of which it may be rather
said then of the lower and Earthly Canaan, Deuteronomy. 8. That it is a Land wherein
thou shall Eat Bread without scarceness, thou shall not lack any thing in it) a
Land that flows with what is sweeter and better then Milk and Honey; How much
more should it prevail with us to deny our selves, and to overcome the
Temporary delights of Sin!

4. This Doctrine of the Resurrection and the Life to come, makes the Spirit of
a Believer Impregnable, when assaulted with the greatest difficulties and
dangers from without. It Arms and Fortifies him against the most threatening
Terrors of the World, as well as against the most alluring Tentations; an
instance and eminent proof whereof we have in the Seven Brethren and their
Mother who suffered under Antiochus; of which we spoke before.

5. It enables Christians to take patiently the Loss of Friends, the Decease of
nearest and dearest Relations that die in the Lord, and sleep in Jesus: As
knowing that God will bring them again with Christ at the last Day, God will
raise them out of their Graves, and they shall as soon be with Christ when he
Descends from Heaven with a Shout, with the Voice of the Archangel and the
Trump of God, as those that are alive upon the Earth at his coming; who shall
not prevent them which are asleep; but the Dead in Christ shall Rise first, and
so all of them (both the newly raised Saints, and the then living who shall be
changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an Eye (1 Cor. 15.) their Bodies being
to be made Incorruptible and Immortal, and so qualified for Heaven, as well as
the Bodies of them that were raised from the Dead) I say, all of them shall at
once be taken up in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air, to attend upon the
Judge, the King of Glory; and so shall they ever be with the Lord. All this we
have in 1 These. 4. And are not these words of comfort in the case of Christian
Friends Deceased?

And it enables also to take patiently, yea, and joyfully, the spoiling of
their Goods, the loss of their Worldly Goods, their Estates and Possessions, as
it is expressly said of the believing Hebrews, in Chap. 10. 34. Where also is
mentioned that which enabled them to such a joyous patience, for it immediately
follows in the same. Verse, knowing in your selves that you have in Heaven a
better and more enduring Substance, better Treasures, and such as cannot be
taken away, none can spoil them of; and that for their losses and sufferings
here, they shall be Infinitely Rewarded and Recompensed at the Resurrection of
the Just.

6. It makes Believers more mindful of, and faithful to, the great ends of Life
and Being in this World; It melts them into softer Compassions to the Souls of
others, and enlarges them into greater desires of and endeavors after the good
of others every way; That they also may with them be the Children of the
Resurrection, and accounted worthy to obtain that World and the Resurrection
from the Dead (Luke 20. 35.) and to stand before the Son of Man (Chap. 31. 26.).

These are those that love the appearing of Christ (as it is in 2 Timothy 4.) and
prepare for it, and they would fain have others also so minded, and therefore
while they are in the World, they endeavor to do what good they can.

These long and look for the Blessed Hope and Glorious Appearing of our Savior
Jesus Christ (Tit. 2.) Then shall the shadows of this dark Life flee away; Then
shall the Day break, and the Night be gone; Then will the Eyelids of that
Morning begin to open, when they shall awake and see the Face of God in
Righteousness; The Morning to that calm and fair Day of Eternity ((...), 2 Pet.
3. ult.) the Day that shall have no Sunset, no Evening; the Day which the Lord
has made, we shall rejoice and be glad in it, (Psalm. 118.)

To these Children of the Resurrection is that encouraging passage of Scripture
in Luke 23. 28. where, after the mention of Christ's coming in a Cloud with
Power and great Glory, it is said, and by Christ himself, When these things
come to pass, then look up and lift up your Heads, for your Redemption draws
nigh. The Phrase is like to that in Romans 8. 19. (...), Exerto capite facta
expectatio Creaturae: Where the Apostle by a Pathetical Elegant Prosopopeia
brings in the whole Creation expecting, looking and longing for, with Head
lifted up, the Manifestation, and Verse. 21. the Glorious Liberty of the Sons of
God, and to be delivered from the Bondage of Corruption and the being subject
unto Vanity, under which it groanth and travelleth with pain until now. But the
word in Luke respects rather the then becoming temper os the Mind then any
gesture of the Body, it imports the greatest longing and most joyous
expectation: And therefore the Syriack attending to the Sense of the place,
rather then to the letter, does not unfitly render the Greek [(...) Look up] by
(...) Be of goood Cheer, have a good Heart. But this comfort is only for the
Children of the Resurrection, for those that love the appearing of Christ (as
the Apostle Characterizes those Christians to whom God the Righteous Judge will
at that Day give the Crown of Righteousness:) and such only can love the
appearing of Christ, his Illustrious appearing, his coming then with Power and
great Glory, who have already endured and felt with patience the Day of his
coming, and the Power of his Spiritual appearance within them, when he was not
disturbed, nor opposed in his Refining and Spiritual Work, for he is like a
Refiners Fire, and he shall Sit as a Refiner and Purifier of Silver; as it is
in Mal. 3.

PROPOSITION III.
3. Christians must always Abound, or Excel, in the Work of the Lord.

The Greek word [(...)] signifies not only to Abound, but to Excel: So in 1
Cor. 14. 12. (...) that ye may Excel; And Matthew. 5. 47. says Christ to his
Disciples, (...); What Excellent, or what Singular, what Extraordinary thing do
ye?

Both come much to one, Christians must Excel others, or Abound more then
others, and they must Excel themselves, or Abound more then themselves, in the
Work of the Lord.

And what herein S. Paul exhorts others to, he himself practiced; He excelled
others, he abounded more then others, so he says of himself in 1 Cor. 15. 10.
(...), I Labored more abundantly then they all, then the rest of the Apostles;
and in 2 Cor. 11. 23. (...), in Labors more abundant: Witness his Preaching
from Jerusalem and round about even unto Illyricum ( Romans 15. 19.) Three
Hundred and Fifty German Miles (as Paraeus upon the place observes)
particularly, in Arabia (Gal. 1. 17.) at Damascus (Gal. 1. 17) at Antioch (Acts
13. 1.) at Seleucia (Acts 13. 4.) in Cyprus (Acts 13. 4.) in Pamphilia (Acts
13. 13.) in Pisidia (Acts 13. 14.) in Lycaonia (Acts 14. 6.) in Cilicia (Acts
15. 41.) in Phrygia (Acts 16. 6.) in Galatia (Acts 16. 6.) at Troas (Acts 16.
8.) at Athens (Acts 17. 15.) in Achaia (Acts 18. 1.) in Macedonia (Acts 16.
10.) besides other places, and those places especially where Christ was not
Named (for to Preach here was his Holy Ambition, Romans 15. 20. (...)) which made
his labor the greater, which would have been far easier, if he had only
Preached where others had laid the Foundation of Christian Knowledge.

And as he excelled others, so he excelled himself also. So he says of
himself, Phil. 3. 3. Forgeting those things which are behind (not looking at
that which was behind, to see how much of the Race I have passed, or how much
others are behind me) and reaching forth unto those things which are before
((...) stretching as hard as I can to get to the end of the Race which is
before me, and to overtake and outrun others) I press toward the Mark, or
Goal, for the (...) the Prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.

Thus we see what the blessed Apostle Taught, and what he Practiced; and in
Conformity to his Doctrine and his Example;

1. Christians must Excel themselves, must Abound more then they have done, in
the Work of the Lord: Their last Works must be more then the first, as it is
said of the Church of Thyatira, in Revel. 2. 19. They must not be weary in
well-doing, but go on and mend their pace, still making a sarther Progress in
Religion, and going onto perfection (Heb. 6. 2.) And the nearer they are to the
Goal, the end of their Race, the faster they must Run

Thus the same Apostle writing to the Thessalonians (Chap. 4. 1.) does beseech
and exhort them by the Lord Jesus, that as they had received (had been taught)
how they ought to walk and to please God, so they would Abound more and more.

And truly the more Excellent Christians have a Spirit of great Ingenuity in
them, For

1. They are Sensible of the much God has done for them already. He has
Blessed them with all Spiritual blessings in Christ, Ephesians. 1. and Spiritual
good things are the choicest of Blessings. And they judge themselves less then
the least of Gods Mercies, as Jacob did, Genesis 32. 10. I am less then all the
Mercies, and then all the Truth, which thou have showed unto thy Servant, which
the Chaldee Paraphrast fitly renders, (...) My deserts are less then all the
Mercies, and all the Benefits which thou have done to thy Servant.

2. They are Sensible of the much more he has promised to do for them, and is
reserved for them in Heaven (1 Pet. 1. 4.) They have cause to say with David
(Psalm. 31. 19.) O how great is thy Goodness which thou have laid up for them
that fear thee: As they have cause also to reckon with S. Paul, that the
sufferings of this present time, all their labors and services, are not worthy
to be compared with the Glory that shall be revealed.

3. They are Sensible of the little they have done for God, what mean and poor
returns they have made to God who has dealt bountifully with them. None are
more deeply sensible of their Omissions, none are more apt to judge themselves
unprofitable Servants (Luke 17.) then they that have abounded most in the Work
of the Lord. It was the Speech of that Holy and Learned Bishop, Bishop Usher,
not long before his Death, Lord forgive me my Omissions: And yet he was a most
Industrious and Diligent Labourer in God's Vineyard. Admirable is the humble
Ingenuity of those good and faithful Servants of God, who when Christ at the
Day of Judgment before Angels and Men does remember to their Honor what they
had done for Him in their life time, reply, Lord when saw we thee an Hungered,
and fed thee; or Thirsty, and gave thee drink; or a Stranger, and took thee in;
or Naked, and clothed thee, or Sick, or in Prison, and came unto thee?

A Lover of God, who serves him not out of Mercenary regards, but from an
Ingenuous Spirit, does not score up his Duties and keep an account of his
Performances, does not Register and then reckon how many good Offices he has
done for the Cause of God in the World, he keeps no Catalogue of his Services;
and then sits still and applauds and pleases himself in what he has done. But
he forgets the things which are behind; he is as little elated as if he had
done nothing; and therefore presses hard forward, and reaches to the things
that are before.

Whereas on the contrary, Formal, mere Outward Christians, being of a
Pharisaick and Servile Spirit, they that are far from serving God acceptably
(Heb. 12) they set an high value upon their Performances; and (like the shallow
Streams which are most loud) they boast of their Outward Services, and please
and pride themselves in their often reflections upon what they have done; and
they would also be applauded by others; for all their Works they do, for to be
seen of Men (Matthew. 23. 5.) (...). The word [(...)] used here (and in Matthew. 6.
5.) is very proper and fit to express Hypocrites, Stage Players and Actors of a
Part in Religion, and it imports such a seeing, such a looking on by Men, as in
a Theater or Stage, a looking on with Admiration and Applause: And to this
purpose is that other word in Matthew. 6. 2. (...), that they may be Glorified,
or Honored of Men; Yea, and of God too. And yet it is but some Outward
Service, void of Inward Life, that they perform to God. But it is their All, it
is All that they will part with; and they would have it valued at no mean rate;
they have no small opinion of their Lip-devotion, and the Bodily exercise of
Religion; their Honoring God with their Lips, some good words, or some good
works not proceeding from a right principle, nor directed to a right end: And
hereby they think they do demereri Deum, and oblige Him for ever. And yet all
is but an empty Shell which they bring, a Shell without a Kernel, a Cabinet
without the Jewels. But such is their high esteem of it, that they are ready to
take it ill, and to challenge God for not taking due notice of the Honor and
Service they do him; and he is not, as they think, so sensible and regardful
thereof as he should be, when things go otherwise with them then they wish. The
Inward Language of their Hearts is fully expressed by Isa. Chap. 58. 3. Wherefore
have we Fasted, say they, and thou see not? Wherefore have we Afflicted our
Soul, and thou take no knowledge? And yet this was but a mere Outward
Humiliation, as it is expressed in Verse. 5. The bowing down the Head as a
Bul-Rush for a Day, and the spreading of Sackcloth and Ashes under them. But
alas, what is the hanging or bowing down the Head, while the Heart is unbowed
and unhumbled? And what is Sackcloth and Ashes, whenas Pride compasses them as
a Chain, (Psalm. 73. 6.)?

Here then is the difference between those that are Christians Outwardly, and
those that are Christians Inwardly (as the the Apostle speaks of the Jew (Romans
2.) The former make great account of their trifles, as if they were the most
solid realities, and the most precious rarities: The other account themselves,
and their Best performances, their most substantial Services, to be as nothing
before God; But though it becomes them to think thus humbly and meanly of
themselves, yet God who weighs the Spirits of Men and tries their Hearts, he
has an high esteem of them; God is not unrighteous to forget their Work and
Labor of Love, which they have showed toward his Name, (Heb. 6. 10.) but he
will remember them and their Performances, and an Honorable Commemoration
shall be made of them at the Last Day, Matthew. 25. 34.

4. As they are Sensible of the little they have done for God, and are grieved
at their Omissions; so they are sensible of the little time they have to repair
their neglects of those fair advantages which they have had for doing good:
They are apprehensive of the Shortness and Uncertainty of their Life and
continuance here; that their time is but Short here to Testify their Love to
God in their Love of others, and caring for their good, they have but a Short
space to Labor in; and it is but short, (and as nothing to Eternity) if they
be in the Morning of their Age, or in the Afternoon (and indeed such serious
Thoughts as these do more commonly possess those that are in the Afternoon of
their Life:) And therefore they rouse up and excite themselves to a greater
diligence, Awake, awake, up and be doing, they say unto their Soul; Stir up the
gift of God in thee, be strong in the Grace that is in Christ Jesus: And show
forth that Strength in a Power to do more, and to endure more bardness, as
becomes a good Soldier of Jesus Christ, (2 Timothy 2.)

While it is Day, while the light of Life shines, thou must Work the Works of
him that sent thee, the Works of God, the business of Religion must be heeded
by thee; For the Night comes when no Man can Work, (Jo. 9. 4.) the Sunfet of
thy Life, the Night of Death approaches, and then the seasons and advantages
for an active employing thy self about the good of others, and Glorifying the
Name of God in this World, will be over and past. And therefore, because there
is no Work, nor deliberation, nor Wisdom in the Grave whither thou art going;
whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might, (Eccles. 9. 19.) Love
God (...) (a more Emphatical word then (...)) with all thy Strength, with all
thy Mind, with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul; with whatsoever is in
thee, and in thy Power; all thy faculties must be raised up to their best
pitch: And the best expression and proof of this Love is in serving the Will of
God in thy Generation to the best of thy Skill and Abilities.

Live much in a Short time, for the time past of our Life may suffice us to
have wrought our own Will; But Christ has suffered for us in the Flesh, that
we should no longer Live the rest of our time in the Flesh, to the Lusts of
Men, (to the gratifying of those Appetites which Men generally Indulge
themselves in) but to the Will of God, which is worthy to be obeyed and
complied with in all things by us. Let it be our wonder and our grief, that we
were for so long a time (the shortest time is too long) Strangers to God and
the ways of Religion, that we should for any time live without God in the
World, and be unacquainted with the Best of Services and Employments, which are
the Services of Religion; That we should be estranged from the Life of God,
which is the Noblest and Sweetest Lise, a Life of the highest Excellency, and
of the most satisfying Pleasure: And therefore being now restored to God, and
having found him whom our Souls Love, and whom our Souls should ever have
loved, him who loved us first, how should we cleave the more close to him, even
with full purpose of Heart; How should we live wholly to his Will; and Walk
Worthy of him unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good Work; studying to
know what will please him, what is that good and acceptable and perfect Will of
God, and then to do it with all Alacrity and Faithfulness.

Live then much in a short time, Redeem the time, repair thy Omissions in some
measure by Redoubling thy diligence. Let the Book of thy Life (the Book that
must be opened at the Last Day) be full of Sense and worthy Matter; Let there
be no void spaces and empty lacunas (Idle Words and an Idle Life are such) in
it: Let every Page of it (every Day) be filled with what is Significant,
Intelligible, Rational, and Worthy to be Transcribed and Copyed out by others.
Live in an Exemplary way, and follow that best Exemplar, the Holy Jesus, of
whom S. Peter gives this short Character, (in his Sermon to Cornelius, Acts
10.) (...), He went about doing good. Think thou have lost a Day (as its said
of the Emperor Titus Vespasian) if thou have not done some good in it. Think
thou have not lived, if thou have not lived to the Service of Religion: As that
Courtier who retired from the Vanities of this World, and seriously applied
himself to the Services of Religion Seven Years before his Death, would have
this Epitaph, Hic jacet Septuagenarius qui septem vixit annos. Let that Speech
of the Apostle ( Romans 12. 11.) be often in thy Thoughts, let it be Written in
fair Letters upon thy Heart, Not Slothful in business, Fervent in Spirit,
Serving the Lord.

We must not be Slothful in Business, (...), as to diligence and industry in
our Calling and what concerns us. Whatsoever thy Hand finds to do, as the
occasion shall offer it self, and the thing shall require (so the phrase is
used in Judge. 9. 33. and 1 Samuel 10. 7.) do it with thy Might, do it as well as
thou can: As we have opportunity, let us do good unto all Men, or as we have
Ability, Gal. 6. But especially do not the Work of the Lord negligently (Jer.
48) be not negligent and lazy in Religion; make that thy business, let it be
thy (...), make it not thy (...), as if the Work of the Lord were to be done
only by the by; be serious and in good earnest in it, it is for the Life of
thy Soul.

We must be Fervent in Spirit, (...) (the like is said of Apollos, Acts 18.
25.) burning in Spirit, not coldly affected toward God's Service and Honor,
but with enflamed affections and earnest endeavors ever following that which
is good; this the Apostle calls in Titus 2. Zealous of good Works.

It follows, Serving the Lord, or the Season, or Opportunity that is before us
(for not a few Greek Copies instead of (...) read (...), the time or season)
embracing and emproving all the advantages that present themselves to us for
procuring the good of others, and winning others, and doing Honor to God. And
this indeed is a good Timeserving, free from the least Self-seeking; and we
serve the Lord, when we serve the time or season, that is, lay hold on and
improve the present opportunity, and every advantageous occasion of doing good.

And indeed, the more excellent Christians, such as are more emproved in Grace
and Spiritual Wisdom, account themselves more obliged to this Abounding in the
Work of the Lord, from the consideration of what the Apostle intimates in Romans
13. 11. that our Salvation is now nearer to us then when we believed, when we
were first called and converted to the Faith of Christ; we are now nearer to
the end, or reward of our Faith, the Salvation of our Souls; we are nearer to
the Coal and end of our Race, and consequently nearer to the Prize of our high
Calling in Christ Jesus. This Life of Action draws nearer to its Period, and
the Life of Reward is more near, the Kingdom of Heaven is at Hand; and
therefore knowing the time, that this is the season of loving our Neighbor, of
doing all the good we can to others, (of which the Apostle speaks in the
foregoing Verse) it is high time to awake out of Sleep, to shake off all
drowsiness, to awake out of a Lazy Profession, to be up and be doing: For we
have not long to live in the World, and e're long we shall lay hold on Eternal
Life, and receive the Reward far beyond all our Services, infinitely above all
our Labors here.

And here it may not be unfit to take notice of a Three fold Self-denial, full
of Nobleness and Ingenuity, in the more Excellent Christians.

1. Though they are Sensible of a Better State in the other World, of better
Enjoyments, and Satisfactions more pure and permanent then in this present
Life; and though they are full of comfortable hopes of their safe arrival and
happy entertainment in that World of Souls ((...) as the Jews call it) when
they shall be gathered to the Spirits of Just Men made perfect: Yet they are
not unwilling, nay rather desirous, to stay longer for their Reward, so that
they may do more Service here, and Minister to the good of others; they would
Labor more in God's Vineyard, they would Abound more in the Work of the Lord.
They are not overhasty to receive their Wages, their Penny for Laboring in
the Vineyard. They do not complain of their bearing the Burden and Heat of the
Day. They are willing with Jacob to serve Seven other Years for Rachel. They
are not impatient of the length of the way to Canaan, nor do they murmur that
they are kept from tasting the Fruits thereof. They are not eager to enter upon
the full pleasures of the Heavenly Jerusalem. They are content with some
Clusters of Grapes here, to Hearten and Strengthen them for their Work and
Labor. They would not go to rest, to their Beds too soon (so the Grave is
called, Isa. 57. 2. He shall enter into Peace, they shall rest in their Beds.)
They are desirous to Work longer; and when they have Labored more, and
finished the work which they desired to do for God, then they can better sing
with Old Simeon, Nunc dimittis, Lord now let thou thy Servant depart in
Peace: And when they lie down, their Sleep shall be sweet unto them, Prove. 3.
25.

And now for the verifying of all this that has been said, we have an evident
proof in S. Paul, an Illustrious Example of this kind of Self-denial, who
though he was assured of a Better State after his Decease, yet he was content
to stay longer for his Reward, he was willing to be absent from the Lord, to be
out of Heaven, and to abide longer here; that he might do more Service in the
World, and Minister to the good of others: He rather considered what was more
Needful for Others, then what would be more Gainful for Himself. This is plain
out of Philip. 1. from Verse. 21. to 25. The whole Paragraph is worthy to be
opened and further explained. In Verse. 21. he Professes,

To me to Live, is Christ] that is, If I Live, my Life shall be wholly spent in
the Service of Christ, this is the main design and business of my Life; this is
my choice, and I do not count it worth the while to Live in the World, Life is
not valuable, but only on this account, that I may bring Honor to Christ, and
win Souls to the Gospel. It follows,

And to Die is gain] that is, If I Die, I shall be a Gainer by it, Eternal Life
and Happiness being infinitely above all the enjoyments in this present Life;
And if I Die a Martyr at Rome (where I am now a Prisoner of the Lord, Ephesians. 4.
1. a Prisoner for the Cause of Christ) if I Seal and Confirm the Truth of
Christ by my Blood, the Service and Glory of Christ shall be advanced by my
sufferings, yea and my Death shall be more eminently gainful to me; this
suffering and Martyrdom being rewarded with a further Accession of Glory, and a
more rich Increase of Happiness: So that I am resolved, that Christ shall be
Magnified in my Body, whether it be by Life or by Death, Ver. 20.

Verse. 22. But if I Live in the Flesh, this is (...) the Fruit of my Labour]
Our Translation makes the place obscure, which otherwise is clear enough, if it
be considered that (...) is the same with operae pretium (and several such
Latinisms there are in the New Testament) and it signifies worth the while,
worth my labor. And so the Sense of this Verse is this, If I continue in this
Fleshly Tabernacle, is I yet live in the World, it is worth the while, it will
not be altogether unprofitable to me, nor to others, because thereby I may gain
some to Christ; and as for you Philippians and other Christians, I may be
helpful to you and them, for your and their furtherance and joy of Faith,
(Verse. 25.)

It follows in the same Verse, Yet what I shall choose, I wot not]: There are
weighty and pressing Reasons on both sides: so that I know not well whether I
should choose and desire to Live or Die, if the choice of both were given me.

Verse. 23. For I am in a straight betwixt two] Here are two different desires,
each have their Reasons to move; on the one side,

Having a desire to depart] I have a great desire to return home. For so the
Greek word should be rendered, rather then to depart; and the fitness of the
Metaphor does by the way suggest this to us, That this Life is a State of
Banishment, or a Pilgrim-condition, a State of absence from God (2 Cor. 5.) and
from our Fathers House, and that Heaven is the proper Country and Seat of
Souls, it is their Home.

It follows, and to be with Christ, which is far better] Our English
Translation is not here so full, and leaves out a word; it is exactly thus, for
this is much better by far, or this is far better by a great deal, (...).

And here by the way may be observed; That the Soul has a Being and does also
act, and is capable of joy or pain, and sensible of the good or evil condition
she is in, after the Death of the Body; and that therefore she does not fall
into a deep Sleep, and continue (as the Body does) in a senseless condition for
many Hundreds, if not Thousands, of Years, till the sounding of the Shrill
Trumpet of the Archangel at the great Day of Judgment: Otherwise it had not
been exceedingly much better for S. Paul to depart this Life, but to have lived
and continued in the Flesh till the coming of that great Day; S. Paul had not
been in a strait between two, nor at a loss whether to choose, but he would
easily have preferred it as more desirable to be awake and alive here to the
Service of Christ, and to the endeavoring the good of others; To act for God
in the World, and to be sensible of that satisfaction, and to reap that joy and
pleasure which would follow (and did flow into his Soul) upon such laboring
and abounding in the work of the Lord, being plainly more eligible and a better
State; And to fall asleep, which is to be in a condition of doing nothing for
Christ, and of being incapable of that joy and pleasure which accompanies the
doing of good, being as plainly a worse Estate. If to be with Christ, be to
fall asleep, to do nothing, to feel nothing, not to be sensible of his being
there, it were better for him to be from Christ; and to be Ministering to the
good of others in the World; considering also that it was so needful for the
Philippians and others that he should abide in the Flesh: To live and to act,
and to enjoy the comfort of such acting being simply better, then for the Soul
to Sleep, that is, to do nothing, to perceive nothing, which is all one for the
time as if the Soul were really Dead, or did Sleep the Sleep of Death.

And whereas some (as Grotius and others) understand no more by this Phrase [
To be with Christ] then this, to be in Christi custodia quoad partenpotiorem,
i. e. animam, to be received by Christ into safe custody, to be committed to
his trust and keeping; I Answer,

First, That so the Faithful were in this Life kept by him and by God, Jo. 17.
11, 12. and Chap 10. 28, 29. 1 Pet. 1. 5. (...), which implys a safe custody,
and Chap. 4. 19. which plainly is meant of this Life; and therefore if this be
meant by being with Christ, they might be said to be with Christ here, in this
Sense.

Secondly, That though the Souls of the faithful be after Death received into
Christ's custody and keeping, yet this does not imply nor infer their falling
into a senseless, unactive, dead Sleep. In Jo. 12. 26. Christ promises to
every one that serves him and follows him, where I am, there shall also my
Servant be; and afterward, him will my Father Honor, that is reward, so the
Greek word imports. So that the being where Christ is [or the being with him]
and God's Rewarding, go together. When S. Stephen at his Death said, Lord Jesus
rceive my Spirit, this does no more prove that his Spirit fell asleep, as soon
as it was received by Christ into his custody, then that the Spirit or Soul of
Christ was asleep for three Days, after his Death, immediately before which he
said, Father, into thy Hands I commend my Spirit, Luke 23. 46.

Thirdly, I add, That this Phrase [ To be with Christ] does in the Style of the
Scripture imply a State of Life and Sense; not a senseless Sleep, but such a
State wherein the Faithful enjoy Christ, and perceive the good of being with
him: As appears by comparing several passages of Scripture. Thus in Jo. 17. 24.
It is joined with their beholding the Glory which God has given him. And it is
made use of by Christ as an, Argument to comfort his troubled Disciples, Jo. 14
3. and by the Apostle Paul to comfort Christians when grieved for the decease
of friends, 1 These. 4. 17. Where, to be for ever with the Lord, that is with
Christ, is more then to be taken into his custody, and is far from signifying
for ever to be asleep. In all these places it signifies a State of Activity and
Sense, and Perception, and a Perception of that Joy and Happiness, which being
considered should fortify Christians against all trouble and Sorrow. And so to
be with Christ, is the same with to live with Christ, 2 Timothy 2. 11. and to
reign with Christ, Verse. 12.

And although their being with Christ, after they have received their Spiritual
and Heavenly Body at the Resurrection, does signify a greater degree of
Happiness and a fuller measure of Reward, of which they are now more capable by
reason of their Spiritual Body: Yet their being with Christ in the intermediate
space, between their Death and the Resurrection or last Judgment, is far from
signifying nothing at all, no lesser degree of Happiness, no enjoyment of
Christ, no comfortable and joyous Perception of their being with him, nothing
but a being kept safe or kept in being, nothing but being in a Dead Sleep in
his Arms.

But to return to the rest of the Paragraph.

Verse. 24. Nevertheless, or but, to abide in the Flesh is more needful for you]
Though it would be more advantageous and gainful to me to Die, to go home and
to be with Christ; Yet it is more for the advantage of you Philippians, and of
others, that I should live and continue longer in this World.

And thus we see how S. Paul was plainly divided between two desires; the one
of his own happiness, in returning to his Father's House and being with Christ;
the other of his doing good to others; and he inclines at last rather to this
latter: Upon this score, of being in a capacity to do good to others, he is
inclined to live; as appears by the following Verse, where he expresses his
hope (which argued his desire) that he should abide and continue with them,
live a while longer, for their furtherance and joy of Faith. He is willing to
stay for his reward, he is content to be absent from Christ, to have his more
immediate and blissful enjoyment of him deser'd, he is willing to be out of
Heaven, that he may do the more good upon Earth; content to be less happy for
the present, that he may be the more serviceable in the World. He would not so
soon be at rest from his labors; though his continuing in the World was likely
to bring him more suffering and hardships: He was now at Rome, a Prisoner for
Christ, and in the days of Nero, that Lion (as he calls him, 2 Timothy 4) and he
never stirred out of his hired House there, but with a Soldier which held him
fast to him by an Iron Chain (of which he speaks Acts 28.) and therefore it
were far better for him, and especially in these Circumstances, to be with
Christ, the Lamb, who is said (in Revel. 7. 17.) to feed those that are his,
and lead them unto Living Fountains of Water, so that they shall neither Hunger
nor Thirst any more; Yet he is willing to stay at Rome, and to await the fury
of the Lion, that Monster of Raging Cruelty, Nero; before whom he was brought
once at least, and he was delivered out of the Mouth of the Lion, (2 Timothy 4.
17.) Good stood with him and strengthened him, when he stood at the Bar before
the Emperor, and delivered him, and to this end (as it follows in that Verse)
that by me the Preaching might be fully known, and that all the Gentiles might
hear (might receive the Gospel) and there were even in Caesar's Household those
that received the Gospel ( Phil. 4.) Christ had a Flock near the Lions Den, a
Church in Nero's House. This was that which was most in S. Paul's Eye, for this
he valued his deliverance, and the preservation and continuance of his Life (as
we observed before) And that according to his hope and confidence mentioned to
the Philippians, of his coming again to them, he was delivered and restored at
his first being at Rome, is proved by some Writers.

In a word, Though it were more for his ease to be freed from his Chain and his
Bonds in (or for) Christ, which (he says Phil. 1. 13.) were manifest in
Caesar's Court; as well as to be freed from the Bonds and Fetters wherewith his
Soul was encompast, while it was in the Prison of this Terrestrial Body; Though
it were more for his advantage to move in the free Air and spacious Regions of
Immortality and Bliss; Yet he chooses rather to wear these Chains and Bonds;
and to wear this great Fetter of the Body, then to wear that Royal Apparel
with which the King of Heaven will Invest those whom he delights to Honor, and
to partake of that. Glorious Liberty of the Children of God in Heaven (that I
may borrow that Phrase in Romans 8.) He chooses rather to continue in the number
of those who groan in this Earthly Taternacle, being burdened, then to Sing
joyful Hallelujahs in the Jerusalem which is above and is free (Gal. 4.) And it
was his Love to the good of Souls, his Zeal for the being more Instrumental to
the Service and Honor of Christ, that was a stronger Chain to hold him here:
This was his great business while he was at Rome in Chains, to Preach the
Kingdom of God, and to Teach those things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ,
Acts 28. 31. He calls his Philippians (in Chap. 4. 1.) his Joy and Crown; and
that he might for some time longer abide in the Flesh for their furtherance in
Christianity, he is willing to be without the Crown of Life reserved for him in
God's Kingdom.

And was not this a rare and remarkable piece of Self-denial in him? And it
will appear the more remarkable, if we consider that S. Paul had been rapt up
into the Third Heaven, he had been caught up into Paradise, and there had heard
unspeakable words, which it is not lawsul, or possible, [(...)] for a Man to
utter; and consequently he knew more of the Felicites and Glories of that Place
and State.

2. A Second instance of the Self-denial of the more excellent Christians is
this. Though they are Sensible of the inward delights and sweetnesse^ which
accompany a Contemplative Life, and are enjoyed by a Soul withdrawing it self
from the noise and cares of the World; Though they are sensible what an Heaven
it is upon Earth to have more inward Communion with God, and in great stillness
and quietness of Spirit to Contemplate the Divine Excellencies and Perfections,
as also to Contemplate the Divine favors and kindnesses, which he has already
bestowed on them, with the much more that he reserves in Heaven, and designs
there to bless them with; And though by such Contemplation of the Divine
Excellencies and Favors, though by such a seeing of God and tasting how good
the Lord is, they are melted into Love, and ravished into Holy Joys; And though
in this deep silence of the Soul they hear the still Voice of the Holy Spirit,
the Comforter, speaking Peace and Love unto them: Yet they are willing to abate
of those Spiritual Satisfactions and Delights in Communion with God (which are
to them far better) that so they may bestow themselves upon Services and
Labors for the good of Others (which are to those others more needful.) They
are willing to abate of the sweetness of Contemplation, that they may apply
themselves more to Action; they account it the greatest Charity to abound in
the Works of the Active Life, and prefer the Advantages which thereby may come
to Others, before the Contentments which might come to Themselves by a Life
more Contemplative.

When S Peter with the two other Disciples saw Christ Transfigured on the
Mount, together with Moses and Elias, who appeared in Glory; he was so
Transported and Enravished with this Glorious sight, (this Model os Heaven upon
the Mount) that he said, Lord, it is good for us to be here, let us make Three
Tabernacles, one for thee, one for Moses, and one for Elias: He wished that he
might always stay upon the Mount, and was loath to return to converse with those
below; though in saying this, he knew not what he said, Luke 9.

But the more Excellent Christians though when they are retired and upon the
Mount of Contemplation, they sometimes see Christ Transfigured before them,
though they see him in his Glory and Beauty, and are Enravished hereby with
Love and Delight, and could ever dwell on the Mount: Yet they do not talk of
Building Tabernacles there; They are willing to Descend to those in the Valley,
to converse with the meanest and lowest in order to their Spiritual good. And
though they gain a more Divine Splendour by such Contemplations, and are raised
up to more Spiritual Heights and Accomplishments (as Moses his Face did shine
by being with God on the Mount) yet they are ready to put a Vail over their
Face, and to the Weak they will become as Weak, that they may gain the Weak;
They are willing to make themselves Servants unto all, that they may gain the
more, as the great Apostle speaks of himself in 1 Cor. 9. They consider that
they are not to please themselves, but to please their Neighbor (every other)
for his good to Edification, Romans 15.

It Is more pleasing to God that, rather then spend most of thy time in silent
affectionate Contemplation of him, thou should earnestly apply thy self to
the Works and Labors of Love for the good of others; which are proper to the
Active Life: And that thou should testify and express thy Love to him in
Loving thy Brother who more needs the effects of thy Charity, then God does thy
afsections and praises, and without loving of whom God does not account that
thou love him, as we read in 1 John 4. where its also said, Verse. 16. That
God is Love, and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in him. And
the more there is of this Hearty Good Will, and endeavors for the good of
Others, the more of this enlarged Benignity and Love to Mankind; the more is
the Love of God perfected in us, Verse. 12. the more shall we have of Gods
peculiar Presence, his Shechinah is in such Souls, he dwells in them, he makes
his abode with them, and will Manifest himself unto them.

There is a Season for all things; The Contemplative Life is Beautiful in its
Season, and so is the Active Life in its Season: And Contemplation should the
more engage, and enable us to Action. The more we fix our Inward Eye upon the
Divine Excellencies, the more we Adore and Love him, the more we consider his
Goodness and Benignity toward all his Works, and in particular his Mercies to
us; the fitter we are to speak of his Glory, and the more should our Love of
God awaken and excite us to endeavor the Spiritual good of others, that they
also may Adore and Admire, and Love, and Praise Him who is Worthy to be Praised.

There is great need of observing fit Seasons for Religious Retirement, and
withdrawing thy self from the noise and busy cares of this World: But this is
more or less to be used, according as the State of thy Soul requires it, and as
Christian Prudence shall direct. Thou art not to dwell upon the Mount, this is
but one part of thy Duty; it must be done, but there are other Duties which
must not be left undone; which though not so sweet to thee as the other, yet it
concerns thee to mind them; and by minding them thou may do more good in the
World, and consequently glorify God more. Thou art not only to consider what
is comfortable to thy self, but what is profitable to others, to thy Family, to
the Church or Commonwealth thou live in.

It was a fault in the Euchite (a sort of mistaken and unskilful Christians of
Old) to account themselves obliged to Pray without ceasing: Whereas God would
rather that they should have been up and doing; and instead of being so much on
their Knees, their Feet should have been Swift to Charity, to procure the good
of others, as its said of the Feet of wicked Men, they are Swift to shed Blood,
(Romans 3.)

To conclude, The best Example for our direction in this kind is the Life of
Christ. He was for the mixed Life, the Life both Contemplative and Active. As S.
Peter said, He went about doing good, and his Life was full of action, full of
the effects and proofs of his good Will toward Men, in doing good to their
Souls and Bodies: So also at Seasons which seemed most fit to him, he would
send away the Multitudes, and withdraw himself from his Disciples, and retire
into the Wilderness, to Pray ( Luke 5. 16.) or to a Mountain, Luke 6. 12. where
it is said he continued all Night in Prayer to God; And that the Mount of
Olives was a place he made Use of for the Ascending of his Heart in Prayer to
God, as it was made choice of by him for the place whence he would Ascend to
Heaven, appears by Luke 21. 37. where it is said, that in the Daytime he was
Teaching in the Temple, and at Night he went out and abode in the Mount of
Olives.

And thus much for the Second sort of Self-denial, which is a lesser Selfdenyal
then the other, in that this Foretast of Heaven, this Heaven upon Earth, in
Communion with God here, is less then the Enjoyment of God hereafter, then
those larger tastes of the River of Life, the River of Pleasures, the Fullness
of Joy in that greater Heaven above.

3. A Third instance of their Selfdenyal is their disvaluing of their own
Services and Labors (of which I spoke before) and their looking up to God for
the increase and blessing. Though they are (...), God's fellow Laborers, (1
Cor. 3. 9.) yet they acknowledge with S. Paul (Verse. 7.) that neither is he
that Planteth any thing, neither is he that Waters: Nothing is to be
attributed to either; but all the Praise is to be ascribed unto God. So far are
they from the the Vanity of Theudas, who boasted himself to be some body (Acts
5. 36.) or of Simon Magus, who gave out that himself was some great one (Acts
8. 9.) But rather are they the followers of the Humility of S. Paul, who
accounted himself nothing, though he was in nothing behind the very Chiefest
Apostles (2 Cor. 12. 11) They desire that all the Praise may run in the right
Channel, may go the right way, that is to God: As for themselves, they are
nothing, and their Services are nothing in their esteem. Instead of applauding
themselves in reflecting upon the much they have done, they rather complain of
their little of the much they should have done. To Conclude,

As a Christian grows in Grace and advances in Religion, there is in him more
of a Godly Sorrow, more of an Holy Shame and Ingenuous Blushing at his little.

II. As Christians are to Excel themselves, and Abound more and more; so they
are to Excel others, to Abound more then others in the Work of the Lord. If
others are coldly affected, yet they are to be a People Zealous of good Works:
Else they will not Answer the full Intendment of Christ's Death and Sufferings,
who gave himself for them, and Redeemed and Purified them to this end, as its
said, Titus 2.

Let then Christ see of the Travail of his Soul, the Fruit and desired effect
of his great Sorrows and Sufferings; let him see of the Travel of his Soul with
joy and delight, and be satisfied, taking full content, and being highly
pleased in seeing the fruit of all his labors and pains. Shall a dull and
dead, lazy and liveless Profession of Religion be all the fruit of Christ's
Sufferings? Will he be satisfied where he sees no better fruit then this? Did
Christ Sweat in the Garden, that we should Freeze? Is there no Sap, no more
Life in the Tree of the Cross, then to put forth only Leaves or Blossoms?
Assuredly the due consideration of Christ Crucified, is that which will make a
Christian fruitful in Holiness and in every good Work.

Christians must be (...), Patterns of good Works, Titus 2. and Examples, they
must shine as lights in the World, (Phil. 2.) If Others are lazy, and content
themselves with doing a little; Yet They must be Exemplary in diligence, go
early into the Vineyard, and work hard. They must do more then others, not
only more then Publicans and Sinners, but more then the seemingly-strict
Scribes and Pharisees, more then Formal Christians; for they are Men of another
Spirit (as God said of Caleb and Joshua, and must follow God fully. They have
received from God other Helps and Advantages (Spiritual Light and Strength) God
has made all Grace to Abound toward them; that so they may Abound to every
good Work, 2 Cor. 9. They have other Hopes and Expectations, better grounded
hopes of a Glorious Reward: They have received Mercies more peculiar then
others: And therefore they should do more then others, they should not live as
others; as they said (Wisdom 2. 15.) His Life is not like other Men's, his ways
are of another fashion.

Yea amongst Real Christians, one must strive to Excel another; A good strife
this is ( -- (...)) to provoke to Love and good works, not only by words but
deeds; to strive who shall do most for God, who shall most Abound in His Work,
Labor most in his Vineyard, who shall live Best. But then they that Abound and
Excel others, must also Excel in Humility; So S. Paul in 2 Cor. 12. 11. and 1
Cor. 15. 10.

PROPOSITION IV.
Christians have good ground to assure themselves, and to be persuaded, that
their Labor shall not be in Vain in the Lord.

I. They may be assured from the Revelation of the Gospel, whereby Light and
Immortality is brought to light (2 Timothy 2. 10.) Light and Immortality, that is,
Immortal Life, Eternal Blessedness both for Soul and Body, is now more clearly
revealed and fully assured by the Gospel.

S. Paul had Preached at Corinth the Chief City of Achaia for a longer space of
time then he used to do in other Cities, (for he continued there a Year and Six
Months, Acts 18. 11.) and God encouraged him hereunto, notwithstanding the many
troubles and oppositions he met with from the Jews, who unanimously and with
one accord set themselves against Paul, (Verse. 6. and 12.) God spoke to him by
Night in a Vision, that he should not be afraid nor hold his peace; for though
some did oppose, yet (says God) I have much People in this City, (Verse. 10.)
and accordingly its said (Verse. 8. That many of the Corinthians believed and
were Baptized, yea Crispus, the Chief Ruler of the Synagogue, believed on the
Lord, with all his House. And in Obedience to this Heavenly Vision, S. Paul did
for a long time (a Year and an half) Preach the Gospel to them of Corinth
clearly, and freely, and with much affectionateness to them; his whole Heart
was set wide open to them, they had a great place in his affections; This he
means, when he tells them in 2 Ep. 6. 11. 12. O ye Corinthians, our Mouth is
opened to you, our Heart is enlarged, ye are not straightened in us.

And what was it that S. Paul took such care to Preach amongst them, and which
he did first of all deliver unto them (1 Cor. 15. 3.)? It was this, That Christ
died for our sins according to the Scriptures, and that he was Buried, and that
he Rose again the Third Day according to the Scriptures: And this
last-mentioned Article of the Resurrection of Christ (on which Our Resurrection
does depend, 1 These. 4. 14.) he particularly enlarges upon, proving it from
Eyewitnesses, and they not only some single persons, as Cephas, and James,
but above Five Hundred Brethren, of whom he was seen at once; there were Five
Hundred Christians, and more, that at one and the same time saw him after his
Resurrection from the Dead; of whom although some were fallen asleep or were
dead, yet (says he Verse. 6.) the greater part remain (most of them are alive)
unto this present, or ((...)) until now, and therefore from some of them they
might know and be satisfied about his Resurrection, and that he who was Dead,
was Alive again. Yea, they might assure themselves of this from S. Paul's own
Testimony; who though he was no Disciple, not a Christian, nor an Apostle while
Christ conversed upon Earth; yet he was afterward at his Conversion an
Eyewitness of Christ's being alive again; last of all (says he Verse. 8.) he
was seen of me also; and by this appearing of Christ from Heaven was S. Paul
Converted: The remarkable Story we have recorded by S. Luke in Acts 9. where
Christ in Glory and Power, with dread and awful Majesty (for there was Thunder,
(...) Verse. 3. and Lightning which flashed and shone about him, Verse. 2.)
appeared to Paul who was still breathing out threatenings and Slaughters, (...),
( Aristophanes in his (...). has a like Phrase, (...)) Thunder and Lightning
was in his Mouth; and Christ to meet him in his fury, appears in Dread to him,
makes him to tremble (Verse. 6.) Strikes him down to the Earth (Verse. 4.) and
turns this Raging Lion, this Ravening Wolf, into a Meek Lamb; Lord, says he,
what will thou have me to do? The Men that were with Paul, saw no Man (Verse.
7.) not him that spoke, but Paul saw him, and He declared himself who he was; I
am Jesus whom thou Persecutest, Verse. 5 And besides this Testimony from his own
seeing of Christ to be alive, he uses other Arguments in this 15. Chap. to the
Corinthians to prove the Resurrection of Christ.

But what is this to the Resurrection of Christians? Very much. For Our
Resurrection depends on Christ's. If Christ be Risen, then there is a
Resurrection from the Dead, Verse. 13. 16. and then shall We also Rise again.
For we must know that Christ is become the first Fruits of them that Slept or
were Dead. He is twice in this Chapter called the First fruits (Verse. 20. 23.)
and Col. 1. 15. The First born of every Creature, or more sully in Verse. 28. He
is the Head of the Body the Church, He is the Beginning, the First born from
the Dead, as he is also Styled Apoc. 1. 5. And these three Titles and peculiar
Prerogatives of his (for in all things he was to have the Preeminence, says
the Apostle) evince the Doctrine in hand.

1. That of First Fruits [the First Fruits of them that Slept.] For as by the
Consecrating and offering up to God the First Fruits, the whole Lump or Mass,
the whole increase was Sanctified and Consecrated (for if the first fruits be
Holy, the Lump, or Mass, is also Holy, Romans 11.) So if Christ be Risen, all
true believers who are fallen asleep, shall also be Raised.

2. That of the Head, [He is the Head of the Body, the Church] Christ is the
Head, and He and true Beleivers make up one Body.

And as Adam is considered as the Head of Mankind, in whom all die, all that
come from him and partake his Nature: So is Christ the Second Adam to be
considered as the Head of all Believers, in whom all shall be made alive; All
that partake of him, of his nature and Spirit, and are like him in Spirit and
Life, they shall also bear the Image of the Heavenly Adam in having an Immortal
and Glorious Body, such a one as Christ now has.

3. That of the Beginning, and the Firstborn from the Dead, or more plainly
(and without a Metaphor) Acts 26. 23. the first that should Ris^ from the Dead.
He is the first among those who shall Rise from the Dead unto Glory, the first
which from the Grave was raised and exalted to Heaven: The First, as being the
Cause of the Resurrection of others (in which Sense he says, Jo. 11. 25. I am
the Resurrection and the Life) and the First in Order of Time, -- Christ the
first fruits (he first was to Rise) afterward they that are Christ's at his
coming; and at his coming to Judgment they shall then Rise who are his Members,
who belong to him, and are his peculiar Possession.

But not only from the Resurrection of Christ does the Apostle Labor to prove
and clear to the Corinthians the Resurrection of Christians, but from several
other Arguments and Proofs, of which there are not a few in this Chapter; and
he does more largely insist upon this Doctrine here, then he does elsewhere in
his Epistles upon any other: He speaks also more particularly here about the
Nature and Quality of the Body to be Raised, of its being Spiritualized and
Immortalized, as also in his 2 Ep. to Cor. Chap. 5. And something he tells them
that was a Secret, undiscovered heretofore, (...), Behold, I show you a
Mystery, or I tell you a secret, 1 Cor. 15. 51. and the same he told to the
Thessalonians, in 1 Ep. Chap. 4. which he ushers in with this Preface, the more
to assure them of it, Verse. 15. [ For this we say unto you by the word of the
Lord.]

And there was great need that the Apostle should be so large and earnest in
the confirming of this Truth, because there were some at Corinth that having
before received it, began to deny the Resurrection of the Dead, Verse. 12. And
indeed this Leaven of the Sadducees, the denial of the Resurrection and Life to
come, was likely to spread there, such a Doctrine there were many that were apt
to receive in this place, and to wish it true (and generally Men from wishing
such a thing to be true, in time think it to be true) because Corinth the
Metropolis of Achaia being grown a Wealthy City by Merchandise (for the which
it was excellently fitted by its Situation) and as Luxurious and Voluptuous as
Wealthy (Riches usually Ministering to Luxury and Lust) so that it grew to a
Proverb, Non est omnibus Corinthum appellere; which Horace has expressed in this
Verse, Non cuivis homini contingit adire Corinthum. There was a Temple in this
City Dedicated to Venus, and (as Strabo relates, Geogr. l. 8.) so Richly
Endowed, that above a Thousand Whores were Dedicated and Devoted for her
Lustful Service, and they were very costly, demanded great Wages for their
luiquity; which gave occasion to the forementioned Proverb; and because of the
Uncleanness that did abound here, and to which the Corinthians were addicted
(so that (...), was as much as Scortari) there was great reason for the Apostle
(in 1 Ep. Chap. 6.) to heap up (though in few words) so many Arguments against
Fornication. Now to such a sort of People as these were, the Doctrine that
denied all Resurrection and the Judgment to come, was very pleasing.

To conclude therefore, from the Arguments used by the Apostle in this Epistle
for the proof of the Resurrection, and from what he Preached at other times (as
he intimates in Verse. 1. 3) concerning it; the Corinthians might well be
assured that their Labor should not be in vain in the Lord; And therefore He
might well say (...), for as much as ye know, etc. and the rather because (as
he tells them in Verse. 1. 2.) ye have received the Gospel which I Preached unto
you, this great Evangelical Truth, and ye did stand or had stood (...) in it,
it had been firmly embraced by them; And he might well also exhort them to be
Steadfast and Immovable, to stand firm in the Profession of it (as he does in
the last Verse) and to the like purpose he tells them, in Verse. 11. Therefore,
whether it were I or they, so we Preach, and so ye Believed: Where having
before spoken of Cephas and the other Apostles, all which were Eyewitnesses of
Christ's Resurrection (for to them he appeared more then once upon Earth) and
having also spoken of himself, to whom Christ appeared from Heaven, and
therefore he of his own knowledge could Testify that Christ was Alive again;
he adds whether it were I or they, whether ye look upon my own Testimony, or
upon the Testimony of his Apostles (of whom he speaks in the foregoing Verse)
so we Preach (both I and they Preach the same thing) and so ye Believed; ye did
receive this Truth, and held it without wavering, as indeed there was no cause
after such Ample and Clear Proof and Testimony to doubt of it.

This Doctrine of the Resurrection and a Reward to come the Corinthians might
also know from the Preaching of Cephas or Peter, or of some of his Disciples:
And from the Preaching of Apollos, Who was an Eloquent Man and Mighty in the
Scripture, and being Fervent in Spirit, (an instance of which is that in Verse.
28. (...), with great vehemence he convinced the Jews) he taught (...) exactly
(with exact Truth) the things of the Lord, or concerning the Lord, (...), the
Lord Jesus (This he did at Ephesus) and being more perfectly instructed in the
way of God by Aquila and Priscilla whom S. Paul did highly value and calls his
Fellow Laborers in Christ Jesus, Romans 16. 3, 4. he went into Achaia, and
coming to Corinth the Metropolis thereof, (...), he helped them much (or he
much advantaged and emproved) them that believed through Grace (Verse. 27.) viz.
upon the Preaching of S. Paul; for Paul planted and Apollos watered, (1 Cor.
3.) And as some might know this from the Preaching of Paul, and Cephas, and
Apollos, so some from Christ himself pretended to have been instructed in the
Christian Doctrine: As appears by those divisions amongst them, in saying, I am
of Paul, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ; as we read in 1 Cor. 1. 12.

And no wonder that S. Paul and the Apostles were so much upon this: For the
Doctrine of the Resurrection, of Christ's Resurrection first, is a Doctrine of
greatest Importance, as it makes for the encouragement of our Faith and Hope in
God (for he was raised for our Justification, Romans 4.) and as it makes for the
justifying and confirmation of the Gospel, the Doctrine that he taught; there
being no greater proof or evidence that the most Doubting and Skeptical and
Prejudiced could desire or expect to have, to prove one to be a true Prophet, a
Teacher sent from God, and that his Doctrine was from God, then this, if the
Prophet or Teacher should foretell and give it them for a Sign to believe in
him, That after his being put to Death by those that would not believe him, he
should arise and live again in the World, and within such a time; which was
fulfilled and verified in our Savior; and this was his last Sign superadded to
the other Signs, the Miracles which he wrought, and is called The Sign of the
Prophet Jonas; For as Jonas was Three Days and Three Nights in the Whale's
Belly, so shall the Son of Man be Three Days and Three Nights in the Heart of
the Earth (Matthew. 12. 40.) And indeed this Sign of the Prophet Jonas was was
very fitly remarkable, Briefly to gloss upon it.

In this great Sea of the World its no wonder if the great Tempest of God's
Anger does arise by reason of Men's Sins, so that all are in danger to be cast
away and Perish: And therefore it was expedient that one should Die (as
Caiaphas the High Priest spoke, and more Prophetically then he was aware of,
Jo. 11. 50) Jonas was cast into the Sea, that the rest might be saved, and the
Sea calmed. He offered himself to them, to stav the raging of the Sea, and to
save them from perishing; And Christ offered himself to those that came with
Judas to apprehend him and bring him to his Suffering, which was designed and
agreed on by the Chief of the Jews (Jo. 18. 8.) I have told you that I am he.
If therefore ye seek me let these (his Disciples he means) go their way: I am
the Man that must stay the Storm. Jonas was in the Belly of the Whale (Jon. 2.
1.) and in the Heart of the Seas, (Verse. 3.) and this Belly of the Whale he
calls the Belly of Hell, so that he was as good as lost or dead, it was a
wonder that he was not consumed, he was dead in a Figure (as it is said of Isaac,
Heb. 11.) And Christ was in the Heart of the Earth, in the Belly of the Grave,
he was dead not in a Figure only, but really dead and buried. Jonas was
restored the Third Day to the dry Land alive [ Thou have (says he) brought up
my Life from Corruption, O Lord my God] And so was Christ restored the Third
Day to the Land of the Living. And to cast in and superadd one Resemblance
more, though not of this kind, Jonas arose and went to Nineveh (a great and
populous City) to Preach Repentance to them: And Christ being risen from the
dead, Repentance and Remission of Sins was to be Preached in his Name, among
all Nations, not to one City or one Nation only, though first it was to be
Preached at Jerusalem, Luke 24. 47.

And as the Apostles Preached Jesus, and his Resurrection, and did it with
great Power, as it is expressed in Acts 4. Verse. 33. And with great Power gave
the Apostles Witness of the Resurrection of the Lord Jesus. S. Peter Preached it
at Pentecost before the Jews then Assembled at Jerusalem, from every Nation
under Heaven, and this he did (...), Acts 2. 29. freely and openly: And again
he did it, at the Temple in Solomon's Porch besore the Jews; and with a
boldness that Astonished them. He and S. John asserted it before Annas the
High Priest, and Caiaphas, and the Rulers and Elders and Scribes, Acts 4. 13.
and this they did again, and in the Temple, as we read in Acts 5. in obedience
to Gods Message sent them by an Angel, Verse. 20. Go, stand and speak in the
Temple to the People, all the words of this Life. So the Apostles also Preached
Our Resurrection (which is consequent upon Christ's) with all freedom, though
it Galled the Sadducees, who were grieved that they Preached through Jesus the
Resurrection from the Dead, Acts 4. 2. And S. Peter in his Preaching to
Cornelius and his near Friends and Kinsmen (the first converted Gentiles) as he
Preaches Christ's Resurrection ( Acts 10. 40, 41.) so he tells them that Christ
Commanded us (viz. the Apostles) to Preach unto the People, and to testify
that it is He which was Ordained of God to be the Judge of Quick and Dead;
whence it follows, That Christ was to Rise from the Dead, and that the Dead
shall Rise again: The words suppose both the Resurrection of Christ, and Our
Resurrection.

But to return to our Apostle Paul (who by the Grace of God labored more
abundantly then they all) He very largely and freely, Preached Christ's
Resurrection, and Ours: That this was his constant Employment, He affirms it in
his defense before King Agrippa and Festus the Roman Governor, Acts 26. Verse.
22. I continue unto this Day, Witnessing both to small and great, That Christ
should suffer, and that he should be the first that should Rise from the Dead;
And in the beginning of his Apology or Defense, why should it be thought a
thing incredible with you that God should Raise the Dead? (Verse. 8.) And as
here before the Greatest Persons, so before the Greatest Judicatory in Greece,
the Judges in Areopagus, before the Philosophers at Athens (that famous
University, (...), the Greece of Greece, as it was called) he Preached Jesus
and the Resurrection, Acts 17. 18. for the which he was opposed by the
Epicureans, and counted at Athens no better then a (...), a Babbler, a Trifler,
a Despicable fellow; and the same Entertainment he met with after he had
Preached the same before the Judges in Areopagus, as we find it in Verse. 32.
And when they heard of the Resurrection of the Dead, some Mocked, for he had
said in the words immediately foregoing, That now God Commands all Men every
where to Repent, because he has appointed a Day wherein he will Judge the
World with Righteousness, by that Man whom he has Ordained (viz. by Christ)
whereof he has given assurance, in that he Raised him from the Dead. Though he
had seen before how this Doctrine was entertained with scorn, as idle talk and
for which he was counted (...), (and for such and no better it was esteemed by
Pliny (in Hist. Not. l. 2. c. 7. and l. 7. c. 55.) pnerile deliramentum, and
also by the Heathen Cecilius in Minutius Felix, Christianorum aniles fabulae)
yet he knowing of what great importance and weighty consequence it was to
Preach this necessary Doctrine of the Resurrection and (that which it is in
order to) the Judgment to come, and what the Power of it was, as it afterward
made Felix, the Roman Governor, to tremble; he thought it Seasonable to
declare it before that Grave and Severe Senate and Judicatory of the
Areopagites at Athens. And what he did here assert and Preach before them, was
very fit and Seasonable; for that Court or Judicatory was a little Figure and
Emblem of the great Day of Judgment. This Court was the Supreme Court of
Justice at Athens, the Judges were persons of great note, and renowned for
their Wisdom and Integrity, able and fit to Judge of the most weighty matters,
and therefore were the most difficult causes wont to be referred to them; they
sat in the Dark, that they might not be moved to any undue affection and
compassion upon Sight of the Malefactor; they would not permit him (...) or
(...), to use any Rhetoric to move their affections, but only to make a plain
and bare Narration: They were also very strict and severe in enquiring into the
Lives and Manners of Men (for this was another End to which this Court was
appointed) and taking an account hereof, ubi quid quisque Atheniensium ageret,
diligentissime inquiri soleb at, ut homines honestatem (vitae rationem memores
reddendam esse) sequerentur (as Valerius Maximus describes it) they were
strictly inquisitive what any one of the Athenians did, how he demeaned
himself, that Men might see it to be their interest to live well, as
considering that they were to give an account of their lives and behavior; and
therefore it was called Sanctissimum Consilium, the most Holy Council or
Judicatory; and by this it seemed a little Representation of the Great Tribunal
of Christ and Solemn Day of Judgment, at what time the Books shall be opened,
the Rolls wherein Men's Actions are Recorded; and when All must appear before
the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his
Body, according to that he has done, whether good or evil, as the Apostle
speaks in 2 Cor. 5. 10. And upon this account and consideration (as a proper
and powerful persuasive to a good Life) he would have Christians to make it
their great design and Holy Ambition to live so as to be acceptable unto God,
in the foregoing Verse, as he adds also in the following Verse, Knowing
therefore the terror of the Lord (this dreadful appearance of the Lord at the
Last Day) we persuade Men.

Thus we see how the Apostle made it his great care and business to Preach the
Resurrection of Christ, as also the General Resurrection, or (which amounts to
as much) the Great Day of Judgment. What ever Doctrine, more smooth and
flattering, and complying with Men's e^e and carnality, Others might Teach, yet
this is that which S. Paul with all faithfullness Preached unto the World, this
was his Preaching of the Gospel, he made sure always to clear, and confirm, and
inculcate this great Evangelical Truth, this Fundamental Article of Christian
Religion, The Doctrine of the Resurrection.

Concerning which, I shall only add this one Consideration more (and its
worthy to be well considered by us) That though in this Fifteenth Chapter to
the Corinthians he uses many Arguments to evince and persuade the Belief of
Our Resurrection, yet first of all, and principally, ((...)) he makes use of
the Resurrection of Christ for the proof of it, who rose as the Head of the
Church (the Second Adam being a Common Head, as well as the First, in the Sense
we have showed) and as the First fruits of them that Slept, and the Firstborn
from the Dead. And further consider. That the Argument drawn from Christ's being
Raised to Life, and to a Life of Immortal Blessedness (Romans 6. 9) is a most
plain and easy Argument to prove that there is a Blessed Life and Immortality
hereafter. There are other Arguments to evince this, but some of them are too
sublime for every capacity; but the meanest are capable of understanding this;
For the Man Christ, one in our nature and flesh, Died, and Rose again, and is
now Alive, and lives for Ever; which is an evident proof of a future Life
after the Death of the Body, and a fair pledge of a Blessed Immortality
hereafter, which God will reward the faithful with, those that have the Spirit
of God dwelling in them, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 8. 11.

And now having seen how Christians have good ground to hope for, and expect a
Future Reward of Soul and Body from the Light of Revelation, we shall show (in
the following Arguments) how they may hope for it from the Light of Reason.

2. From the Justice of God, they may know their Labor is not in vain.

His Justice manifests it self in rendering to every one according to his works,
and this without any respect of Persons: Both Maxims are much insisted upon in
the Scriptures both of the Old and New Testament. The first is acknowledged by
David the Royal Psalmist, in Psalm. 62. 12. by that Royal Oracle of Wisdom,
Solomon his Son, Prove. 24. 12. by the Prophets, Jeremy 32. 19. Ezekiel. 33. 20.
and by one greater then Solomon, and the Prophets, even Christ Jesus, the Judge
himself, in Matthew. 16. 27. Revel. 22. 12. and by his Apostles, S. Paul, Romans 2.
6. 2 Cor. 5. 10. and S. Peter, 1 Ep. 1. 17.

Now the ways or works of Men are either good or evil; and God who rewards,
cannot be deceived or mistaken; (as not corrupted or wrought upon by fear or
flattery) but he has a perfect knowledge, and just value of Men's works, knows
the inward Springs and Principles of their actions: And he which is Lord over
all, shall fear no Man's persons, nor shall he stand in awe of any Man's
greatness, etc. Wisdom 6. 7. He sees not as Man sees, for Man looks on the
outward appearance, but the Lord looks on the Heart, 1 Samuel 16. 7. The
Righteous Lord tries the Reins and Heart, Psalm. 7. 9. And this, That he may
give every Man according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings;
which is mentioned with God's searching and pondering the Heart, and trying the
Reins, Jer. 17. 10. Prove. 24. 12.

And that God renders to every one without respect of persons, is a Maxim
frequently also asserted in Scripture, in the Old Testament, Deuteronomy. 10. 17. 2 Chronicles. 19. 7. Job 34. 19 and in the New Testament, Acts 10. 34. Romans 2. 11.
Gal. 2. 6. Ephesians. 6. 9. Colos. 3. 25. We read in Prove. 11. 1. that A false
Balance is Abomination to the Lord, surely then God will not Practice that
himself, which he Abominates in Men; but he will weigh the actions of Men in a
true Balance. He will be far from all Partiality and respect of persons, which
are false Weights and Measures, and Balances of deceit. He will not accept or
respect persons in Judgment. In the dispensation of Rewards and Punishment, he
will not regard or look at any thing but the temper of their Minds, and their
Actions, whether good or evil.

Now the Justice of God requires ut bonis been, malis male sit. Isa. 3. 10, 11.
Say ye to the Righteous, That it shall be well with him. Woe unto the wicked, it
shall be ill with him.

But we often experience it otherwise to be in this World, yea good Men in the
Old Testament found it not seldom to be otherwise; and yet under that
dispensation there is more abundant mention of Temporal good things in the
Promises there recorded; and hence were those complaints in Mal. 3. 15. and in
Psalm. 73. from Verse 3. to 12. (as Job 12. 6.) and in Jer. 12. 1. and Holy
David observed the like of wicked Men, the Men of the World, Psalm. 17. 14. and
in the Epistle to the Hebrews the Calamities of the most Eminent in goodness
are described, Verse. 36. 37, 38.

The Israelites (God's People) gather Straw. make Brick, live a Life of bitter
affliction, when as the Egyptians live at ease, and in pleasures. When Jacob
and his Children were afflicted, partly as being in a Sojourning and uncertain
condition, and partly while they were Strangers and Servants in Egypt, Esau and
his Posterity flourished in Honor.

Lazarus (a Son of Abraham) had many evil things, was in hard Circumstances,
not only poor, but full of Sores, a sick weak thing, unable to get his Bread
with labor and sweat of his brows; desired but the Crumbs that fell from the
Rich Man's Table. Dives the Rich Man, and wicked, had his good things; he was
Richly Attired, and fared Deliciously every Day, (Luke 16. 19.) (...), Every
Day he enjoyed all that made for pleasure, and not only at some great or
Solemn times; He and his Five Brethren with other jolly Company: While others
(as Lazarus) fared hardly.

So that Sin is not always punished in this Life, nor Holiness rewarded.

God did not render unto Lazarus, and those of whom the World was not Worthy,
he did not render unto them in this Life according to what they had done or
suffered.

God did not render unto Dives here according to the evil he did, his
Unmercifulness, his Luxury and Riot, with the Sins attending thereon; He had
the good things of this Life, lived in ease and pleasure, he received in full
Measure his good things: Now this was not a Reward according to what he did; he
Reaped what was better then he Sowed.

And therefore if Divine Providence does not equally distribute Rewards and
Punishments here; it follows, since God is Just, That in the World to come he
will dispense Rewards and Punishments according as they have lived here; that
every one may receive according to what they have done in the Body, whether
good or evil. There is therefore a time, a Day to come, wherein the Judge of
the World will make it appear that he did weigh and consider the Spirits and
Lives of all Men, and now they shall be dealt with according as they have done
well or ill here, and therefore this time is called, Romans 2. 5. The Day of the
Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God.

This Argument taken from the Justice of God, is mentioned by the Apostle in 2
These. 1. 6, 7. It is a Righteous thing with God to recompense Tribulation to
them that trouble you: And to you who are troubled, Rest with us, when the Lord
Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels.

In short thus, God the Wise and Righteous Lawgiver and Ruler of the World,
has given us a Law and Rule to walk by and govern us, and he has showed us
what is good, and what the Lord our God requires of us, (and his Will is Holy,
and Wise and Perfect) this Law he has Written in Man's Conscience, and has
more fully declared it in his Word: Now he will not let the Transgression of
his Righteous Law, the open and constant violation of it by wicked Men, go
unpunished; though he may bear with them here for a while, he will not suffer
them to devour and cruelly to treat his obedient Servants; the Rod of the
wicked shall not always rest upon the Lot of the Righteous, (Psalm. 125.) But
they shall know that there is a God that Judges in the Earth, and shall find
that Tribulation and Anguish, Indignation and Wrath, will be to every Soul that
does Evil, Romans 2.

Nor will God forget the faithful and sincere obedience of his Servants, but
will render Eternal Life to them that by patient continuance in well-doing seek
for Honor, and Glory, and Immortality. So in Hebr. 6. 10. God is not
unrighteous to forget your work and labor of Love. He has his Book of
remembrance, Mal. 3. He has promised and Eternal Reward, a Crown of Life; and
this Crown of Life and Glory is also a Crown of Righteousness, 2 Timothy 4. And
God as he is the Righteous Judge (as well as a God of Mercy) will give it,
because he has promised to give it upon the Terms of Faith and sincere
Obedience, or patient continuance in well doing: And he who has promised, will
be Just and Righteous to perform; as he is abundantly Merciful in Pardoning our
Infirmities and Imperfections, and also in Rewarding us and doing for us
exceeding abundantly above all that we have done. So Rich is his Mercy, and so
Noble his Goodness: And so far are our works, our doings or sufferings from any
Merit or any Worthiness, to be compared with the Reward and Glory to be
revealed, Romans 8. It is a Merciful Justice, and therefore its said in Psalm. 62.
12. Also unto thee, O Lord, belongs Mercy: For thou rendrest to every Man
according to his Work.

Human Judicatories and Tribunals cannot take notice of all Sins and Offenses;
and where they do, they may be corrupted or bribed, or they may be deceived and
mistaken. But the Judge of all the Earth, he regards not persons nor takes
reward, Deuteronomy. 10. 27. Nor can he be deceived by false pretensions; for the Lord
is a God of knowledge, and by him actions are weighed, 1 Samuel 2. and before him
all things are naked and open, Heb. 4.

Humane Laws only restrain Words and outward Actions; But the Divine Law
reaches the Spirit of Man, his inward Thoughts, and Secrets of the Heart.

There are Spiritual Sins, as Hypocrisy, Pride of Heart, Envy, Lusts of the
Heart, Murder of the Heart; These, and the like, are not punished by Human
Laws, but are greatly Criminal before God.

There are Speculative Sins; Sins acted over in the Phansy, and there repeated
and remembered with delight (when the outward act is past) which are highly
provoking to God, and shall be judged: For, for Men to do this, to recall in
their thoughts with pleasure and delight such and such Sins, is to act over the
same Sins in Fancy and Speculation, to aggravate their Sins by new and fresh
guilt, it is to stand to and make good their former Transgressions, instead of
repenting of them; for then they would be remembered with Sorrow and Abhorrence.

These Sins not falling under Man's Cognizance; as only Words and Actions do,
but not Thoughts (which yet are the first contrivers of that Sin and evil in
Words and Actions) and these Sins escaping the Judgment and Punishments of
Humane Judicatories; yet shall not escape the Judgment of God.

The Day of Judgment is described by this, 1 Cor. 4. 5. Judge nothing before
the time, until the Lord come, who both will bring to light the Hidden things
of Darkness, and will make manifest the Counsels of the Heart; and then shall
every Man have praise of God; that is, every one that has done well; as on the
contrary, they shall have shame and everlasting contempt (Dan. 12. 2.) that
have done evil, how cunning and close soever they were, and whatsoever fair
pretenses they might make before Men. The Day of Judgment is described here by
the time when Christ shall bring to light the Hidden things of Darkness, and
make manifest the Counsels of the Heart: And so in Romans 2. 16. its called the
Day when God shall judge the secrets of Men by Jesus Christ.

3. From the Testimony of Conscience.

Conscience is God's Deputy and Vicegerent. The voice of Conscience is God's
voice, and it does powerfully witness a Future State, and the Rewards and
Punishments to be dispensed therein, according to what we have done here, Good
or Evil.

Upon the Consciousness of doing their duty, there arises within Men a Peace,
and Satisfaction, and Comfortable expectations from God who is the Father of
Mercies. And there is no such satisfaction, no such joyous reflections as
those; as 'twas said of the Athenians, (...). A continual Feast is a good
Conscience; But this Feast is but an Antipast, a foretast of a better in Heaven.

Now on the contrary, there follows upon Sin, inward Trouble, and Anguish, and
Fear, a fearful expectation of a sad after-reckoning and Judgment to come. Hae
sunt impijs assiduae domesticaeque furiae (says Tully.) And these inward Fears
and Troubles, Terrors of another World, are not impressed upon Men by Politians
and Statesmen, for Secular ends and interest of State, to awe Men into
obedience; For,

(1.) They follow upon such sins as are not punishable by Human Laws, as Secret
Sins, Sins of the Heart, Speculative Sins and Spiritual Wickednesses; which are
such Sins as no Earthly Judges, no Magistrates can have Cognizance of, and no
Human Laws can reach: It would be a vain thing for the Supreme Powers to make
Laws about what its impossible for them to know, and consequently impossible
for them to punish.

(2.) Yea, they follow upon such Sins as are hid from Men, if punishable by
Laws when discovered, such Sins as no Man can accuse the Malefactor of, or not
prove them against him.

(3.) Yea, they follow upon such sins, as being known by Man, yet are not
punishable by the Laws of that Country, nay sometimes are applauded and
esteemed by Men. Judas his sin was so far from being punished by the Jewish
Powers, that he was rewarded for it; But the reward he had, and all the
applause and encouragement they could give him, could not ease and sree him
from the Anguish in his Conscience, and Fear of what was to come.

(4.) Yea these Fears and Terrors are found to be amongst them in whom is no
Policy, Nations that are rude and barbarous, and not governed by Crafty
Politicians; yet even in such appeared Magna vis Conscientiae: So universally
have they possessed Men, and in all ages; whereas vain and causeless and Panick
Fears are of a short and uncertain continuance, and not so universal, as these
inward Fears and Troubles of Conscience. Nor are these Fears pleasing and
grateful to Men (as is easy for any Man to judge and acknowledge) but contrary
to the inclinations of Men, who are carried out to the love and practice of
such Sins (as Revenge, Injustice, Lust, and the like) whence these inward
Troubles arise.

(5.) To what has been said, I shall superadd this, That the Deepest
Politicians and Greatest Statesmen, the Greatest Potentates of the Earth are
not more free and secure from these inward Fears then the populus terrae, the
mean Peasants and those of low degree (which yet these Grandees could not have
been disturbed with, had they known that these were but arts and a juggle
invented by them for State-reasons) yea the Great Men of the Earth, Men of
Policy and Power, have been rather more severely lasht caeco verbere, with
these secret and unseen lashes: They have been more severely assaulted and
haunted by these domesticae furiae and inward Horrors, though they would fain
have been delivered from them, and have used all arts to be freed from this
evil Spirit, a Self-corroding and tormenting Conscience, which troubled them.

4. From the Souls inward Sense in good Men.

There are certain Instincts and Sympathies and Propensions in the Soul of Man
to Religion, to God and the Enjoyment of him; and these are more especially
enlivened, and vigorous, in Holy and renewed Souls. There is a vehement thirst
and longing in such Souls after Union with God, the Father of Spirits: Their
Souls pant after God, after the living God, that they may see and enjoy him
whom their Souls love, whom they have chosen for their Portion, for whom they
have forsaken all the vanities of the World, and denied All to enjoy Him; They
have none in Heaven but Him, none in Earth in comparison of Him. As for this
present Life and State, they groan being burdened, while they are in this
Tabernacle; this is their State of Pilgrimage; while they are here, they are
absent from the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.

And hence it is that these Holy Souls persuade themselves that the Father of
Spirits, God who is Love, that implanted these Instincts and Affections in
them, that has awakened them by his Grace, that has drawn out their Hearts
after him, so that the Love of God has constrained them to count nothing that
he commanded them grievous to do, nothing hard to suffer for him, they persuade
themselves that God will satisfy these Desires and Affections of his own
begetting in them, I shall be satisfied when I awake, with thy likeness (as
Holy David speaks Psalm. 17.) and that their Souls who cleave to God in love,
who desire and love him above all things, and do more thirst after a full
Enjoyment of him from the lesser tastes and relishes of his Goodness here, and
hope to see him as he is, face to face hereafter, shall not be frustrated of
their desires and hopes; but God will satisfy these by the manifestation of
some better State and Enjoyment then of this World, which is not their Portion,
nor did they mind Earthly things. They persuade themselves that God will not
forsake them, nor thrust away the Soul that thirsts after him, and loves and
desires him above all, and places her Felicity in him; and when it has most
prepared her self, as a Bride adorned for her Husband, for the other State, and
is more near to enjoy him, as it is when the Death of the Body is near.

That such a Soul should be cut off from God, and cast into the place of
forgetfulness and be no more, so as she should never enjoy God (nor indeed any
thing else) is not to be conceived, it being manifestly contrary to the Divine
Goodness.

Has God implanted in Brute Beasts such and such Propensions and Instincts,
Sympathies and Antipathies, the Passions of Fear and Aversation, the Affections
of Hope, and Desire, and Joy, with real and proper Objects for them to be
respectively exercised upon; So that they naturally fear and avoid what is for
their hurt, and they hope and desire and delight in what is for their welfare
and pleasure? And is it to be imagined that the same Passions which are
implanted by God in Better and Higher Beings, the Souls of Men, and in Holy and
renewed Souls (the Best Souls) have not suiteable Objects for them also? Is the
Hope of enjoying God, and a Blessed Immortality, and the Future State (and the
Joy thence arising, or, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 5. the rejoicing in Hope of
the Glory of God) a vain Hope, a vain Joy? Do the Best Men act like Fools, and
unwisely, in denying themselves as to many advantages and pleasures in this
World, for an Vtopian Paradise, for a Nothing, for that which is not? Are all
the Religious Instincts and Propensions toward God, which are rooted in the
Souls of Men, and are most active in the Souls of Holy Men, and especially
toward the end of their Life, are they Frustraneous and Vain?

But we cannot imagine things to be thus, without highly reproaching the God of
Nature, God most Wise and most Good, who made all his Works in Wisdom, (Psalm.
104. 24. which Wisdom reaches from one end to another, and sweetly orders all
things, Wisdom. 8. 1.) and who saw every thing that he had made, that it was
good, very good (Genes. 1.) and accordingly fitted every Creature for its End,
which it knows, and observes the proper means to attain it; this Wise and Good
God did not surely do otherwise in making of Man, but he has excellently
fitted him for the Highest and Best End; and Holy Souls are in the readiest
capacity for it. Hence that in 2 Cor. 5. 5. He that has wrought us for the
self same thing, is God, who also has given unto us the earnest of the Spirit.

And thus much for the Arguments from the light of Reason: Concerning which, if
any shall object, That this last Argument (as also the former) seems not so
much to prove the Resurrection of the Body, as a Life to come, or a Blessed
Immortality of the Soul after the Death of the Body; I answer, Be it so, yet
they are of force to prove that which was the matter in hand, viz. That those
who Abound in the Work of the Lord, their Labor shall not be in vain in the
Lord.

THE END.

