Suum Cuique OR, EVERY ONE HIS OWN.

In a Short DISCOURSE ON THE 21th. Ver. of the 22th. Chapt. of St. MATTHEW.

First Preached, from the firm Principles of his own Loyalty; Then Published,
to gratify the free Proposals of a Neighbors Generosity.

By J. Wyllys, M. A.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun at the West End of St. Paul's
Church, 1676.

To the Worshipful, John Morecraft Esquire; my especial Mecenas, the Worthy owner
of that true Nonesuch, a Manor called Fitzwaters, in the Barony of Shenfield,
in Essex.
SIR,
THat you laid this grateful task upon me, under the refreshing shadow of your
spreading Name, to print, dedicate to, and present you with, a Sermon on this
Text; made me a little solicitous to find the Reason: From any designed reward,
to unite me more to your Service, it could not be; since there is no degree
beyond superlative, nor are Attoms divisible. To expose my weakness, I could no
way persuade my self 'twas, for that, as, I already am, and hope to be
abundantly more, satisfied in your Candor, so I am easily sensible, how without
Printing, I am obnoxious. And for you, Sir, who are Extracted from the most
ancient Family of the More-Craft's; You, Sir, who are celebrated for Your
foreign Adventures, Your domestic Physical Efforts, Your most Remarkable
Mansion, and that Noble Court, that, rose from its ashes, to bear up Your Name,
does blazon You, to more advantage, than can the small character of an obscure
Press: However, I have hereby an opportunity, as to make known Your regards to
King and Church; so to leave a Printed Record, how ready to obey all Your
Commands, though otherwise to his disgrace, is

Your Obliged Servant, J. W.

Suum Cuique Or, EVERY ONE HIS OWN. In a SERMON on St. Matthew. 22. Verse. 21. ult.
Render therefore unto Caesar, the things that are Cesar's: and unto God, the
things that are God's.

THE Blessed Jesus that was so anointed above his Fellows, that He Is called the
wisdom of the Father, does in these words, circumspectly answer, what was
circumventingly proposed; for ver. 15. the Pharisees, a knowing and subtle
Sect, had a design to entrap him in his talk: The Devil had before laid his
snares, that are called Questuum, by which he catches so many ambitious and
covetous ones, viz. Riches and Honors. They in the Text, lay theirs
Questionum, in which many inconsiderate and unwary ones are snared, viz. those
of dilematical and doubtful Questions; which that they might more succesfully
do, than did their Father the Devil, they first take Counsel about it, then
choose fit Emissaries to effect it, some of their own Disciples, and some of the
motly Herodians, who being of a politic Religion, propose a politic Question,
about the King's Revenue: which, according to counsel taken, and instruction
given, they very craftily propose, and first, to remove all suspicion of their
design, they first court him, which indeed he was, though they believed it not,
as a Teacher and Doctor, as the word rendered Master implies. Secondly, they
characterise him, though truly in it self, yet falsely as to them, as one,
first, of Truth and Integrity; thou art true, etc. Secondly, of Courage and
Impartiality; neither carest thou for any man. For, etc. Thirdly, least yet
some jealousy of their design might remain, they, uncompell'd and freely,
attest the truth of this Character, and become his Scio's, Master, we know,
etc. and then secondly, they put the Question: tell us then what think thou,
etc. which cunningly insinuates that it is his opinion, not his determination
which they expected, as if they only desire to know whether as to this problem
he would affirm or deny: if he had said it is, then the Pharisees and such as
were simply Jews, would have taken just offense: they being as to Caesar a free
people, and by Conquest only made tributary. If he had said it is not, then he
would necessarily have fallen into the displeasure of Cesar's Substitutes, and
these mungrel Herodians.

But, He was to understanding a Fencer, not to ward the blows of this two-edged
Sword.

Therefore knowing and observing all their falsifies, v. 18. but Jesus, etc.
fending theirs, he makes a blow at them, ver. 19. 20. which they breaking with
a positive, though unwary Answer, ver. 21. they say unto him Cesar's this,
their own answer becomes a Delphick Sword in his Menage; For by owning their
current Coin, to the least denair, to bear the Image and Superscription of
Caesar; they in that very thing own Cesar's Sovereignty; nothing being more a
badg thereof, than coining money, and therefore always altered upon the death
or change of a Prince: so that he let them see, from their answer to his, how
they might have saved their Question; as long as they had, or could see, money,
their Coin would furnish them with an argument for Tribute. It being but a
rendering to Caesar the things that are Cesar's.

Obj. This Connection is clear, but how comes this in, and unto God?

A. If we look back to the former Chapter, we shall find that diverse Questions
Religious had gone before. He was no sooner come to Jerusalem, but he begins
his designed Reformation, ver. 12, 13. and to make it the more current, he
heals all comers, chapter 21. ver 14. which produce Hosanna's from the very
children. But those that chiefly should have abetted him, in such works of
Piety and Charity, are displeased, and quarrel with him, not so much, overtly,
for those his deeds, as the results of them, his praises: ver. 16. but he
answers them as he did their Instigator with Scripture, out of Ps. 8. 2. after
a recess from the 17. to v. 23. the very same come again to question him, even
the chief Priests, and the Elders of the people, instead of the Scribes, ver.
24. asking for his Commission and its derivation, which was of the same
dilematical and dubious nature, as appears by the Question He opposes instead
of an answer, upon the clear and open answering of which, he promises
satisfaction, v. 24. and beginning of 25. but the cunning they used in their
proposal, they have recourse to for their answer, in seq. 25. and 26. therefore
their return is short, but subtle, ver. 27. beginning, which gives him scope to
make his Rejoinder in the end of the same verse.

And smartly rebukes them in three Parables, that of the two Sons, v. 28. which
from their own mouth, pr. 31, he homely applies in the end of 31 and 32, and
that of the Husbandman, which from v. 33, to the end of v. 40, He proposes, and
they in v. 41, answer, out of which their own answer, he infers their guilt, v.
42, 3, 4. which they easily perceived v. 45, and would, if they durst, have
revenged, v. 46. But that yet, as by the mouth of two or three Witnesses, they
might be condemned, he gives them yet another Parable of the marriage of the
Kings Son in the beginning of this; where he closely hints the Gentiles
Vocation, v. 9. and their Rejection, v. 12, 13. which they also could not but
understand it, as they had done the former, that it especially concerned them.
Therefore they laying aside all religious Questions, not being able to this
threefold allusion to answer a word, as v. 46. of this, but what he could make
use of to their confutation; whilst they not caring to hear any more of that
ear, are resolved to entrap him in matter of the Kingdom. He unwilling to let
them go, without some reflection, on what they were willing to forget. He minds
them that some things by way of rendition and tribute, do distinctly refer to
God, after rendition unto Caesar, therefore, after Render unto Caesar etc. he
leaves the same word to be supplied, and unto God, etc.

Q. Why then begins he with Caesar?

A. It may be, first, that he might upbraid them for that folly of theirs, that
made sure to entrap him, by this generically different, and consulted Question;
and about to convince them, that the wisdom of men is foolishness with God, He
shows how, what they just now urged as irrefragable, he can with ease,
immediately overthrow, or secondly, to let them know, that he the less wondered
at, their not giving to God over all blessed for ever, the things that were
his; when they should be found under a doubt of giving, to those who are called
Gods, the things that are theirs.

These for the most part being in couples, so inseparable, that who so is a bad
Christian, can never be a good Subject; nor he who is a bad Subject, a good
Christian. So he that is a good Subject, is a good Christian; and there is no
good Christian, but is a good Subject; a truth, that if it were well weighed by
our two Polar dissenters, would certainly even constrain them, that they might
evidence their pretenses of being the true Christians, to become the better
Subjects. We should all more believe, that they did really give unto God, etc.
if more visibly they did give unto Caesar, etc. of which, according to our
Saviors Order; First, and in it these three parts, the Act, Object, Subject,
in whom, about what.

The Act is, Give, or rather Render, which Pareus himself no great friend to
Royalty, acknowledges on the place, constrained it may be by the force of the
original word, or the clear scope of the place. 1. Render, (i. e.) give as of
due and debt, not of grace and kindness: there is a due we are to render unto
all men, Romans 13. 7. (i. e.) where another has, either a Natural, Civil, or
Religious right, things are not given, but rendered. 2. Give freely, and of a
willing mind, not grudgingly, and by constraint: Our Lord does as his, and
ours, love a cheerful giver, because it assimulates a man to him, who gives
freely, and upbraideth not. 3. Largely and fully, not niggardly and sparingly,
as we would to a Treasury or Granary, whence we hope to receive again: would we
not reap little, let us sow much. For, 2 Cor. 9. 6. He that sows bountifully,
shall reap bountifully; and contrarily: our opening wide, is the way to have
our expectations more amply filled.

4. Render seasonably, and in due time; not slowly, and out of season: Who
gives quickly, gives doubly: Who gives seasonably, gives trebly: Nay, who
renders quickly and opportunely, gives; as we say of a just and punctual
debtor, when he pays upon a pinch, he did me as great a pleasure, as if he had
given me such or such a sum. There are a sort of viscous and bird-lim'd gifts,
that by their sticking become ungrateful: Whilst such gifts hang in the hopper
(as we say) Caesar may starve for want of his due.

Whosoever gives, should thus give, especially he that renders; yet more when
he renders unto

2. The Object, Caesar: The whole race of the Roman Emperors, from their first
original to this day, from Julius, were surnamed Cesars, and under that name
are comprehended all supreme Magistrates, yea and Governors as sent by them.
Which at this time were Infidels and Heathens, and so strangers to the Covenant
of Grace. Nay, they were persecutors of all that professed and owned the name
of Jesus; insomuch that we have recorded near as many persecutions as there
were eminent Cesars; ten of them, and but twelve of these. And did Christ give
this in charge then, when Nero's, Domitian's, and Maximine's were Emperors? and
shall we think he meant it less due to those, who themselves professed
Christianity, and fostered it in others? was it not to Constantine's and
Theodosius's due? though indeed as the Church by their bounty brought forth
riches, and after the Daughter, devoured the Mother, by introducing Luxury and
Lasiness, yet was their Piety never the worse meant, or ought their due
therefore to be subtracted. Again, was it to be rendered to the Propagators,
and not to the Defenders, the James's and Charles's of our days, the most
strenuous, and able Assertors of that Faith that providentially was delivered
to them: insomuch that the first defended it with his Pen against the two
tropicks of Popery and Phanatism to the amasement and silence of all foreign
Princes and doctors; and the stopping the mouths of all domistick gainsayers:
and the Other maintained it against the same extremes both by Pen and Sword,
with the hazard of his life whilst at Liberty; and after to the perpetual
shame of his Rebellious Subjects, but to his own eternal Honor, Sealed it with
his blood: Being in One, a Constellation of Confessor, Defender, and Martyr.

And is it less to be rendered to our present Sovereign? who, as much as I pray
God he ever may, has traced his blessed Fathers steps; nay in some made deeper
impressions. He was not less hunted like a Patridge upon the Mountains, then
his Father was; objected to equal perils and dangers from his Countrymen and
subjects. And, his Father was actually bought and sold, first by a perfidious
party of his own Countrymen to the Rebellious English, and afterward cursedly
bargained for betwixt those most Disingenuous, and Traiterou's Bradshaw's and
Crummel's; So was there a price laid down for his life; So our present Caesar
was from a Prodigious height of traitorous impudence, publicly proclaimed an
Excile from, and Enemy to his Native Soil and Subjects. And in those foreign
parts where he was constrained to converse, how many solicitations to shipwreck
Faith and good Conscience must he needs meet with, which must sure be more
poingnaunt and tempting, when accompanied with his pressing wants and
Necessities when every fresh Meal, Garb or Lodging, were each a new Stratagem;
being forced to be beholding to them, who designed Him their prey: Which was a
kind of Martyrdom. But yet with what invincible, and unparalleld Resolution,
did he maintain and bring home himself a Confessor and Defender of the true
Faith? and is not such a Caesar fit to be rendered to, therefore Render, etc.

2. But who, or what, do you mean by all this Harrangue? If their be an Act,
and an Object, there Must be a Subject, and that Leads to thirdly the subjects.

The subject therefore of this action, is two fold, 1. Who 2. What.

1. Who, in the Text, there were such, as were simply Jews, of which the
Pharisees were looked upon as the Top and Prime, and therefore under them all
that professed simple Judaism, which were under the power of their Instruction,
or example, and also those party-perpale, the Lincy-woolsie Religionists, the
Herodians, whose pretense, was a sort of Alcoran of Heathenism and Judaism. In
proportion to which our Savior by this Resolution Engages all men, of
whatsoever Degree or Sect, Denomination or Religion to render to Caesar, etc.

I know the Romanists would exclude their Clergy: But surely St. Paul, Romans 13.
1. when he says, Let every Soul be subject, includes 'm, unless to avoid it,
they will renounce their having Souls; the Scriptures, frequently by Soul,
understanding the whole man.

A generation of men, decry'd by their pretended opposites, the presbyterians,
but apparently all the while Ap'd by them, as in many others, so in this,
whilst they, to fend themselves, will call, not only Parliaments, but Cesar's
to account, for their Civil Sanctions; and all upon the same Principle, In
order to Spirituals, contracting only the more bugbear-name of Holy Church into
The Kirk: But I see no more for one side than another, why a National Counsel,
or Provincial Synod, may not now be called, ordered, determined and dissolved
by our Sovereign Prince, as they were by the ancient Cesars, since that is the
undoubted Prerogative of every supreme power in its own Jurisdiction; and all
persons are indefinitely obliged, to render unto Caesar the things that are
Cesar's; which brings us to the fourth particular, and

The second Subject, what they are to render, scil. the things that are
Cesar's, (i. e.) such as he may, and does justly claim, by the Right of Nature,
Religion, or Civil Society; which to treat of distinctly, would not be so
proper, since the examination of the first, would necessarily lead me into the
abstruse enquiry after the Rights and Prerogatives of the Crown, in which I
should argue my self guilty of unseemly presumption; having ever esteemed them
the hidden things of Empire, always to be kept close locked in the Regal
Archives: Nor is it fit that humble Subjects should so much as audaciously
Smell to, less Gather, least of all make a Posie of, the Flowers of the Crown;
they are Cesars by the Law of Nature, the first Man being the first Monarch,
and therefore for them, we rather leave them, than render them to Him.

Again, should we speak distinctly, of what the Religious, and Civil Law, makes
his, we should be forced upon coincidencies; Caesar claiming, and we standing
bound to pay, many of his dues by the right of both, Religion, and Law, yea and
Nature too.

For, as Caesar is our Father which is natural, and by the superadded Law of the
fifth Command, Divine; as also by the authoratative explanation of Human Laws,
Civil. Honor and Esteem, Fear and Reverence, Obedience and Subjection, Defense
and Support, Love and Prayer are his dues. Now whatsoever divine right was
affixed to the late pretended Government of the Church of England, as then
'twas nicknamed: Sure I am it is stamped upon all these, and clearly sortified
by the Laws of Human Nature, and Civil Society; a lawful Caesar being by all
those Laws a common Father: upon which account,

1. Cesar's due is Honor and Esteem from his Subjects, which all, are as so
many members in his Royal Family, He being the Father of his Country.
Therefore, St. Peter, 1 Ep. c. 2. ver. 17. having earnestly exhorted Subjects
to their duty from the 13. He closes all with, Honor the King: the
foundational excellency of this relation exacting as a due, all possible Esteem
and Honor, in thought, word, and deed. And it is one part of the inference from
all that of Romans 13. v. 7. Honor to whom honor.

2. Cesar's due is Fear and Reverence: We own them as Fathers, and They are, by
our heavenly Father, owned, as Gods; having not only the Image of God, as Men,
on the one side, but on the Reverse the Image of God, as Gods; his Spirit thus
speaking, I have said you are Gods, And when by the same Psalmist He Is said to
sit in the Congregation of the Gods, He is universally understood to mean, the
meeting of Magistrates: Cesars then are not mere men, but as vice-Gods, and as
such, to be feared, and reverenced; therefore Romans 13, 4. we are obliged to be
afraid of Them as immediate Ministers of God, and Revengers, to execute wrath
upon them that do evil.

Fear, therefore, and Reverence, is one of their dues to be rendered, v. 7. And
by a strong parity of Reason, not only when good and gentle, but also to the
Froward, as appears, 1 Pet. 2. 18. They being our Masters paramount, and all
subjects their servants, Caesar being supreme, v. 13. Which Leads to the third
due that we are to render to Caesar (i. e.)

3. Obedience and Subjection; either in an active Service, or a patient
Sufferance:

1. Readily complying with all their Commands: not only agreeing with, but if
not contrary to, Gods revealed will, then are subjects bound actively to obey.

2. Calmly and quietly undergoing the penalties, even of such injunctions, as
not only disagree with, but are contrary to, Divine precepts; which indeed is
the proper Cue of passive obedience: And, Note, of this disagreement or
contradiction we must be sure, to be fully satisfied, before we actually
disobey: And then its no great difficulty to resolve that Question, Whether it
be better to obey God or Man, and even then, patiently to suffer for our
non-obedience; which has been so plentifully exemplified, by holy men of all
Ages, from the testimony both of divine, and human Writ, that it would be
superfluous to prove it.

And this obediential subjection, we stand necessarily engaged to, nor only for
wrath, but conscience sake, Romans 13. 5. not only as the worst may, for fear of
Punishment; but as the best ought, from love of duty: we must be sensible, not
so much of man's wrath that may, but Gods, that cannnot be shunned but will be
finished, without repentance, in the damnation of disobedient resisters, Romans
13. 2.

4. A fourth due is Defense and Support. He is the Minister of God, to every
Individual Subject for good, Romans 13. 4. always vigilant and careful for the
welfare of the whole, and therefore it follows, v. 6. of the 13 to the Romans for
this cause pay you tribute also, for they are Gods Ministers, continually
attending upon this very thing: They maintain, Fleets and Armies, for security
of Seas and Trade, Judges and Courts of Judicature, to free from Intestine
Force and Fraud* and maintain Honesty and Property. Caesar is the Stomach, the
Heart and Liver of the Body politic, that digests Nutriment, and makes blood,
for the Benefit of the Whole. Now as all Members, yea and all Faculties, are
diligently employed, to provide Meat for the Belly, to invent and menage
Preservatives for the Breast, rendering their utmost as due to those vital
parts; nay, venturcing the loss of any, of all, to save Them: So should all
Subjects, render unto Caesar, all possible Defenes, and Support.

5. And at this time lastly, Cesars due is Love and Prayer; I join them,
because our love, is manifested in nothing more, to persons out of our reach,
then in praying for them. Now Caesar, is above us, and our ordinary duties of
Charity: tho as divine Herbert sings: Love is a present for a mighty King;
which because we cannot frequently manifest, in it is more familiar acts* though
bound habitually to have it in readiness, therefore this, that extends to all,
at all distances, and is every ones due, so in a peculiar manner is it Cesars:
See the Apostle's Cannon for it, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. I exhort therefore that first
of all Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks be made for
all men; but particularly, for Kings and all that are in Authority over us: And
they, indeed, especially need it: Cesar's Condition tho much above others, yet
is more Exposed than others; his Greatness, makes not only his Burdens, but
dangers more imminent; He becomes, from His height, a more conspicuous Mark,
for the whole Artillery of Hell, and wicked men; His temptations are many, from
His uncontrollable Capacity; all being accountable to Him, He only to God:
From His Eminency, He is liable to be flatterd in any of his possible Errors,
too many being still ready, with their Pillows and Kerchiefs, nay and the very
Prophets are apt to dawb with untemper'd mortar. Their Counsels are intricate
and difficult, their thoughts often ruffl'd with their Solicitous care of the
Peoples good, and therefore as a particular and peculiar due they call for our
Prayers, that They may be directed upon all Emergencies to sound and safe
Resolves; that They may be preserved from all those theatning dangers; that
They may wisely, and powerfully, resist and repel, those many sly and mighty
temptations; and indeed, in nothing more can subjects be expressive of their
Love to Caesar than in humble, sincere, and constant prayer. All, and every of
which, must in their proportion be derived upon his Substitutes, it being by
St. Peter's Rule, 1 Ep. 2. 13, 14. Due to every ordinance of man and that for
the Lords sake: For as Cesars are Gods, so all other Rulers and Governors, are
Cesar's Substitutes.

But oh how little has been, nay, may I not say how little is, Christ's advice
followed by Christians; his peaecable and humble precepts, being esteemed
rather as Bouys and Marcks on Shelfs and Rocks, not to be approached, than as
Phares and Light houses to direct our way: Lets expostulate the thing a little,
and may such as are guilty so self-judg and condemn themselves here, that they
may avoid the judgment of Condemnation hereafter! we shall only thetically
enquier whether.

1. This be to honor and esteem Caesar, or his Substitutes, when we speak all
manner of evil of Dignities? which tho St. Jude propheci'd of, yet with such an
assimulation, that one would think, should make all men avoid it, or at least
the punishment annexed to it, the perishing of Corah.

I am sure St. Paul, Act 23. 5. Owns the canonical obligation of Exodus 22. 28.
That none ought to speak evil of the Ruler of the people; which is yet much
more material for the Conviction of all, who withold their Due; if we
consider, it was after the dissolution of the Mosaical Frame, yet spoken in
reference to a pretended high Priest, then in being, by whose unjust command He
was struck in the Face, v. 2. and uttered by way of retractation, that he had
any way cast dishonor, or appear to disesteem him. Those certainly that do
slight, vilify, and contemn Caesar, either in thought, word or deed, do in
neither Honor and Esteem Him, and contrary to Christ's Command withold his
due, not Rendering unto Caesar the things that are Cesar's.

2. Do they Fear or Reverence Caesar, that vilify and reproach him, and all his
actions? do they regard them as Gods, that refuse them the common reverence due
to men? that if they please not them, they shall not only not be, what God has
appointed them; but, not be at all: Invading not only their undoubted
Prerogatives, but their sacred Persons. Shall it be thought an effect of fear
and reverence, that made David's heart smite him, for cutting of Readiness lappet?
and shall not the stupendous Treason of Remorseless severing his Anointed Head
from his Body, be ranked in the front of the same Classis?

I leave the question to be resolved, by the most cauterised Conscience.

But we hope, that so detestable a thing, will never again enter into the
heart, much less reach the hand of the most miscreant Subject. For, 1 Samuel 26.
9. Who can stretch his hand against the Lords anointed, and be guiltless? Nay,
who can brandish his tongue against the worst of Cesars, and not incur divine
displeasure? For Solomon a King, wise and good, Eccles. 10. 20. Curse not the
King, no, not in thy thoughts; though it may be thou may think he deserves
it, much less upbraid him in thy speech; though never so reproachable. Elihu
intimates, though he be possibly wicked and ungodly, yet it is a very unfitting
thing to be said to any Supreme. Job 38. 18. Is it fit to say, to a King thou
art wicked? or to Princes ye are ungodly? The affirmative Interrogation
strongly denies the thing; it is by no means fit: which he esteems so
indubitable, that he dare leave it to common judgment.

Every Caesar, not being less Gods Minister, to execute vengeance on evil doers,
tho He himself be such, They are not to be reviled and flighted as Sinners, but
dreaded and revered as Avengers.

3. Again, are such Obedient and Subject, that out of, pretended Conscience,
but, real faction, dispute and question all, but contradict and oppose many of
his Injunctions? Not considering, that nothing is more evident, than that all
lawful Commands, are to be obeyed actively, and even the most unlawful,
passively, as before; and then, are Cesar's Commands lawful, when, no way
contradicted by Gods: Indeed it is unlawful to obey, when God forbids, the very
matter of their commands: But then this caution is not to be forgotten, That,
as we are sure, Subjection and Obedience is Cesar's due; so after the impartial
use of all possible means, we stand assuredly convinced, that this or that
command of Cesar's, runs counter with God's; else, how easy is it, to put on
the pretense of Conscience, to Cloak Disobedience; appearing to give unto God,
the things that are God's, and in the mean time, Robb Caesar, of that which is
his; and so, under a specious notion, of it is being better to obey God then
man, Disobey both.

4. Yet again, do they give Caesar his due of Defense and Support, who grutch
every penny of Tax or Tribute, and that, most unreasonably, when by their own
Consent Legally Erogated? Such who, every day, can spend more, vainly, it may
be, sinfully (i. e.) to gratify an unreasonable passion, a destructive lust,
or a factious Party, and yet think much, to render Caesar his due: Nay, who will
pawn their necessaries, to supply their Extravagancies, and yet repine at every
small sum, for defense and support of their Prince. Why, is not all thy peace
and plenty, Liberty, and Property, both begot, and maintained by Caesar,
sufficient to oblige thee to a cheerful rendering Him his due? Shall that Head,
which by his Legal administration of justice, sits safe on its shoulder,
refuse, when called for, to pay its pole? shall thou quietly sit in thy own
Chimny-corner, and thinks two shillings a year for thy hearth, a rack-rent for
such a Benefit? do thou unmolested buy, sell, and get gain; and yet preser
danger of plundring, before dutiful paying of Custom and Excise? Sit thou
under thy own Vine, and Fig Tree, rejoicing in the wife of thy Youth, and thy
children, like Olive branches, round about thy Table, None making the afraid:
And are lawfully imposed Taxes to dear a purchaser for such a desirable
blessing? Cesar's must be considered as our Seas, into which as all our Rivers
Run, so from thence by secret Caverns, they again return to supply our
Fountains.

They are, as before, the Stomach of the Nation, that disgests all, but it is
for the Benefit, and supply of the whole; which if rightly considered, would
even constrain us, no more to withold their due, then our hand would refuse
to feed our Belly: did we know the cumbersome, and unweildy nature of a
Scepter, the Massy weight of an Imperial Crown; what pricking thorns, Cesarian
Ermyns are powdered with; (to which purpose blessed Charles the first speaks) we
would not stoop to take them off a Dunghill: Were subjects acquainted with the
amusing intricacies and deep policies of their various Councels; did they but
think on their many meals deferred, nay forsaken; their interrupted sleeps, and
waking nights, and all for their good: They must be forced to own, that
Princes, more difficultly earn, even their dues, than the meanest Labourer does
his hire: Remember also the grand Examplar, I mean the blessed Jesus, who upon
the first intimation, rather then not pay tribute unto Caesar, He puts himself
to the charge of a Miracle, the 17. chapter of this Gospel and the 27. v. Yet again.

5. And lastly, I still ask the Qurstion only, whether they answer the
Apostollical Cannon, in praying especially for Kings, and all in authority;
who, in their licensed public devotions, vent rather Libels against, than
Petitions for, their Princes? Whilst they remonstrate, not so much to God, as
the Congregation, their popular, though but pretended, grievances: So far are
such from praying according to the clause of tho same Canon, that under them,
they may lead peaceable and quiet lives, in all godliness and honesty: that
they only suggest their Fears, of its being impossible. Hence, He, happily,
thinks Himself, and sometimes is celebrated, by others, as praying most
affectionately for, that does it, most scandalously against Caesar; as if the
Spleen, not the Liver, were the proper Focus to warm their devotion. No wonder
then such meet with, as they call it, hard measure: For why should God for them
alter his resolution, of every ones reaping what he sows: If they, in the face
of God, and his Congregation, will sow disquiet and dissension, what hope is
there that they should reap other, than trouble and confusion?

But I begin to hope, and shall at least continue to wish, better things of all
English Subjects, and such as ought to accompany true Christians, obeying
Christ, as in all other, so in this command especially, to give unto Caesar the
things that are Cesar's. In thought, word, and deed, rendering Him all Honor
and Esteem, Fear and Reverence, Obedience and Subjection, Defense and Support,
Love and Prayer. Lest possibly, the not practicing of this, should introduce a
neglect of what follows: And we should not at all, or more awkwardly, give unto
God the things that are Gods: For in a proportion to that of 1 John 4. 20. If
we render not the dues, to these Gods, we do see; how shall we, to Him, whom we
have not seen? As, 1. How can we acknowledge the Supreme, that disown the
subordinate Deities? Can they in likelihood have a true estimate of God, that
despise Dignities? How can they fear him, that honor not the King; since both
are forced on by the same Apostolical rule? and it were easy to instance in the
rest.

In a word, how can They render either to God, or ought agniz'd to Him, who are
not lead by this manuduction; of rendering to Caesar, etc.

Let us therefore all render unto Caesar the things that are Cesars, least, as a
just judgment. He might withold from us, the things that are ours, or,
straitning our selves in our rendition to Caesar, we should never be truly
enlarged fully to accomplish the whole Text; and give unto God the things that
are Gods.

FINIS.

