COMFORT FOR BELIEVERS, OR, A Discourse of the Duty and Privilege of being
Sealed by the Holy Spirit.

In Five Sermons upon Ephesians. 1. 13 -- PUBLISHED For the Establishment of weak
Believers, who are filled with Doubts and Fears about their Eternal State.

By Nathanael VViles Pastor of a Church of Christ in Shadwell.

Now he which stablisheth us with you in Christ, and has anointed us is God.
Who has sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our Hearts. 2 Cor.
1. 21, 22.

London, Printed for James Gibbs, and to be sold by Caleb Hooker, at the
Muzeled-Bear upon VVapping-VVall near Peliean-Stairs.



Thi^ Shadow, Shadows out the Face of one.
Whose Life's a Bubble, and will soon be gone.
He is a Mortal, and must shortly dye:
But hopes to live with Christ Eternally
Who lost his Life, and freely shed his Blood,
He trusts to Sa^ve, and bri^ng him unto God.
My Flesh, my Soul, my All I owe to Thee,
My ble^ssed Lord, whos^e Stripes are Balm to me.
THE Epistle Dedicatory, To all who are in God the Father, and in our Lord
Jesus Christ, but particularly to the Church of Christ, meeting in Shadwell,
Grace, Mercy, and Peace be multiplied.
Dearly Beloved,
THE wisest of Men has told us (excepting Christ) that a word spoken in
Season, (or, as it is in the Original, upon his Wheels) is like Apples of Gold
in Pictures of Silver, Prove. 25. 11. Oh how excellent are Words, rightly
ordered, placed, and circumstantiated; such words of all are the most
excellent, the most prevalent, and the most pleasant Words that can be spoken;
they are most precious, most desirable, and most delectable; the Lord grant
that what is here spoken in this Treatise, may be such kind of Words, that all
that read them may find them most precious, most sweet, and very seasonable.

To time a Word (Beloved) in Season is to set it upon the Wheels. And, Oh that
this might be a Word well timed! To speak a word to the purpose (si Deo
placuerit, if it shall please the Lord) is the project and design of this Book;
there is a great glory upon all words of Truth, but there is a double Glory
upon seasonable words of Truth.

Therefore in the following discourses I have made it my Care and Business to
set before you a seasonable, comfortable, and encouraging Truth and if the Lord
will set in by his Spirit, (I am sure) you will find it such to be sealed by
the Spirit, and to have his Witness in our Hearts, (that God loves us with an
Everlasting Love, therefore with Loving Kindness he has drawn us, Jer. 31. 3.
And that we are the Children of God) is most sweet and comfortable; there is
nothing can, or will encourage the Saints of God, living, and dying, and
comfort their Souls more than this.

A Seal beloved is for two Ends, viz. Safety, and Secrecy; and Sealing is used
in three Cases. First, to keep things secret, that they may not be seen.
Secondly, Distinct, that they may not be confused. And Thirdly, Safe, that they
may be forthcoming; these uses you will find opened in the Book: To set forth
the unspeakable Privileges of Believers Sealed by the Spirit, from which may
be drawn much comfort and sweetness: there is not a more encouraging and
comforting Truth in all the Book of God, well understood and applied, than this
is of Sealing by the Holy Spirit to the Day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30.

In these Sermons of Sealing by the Holy Spirit, I may say, There is Milk for
Babes, and Meat for strong Men. I hope all that see, or read them, will reap
benefit by them.

Many of you (Beloved) were well pleased, and much refreshed in the hearing of
these Sermons; and I trust, yea, and shall pray, that you may be also built up,
and nourished in the reading of them.

It Is true, they are brought forth and set before you in a homely Dress, not
garnished with fine Phrases, and Rhetorical Expressions; but such as they are,
I hope you will accept of them: The design of them is honest, viz. God's Glory,
and the edifying and building up of your Souls in Christ Jesus.

What you find of God in them, to the use of Edifying, give him all the Glory
of it; and bless his Name, for making the hearing, or reading of these Sermons
beneficial to your Souls.

I am well aware, That some will censure me, for what I have here done and
offered to the World. But if God may have Glory by these weak Endeavors of
mine, and any poor Soul reap Spiritual Comfort and Advantage, then I shall have
my end, and bear up cheerfully under the variety of Censures, which may be
passed upon me

To conclude, Consider this one thing Christians, for your comfort and
establishment in Christ Jesus, viz. That those who are Sealed by the Spirit of
God here, shall be crowned with Eternal Glory hereafter, Rev. 2. 10. Such shall
have a Crown of Life. Christ has bought the kingdom of Heaven for them that
Believe, and has paid for it at an high rate; even his most precious Blood is
the price paid for it, Ephesians. 1. 14. 1 Pet. 1. 17, 18, 19. And he has prepared
for them Mansions, who are Denisons; Crowns for them who are Heirs: And pray
who are these, but such as are born again, and Sealed by the Spirit of Promise,
Romans 8. 16, 17.

Believers have Assurance of Heaven three ways.

First, By Fai^th in Christ, 1 Pet. 1, 9. Receiving the end of your faith, even
the Salvation of your Souls.

Secondly, By their hearty and real Conformity to Christ, Romans 8. 29. For whom
he did foreknow, he also did Predestinate to be made conformable to the Image
of his Son.

Thirdly, By the Sealing Work of the Spirit. For they are Sealed unto the Day
of Redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30. And says Paul, in the Text, Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. After
that ye Believed, ye were Sealed with that Holy Spirit of Promise, which (says
he) is the earnest of our Inheritance, etc.

Believers shall as certainly be glorified, as if they were Crowned already,
John 14. 1, 2, 3. They be Heirs to Heaven's Crown here, and shall be possessed
of it when they come there: What the Saints hold now in reversion, they shall
then have in full possession, and be with their God in the Impyreal Heaven,
where there will be nothing present, that offends, nor nothing absent that
delights.

Now that you may all (Beloved) arrive at this place of Blessedness, and be for
ever with the Lord, is, and shall be the prayers of him, who subscribes
himself, Your Servant in the Gospel, for Jesus's sake,

Nathanael Wyles.
December. 4. 1696.
Believers Sealed BY THE Spirit of Promise.
First Sermon, from Ephesians. 1. the latter part of the 13 verse. In whom also,
after that ye believed, ye were Sealed with the Holy Spirit of Promise.
THE Apostle Paul, a Servant of Christ, in this Chapter enumerates the
principal Christian Privileges, and Blessings, that were given to, and
conferred on Believers through Christ, which were the occasion of his Doxology
and Solemn Thanksgiving, verse the third. Blessed, (says he) be the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us, that is, us Believers,
with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places, or things, in Christ Jesus.
Whence note, That Christ is the Foundation of all those Spiritual Blessings
that are given and bestowed on the Saints. Secondly, That God the Father is to
be blessed, that is, praised and glorified, for these spiritual Blessings, who
is the Donor of them through Jesus Christ. Blessed be the God and Father, etc.
What these rich Blessings are, which are bestowed on Believers, in and through
Christ, the Apostle shows, from the 4. to the 13 v. and numbers them up, which
are;

1. Election before the Foundation of the World, or from Eternity, in Christ,
v. 4. according as he (viz. God) has chosen us in him, (viz. Christ) before
the foundation of the world, that we should be holy, and without blame before
him in love. Where observe four things. 1. That the efficient cause of Election
is the love of God, 2 Timothy 1. 9.

Secondly, That the Election of Persons is sounded in Jesus Christ, chosen us
in him. Christ is the Elect of God, and all the Elect are chosen of God in
Christ.

Thirdly, Election of certain Persons in Christ is not after they are born, or
do believe, but before, even from Eternity: he has chosen us in him: when?
before the foundation of the world, that is, from Eternity. Election is from
Everlasting, though Vocation is in time.

Fourthly, That God has not chosen Persons to happiness only, but to holiness;
that we should be holy, etc. Happiness is the End, Holiness, through Christ,
the means to that End: Though God has chose some to happiness, and they shall
all certainly be Saved, he having set his Seal upon them; yet they that name
Christ's Name, must depart from Iniquity. So says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2. 19.

Secondly. Another Blessing is Predestination unto the Adoption of Children, by
Jesus Christ, according to the good will and pleasure of God; to the Glory and
Praise of his rich Grace, v. 4. and 5.

Thirdly. Acceptance with God, (both of our Persons and Services) in, and
through Christ, who is the beloved, is another Blessing, v. 6. to the praise
and glory of his grace, wherein he, (viz. God) has made us accepted in the
Beloved.

Fourthly. Redemption from sin and wrath, through the Blood of Christ, which is
precious Blood, that only makes peace with God for us, v. 7. In whom, through
or by whom, we have Redemption through his Blood, Colos. 1. 20.

Fifthly. Forgiveness of Sins, which is a Soul-inriching Blessing. This comes
through the bitter agony and bloodshed of Christ to us, Heb. 9. 22. We have
not only Redemption, but Pardon and Forgiveness of Sins through Christ,
according to the riches of his grace, bounty or goodness, v. 7.

Sixthly. A manifestation and discovery of the mystery of God's Will, through
Christ, in the Gospel, concerning the Salvation of Sinners, etc. according to
his good pleasure, which he has purposed in himself, v. 9. Whence observe,
That not only the Election, but also the vocation of the adopted Sons of God,
proceeds from mere free Grace in Christ, and nothing else.

Seventhly. Union with Christ, the Head of all the Faithful; this is a great
blessing and privilege, mentioned v. 10. That in the dispensation of the
fullness of times (that is, in the time prefixed by the Lord, who is the
disposer of times and of order in all things, for the accomplishment of the
Promises that concerned Christ the Messiah, and that concerns all the Elect in
him) he might gather in one all things in Christ; reduce into one capital sum,
or bring under one head, so the word signifies, both which are in heaven, and
which are on earth, even in him. Some understand here the Faithful, whereof
some are now in Heaven, and others are yet upon the Earth, which are called and
gathered into one body, and under one head. The Faithful may be said to be
gathered together in Christ (which holds forth their mystical Union with him)
because they are joined together with him by Faith, and so are become, as it
were, one Man. But,

Eighthly. In the 11. and 12. v. you have the vocation, or calling, both of Jew
and Gentile, to the participation of that Redemption in Christ, according to
God's good pleasure and purpose; of the Jew first, and afterward of the
Gentile. In whom also we have obtained an Inheritance, being predestined
according to the purpose of him, who works all things according to the
counsel of his own will, that we should be to the praise of his glory, who
first trusted (or hoped) in Christ. Where observe four things. 1. That the
calling of Jew and Gentile by Grace in Christ here, and their obtaining Heaven
and Glory hereafter, is all according to the good pleasure, and wise purpose of
God.

2dly. All things are attributed to the Free Grace of God through Christ,
without exception, who works all things; yet we are not stocks, for he gives
us Grace both to will and to do those things that are good, Phil. 2. 13.

3dly. God's working all things, not simply according to his will, but
according, or after the counsel of his own will, teach us thus much, That God,
as an intelligent and most wise Agent, does all things upon most just and
prudent grounds, known to himself; and he has always a reason for his will,
though to us his will must stand for the supreme Reason. Stat pro ratione volunt
as, Matthew. 11. 26.

4thly. Observe the great end of all this, viz. the praise and glory of his
Grace, i. e. of his glorious Grace; that as his bountiful goodness, and love in
Christ, deserves all praise, so also it should be set forth and published.

Ninthly. In the 13, 14. Paul speaks particularly of the vocation of the
Ephesians, to whom he wrote. And that 1. by the operation of the word of truth,
which they heard. 2. By the obsignation of the spirit, in whom also they
trusted after that they heard the word of Truth, the Gospel of your Salvation.
In whom also, after that ye believed, ye were Sealed with the Spirit of
Promise. Here is another Blessing, which is not one of the least, though it be
one of the last named.

In this one Verse (part of which is our Text) we have two noble acts of Faith
spoken of and displayed.

1. A direct act, called trusting, In whom also ye trusted, etc.

2. A reflex Act, which in order of Nature and Time follows it, which act is
implied in the word Sealing. In whom also, after that ye believed, ye were
Sealed, etc. In which words are these four parts; as,

1. The Subjects of this Sealing, or Assurance, and they are Believers; such as
have closed in with Christ by Faith. An Unbeliever, as such, was never sealed,
unless to damnation. It Is Believers only that are sealed to Salvation. In whom
after that ye believed, etc.

2. The nature of this Assurance. Paul calls it a Sealing; ye were sealed, etc.
Assurance (says one) is like to a Seal for three things.

1. It confirms the Grants of God. And,

2. It declares the purpose of God. And,

Lastly, It distinguishes the Persons so privileged, from other Persons.

3. Here is the Author of this Sealing, viz. The Holy Spirit of Promise. Ye
were Sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise. It is he (Beloved) that keeps the
great Seal of Heaven, and it is his Office to Seal, and to confirm, to
Believers, their Interest in Christ by Faith, and right to Heaven, and Glory:
As it is his work to sanctify, so also to seal Believers, and witness to them
their Adoption, Romans 8. 16. The Spirit witness with our Spirits, that we are
the children of God.

4. You have the quality of this Spirit that seals Believers; he is a Holy
Spirit, and he seals the Saints as an Holy Spirit of Promise. Now the Spirit's
sealing thus, 1. as an holy Spirit, relates to his previous work of
Sanctification in the Souls of them he seals: the Spirit first sanctifies, and
then seals the Soul.

2. As a Spirit of Promise; this respects the Medium, or Instrument made use of
by him in his sealing of Believers, viz. the Promises of God, which are made
in, or with Christ the Head, for all Believers, and given to them through him, 2
Pet. 1. 4. The Spirit opens and applies the Promises of the Gospel to
Believers, in order to their sealing.

Thus having opened the Text, and given the Analyzes of it, we shall note two
Doctrines.

First Doctrine.
That the Spirit of God, who is a sealing Spirit, is a holy Spirit, or a Spirit
of Holiness; the Sanctifier of unholy Persons: he is called by this Name often
in the Scriptures, 1 These. 1. 5. As the Devil is an unclean Spirit, or a Spirit
of uncleanness, Matthew. 12. 43. so the Spirit of God is a holy Spirit, or a
Spirit of holiness. We read of the sanctification of the Spirit, 1 Pet. 1. 3.
And we are said, 2 Cor. 3. 18. to be changed from glory to glory, into the
Image and likeness of Christ, even by the Spirit of promise.

I shall not enlarge upon this, only beseech you in Christ's stead, to examine
your selves, whether you have this holy Spirit of Promise dwelling in you; know
this, that if you have not the Spirit of Christ (Profess what you will) you are
none of his, Romans 8. 9. Have you therefore the Spirit or not? If you have, then
you are Christ's, and transformed into his Image and Likeness; you are made
comely, through his comeliness put upon you, Ezekiel. 16. 14. If you have not the
Spirit, you are still under the power of Satan, led captive by him at his will,
2 Timothy 2. 26. He rules in your hearts, and has his throne there, Ephesians. 2. 2, 3.

Quest. How shall we know we have the Spirit?

Answ. By his blessed Operations and Fruit in your Souls; where the Spirit is,
the Soul is changed and renewed; and there is Faith, Love, Patience, and other
Fruits of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 5. 17. Gal. 5. 21, 22.

Second Doctrine.
The great Privilege and Blessing of sealing by the Spirit, follows the duty
and act of Believing; In whom also, after that ye believed, ye were sealed with
the holy Spirit of Promise.

For the prosecution of this great Truth, for your Edification and building up
in Christ Jesus, I shall

1. Show you what the sealing of the Spirit is, and how it is performed by him
in the Soul.

2. Show you why none are sealed with the Spirit, till after they do believe,
and close in with Christ by Faith.

3. Show, whether all Believers are sealed by the Spirit.

4. Show you the great Privileges of them that are Sealed.

5. Then sum up all by way of Application.

1. Show you what the Spirit's Sealing is, and how it is performed by him in
the Soul.

In general: the Sealing of the holy Spirit is his giving a sure and certain
testimony to the reality and truth of that Grace, whichhe has wrought in their
Souls, and to their saving Interest in Jesus Christ, and propriety in all the
promises of the Gospel, that are made in Christ, for all true Believers: This
is the Spirit's Sealing, whereby he resolves the fears, and satisfies the Souls
of Believers, whom he seals, about their state and condition.

This sealing Work is alone by the Spirit, none else need do it, and no meaner
Person than he can do it. The Holy Ghost delights to speak in our Language,
that we may understand him; and because we cannot rise to him, he therefore
stoopeth unto us.

Under the Law we find that a matter of great concernment and weight, was to be
proved and confirmed by two sufficient Witnesses, Deuteronomy. 19. 15. One witness
shall not rise up against a Man for any iniquity, etc. at the mouth of two
witnesses, or at the mouth of three, shall the matter be est ablished, or
confirmed. Now the sincerity or uprightness of our Souls before God, and our
saving Interest in Jesus Christ, are matters of great, yea, greater
concernments to us, than all in the World. And being so, they need a further
Witness to confirm them, than our own Spirits; therefore the Spirit of God
witnesses with our Spirit, that we are the Children of God, through Christ
Jesus: it is by him that we know God is our Father, and that we are enabled to
call upon him in Christ as our Father, Gal. 4. 5, 6. He has given us the
Spirit of his Son, whereby we cry Abba Father.

This Sealing is not only a witnessing to us, but it is a work upon us, and in
us, carrying the Image of him that Seals us; whereby (says Dr. Sibbs) we are
not only assured of the Good promised to us, but freed for the receiving of it.
God prepares no Good for any, but whom he prepares and fits by his Spirit for
that good, 2 Cor. 5. 4, 5, 6.

There be three things that the Spirit does in Sealing Believers, which things
all concur together, and must be in this Sealing Work.

1. The Spirit Sanctifies the Soul, and makes it holy; he never Seals before he
Sanctifies; this is the Spirit's material and objective Seal; where he is a
Sealing Spirit, there he is a Spirit of Sanctification: he renews and changes
the Soul, and forms Christ's glorious Image upon it: where the Spirit Seals, he
subdues Sin, makes the Heart anew, and enables them he Seals, to cast off the
works of darkness, and put off the old man, after the flesh, with his deeds,
and put on the new man, which, after God, is created in righteousness and true
holiness, Ephesians. 4. 22, 23, 24. He Sanctifies them throughout, in Body, Mind and
Spirit, 1 These. 5. 20. and makes them that were darkness to be light in the
Lord, Ephesians. 5. 4, 5. Ye, were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the
Lord.

2. The Spirit irradiates and clears this up to the Souls of them whom he
Seals, that they are Sanctified, and made holy; that their Hearts are changed,
and Grace wrought in them, which was not there before, and that now they are
new Creatures, being in Christ. 2 Cor. 5. 17. For if any man be in Christ, he
is a new Creature, old things are done away, and all things are become new.
This the Spirit shows to the Soul, in his Sealing Work; and by this, enables
Believers to say, doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham know us not; or
be ignorant of us. Thou O Lord, art our Father, our Redeemer, (...) Name is
from Everlasting, Isa. 63. 16. This God is our God for ever and ever, he will
be our guide even unto death, Psalm. 46. 14. The Lord is my portion, says my
Soul, therefore will I hope in him, Lam. 3. 24. My beloved is mine, and I am
his, Cant. 1. 16. Now Believers know this from the Holy Spirit, who clears
these things to their Souls, when he Seals them.

3. The blessed Spirit, after all this is done, in order to Sealing, he enables
the Soul he Soals, to lay hold on, and to apply the precious Promises to its
self; so that whenever a Promise is read or spoken of, the Soul may apply it,
and say, this is mine, and the other Promise is mine, they are a Legacy left
me, may the Soul say, by my dear Husband, and Head, Christ. This Divines call
the Formal Sealing of the Spirit. There is none but the Holy Spirit that can
thus Seal Believers, viz. by clearing up to them their title to, and interest
in Christ, and the Promises, as there is. For he only knows the deep things of
God, 1 Cor. 2. 10. 11. And besides, it is his office to clear and witness this
to Believers, who is a Spirit of Truth, and therefore he cannot, neither will
deceive us, John 14. 17. My Beloved, the Spirit's Testimony in this, is more
than a voice from Heaven, or than if an Angel should come and say, Christ has
sent me to tell you, That he loves you, and shed his blood for you. This could
not satisfy as the internal Sealing of the Spirit to the Minds or Souls of
Believers; the other may be a Delusion, but this of the Spirit is certain, and
may be depended upon. The witness of a Man's Spirit may come to a probability,
but the witness of the Spirit is clear demonstration. 1 John 4. 12, 19. No man
(says he) has seen God at any time. If we love one another, God dwells in
us, and his love is perfected in us: hereby we know that we dwell in him, and
he in us: how? because he has given us of his spirit. The Spirit receives of
Christ's, and gives it to Believers, John 16. 18, 19. As it is the Devil's work
to cast in Fears into the Soul, to perplex and disquiet the heart; he being the
red Dragon that disturbs the Waters of the Saints Peace. So it is the Spirit's
work to clear things up, to settle the Sanctified Soul, and fill it with peace,
joy, and comfort, John 16. 7. As it is his work to convince of Sin, to
Sanctify, so to establish, and settle the Heart, and give that peace and
comfort to it, which none can give, nor take away, Romans 14. 17.

The Spirit in this work of Sealing, attests and witnesses, both first, to the
Doctrine, or Object of Faith, and secondly, to the infused habit of the Grace
of Faith in the Soul; of the former he says, this is my word, I indicted it,
do you therefore believe and embrace it: of the latter, he says, this is my
work within you; this Grace, this Faith, this Love, Patience, Self-denial, is
my work in you; I have produced all these things in your Souls. So that
(Beloved) this Sealing Work of the Spirit is evermore agreeable to the written
word of God, Isa. 8. 20. What he speaks in his holy Word, and in our Hearts,
are all harmonious Testimonies.

The Spirit in Sealing Believers, makes not use of an audible voice, as to say
vocally, Thomas, or John, thy Sins are pardoned, etc. nor of immediate and
extraordinarily Revelations; therefore expect them not; for he makes use of the
spiritual Graces that are wrought in the Soul, and of the precious Promises
writ in the Word: By these means the holy Spirit comforts the Heart, and
usually brings the Soul to rest and joy.

Secondly, Show you, why none are Sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise, till
after they do believe in Christ. In whom also, after that ye believed, ye were
sealed, etc.

Before I Answer directly, or give the Reasons, let me promise this one thing,
viz.

That there be many who are in the state of Nature, and have not one dram of
Grace in their Souls, nothing but Sin and Corruption, and yet these have, and
may have, many false hopes, and vain confidences, which will deceive their
Souls: you read of the hope of the Hypocrite, and the House which he leans
upon, that will fall, and leave him in utter despair. For what is the vain hope
and confidence of the Hypocrite, when God shall take away his Soul, Job 8. 13,
14, 15, 13, 16, 27. When these poor wretches dye, their vain hopes of Heaven
dye with them: many take Presumption for Assurance, and a vain confidence, for
well-grounded hopes of Heaven; because they have external Privileges, and talk
of Christ, they think all is well, and that there needs no more ado. Thus many
will go down to Hell with a Lie in their right hand? That it is thus, is clear,
from Matthew. 7. 22. Many will say to him in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not
prophesied in thy name, and in thy name done many wonderful works, cast out
Devils, etc. And in John 8. 54, 55. Of whom ye say (says Christ to the Jews,
that pleaded Abraham was their Father, and that they were never in Bondage,
etc.) that he is your God, and yet ye have not known him. Here this People, you
see, had grounded Confidences, and false Comforts built thereupon. They said,
God was their's, and yet they were ignorant of Him, and did not know Him. Oh!
tremble at the word of the Lord, and have a care of vain Confidences, and
putting the Lie upon your own Souls, as these did. Paul tells us of some, that
went a great way, and attained to much, and yet were not Believers, nor Sealed
by the Holy Spirit, Heb. 6. 4, 5. A startling Word: They were once Enlightened,
tasted of the heavenly Gift, were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and tasted
of the good word of God, and the Powers of the World to come. If these fall a
way, it is impossible to recover them again, etc. Thus (I say) Persons may
deceive their Souls, building their hopes and comforts upon sandy foundations,
being foolishly confident they shall be Saved. But for any, except real Saints
and Believers in Christ, to have those witnessing Sealing Testimonies of the
Spirit, which we have discoursed of, and described to you; I say, for any but
real Christians to have these, is utterly impossible, which brings me now to
give the Reasons, why none but real Believers are, or can be Sealed by the
Spirit of God. And the Reasons to make it evident and plain, shall be taken.

1. From the Author. 2. From the Nature 3. From the Object Matter. 4. From the
Mediums. And Lastly, from the great design and end of the Holy Spirit in his
glorious Sealing Work.

1. Reason; taken from the Author of this Sealing Work, viz. the Spirit of God,
who is the Spirit of Holiness, and Spirit of Truth. So Christ calls him, John
14. 17. I will pray the Father for you, and he shall send you another
Comforter, etc. even the Spirit of Truth, who shall lead and guide you into all
Truth, John 16. 13, 14. Now he being a Spirit of Holiness and Truth, he cannot
witness to a Lie, or give a Testimony quite contrary to the whole tenor of the
Sacred Word of God. Whose word is a word of Truth, and not of Falsehood, John
17. 17. The Spirit Indicted the Scriptures, and they are all like him that is
Truth. Now were the Spirit to Seal Unbelievers, he would give a Testimony quite
cross to the Word of Truth, which he will never do. The Elect themselves, while
in a natural state, have no actual Interest in Christ, nor the Promises,
therefore, while in that state, they can have none Sealed to them. They that
have no actual Interest in Christ, and in the Promises of the Gospel, cannot be
Sealed by the Spirit of Promise. We must (my Beloved) be Saints, before we can
be known to be so: a Man must be in Christ before he can know he is in Christ;
and a Believer, before he can know he is a Believer, and that he has Faith in
Christ.

2. Reason is taken from the nature of this work of Sealing: If you consider
the nature of it, it cannot be, that Unbelievers should be Sealed. Assurance is
produced in the Souls of Believers, by the reflexive acts of their Faith: the
Spirit in Sealing Believers, helps them to reflect upon what he has formerly
done, and wrought in their Souls. 1 John 2. 3. Hereby (says John) we know,
(that is, we Believers, that have closed in with Christ, and have him to plead
for us, etc.) that we know him. Now to know that we know is a reflex Act, (as
one says;) and there can be no reflex Acts, where there is no direct Acts of
Faith; it is impossible that there should be a reflex Act, before a direct Act
of Faith. No Man can have the evidence of his Faith, before the habit of it be
infused, and the vital act first performed: therefore deceive not your Souls
with vain hopes of Heaven.

3. Reason of this is taken from the object Matter, to which the Spirit Seals;
and that you will find to be his own Sanctifying Operations upon the Heart, or
in the Hearts of those that he Seals; and consequently, to their great
privileges and advantages in Christ Jesus: the Spirit witnesses to Believers,
that they are Christ's and that he has loved them with an everlasting Love,
and shed his precious Blood for them, Rev. 1. 5, 6. This the Spirit Sealed to
Paul, Gal. 2. 20. I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I,
but Christ lives in me. And the life says he) that I live in the flesh, is by
the faith of the Son of God, who has loved me, and given himself for me. How
did Paul know this, but by the still voice of the Spirit, who discovered in
particular Christ's love to him? The Spirit in Sealing Believers, does attest,
That Christ abides in them, and that they are the Sons of God, Romans 8. 16. 1
John 3. 24. Hereby we know that he (viz. Christ) abides in us, by the Spirit
which he has given to us. Now no such thing as this can be Sealed to us, until
we believe; because neither our Adoption, nor Sanctification is before Faith,
John 1. 12. Gal. 3. 26. When Persons believe truly in Jesus Christ, then are
they actually Sons of God, and really Sanctified, and not before; for our
Hearts are said to be purified by, or through Faith, Acts 15. 9. Therefore
Persons being unsanctified, cannot be Sealed, before Faith in the Blood of
Christ.

4. Reason it is thus: If you consider the Mediums or Instruments, made use of
in this work of Sealing: The Spirit of God in Sealing his People, makes use of
the great and precious Promises; therefore he is called a Spirit of Promise in
our Text: He is not so called only because he is the Spirit promised, Ezekiel. 36.
27. but secondly, because he opens and applies the Promises to Believers, which
he does when they believe, and are united to Christ, and not before: The Spirit
clears the Promises to their Understandings, and by Faith enables them, to
apply them to their own Souls; but still remember, it is after Faith; for 'till
a Person is united to Christ, he has no true saving right to the Promises; they
are Childrens Bread, and Dogs that are without must not meddle with them,
Matthew. 15. 26, 27. Rev. 22. 15. But

Fifthly. The Fifth Reason is taken from the great End and Design of the Spirit
in this Sealing Work, which is, to secure to the believing Soul its Peace,
pardon of Sin, and eternal Salvation with Christ in Glory: The end of our
Faith, we read, is the Salvation of our Souls; and this is the end of the
Spirit's Sealing, to secure it to the Soul, 1 Pet. 1. 9, 10. The Spirit of God
is said, Ephesians. 4. 30. To Seal Believers to the day of Redemption; that is to
their complete Salvation in Christ. We are all by nature in bondage to Sin and
Corruption; and we are Redeemed from Sin by the first coming of Christ, Matthew.
1. 21. Tit. 2. 14. And shall be fully and perfectly Redeemed from all Sin at
his second. Now, in the mean time, 'till this be, God would have his People to
be assured of it beforehand, therefore he has given his Spirit to Seal them
up to the Day of Redemption. Now, my Beloved, it is as equally impossible for
Unbelievers, as such, to be Sealed, as Saved. And the Word says, Matthew, 16.
16. He that believes not shall be damned. And, John 8. 24. Says Christ to the
Jews, If you believe not, ye shall die in your sins. Thus you see the Doctrine
is clear, That the great privilege of Sealing by the Spirit follows the Act of
Believing, and goes not before it. I should have shown you now,

Thirdly, Whether all Believers are Sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise; but
our time is gone; therefore I shall sum up all with a short Word of
Application; and leave what has been said to the Blessing of God.

1. Use. If none are Sealed, nor can be Saved, until they believe in Christ,
then examine what your state is, how it stands between God and your precious
Souls; if you find it good, bless God, who has called you by his Grace, and
Sealed you by his holy Spirit: if you find it bad with you upon trial, that God
and your Souls are strangers, then cry to him earnestly, through Christ, to
open your Eyes, and show you your state and condition, that you may not live
and dye strangers to him; say, as the blind Men, Lord we would receive our
sight, we would have our Understandings opened and illuminated; Oh! thou that
commandedst the Light to shine out of darkness, shine into our Souls, and give
us the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of thy self, in the face of Jesus
Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 4, 6. Give us to see our state and need of Christ, and save
us Lord, or we shall perish. Say, Lord take away sin, and receive me graciously
into thy favor, and our Lips shall praise thee, Hos. 14. 2, 3. Give us Christ
or we dye. Thus be importunate with God, and give him no rest, for it is for
your Lives.

2. Use. Be exhorted to these three things.

First, Not to quench the Spirit. Oh! comply sweetly with all its motions, and
hearken to all his calls. 1 These. 5. 20. Quench not the Spirit.

Secondly, Grieve not the Holy Spirit in any wise; there is a great respect due
to the Spirit, for doing such a gracious and glorious work as Sealing is; see
then that you grieve him not, but in all things endeavor to please him, so
that he may delight to go on in this blessed work, that he has pleased to take
upon him: beware of Pride, Passion, Envy, and all Sin that grieves the Spirit.
Oh! grieve not the holy and good Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed to the
day of redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30.

Thirdly, Bless God that he has given his good Spirit to any of you, to cause
you to walk in his Statutes, to keep his Judgments, and do them, Ezekiel. 36. 27.
As also, to clear up his Love in Christ to your Souls.

So much for this time.
Believers Sealed BY THE Spirit of Promise.
Second Sermon, from Ephesians. 1. the latter part of the 13 verse. In whom also,
after that ye believed, ye were Sealed with the Holy Spirit of Promise.
BEloved, we began the last Day with these Words, and after we had opened, and
given the Analysis of them, we stated this Doctrinal Conclusion, viz.

Doct. That the great privilege of Sealing by the Spirit, is after the duty
and act of Believing.

For the opening of this weighty Point, we have shown,

First, What this Sealing work of the Spirit is, and how it is performed by him
in the Soul. And,

Secondly, We have given the Reasons why none can be truly Sealed by the Spirit
until they believe in Christ Jesus.

Now, Thirdly, we shall proceed to show you, whether all Believers are Sealed
by the Spirit of Promise or no.

This is a weighty case, and requires a better Judgment than mine to discuss
it; but as the Lord shall help, I shall say something at this time in Answer to
it, viz. Whether all Believers are Sealed by the Spirit of God, or no. For the
opening of it, (that you may rightly understand, and, if the Lord please, be
established and comforted) I must make some Distinctions that ought to be made,
in so great a Matter and Concern as this is.

The Distinctions I shall make are these three, viz.

First, The different kinds of the Spirit's Sealing.

Secondly, The times and seasons thereof. And,

Thirdly, The several ways and manners of this Sealing.

First, We must distinguish the different kinds of the Spirit's Sealing: the
Sealing Work of the Spirit is not of one kind, nor to one and the same use and
end.

There is (Beloved) a twofold Seal of the Holy Spirit.

First, An objective Seal, which Seal distinguishes the Persons that have it,
from other Persons: And,

Secondly, There is a formal Seal, by, or in which Sealing, the Spirit clears
up, and ratifies the Soul's Interest in Christ, and Right to Heaven and
Salvation, by and through him.

First, The objective Sealing of Persons, the Spirit does, in Sanctifying and
making them holy, that he Seals; who before were filthy and unholy; the Spirit
changes the Heart, renews the Nature, and forms Christ's Image in the Souls of
them he Seals.

When the Spirit Seals Persons objectively, he really and truly sanctifies them
by the Infusion of his Grace; and thus he seals us in way of distinction from
other Persons.

And this is one end of his glorious sealing Work: before we proceed further,
pray mind these five things.

First, In the Decree of God's Election there was a difference between
Believers and others, even from Eternity, before all Time: There is a privy
Seal of Predestination, that is only known to God himself. 2 Timothy 2. 19. The
Lord knows them that are his. By Election and Choice in Christ, before the
foundation of the World, Ephesians. 1. 4. This knowledge of God of us, is carried
secret, as water that runs under the ground, until by vocation he calls us from
the rest of Mankind. God has chose a certain number in Christ, which shall
certainly be saved: For the foundation of God stands sure, viz. of Election,
having this Seal, etc.

Secondly, In the purpose and intention of the death of Christ, there was also
a difference between the Elect, and other Men; for though all have a common
benefit by Christ's death, yet he shed not his blood for all, but for some,
even for all those that the Father had given him, and for whom he covenanted
with his Father, to satisfy Justice in their stead: God the Father, and Christ
the Son, struck hands together about the Redemption of Sinners; the Father gave
out of the World to Christ, a certain number that he would have saved; and the
Son engaged with the Father for their Redemption, and to bring them to Glory,
Isa. 59. 1. to 6. John 6. 38, 39. Now dare any say, That God gave all the World
to Christ, and that Christ did covenant with his Father, to save all? If all
are given to Christ, and he is become Surety to his Father for all, then all
shall be saved. For God has promised to Christ, That he shall see his Seed, and
see of the travail of his Soul, and be satisfied. Isa. 73. 8, 9, 11, 12. And in
the 10 v. it is said, That the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hands.
It is the pleasure of God those Christ dyed for should be saved, and they
shall, therefore Christ dyed not for all alike: besides, Christ prayed not for
all, therefore he dyed not for all: for surely Christ will not stick to spend
his breath for them, for whom he spent his blood. John 17. 6, 9, 15. I pray not
for the World, but for them which thou have given me out of the World, thine
they were, but thou gave them me, etc. Thus by the way you see, that in
regard of Christ's death, viz. the Intentionality of it, there was a difference
between the Elect, and others: For though all Men have a common, yet it is only
the Elect who believe, that have a special, real benefit by it. But,

Thirdly, Yet know, That all this while, though there be a difference between the
Elect and others in the Election of God, and death of Christ, yet there was no
personal, actual difference between them and others, until they are sanctified
and renewed, and so are distinguished from other Men: The Elect themselves
(considered in Adam) are Children of wrath, even as others, till they are
called, and believe, Ephesians. 2. 2, 3. The Devil rules in them, and they are kept
in blindness by him, as well as others, 2 Cor. 4. 4, 5. They are affar off from
God, Ephesians. ^^ 13. and are wallowing in their Blood, to the loathing of (...)
Persons, till God say to them, (...) ye, Ezekiel. 16. 4, 5, 6. They are born in
sin, and polluted by it, even as others, till God sprinkle their Hearts with
Christ's Blood, Ezekiel. 36. 24, 25. They are as vile as the vilest, 1 Cor. 6. 11.
Such were some of you, viz. Thieves, Covetous, Liars, Swearers, etc. but now ye
are washed, now ye are sanctified by the Spirit of our God.

Fourthly, Know that the Spirit of God in this objective Seal, viz.
Sanctification, makes a real difference in the states and tempers of those that
he thus Seals. For (says Paul) If any Man be in Christ, he is a new Creature,
old Passions and Corruptions are subdued in the Soul, and all things are become
new. And the Spirit also manifests that difference, which God in his choosing,
made between them he sanctifies, and others, 1 These. 1. 4, 5. Brethren, ye know
your Election of God. But how did they know it? The Gospel (says he) did not
come in Word only, but in power, and in much assurance of joy in the Holy
Ghost. When the report of God is believed, and the arm of the Lord revealed to
any, then they see that Eternal Love that God bore to them in Christ, before
the World was. Vocation in time, is a sign of Election from Eternity: For those
that God has Elected in Christ, shall certainly be called by the Spirit, out of
Darkness into Light.

Fifthly, Know further, that all this while, though a Person be sanctified, which
is the objective Seal of the Spirit, yet he may not be formally Sealed; i. e.
he may not have his change of state, and interest in Christ, fully sealed up to
him: a Man's Sanctification may be very doubtful to himself, and he may labor
under many and great fears about it, whether he is changed or no, be in Christ
or no; so that this is one distinction we must make, the kinds of the Spirit's
sealing; a Man may have the objective Seal, but not the formal Seal, presently;
a Letter may be writ sometime before it is Sealed; the Spirit may work Grace in
the Soul some time, before he sets his Seal to it. But,

Secondly, We must distinguish the times and seasons of the Spirit's Sealing;
for there be various times of his sealing Believers; as the kinds of the
Spirit's sealing are different, so the seasons wherein he does this work, are
many and various: As,

First, Some Persons (though I think but few) are sealed immediately upon their
Believing in, and closing with Christ by Faith; they are no sooner Converted,
but Sealed; but this is very rare, and not common; here and there one are
sealed immediately by the Spirit upon Conversion: I heard credibly of One that
was convinced of Sin, saw himself lost and undone, and thereupon having a sight
of Christ, fled to him for Pardon, Peace, Life, and all Grace; and was enabled
to close in with Christ by Faith; and had also thereupon, the Love of God, and
certainty of his being Saved, Sealed up by the Spirit to him, and all in an
Hours time: many Ministers, and good Christians, were amazed at it, and afraid
it was a Delusion; but by close walking with God, and a pious Conversation, he
declared it was God's work in him. The prodigal Son returning home to his
Father, was thus immediately Sealed; for he was entertained with a fatted Calf,
and sweet Music; and his Father ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him,
Luke 15. 23, 24, 25. But all Believers find not this presently, as soon as they
are Converted, nor for some time after; it is but few that are thus Sealed by
the Spirit.

Secondly, Season. The Spirit Seals in times of great and eminent communion
with God, through Christ. Times of Communion, are sealing times: when the Soul
sees and injoys God, tastes of his matchless Love, and the sweet kisses of his
Mouth, which are better than Wine, Cant. 1. 2. Then there is much Joy; and
great out-lets of Peace and Comfort to that Soul: When God meets, and shines
upon Believers in a Duty, and in an Ordinance, then he makes their state very
obvious and clear to them; then he banishes away all fears and doubts in their
Souls, and makes them rejoice with greater and better Joy, than the World can
afford, says David, who was a Man much in Communion with God, Psalm. 4. 7. Thou
have put more joy and gladness into my heart, than when their Corn, and Wine,
and Oil increase: But how was this? no otherways than by God's lifting up the
Light of his Countenance upon his Soul, which will gladen the heart indeed.

Thirdly, Many have been sealed, upon some great and eminent Trials and
Dangers, that they have been exposed to, for Christ's sake, and his Gospel.
Many Persons, in times of eminent sufferings for Jesus Christ (wherein they
have carried it with great meekness, patience, and self-denial) are sealed;
they have much comfort and assurance given to them. Paul tells us, 2 Cor. 1. 4,
5. That as their sufferings did abound for Christ, so their consolations did
abound in him. For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation
also abounds by, or, in Christ. And whether we be afflicted, it is for our
Consolation, etc. How were the Martyrs Sealed many times in the depth of their
Suffering for Christ his Cause? one cried out when he was going to dye; Oh!
Austin, he is come, he is come; meaning Christ, who then met him, and by his
Spirit Sealed up his Love to him. Another, when in the Flames, enjoyed so much
of God, That he said, He was as if he were in a bed of down: He sweetly
conversed with God in the Flames.

Fourthly, The Spirit usually Seals Persons, after a dark day and time of
desertion, when they have been clouded, and gone mourning for lack of the Sun,
Job 30. 18. When they have had hard and sore conflicts with Satan, and their
own base Lusts. Thus some read, and understand that Text, Revel. 2. 17. To him
that overcomes will I give to eat of the hidden Manna; and I will give him a
white Stone, and in that Stone a new Name written, etc. These are sweet words;
in which observe,

First, The Persons to whom Christ makes this Promise, viz. to overcomers; who
having combated with Sin, and Satan, and the World, are Conquerors through him.
To him that over comes, etc. But,

Secondly, Observe here a threefold Promise made by Christ, to such Souls as
are true Victors over Sin, Satan, etc.

First, I will give him to eat of the hidden Manna. Manna is the Corn and Bread
of Heaven, called Angels Food, Psalm. 78. 24. This was the Bread that God gave
Israel in the Wilderness; some of which was put in a Pot, and laid up before
the Testimony, Exodus 16. 33, 34. By this hidden Manna here, we are to
understand Jesus Christ, who is the Bread of Life (so called) that came down
from Heaven; whosoever eats, by Faith, of it, shall never dye, that is, not
Eternally, John 6. 48, 49, 50, 59. What can Christ give more than himself, and
the inward secret Communications of his Love and Grace, which are hid and laid
up in Christ, for all them that do truly believe in him? By these he feeds and
strengthens the Souls of his People.

Secondly, A white Stone. And I will give to him a white Stone, etc. There was
among the Romans a twofold use of the white Stone, says Reverend Mr. Knowles,
now with God.

First, He that was a Victor, and had overcome in their Olympic Games, had a
white Stone given him, as a badge and token of Honor and Victory: Thus Jesus
Christ will give to his People, that through him overcome (by wrestling with
Sin, the Devil, and the World, Ephesians. 6. 12, 13.) a Crown of Glory: They shall
stand before the Throne with Crowns on their Heads, and Palms in their Hands,
as tokens and signs of honor and victory, Revel. 7. 9, 10. 2. 10. Be thou
faithful unto death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life. Christ gives to his
a Title to the Crown of Heaven here; so that though the Saints have not a Crown
in Life, yet they are Heirs of a Crown of Life, which Christ will give to them.
There is a Crown of Righteousness for all them that are in Christ savingly, and
that long for, and love his appearing.

Secondly, He that being accused of any crime in their Courts of Judicature,
was found innocent, and so was acquitted of his Crime, had a white Stone given
him, as a sign of absolution. All Believers are acquitted and discharged through
Christ here, he having satisfied divine Justice for them, Romans 8. 33. And they
shall have a public Absolution in the day of Judgment, before Angels and Men,
Rev. 20. 11, 12. Christ at that Day will fully and openly acquit his own
People, and say, Enter now into the Joy of your Lord.

Thirdly, In this white Stone, Christ promises to Overcomers, a new Name
written, which no Man knows but him that receives it: by which is meant some
spiritual dignity and honor, that Christ will confer on them that believe in
him, Isa. 62. 2, 3. They shall be made partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1
4. And have the Communications of his saving Graces, and the indwelling
Presence of his Spirit; the witness and sealing Testimony of which Holy Spirit,
is this new Name in the white Stone, which no Man knows but he that receives
it, 1 Cor. 2. 12. The Spiritual Senses (says one) of the new Man, is only
capable to know and understand the Divine nature of Christ's new name, written
in the white Stone of Absolution, pardon of Sin, and the gracious Promises of
Eternal Life. This new Name is Christ's own Handwriting, and none can read it,
but such as are spiritually taught by Christ: The natural Man, that is, the
unconverted Man, receives not the things of the Spirit, because they are
foolishness to him; and he knows them not, because they are spiritually
discerned; they cannot be seen with a blind Eye.

Fifth Season is, When they die. Dying times are Sealing times to many
Believers: many Christians here walk in the dark, and have their whole Lives,
as it were, like that Day spoken of, and described by the Prophet, Zech. 14.
17. A Day that is neither dark nor light. Some enjoy more of God, than others
do, and are Sealed in a greater degree. And as for those, whose Life is a Life
between hopes and fears, they shall more or less, have an Evening time of Light
and Joy; God that has promised to be with his Living, will not forsake them
utterly when dying: he will not be a stranger, much less a Terror to them. Many
have lived in the dark; and when they have died, they have seen God's sweet
Face, and have had his Love sealed up to their Souls. When all comforts are
gone, then God sends his to them: when their outward Appetite fails, then God
feeds them with spiritual hidden Manna: though all God's Children have not joy
and assurance alike, when they dye, yet they all have joy, and are sealed more
or less. For as the wicked have some apprehensions of Hell and Wrath in their
Consciences, which makes them afraid to dye, (as one cried out, I am so sinful,
that I cannot dye; and said another, I have lived in care, and now dye in
doubt; for whither I am going I cannot tell.) So the Godly have some
fore-tastes of God's Love and Favor, when they dye. Though it is true, their
Diseases may be such, and their Animal Spirits so oppressed, that they cannot
express what they feel. Good Jacob (says one) laid asleep upon a stone, when
he saw a Vision, Genesis 28. 7, 8, 9. So the Saints, when they lay themselves down
to sleep the sleep of death, they have often a Vision from God; they see the
light of his countenance, and have his Love sealed up to them for ever: Now
they desire, with good old Simeon, Luke 2. 30, 31. To be gone, and depart in
Peace, for their Eyes have seen his Salvation.

Third Distinction. We must distinguish the several ways and manners of the
Spirit's Sealing: As,

First, Some are extraordinary and immediate, given and vouchsafed to some
only; and that at special times: thus Zacheus was Sealed, Luke 19. 9. Come down
(says Christ to him) This Day is Salvation come to thine House. And that Man
was thus Sealed, Matthew. 9. 2. to whom Christ said, Son be of good cheer, thy
sins are forgiven thee. These immediate ways are now ceased; so that no Man can
expect now, by any New Revelation, or Sign from Heaven, by any extraordinary
Inspiration, or Voice, to have his Salvation Sealed up to him; but he must look
for it in God's ordinary way, viz. by searching of the word, John 5. 39.
examining of his own heart, 2 Cor. 13. 5. And waiting upon God in Prayer, and
in other Ordinances, Isa. 40. 29, 30. I have read of one who had been long upon
the borders of Despair, and at last he was sweetly assured, and Sealed; being
asked how; he answered not by any new Revelation, or extraordinary Voice from
Heaven, but by subjecting his Understanding to, and comparing his heartwith the
word.

Thus having made these Distinctions, for your clear understanding the Case,
give me leave to Answer all out of doubt, from what has been said; And that
briefly in these three things.

First, Consider, that though all Believers have not the Formal, yet they have
the Objective Seal of the Spirit, they are all Sanctified, and made Holy, by
the holy Spirit of Promise; true Grace is infused, and imprinted in their
Souls; though the formal Seal of the Spirit may not yet be set to it. There may
be Fire put in, on the Hearth. Though you cannot well see it; there may be
Grace in the Heart, and spiritual life, though it cannot be well discerned,
because of the many Corruptions that be yet in the Heart. You read, Matthew. 12.
20. of the smoking. Flax, and bruised Reed: Grace may be true, though weak;
and a Man may be in Christ, though it be not clear to him; all Believers are
Sanctified, though not Sealed presently. But,

Secondly, Consider, That though all Believers are not Sealed at one and the same
time; yet there are few that are true Christians, but before they dye, meet
with one Season or another, wherein the Lord does Seal them. If they be not
Sealed at their first closing in with Christ by Faith, as some are, though but
few; yet they are Sealed by the Spirit, more or less, before they dye, and go
out of the World.

Thirdly, and Lastly, Consider, That though God does not now seal by his Spirit
in an extraordinary and immediate way, by Revelation, etc. yet most Christians
in the ordinary way of the Spirit are sealed: God meets with them in one Duty
or another; in one sacred Ordinance, or another; either in Prayer, Reading,
Hearing, or in receiving of the Lord's Supper. This God has promised, and
Believers may expect; for God is faithful, who has promised, I shall conclude
with these two Scriptures, Isa. 32. 17. And the work of Righteousness shall be
peace; and the effect of Righteousness, Quietness and Assurance for ever. Isa.
64. 5. Thou meetest him that rejoices and works Righteousness, and remembers
thee in thy ways.

So much for this time.

Believers Sealed BY THE Spirit of Promise.
Third Sermon, from Ephesians. 1. the latter part of the 13 verse. In whom also,
after that ye believed, ye were sealed with the Holy Spirit of Promise.
BRethren, the Truth we are upon from the Words is this.

Doctrine. The great privilege and mercy of being Sealed by the Spirit of
Promise, is after the Duty and Act of Believing. After ye Believed, ye were
Sealed by the Spirit, etc.

For the opening this great Point we have,

First, already shown, what the Spirit's Sealing is.

Secondly, Why none are, nor can be Sealed, till they Believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ. And,

Thirdly, We have answered this great Question, viz. Whether all Believers are
Sealed by the Spirit of Promise, or not. Now in the

Fourth place, God assisting, we shall show you the great Privileges of those
Souls, that are Sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise.

And (my Beloved) their Privileges and Advantages are many and great; even so
great and many, that words cannot express them fully; nor set out the riches
and worth of this mercy.

Some of the Saints Privileges, by being Sealed, we shall acquaint you with in
these particulars.

First, The use of a Seal in Men's Affairs, sets out the privileges of
Believers Sealed by the Spirit. For as the use of a Seal is manifold, so the
advantages of Believers are many, who are Sealed by the Holy Spirit to the day
of Redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30.

Quest. What are the Uses (...) Seal.

Answ. The Uses of a Seal are many: as,

First, A Seal serves for Confirmation amongst Men; there is the Writing, and
the Seal put to the Writing: now when the Seal is added, there is a perfect
Ratification, or Confirmation of what is in the Writing. There are abundance of
great and precious Promises in the Word of God, which the Spirit of Promise
seals to the Soul; and when he seals them, then are they sure to us. The
Apostle tells us, 2 Cor. 1. 20. That all the Promises of God are in Christ,
yea, and Amen. Yea, that is truth. Amen, that is assurance. And in v. 21. He
has also Sealed us, and given the earnest of his Spirit in our hearts. Those
Promises that are made and given us in Christ, the Lord assures and confirms to
us, by his Holy Spirit; who opens and applies the Promises to Believers. The
Spirit assures the Saints their right in the Promises, and that God will pay
the whole sum of them in his time to them. For an Earnest (says the Annotators
on the place) is as a pledge, whereby we confirm a Bargain; or, as a piece of
Money, whereby we assure the payment of the whole. The first gift therefore of
the Spirit, and of Life, is a pledge of our whole Inheritance, insomuch, that
this anointing, sealing, and pledging, all serve to one and the same end. God
is both able and willing to perform all that he has promised; and this the
Spirit testifies to the Souls of them that he Seals.

2. Use. A Seal is for distinction, from others that carries not that mark: the
Spirit of God distinguishes them he Seals, from other Men in the World: There
is (as before I have told you) a distinction between Persons in God's Election,
and Eternal Purpose; but this concerns us not, (secret things belonging to God,
Deuteronomy. 29. 29.) any further than to know it in the general, that there is such a
thing: we are not to meddle any further with it, 2 Timothy 2. 19. The Lord knows
them that are his, and them that are not his: for he has set his seal and mark
upon them in Christ from Eternity; but now the Spirit of God in time,
distinguishes and ranks Men (says D. Sibbs) as they were before all Worlds,
and as they shall be at the Day of Judgment, when Christ shall come, and give
to all Men according to their works, 2 Cor. 5. 10.

The beginning of that distinction that shall be afterward, is in this life:
the Spirit's objective Seal, viz. of Sanctification, makes a distinction
between Men. A Seal you know, makes the Impression of an Image; and the
Prince's Image uses to be in his Seal: The glorious Image of God is in his
Seal, which ruins and destroys the old Man, and prints the New in the Souls of
Believers, by the Spirit's Sealing, Ephesians. 4. 22, 23, 24. There is that by the
Spirit stamped and printed in the Soul, that was not there before. True
Believers by the Spirit's Sealing, are,

First, Distinguished from moral, civilized Men, which are at best but tamed
Devils, and old Adam put in a new Dress. The House may be swept, i. e. Man may
be civilized, and have many good Morals, and yet the Heart not Sanctified. See
Matthew. 12. 43, 44. The inward work of Holiness, or Sanctification in the heart,
which civil Men have not, but ridicule and despise, distinguishes Believers
from them; for they are changed, made anew, and created in Christ Jesus, to
good works, Ephesians. 2. 10.

Secondly, This Sealing of the Spirit distinguishes the Saints from seeming
good Men, that seem and pretend to be that outwardly, before Men, which they
are not inwardly, in reality, before God: there are too many of these deluded
Souls; the good Lord deliver us from cheating our own Souls thus. The depth of
the Spirit's work in the Soul, whereby he makes a new Nature, distinguishes
Believers from those who are but painted Hypocrites. Pray mind here two or
three things, wherein you will see how Believers, that have a new Nature, are
by the Spirit distinguished from others.

First, Nature in every Creature is carried to one thing more than to another;
so there is a distinct propension in good and upright Men, to God, to Christ,
to his Grace and Goodness; their aims and bent are distinct, and thereupon they
have a greater enlargement of Heart, according to their great aims. Believers
desire more of God, and his Grace, and aim purely at his Glory: they now look
above the World, and worldly Men, who are poor, narrow, base Spirited Men; yea,
the best of the Men of the World are so, Jer. 9. 3. Phil. 1. 20, 21.

Secondly, Things by Nature work from within; and in this painted Hypocrites
are distinguished from real Christians. A Believer (in what he does for God and
his Glory) is moved from a Principle of Grace within, wrought by the Spirit;
but as for Hypocrites, they are moved in what they do, as things of Motion;
like Clocks, and Engines of Wit, which move from a weight without as one says)
that poyseth them. If Hypocrites do any good, there is something from without
which sways their Ends and Aims; it is not a Principle of Grace within, as Faith
in, and Love to Christ, etc. But it is something else that sways them: if they
Pray, Read, Hear, give Alms, and Fast, it is to be seen of Men, and to receive
Honor from Men; this our Savior tells us, Matthew. 6. 1, to 6. Thus good Men,
who are Sealed by the Spirit, are distinguished from others. There is a new
Divine Nature in them, 2 Pet. 1. 4. which carries them out of Self, and above
the World, even to seek God and his Glory.

Thirdly, Nature is constant, and what is done naturally, is done constantly;
every Creature works according to its nature: Good and holy Men are exercised
constantly in Holiness, because they do it from an inward Principle of Grace
and Life, and from a work and stamp of the Spirit within; it is true, different
things may seem the same; as wild Herbs in the Field may have the color and
form of them which are planted in a Garden; but there is a difference in their
virtue: The seeming Graces and Works of Hypocrites, may look like true, but
they leave no virtue in them; all is not Gold that glisters; all is not Grace
that looks like it; the works of Hypocrites are dead things: You read, Heb. 10.
22. of dead works. And in Tit. 1. 15, 16. of some, who profess they know God,
and yet in works deny him; who are defiled, and unto good works prove
Reprobates.

But, in a Christian's Grace and Faith, there is a distinguishing Virtue: their
spikenards send forth fragrant smells, Cant. 1. 12. Their Graces are like the
Ointment that perfumed the whole House, John 12. 3, 4. A Believer, by Faith,
overcomes the World and his Sins, 1 John 5. 4, 5. He resists the Devil,
steadfast in the Faith, 1 Pet. 5. 9. and with this Shield, quenches all his
fiery darts, Ephesians. 6. 16. What great things did those Worthies by Faith, Heb.
11. 33, 34, 35. By Faith they subdued Kingdoms, wrought Righteousness, obtained
Promises, stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of the Fire, etc
endured Tortures, and cruel Mockings, not accepting deliverance; yea, moreover,
Bonds and Imprisonment: they were stoned, sawn asunder, were tempted, etc. of
whom the World was not worthy, v. 38. By Faith a Christian performs all Duties,
Prays, and Hears, and is very fruitful in his whole Conversation: there is in
all a Believer's Graces a comforting and strengthening Virtue. Two Men may do
the same things, and yet there be a great and grand difference; for Hypocrites
cannot do as Believers, though in some externals they may outdo them. What
Believers do, is from the Spirit's Sealing, in a special way; but what others
do, if it be from the Spirit, yet it is but from the Spirit in a common way at
best; you must know there are common works of the Spirit, as well as special;
Hypocrites may have the common, and so do many things externally; but it is
only Believers that have the special workings and operations of the Spirit, and
so can only do Spiritual Duties sincerely. But,

Thirdly, A Christian's Graces, wrought by the Spirit, holds out in all kinds
of Weather, in Winter and Summer, in Prosperity and Adversity. A Believer
follows the Lamb, whither soever he goes, Rev. 14. 4. But counterfeit Holiness
will not hold out always; though it may some time, it will soon go out: The
Young Man in the Gospel went a great way, he took many a fair step for Heaven,
and yet at last parted with Christ for the World; he was not sound at Heart,
for if he had, he would have left all for Christ, rather than him, Matthew. 19.
19, 20. He went away sorrowful, for he had great Possessions; he did not like
Christ's terms at all. Will a Hypocrite always delight himself in God, and pray
to the Almighty, surely no, Job 27. 8, 10. Demas (says Paul) is departed from
us. How came that to pass? Having loved this present World. The World, with its
Riches, was loved more by him, than Christ, and his Graces: many begin to run
well, but soon tire: they are soon out of breath, because they have not true
Grace; they went off from us, because they were never of us: for had they been
of us, that is, sincere, they would not have gone off from us. Oh! think of
this word, and tremble, 1 John 2. 19.

3. Use. A Seal is for Appropriation: Merchants use to Seal those Goods, they
would not have others have any right to. Believers are God's in a more peculiar
manner than others* all are the Lord's by Creation; but as for Believers, they
are his by Election, Redemption, and Vocation, Psalm. 4. 5. The Lord has set
apart him that is Godly for himself. There is not only in a Christian the
witness of the Spirit, That God is his God, and dwells in him, 1 John 4. 13.
but this Spirit works in a Believer, an assent to take God again to be his; so
that there is a mutual Appropriation. Cant. 2. 16. My beloved is mine, and I am
his. Where the Spirit Seals, there God appropriates; and this may be, yea, and
is known, by the Soul's appropriating God again, Psalm. 73. 25, 26. Whom have I
in Heaven (says the Believer) but thee, or on the Earth, that I desire, in
comparison of thy self. When my Flesh and Heart fails, thou art the strength
of my heart, and my portion for ever. There is (Beloved) no action God works
upon the Soul, but there is a reflex action of the Soul, by the Spirit, to him
again: If God choose and love a Soul, that Soul, by the Spirit, chooses and loves
him; it can do no other, but choose him for its all, and love him above all, 1
John 4. 19. We love him, why? because (says he) he has loved us.

4. Use. A Seal is used for Estimation: Persons use to set their Seal only upon
that, for which they have an Estimation. The witness and work of God's Spirit
in Believers, shows the Estimation that he has for them: God sets a great Price
upon his; therefore they are called his Children, Gal. 3. 26. His Spouse, 1
Cor. 11. 2. His dearly beloved, yea, the dearly beloved of his Soul, Jer. 12.
7. They are called his Friends, John 15. 14. His portion and treasure, Jer. 12.
10. His Coin, upon whom he set his mark; his Image and Likeness, being formed
into it by the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 18. These Titles show us the esteem that God
has for them that believe: He values them more than all the World besides. It
is said, Prove. 11. 26. The righteous is more excellent than his Neighbor. And
Believers are said, 1 Pet. 2. 9. To be a chosen Generation, and a Royal
Priesthood, a peculiar People, etc. As there is a difference between precious
Stones and others, so there is between good and bad Men, Believers, and
Unbelievers: God sets a higher Esteem upon some, than upon others: wicked Men
in Scripture, he calls Dogs and Swine, Matthew. 7. 6, 15, 26. Rev. 22. 15.
Without are Dogs, etc. The Saints, he calls Sons, Kings, and Heirs, Rev. 1. 5,
6. Romans 8. 17. If Children, then Heirs, etc. When Sinners are termed dross, and
dung, and thorns, and have all the base Names which they deserve, and terms
that may be: Believers are honorable in their Names and Titles, which (I say)
shows, that God esteems them.

Quest. Some may ask me, How they shall know whether God thus esteems of them,
or no.

Answ. You may know this, by his saving and precious Graces, that are wrought
in your Hearts, by the Spirit: where true Grace is, those Souls are precious
and honorable in the sight of God, Isa. 43. 4. Common Gifts, and Privileges,
and Riches in the World, are no Seal of God's Estimation; for a Man may have of
these, and yet be a castaway, and not beloved of God. If God, Sirs, should
give you a whole Kingdom, it would not Seal his Love to you at all: But when
God changes your Hearts, and makes you spiritual Kings to rule over your base
Lusts, and Priests to offer up spiritual Sacrifice to him, this is a Seal
indeed, that God values and esteems you. For whom he did foreknow, that is in
Christ, he also did Predestinate, to be conformed to the Image of his Son. If
the Spirit has Sanctified you, and formed Christ's Image in your Souls, and
revealed him to you, then you may comfortably conclude, That God loves you, and
that you are his Jewels, and shall be his, in the day when he makes them up,
Mal. 3. 17, 18.

Use. By the way, from this learn, How to value your selves, and others in the
World; not by common Gifts and Parts, that castaways, and reprobates may have,
but by the Stamp that God has set upon you by his Spirit; which is an Argument,
That God intends to lay you up, as Corn for another Treasury, viz. for Heaven,
that is his Garner, into which he will gather his Wheat, Matthew. 3. 12. 2 Cor.
5. 5. Account of others, not for their great Parts only, but for their Grace
and Piety, which they discover by a good Life: many deceive themselves with
false hopes and evidences for Heaven: Some think God loves them: First, because
he spares them, and follows them with long Patience. God spared the old World
120 Years, and yet at last destroyed them with a Deluge, for their Sins, Genesis
6. 3. And so he will you, after long Patience, if you Repent not, Psalm. 50. 21.
Secondly, Because they Thrive, and grow rich in the World. Are these the Fruits
of God's special Love? surely no. For God gives much of the World to them that
are his Enemies. You read, Luke 16. of a rich Man, that fared sumptuously every
day: he had what Heart could wish; and yet in Hell he lift up his Eyes, being
in Torments, ver. 22. His riches could not keep him out of Hell. Oh! then
beloved, deceive not your selves, but look for the Royal Stamp of God's Grace
and Image in your Souls; For without Grace and Holiness none can see God, Heb.
12. 14.

5. Use of a Seal is for Secrecy, as in Letters, etc. The Seal of God's Spirit
is a secret work in the Soul: Believers are only known to God, and to their own
Hearts, that they are his. The white Stone with the New Name, is only known to
them that have it, Rev. 2. 17. It Is true, Holy Men are known in some degree one
to another, to make their Communion the sweeter. There is (as one words it) a
great deal of spiritual likeness in Christians; and they have a strong
confidence of one another's Salvations. But, notwithstanding all this, The
undoubted Certainty of Man's State, that is only known to God, and a
Christian's own Soul. Nay, sometimes, this may be hid from a Believer, in some
measure. Hence Life is called a hidden Life, Col. 3. 3, 4. It may (I say)
sometimes be unknown to a Believer, but I am sure it is always to the World;
for they neither know God that begat, nor them that are begotten. But,

Sixthly, To Conclude: A Seal is also for Security, both of Persons and Things,
from common Annoyance or Hurt. The Spirit secures Believers in his Sealing
work, First, from being overcome by sin or Satan, Romans 6. 14. Secondly, From
falling totally and finally from Grace: And, Thirdly, from Hell and Eternal
Wrath. As the Blood sprinkled on the Door Posts secured the Israelites from
being Destroyed by the Destroying Angel, Exodus 12. 8, 12. You read, Ezekiel. 9. 4.
That a mark must be set upon them in Jerusalem, that should not be destroyed.
And in Revel. 7. 2, 3. That God's Sealed ones must not be hurt. The Spirit's
Sealing is an Argument, That those shall be Saved, not only from Troubles here,
but from Hell hereafter. Romans 8. 1. For there is no Condemnation to them which
are in Christ, who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit.

So much for this time.

Believers Sealed BY THE Spirit of Promise.
Fourth Sermon, from Ephesians. 1. the latter part of the 13 verse. In whom also,
after that ye believed, ye were Sealed with the Holy Spirit of Promise.
BEloved, the Theme we are upon is this, viz.

Doct. The great privilege and mercy of being Sealed by the Holy Spirit, is
after the Duty and Act of Believing. In whom after ye believed, ye were Sealed
by the Holy Spirit of Promise.

For the management of this weighty Point we have

First, Shown you what the Spirit's Sealing Work is.

Secondly, Why none are, or can be Sealed, 'till they Believe.

Thirdly, Whether all Believers are Sealed by the Spirit, or no.

Fourthly, We are now upon showing you the great privileges of Persons Sealed
by the Spirit of God.

And for the doing of this, we have in our last Discourse, shown you some of
the Believers Privileges being Sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise, and that

First, In the many uses of a Seal, in six things. Now we shall, through God's
Assistance, proceed further, to set forth the Privileges of Sealed Believers,
by the Spirit of Truth and Holiness; and therefore,

Secondly, The Saints Privilege (being Sealed) appears, from the Author of it,
viz. the Holy Spirit of Promise. This is the Spirit's Act, and proper work
alone: God does not send Angels upon this Errand, or to do this Work; but he
gives and sends his gracious Spirit to do it. If God did send an Angel to do
this work, it would be an honor to poor Man, but for God to send his Holy
Spirit to Seal us, is more and greater honor, than if Millions of Angels were
to come, and to be employed in this work; What is sorry Man, that God should
give him his Spirit? And besides, the certainty and satisfaction of the Spirit
is beyond all other ways and methods in the World. In miraculous Voices and
Inspirations, there may be found some cheat of the Devil, who is a deceiver,
and seeks to deceive poor Souls. But the Spirit's witness is certain and true,
it being suitable to his revealed Mind in the written Word, as I have told you
before; and being thus, it cannot deceive us. The Spirit that Seals us, is
Truth, and cannot witness to a Lie, nor deceive them that he Seals.

Thirdly, Their Privileges who are Sealed, appears from the Truth that is
Sealed to them, which is Ravishing and Transporting. The Spirit Seals to
Believers, the Pardon of their Sins, through the Blood of Christ, which is a
great Blessing: and their propriety in Him, as their Head, their Husband, their
Friend, their All in All. This is that which Believers long to know, and is
their great mercy for to know by the Spirit; what sweeter, and more
transporting to the Souls of Believers than this, to know their Sins, which
were many, are pardoned; that Christ is their's, his Righteousness their's, his
Merits their's, his Grace their's, to supply their great wants; and that they
shall be saved from Wrath, through him? Romans 5. 9. To know this indeed, is
sweet, it is to enjoy Heaven upon Earth, and to have such Joy, as is beyond all
the Joy in the World. Oh! then, what a mercy and privilege is this, to know
that Christ is ours; so as to say with the Spouse, Cant. 2. 16. My beloved is
mine, and I am his. And to say with them upon good grounds, Lam. 3. 24. The
Lord is my portion, says my Soul, therefore I will hope in him. And with
David, Psalm. 73. 25, 26. Whom have I in Heaven, but thee; or upon Earth, which
I desire besides th^^? My flesh, and my heart fails, but thou art the
strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. How sweet was this to David,
under his troubles, to know that God was his Portion for ever? Paul tells us,
Gal. 2. 20. The life that he lived in the flesh, was by the faith of the Son of
God, who loved him, and gave himself for him: And 2 Timothy 1. 12. I know (says
he) in whom I have believed, etc. Which knowledge was by the Spirit's Sealing;
and this is that which is Sealed up, more or less, to every Believer, which
affords great comfort, and joy, even joy unspeakable, and full of glory, 1 P.
l. 1. 7, 8.

Fourthly, From the Subjects or Pe^^^ns that are Sealed: and they (...), as i^
themselves are sinful (...) grieved the Spirit (...) God a thousand times over.
Now is n^^ this a great mercy, that they who grieved the Spirit so much, should
be Sealed thereby, Ephesians. 4. 30. Oh! wonderful privilege that such, who had
deserved to be Sealed to damnation, because of their sins, should be Sealed to
Salvation.

Fifthly, The Privileges of Sealed ones, appears to be many, from the great,
or grand design of the Holy Spirit in Sealing. The Spirit's designs and aims in
Sealing of Believers, are these three, viz.

First, To secure them from Hell and Wrath: they that have the Spirit's Seal,
shall not be condemned; the Wrath of God that falls upon others, shall not
touch them. For there is now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus,
who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit.

Secondly, To secure Heaven to them for ever: They that are Sealed here by the
Spirit, shall certainly be crowned with Glory hereafter, says Paul, 2 Cor. 5.
4, 5, 6. Now he that has wrought us, or made us fit, for the self same thing,
viz. Heaven, is God, who has also given unto us the earnest of his Spirit. But,

Thirdly, The third design of the Spirit, in Sealing Believers, is, as
intermediate thereunto, to bring much of Heaven into their Souls, in order to
comfort and strengthen them in their way to Glory. Believers Sealed by the
Spirit, enjoy much of Heaven, in their way to it, which makes them long to be
with Christ, in the full possession of Glory, Phil. 1. 22. Believers being
Sealed, enjoy much comfort, joy, and peace in their Souls, Romans 5. 1, 2. They
rejoice in the hope of the glory of God. That God, who is the God of Peace,
does, and will give to his, much joy in believing; he will fill them with joy,
and peace, above all others; they shall have the foretast of Glory and
Blessedness here, and in a little while, they shall be received to Glory, where
all tears shall be wiped away, and they shall be for ever with the Lord, 1
These. 4. 18. This shall suffice to have set forth the Privileges of those,
that are Sealed by the Spirit of Promise.

Fifthly, Application.

First Use, By way of Information, from this great Doctrine of Sealing by the
Spirit, I infer these Two things, viz.

First Infer. That Persons may know here, they are in a state of Grace. And,

Secondly, That Persons upon knowing there present state in Grace, may be
assured for the time to come. But,

First, I infer, That Persons may know here, they are in a state of Grace, and
Salvation; that their Sins are pardoned; that God is pacified toward them,
through his Son; and that also, through Christ, they are saved from Hell, and
Eternal Wrath, which for sin they deserved. This (I say) Believers may know,
and have cleared up to them, and that upon a five-fold account; as,

First, Because the Sealing of us by the Spirit, is not in regard of God, but
in regard of our selves. As for God, he knows them that are his, 2 Timothy 2.
19. But we do not know, neither can we, that we are God's, but by the Sealing
of his good Spirit; and this Sealing is on purpose that we may know, God is our
Father, and we are his Children. Paul tells us, Gal. 4. 6. That therefore God
has sent his Spirit into our hearts, that we may cry Abba Father. But,

Secondly, Because the Scope of the Word which was Indicted by the Spirit, is
for our comfort, and that we might have hope, Romans 15. 4. For whatsoever things
were written aforetime, were written for our Learning, that we, through
patience, and comfort of the Scriptures, might have hope. Now Beloved, what
comfort can a Man have in an uncertain condition, wherein he knows not but he
may be a Reprobate. But again,

Thirdly, Why did Christ Jesus come into the World, and take our Natures upon
him? Why did he become a Curse for us, and carry our Natures (when he had
suffered) into Heaven, there to appear before God for us, 'till he has brought
all home? Gal. 3. 13, Heb. 9. 24. I say, why has, and does Christ all this for
us, but to have us out of all doubt of his Love and Good Will, after once we
have received him by Faith. For having loved his own, he loves them to the end,
John 13. ^.

Fourthly, We may come to arrive at some knowledge of our state in Grace,
because we are commanded to make our calling and election sure. Now God does
not injoin Impossibilities upon us, but commands that, which may be done; and
bids us seek after that which may be attained to, 2 Pet. 1. 10. Give all
diligence to make your calling and election sure. But,

Fifthly, What use are the Sacraments for, especially the Lord's Supper, but to
confirm our Faith, and seal up Christ's Benefits to us? Says Christ to the
Noble Man, that besought him to come down, and heal his Son, John 4. 47, 48.
Except ye see signs and wonders, ye will not believe. Christ sets the Elements
of Bread and Wine, in the Lord's Supper before us, that by these visible signs,
our Faith and Grace might be strengthened. As Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.
17. so it is confirmed by seeing Christ Crucified; which by Faith may be seen
in the Lord's Supper. This Sacrament is not only a bare sign to represent
Christ to us, but it is a Seal to confirm our Interest in him: He that would
have his Grace strengthened, must be found in this Ordinance, in which Christ
is set forth, and as it were, lively Crucified, Gal. 13. 1, 2. It was a saying
of Bernard, When my spiritual strength begins to fail, I know a Remedy (says
he) I will go to the Table of the Lord, and there I will eat and drink to
recover my decayed strength. God meets his at the Table, and there seals up his
love to them, and strengthens their Graces, Cant. 1. 13. While the King sits at
his Table, my spikenard sends forth its smell. Christ's presence in his
Ordinances, stirred up the Spouse's Graces, and put them into exercise. Now,
after all this, shall we doubt of God's love to us, especially, when besides
the Sealing of the Promises to us, we our selves are sealed by the Holy Spirit
of Promise.

Object. But some may say, We should not doubt, did we but know this, That we
do Believe truly.

Answ. As it is the Office of the Holy Spirit to work Faith, and other Graces
in the Soul, so to reveal this Faith and Grace to the Soul. The Grace of God is
Light in its self, because it comes from him, who is the Father of Lights, from
whom comes every good and perfect Gift, James 1. 17. And it is the property of
Light, not only to discover other things, but it self also: And observe also,
That the Spirit gives Light to this Light, by shining on his own Graces wrought
in the Soul, 1 Cor. 2. 12. We have received not the spirit of the world, but
the spirit which is of God, that we might know the things which are freely
given to us of God. And says Paul, Romans 8. 16. The Spirit it self bears
witness, etc. we are the Children of God. God's Children know that he is their
Father, and they his Children; but the remainders of sin and corruption, are
still breeding doubts in the Soul: but it is the office of the Spirit of Faith
to quell them as they arise. We are too prone, in a time of temptation, to
doubt, and have great fears. But Sirs, we need not help the Tempter, as some
do, by holding it a Duty to doubt of Salvation, when Christ says, be not
faithless, but believing. Oh! have a care of this, and rouse up your selves,
and say as David, when doubts arise, and your Souls are disquieted, Psalm 48.
ult. Why art thou cast down, O my Soul, and why art thou disquieted within me:
hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my
countenance, and my God. But,

Secondly, From the Sealing of the Spirit, I infer, That Persons, upon knowing
their present state in Grace, may be assured for the time to come. For the
Sealing of Believers by the Spirit, is not only for the present, but to the Day
of Redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30. Grieve not the Holy Spirit, says Paul, whereby ye
are Sealed to the Day of Redemption. That is, 'till they come to the full
possession of that Glory which now they believe and hope for. And besides, this
Sealing of the Spirit is for the securing of Believers for the time to come,
John 14. 16, 17. Faith and Love, and other Graces of the Spirit, never sail
finally, but ever remain in their Habits, though sometimes lost in the
exercise. True Faith sets us in a state of Salvation; and we being put into
Christ by Faith, or ingraffed into him the Vine, are risen with him, and sits
with him in heavenly places, as you may see, Ephesians. 2. 5, 6. True Faith makes the
things to come, present; for it is the substance, ground, or confidence of
things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11. 1. 2. Faith
also Believes, that neither life, nor death, principalities, or powers, things
present, or to come, can never separate the Soul from the love of God, which is
in Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 8. 38, 39. So that (Beloved) the Assurance of
Believers, is not only for the present, but for the time to come. For they are
Sealed up to the Day of Redemption; even to that day in which Christ shall
fetch them to Glory. Who is there, my Brethren, that can reverse the Seal of
God, and make it void. Grace is an earnest Penny for Glory; and where God gives
the one, he will give the other. Psalm. 84. 11. For thou will give Grace and
Glory, etc. to them that walk uprightly with thee. If you can be assured, that
you have Grace for the present, you may be sure it shall be made up full in
Glory. There is no opposition that shall prevail to hinder it, for God has set
his as a Seal.

First, upon his Hand, to show that he does, and will keep them, 'till they
come to Glory, Isa. 41. 10. Fear not, for I am with you (says God) and I will
uphold you with the right hand of my righteousness: Behold, all they that are
incensed against thee, shall be ashamed and confounded, they shall be as
nothing, etc. Even they that contend with thee shall be as nothing, v. 13. Why
shall it be thus? The Answer is, For I the Lord thy God will hold thy right
Hand, saying unto thee, fear not, I will help thee, v. 49. Isa. 13. 14, 15.
Sion said, the Lord has forsaken me, and my God has forgotten me. Thus many
Believers say: But says God, Can a Woman forget her sucking Child, not to have
compassion on the Son of her Womb; yea, she may be so cruel as to forget; but I
(says the Lord) will not forget thee: For, behold, I have graven thee upon the
Palms of my Hands; or drawn thee, portrayed thee on my hands. A Metaphor taken
from some that used to tie something on their hand, to put them in mind of
Business they would not forget. God having set his People as a mark, or seal
upon his hand, he will never forget them: for they are not only set, but
engraven, which will not easily wear out. But,

Secondly, God has set them as a Seal upon his Breast, to love them; and He
will love them, and that for ever, John 13. 1. Our Love indeed may be deadned,
and decay toward God; we may leave our first Love in a great measure, Rev. 2.
4. But there is nothing that can, or shall deaden God's love toward his
Children Where God loves in Christ, he loves for ever; his Love is an
everlasting Love, Jer. 31. 3. But,

Thirdly, On his Shoulder, to support and uphold them, at all times, and in all
places and conditions, 'till he has brought them to glory. Says God, to (...)
disconsolated People, Isa. 40. 27, 28, 29. Why say thou, O Jacob, and
speak, O Israel, my way is hid from the Lord, and my Judgment is passed over
from my God. Why speak ye after this manner; this is but the surmisings of
Unbelief; have thou not known, have thou not heard, That the everlasting God,
the Lord, the Creator of the Earth, faints not, neither is weary; he gives
power to the faint, and to them that have no might, he increases strength. But,

Fourthly, God sets them as a Seal on his Heart: they lie near his Heart;
therrefore are they called the Beloved, yea, the dearly beloved of his Soul,
Jer. 12. 7. They that are sincere, shall enjoy and taste his love, and lie in
his sweet embraces; he will smile on them, with the Light of his countenance, for
they are the joy of his heart, and are in the most inward parts of it, Cant. 8.
6. Thus you see how Believers are assured, and secured, for the time to come.

Those that are in Christ, the rock of Ages, are secured for ever. And though
they meet with temptations, oppositions, and trials; yet they are but as Waves,
that dash upon them, but shall not ruin them, for they are kept by the power of
God, through Faith, unto Salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 4, 5.

Quest. But may some say; If it be thus, that Believers are assured for the
time to come; Why then do we pray for the forgiveness of sins.

Answ. First Consid. That as God has ordained the End, so also the Means; God
does, and will pardon Sin, for he has promised to do it, Isa. 55. 7. Therefore
we ought to pray for pardon through Christ, as a means ordained of God: For
these things I will be sought to by the House of Israel. We should pray as
David, who (though he was a justified Person, and secured in the Covenant for
Heaven) yet falling foully into Sin, he plyes the Throne of Grace hard. This was
his duty, and is ours in such a case, Psalm. 27. 10. Forgive mine Iniquities for
thy Names sake, for they are great. And Psalm 51. 1, 2. Have mercy upon me, O
God, etc. and wash me thoroughly in every part, and from every sin. Prayer is
an external means, ordained of God, to obtain Pardon, and other Mercies in;
therefore we are bid in every thing to make our Requests known to God, Phil. 4.
5, 6. But,

Secondly, Consider, When Believers pray for pardon of Sin, it is for a clearer
evidence of what they have already in Christ. To be pardoned and justified
through Christ, and so secured for Heaven, is one thing; and to know it, is
another: Persons may be in Christ, and pardoned, and so in a sure state for
Glory, and yet may be in the dark about it, and not know whether they be so, or
no. Now it is the duty of these, to seek after a clear knowledge of their state
in Christ, and the pardon of their sins, through his Blood. When Believers pray
for pardon, it is not because their pardon is not sure in Christ, but it is that
they may get a clearer apprehension of it, for their comfort.

Thirdly, Consider, that Prayer does not prejudice the stability or certainty
of a thing. Our Savior himself prayed for that which he was sure of, John 17.
9, 10. The Covenant stands fast for ever; and the promises of Pardon, and all
good in it, are most certain, and shall he fulfilled; for God will not alter
the thing that is gone out of his mouth, Psalm. 89. 27, 33, 34. Yet we must
seek, and pray, and put God in remembrance of his Promise, as he bids us; for
this prejudices not at all the certainty of the Promises, nor the stability of
the Covenant of Grace in Christ. Thus much for Information, and for this time.

Believers Sealed BY THE Spirit of Promise.
Fifth Sermon, from Ephesians. 1. the latter part of the 13 verse. In whom also,
after that ye believed, ye were Sealed with the Holy Spirit of Promise.
BRethren, The Point we are upon is this, viz.

Doct. The great privilege and mercy of being Sealed by the Spirit, is after
the duty and act of Believing. For the opening this Truth.

First, We have given you the nature of the Spirit's Sealing-work, and how it
is performed in the Soul.

Secondly, we have shown you, why none can be Sealed by the Spirit of Promise,
till they believe in Christ.

Thirdly, Whether all believers are Sealed by the Spirit, or no?

Fourthly, What the great Privileges of Sealed ones are? These things we have
opened largely. Now,

Fifthly, We are upon the Applicatory part of this discourse; and we have
already said something,

First, By way of Information, or Instruction in two things, which now I shall
not Repeat to you; but through God's assistance, proceed, and put a period to
this subject at this time.

2. Use, Is by way of Examinatition and Trial: Oh, examine your own Hearts
narrowly; see how it stands between God and your Souls; and whether you are
Sealed by the Spirit of Promise, or no? This is a matter to be strictly
searched into, and ought to be made your greatest business in the world.

Quest. How shall we know that we are in Christ by Faith, and so sealed by the
Holy Spirit of Promise?

Answ. By the Divine Operations of the Spirit within you, by the word, 2 Cor.
5. 17. 1 These. 1. 4, 5, 6. And by the proper genuine effects and Fruits of the
Spirit's Sealingwork; where the Spirit Seals, there be such proper genuine
effects and fruits thereof, that we may distinguish and discern it from all the
delusions of the Devil, and from all Impostures whatsoever. Oh! See if you can
find these in your Souls, or no; by which you may know, how it stands with you.

Quest. What are those proper genuine effects and fruits of the Spirits Sealing
Work.

First Effect is, inflamed Love to God and Christ, where the Spirit seals, that
soul cannot but love Christ dearly; for one Flame does not more naturally beget
another, than the Love of God in Christ does kindle the Love of the Soul to him
again. 1 John 4. 16. 19. We have known and believed, the Love God has unto us,
etc. v. 19. We love him because he has first loved us. God's Love in Christ in
the Fountain; ours the stream flowing from it: Love is the Life and Soul of
Religion, the Salt of the Sacrifice. Who can but love God, that is Sealed by
the Spirit, and have assurance of his Love to them, through Christ. When Christ
had forgiven much to poor Mary, who had sinned much, Oh, how greatly was her
Love inflamed to Christ, Luke 7. 47. She loved much, for much was forgiven her.
When Paul was assured by the Spirit that Christ loved him, Gal. 2. 20. Who
has loved me, and given himself for me. O how was his Love to Christ inflamed,
Phil. 3. 7, 8, 9. As Christ was fastened to the Cross, so was he to Paul's
heart by Love: Do you love Christ or no? Can you say as Peter, Thou that
know all things, know that I love thee. Joh. 21. 15. 16, 17.

Second Effect, is Care and Diligence to follow Christ, and do his Will; a
Soul Sealed by the Spirit, lies at the Foot of Christ, and is careful of his
Honor and Glory; his Care is to serve Christ, and in all things to please him;
the Sealed Believer runs after Christ, and is careful to keep in his Love, Jude
21. And to have respect to every part of his Sacred Will. That Soul which was
dull and careless before, is now active and lively in God's Service; Faith will
make a Man walk, but the Spirit's Sealing, or assurance will make him run; this
will be as wings to a Bird, as weights to a Clock, that will set all a running.
Is it thus with you or no? Do you run the way of God's Commands with Delight?
Psalm. 119. 34, 90.

Third Effect is, Humility of Soul before God, deep abasements, and great
humblings, use to follow the Spirit's Sealing; those that are Sealed, are
humble Souls, they say to Christ as the Disciples, Joh. 14. 22. Lord how is it
that thou will manifest thy self unto us, and not unto the World; Why me, Lord,
Why me, says the Soul: When God sealed the Covenant of old to Abraham, that
he would be his God, and his exceeding great reward, he fell on his Face at the
time, and was very humble, Genesis 17. 1. 2. A Soul never lies lower at the Foot
of God, nor abhors it self more than when God manifests his Love, and Seals it
up to it. O what am I, that God should be thus good to look upon me, and to
call me out of Darkness by his Grace.

Fourth Effect is, Spiritual Strength; for the Ways of the Lord are strength to
the upright. Prove. 10. 29. Increased Strength in the Soul follows the Sealing
of of the Spirit. When Believers are sealed, then new Power and Strength enters
into their Souls, they are strengthened with might in their inward Man. Col. 1.
11. The Saints find sensible Improvements of their Abilities for Duty. Cant. 6.
12. Is it thus with you.

Fifthly. This sealing will make us Praise God, those that are sealed by the
Spirit, have their Mouths filled with the high Praises of God; they cannot but
Pen a Soug of Praise, and bless the Name of that God, who has done so much for
them: Such say to their Souls as David, the sweet Singer of Israel, Psalm. 103.
1, 2, 3. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me bless his holy
Name, bless the Lord O my Soul, and forget not all his Benefits, who forgiveth
thy Iniquities, heals thy Diseases, and Crowns thee with Loving Kindnesses:
Paul Penned a doxology for this Blessing of Sealing, etc. Ephesians. 1. 3. His
solemn Thanksgiving was for this, as well as for other Blessings. But agaiu,

Sixth Effect, is great Longings, and inflamed Desires, after the full
enjoyment of Christ in glory. They who are Sealed by the Spirit, long to be in
Heaven, at home with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5. 4, 5. They that have tasted the love
of God, in Christ here, long to be drinking full draughts of it in Heaven,
Psalm. 42. 1, 2. My Soul thirsts for thee; when shall I appear before my God.
David did not only long to see God in his House, and in his Ordinances, but
also in his glory, where his Soul should be fully satisfied, Psalm. 17. 15.
There is nothing that makes Death so undesirable, as doubts and fears, that
hang about the Saints, and upon their Spirits, about their eternal State and
Condition. Persons under great doubts, don't long so much for Death, as those
who are Sealed and Assured: Where Persons evidences for Heaven are clear, and
their doubts resolved, they fear not Death, but go full Sail to Heaven, and
depart in great Peace, Psalm. 37. 37. Luke 2. 29, 30.

These are the Souls, that with Paul, desire to depart, and to be with Christ,
which is far better, or best of all, Phil. 1. 21, 22. If once (Beloved) the
great Question of our Interest in Christ be thoroughly decided, and be clear
between God and us, then we shall find Life the matter of Patience, and Death
the object of desire. But thus much by way of trial; the Lord set you as a Seal
upon his Heart, and upon his Arm, and clear up his Love and good will in Christ
to your Souls, that so you may know it, believe it, and admire it.

Third Use, by way of Exhortation. And,

First, You that are not Sealed yet by the Holy Spirit of Promise, be exhorted
and stirred up this Day, to seek out after it, That you may be assured of your
Peace with God, and the pardon of your Sins, through the Blood of Christ. Say
unto Christ, as the Spouse, Cant. 6. 8. Set me as a Seal upon thy heart, and as
a Seal upon thy arm. Pant after it, as David, Psalm. 35. 3. Say unto my Soul, I
am thy Salvation. Make this your greatest care and business in the world, next
to glorifying of God, to set things to rights, betwixt God and your Souls; and
to get an assurance, That he is your Salvation. Give all diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10, 11.

The Usurer says, It is good to be sure; the Purchaser says, It is good to be
sure; that his Title to Lands and Houses be sure and firm. The Tradesman says
it is good to be sure; and ought not Believers, above all, to say, That it is
good to be sure of Christ's Love, and of the goodness of our Title to heaven
and glory? For the love of Christ, heaven and glory, are infinitely above all
other things; therefore to be well assured of them, we should mind 'em with the
greatest care and diligence.

Motives.

First, Consider, That every wis Man will labor to get a good thing, and make
it as sure as he can, and will you be such Fools as not to mind and labor to
be sealed by the Spirit, and to be assured of Christ's Love to you, and of your
Title to Glory; it is good to be sure here, that when you dye, and have this
Earthly Tabernacle dissolved, you may know you have a Building with God, an
House not made with Hands eternal in the Heavens, 1 Cor. 3. 1, 2. 2dly.
Consider that there be many who will question your Interest in Christ, and
title to Eternal Lise: As first, the Devil, who is the Accuser of the Brethren,
a Fighter against the Saints, and a great Enemy to all their Peace and Comfort:
O Believers. he will follow you with many Temptations, and Objections about your
Eternal State, and raise many doubts in your Hearts if he cannot split you upon
the Rock of Presumption, (as he does Thousands) he will endeavor to ruin you on
the Rock of Despair. Peter tells us, that the Devil goes about like a roaring
Lion, seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5. 8. Blessed be God it is not whom he
will, but whom he may devour. Says Paul, 2 Cor 1. 11. Take heed lest Satan get
an advantage against you; for we are not ignorant of his Devices: The Devil has
many Stratagems and wiles to ruin poor Souls, and to disquiet the Hearts of
Believers, therefore labor to be well assured, that you may answer all the
false accusations of the Devil; but, Secondly, There is the World, which is
filled with Scoffers and Troublers of God's Israel, the wicked Ishmaels of the
World, they will call you Hypocrites, and question your Title to Heaven and
Glory; therefore seek after the sealing of the Spirit, and to be well assured
of your States and Conditions, respecting Christ and Glory, that under all the
false Censures of the World, you may approve your selves to God, and have
inward Peace, and Comfort, from this that your Hearts are right with God, and
that you are, and desire to be that before God, in reality, that you seem to be
in appearance before Men: My Righteousness, (says Job) I will hold fast, and
my Heart (viz. my Conscience) shall not condemn me as long as ever I live.

Though you condemn me for an Hypocrite, yet my Righteousness or Integrity I
will hold fast, and I will keep a good Conscience, that shall not condemn me as
long as I Live.

Thirdly, There is your own Hearts, that will join in too much with these
Accusers; there fore you had need labor to get a good Assurance, for if your
Hearts condemn you, God is greater than your Hearts, and knows, all things;
but if your hearts condemn you not, then have you Confidence toward God, 1
John 3. 20, 21. But,

Thirdly, Consider when you are sealed by the Spirit, or have got a good
Assurance, etc. you will go about good duties with great comfort, and delight;
you will resist Sin, and the Devil, Pray, Read, and Hear with great sweetness
and delight; you will bear Crosses, endure Trials with great Patience. Abraham
was to do a hard piece of Work, viz. to kill his only Son, bot having received
the Promises, he went about it cheerfully, Heb. 11. 17, 18. Says David, Psalm.
89. 15, 16. Blessed are they that hear the joyful Sound; why are they blessed?
They shall walk (says he) in the Light of thy Countenance, O Lord, in thy Name
shall they rejoice all the Day. But,

Fourthly, Consider that he whom God loves is a happy Man, though he knows it
not, i. e. be not fully assured of it; but he that knows he is beloved of God,
knows himself to be a happy Man, to be beloved of God in Christ is great
happiness; but to know that God does love us in Christ, is greater happiness.

Fifthly, Consider, that to he sealed, or assured by the Spirit, is very sweet
and comfortable to the Soul: This is the Manna, (says one) in the golden Pot,
the Wine of Paradise, which chears and revives the heart; how sweet is a Smile
from God, through Christ. The Sun, you know, is more chearing when it shines
out, than when it is hid in a Cloud, assurance is sweet in Life in Sufferings,
and in Death it self, it puts a Man in Heaven as it were, before his time. But,

Quest. May some say, What must we do to obtain the Sealing of the Spirit, or
Assurance.

Answer.

First, Direction. Labor to get some certain and infallible Signs and
Characters out of God's holy Word of saving grace, that you indeed are such as
God has changed by his Spirit, and wrought grace in your Hearts; the Spirit's
Sealing, or Assurance (says one) is made up of a practical Syllogism, where
the Word of God is the Major, a good Conscience the Minor, and the Spirit of
God the Conclusion; as for Instance, the word says, that he who loves God is
beloved of God. Conscience says, but I love God, says the Spirit, therefore
art thou beloved of God. As also, He that believes (says the word) shall be
Saved, John 3. 16. Conscience, but I do believe, therefore (says the Spirit)
thou shall be Saved. Now see if you can find these in your Hearts.

Secondly, Retire your selves into some private place alone, from the Eye of
the World, where none see you but God, and there narrowly search and try your
hearts. See how it stands between God and you: Have you Grace, or no; Faith, or
no, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Examine whether you be in the Faith, and Faith be in you. Oh!
be not Strangers to your selves, but commune daily with your own Hearts. This
is a good way to get Assurance: Many are Strangers to themselves, and look more
aborad upon others, than at home, into their own Hearts, Psalm. 4. 4, 5.

Thirdly, Be earnest with God at the Throne of Grace, Heb. 4. ult. Beg of him
to Seal you by his Spirit, and, through Christ, to discover your state and
condition to you; that so you may not be deceived, and go down to Hell with a
Lie in your right hand. Lord say to my Soul, I am thy Salvation, Psalm. 35. 3.
Plead thus daily with God, that so you may not lose your comfort on the one
hand, nor your precious Souls on the other. But,

Fourthly, Watch much over your own Hearts and Lives; be very careful of your
steps, and how you walk, that you grieve not the good Spirit. Let not your
Hearts run out too much upon the World, and be not too careless of your steps,
lest you offend God, Psalm. 39. 1. I said, I will look to my ways, etc. That is,
I resoved to do so. So Pray do you, for to him that orders his Conversation
aright, God will show his Salvation, Psalm. 50. 23.

Fifthly, Wait humbly and patiently upon the Lord, even 'till he shall shed
abroad his Love in your hearts, and set you as a Seal upon his heart. They that
wait upon God, shall have renewed strength, Isa. 40. 29, 30. Who is there among
you that fears the Lord, who walks in darkness, and see no light. Oh! trust
in the Name of the Lord, and stay, and wait upon him. I say to you, as David,
Psalm. 27. ult. Wait on the Lord, and be of good courage, for he shall
strengthen your hearts. Wait, I say, on the Lord: waiting Christians will lose
nothing, Mich. 7. 9.

Sixthly, Mourn over all those sins, that cause the Lord to withdraw, and hide
his Face from your Souls, Isa. 59. 2. Have you not grieved the Spirit, and been
guilty of too much Pride, Passion, Formality, and Unbelief? Oh! weep bitterly
for this, before the Lord; look upon Christ, whom you have pierced, Zech. 12.
10. Sights of a broken Christ, will cause a broken Heart. None can look upon
Christ truly, without brokenness of heart: he that looks upon Christ savingly,
will mourn for him, as a Man for his only Son. Mourning for an only Son, is the
greatest of Sorrow: our sorrow for sins against God, should exceed all other
sorrow. Though there be no merit, yet there is much mercy in a broken heart,
Psalm. 51. 17. 34. 18. They that mourn, shall be comforted, Matthew 5. 6.

Seventhly, In times of trouble and desertion, keep up Faith; and in times of
Communion keep up fear: when God has hid his Face, and you sit in darkness,
then stir up Faith; trust, and stay still upon him, Isa. 50. 11. And when God
shall manifest himself, and shine upon you, then keep up fear; a fear of
Jealousy, not of Distrust. Work out your Salvation with fear, Phil. 2. 12.
Blessed is the Man that seareth always,: Though my Beloved, we blame the Papists
for teaching People to doubt, and for making that a duty which is a Sin; yet we
are for a narrow search, and a holy Fear, and Trembling in trying of our
hearts, lest we be deceived in the end.

Eighthly, Make much of, and cherish the holy Spirit of God. Oh, do not resist
him, but comply with his Blessed Motions; it is the Spirit that is the
Comforter, John 14. 16. who seals up assurance to us, 2 Cor. 1. 22. When good
David would have assurance of God's Love, that his broken Bones might be
healed; he prayed earnestly that God would not take his holy Spirit from him,
Psalm. 51. 11. 12. David knew that it was the Spirit only that could make him
hear the Voice of Joy and Gladness. O make much of the Spirit, deal tenderly,
and kindly by him; do not grieve nor quench him, as too many do. Ephesians. 4. 30. 1
These. 3. 19.

Ninthly, As doubts arise in your Hearts, get them satisfied, and and as Sins
are committed in your Lives, get them pardoned. Are your Hearts, Christians,
filled with doubts and fears about the state of your Souls: O cry to God to
resolve and scatter them: Have you fallen into any Sin through Infirmity, and
Temptation: Cry for pardon through Christ, who is your Advocate, and Friend in
Heaven, and is there pleading for you. Heb. 7. 26. 1 John 2. 1, 2.

Tenthly, Keep a pure Conscience; O see that no Sin or guilt lie there
unrepented of; remember that God Seals no Pardon, before Faith and Repentance;
keep Conscience therefore pure, and void of offense, we are bidden, Heb. 10.
22. to draw near to God, with true Hearts, and in the full assurance of Faith;
having our Hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience, etc. He that allows
himself in Sin, and keeps not a good Conscience, cannot draw nigh to God in the
full assurance of Faith: But,

11. Lastly, Lie at the Pool of Ordinances; frequent much the Word and
Sacraments, that are God's Appointments, in which he has promised to meet his
People; do not stay away from Hearing, nor from the Table of the Lord, at no
time, as many do, for every small frivolous thing. The way to meet with God,
and to have an assurance of his Love, to be Sealed by his Spirit, is to wait
upon him in his Ordinances, and to remember him in his ways, Isa. 64. 5. The
Ordinances of God, are the banqueting House, where God displays the Banner of
his Love, and seals it up to his People, Cant. 2. 4. To be found sincerely in
the way and use of God's Ordinances is the way to be set as a Seal upon
Christ's heart.

2. Branch. You that are Sealed and assured by the Spirit, of the love of God
in Christ to you, Oh! be exhorted.

First, to endeavor to keep the assurance you have; as we must labor, to get
it, so to keep it. It is a Mercy we should beware of losing; it is the comfort
of your life, and 'twill be sweet in death: What comfort is there preserable to
this, which flows from the Sealing of the Spirit, or the Assurance of God's
love in Christ. Now that you may have much of this Sweetness, and Comfort,
keep, and hold fast that assurance which you have through Grace obtained.

Question.

How, or by what means may we do this?

Answer.

First, By renewing your Repentance often for Sin, you cannot live without Sin,
therefore live not without Repentance; God often clothes such with the Garments
of Joy, and Comfort, who tumble themselves in Ashes, as it were, for their
Sins. Blessed are they that mourn; for they shall be comforted, Matthew. 5, 6.
And that are humble, for they shall he exalted. James 4. 9, 10.

Secondly, Fear the hidings of God's Face, and the withdrawing the Light of his
Countenance, from you; David feared much, therefore prayed much, Hide not thy
Face from thy Servant, etc. Psalm. 27. 9. Fear also to offend God by doing of
any Evil, beware of every Sin, and of every Temptation to Sin, either from the
Devil, the World, or your Hearts. When tempted to Sin, say as Joseph did, How
can I do this great Evil, and sin against God, Genesis 39. 9. Sin is an enemy, it
hides God's Face from us, and wounds our Souls; 'twill break our Bones,
therefore fight against it. 1 Pet. 2. 11.

Thirdly, Renounce all trust, and Confidence in your selves, in your own Works,
and Righteousness; depend alone upon God in Christ, and labor to be found in
him, having on his pure Righteousness. Paul desired to renounce and leave all.
to be found in Christ, Phil. 3. 7, 8. Where is the Christian like Paul, that
has no Confidence in the Flesh, or in their own Abilities; but trust alone in
God, who gives his all things to enjoy. 2 Cor. 1. 9.

Fourthly. Study Sanctification more, both in Heart and Life; they must follow
after Holiness, that would see God, Heb. 12. 14. They that perfect Holiness in
the fear of the Lord, shall certainly see God, and behold his Salvation, Psalm.
50. 23. Oh! then be found in the constant and daily exercise of Grace, and
perseverance in Holiness and Piety, 2 Cor. 7. 1, 2. 1 Pet. 1. 15. But,

Fifthly, Take heed of nourishing Jealousies, and Suspicions of God in your
hearts; fear not his Love to you, but yours to him. Some cry out, Oh! the Lord
does not love me; for he has set me as a mark for his Arrows, and has forsaken
me; he is my Enemy, and I fear he will damn me at last, after all. What
dreadful thoughts are these of God; even that God, who keeps covenant and
mercy with his for ever, Psalm. 89. 33, 34. Oh! harbor not these Jealousies of
God. If you find them in you at any time, see you check them, for God abides
faithful, and his love is the same for ever, Jer. 29. 11, 12. I know the
thoughts that I think toward you, says the Lord, they are thoughts of peace,
and not of evil, to give you an expected end. My thoughts are not your
thoughts, nor my ways, your ways, says God, Isa. 55. 8, 9, 10, 11. But

Sixthly, Stand up for the Truths of God against all Opposers; and for the
Faith once delivered to the Saints, Jude v. 3. Much of God's Glory lies in his
Truth, and they that stand up for his Truth, as it is in Jesus, and bear
witness for it in the World, are, and may be sure, they shall be happy, 2 Timothy
2. 12. But,

Seventhly, Have a care of Sinning; but especially of sinning presumptuously
against Light and Knowledge. Pray as David, Psalm. 19. 11, 12. To be kept from
all sin, but especially from presumptuous sins, that they have no dominion over
you. Sin is that which provokes God, and will wound your Consciences, spoil
your Peace, and mar your Evidences, and Assurance for Heaven; therefore strive,
and watch against all Sin, Jer. 44. 4. Matthew. 26. 41.

Eighthly, Be much in Prayer to God, through Christ. Pray often and earnestly,
like Jacob, for the Spirit of Adoption, to Seal you up to the day of
Redemption. It Is the Spirit must Seal you, and reveal to you, the great things
of God, that appertain to the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 2. 10. Oh! Pray for more
Grace, more Faith, more Love, and for more Assurance, Luke 17. 5. Psalm. 4. 6.
36. 10.

Ninthly, Be tender of God's Honor and Glory in the World; seek and study that
above all, 1 Cor. 10. 31. Our dear Lord Jesus, as Man, abode in his Father's
love, by being zealous for his glory, and so may you this way. Let the zeal of
God's House eat you up, John 2. 17. Oh! study every way to advance his glory;
for they that advance God's glory here, he will advance their joy and comfort in
Christ, 1 Samuel 2. 30.

Tenthly, Be very humble. Oh! have a care of Pride; for Pride estrangeth the
Soul from God, and God from the Soul. He beholds the Proud afar off, James 4.
6. but gives more grace to the humble. When you are high in Assurance, and have
received much from God, Oh! then be low in Humility; for God resists the
Proud. Paul had a great assurance, being Sealed by the Spirit; yet (says one)
he baptizeth himself with this name, the chief of Sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15, 16.
The Jewel of Assurance, I am sure, is best kept in the Cabinet of a humble and
low Spirit. Oh! be humble in your own eyes, and lie low, then God will exalt
you. But,

Secondly, You that are Sealed by the Spirit, and have Assurance, be exhorted,
not only to keep it, but to improve it, for God's glory, your own comfort, and
the good of others.

Quest. How shall we do this in a right manner?

Answ. First, by encouraging of those poor Souls, who are yet in their Sins,
and in an unconverted State. Oh! tell them how sweet this hidden Manna is, and
what a good Master Christ is, whom you love and serve. Oh! persuade Sinners by
the love and mercy of God in Christ, to leave their sins, and inroll their
Names in his Family: use what Arguments you can with them; for he that wins
Souls is wise, Prove. 11. 30. Such shall shine in glory, Dan. 12. 5, 6.

Secondly, Comfort as you can, weak Christians, who have not the Sealings of
the Spirit; that you have, I say to you as Christ said to Peter, Luke 22. 32.
When you are converted, strengthen your Brethren: Comfort them that are
struggling, and ready to sink.

Thirdly, Walk more heavenly than ever; look to your Hearts, Lives, and
Actions; see that you walk as Children of the light, not as the foolish, but as
the wise, redeeming all time for God, Ephesians. 5. 15, 16. But,

Fourthly, Improve it by a cheerful walking and serving of God; Come before him
with gladness and singing, Psalm. 100. 1, 2. It Is for Persons condemned to hang
down their heads, and be sad: but you are pardoned and justified through
Christ, therefore rejoice, Romans 5. 1, 2. 1 Cor. 6. 11. Shall Drunkards,
Swearers, Whoremongers, and wicked Wretches rejoice, who are just upon the
brink of Hell, and are condemned already, John 3. 18. and will you that are
Believers be sad. Oh! cheer up, lift up your Heads and Rejoice. I say to you as
Jonadab to Amnon, 2 Samuel 13. 3. Why art thou, being a Kings Son so lean from
day to day, so, why are you, Believers, being the King's Sons, and Daughters of
Heaven, so sad, Why do you not rejoice more in Christ, and in your blessed
Estate, being Sealed, and assured by the spirit; Oh rejoice in the Lord, and
again I say rejoice. Phil. 4. 4. How merry is the Bird, how musical does it
sing, that knows not where to have, and pick up its next Crumb, and will you be
sad who are assured of God's Love to you, and not rejoice in it. I will rejoice
(faith Habakkuk in the God of my Salvation. Hab. 3. 17, 18. But,

Fifthly and lastly, and so I shall conclude. Let your Hearts be much endeared
to God by Love; he has done great things for you in Christ, and bestowed much
upon you. Oh, see that your Hearts run out in Love toward him, Psalm. 31. 23.
Oh love the Lord, all ye his Saints; it was a Saying of Austin, I would hate my
Soul if I did not find it loving God. Whom should you love but God? Has he done
so much in you, and for you, and will you not Love Him? Oh give him your Hearts
and best Affections, and show your Love to him by obeying his Commands; If ye
Love Me (says Christ) Keep my Commandments, John 14, 15, 16: Thus improve your
Grace and Assurance, that you may glorify the Name of that God, who has
called you out of Darkness, into this mavelous Light; and Sealed you by his
Spirit. Thus much for this Time, and this Text; the Lord give you
Understanding, in all these things. Amen.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
ALL Sorts of Second-hand Books bought and Sold; as Mathematical, Arithmetical,
Philosophical, Astrological, Chemical, Chyrurgical, Physical Poetical, Travels,
Voyages, and Divinity; choice Bibles; where is to be had Money for any Study,
or Parcles of Books; by Caleb Hooker, at the Sign of the Muzeled Bear, on
Wapping-Wall, near Pelican-Stairs.


