Primitive Christianity CONTINUED, IN THE Faith and Practice Of the PEOPLE
called QUAKERS: BEING IN ANSWER To a Pamphlet, Entitled, Primitive Heresy,
etc. And which may serve as an Appendix to a Book, Entitled, An Antidote
against the Venom of the Snake in the Grass, by George Whitehead.

Joseph Wyeth.

Prove. 24. 8. He that Devises to do Evil, shall be called a Mischievous
Person. Psalm. 140. 3. They have sharpened their Tongues like a Serpent: Adders
Poison is under their Lips. Selah. London, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, next
Door to the Meeting House in White-Hart-Court in Gracieus-street, and at the
Bible in Leaden-hall-street near the Market, School.

THE PREFACE.
Friendly Reader,
THE Ensuing Leaves, which contain our Vindication against the Black Attempts
of a Necessitous and Malicious Priest, in a Piece of his, Emtituled, Primitive
Heresy, etc. are Commended to thy Perusal; wherein thou will see the
Consonancy and Constancy of our Principles to the Holy Scriptures Asserted, in
Opposition to the Charges of Heresy, and New Representation by him Falsely, but
not first laid: For it has often been the Practice of our Adversaries, when we
have brought forth our True Testimonies, to say, our Representation was New.

But, as this Man seems to Love Controversy, in Opposition to Peace and Quiet,
because he may find his Bread or Base Ends supplied by the Contest; and to make
use of False Glosses to Color the Pretended Occasion: So I Esteem it a Duty to
wipe off the Dirt he has flung at us herein; for which, though I have none of
his mean Profits; yet I can assure thee, Reader, I have Satisfaction in so
doing.

The Method I have herein taken is this, I have from the Year 55. or there
about, brought in a Succession, diverse Testimonies against the Particular
Charges; which do at once show, that what we now Profess, is no other than what
we did: The Quotations all speak the Minds of the Persons, whose Names they
bear: I say this, because those Quotations of our Friends, which this Man
brings, does not, nor can, after the Barbarity he has used toward them, of
which I have herein given diverse Instances.

I need Preface no further, than to Acquaint thee, that as the Author Styles
himself from the Snake in the Grass, I also have frequently Styled him so; not
being willing to Abridge him a Title of his own choosing, which fitly Expresses
the Workings of that Deceit, which was first began by the great Enemy of Man,
the Devil; from whose Temptations and all Deceit, howsoever working; The Spirit
of Truth, which comes by Jesus Christ can only be thy Safe Guide: To this thou
art in all Sincerity Commended.

THE CONTENTS.
I. THE Incarnation of Christ; that is, the Union of the Divine and Humane
Natures, in his being made Flesh, Asserted and Believed. p. 12 II. The Truth
and Reality of his Death and Sufferings, Asserted and Believed. p. 19 III. The
Resurrection and Future Judgment, Believed and Testified to. p. 25 IV. Baptism
and the Supper spoken to. p. 32. Marriage owned, and Fornication Preached down
and denied. p. 39
V. Magistracy and Government owned. p. 46 No Stiffness in not taking off Hats:
Civility acknowledged to all. p. 48
The Conclusion. p. 49 Misrepresentation fixed. p. 51 Our Ancient Belief, no
Modern Representation. p. 53 Expostulation with W. Penn Considered. ibid.
Primitive Christianity CONTINUED, etc.
SECT. I.
LOVE to Truth, not Controversy, has drawn this from me; for from a
wellgrounded Satisfaction, Knowledge and Belief (according to my measure) in
the Manifested Principles of True Religion, I could with more ease have been
pleased to Enjoy that quiet which results from the Practice of them; and which
it has Pleased the Government to allow to Persons quictly, though differently
Opining. To the Disturbance of the Quiet, thus allowed, there has of late
appeared an Expulsed Clergyman, boasting himself to be some great one, and
indeed in all the Qualities of Venom, Slander and Abuse he is so, his first
(for what I know) Libel against us, The Snake in the Grass, shows this; and
this he makes the Epoch of his Scandalous Practice in his succeeding Scurrilous
Pamphlets, which his Sculking Leisure and Malice Furnishes him with Opportunity
to multiply; for, from being an Expulsed Priest, he makes it a Trade for Bread,
and in part to repair those Losses which he charges the present Establishment
to have brought upon him: What he says of himself is, That he Fights for his
Soul, the Joy and Union of Christendom, the Honor of Religion, and Pri. Her.
p. 20.
the Glory of God. But upon better Information this appears to be False, and
that he seeks nothing less than those good things he speaks of, but to varnish
ill Attempts with Specious Titles, and the Confusion of a Church and Nation,
with a Prayer Dis. Showing who they are that are now qualified, etc. p. 33.
for a Removal of High Places is no new thing. But to come more parcularly to
his Outrage against us: He is pleased to Charge us with Follies, Crimes,
Errors and Heresies of very many sorts; and herein has gone so far, that, I
think, there are few that know and impartially consider us, but know that it is
False, though Attested, Verbo sacerdotis, in the disguise of a Snake, etc. It
is true, it is no new thing for particular Persons or Communities of Men to be
Charged with Blackest Crimes, Greatest Errors, Schisms and Heresies. An
Instance of this kind, and which comes to our present purpose, is seen in the
Apology of the Church of England, for her separation from Rome; in the Fifth
Article there is numbered up some of the Crimes which were Charged upon her; the
Article it self follows:

Clamant hodie passim nos omnes esse haereticos, disccssisse a side and novis
persuasionibus atque impiis dogmatis, Ecclesiae causam dissipavisse: nos
veteres and jam Doctrina and Politia Ecclesiae Anglicanae, etc. p. 3. Ar. 5.
olim Damnatas Haereses ab inferis redivivas restituere, and novas sectas and
inauditos furores disseminare: jam etiam in contrarias factiones and sententias
distractos esse, nec ullo pacto potuisse unquam inter nos ipsos convenire: esse
homines and gigantum more, Deo ipse bellum facere, and prorsus sine omninuminis
cura, cultuque vivere: nos omnia rectefacta despicere, non virtutis disciplina
uti ulla, non legibus, non moribus, non jus, non aequum, non rectum colere; ad
omnia flagitia laxare fraenoe, and populum ad omni genus licentiae atque
libidinis provocare: nos id agere and querere, ut monarchiae and regnorum
status evertantur, and omnia ad popularem temeritatem, and imperitae
multitudinis dominationem ridigantur: nos ab Ecclesiae Catholicae tumultuose
defecisse, and nefario Schismate orbem terrarum concussisse, and pacem
communem, atque otium Ecclesiae publicum conturbasse: utque olim Dathan and
Abiram Arone and Mose, Number. 16.
ita nos hodie a Romano Pontifice, sine ulla satis justa causa secessionem
fecisse; priscorum Patrum and veterum conciliorum anctoritatem pronihilo
putare: Caeremonias antiquas a patribus and proavis nostris multis jam Seculis,
bonis moribus, and melioribus temporis approbatus, temere and insolenter
abrogasse; and nostra tantum privata anctoritate, injussu sacri and Ocumenici
consilii, novos in Ecclesiam ritus invexisse: atque ista nos omnia non
Religionis causa, sed contention is tantum studio fecisse. Se autem nihil
prorsus immutasse, omnia vero ut ab Apostolis tradita, and ab antiquissimis
Patribus approbata fuerint, ad hunc usque diem per tot secula retinuisse.

They cry every where this day, We are all Heretics, departed from the Faith,
have rent the Unity of the Church with now and ungodly Tents, that we have
Revived and Restored the old Damned Heresies, have sown new and unheard of
Sects and Madnesses, and are already broke into Factions and Divisions, nor by
any agreement can never be united among our selves: Impious Men of monstrous
Manners, making War against God, and living without all Worship and Fear of the
Godhead: That we despised every right Way, and used no Virtuous Discipline, nor
loved either Laws, Manners, Religion, Right or Equity, but let loose the Rein
to all manner of Wickedness, and Provoked the People to every kind of
Licentiousness and Lust, and sought and did this that the State of Kingdoms and
Monarchies might be over-turned and reduced under the Rule of the Rash and
Unskillful Multitude: That we have Tumultuously Separated from the Catholic
Church, and have shook the Earth with a Nefarious Schism, and have troubled the
common Peace and Quiet of the Church, and as Dathan and Abiram from Aaron and
Number. 16.
Moses, so we this day from the High Priest have made separation without any
cause sufficiently just: That we account for nothing the Authority of the
Ancient Fathers and Old Counsels, that we have rashly and insolently Abrogated
the Ancient Ceremonies and Good Manners which by or Fathers and Forefathers
for many Ages were Approved; and only by our private Authority have brought new
Rites into the Church, no Holy and Ocumenick Counsel Commanding; and that we
have done all these things, not for the cause of Religion but only in a Study
of Contention: But that she is not all changed, but that all things, as
delivered by the Apostles, and as they have been Approved by the Ancient
Fathers, do through so many Ages remain to this very day.

This, with much more in the Apology, is said to have been the Charge of Rome,
and yet, I do not doubt but this Man will readily discharge Her from these
these alleged Crimes. Hence we may have at least this Consolation, That we are
not therefore Villanously Criminal, because Villanously Charged; and to show
that we are not so, there has been already Published an Answer to that
Venomous Piece of Villanny, The Snake in the Grass; wherein is also ome notice
taken, and answer made to some noted Passages in two other Scandalous
Pamphlets, one Entitled, Satan Disrobed, etc. and the other, A Discourse for
Water Baptism, etc. which Answer is Entitled, An Antidote against the Venom of
the Snake, etc. by George Whitehead; in which Answer is a Discovery of the
Falsity and Envy of this Loose Charger.

But as to what is here advanced, being what he says he Promised upon this
Subject, in hopes that the Quakers, seeing the Prim. Her. P1..
original of their Errors, may bethink themselves and return from whence they
have fallen. I do tell him, that whatsoever his Promise was his Performance is
very bad; because, what he assigns for Original Errors, are but his Coppied
Fasiti^s upon us (having been Charged by our Enemies many Years past) and
therefore we are very far from returning to Communion with one, whose
Fellowship is with the Father of Lies. As to the Oral Traditive Faith, by which
he would Confirm Baptism, though said to be learned within 150 Years after
Christ, it is, what will not do it, for the same Antiquity and pretended
Authority may be brought for Mistakes more noted; But besides, Faith is the
Gift of God, to whom we must look for it, and not to the Mouths of Men: Indeed
if he can absolutely determine the question by the Scriptures, the Work is
done, and then there is no need of any doubtful help; but if not, it will not
avail, though he bring many Clouds of such Witnesses in the latter Ages; and the
Reason is plain, because Scripture is (what he calls his Rule) not to be tried
by them, but they by it, and if found contradictory thereto, our Dissent cannot
be Criminal: And notwithstanding he calls this A Cavil we learned from Elder
Dissenters; we are not afraid to stand by it, and therefore pay little
Reverence to those, nor any thing not purely Apostolical.

Here he says, The late Representations of Quakerism, has given it quite
another Turn and Face than it ever had before; if he had added Ibid. p. 2.
[that he knew of] it had shown some Modesty, but since he has shown none, I
will tell him, he is Dogmatically False; for our Principles are now no other
than what they were when we were first a People, for Truth changes not; and
this, I hope, will appear beyond Contradiction, from the many Quotations, I
shall have occasion to bring in, out of many of our former and latter Books; so
that the Ground of what he calls our Schism (and which I say is our just
Dissent) will consequently appear as large as before.

He says, He hopes our Conversion is nigh, or if already Converted, our full
Reconciliation to the Church. He should have told us what Church he means; for
if he means into Communion with himself, that is Scandalous (to say, no worse
at present) if he means to the Church of England, I cannot think she would send
a Rebellious Son to call us: And here I will take opportunity to Confute a
Lying Boast, I have heard; and which is favored by what himself has said
above, viz. He has brought over a great many from Us: I know not, nor cannot
hear (and I have inquired) of one Silly Quaker, who is yet so Ignorant, as to
go from our Allowed Meetings, to his Unallowed One: And therefore, when this
his pretended Service is urged, as an Argument for his Atonement and
Reconciliation, I can assure them the Argument is False; and there is great
Reason it should, for God advances not Truth by Pie frauds, much less Impie
frauds.

He changes Style; and now Fawns, calling W. Penn, The Valuable Mr. Penn. At
the end of his Book he changes again, and would there Insinuate, This his now
Valuable Mr. Penn to be there very weak; of which in its place.

I shall here a little interrupt the Thread of my Discourse upon this Pamphlet
of Primitive Heresy, etc. and bestow a few Words relating to his Pamphlet or
Discourse of, Who are Qualified to Administer Baptism and the Lord's Supper,
together with the Cause of Episcopacy. But I shall not take much notice of it,
not knowing any of us that want his Information in the first, and as for the
last, I shall leave it to that Community to whom more particularly it is
directed; only thus much by the way I shall first observe, that I take this
Pamphleteer to be no proper Administrator (notwithstanding his noise for the
Church) hebeing a Schismatic and Disobedient to (what he owns) the Jus divinum
of his Bishop. And next, that the noise he makes against us for Schismatics,
and offers A Discourse showing who they are that are now Qualified, etc. p. 18.
33.
against us, That Idolatry does not Unchurch, and that Great things ought to be
borne rather than run into it. It will not be foreign to the present Case to
give the Eighth Article of the Churches Apology beforementioned, wherein are
Reasons for their Separating from Communion with Rome. I hope the pertinency of
the Citation will atone for its length:

Nos vero cum proximis isti viginti annis, tot millia nostrorum fratrum inter
exquisitissimos cruciatus Testimonium Apol. p. 5. Ar. 8.
dixerint veritati, and Principes, cum fraenare cuperent Evangelium, multa
moliendo nihil egerint; and totus sum prope terrarum orbis ad aspiciendam lucem
oculos incipiat aperire; satis jam dictam and defensam putamus esse nostram
causam: cumque res ipso prose lo quatur, non multis opus esse verbis. Nam si
pontifices ipsi vellent, aut etiam si possent, rem ipsam secum, and initia
progressusque Religionis nostrae cogitare, quemadmodum sua pene omnia nullo
impelente, sine ulla humana open ceciderint: nostra vero invitis ab initio
Imperatoribus, invitis tot regibus, invitis pontificibus, invitis prope
omnibus, in crementa ceperint; and paulatim in omnes terras propagata fuerint,
atque etiam in postremo in regnum jam aulas and palatia pervenerint, vel haec
ipsa satis illis magna esse possent; Deum ipsum pronobis propugnare, and
ipsorum conatus de Coelo ridere, and eam essevim veritatis, quam nec humanae
vires nec inferorum portae possunt convellere. Non enim insaniunt hodie tot
civitates liberae, tot Reges, tot Principes, quia a sede romana defecerunt, and
se potius ad Christi Evangelium adjunxerunt.

But we, for these past Twenty Years, have had many Thousands of our Brethren
given Testimony to the Truth in exquisite Torments; and Princes, when they
sought to stop the Gospel, though with much Labor, effected nothing; and now
near all the Earth begin to open their Eyes to see the Truth, and we think our
Cause enough spoken to and defended; for if the Romanists will, or are able, to
consider the thing with themselves, and think upon the Beginning and Progress
of our Religion, how that theirs almost no one forcing, and without any humane
help is fallen, but ours, from the beginning, against the Will of Emperors,
against the Will of Kings, against the Will of Popes, and against the Will of
almost all, has received increase, and by degrees has been Propagated in all
Lands; and after Kingdoms, it is now come into Courts and Palaces, THESE
THINGS ALONE may be to them a great Indication, that GOD HIMSELF HAS FAUGHT
FOR US, and has Laughed from Heaven at all their ENDEAVORS, and such is the
force of Truth, that neither Humane Strength nor the Gates of Hell can pluck it
up. Neither are so many free Cities, so many Kings, and so many Princes MAD,
because they have separated from the Sea of Rome, and rather joined themselves
to the Gospel of Christ. Thus the Apology.

If I should now thoroughly show, in how many Instances the above Description
has been our Case, it would swell this to an undue Bulk; and I should be
obliged to remember things; which time, and a better aministration, have laid
to Sleep: Not but that any of middle Age, and tolerable Observation are
capable of calling to mind a great many instances wherein the Parallel Suits;
and here I am the rather willing to leave it, not judging it meet to
Recriminate upon a whole Body, for the Faults of an Excluded Member; who, while
he is crying out against Schism and Schismatics, forgets his own Separation
and Disobedience from a Power which he pretends to own, of which possibly more
anon. What I particularly now make my Business, and to which I return, is to
consider his Scurrilous Pamphlet, Entitled, PRIMITIVE HERESY REVIVED, etc. by
which he has Charged us, the People called Quakers, in Faith and Practice,
with diverse Errors, the chief of which are, that we deny the Incarnation of
Christ, the Truth and Reality of his Death and Sufferings, the Resurrection and
Future Judgment, that we deny Marriage, and Preach up Fornication, contemn
Magistracy and Government; which Charges, though of the greatest and foulest
kind, he will not, as himself says, take up the Readers time to prove; Prim.
Her. Rev. p. 2.
but refers him to his former Books, which have been already answered, and his
Abuses and Falsities therein laid at his Door. So that if I resolved to take
his Example: I need say no more, than that these his Charges are, near all of
them, already answered by George Whitehead, in the Antidete aforesaid, and
refer the Reader thither, and this I might the rather do, because, for Forty or
more Years past, there have been frequent and repeated Accounts of our Belief,
in some or other of these things, as they have happened to be made Charges upon
us by our Adversaries during that time: But I am contented for this once Actum
Agere, and to bring into this, out of several of our Ancient Friends Books,
some account under each of these heads, whereby the Reader may see, that our
Faith and Practice herein, since we have been a People, has been agreeable and
consonant to the Holy Scripture; and do so continue to this day: And if upon
inquiry, we are found agreeable to that; I shall not matter whether we be so or
not, to the controverted Records of uncertain, and unsound Antiquity: Nor shall
we need be at all affrighted, if we do find our selves to differ; from what is
to be found under the specious names of Ignatius, Policarp, etc. though living
within 150 Years after Christ, nor under the great names of them called Fathers
in the succeeding Ages; of which Subject many have written, and may have
perhaps evinced, that the great uncertainty of not being deceived by them, and
the little advantage if not so; will not nor cannot admit us to value them so,
as to be determined by them rather than by the Holy Scriptures, which in this
Nation, is commonly called the RULE of Faith. And though this Man to divert his
cares, his fears, and to supply his wants, may spend his time in Catalogues of
Heresies, and the Stale Tracts of uncertain Persons, to enable him to club
Quotations, and clap them upon the back of Charges taken from our professed
Adversaries, from whom in part, he receives his Bread; yet I doubt not, but to
bring in such a train of Evidence in these Questions wherein we are said to be
Heretical, as will sufficiently evidence to the Impartial Reader, that the
Charge, as as well as the Man, is false; and that our belief in these Articles
is Scriptural: The Method I purpose to take herein, is this, I shall set down
in a methodical order, the several Testimonies under each distinct Head,
according to the priority of time in which they were written, so that upon a
short view, the Reader may have recourse to each.

Some Testimonies to Christ Jesus, as the Son of God, and come in the Flesh.
SECT. II.
Page 2, 3, 4. WE Profess and Confess Books Titles
Faith in God the Father, and in Jesus A Confession and Profession of Faith in
God, etc. 1651. by Rich. Farnsworth.
Christ his Eternal Son, the True God, and in the Holy Spirit: And we do
acknowledge the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament to be the Words of
God. -- And there is none other Gods but One, and this is God the Father which
we own, Isa. 44. 8. 1 Cor. 8. 4. John 10. 30, 31 Mark 12. 29, 30, 31, 32, 33,
34. 1 Cor. 8. 5, 6. Romans 4. 25. Isaiah 45. 6. Ephesians. 4. 4, 5, 30. John 4. 24.
Phil. 1. 1, 29.
and Profess Faith in, and in Jesus Christ his Eternal Son, who said, I and my
Father are One (upon which saying the Jews took up Stones to Stone him) yet
notwithstanding the same Christ that the Jews hated, we love, belive in, and
own, who was delivered up to be Crucified for our Offenses, and was raised
again for our Justification, who is the True God: And him we Own and Profess
Faith in, and in the Holy Spirit, God; together equal with the Father and the
Son, One God over all Blessed for ever. And unto us (and all True Christians)
the Saints in Christ Jesus. It is given in the Behalf of Christ, not only to
Believe on him, but also to Suffer for his Name sake.

P. 10, 11. VII. In the next place, truly to know this Lord Jesus The One Good
Way of God. Printed 1661. Written by Rich Hodden.
Christ come in the Flesh, as the New and Living Way to the Father, the
Immanuel (God with us) making the Atonement by the Blood of his Cross, to have
all things subject unto him, his Servants in him, and he in them; which is the
great Mystery of Godliness, his from Ages and Generations until the fullness of
time, and then Manifested in the Flesh, Justified in the Spirit, Believed on in
the World, and Received up into Glory; which none of the Wise Men of the World
ever knew, or can know by all their Learned Skill of Earthly Wisdom; nor any
Man that Lives after the Flesh, or satisfies himself with Hearing, Reading,
Telling or Talking of him, or concerning what he or his Apostles did, said or
suffered; as those that vainly take his Name into their Mouths (on most
occasions of their Invented Ways) but know him not, neither by his Divine
Nature nor Name, nor HOW GOD AND MAN BECAME ONE CHRIST JESUS, how that which
may be known of God is manifest in Man, how he is The Wonderful Counselor, the
Mighty God, the Prince. of Peace: The Author and Finisher of our Faith. How he
saves his People from their Sins, is the Reconciler without Imputation of Sin:
How he is Formed in his Servants, and Cleanses them by his Blood from all Sin
and Unrighteousness; how they take up the Cross and follow him, or what the
Cross is; how the Body becomes Dead because of Sin, and the Spirit Alive for
Righteousness sake: How they are Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his
Bones; how he is their Loader, and Captain of Salvation, made perfect through
Sufferings: How they are Baptized into his Death, and Saved by his Life: How
the Union is perfected in all the Parts and Members of his Body the Church:
What the Church is, or how his Body; or what it is to eat his Flesh, and drink
his Blood; without which (as himself said) we have no Life in us: How every
Knee shall bow to him, of things in Heaven, in Earth, and under the Earth; and
confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the Glory of God the Father: How he is
that Blessed and Only Potentate, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the Head of
all Thrones and Dominions, and every Name that is named.

P. 2, 13, 14. This is answered in part already, by what is said to A
Vindication of the Principles and Practices of the People called Quakers, 1665
By Geo. Bishop.
the former Question, which in effect is this -- That that which enlightens,
which shows a Man his Heart, his Reins, and tries them, which reproves; which
makes manifest, is Christ the Light; which Christ is the same that was born of
the Virgin Mary, which was made Flesh, which sits at the right Hand of God,
which was Crucified, Dead, rose again from the Dead; and ascended far above the
Heavens, that he might fill all things, who when he was in the days of his
Flesh with his Disciples, said, It is expedient for you that I go away; for
John 16. 7. 8, 9, 10, 11.
if I go not away the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart I will
send him unto you; and when he is come, he will reprove the World of Sin, of
Righteousness, and of Judgment; of Sin, because they believe not in me; of
Righteousness, because I go to my Father; and of Judgment, because the Prince
of the World is Judged. So that which reproves the World of Sin, of
Righteousness, and of Judgment, the Spirit of Truth, which proceeds from the
Father, which testifies of Christ, which guides into all Truth, is the thing
that now is to be looked to; Christ in you, the Hope of Glory; the Mystery hid
from Ages and Generations, but now made manifest to his Saints; the Riches of
the Glory of the Mystery: Now the Lord is that Spirit -- And when the Spirit of
Truth is come, he will John 16. 13. 2 Cor. 3. 17.
guide you into all Truth.

Christ and the Light which is within, are not Two, but One; yet are Ibil. p.
15.
they not so One, as that where Christ is, there is the Body that Suffered at
Jerusalem; that was Flesh; that proceeded from the Virgin Mary, that died, was
buried, rose again, and ascended, for in that he sits at the right Hand of
God. But where the Light is, there is Christ, which was in the Beginning with
God; by whom all things were made that was made. In whom was Life, and the Life
was the Light of Men, John 1. 2, 3, 4.

P. 11, 12. It is objected against us, who are called Quakers, That Concerning
the Sum or Substance, etc. Isaac Pennington.
we deny Christ (and look not to be Saved by him) as he was manifested without
us, but look only to be Saved by a Christ in us. To which this is in my Heart,
to answer to such as singly desire satisfaction therein.

We do indeed expect to be Saved (yea, and not only so, but do already in our
several measures witness Salvation) by the Revelation and Operation of the Life
of Christ within us; yet not without relation to what he did without us. For
all that he did in that Body of Flesh, was of the Father, and had its Place and
Service in the Will, and according to the Counsel of the Father. But the
Knowledge and Belief of that, since the days of the Apostles, has been very
much held in the Unrighteousness, and in the Separation from the Inward Work of
the Power and Life of Christ in the Heart; which as so held cannot Save any.
But whoever feels the Light and Life of Christ revealed in him, and comes into
Union with God there-through, he feels the Work of Regeneration, of
Sanctification, of Justification, of Life and Redemption; and so comes to reap
Benefit inwardly, and to partake of the Blessed Fruits of all that Christ did
outwardly. Yea, he that is thus one with Christ in the Spirit, cannot exclude
himself, nor is excluded by God, from the Advantage of any thing, nor every
thing that Christ did in that Body of Flesh.

P. 243. The Doctrines and Principles of the People called Immediate
Revelation, etc. By Geo. Keith.
Quakers, as well as the People, do indeed more acknowledge the Man Christ
Jesus, than any of them all: Inasmuch as we do believe and acknowledge that a
measure of the same Life and Spirit of the Man Christ Jesus, which dwelt in him
in its Fullness, and had its Center in him which came in the Flesh, and was
born of the Virgin Mary, and is now glorified in Heaven, is communicated unto
us, and extends it self into our Hearts and Souls, and whole Inward Man, so
that the Man Jesus, who Simeon embraced with his Arms according to the Flesh,
is, according to the Spirit, our Life and Glory, by whom we receive Light,
Grace and Truth, and through whom we have access unto God.

P. 358. Yet notwithstanding for your Satisfaction, we do now Journal. Geo. Fox.
plainly and sincerely declare, That we Own and Believe in God, the Only Wise
Omnipotent and Everlasting God, who is the Creator of all things both in Heaven
and in the Earth, and the Preserver of all that he has made; who is God over
all Blessed for ever: To whom be all Honor and Glory, Dominion, Praise and
Thanksgiving, both now and for evermore. And we do Own and Believe in Jesus
Christ, his beloved and only begotten Son, in whom he is well pleased; who was
Conceived by the Holy Ghost, and Born of the Virgin Mary; in whom we have
Redemption through his Blood, even the Forgiveness of Sins: Who is the express
Image of the Invisible God, the Firstborn of every Creature, by whom were all
things created that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth, Visible and
Invisible, whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers;
all things were Created by him. And we do Own and Believe that He was made a
Sacrifice for Sin; who knew no Sin, neither was Guile found in his Mouth. And
that he was Crucified for us in the Flesh, without the Gates of Jerusalem; and
that he was Buried, and Rose again the Third day, by the Power of his Father,
for our Justification: And we do Believe that he ascended up into Heaven, and
now sits at the right Hand of God. This Jesus, who was the Foundation of the
Holy Prophets and Apostles, is our Foundation: And we do Believe that there is
no other Foundation to be laid, but that which is laid, even Christ Jesus; who
we Believe tasted Death for every Man, and shed his Blood for all Men, and is
the Propitiation for our Sins, and not for ours only, but also for the Sins of
the whole World.

P. 149. We do Believe in One Only Holy God Almighty, who A Serious Apology,
etc. 1671. By G. Whitehead and W. Penn.
is an Eternal Spirit, the Creator of all things. And in One Lord Jesus Christ,
his Only Son, and express Image of his Substance, who took upon him Flesh, and
was in the World, and in Life, Doctrine, Miracles, Death, Resurrection,
Ascension and Mediation, perfectly did and does continue to do the Will of God;
to whose Holy Life, Power, Mediation and Blood, we only ascribe our
Sanctification, Justification, Redemption, and Perfect Salvation. And we
Believe in One Holy Spirit, that proceeds and breaths from the Father and the
Son, as the Life and Virtue of both the Father and the Son, a measure of which
is given to all to profit with; and he that has one has all, for those Three
are One, who is the Alpha and Omega, the First and the Last, God over all
Blessed for ever, Amen.

To these foregoing Citations I could add very many more, both of older and
later date, but as I would not needlessly quote Instances, so I hope the Reader
will not account me hitherto Superfluous, in rescuing our selves from Calumny
and Abuse, in a Charge which appears so plainly to be False; for a plain as is
the Sun when on its Meridian, so plain is it that we sincerely own, and
heartily believe, all that the Holy Scriptures testify concerning the
Incarnation of Christ, and the Union of both Natures, that is, as God and Man.

SECT. III.
HIS next Calumny in the order of his Charge is, That we deny the Truth and
Reality of his Death and Sufferings. In proof of our Belief whereof, I am
already in good part prevented, by the foregoing Testimonies; in almost all of
which, there is some mention of his Crucifixion, as well as of his Birth: But
however I am content to answer exabundanti, not wanting Instances of our Belief
herein, from whence I can allow Measure pressed down and running over.

Some Testimonies to the Truth and Reality of Christ's Death and Suffering.
Page 3. Before Abraham was, I am; who was in the Beginning, The Path of the
Just Cleared, 1655. By G. Whitehead.
which was the Word, by which all things were made, which Word became Flesh,
and dwelt among John 8. 58. John 1.
the Disciples, and Suffered at Jerusalem, and witnessed a good Confession
before Pontius Pilate, whom Pilate delivered up to the Jews, and the Chief
Priests and Elders, whom they mocked and despitefully used, and put to Death
concerning the Flesh; but is raised up by the Spirit, and ascended into Glory,
which Glory he prayed for, even that Glory John 17. John 5. 22. John 10. 30.
whereby he was at first by his Father glorified in, wherein he is glorified in
his Saints, and is God over all Blessed for ever.

Page 4. Christ, in dying for us, is our Example in Sufferings, and The Brazen
Serpent lifted up, etc. 1655. By R. Farnsworth.
way to the Father, for Christ in Dying for Sinners and Ungodly, died for all;
for was not all Sinners and Ungodly guilty of Christ's Death; but it is by his
Blood that we are Justified, and by his Life that we are Saved -- In following
his Counsel and obeying him, through the Cross which slays the Enmity, as he
became obedient to the Death of the Cross, who is our Leader and Example, and
is the Author of Eternal Salvation to all that obey him, but none else.

We believe that all things which are spoken by the Holy A new Catechism, 1664.
By W. Smith.
Prophets and Apostles concerning Christ, are true according to the Scriptures:
We believe that all the Dispensations of God, which are manifested by the
Scriptures, are altogether true, and that they were all fulfilled according to
the determinate Will and Counsel of God: So that our Faith concerning Christ in
us, and the Work which he there works for us, does not all make void any of
the Dispensations of God, which in times past were revealed unto his Holy
Prophets and Apostles, and by them testified in the Scriptures; so that the
Work which the Father then gave unto the Son to do, we believe that he
fulfilled according to the Father's Will, and that all things pertaining to
Life and Salvation were FULLY and PERFECTLY in him, and that he humbled himself
to the Death of the Cross, and from Death did rise again: And we believe that
he is the Resurrection and the Life, and gives Eternal Life to all that believe
in him.

P. 19, 20. We Believe and Testify, that this Jesus of Nazaretio Rebellion
Rebuked, etc. 167. by John Crook and William Bailey.
wrought out, fulfilled all Righteousness in his Obedience, both in DOING and
SUFFERING the Holy Law and Will of God, and that this Righteousness so wrought
out and fulfilled, was not for himself, but for, or because of all such as
truly, seeing they have no Covering or Righteousness of their own, flee unto,
and lay hold of him and his Everlasting Righteousness, by a True and Living
Faith. -- We Believe and Testify, That his Blood exceeds not only the Blood of
Bulls and of Goats, but the Blood of the best Man or Men that ever was, or
shall be, in the World. And we do, in the sight of God, really own the Blood of
the Son of Man; both according to the History, and in the Mystery (as we do his
Cross) both as Shed for us, and to be Drank by us; both as bespeaking Remission
of Sin past through Faith in it; and as Sprinkling the Conscience of True
Believers, and Cleansing them from all Sin. -- But because we Testify, that
it is not the Notion, or bare Historical and Literal Belief of those things,
that Justify, or make us Really free from that which comes upon every Soul of
Man that does Evil, whether Jew or Gentile, Professor or Profane, but only the
Life and Virtue of this Blood received into the Heart, by that Living Faith,
which Christ alone is the Author of. Therefore are we Branded with Slighting
the Blood of the Man Christ, etc. though we Testify our Esteem thereof, both
in the History and in the Mystery, and that without the Life and Virtue of this
Blood there is no Remission.

P. 9. -- Therefore we do Confess to his Sufferings, according Truths
Vindication, etc. 1679. Eliz. Bathurst.
to the Scriptures; for Christ also has once Suffered for Sin, the Just for
the Unjust, that he might bring us to God; being put to Death in the Flesh, but
Quickened in the Spirit; we 1 Peter 3. 18.
own his Death, as an Acceptable and most Satisfactory Sacrifice to God for the
Sins of all, and is of Blessed Advantage to all that receive Faith in his
Blood, Whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation through Romans 3. 25. Ephesians. 5.
2.
his Blood to declare his Righteousness for the Remission of Sins that are
past, through the Forbearance of God; and he has given himself for us an
Offering and a Sacrifice to God for a Sweet Smelling Savor. Also we Believe,
that as Christ Died for our Sins, so he was Buried likewise, and rose again
according to the Scriptures. But now is Christ 1 Cor. 15. 3, 4. 20. 21.
Risen from the Dead, and become the first Fruits of them that Sleep: For since
by Man came Death, by Man came also the Resurrection of the Dead. The Apostle
mentions this as the Assurance which God gave to Men, of his Judging the World
at the Great Day, by his Son Jesus Christ, namely, Acts 17. 31.
his having Raised him from the Dead.

P. 31, 32. And the Preaching of this Jesus, Powerful Shepherd and A Mirror,
etc. 1683. by Sam. Wattson.
Bishop of our Souls, was in the Heavenly Authority of his Father in which he
spoke forth all things appertaining to Life and Salvation, and are left upon
Record by those who were Witnesses of his Coming in a most Special Manner, by
Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, who were Witnesses, with many more, of his
Doctrine, Life and Suffering, which laid down his Life for his Sheep; as it is
Written, They stripped him, and put on him a Scarlet Mat. 27. 28.
Robe, and when they had platted a Crown of Thorns, they put it on his Head,
Nailing him to the Cross, Spitting upon him, and Mocking him, saying, Hail KING
of the Jews; though he had done nothing worthy of Death; yet the Hard-hearted,
who Rejected the Corner Stone, said, We have a Law, and by our Law this Man
must Die. So, refusing the Just One, and the Savior of the World, they chose
Barrabas to Live. This Cruelty Acted it self in a Guileful Spirit, to Destroy
him in whom was found no Guile, neither ever was it in his Mouth. This is he
who Suffered under Pontius Pilate; was Crucified, Dead and Buried, and the
Third Day Rose again; who ascended, and sits at the Right Hand of God the
Father, from whence by his own Power he comes to Judge both the Quick and the
Dead. This is he in whom I Believe, and is my Savior, in and through whose
Precious Blood is my Salvation and Redemption, and not in another (which
Thousands with me are Witnesses of) whose Blessed Promise we Believe in, and in
measure made partakers of, that he would send the Comforter, the Spirit of
Truth, whom the World could not receive, because they knew him not; he shall
bring all things to Remembrance, and shall lead and guide into all Truth; And
he that is in you, shall be with you to the end of the World. This is the
Blessed Savior, whose Appearance is in Spirit, as the Apostle Testifies of his
Second Appearance without Sin to Salvation, which cannot be known but by his
Spiritual Work in the Inner Man, whose Appearance and Manifestation is to
Destroy the Works of the Devil, which is Sin, Unbelief, and all Unrighteousness
whatsoever, that he alone may Rule and Reign in Man and Woman, who brings
Salvation to their House.

This his Second Charge, of our Denial of the Truth and Reality of Christ's
Death and Sufferings is, I think, by the foregoing Testimonies, sufficiently
Cleared; it appearing from them, that his Charge, of our having left the Body
of Christ, as a Forsaken Vail and Garment, Prim. Here. etc. P. 7.
to Rot in the Grave. And Careless of what is become of it, as a thing now of
no Virtue or Consequence with Us, is False, if a Succession of Testimonies of
our Belief herein, produced for about Forty Years can Prove it; yet if these
are Judged too few, I have many more in Store; not that I can at all doubt that
these are not enough to satisfy Honest Enquirers at a distance; and also to
Invite them to a nearer View of us herein, and in the whole System of one
Faith, it being for the sake of such, that we find our selves Concerned, to
Oppose the Truth of our Profession, to the Falsity of our Enemies Charges. For
with respect to our selves, we do Enjoy great Peace and Quiet, though thus
Evilly spoken of, as knowing, it was by our Savior so foretold it should be,
who also himself was said to have a Devil, to be a Seducer, a Samaritan, and a
Winebiber, his Apostles and Servants of Old, found suchlike Treatment, Stephen
being Stoned, as a Contemner of God, of his Law, of Moses, and of the Temple:
And the Apostle Paul was accounted a Heretic, a Deceiver, a Madman, a
Blasphemer, a Seditious Person, and a Contemner of the Law of his Fathers. What
better may we then expect from the same Spirit working in that Snake, which
hides himself in Grass or other Subterfuge.

SECT. IV.
I Come now to his third Charge, That we deny the Resurrection, and Future
Judgment, which upon enquiry, will be found as False as the foregoing Charges,
and it cannot well be otherwise, for it is next to impossible to be Orthodox in
them, and Heretical in this, their dependence on each other is such: And the
Apostle's Argument is very strong; If we had hope only in this Life, we were of
all Men most Miserable: For true Religion cannot incline a Man to believe and
be obedient to such Principles, as here expose him to utmost Dangers, and
hereafter to no Joys: Christianity is a Complex of more rational Truths, than
so to Clash and Jarr: And however Foolish the Man accounts us, we are more
Learned in the School of Christ, than to deny or be ignorant of so inestimable
an Advantage, as is the Resurrection by Christ to Eternal Glory, and of that
Future Judgment by which the States of Men must be determined. I now subjoyn
some Testimonies hereof.

P. 4, 5 of his Works. Therefore Woe be unto all Epicures, who The Lying Spirit,
etc. 1658. William Smith.
put the Judgment of the Lord afar off, and sit down at ease in the Flesh, and
make their Belly their God, minding Earthly things, devouring God's Creation to
satisfy a Lustful Appetite, and so Treasuring up Wrath against the Day of
Wrath, and Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God, who will render to
every Man according to his Deeds, when the Workers of Iniquity will not be
known by him, but must all depart from him into Everlasting Fire, there to
abide under the Eternal Judgment.

P. 332. And he that dies in his Sins, not believing in the Humphry Smith's
Works, about 1660.
Light, which makes an end of Sin, cannot come where Christ is, and so the Tree
falling there it lies; and as Death leaves, Judgment finds; so shall the
Reward according to the Deeds be; and then shall every Man stand or fall to his
own Master; the Servants of the Devil to their Master, and the Servants of God
to their Master; and there is no more Masters but them two, and no Man can
serve them both.

Again concerning Christ, We believe that he is one with the Edward Buroughs
his Works, P. 440.
Father, and was with him before the World was; and what the Father works, it
is by the Son; for he is the Arm of God's Salvation, and the very Power and
Wisdom of the Creator; and was, is, and is to come, without Beginning or End.

And we believe, That all the Prophets gave Testimony to him, and that he was
made Manifest in Judea and Jerusalem, and did the Work of the Father, and was
Prosecuted of the Jews, and was Crucified by his Enemies; and that he was
Buried, and rose again according to the Scriptures.

And we believe, he is now ascended on High, and exalted at the right Hand of
the Father for evermore; and that he is glorified with the same Glory that he
had before the World was; and that even the same that came down from Heaven, is
ascended up to Heaven; and the same that descended is he that ascended.

And we believe, even that he that was Dead is Alive, and lives for evermore;
and that he comes, and shall come again, to Judge the whole World with
Righteousness, and all People with Equity, and shall give every Man according
to his Deeds at the Day of Judgment, when all shall rise to Condemnation or
Justification; he that has done good, shall receive Life, and he that has
done Evil, Everlasting Condemnation.

P. 197. of his Works. And thus in the Blindness of their Uncircumcised God's
Virtue, etc. 1670. By Tho. Tailor.
Hearts, they heap up Wrath against the Day of Wrath, and Revelation of God's
Just Judgments upon them. Where is he that comes from the Dead, to tell us what
is in another World; Let Us Eat and Drink, and take our Fill of Pleasures, for
to morrow we Dye and are not, say they.

P. 9. And how God has anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the A Testimony, etc.
1677. By George Fox.
Holy Ghost, and with Power, who went about doing good, and Healing all that
were Oppressed of the Devil, for God was with him; and we are Witnesses of all
things which he did, both in the Land of the Jews, and in Jerusalem, whom they
slew and hanged on a Tree, him God raised up the third day, and showed him
openly, and we did eat and drink with him after he arose from the Dead, and he
commanded us Acts 10. 41.
to preach unto the People, and to testify that it is he that is ordained of
God, a Judge of Quick and Dead. And to this do we testify, which are the
People of God in Scorn called Quakers.

P. 159. of his Works. Marvel not at this, for the Hour is A Catechism, 1673.
By Robert Barclay.
coming, in which all that are in the Graves shall hear his Voice, and shall
come forth; they that have done good, to the Resurrection of Life; and they
that have done evil, to the Resurrection John 3. 28, 29.
of Condemnation. But the Heavens and the Earth which are 2 Peter 3. 7.
now, by the same word are kept in store, reserved unto Fire against the Day of
Judgment, and Perdition of Ungodly Men.

The Angels which fell had a State of Rest and Peace with Election and
Reprobation, p. 24. 1678. By William Gibson.
God; this was the first State which Jude here speaks of, but they kept not
this first State and Habitation, but left it, yea, lost it, through
Presumption, Irreverence and Neglect of their Duty, whom God in his Righteous
Judgments has reserved in Everlasting Chains under Darkness, unto the Judgment
of the Great Day.

P. 3. For at the Great Tribunal Christ Jesus will not fear An Antichristian
Conspiracy, etc. 1679. By Tho. Win.
to tell them, it was Work of Iniquity; For, said he, Inasmuch as ye have done
it to one of the least of my Brethren, ye have done it unto me.

P. 7. The Quakers deny no Resurrection that is according to A Brief Answer,
etc. 1678. By W. P.
Scripture; we own the Resurrection both of the Just and Unjust; we declare to
all People, we own the Resurrection of the Body, according to the Pleasure of
God: And every Seed shall have its own Body; and Woe to the Wicked in that Day.

P. 13. And if Christ did say to them that in his Members did not The Unequal
Vnyoaked, etc. 1683. By Peter Price.
visit him in Prison, Depart from me, ye Cursed, into Everlasting Fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels; What will he say to you, that do cast
him in his Members into Prison? Seeing Christ said so to them that were too
short in their Duty toward his People, What will he say to you, Matt. 25. 32.
that are Cruel and Spiteful toward his People? Read these Scriptures to the
end, and you may see the Reward both of the Godly and Ungodly, the Portion of
the Faithful and Unfaithful.

This is not to Rule for God, an Account you must give, to William Deusberry p.
394. of his Works.
the Judge of Heaven and Earth. Oh Men! How will you stand in that Day, when it
shall be said unto you, I was Sick and in Prison, and you Visited me not;
Hungry, and you gave me no Meat; Naked, and you Clothed me not; a Stranger,
and you took me not in. The Day is near, to this Account you will be called by
the Lord of Life and Glory.

P. 204. We own the Resurrection, and do believe that the John Burnyat in his
Works.
Righteous shall ascend into Glory, and be Glorified in Heaven with an Eternal
Reward; and that the Wicked also shall Rise and come to Judgment, and be turned
into Hell, to receive an Eternal Punishment.

Here I have brought Twelve Witnesses, to Testify contrary to this Man's False
Charge; which they do so Scripturally, and Truly, as Effectually to wipe it
off, and leave no room for this Snake of Envy to hide himself in a Color of
Truth; if it may be allowed more reasonable for a Man to Declare his own Faith,
than to be obliged to stand by the Declaration of it made by his Enemy. And
this Man, is Wilfully or Ignorantly, unknowing of our Belief herein: For we
continue to say, That in order to Salvation, Man must in this Life Witness the
Redeeming Power of Christ Jesus to Quicken and Raise him out of Sin, which,
when Man does Witness, he is then in Scripture Acception, Partaker of him who
is the First Resurrection. And every Man so Redeemed, and Raised, does
Faithfully, and of necessity must, Believe the Future Resurrection into Eternal
Glory; and the Future Resurrection of the Wicked to Everlasting Torments. As
for the Body, 1 Cor. 15. 37. Thou sowest not that Body that shall be. But we
are Heartily Satisfied with the Apostle, Verse 38. That God gives it a Body as
it pleases him. Our Belief herein has often been Declared, notwithstanding
which, because we are not Foolishly Querying, as the Apostle says some were,
with what Bodies the Dead are Raised, they will needs have us Heretics: The
Gross Conception, concerning Resurrection of Bodies, is well Contradicted by a
Bishop in a late Sermon before the King, viz. We shall at last escape out of
this Vile World, and from these Vile Bodies: We shall arise above the
Depression of Sense and Imagination, and the Disorders of Appetite and Passion.
We shall drop our Bodies, with all the Necessities and Weaknesses that hang
about them, and shall arise into a State of Pure and Clear Light; into a State
of Purity and Perfection; into the Angels and Saints, and be brought to see and
enjoy God to all Eternity; and that too with all the Fullness of Comprehension,
as well as Joy, that our Faculties in their utmost Enlargment and Elevation are
Capable of. Of this enough is said here; I must now look upon another Line of
this our Adversaries, and I have found a very ill one in p. 9. That we think
our own Flesh and Blood, to be the Flesh and Blood of Christ, etc. But it
happens that I have brought some among the foregoing Testimonies against it,
and he only Urges himself for an Authority, who I shall anon prove to be a
Splitter of Sentences, an Enemy to Colons and Semicolons, and Orthodox
Doctrines, when in a Quakers Book.

SECT. V.
HIS Fourth Charge is, That we Abstain from the Sacraments, and the Prayers of
the Church; which he seems to think of such Moment, as to be the Guards of the
Truth, and Importance of Christ's Outward Sufferings, and that where taken
away, Men fall from the True Faith in them. But then e contrae it should
follow, that where these are, there True Faith remains, which does not appear
either in his own, nor the Practice of very many others who have them: But if
Fellowship in Misery is any advantage; enough of Company he has afforded us,
for there is a pretty many up and down in the World that do not use his
Prayers. As for our selves, I must truly Confess, That we know not how to Pray
as we ought, but the Spirit it self helps our Infirmities. And I take the
Holy Spirit to be a Surer Guide, both for Time, Matter and Manner of Prayer,
than what he would give us in the stead thereof. But here he is so sure of his
Charge, that he makes Quotations; his first is out of, News out of the North,
by G. Fox; I cannot Examine it, not having the Book by me; but I much question
the Truth of the Quotation, as anon it may be the Reader will think I have
cause. His next Quotation is out of Edward Borrough's, p. 190. of his Works; it
was well for me that I had this direction, or else I know not how I should have
found it; for as the Words lie in his Charge, they are not like E. B's Words:
The Snake has here declared himself an Enemy to well-plac'd Stops, and given us
to understand, that he more Merits Advancement in Spain than in England: He
begins a Quotation thus, Their Doctrines are of the Devil, who -- (but he has
left out what follows) denies the Truth which the Scripture bears Witness of.
Thus good things are spoiled by ill Handling, and Orthodox Sentences made
Heretical; but this is not to be wondered at, when an Inquisitor has Cut, or a
Snake Bit them. His next Quotation is in p. 191. and here he is playing the
like Pranks; for when he has made up a Period, picked out of three places, the
last of them Concludes, These are Damnable Heresies, even to the Denying the
Lord that bought them; (And leaving out what follows, and which shows who they
are that do so) for they Deny the Light of the Lord Jesus Christ given to every
Man, to be the only Teacher, and the only Guide of Man; and they that do deny
the Light of Christ, with which every Man that comes into the World is Lighted,
to be sufficient to lead to Christ, and to the Kingdom of God (as these
Teachers in this Age do) they do deny the Lord that bought them. He continues
his Quotation out of Page 644. of E. B's Works, but here, as before, he has
cut off, I should show you according to Scripture. Sure this Man has an Enmity
to the Holy Scriptures, when mentioned by us, that he thus cuts out the Word
when he meets it in his way. But by this time it may appear, that his Charge of
Hideous Blasphemy and Outrage, proves to be, a Hideous Stinking Vapor; and
that himself deserves to be added to the Congregation, at the next Edition of
the Index Expurgatorii. Page 10. Speaking of his Discourse of Water Baptism, he
says, It seems to have had some Effects already, even with G. Whitehead
himself. He says true; it has had some Effect, for it did occasion a Chapter in
G. Whitehead's Answer, An Antidote, etc. in which Chapter, the Malice and
Impertinency of that Discourse is somewhat shown. But if he thinks it had any
other Effect, the Boast is full as Vain and False as his former ones; of which
I have already taken notice. This will best appear by G. Whitehead's own Words,
which he has neither fully nor truly given, by so imperfectly Quoting them: The
place in Page 114. of the Antidote is this, Yet others being more
Conscientiously tender in the Observation thereof, we are the more tender to
these, so as not to Censure or Condemn them, merely for Practicing that which
they believe is their duty, either in Breaking of Bread, or Water Baptism; yet
desire they may see further, and come under the Higher and Evangelical
Dispensation of the Spiritual Communion and Bread of Life, and Cup of Blessing
from Heaven (which can only Nourish the Soul unto Eternal Life) and of the
Spiritual Baptism of Christ, which only is the Souls Sanctifying and Saving
Baptism; so that this One Baptism, and this One Bread, which is the Substance
they may Livingly partake of. Now Charles, from thy Maiming of this place, it
is much easier for George Whitehead, and all that will Read it, to be confirmed
in a Certain Knowledge of thy Baseness, than to be Converted to the Communion
of One, who makes Lies his Refuge, and Deceit his Support.

As to our Belief, with Respect to Baptism and the Supper, it has been very
frequently Published, in Opposition to the False Constructions of our Enemies,
and while we most Steadfastly Believe, Assert, and in measure Witness; that
Baptism, which is not a putting away the Filth of the Flesh: And that Holy
Supper, of which Christ has said, I will come into him, and Sup with Rev. 3.
20.
him, and he with me; we cannot go back to less Beneficial Types. Who please to
see these, Scripturally and very Largely Defended and Discussed, may find it
done in Robert Barclay's Apology, which is very easy to be had, whether I
refer the Honest Reading Enquirers for further satisfaction herein: And come to
his next Charge of being Gnostics, Denying Marriage, and Preaching up
Fornication. He might have as easily said, We were Nicolatians; and then, upon
an express Text, Warranted our Damnation. It is time for us to examine his
Charge; why that is, That the People called Quakers forbid to Marry, and Preach
up Fornication; which is implied in the Title Page, and abundantly Charged in
the Contents. This is general enough; for I cannot find one Married or Single
Quaker left out. Now it is time to Prove it, when it is so home laid: in order
for Proof, I come to Page 12. and there he says, He does not Charge all the
Quakers with this; no, nor the greatest Number of them; only those called New
Quakers in America. The first Charge runs over England, and all the rest of the
World, where there are Quakers; the last is Limited only to America. Ah
Charles! Do think this Looseness will carry thee off: This is a very Loose way
of Charging, and is at best an Equivocal Lie: But after his hasty running from
his Charge, he stops at a distance; But the Quakers are thus far Answerable,
That all this Wild Extravagance is a Natural Consequence of their Common
Principle, and Notion of the Light within. I looked for his Proofs, but he has
none here, and therefore I suppose it is, he asks us two Questions, to see if
he can Snap us with Poor Silly Answers. (For it is a Jest to think he will
allow us any other.) Well, since I can get nothing else from him, I will take
his Questions; which are:

Now let me ask the Old Quakers, Are they the Children of the Resurrection?
They must answer, Yea, or go against their own Avowed Principles: And if Yea,
then the Text is plain against their Marrying.

This is a Shrewd Question, and has a Strange Consequence; but I shall not
Reply to it till I have given the other Question too.

Let me ask again, Are they THE CHILDREN OF THIS WORLD? They will all say, NAY,
For that is the common Epithet by which they Describe the WICKED; and is a Term
that they put in Opposition to THE CHILDREN OF THE LIGHT, which they bestow
upon THEMSELVES. Now it is Written, That THE CHILDREN OF THIS WORLD MARRY.
Therefore say the New Quakers, MARRYIAGE IS A WICKED THING, and Consequently of
the Devil. And the Old Quakers have not yet Answered their Arguments, that I
can hear of. Then it is high time it be done now, which I will perform
by-and-by, but I must take my turn to ask Charles two Questions; to which he
shall true Answer make, in like manner, as he has before made the Old Quakers:
My first is:

Charles, Art thou a Child of Wrath? He must answer, Yea; or go against his own
Avowed Principles. And if Yea; then the Text is plain against his Inheriting
the Kingdom of Heaven. This is very hard, a Man should send himself thus to
Hell; but don't Wonder, till we see what the next Question will do.

Let me ask again, Charles, Art thou a Disobedient Son? He will say, Nay: For
that is the common Epithet by which he describes the Obedient; and is a Term
that he puts in Opposition to Loyalty, which he puts upon himself. Now it is
written, Disobedience is as the Sin of Witchcraft. Therefore, say all good Men,
Disobedience is a Wicked thing, and consequently of the Devil. Now Reader see,
Before he sent himself, and now he would hale all the People thither: Thus the
Vanity and Folly of his Idle Questions does appear; when by only turning the
Tables, and shifting the Terms, they do as certainly Damn him, as conclude
against us. But now I come more closely to examine and see how his Extravagant
Consequences can be the Natural Result of our Common Principle, and Notion of
the Light Within: We, according to the Holy Scriptures, say, That the Grace of
God, which brings Salvation, appears unto all Men; and that the Grace,
Light, Spirit, or Truth, (by all which, and more Names, it is called in Holy
Scripture) if obeyed in its Operation, will of Sinners make Saints: And when
Men, by the Grace of God, are thus made Holy, they are then Partakers of him
who is the first Resurrection; for whereas they were Dead in Sins, they are
now, by the Grace of God, made Alive unto Righteousness, and so can then truly
say with the Holy Apostle, How can we that are dead to Sin, live any longer
therein? And when Men are thus risen from the Grave of Sin, and made alive unto
Righteousness, they then are truly capable of so enjoying Marriage, and all the
other Comforts of this Life, as to Glorify God, through Jesus Christ, for that
he has made them Witnesses of him who is the first Resurrection, and Partakers
of these his Temporal Mercies. As for the Terms of Children of the Light, and
Children of the World, they are such as it seemed good to our Lord Jesus
Christ, and his Apostles, frequently to use, as having in them a Significancy
of Expression, to denote the Wicked and the Godly, which is Authority
sufficient for us to use them in their proper places: And it is Eternally true,
That Men, by Believing in the Light, (notwithstanding his Idle Scoff) may
become Children of the Light: And it is of necessity, that them that are truly
such, must be Separate from, and Discerners of, the Children of this World, i.
e. Darkness; and not so only, but as they continue in that Light of Christ
Jesus, wherewith he has enlightened them, it will so renew the Spirit of their
Minds, as both to let them see their Duty, and also enable them to do it; for
it is no Ignis faiuus, no wild Enthusiasm, it leads not into Idle or False
Imaginations or Whimsies, but is Solid Christianity, and a true Guide to all
Christian Actions, and such as become the Profession thereof; And the Deduction
and Consequence is very plain, That when, by the Grace of God, Men's
Understandings are Illumined, their Wills made Obedient, their Passions
Subdued, and their Affections made Clean and Temperate, then the Actions of the
Whole Man will be very Regular, and such an one must needs be a good Christian,
a good Subject, a good Servant, a good Husband or Parent, and a good Neighbor:
Governors will be Safe, Subjects Peaceable, Relations Affectionate, all Men
love one another, and God from all, who over all is Blessed for ever, will
receive Praise and Thanksgiving.

Now our Practice, in the case of Marriage, is so well known, that little need
be said concerning it, only thus much I may say, that no Lawful Causes
appearing to hinder, we never discourage Marriage; but when any such do appear,
it is agreeable to our Christian Profession to prevent them. The Method we have
in this Case of Marriage, has been laid before Men in Government, and has by
them been approved as such, that will answer the End proposed, that is, the
Honor of Religion, and Peace and Safety of Civil Society, and Particular
Persons and Families: And beyond this I know of no Provision can be made, in
the Administration of Church Discipline. And if any after-Marriage, do break
Wedlock, do become Vicious, and turn from the Grace of God into Wantonness, and
do commit Fornication, it cannot be chargeable upon that Grace and Light, which
had they kept obedient to, would have preserved them; nor upon that Discipline,
which, while they continue within our Society, is an absolute Hedge against
such Disorder. From all which, I suppose it may by this time appear, that our
Common Principle and Notion of the Light Within, is no more chargeable with
Back sliders Faults, than with his Falsities.

SECT. VI.
HItherto his Perversions and Malice have been manifest; I now come to his
Sixth Point or Charge, That we Contemn Magistracy and Government. His first
Quotations are from himself in the Snake, and therefore of no notice to me
here. What I first shall take notice of, is a pieced Quotation he brings, out
of George Fox in his Great Mystery, Printed 1659. p. 76. and here I find the
first Sentence his Pen light on he cut asunder, the place is thus, The Power of
God (what follows he cut off) Rules and Orders People, when there is no outward
Government. Nay, it (these two words he cut off) strikes down Government of Men
and Governors, (all that follows he left out) as in the days of Daniel and
Pharaoh, and in many other places in Scripture mentioned. Now Reader, Can any
Father of the Inquisition be more careful to Expugn Passages offensive to
Christian Eyes, than this Man is to Expugn such as are offensive to his own?
The remaining part of the Quotation, he has picked and pieced out of page 90.
and by his dislocating and pulling asunder the Sentences one from another, some
of them look with as wry Faces, as if tortured in a Scotch Boot. I will at
least rescue one of them, that we may see its Native Feature, the place being
thus, Such as are turned into Corruption, and are Hypocrites, Great Mist. p. 90.
they are gone from the Higher Power which the Soul should be subject to, and
it is gone over them; and so (here he is pleased to begin) for the Lord's sake
the Saints cannot be subject to that Power. By the remaining Sentences he has
done the like, so that there is not one of them that speaks the Mind of the
Writer: The place is too long to transcribe here, because I have many Instances
to bring, where it will appear, that we always, since a People, have been
Obedient to Government and Governors; and that, not for Fear but Conscience
sake; and have always testified against Plotting and Contriving the Hurt or
Ruin of any; which by our agreeable Practice, is better Proof for us, than all
his own Lies, or the, by him, Suborned Passages, of our Writings, are against
us.

Some Testimonies concerning our Acknowledgment of, and our Obedience to
Government.
P. 10. And the Powers that are ordained of God, who are The Path of the Just
Cleared, 1655. By G. Whitehead, etc.
sent of him for the Punishment of Transgressors, and for the Encouragement of
them that do well: These we own, and are subject to them for Conscience Sake,
knowing that such are not a Terror to Good Works, but to Evil; for such execute
the Law in Righteousness, upon them who are guilty of the Transgression of it;
for because of Transgression the Law is added, and there the Law is executed in
its place, and in Righteousness; and those that execute the Law in its place,
they are for the Establishment of Righteousness and Peace; and, contrary to the
Law of Justice and Equity dare not Act in their own Wills, nor for their own
Ends: And herein they seek not themselves, nor their own Glory, nor Honor, but
the Glory and Honor of God, who is Honored and Glorified among them who Act
in Truth and Righteousness, and love the Lord; and to them our Souls are
subject.

P. 23. And as for this present Authority and Government now in A Visitation of
Love, 1661. By Edw. Buroughs.
Being, under the Name of King Charles the Second, we do believe and
acknowledge, That according to the Purpose and Will of God, and of his bringing
to pass, this present Government and Authority is set up, and, into its present
being, established.

P 6. 7. The Honor that is due unto Magistrates consists in True Magistracy
Described, 1660. By Henry Clark.
these two Particulars: 1. Love. 2dly, Obedience.

First, He that is in the Well-doing himself, loves the Rulers that be set up
of God, who are Just, and Rule in the Fear of God, and is a Terror to the
Evildoers; for When the Righteous are in Authority, the Children of Wisdom
rejoice, desiring of God that long they may Live, and Prosper in the Work of
the Lord; and Love thinks no Evil, nor behaveth not it self unseemly toward
the Rulers, neither speaks any Evil against him, neither does it revile the
Judges.

Secondly, Honor due to the Magistrate consists in Obedience, either
Actively in Doing, or Passively by a Willing, Patient, and Meek Suffering under
them for the Lord's sake.

And because Christ's Headship, Kingship and Supremacy alone, Sam. Fisher, p.
34. of his Works.
we (together with the True Church which is in God the Father, and in Jesus
Christ the Light) can own in the Court of Conscience, and in Matters purely
Spiritual, and of mere Religious and Soul Concernment, and not any mere Man's
(much less the Pope's or any Priests in such Sacred Secrets) therefore are we
mistaken and misranked among such as are utter Enemies to the present King's
Supremacy in these Dominions. Whereby we do, according to what the Spirit
requires of us, in all Civil Causes and Cases between Man and Man, submit our
selves to every Ordinance of Man himself (I say, in such cases) even for the
Lord's sake, whether unto the King, as Supreme, or to such as are sent of him
to be a Terror to Evildoers, and a Praise to them that do well. And if those
who have the Sword in hand, shall turn it against us for well doing, and so act
against the good Will of God, or impose, by God's Permission, upon us, contrary
to our Consciences, even there where we cannot obey actively, we are willing to
bear Patiently, without Violent Resistance, what God will leave us to Suffer
from the Hands of such as should Protect us, not Reviling, nor Threatening, nor
Cursing, but committing our Case in Quietness, to him that Judges Righteously,
and our Souls to him in Well-doing: And that Passive Deportment must be, and is
Judged by all, to be Equivolent to that Active Obedience, which others yield,
for Fear, to what Laws soever is made among Men.

Page 20. Our Principle is, to bring all into a Peaceable Life, To the King and
both Houses of Parliament, a Representation, etc. 1666. By John Whitehead Alex.
Parker, and Leonard Fell.
out of those things that are Evil, that the Law of God, and every Law of Man,
that is grounded upon Reason and Equity, takes hold upon, and therein we are
one with Justice. Therefore distinguish between those whose Principles lead to
Violence, or other Evils, that the Law of God (and of Man, which is equal)
takes hold upon; and us, who are one with Justice, and lead from those things
into a Peaceable Life, as much as in us lies, with all Men, which is according
to the Practice of the Primitive Christians.

Page 101. And those Rulers, Governors or Magistrates, who The Life of God,
etc. 1677. By William Gibson.
are a Terror to Evil Doers, and a Praise to those that do well, are worthy of
Honor, yea, of double Honor, and all such are duly honored by us, with the
Honor which belongs unto them; and we really, and with Pleasure, Honor and
Obey all such, not for fear of the Wrath, but for good Conscience, sake, as the
Apostles and Primitive Fathers did.

Page 481. It is our Principle, and Testimony, to deny and renounce G. Fox's
Journal given the Parliament, 1680.
all Plots and Plotters against the King, or any of his Subjects, for we have
the Spirit of Christ, by which we have the Mind of Christ, who came to Save
Men's Lives, and not to Destroy them; and we would have the Kind, and all his
Subjects, to be safe. Wherefore we do Declare, That we will Endeavor, to our
Power, to Save and Defend him and them, by Discovering all Plots and Plotters
(which shall come to our Knowledge) that would Destroy the King or his Subjects.

These Quotations are, I hope, sufficient for the purpose Intended; which is,
To Testify our Constant Peaceable Principle and Practice, in Obedience to
Government and Magistracy; yet as a close to all the foregoing Quotations from
our Friends Books, I will give one Quotation, which Relates to near all the
foregoing Charges, and which is taken from a Paper lately given to the
Parliament, Occasioned by E. Bugg's Calumnies; it is Entitled, The Quakers
Vindication; and was PRESENTED to the Members of Parliament in December, 1693.

We whose Names are Underwritten (being in Christian Society with the People
called Quakers) do, in good Conscience, Declare and Certify all Persons
Concerned.

1. That we sincerely Believe and Confess, That Jesus of Nazareth, who was Born
of the Virgin Mary, is the True Messiah, the very Christ, the Son of the Living
God, to whom all the Prophets gave Witness. And we do Highly Value his Death,
Sufferings, Works, Offices, and Merits for the Redemption and Salvation of
Mankind, together with his Laws, Doctrine and Ministry.

2. That this very Christ of God, was and is the Lamb of God that takes away
the Sins of the World, who was Slain, was Dead, and is Alive, and Lives for
Evermore, in his Divine Eternal Glory, Dominion and Power with the Father.

3. That the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, are of Divine
Authority, as being given by Inspiration of God.

4. And that Magistracy, or Civil Government, is God's Ordinance, the Good Ends
thereof being for the Punishment of Evil Doers, and Praise of them that do Well.

And we know of no other Doctrine or Principle Preached, Maintained, or ever
received among (or by) us, since we were a People, contrary to these aforesaid

Signed in Behalf of the said People.
Thomas Lower William Crouch William Ingram William Mead William Macket Philip
Ford Francis Camfield John Edge Thomas Hudson Charles Marshall Josiah Ellis
Gilbert Latey Theodor Eccleston Joseph Wasey Thomas Cox John Bowater William
Phillips Edward Brook William Townsend John Hall George Oldner Thomas Barker
Abraham Johnson Thomas Twinbarrow Michael Russell John Harwood John Danson John
Stringfellow William Paul Francis Eteridge Benjamin Bealing.
By what has now been said, and shown, it may plainly appear, that his Charges
are utterly False; and notwithstanding he makes Quotations, Page 16, 17. which
he calls Edw. Burroughs's, to Countenance his Villainy herein; yet he is as far
from Honesty in his Quotation, as he is from Truth in all those; for I shall
show that he has Committed Forgery to make this Man's Writings answer his Mind.
Part of his Quotation is thus, And Cursed be every one that rises not up to
the Help of the Lord, against the Mighty. Put on your Armor, etc. This, one
would think, looks somewhat with a Martial Face; but when, for Confirmation, I
came to look in this Piece, called, The Camp of the Lord, whence he took these
Lines, instead of finding them in the Order they now stand, the first Sentence
is last, and both Twenty Three, or more, Lines asunder, and the rest of the
Quotation he has also Transposed the Sentences, that they cannot speak their
Writer's Mind: How far this Practiee is, To Fight for the Joy and Union of
Christendom, and the Glory of God, is easy to find; it being an Outrage, for
which the Inquisition will hardly afford him President, and a Practice that
Glorifies not God, nor Advances the Union of Christendom, nor the Joy of any,
but Men of Corrupt Minds: Besides, this Piece of Edw. Buroughs, has not in it
any Tendency to Outward War; the whole Piece, being an Allegory of the
Christian Spiritual Warfare, which he Encourages his Brethren to go in; and if,
where Divine Matters are thus spoken of, both in the Old and New Testament, the
Places should be thus Tortured, and the Sentences Transposed, they would not
speak in the Quietest Terms? Nay, our Lord's Prayer, if this Man had the
turning the Sentences, he would soon spoil its Divine Authority.

But, that I might do Justice to the Memory of this our Deceased Friend, I
have, among the Quotations Relating to our Obedience to Magistracy and
Government, given One from himself, wherein he is so full, plain and distinct,
as may Effectually Vindicate his Memory, and our Principle. In like manner he
has Abused Samuel Fisher, who, by the Quotation taken from him, will answer
for himself.

I come now to the last Ridiculous Charge, of not pulling off our Hats, and
giving Civil Titles, which he Falsely and Foolishly Insinuates to have been
Condemned by the Apostles, etc. which is a Pretense so Idle, that he may as
soon find in them Early Times, the taking of Snuff after his manner, to be
declared Heresy. But however, by his Title Page, we are to expect some Ancient
Father to Condemn us. And when in Page 17. I found that Name, under the
Prejudice of whose Censure the Snake had Placed us, I found it to be neither
Father of the Church, nor Member of the Senhadrim, but Josephus the
Warlike-Jew; who, though he Professes to Write the Wars of the Jews, etc. yet he
never Pretended to Declare Heresies: But this Man, that he might show himself
to be fully Qualified for the Inquisition, can as easily Canonize this Jew, as
Dismember our Books. Well, I will not yet wholly reject Josephus, but will
Consider the Instance taken out of him, and which is Judas Galileu's; Who (as
he Quotes Josephus, and I hope has been Honest here, though otherwise in our
Books) would rather Expose themselves, their Children and Relations, to the
most Cruel Torments, than call any Mortal Man Lord or Master. Now, Believe me,
Friends, I cannot see the Heresy of this Doctrine, unless I should Conclude,
that to agree with Judas Galilaeus, in any thing were so; and if that be Rule
to Judge by, I suppose this Snake is a Heretic too; for this Jew believed in
One God, and if this Snake does not believe as much, he believes less than the
Devil.

But besides this Question of Lord and Master, he has not given us any Apostle
or Ancient Father to Condemn the Use of the Singular Number to a single Person,
or to Authorize the Use of the Plural in the same Case; nor has he yet Produced
the like Authority to Reprove our Stiffness in not pulling off our Hats. If he
meets with no such Authority, nor finds any other Original Heretic, the Snake
falls short of Proof, both for Precedent and Censure; and then Geo. Fox has (in
his own Foolish and False Words) the Glory of being an Original. But now he
affirms, that George Fox's Inspirations came from the Spirit of Pride; but how
Charles will assure any Man of that, which he is not Infallibly Assured of
himself (an Inspiration, so foul a Vessel must not pretend to) cannot readily
be guessed. I come now to Examine, by Holy Scriptures, how far G. Fox's
Practice herein did, and ours does, agree therewith; for if it be agreeable
with them, we shall not be careful for the rest. First, The Single Number, to a
single Person, in all the Instances the World has yet had (that I know of) it
has ever been the Language of God and Angels unto Men, and the Language in
Holy Writ of Holy Men to God, to Princes, to Rulers, and one unto another;
which, without the Snake's leave, is Authority sufficient for us; though, were
I minded to be Prolix, I could multiply Instances about the Reformation and in
other times. And as for the Titles of Lord and Master; where, in the Scriptures
they are denied and forbid, there and in such Cases we do deny and forbid them:
And as for our Hats, we pull them not off in Ceremony or Civility, yet we pay
Honor to whom Honor is due, Fear to whom Fear is due, and Civility to all Men
with whom we Converse; and this is agreeable to our Christian Profession and
Principles, which teaches us to preserve and keep that Distinction and Order,
in Persons and Things, as is necessary for their Good Government and
Preservation, which are the Good Ends we chiefly Desire to aim at herein.

CONCLUSION.
I Have herein purposely omitted to say any thing to his Quotations of the
Fathers, etc. because, by what is before written, it appears, the Opinions he
sets them against, are not ours; and that our Principles beforementioned, are
Consonant to the Holy Scriptures, and not deserving the ugly Shapes which this
Snake endeavors to draw over them: For they are no other than the Doctrines
which our Lord Jesus Christ did reveal, and which his Apostles did Preach, and
which after a time of great Apostasy have been again Preached, and by a Sincere
Belief whereof, in Obedience to Christ Jesus, Men may be enabled to distinguish
between Light and Darkness: And notwithstanding they have been, and are,
withstood by Men of Corrupt Minds, who would pervert the Way of the Upright,
who cover themselves with all Deceiveableness of Unrighteousness, yet they must
Thrive and Prosper, for God has Promised, He will Establish Truth in the Earth.

And though this Man pretends to say, that we now begin to Complain of
Misrepresention, it is wrong; for it is what we have had cause to Complain of,
and what we have Complained of from Truths, and our Enemies from the first. And
though every Adversary, in their turn, may not have been so Violently Base, in
slitting Sentences, and Transposing them, and taking one part of our Words, and
leaving out others Explanatory, as this Man has been, as is here before shown
and proved; yet we have had occasion sufficient to show, wherein we have been
Misrepresented by our Adversaries; which yet has often had this good Effect,
that many, Berean-like, have applied themselves to see whether those things
were so or no; and finding their Charges False, have been drawn to Love and
Espouse that Truth, which has been thus almost every where spoken against, and
to Worship God in that Way which some call Heresy.

Now Jesus Christ the Truth, and the Light which comes by him, has, since we
have been a People, been always Testified to by us, as that which is the only
True Guide of Men, in matters Eternal, and of Soul Concernment, and do continue
to be so Preached and Testified of; of which the few foregoing Instances are
proof; and that we are not changed. And we have and do continue to say, That
whoever sets up any other Guide, in Opposition to this Truth and Light of Jesus
Christ, or prefers any other thing before it, they have not a right Ground of
Faith, but all that are Obedient to this certain and right Ground of Faith,
according to the Degree manifested unto them, we really own, by what Name
soever called: And the Degrees of our Friendship and true Communion in
Spiritual Matters, is according to this Rule, and against it we cannot make
Composition, because we know by good Authority and Experience, whatsoever is
reprovable, is made manifest by the Light. And though it is possible for this
Snake in the Grass to imitate an Explanation of the Light within, and for the
Devil to transform himself into an Angel of Light; yet they can no more be said
to be guided by the Light, than the Devil might be said to be Refreshed by the
Sweets of Paradise, when he came to Destroy them: Nor can they that abide in
the Light, have any Union at all with the Unfruitful Works of Darkness.

By the Title and Contents of his Charge, this Snake would suggest us to
Heretics, but now in the Conclusion he softens the Term, and brings it down to
Separation, which he would not have kept up; by which he seems to arrogate the
Title of Mediator, which Quality cannot be well performed, but by one admitted
on both sides, which this Snake is so far from being, that I may affirm, he is
chosen by neither; for I can have no ground to believe, That a Rebellious Son
(whatsoever he may be for a Subject) can be dignified with Credentials to
mediate her Cause whose Head he has denied; and I am very sure, that we shall
never choose him for Mediator, who, we find, is disposed to say any thing of us,
rather than what is right; and seems to have the reverse of that Quality which
Midas is Fabled to have had, of turning all he touched into Gold, for what of
ours this Man's Pen touches, he commonly turns it to Poison.

As for what respects our nearness of Belief with the other Communities of Men
in the Nation, I am so far from being Sorry that others acknowledge the Light
of Christ Jesus, that I hope I shall always rejoice in it, and in a Life
obedient to it; into which Obedience, as the whole Nation comes, their
Separations will be less, and their Union more and greater, under that one
Eternal Head, Who by one Offering has perfected Heb. 10. 14, 15.
for ever them that are sanctified: Whereof also the Holy Ghost is a Witness to
us.

The Expostulation with W. Penn Considered.
I Have before showed, that our Principles are now no other than what they were
when first a People, and that they are confonant to the Holy Scriptures; so
that that Book of William Penn's, Entitled, Primitive Christianity, etc. is no
new Representation, concerning which Book somewhat is now to be said, at least
to places quoted and cavilled at by this Snake, and he first quotes p. 29. and
says, W. Penn will not grant we have any Natural Light at all; which is an
Abuse and Perversion; for W. Penn denies not Natural Light to Men, but that by
it they can understand the things of God, is what W. Penn in that place speaks
of; and this is agreeable to the Apostle, who has told us, That the things of
God are not to be known, but by the Spirit of God.

He next turns to George Fox's Great Mystery, p. 42. where he as plainly
perverts the Sense of this place, as the last, for the Tenet opposed by George
Fox was, That no Man, by that Native Light inherent in him, had power to
believe: And G. Fox had reason to oppose this Tenet, because it appears p. 39.
Great Mystery, what his Adversary did mean by Native and Inherent Light, viz.
That Light wherewith every one that comes into the World is enlightened
withal. This was what George Fox did preach, and which the Priest did oppose,
and therefore G. Fox answers it with the Text of John 1. 9. and concludes from
it (and that very truly) that this Light is beyond Natural Sense and Reason.

He returns again to W. Penn's Prim. Chris. p. 15. where he says, W. Penn
allows no Natural Light to the Understanding; which is a manifest Perversion of
the place, the words alleged are, Man can no more be a Light to his Mind, than
he can to his Body. But if this Man had been so Honest, as to have also
transcribed out of the same Paragraph these words, viz. About those things that
more immediately concern our Better, Inward and Eternal Man; he would have
found his Cavil useless, and his Flout would have appeared as flat, as now his
Charge appears False, and he may take his grains of Allowance again. The Snake
leaps from p. 15 to 50, and here thinks fit to carp and bite at this
Expression, All Men have Reason, but all are not Reasonable: Where Is the
Riddle, Jest or Nonsense of this Passage, Men have Reason, in potentia, but if
they will not use it the Fault is their own; this W. Penn further speaks to in
p. 51. his words are, For the reasonable part of Man, is his Spiritual part,
and that guided by the Divine (...), or Word, which Tertullian interprets,
Reason in the most Excellent Sense, makes Man truly reasonable; and then it is
that Man comes to offer up himself to God a Reasonable Sacrifice. In what
plainer words can a Man own Man's Reason, and God's Revelation, the first as it
is Natural, and the other as it is Divine.

He leaves W. Penn at present, and turns to Edw. Buroughs p. 17. of his Works,
from whence he makes a Quotation, but has abused the Sense of the place, by
leaving out the two following Sentences, and then the place is thus. I wrote
not as from Man, whose Light is ONLY Natural and Carnal, and does ONLY make
manifest Carnal Transgressions, of a Carnal Law, but as from the Eternal and
Spiritual Light, which does make manifest Spiritual Transgressions of a
Spiritual Law. From this place John Stalham would fastly conclude, that Edw.
Buroughs called the Light of Christ Carnal, which, that he did not, I think is
very plain: And accordingly Richard Hubberthorn p. 144. says, That we do not
allow any to call the Light of Christ Jesus Natural, but the Light of Man, by
which Carnal Men do judge of Carnal Transgressions. So that W. Penn, and both
these, do allow the Natural Reason, or Light of Man, to be one thing, and the
Divine Revelations of the Holy Spirit another; so that they do all plainly
agree, in the One Holy Spirit, or Light of Christ Jesus, given in measure to
all Men to guide them; and this W. Penn has not opposed, nor the reasonable
Understanding of Man, as this would falsely suggest.

He comes back to p. 29. where he would have W. Penn to Suppose, that nothing,
but the Divine Light, could reprove of Evil. But I have looked, and find no
such Supposition, and therefore no further notice need be taken of the
Consequences he draws as depending on that Supposition. Yet nevertheless I may
add; That as no one knows the things of God, but by the Spirit of God; so if
Man do attend upon the Manifestation of this Holy Spirit, it will discover to
him all that is Reproveable; and without which, by any reason of his own, he
cannot make such Discovery; and by its Power it can, and if Man be Obedient, it
will enable him to turn from that which it does so Discover and Reprove him
for: This is that sure Basis, upon which, being fixed, we easily reject all
Guileful Pretenses to the contrary: And though this Man may have a great Opinion
of his Wise Charming, p. 24. yet I never understood that the Hissing of a Snake
was Wise Charming.

Now if any go from the Spirit of God into Delusions; is that reason sufficient
why none shall depend upon the Guidance of the Spirit of God. Because, there
have been innumerable Falsely pretended Miracles, must we therefore believe no
true Ones: No, the Effect it ought to have, should be quite otherwise; have
others by Disobedience, and leaving of their Guide, fallen into Delusion, let
me therefore attend my Watch more closly; have others by forsaking their True
Guide, the Holy Spirit, been given up to believe Lies; let me keep close to it,
that it be not so with me: But if instead of this, Men will pretend to subject
the Unerring Spirit of God, to be tried by the Erring Spirit of Man, as it is
not Scriptural, so neither is it safe; nay, it cannot be safe, if to the Spirit
of Man, they add all Study, all mere Humane Endeavor, all Communities,
Ordinances, Histories or Humane Learning, all these will not Poise the Balance
where the Spirit of God is wanting, nor can any of these perform that excellent
Office of the Spirit of Truth, which our Savior has Infallibly Assured, will
lead into all Truth; and when we have all Truth, what Spiritual Good can we
want. And this destroys not the Freedom of Man's Will, nor Understanding, nor
extinguishes his Humane Page 26, 27.
Reason, but on the contrary, exalts and enobles all the Powers and Faculties
of the Mind. So that it is utterly impossible for a Man, under the Guidance of
the Spirit of Truth, to make God the Author of Sin: Nor does this Principle
arraign the Wisdom of God in his Ordinances, but shows forth his Good Will to
Men, in that he has not only sent forth the Spirit of Truth, but also sends
forth his Servants guided by it, to call the People into Obedience to it. And
thus God is pleased to work mediately and immediately.

Here in p. 29. he would seem to approve and congratulate W. Penn upon his
Exposition of Justification, but his Assent or Dissent we value not, nor our
selves for its sake; but the Doctrine is true, and has from the first been
professed by us. But to remind him a little, How is it possible for us to be
Orthodox herein (as he says we are) and Heretical in the Articles which relate
to Christ Jesus, as God and as Man, by and through whom Justification comes?
But Self-contradiction is no new thing to this Man.

He now numbers up in Page 30, 31, 32. diverse things, wherein he would fain
have the Church and us agree, they not being sufficient (as he says) for
Separation. This Man is of a very changeable Humor, in his Title, and for near
all the Book, we were Sad Heretics, but now he would have us Associates, which
if we will not be, he gives a Threatening Advertisement, that he will Trump up
more Heresies upon us. Well, in that let him do as God shall permit; but of two
things he may be assured, that we shall have no Communion with his Lies, nor he
true Peace in persisting in them.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed and Sold by T. Soul, next to the Meeting House in
White-Hart-Court, in Gracious-Street. And at the Bible in Leaden-Hall-Street,
near the Market, 1697.
SAmuel Fisher's Works, in Folio.

The Works of the Long, Mournful, and Sorrowful Distressed Isaac Penington's,
Folio.

William Bayly's Works, Quarto.

The Works of that Memorable and Ancient Servant of Christ Stephen Crisp;
containing also a Journal of his Life, giving an Account of his Convincement,
Travels, Labors, and Sufferings in, and for the Truth. Price Bound 5 s.

A Collection of the several Writings and Faithful Testimonies of that
suffering Servant of God, and patient Follower of the Lamb, Humphry Smith.
Price Bound 2 s. 6 d.

A Collection of certain Epistles and Testimonies of Divine Consolation,
Experience, and Doctrine; Written by that Faithful, Patient and Long-suffering
Servant of Christ, William Bennit. Price Bound 1 s. 8 d.

The Memory of the Righteous Revived, being a brief Collection of the Books and
Written Epistles of John Camm and John Andland: Together with several
Testimonies relating to those two Faithful Laborers. Price Bound 2 s.

Truth Vindicated, by the Faithful Testimony and Writings of the Innocent
Servant and Handmaid of the Lord, Elizabeth Bathurst, Deceased. Price Bound 1 s.

Baptism and the Lord's Supper, Substantially Asserted; being an Apology in
behalf of the People called Quakers, concerning those Two Heads. By Robert
Barclay. Price Bound 1 s.

A Catechism and Confession of Faith. By R. Barclay. Price Bound 9 d.

No Cross, No Crown. A Discourse showing the Nature and Discipline of the Holy
Cross of Christ. By W. Penn. In Two Parts. The Fifth Edition. Price 3 s.

An Address to Protestants of all Persuasions; more especially the Magistracy
and Clergy, for the Promotion of Virtue and Charity. In Two Parts. By W. Penn,
a Protestant. The Second Edition, Corrected and Enlarged. Price Bound 1 s. 6 d.

An Account of W. Penn's Travails in Holland and Germany, for the Service of
the Gospel of Christ; by way of Journal. Containing also diverse Letters and
Epistles writ to several Great and Eminent Persons whilst there. The Second
Impression, Corrected by the Author's own Copy, with some Answers not before
Printed. Price Bound 2 s.

A Brief Account of the Rise and Progress of the People called Quakers, in
which their Fundamental Principle, Doctrines, Worship, Ministry and Discipline
are plainly Declared, to prevent the Mistakes and Perversions that Ignorance
and Prejudice may make to abuse the Credulous. With a Summary Relation of the
former Dispensations of God in the World, by way of Introduction. By W. Penn.
Price Bound 1 s.

A Cast to Christendom. By W. Penn. Price Stich'd 3 d. Tender Counsel and
Advice, etc. By W. Penn. Price Stitched 3 d.

The Harmony of Divine and Heavenly Doctrines, Demonstrated in sundry
Declarations on Variety of Subjects. Preached at the Quakers Meetings in
London, by Mr. W. Penn, Mr. G. Whitehead, Mr. S. Waldenfield, Mr. B. Cool,
Taken in Shorthand as it was delivered by them; and now Faithfully Transcribed
and Published for the Information of those who by reason of Ignorance may have
received a Prejudice against them. By a Lover of that People. Price 1 s. 6 d.

Primitive Christianity Revived, in the Faith and Practice of the People called
Quakers. Written, in Testimony to the present Dispensation of God, through them
to the World: That Prejudices may be Removed, the Simple Informed, the
Well-enclined Encouraged, and the Truth and its Innocent Friends Rightly
Represented. By W. Penn. Price 1 s.

Rabshakeh Rebuked, and his Railing Accusations Refuted; containing, 1. Some
Reflections upon a late Sheet, Entitled, An Essay toward the allaying of
George Fox his Spirit; by way of Introduction. II. A Reply to a later Book,
Entitled, A Discovery of the Accursed Thing, etc. Enlarged; both written by
Thomas Crispe. III. A Display of some, amongst many, of his Self-contradictions
and Tautologies; by way of Conclusion. By E. P. Price Stitched 6 d.

A Diurnal Speculum; containing, I. A plain and easy Method to find out those
things that are most useful to be known Yearly: And may serve as an Almanac
for Thirty Years; and many other things suitable to the Matter, etc. II. An
Explanation of Weights, Money, and Measures, both Scriptural and Usual, with
sundry Tables depending thereon, etc. III. Some Remarks on England; or a Brief
Account of every County, with the Names, and Days of the Markets, and the Chief
Commodities therein, etc. The whole consisting of Great Variety, explained by
diverse Examples, the like in all particulars not extant; as by the Contents
does more at large appear. Collected by J. B. Price Bound 1 s. 6 d.

The Spirit of the Martyrs revived, in a brief Compendious Collection of the
most Remarkable Passages and Living Testimonies of the True Church, Seed of
God, and Faithful Martyrs in all Ages. Price 2 s. 6 d.

The Arraignment of Popery: being a Collection taken out of the Chronicles and
other Books of the State of the Church in the Primitive Times. I. The State of
the Papists; how long it was before the Universal POPE and MASS was set up; and
the bringing in their Rudiments. Traditions, Beads, Images, Purgatories, Tithes
and Inquisitions. II. A Relation of the Cruelties they acted after the Pope got
up, being worse than the Turk and Heathen: New Rome proving like Old. III. What
the People of England Worshipped before they were Christians. IV. To which is
added, the Blood of the Martyrs is the Seed of the Church. With several other
things, very profitable for all that fear God to Read, Try and give Judgment by
the Spirit of Truth, against the Worship of the Beast and Whore. Price 1 s. 6 d.

Instructions for Right Spelling, and plain Directions for Reading and Writing
True English. With several delightful things, very Useful and Necessary, both
for Young and Old to Read and Learn. Price 6 d.

A New Book for Children to Learn in. With many wholesome Meditations for them
to consider. With Directions for true Spelling. And the Ground of true Reading
and Writing of True English. Price 3 d.

Miscellania: Or a Collection of Necessary, Useful, and Profitable Tracts on
variety of Subjects, which, for their Excellency, and Benefit of Mankind, are
compiled in one Volumn. By Thomas Tryon Physiologus. Price 1 s.

A Treatise of Charity; and as directed, Universal, under the Law, and under
the Gospel; (showing the Nullity of all Religion without it) as also of
Goodness, Providence; Riches, Poverty, Prosperity, and Adversity. And of
Sacrificing and Feasting, their continuance under the Gospel. With a Paraphrase
upon the Parable of Dives and Lazarus. Price Bound 1 s.

Antichrist Unvailed, by the Finger of God's Power; and his Visage Discovered
by the Light of Christ Jesus, etc. Written in the Love of God by a Prisoner (at
Lancaster Castle) for the Testimony of Truth, and one of the People called (in
Scorn) Quakers. Price Bound 2 s.

An Account of the Life and Death of our Faithful Friend and Fellow Laborer in
the Gospel, Thomas Markham; with several Testimonies concerning him, given
forth by several Friends, whose Names are thereto Subscribed. Alsoa Testimony
written by himself, for the Necessity of Waiting on the Lord, and the Benefits
thereof to Men: Where being Dead, he yet Speaks. Price Stitched 4 d.

Proposal for raising a College of Industry of all useful Trades and
Husbandry, with Profit for the Rich. A Plentiful Living for the Poor, and a
good Education for Youth. Which will be Advantage to the Government, by the
Increase of the People, and their Riches. Price 4 d.

An Epistle to Friends; showing, the Great Difference between a Convinced
Estate and a Converted Estate; and between the Profession of the Truth, and the
Possession thereof; with the Comfort and Sweetness to the Soul it affords.
With a few Words of good Counsel and wholesome Advice to both Parents and their
Children. Price 2 d

The Counterfeit Convert, a Scandal to Christianity, and his unjustly opposing
Quakerism to Christianity justly reprehended. And the True Christ, and
Scriptures confessed by the Quakers. In Opposition to Two Scandalous Books
falsely styled, I. Quakerism Withered, and Christianity Reviving. II.
Animadversions on G. Whitehead's Book, Innocence Triumphant Price Stich'd 6 p.

An Invitation, from the Spirit of Christ, to all that are a Thirst, to come
and Drink of the Waters of Life freely, which proceed from the Fountain of
Eternal Life: showing how all may come, that are willing, to Drink thereof to
their full Satisfaction; whereby they may attain unto perfect Health and
Salvation of their Souls for ever in the Lord Jesus Christ. And also, showing
what it is that hinders People from being truly a Thirst after the Waters of
Life; and from coming to Drink thereof; with the destructive Quality of that
which hinders; and how it may be avoided. Concluded, with a Word to all
Singers, upon a Religious or Spiritual Account. Written by one, who has for a
long time been deeply Distressed with Thirst after the Water of Life; out,
through Mercy, has Obtained Satisfaction thereby: Known by the Name of, Henry
Mollineux. Price Bound 1 s.

The Spiritual Guide, which dis-intangles the Soul, and brings it by the inward
Way, to the getting of perfect Contemplation, and the Rich Treasure of Internal
Peace. Written by Dr. Michael de Molinos, Priest. Translated from the Italian
Copy. Price Bound 9 d.

An Essay toward the Present and Future Peace of Europe, by the Establishment
of an European Diet, Parliament, or Estates. Price Stitched 2 d.

Spira Respirans; or the Way to the Kingdom of Heaven, by the Gates of Hell; in
an Extraordinary Example. By a Person brought to the depths of Despair and
Anguish, recovered by the mighty Grace and Power of God, and raised to the
heights of Assurance and Joy. Wherein are some uncommon Considerations
concerning the manner of Salvation and Damnation, Life and Death, Happiness and
Misery. With some Fundamental Arguments for the Immortality of the Soul. Price
Stitched 6 d.

AN Epistle to Friends, briefly Commemorating the Gracious Dealings of the Lord
with them; and warning them to beware of that Spirit of Contention and Division
which has appeared of late in George Keith, and some few others that join with
him, who have made a Breach and Separation from Friends in some Parts of
America. By Thomas Ellwood. Price stitched 6 d.

The State of the Case, briefly but impartially given, betwixt the People
called Quakers in Pennsylvania, etc. in America, who remain in Unity; and
George Keith, with some few Seduced by him into a Separation from them. As also
a just Vindication of my Self from the Reproaches and Abuses of those
Backsliders. By Samuel Jennings. Price Stitched 6 d.

A Further Discovery of that Spirit of Contention and Division which has of
late appeared in George Keith, etc. Being a Reply to two late Printed Pieces of
his, the one Entitled, A Loving Epistle, etc: The other, A Seasonable
Information, etc. Wherein his Cavils are answered, his Falsehood is laid open,
and the Guilt and Blame of the Breach and Separation in America; and of the
Reproach he has brought upon Truth and Friends, by his late Printed Book are
fixed faster on him. Written by way of Epistle, and Recommended as a further
Warning to all Friends. By Thomas Ellwood. Price Stitched 1 s.

Truth Defended, and the Friends thereof Cleared, from the false Charges, foul
Reproaches, and envious Cavils, cast upon It and Them, by George Keith (an
Apostate from them) in two Books by him lately Published; the one being called,
A True Copy of a Paper given into the Yearly Meeting of the People called
Quakers, etc. The other, The Pretended Yearly Meeting of the Quakers, their
Nameless Bull of Excommunication, etc. Both which Books are herein Answered,
and his Malice, Injustice, and Folly, Exposed, By Thomas Ellwood. Price
Stitched 1 s.

An Apostate Exposed: Or, George Keith contradicting himself and his Brother
Bradford; wherein their Testimony to the Christian Faith of the People called
Quakers, is opposed to G. K's late Pamphlet, Styled, Gross Error and Hypocrifie
Detected. By John Penington. Price Stitched 3 d.

A Modest Account from Pennsylvania of the Principal Differences in Point of
Doctrine, between George Keith, and those of the People called Quakers, from
whom he separated; showing his great Deolension, and Inconsistency with himself
therein. Recommended to the Serious Consideration of those who are turned
aside, and joined in his Schism. Price Stitched 4 d.

The People called Quakers cleared by George Keith, from the false Doctrines
charged upon them by G. Keith; and his Self-Contradictions laid open in the
ensuing Citations out of his Books. By John Penington. Price Stitched 4 d.

More Work for George Keith: Being George Keith's Vindication of the People
called Quakers, as well in his Part of the Dispute held at Wheelers-Street, the
Sixteenth Day of the Eighth Month, 1674. As in his Treatise against Thomas
Hicks, and other Baptists, with the rest of their Confederate Brethren, at the
Barbican Dispute, held at London the twenty eighth of the Sixth Month, 1674.
Price Stitched 4 d.

The Quakers cleared from being Apostates: Or, the Hammerer Defeated, and
proved on Impostor. Being an Answer to a Scurrilous Pamphlet, falsely Entitled,
William Penn and the Quakers either Apostates or Impostors, subscribed
Trepidantium Malleus. With a Postscript, containing some Roflections on a
Pamphlet, Entitled, The Spirit of Quakerism, and the Danger of their Divine
Revelation laid open. By B. C. Price Stitched 6 d.

An Answer to George Keith's Narrative of his Proceedings at Turners-Hall, on
the eleventh of the Month called June, 1696. Wherein his Charges against diverse
of the People called Quakers (both in that, and in another Book of his, called,
Gross Error and Hypocrifie Detected) are fairly Considered, Examined, and
Refuted. By Thomas Ellwood. Prce 1 s. 6 d.

Keith against Keith: Or some more of George, Keith's Contradictions and
Absurdities, collected out of his own Books (not yet Retracted.) upon a Review.
Together with a Reply to George Keith's Late Book, Entitled, The Antichrists
and Sadduces detected among a sort of Quakers, etc. By John Penington. Price
Stitched 9 d.

Some Brief Observations upon George Keith's Earnest, Expostulation, contained
in a Postscript to a late Book of his, Entitled, The Antichrists and Sadduces
Detected, etc. Offered to the Perusal of such as the said Expostulation was
Recommended to. By E. P. Price Stitched 2 d.

A Modest Detection of George Keith's (miscalled) Just Vindication of his
Earnest Expostulation: Published by him as a pretended Answer to a Late Book of
Mine, Entitled, Some Brief Observations, etc. By E. P. Price Stitched 4 d.

A Few Queries relating to the Practice of Physic, with Remarks upon some of
them. Modestly proposed to the serious Consideration of Mankind, in order to
their Information how their Lives and Healths, (which are so necessary, and
therefore ought to be dear to them) may be better preserved. By H. Chamberlen,
Physician in Ordinary to the Late King Charles the Second. Price Bound 1 s.

The Writing Scholar's Companion: Or, Infallible Rules for Writing True English
with Ease and Certainty: Drawn from the Grounds and Reasons of the English
Tongue. Comprehending in a Full, Plain, and Exact Method, whatever is necessary
to be observed in Writing True English. In Three Parts. Composed forth Benefit
of all such as are Industriously Ambitious of so Commendable an Ornament, as
Writing true English is generally esteemed. Recommended especially to the Youth
of both Sexes, and to be Taught in Schools. Price Bound 1 s.

The Good House-wife made a Doctor: Or, Health's Choice and Sure Friend. Being
a plain way of Nature's own prescribing, to prevent and Cure most Diseases
incident to Men, Women, and Children, by Diet and Kitchin-Physick only. With
some Romarks on the Practice of Physic and Chemistry. By Thomas Tryon, Student
in Physic. The Second Edition, To which is added some Observations on the
Tedious Methods of Unskilful Chirurgions; with Cheap and Easy Remedies. By the
same Author. Price Bound 1 s. 6 d.


