THE Dean of RIPON's SERMON Before the QUEEN, July xxix. 1694.

The Duty and Obligations of serving God. A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN,
AT WHITE HALL, JULY xxix. 1694.

BY Christopher Wyvill, D. D. And Dean of RIPON.

Published by Her Majesty's Especial Command.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Warren, for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's-Head in
St. Paul's Churchyard, M DC XCIV.

A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN.
Joshua xxiv. 15. And if it seem evil unto you, to serve the Lord, choose you
this day whom you will serve, whether the gods which your Fathers served, that
were on the other side of the Flood, or the gods of the Amorites in whose Land
ye dwell; but as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord.
THESE are the Words of Joshua, which he spoke to the Children of Israel, after
(by the Providence and Blessing of God) he had settled them in the Land of
Promise. He had gathered all the Tribes of Israel together at Shechem, and
called for the Elders of Israel, and for their Heads, and for their Judges, and
for their Officers, and they presented themselves before God; and there did he
recite unto them the Benefits which God had done unto them and to their
Forefathers, the Wonders which he did in the Land of Egypt, and the fearful
Things by the Red Sea; how he had preserved them in the Wilderness, delivered
them out of the hand of their Enemies, given them a Land which they did not
labor for, Cities which they built not, Vineyards and Oliveyards which they
planted not: And from thence he takes an occasion to exhort them to fear the
Lord, and to serve him in sincerity and truth, and to put away the gods which
their Fathers served on the other side the Flood, and in Egypt, and to serve
the Lord only, the only true God; and then, says he, in the Verse of my Text,
If it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom you will
serve.

By which manner of expression, we must not conceive that it was his intention
to leave it as an indifferent matter, whether they served God or not, or
thereby to free them from the Obligations they already lay under of serving the
Lord only; but rather that it was his Design by these words, to try and to
prove their Inclinations and Affections toward the Almighty, and to induce
them by a wise and a deliberate Consideration, to a Resolution of serving the
Lord only; and to bind them the more strictly to his Service, as having of
their own free will chosen him to be their God. The Service of God is a
reasonable Service; he would have men consult their own Reason, and consider
what they do, and wisely and seriously to make choice of him.

This it seems Joshua himself had done, and by his own Example would excite the
People to do the like; for he acquaints them with his own Choice and Resolution
upon the Matter: For as for me (says he) and my house we will serve the Lord;
and a brave and a noble Resolution it was, that although all others by a base
Rebellion should Apostatise from God, although they should choose them other
Lords, and make to themselves other Gods, whilst others put themselves under
the subjection of wild Passions and vile Affections, serving diverse Lusts and
Pleasures; yet he with his whole Family would serve the only true God, the
great Creator and Lord of Heaven and Earth: And what was his Resolution at that
time should be ours now; for we have the same God to serve that he had, and the
same and yet far greater Motives to induce us to it.

And that which makes his Example the more remarkable, and the more enforcing
is this, that he was a sovereign Prince and Commander in chief of all the Hosts
of Israel, and yet neither the Charms nor the Troubles, neither the Pleasures
nor the Cares, with which so high a Station is usually attended, could keep him
off from a vigorous prosecution of the great business of Religion, and of the
true Service of God. And when such as he, when Princes and noble Persons, when
rich and great Men make an open profession of serving God, when they make it
their choice and their delight, and their business, what an excitement and
encouragement must it be to inferior people to do the like?

And indeed the Duty of serving God is so just, and so reasonable, the
Obligations and Motives to it so many and so weighty, that if we seriously
consider the matter, it will appear to be the wisest and the best choice that
we can make.

In discoursing therefore upon this excellent Subject, I shall endeavor
through God's assistance briefly to do these Two Things.

I. To show what it is to serve God; and II. To show what Obligations and
Motives there are that can induce a man to resolve so to do.
And may that great and good God whom we serve, give such a Blessing upon what
I shall now say, as that his Name may be thereby glorified, and our selves
advantaged!

I. Now then as for the First of These, to serve God, is not only to profess
God's true Religion, but to live according to it, and to behave our selves in
such a course and way of living, whilst we are in this World, as may evidence
the sense we have of the great Majesty of God, and of his Sovereignty over us.
This in general is the meaning of serving God as it is taken in the largest
sense, and in the full extent; for I shall not confine it to any one particular
part of Piety, but look upon it as it takes in the whole compass of Religion;
and that we may the better understand when we observe this Duty, and when we
decline from it, I shall show how we may serve God, in what things God may be
served by us, and what are the proper Qualifications of That Service.

(1.) First then, We serve God by obeying his Commands, and by executing his
Will and Pleasure, in those things which he requires of us. For Obedience to
the Commands of God, is one great part, nay the first, the very chief and
principal part of that Service which we owe him, and which he, who is resolved
to serve God acceptably, must be sure to mind; without This our Service of him
is very lame and imperfect, or rather in truth nothing at all. There can be no
better proof of Service than Obedience; Know ye not, says Romans 6. 16. Ephesians.
6. 5.
St. Paul, that to whom ye yield your selves servants to obey, his servants you
are whom you obey? And it is his Advice, that Servants should be obedient to
their Masters: and therefore if we would approve our selves the true Servants
of God, we must heartily and sincerely endeavor to obey all his Commands,
whether they be against our present Inclinations and worldly Interest or not.
With what cheerfulness did the Servant of the Centurion in the Gospel conform
himself to the Commands of his Lord; who, if he did but say Do this, went
instantly, without any more ado, about it? And should not we then testify our
Subjection to Almighty God, and make as full proof of our being his Servants,
by yielding as great a deference to his Injunctions? With what readiness do Men
usually obey the Commands of their Masters, according to the Flesh, even
sometimes in wicked and unrighteous Actions? And should not we then as readily
obey the Commands of the great Majesty of Heaven, who commands us nothing but
what is just and reasonable; nothing but what tends to our present and future
Happiness? If mortal and sinful Men expect entire Obedience from their
Dependants, upon the account only of their own bare Word; how much more
reasonably may the Eternal and Righteous God lay claim unto, and expect the
like Obedience from all of us? If we pretend to be his Servants, Him we must
obey without dispute; the least intimation of whose Commands (none of which can
be any other than holy, and just and good) is a sufficient Warrant for our
immediate Compliance with them. And what those Commands of his are, he has so
plainly, and so fully revealed and declared in the Holy Scriptures, that it
must be our own fault if we are ignorant of them; but then we must withal
remember what our Blessed Lord has told us, That he that knows his master's
will, and does it not, Luke 12. 47.
shall be beaten with many stripes.

Now the Commands of God are such as enjoin some things to be done, or forbid
us the doing of others; and if we would serve him as we ought do, we must have
a special regard to all these; we must take care to perform all those things
which he positively commands, and decline from all those things which he
expressly forbids; he commands us to be holy as he is holy, to be temperate and
chaste, charitable and kind, upright and just in all our Dealings; and he
forbids Intemperance and Luxury, Sensuality and Pride, and all kind of
Uncharitableness and Injustice one to another.

In a word, he commands us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we
should live Tit. 2. 12.
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world. These are the Divine
Sanctions and Edicts which are good and profitable unto men, which tend to the
Welfare and Happiness of Mankind, and which He, our great Lord and Master, does
expect and require should be observed and obeyed by us. And how then do they
approve themselves to be his Servants, that all along go contrary to these his
just and equal Commands? How can they hope to enter into their Master's Joy?
What can they expect hereafter, but that they shall be cast, with all such
wicked and evil Servans, into That place of utter darkness, where there is
weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth.

(2.) Secondly, We may serve God, by promoting his Glory and Honor in the
World, and by showing, upon all occasions, a zealous and a prudent regard for
it. An honest and good Servant, that loves his Master, will be ready to do such
things as may tend to his Honor, and further his Credit; he will preserve and
support his esteem so far as it is in his power, and endeavor to vindicate and
assert it when he finds it is assaulted. No less should the Servants of the
Almighty God be concerned for his Honor, yea rather much more, inasmuch as his
Honor is far to be preferred, and ought to be dearer unto us, than that of any
mortal Man: and therefore if we be resolved to serve God, and to approve our
selves unto him his true and faithful Servants, we must make the Advancement
and Preservation of his Glory a great part of our care. We should endeavor to
promote his Glory and Honor in all Places, and among all Persons we converse
with. To the doing of which we have several ways and means that may conduce
very much, and we may meet with diverse Occasions and Opportunities for it,
which, without great Blame to our selves, and wrong to God, we cannot pass by,
or let slip from us without their due Improvement. To this end,

We should embrace and lay hold of, or rather, we should look for and seek out
all fit Times and proper Occasions of speaking honorably of him, publishing
and declaring his noble Acts, and praising him with our lips, according to his
excellent Greatness; extolling and magnifying his holy Name, for the great
Works of Creation and Providence, for his admirable Wisdom, in contriving the
Means of our Redemption; for his great Mercies and Blessings at any time
conferred upon us; ascribing all happy Events, and prosperous Successes to his
Goodness only, and rendering him all Praise and Glory for the same.

We should testify our Dependence upon him, and our Acknowledgment of his
Dominion and Power, by entirely submitting our selves to his blessed Will,
humbly expressing our Content and Satisfaction with our Allowances and
Provisions, those wages, which he, as our Master, affords ^s, as knowing him to
be Lord of all; patiently also enduring all Afflictions and Crosses, those
Corrections and Punishments which he shall think fit to inflict upon us, as
knowing that they come from him; in all such Cases being ready to say with good
old Eli, It is the Lord, let him do what seem eth him good; or rather with our
blessed Savior, not my will but thine be done.

We should use with especial Respect all things peculiarly relating unto God;
such as are the Holy Scriptures, which deliver to us the Word of God; the Holy
Sacraments, which convey to us the Grace of God; the Holy Places of God's
Public Worship, those Places where his Honor dwells, together with whatever
else is dedicated and set apart for the peculiar Service of God. These we
should never profane, speak ill of, or misuse; it does not become those who
make profession of Serving God, to use these things any otherwise than with
very great Esteem and Veneration, because the Honor of God is very much
concerned in the right, or ill Use of them.

And that we may be happy Instruments of glorifying God, and of causing him to
be glorified and honored by all Persons, we should heartily endeavor to
promote the sincere Practice of P^^^y and Religion in the World; for nothing
can more naturally tend to God's Glory than That. It Is the universal Practice
of Piety, and the sincere Profession of God's true Religion, that will make his
Name venerable, and cause it to be blessed and reverenced among Men; when Men
are eminently good and virtuous, regulating their Lives and Actions according
to the Laws of God, they thereby make it manifest, That they reverence his
Authority, which enacted them; that they admire his Wisdom, which contrived
them; that they dread his Justice, which can punish Men for the neglect of
them. There is a kind of Luster and Brightness in the Works of Piety and
Religion, done with a good Conscience, and in Obedience to God's Commands,
which cannot but attract the Eyes, and captivate the Hearts of all Beholders;
which will make them clearly discern, and openly acknowledge the great
Excellency, the awful Majesty, the admirable Wisdom of our Lawgiver, will
consequently induce them to magnify and praise him. The Practice therefore of
Piety and Religion, if we resolve to serve God, we should endeavor to advance
and propagate, by the best and the wisest means that we can, by
discountenancing Vice and Profaneness, by encouraging Virtue and Holiness, by
removing Men's Prejudices against it, by recommending it to the Minds of Men
from its great Worth and Loveliness, its general Usefulness, its absolute
Necessity, its solid Comfort and Peace, which it brings to the Souls and
Consciences of Men: but chiefly by practicing it our selves, and showing a good
Example; for the World is very much led and guided by Example; and when Men see
others, especially their Betters and Superious, to be sincerely religious and
good, Men fearing God, and serving him; they will be apt to endeavor to be so
too.

Those Talents also with which God has entrusted us, (our Wit, and Reason, and
natural good Parts); and those temporal Blessings which he has conferred upon
us, (our Wealth, our Honor, and Authority); we should make use of and improve
for the Advancement of God's Glory; in setting forth the Praises of God, in
promoting Works of Charity, and doing good, in bringing Religion into Credit
and Esteem with Men.

And as we should studiously and industriously endeavor to promote the Glory
of God our selves, so we should express our just Grief and Resentment, when
others do contrary unto it; and, so far as we can, we should vindicate and
assert it, and not patiently suffer the least Affront done unto Him; otherwise
we do but falsely usurp the Title of his Servants, and become more like
Deserters of him.

Now by these ways and means we may eminently set forth God's Glory, procure
many Proselytes to him, and Worshippers of him; and render his Religion, in the
Eyes of all Men, very lovely and acceptable: in doing of which we do really and
truly serve God, and God will accept of and own us for his Servants.

(3.) Thirdly, God may be served by us, by our being diligent and faithful in
our several Vocations and Employments. For the whole World is but, in a manner,
one great Family, wherein God, the great Master of it, has placed us all,
according to his good Pleasure, assigning unto every one some particular
Employment; and he that with Diligence, and Industry, and Faithfulness does his
Duty, in That state of Life in which God has placed him, does therein serve
God: and although some are placed in an higher Sphere, and made more capable of
serving God than others are; yet all of us were designed by our wise Master for
some kind of work, though it be in an inferior Order, that so no room should
be left for Idleness in the World; and though some have a nearer relation to
God's Service than others, and, by reason of the nature of their Calling, are
more usually and properly honored with the Title of God's Servants, (such as
are all chief Rulers and Magistrates, and the Ministers of God's Holy Word and
Sacraments, both which sort of Persons are emphatically called the Servants of
God; those in governing and protecting, these in teaching and instructing the
People): yet every honest and lawful Employment does give a Man a Title to That
Honor too. And what Calling or Profession soever a Man be of, whether it be
honorable or ignoble in outward Appearance, yet if he do but prosecute his
Business (provided that it be a lawful Business) industriously and diligently
and faithfully, according to the Rules of Christian Prudence, with Sobriety and
Moderation, he is even then about the Service of God, although he seems most
busy about his own Concerns. But,

(4.) Fourthly, The last thing which I shall mention, wherein God may be served
by us, is a Religious Worshipping of him, which consists in putting up our
fervent Prayers to him, and hearty Praises of him; supplicating his Mercy and
Grace, deprecating his Wrath and Vengeance, calling upon his Holy Name, and
attentively reading or hearing his Holy Word; and that not only publicly, when
we are in the House of God, but privately also, when we are secluded from
Company: and all this is to be done in the most humble and devout posture; the
bending of our Knees, the bowing of our Bodies, the lifting up of our Hands and
Eyes, and the like; which are the most proper Acts whereof God's outward
Worship does consist, and whereby we testify our inward Acknowledgment of that
Great and most Adorable Majesty which we come to worship. The doing of all
which, does often of its self bear the Name of God's Service; and indeed we
cannot be truly said to serve him, whilst we wilfully neglect, or are very
deficient in this Duty; and he that never, or perhaps but seldom, does thus
worship the Lord his Maker, he that is so intent upon his worldly Concerns, as
that he cannot, or will not allow himself some time for the Public and Private
Worship of God, does not in truth serve GOD, but Mammon.

Now in these Particulars does the Duty of Serving God chiefly consist; which,
that it may be the more acceptable unto him, should be attended with such
Qualifications as these;

First, With Reverence, for we should continually carry about with us such an
awful Sense and Apprehension of him, as to make us walk humbly with him; such
honorable and worthy Thoughts, as are suitable to the Eminency of his State,
to his Divine Perfections, to all his wise Works and Actions; such as are due
unto, and befitting the Majesty of so holy, so pure, and so glorious a God.

Secondly, With Godly Fear, not a servile or a slavish Fear, such as the Devils
and all wicked Men have (for in that respect we should serve God without Fear)
but a Fear which proceeds from a Love of him, and a Desire to please him, such
a Fear as makes us dread nothing more than to offend and displease him. And,

Lastly, With Gladness, and Cheerfulness of heart, for it does not become the
Servants of God, (the greatest and the best of Masters, whose Service is
perfect Freedom) to do his Business, and to go about his Work, with heavy and
mournful Hearts, as if they served a cruel and austere Master; but rather with
all the Cheerfulness and Alacrity that they can. And God himself, in several
places in his Holy Word, has exhorted us to rejoice, to be glad, to delight
our selves in him, making it thereby sufficiently evident, that to serve him
with Gladness and Cheerfulness of Heart is agreeable to his Will, so as that we
may serve God, and be cheerful too.

And thus having shown what it is to serve God, wherein That Duty does consist,
and what are the proper qualifications of it, I come now to

II. The second thing which I proposed to do, and that was, to show what those
obligations and motives are that may induce us to resolve to serve him.

(1.) And first I shall begin with That which Joshua made use of as an Argument
to engage the Israelites to the service of God, and that is the consideration
of the goodness of God and of those Blessings and benefits which we receive
from him. And it is certainly a very enforcing Argument that carries weight,
and strength, and reason along with it. The consideration of the Mercy, of the
Favor, of the goodness of God, must needs be accounted a great motive to do
him service, and cannot but be very prevalent with those that have any
ingenuity or sense of gratitude in them. For who but he that is a stupid
ungrateful Man, will kick and spurn at his best Friend, will refuse to do him
any service, will not use his best endeavors to fulfill the will and pleasure
of such a Benefactor as has done him the greatest Kindnesses; and is still
able and ready to do him more?

Now the Benefits and Blessings which our most merciful God has conferred upon
Mankind, are many and great. We owe our Life and our present Being to him; all
this great and beautiful World, and all the Comforts and Conveniences we enjoy
in it, proceed solely from his Goodness. There is nothing that we have, which
may be for the Pleasure and Content, as well as for the Help and Support of
Man, which comes not most liberally from him. We all live upon his Provisions,
and are sustained by his Mercy, and preserved by his Bounty. The air wherein we
breathe, the ground whereon we tread, the comfortable influence of the Sun, the
Moon and the Stars, all the Happiness which we now have, or may hope for
hereafter; all these are the Effects of his great love to us. Every where we
meet with sensible demonstrations of his Kindness, in every moment of our Lives
we have great pledges of his Goodness toward us; nay (That which is the
greatest Endearment of all, and which aloud proclaims his Love and Favor to
the Sons of Men) he has given his only Son to die for us. And now what shall
we render unto the Lord for all the benefits he has done unto us? He requires
our Service, and we shall be vilely ungrateful if we yield it not unto him.
Shall we repay all his Goodness with disrespect to him, or disregard of him?
shall we slight his Commands, and be disobedient unto his Will, or turn our
backs upon him, and refuse to do him Service? If we thus requite the Lord, may
we not be truly called in the Language of Moses, Foolish people and unwise? O
let us in the abundance of the Mercies we enjoy look up to Almighty God the
great Author of them; and let the repeated acts of his Goodness and Bounty
prevail with us to do him Service! The Goodness of God extends it self to all
the Corners of the Earth, who dispenses the temporal Blessings and Comforts of
this Life (although not equally, yet) so universally and justly, as that he
that has least of them has enough to oblige him to serve God faithfully all the
days of his Life. But then, as for those that have a greater share of the
Blessings and Mercies of God, they that have an affluence of these Worldly
goods, what an Engagement do they lie under to this duty? When God extends
his bountiful hand in affording us an abundance of good things, so far as to
add superfluities to the necessities of nature; This lays still a greater
obligation upon us to do him service. He therefore whom God has raised to an
higher degree in Wealth and Honor than other Men, is infinitely bound for the
plentiful accommodations and comforts of his Life, to be more diligent and
faithful in serving God, and to employ all the Advantages of his State to
advance the Honor of his munificent Benefactour, to whose good Providence
alone he does owe them, from whose Goodness only he receives them.

But we should not only consider our own private Blessings, but those also
which God has conferred on the Public, obliging thereby every particular
Member thereof to a dutiful Observance toward him; for we should not be so
narrow-spirited, as to respect only our own private Advantages, but should
withal regard those of the Public, of which every Man is a Part; and (if it be
not through his own Demerit) may partake of the Happiness and Prosperity of it.
And among all the many Mercies, with which God has blessed this Nation,
certainly it ought not to be accounted one of the least considerable, That at
present we enjoy the great blessing of Peace amongst our selves at home,
although we are engaged in a just War with our Enemies abroad. And if we
consider that there are a great many who would willingly disturb this our
Peace, but through the good Providence of God are withheld from doing it, and
that we are not exposed to those Miseries and Devastations under which our
Neighboring Countries do groan, which are now made the Seat of the War; if we
call to mind the many Providential and Wonderful Deliverances we have had from
the restless but fruitless Endeavors of our Enemies to subvert and ruin us; In
a word, if we reflect upon the happiness we have, in enjoying the freedom of
our Laws, together with all our just Rights and Privileges, whether we consider
the Mercies of the past, or of the present Age, we cannot but thankfully
acknowledge, that the goodness of God has been great toward us; and if the
consideration of these things cannot prevail with us to serve him in truth, and
with all our hearts, how righteous a Controversy with us has, not only his
Justice, but, his very Grace and Mercy?

(2.) But farther, we have another Obligation and a strong Motive to serve God,
arising from the consideration of the Divine Perfections those glorious
Attributes which reside in the Divine Nature, and whereby he has been pleased
to make himself known to us, the which do demand the Observance of this Duty
from us, and are of themselves perswasives sufficient enough to excite Men to
it, whether they receive good or evil at his hands. Although God should not
exert his goodness in conferring External Blessings upon us, although he should
withhold even good things from us, and inflict on us evils, as great as were
those of Job, yet he is infinitely worthy of all the service that either Men or
Angels can do unto him. His absolute, and entire, and complete Perfections, do
indispensably require it of us, and all that we can do in serving him, is but
of right due unto him. For he is a God (and there is none else beside him) of
Infinite Majesty, Power and Might, of Infinite Wisdom, Justice and Mercy,
Righteousness and Truth. He is That high and lofty one that inhabiteth
Eternity, whose name is Holy; He rules all things both in Heaven and Earth,
and governs the World by an Infinite Wisdom and Infinite Goodness; his Majesty
is so Wonderful, that the Angels themselves in Presence of it do hide their
Faces, and the Devils for fear of it do shake and tremble. And what kind of
persons then are they, that in Contemplation of so Excellent and so Glorious a
Being, can refuse to serve him with their utmost Power?

(3.) Besides we should consider that we are obliged to this Duty by the
Example of all the rest of our Fellow Creatures; who, if we should be
neglectful of it, or deficient in it, might all upbraid us for it. For do we
not see, how all the Creatures of the World, all the Works of God, though never
so much void of Sense and Reason, do bear their parts in serving the Author of
their Being; inasmuch as they prosecute the design for which he made them? And
if we Men, whom God has endowed with Reason and Judgment, whom he has every
way qualified and made fit for his Service; if we should not have a share in
this high and most important Work, how justly might our Stupidity be reproved
by their Subjection?

(4.) We should also further consider, what just Right and Title God Almighty
has to our best services. We are or should be his Servants by Right of
Creation, for He has made us, and not we our selves; by Right of Purchase and
Redemption, for he has bought us and redeemed us, not with corruptible things,
as silver and gold, but with the precious Blood of Christ; by Right of Conquest
and Deliverance; for God, by sending his Son to die for us, conquered Sin, and
Satan, and Hell, and has delivered us out of their Power and Rage; that we,
being delivered such Enemies, might serve him without fear in Holiness and
Righteousness before him all the days of our life. He therefore having such and
so great Right, and so many, and so strong Titles to our Service, how can we
withold it from him? If we are obliged to give unto Caesar the things that
are Caesar's, why should we not give unto God what does so justly belong unto
him? In not doing of which we shall be unjust and sacrilegious in the highest
degree.

(5.) To this we may also add that it is an honorable thing to serve God, the
best and the noblest Employment, That which is the proper work of reason, That
wherein consists the greatest Honor, and from whence does redound the truest
Glory that the Sons of Men can be capable of. It Is not a service which we need
be ashamed of, or blush to own, or seek to decline, but rather such as we have
the greatest reason in the World to be glad and proud of. It Is an Employment
that ennobles Heaven, and wherein the Angels themselves do rejoice and glory.

The wisest and the best of Men, have all along esteemed it a great title of
Honor to be styled the Servants of God. St. Paul in his Epistle to Titus calls
himself the Servant of God; and the Epistle of St. James begins thus, James the
servant of God; and Moses who was a great Prince, and a Ruler under God of all
the Tribes of Israel, has this honorable Character given of him (as also
Joshua his immediate Successor had) that he was the servant of the Lord, and
(that I may mention no more of this kind) David himself, who was an Anointed
King, in many places of the Book of Psalms, makes mention of his being the
servant of God, as a matter wherein his greatest Glory and Renown did consist.

Indeed it is That which adds a Luster and a Glory to the Crowns of Princes, and
makes them shine with the greater Brightness; it is That which advances the
poor Man to an high Degree in the Love and Favor of God, and which adorns and
beautifies the Soul, more than all the external Appendages of State and
Grandeur, without it, can set off, or advantage the Body: it is That only which
can make the rich Men truly honorable, and gain them the truest Esteem and
Veneration. Them that honor me (says God) I will honor, and they that
despise me shall be lightly esteemed. To serve God, is to honor him; and they
that do so shall be honored by him: not to serve God, is to despise him; and
they that do so shall be rejected of him. Honor and Esteem, both with God and
Men, do constantly attend the Observance of this Duty; Disreputation and
everlasting Contempt are the natural Consequents of neglecting it.

Being therefore that all Men are naturally desirous of Honor, being nothing
can be a greater Honor to us, than to be employed in the Service of God, why
should not this be one good Motive to induce a Man to resolve to serve him?

(6.) And then we should consider farther, in the last place, that our State,
in this World, is not of a very long continuance; our Life is upon the wing,
and every moment hasting to its Period; every day that we live, we draw nearer
to our End; and many Instances of Mortality we meet with, which may put us in
mind of our Death. But then what will become of us in the other World, if our
Life be not spent in the Service of God in this? We are sure that we shall not
be eternally extinct, like the Beasts that perish, we shall not cease to have a
Being, even when we are departed hence, but we shall assuredly live either in
Eternal Misery, or Eternal Happiness; and there is no way for the avoiding the
one or obtaining the other, than by serving God whilst we are on this side the
Grave. If we serve Sin, the wages we shall reap thereby (besides the terrors
of an afflicted Conscience) will be Eternal Death, That will be our Misery; but
if, being made free from sin, we become the servants of God, we shall have our
fruit unto holiness, and, the end, (besides the comforts of a good Conscience)
everlasting life, (Romans 6. 22.) that will be our Happiness and our everlasting
Reward. This whosoever does seriously consider, he must be egregiously stupid
and senseless, if he prefers not the Service of God to all the vain Pleasures
and Enjoyments of the World, and chooses rather to serve him faithfully whilst
he lives here, than, by neglecting so to do, to run the hazard of being
eternally miserable hereafter. We know not how soon we may die, and go into
another World; and we shall be very unwise, if we take not care that our
portion may be amongst the Blessed, even in those happy Mansions above, where
all the true Servants of God enjoy never-fading Felicity, and reap those
Pleasures which are at God's right hand, and endure for evermore.

And thus, from these few Considerations (many more I might allege, but from
these few) we may sufficiently discern what great Motives and Reasons there
are, that may persuade us to this Duty of serving God. There may perhaps be
such unreasonable Persons, who, like those in the Prophet Malachi, speak
against the Lord with stout words, and either say openly with their mouths, or
think secretly in their hearts, that it is in vain to serve God, and what
profit is it, that we have kept his ordinances? (Mal. 3. 13, 14.) or with those
wicked Men in Job, What is the Almighty, that we should serve him, and what
profit shall we have if we pray unto him? (Job 21. 14, 15.) But ah, miserably
deluded Men! how do they speak? How do they think, without all Truth and
Reason? For never any Man did truly serve God, who was not a great Gainer
thereby, either in this World, or in the other, which is far better. Wherefore
whatever the sentiments of wicked Men may be, whatever may befall us in the
World upon This account, let us take up a firm Resolution with Joshua, and put
That Resolution into practice, of serving, honoring, and obeying the Almighty
Lord that made us.

And that we may be the better enabled to serve him as we ought to do, it is
very necessary that we should daily have recourse unto him for a continual
supply of his Grace and Holy Spirit, which we are infallibly assured he will
not deny to those that humbly crave it of him, and we must for the sake of our
ever-blessed Redeemer, Jesus Christ, beg God's Acceptance of our Persons and
our Endeavors. But then, when we have done all that we can in serving him, we
must beware that we boast not of it, nor pride our selves upon that account,
for we are still but unprofitable Servants; and we must be so far from taking
to our selves the praise of any thing that we do, that we should give Praise
and Glory to God only, who has given such power unto Men to serve and glorify
him.

Now unto The King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the only Wise God, be Honor
and Glory for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

