Anguis Flagellatus: OR, A Switch for the Snake.

BEING AN ANSWER To the Third and Last Edition OF THE Snake in the Grass.
WHEREIN That Author's Injustice and Falsehood, both in Quotation and Story, are
Discovered and Obviated. And the Truth Doctrinally Delivered by Us, Stated and
Maintained in Opposition to his Misrepresentation and Perversion.

By Joseph Wyeth.

To which is added a SUPPLEMENT, By George Whitehead.

Psalm. 37.12.The Wicked Plotteth against the Just, and Gnasheth upon him with
his Teeth. Prove. 26.18, 19.As a Madman, who casts Firebrands, Arrows and
Death. So is the Man that Deceives his Neighbor, and says, am not I in
Sport? London, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in
Gracious-street, and at the Bible in Leaden-Hall-street, 1699.

Academiae Cantabrigiensis Liber


PREFACE.
Impartial Reader,
AS I here present to thy View and Serious Consideration, Our Vindication
against the Attempts of an Enemy: So I judge it necessary, at least briefly, to
give thee some Account, some Reasons for my so doing. I am sensible, that
Business and Action tread so close upon the Heels of Leisure with very many,
that though this may incline, yet that may prevent the bestowing time to read
Discourses, either tedious in their Length, or in their Nature. If this partake
of both these, I can assure thee, Reader, with respect to its Length; it has
so happened not through any abounding Leisure that I had, to swell this, but from
a necessity to follow the Snake through his Windings, or (to speak in his
Phrase) (...): Thereby to obviate his Objections, which were of any seeming
force; and how far that is done, thy Judgment is (for thy self) to determine:
Of this I shall only say, that as on the one hand, I have endeavored to avoid
prolixity, so on the other, I have endeavored to use such, and so many words
as might sufficiently express the Matters spoken to.

If in this endeavor I have proved something short or defective in Expression,
or have sometime used, not the most proper, and apt Expressions to the purpose
intended; I hope the impartial Reader will from the Bulk, Scope and general
Tendency of what I have said, find cause to conclude that the fault is only in
that, and not in the meaning: And that this is always sound, if that be not
always so; this being our Duty, that so far as it relates to Art being only an
accomplishment, is, though a convenience to them that have it, yet a Duty upon
none: Which as I do not profess to be my Talent, so neither will it I hope be
strictly exacted of me.

But as to the Nature or Kind of this Tract, that was wholly out of my Power;
for Controversial it must be, and that is not always pleasant to every Reader:
And what may yet serve to add to that Ground of Dislike is, that the Chain or
Thread of the Discourse being frequently broken, by Quotations from the
Adversary, and other occasions; there often may be an uncertain or uneven
Style. Yet I hope the Reader will not be hereby prejudiced against the Truth
delivered, but accept that, though meanly dressed: This in general for the Book I
here present. And now I may add some few things with respect to that, to which
this is the Answer, viz. The Snake in the Grass: Which Title imples a Lurking
Practice, not imputable to us, since the things Charged are mostly from Books
that are Public to all, and made so with Design that they might be more
generally looked into than they are; so that Lurking is not our Way, but his
Practice; which is yet more manifest, in that the pretended Relations of Fact
which he gives to support the Title, Snake in the Grass, are by their Falsehood,
true Evidences that this Title is his Character.

But as Naturalists observe, Things Venomous do often carry with them their own
Antidote; so it is by this Snake. In which the Antidote is near the Poison, and
the Remedy near the Disease. His Disingenuity is the Poison, its
Counterballance is his Self-contradiction, and apparent Perversions, which are
such as may be seen by little Observation. For what greater Contradiction can
there be, than after having Ridiculed, Aspersed and Profanely Treated our
Belief of the Sufficiency of the Light within, and having endeavored to
represent it as Inconsistent and Impossible, by fallacious Arguments in several
of his Sections? Yet after all this to come and say, and acknowledge concerning
its Sufficiency, as much as we do; and to persuade his Reader that it is his
belief. Thus p. 39. he has endeavored to represent wicked Men and Devils to be
as Infallibly guided as those who are guided by the Light of Christ in Men,
which we say is Suffitient to guide Men in the way of true Obedience to God:
And in p. 60. he has endeavored to represent this our Belief of the
Suffitiency of the Light within, as that which does totally root up and destroy
all Church Government and Order: And p. 167. he says, Outward Preaching must
be wholly inconsistent with this Suffitiency of the Light within.

And now in Opposition and Contradiction to all this, and much more of this
sort, scattered throughout the whole Book; he seems in p. 319. to be as fully
persuaded of the Suffitiency of the Light within as any Sober Quaker (as he
expresses it) and there says of this Light within, or Inspiration (for he makes
them Synonimous) It is the Cause of all the Good that is in us, and we are
directed to it, to follow and be guided by it; and are assured that it will
lead us to all Truth that is requisite and necessary for our Eternal Salvation.

And this he delivers, not as his own Sentiment only, but also as the belief of
the Church of England, which if it be, it will concern him to prove for himself
and them, that this Inspiration which is suffitient to lead to all Truth
requisite and necessary to Eternal Salvation, do not run into the Error of
Origin, that the Devils shall be finally saved. That it do not totally root up
and destroy all Church Government and Order. That it be not wholly Inconsistent
with all outward Preaching: And with many other things which he has said it
is, as is before quoted.

But now more Particularly with respect to the Author of the Snake, he is
disingenious, and a false Witness: And as a Clipper or Coiner is of no Credit,
so he by perverting words spoken, and forging that for ours which never was,
has sufficiently shown what Credit is to be given to him. As for his
Perversions, they are detected in every of the following Sections, and are so
numerous, that to repeat them all, I must transcribe a great part of the Book
into the Preface; wherefore I shall only take notice of one, and that is a
Quotation which he has made in p. 81. out of W. Penn's Address, etc. which he
has notoriously perverted as I have shown, Sect. V. p. 144, 145. And although the
Snake has, to excuse this, made an Advertisement, p. 346, 347, 348. yet he
has not cleared himself of it, in that by a most wilful perversion he says,
p. 347. It lies still against Mr. Penn, and the other Foxonian Quakers.

But besides Perversions of this Sort, his Curtailing Quotations, his Changing
and Placing of Words and Sentences, so that they might speak his Sense, not
ours, is most notorious; and such as does at once destroy both the Charity of a
Christian, and the Honor of a Man.

Thus, making a Quotation from G. F's Answer to the Westmerland Petition; he
pretends to take these words, You will own Our Writings; when in that place as
I have shown p. 83. the words are, You will own Them; so that the words Our
Writings are his Addition.

Thus, also he makes a Quotation from Edw. Burroughs's Works, p. 862. Every
True Member of the Church, here he gives a Dash -- and then goes on, and leaves
out these words which next follow, has its particular Measure of the
Infallible Spirit of Christ, etc. as I have shown in p. 93. and thus he has
done by G. Whitehead, W. Penn, T. Ellwood, F. Howgill and others, whose
Writings he mentions, which I have detected as I have met with them.

And besides this his base Practice of Clipping our Words, and Coining, and
passing upon his Reader his own words for ours, in pretended Quotations which
are herein detected. He also in Relations of Fact has been equally injurious
to Truth and Us.

Thus in p. 148. He pretends to give an account of the Practice of one of our
Schools, to tell what they do, and what they do not read; and says, Never a
Chapter out of the Bible, that is Beastly Ware with them, Dust, and Death, and
Serpents Meat.

Yet this is false, as I have shown by Certificates, under the hands of
Persons, who well know the Practice of that School; and have testified, p. 225,
226, 227. That the Scriptures are in that School daily read by the Scholars;
and that there has not been the least appearance of Slight or Disesteem showed
to them, either by the Master or any other belonging to the said School. And to
what I have thus proved notoriously false, he had the Face to call upon the
Public to take some care in it; which if himself had done, he could not have
told that Untruth.

Thus in p. 110. He does in the last degree of Confidence say, We never heard
of any Censure they have passed upon those many much grosser Contempts of
Scripture, which daily are found among them, particularly of Mary Tucker, etc.

When on the contrary, his general Slander [ Contempts of Scripture, which are
daily found among them, etc.] is no other than a general Falsehood, and the
particular Story I have shown, p. 171, 172. to be as falsely cast on us. For
that there was Censure past upon Mary Tucker, for her gross Contempt of the
Holy Scripture, both by her then Master (for it is now near 40 Years since) W.
Reyman: And also by Edw. Buroughs, and other of our Friends, who did then deny
her for that Action. And of this he might easily have heard, who did so well
know the place of W. Reyman's abode.

But the meanness of his Soul, follows that of his Fortune; to supply his Teeth
he turns Broker or Pedlar to Renegades, and licks up their Spittle, (to use his
own Phrase) only that he may have the Pleasure of throwing it at us, having
added to its Filthiness, from his own foul Mouth. Thus, by a strange
Contradiction he can receive Information from T. C. against J. Naylor, who yet
has professed so much respect to that deceased, as to conclude to be buried by
him, which shows, that while they are lashing of J. N's Memory, or the faults
of such as have been long since denied by us; it is only with design that they
might reach our Backs. This is the Aim and great Design, in order to which, the
Charges which we have heretofore Answered over and over, are now new vamp'd and
changed by this Snake, in a fresh Dress, and given forth as a new discovery,
which though it be a plain proof of his Disingenuity; yet is there little New in
it, for that Charges of these sorts have been made by our Adversaries, in their
Books Printed against us, as well during the Days of the Commonwealth, as
since. And though there has been hardly any in their Writings against us, but
have shown themselves to have some Rancour and Enmity: Yet I think none have
gone the length of this Snake herein, as well in his Profane Jesting, and
playing the Buffoon on the Subject of Religion; some Instances of which I have
Collected, p. 19, 20. whereby he has shown himself fitter for a Stage Play,
than a serious Controversy; as in the management of it he has discovered
nothing more than a Persecuting Spirit, by ill and false Practices,
endeavoring to expose us for our Christian Principles, while himself, for his
own Principle, or rather Humor, is Incognito. I say Humor, because he was
formerly as much the other way, toward the late King, even to Rudeness and
Sedition, as he has since manifested himself to be against the Present
Government. Insomuch that if we fetch his Parallel from Scripture, it must be
Ishmael, both in Scoffing, and having his Hand against every Man; by which his
ill Practices, and Un-Christian Attempts and Designs, he has given true
Evidence and Reason to conclude concerning him, in the Words of the Prophet
Isa. 57.20. But the wicked are like the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest,
whose Waters cast up mire and dirt.

Reader, I shall not be so tedious in the Preface, as here to touch upon the
several kinds of Ills he has done toward us, they being somewhat spoken to in
the Introduction. What remains is, That I account it, in some sort, an Act of
Supererogation, to consider him at all, after the Answer which has been
already given by G. W. to the first Edition, and what has been occasionally
Answered in former times: The Substance of his whole Book being no other than a
Repetition of former Calumnies from several Adversaries; which as he has
collected, or epitomized, into one Volume; so if thou herein finds fit
Collective Answer, it may in some degree, ease thee of the trouble of an exact
and distinct Inquiry into all our particular Answers. If herein it be
serviceable, in that the Calumnies of the Adversary are wiped away, his
Falsities refuted, and Truth set in it is Native Light; so far God shall hereby
be Glorified, and both my trouble in Writing, and thine in Reading of it, will
be answered

J. W.

THE CONTENTS.
Sect. I. INtroduction, Wherein also the Preface and Introduction of the Snake
are considered. p. 1. Sect. II. Showing that we do not make our Souls of the
same Person and Substance with God, nor Aspire to an Equality with him. p. 49.
Sect. III. Concerning Perfection. p. 69. Sect. IV. Concerning Immediate
Revelation. p. 74. Sect. V. Concerning Infallibility. p. 85. Sect. VI.
Concerning the Authority of the Holy Scriptures. p. 150. Sect. VII. Concerning
Idolatry. p. 173. Sect. VIII. Concerning the Holy Three, Bearing Record in
Heaven. p. 184. Sect. IX. Concerning the Divinity and Incarnation of Christ. p.
191. Sect. X. Concerning the Satisfaction of Christ. p. 230. Sect. XI.
Concerning the Resurrection. p. 239. Sect. XII. Concerning Baptism and the
Supper. p. 258. Sect. XIII. Showing Popish Emissaries did not set up Quakerism
in England. p. 276. Sect. XIV. Showing that we do not Damn all but our selves.
p. 293. Sect. XV. The Quakers cleared from the Charge of Venom and Nastiness,
and it shown to be his own True Character. p. 308. Sect. XVI. Of F^ghting and
Loyalty. p. 316. Sect. XVII. Concerning Tithes. p. 376. Sect. XVIII. Showing
that the Pretensions of the present Quakers (as of the former) to the Spirit of
Prophecy, Infallibility, etc. is according to, and agreeable with the
Scriptures of Truth. p. 434. Sect. XIX. Visible Possessions by the Devil
Examined and Refuted. p. 442. Sect. XX. Of Enthusiasm, or Inspiration, as said
by the Snake, to be owned by the Church. p. 462. Sect. XXI. His Falsely
Entitled Impartial Comparison, between G. Fox, L. Muggleton, and Oliver's
Porter, shown to be Profane, etc. p. 472. A Supplement by G. Whitehead. p.
486. Sect. XXII. A Reply to some Remarks upon (as it is called by the Snake) G.
W's Creed. p. 486. Sect. XXIII. Some Reflections by G. W. upon A Supplement,
pretended, upon occasion of his Answer to The Snake in the Grass, p. 343. p.
507.
ERRATA.
PAge 32. l. 24. things, r. thing, p. 34. l. 23, it, r. is, p. 64. l. 17. Te^^
r. Fell, p. 76, l. 16.21, r. 28, p. 91. l. 7. after gave us, add to discen^ p.
94. l. 5, swearing, r. to swear, p. 111, l. 17, after have, add little, (...)
p. 126, l. 32. it, r. is, p. 144, l. 27, dele unless, p. 152, l. 27, after is*
(...) as, p. 168, l. 1. after was, add said to be, ib. l. 22. r. as before is,
p. 180. ^* 34, word, r. world, p. 197, l. 19, after that, add it, p. 202, l.
30, (...) here, add, desire him to, p. 216, l. 9. after to, add the, ib. l. 10,
land, (...) lamb, p. 272, l. 28, after what, add it, p. 286, l. 13, dele Qua,
p. 398, (...) 28, after of, dele the, p. 413, l. 30, dele all, p. 431, l. 5,
drink, r. dru^^*

Anguis Flagellatus: OR, A SWITCH FOR THE Snake in the Grass.
INTRODUCTION. Wherein also the Preface and Introduction of the Snake are
Considered and Replied to.
AGainst the Venom of the Snake, as it at first appeared, an Antidote has been
already given, in an Answer under that Title, by George Whitehead, to the First
Edition of the Snake in the Grass: Of which Answer, the crafty Sophister,
having gotten notice, hastened a Second Edition of the Snake, so different from
the First, that it might rather seem a New Book, than a New Impression of an
Old One. For besides the Additions which he made, he altered the Frame and
Contexture of it, by choping and changing the Parts, and melting (as his Phrase
is) a Preface of above 350 Pages (and bigger than the Book it self) into the
Body of the Book, which (as himself says) in his Account of the Second Edition,
renders it in a manner a New Work; and he calls it a pulling down the whole,
and rearing it in a new Form. Thus the Snake cast its Skin, changed both Color
and Shape in the several Subsequent Editions: By which Artifice, the Answer,
which was designed and adapted to the First Edition, was rendered less
Serviceable and Useful. The Reader, not knowing, by the Pages referred to in
the Antidote, where to find in the later Editions, the Matter treated of. As
this, together with the Adversary's Allegations in his latter Editions, that in
the Answer to his first, his Quotations were not disproved, was the Ground or
Motive to this Second Answer: So also the Reasons why this Answer came not
sooner forth, were partly, that we might see in what Shape this Proteus, who
has transformed so often, would at length settle, that we might not be again
obliged Actum Agere: And partly, that we might have had his Reply to G.W's
Antidote, which is his Third Edition, p. 358, and 366. He has as good as
promised, that That also might have been considered. But since our Adversary
has thought fit to suspend, if not wholly to throw off, his pretended
Intention, of giving a particular Reply to the Antidote: I was not willing
longer to delay this Answer, to the Third and Last Edition of the Snake. And do
here acquaint such Readers, who have the Second Edition of the Snake, that
though the Pages differ, so that the References by them do not agree, yet the
Sections in both the Second and Third Editions, standing in the same Order, and
bearing the same Titles; and this Answer being adapted to each Section mostly
separatim, it will not be very difficult for the Reader herein to find the
Matter referred to in the Second Edition of the Snake also.

Thus having given some short Account, both of the Reasons why this Answer was
delayed till now, and why written now: It will be necessary to proceed to the
Work; in which, that I may not omit any thing in the Snake, deserving notice, I
shall begin with his Preface.

The Preface considered.
THE Snake, that he might not miss any occasion of showing the World the Squint
Opinion he has of us, is pleased to link us in his Preface with one Antonia
Bourignon, of whose Principles he pretends to give some Account, and that she
perfectly agrees with us, Pref. p. 11. even in those things wherein himself
says she has writ against us; and takes up a great part of 44 Pages, of which
his Preface consists, to show some Instances of those Wild, Heretical and
Barbarous Notions, which in Pref. p. 4. he says Antonia holds, and which he in
order bestows upon us, thereby to prepossess his Reader: Not unlike the Fellow,
who to show his Squint and Blasphemous Opinion of the Apocalypse, bound up St.
John's Revelations and Aesop's Fables in one Volume. But as St. John's
Revelations had another Origin than the Imaginary Fables of Aesop: So the
Revelations of the same Holy Spirit at this day do vastly differ from all
Imaginary Flights, from all Heretical, Wild and Barbarous Notions; and does
give Solid Reasons of that Faith it begets in us, and which we are ready to
give to the Sober Inquirer. As for Bourignon, her Errors concerns not us (if
she be what the Snake says) she appearing an Enemy, as well as he, by having
writ against us; not but that there is some reason to suspect he wrongs her
from the certainty we have of his often and greatly abusing us. Pref. p. 11,
12. The great design of the Devil is, and has always been, to beat down the
Priesthood, and outward Ordinances, etc. When the Apostle Paul decry'd the
abrogated Priesthood and outward Ordinances, did he thereby carry on the design
of the Devil? From the Rise of Popery, all along the Apostasy, to the time of
the Reformation beginning, did the Devil labor to beat down the Priesthood,
and outward Ordinances, or to keep them up?

Ib. Knowing that Religion must needs fall with them. What Religion must that
be? This shows the Religion the Snake contends for, is built upon the
Priesthood, and outward Ordinances, else it could not necessarily fall with
them. He has another Notion of Religion than the Apostle James, as well as
another Religion; and according to him, James 1.27. must be read, Pure
Religion, and undefiled before God and the Father, is this, To keep up the
Priesthood and outward Ordinances; for if they fall, Religion will fall with
them. Such as is his Religion, such the Government also, and Order he contends
for, viz. a Government that depends upon saying You to One, calling Men Lord or
Master (who are not so) taking off the Hat, and Bowing: For not to do these
things is with him, Pref. p. 15. a dissolving of all Government, and order the
Relations of King and People, Husband and Wife, Parents and Children, Masters
and Servants. Which Notoriously False and Childish Assertion deserves to be
Hissed out of the World: For in the Instances of Government, disolv'd in the
Relation of King and People, pray Reader consider, have they been dissolved and
run down by Thee and Thou; not saying Master or Lord, by not pulling off the
Hat, or Bowing; or have they been run down and dissolved by Men who Practiced
contrary to these things? The Author of that Treasonable Piece, in answer to
Dr. King, now Bishop of Londonderry, in Ireland, can say You to One, can call
Men Lord or Master (who are not so) can pull off his Hat, and Bow; yet has
given a fair Specimen of his design to dissolve the Relation of King and
People, by running down the present Government. And for the Instances of
Relation, between Husband and Wife, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants,
never was one of these Relations, dissolved, or run down, through Obedience to
the Precept of our Savior, but always by the Iniquity and Disobedience of
those in these Relations, who have Despised the Precepts, and cast off the Yoke
of Christ.

Ibid. That the Quakers at first left their Houses and Families to run about
and Preach; and cried down Riches when they had none: Is notoriously false: For
the Quakers never left their Families to shift for themselves, but always took
due care of them, which is evident in this; in that their Families have not
offered themselves to the care of the Parishes where they dwelt; but on the
contrary, have defrayed their own Charge, and paid their Lot in the Assessments
for the Poor of the Church, which our Adversary pretends Membership in: But if
I should examine how many Priests have spent their exactions in Pride, Luxury
and voluptuous Living, and have left their Families to shift for themselves, or
to the Alms of their dissenting Neighbors, the Number would not be very small.
Nor did the Quakers ever cry down Riches, but the immoderate desire after and
abuse of them: This we practiced then, and the same now.

Pref. p. 24. The Quakers dispute against these (viz. the outward Sufferings
and Death of Christ) and place the Merit and Satisfaction in the allegorical
Sufferings and Blood of their Light within, inwardly shed, etc.

This Assertion of the Snake is not allegorically, but literally a Lie; for we
acknowledge the satisfaction made by Christ to his Father, but we do deny that
groundless and dangerous Notion of his having paid, and his Father exacted,
that strict and rigorous Satisfaction, by undergoing the self-same Punishment
and Pains that the Damned suffer in Hell.

We own the Merit of his outward Death and Sufferings, but dispute against the
misapplication of that Merit to ungodly Men, continuing impenitently in their
Sins.

We own and believe, that Men, by continuing impenitently in their Sins, do
press, as with sheaves, the holy Spirit, and by such their despite to the
Spirit of Grace, do grieve the good Spirit of God which he has shed abroad
upon the Hearts of Men in order to their Regeneration. But have never said, or
believed, that the Satisfaction made by Christ to the Father, and the Merit
thereof, consisted in any allegorical Suffering, and Blood of the Light within
inwardly shed.

We own and believe, that Men, through obedience to the Spirit of Grace, may
come to have their Consciences sprinkled from dead Works to serve the living
God; and may, through the Blood of the everlasting Covenant, be made perfect in
every good Work to do the Will of God through (...). But have never placed or
believ^^ (...) thereof did consist in such allegorica^ (...) and Sufferings, as
the Snake does insinua^^ ^^ainst us; no more than the Apostle, in the^^ and
other places of holy Writ, where he directs Men to the word (Christ) in Them,
can be supposed to undervalue the outwa^d Death and Sufferings of Christ at
Jerusalem: And to place the satisfaction he made to the Father, and the Merit
of it, to consist in these his spiritual appearances by the holy Spirit in the
Hearts of Men.

Pref. p. 29. George Fox was much more inconsiderable than A^^onia Bourignon;
and got none at the beginning to follow him, but from among the poor and most
ignorant of the Herd; who have since swelled to a rich, numerous, and a potent
People, overspreading these three Nations, and stocking whole Plantations
abroad: And their Succors have taken Root both in Holland and Germany.

O! Excellent beginning, though not enough desired increase: Yet both beginning
and increase, does in his show, the Servant like his Lord, against whom it was
objected, John 2.48. Have any of the Rulers or Pharisees (the Rich, Great or
Learned) believed on him, but this People who know not the Law, and are cursed.

Herein the Snake shows his unity with those Blasphemous Opposers of Christ,
and also gives a Testimony for us, that in beginning and increase, we are like
the Primitive Times of increasing Christianity: Which, though it is beyond the
common Rule of Judging, yet it is certainly true, that by the things which are
not, God will bring to naught things that are: And the mean and low, who keep
so, in his Fear, them he will exalt; and them who seek first the Kingdom of
Heaven, and the Righteousness of it, shall not fail to have all convenient
things added; for being Lord of Heaven, he is the same over Earth, and disposes
it at his pleasure. This, many have experienced; after all the fleecings and
tearing to pieces of Estates and Families, which we have suffered, by the cruel
hands of such, who pretended love to our Souls: So that we have none, to whom
to attribute our Riches, Numbers or Might, but the Secret Hand of divine
Providence, which first gave us being. And I firmly believe, that if the
Professors of Truth keep in the Possession of it, the Kingdoms of this World
will become the Kingdoms of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ; who in his
smallest appearance, as in the vision declared by the Prophet, Dan. 2.31, 32,
33, 34. breaks to pieces the seemingly strong and gay Combinations and
Pretenses of Men, which shall oppose his Work in Men, and will Blow them away
as the Chaff of the Summer threshing Floor.

Pref. p. 31. Enthusiasm has been the root of the greatest Evils that have
befallen the Church. It is a perfect opposition to all Rule and Government: And
there can be no order kept where it is admited.

Thus Indefinitely and without distinction he brands Enthusiasm, yet in the
same Page allows it to be Divine, admits the greatest flights and ecstasies of
it. And says, The Higher the Better.

And in Sect. 22. p. 314, etc. defining Enthusiasm to signify Inspiration, and
saying it may mean a Good as well as an Evil Inspiration.

He takes some pains to prove, from the Liturgy and Offices of the Church
Service, that the Church of England (which he pretends to be of) allows it,
pretends to it, and prays for it. Yet in Pref. p. 43. He says, There is no
Enthusiasm, where there is not Pride: Which being dressed in the Garb and Guise
of Humility, is literally the Devil.

Thus he fights against himself, by owning and denying the same thing: And not
less in the Marks he gives, to know that Enthusiasm, which he calls Divine,
from that which he calls Diabolical.

The first ( Pref. p. 323.) is, that Enthusiasm, or those Inspirations (for he
makes them Synonymous) which are Divine, fill us with Humility, and withal a
great Charity for others; being more apt to have a good Opinion of them, than
of our Selves.

Now Reader I will show thee, that the Snake, our Adversary, is free from this
first Mark of Divine Inspiration: For as contrary as Hatred is to Love, as
Cruelty is to Mercy so is his Disdainful and Scornful, Insulting and Scoffing
(which throughout his Book appears) contrary to the Humility and Charity which
the holy Spirit teaches.

And it is in Disdain and Scorn where this Adversary, p. 16. speaking of G. F.
says, it was a bewildring of his poor Understanding.

And in p. 17. speaking of G. F. he says, he had an immoderate degree of
Dullness and lack of Understanding, as could hardly befall any thing in Humane
Shape.

And in p. 150. speaking of G. F. he says, But George Magus owned no other Holy
Ghost, than what was within himself, of which he was the Possessor and Owner.

P. 42, 43. Speaking to G. W. he says, Scoffingly and Insultingly, George hold
up thy Face and look like a Man! Come, be brisk, and tell me by yea and by nay.
Ibid. Alas poor George! Is the Infallible Quakers dwindled down to a mere
Gypsy? -- Ah! George! What a blessed Spirit would thou have thought Satan?

These few instances, may show how far the Snake is from that Humility and
Charity which himself makes the first and proper Mark of Divine Enthusiasm or
Inspiration. Charity (he says, Pref. p. 35.) believes all things that are
good, or can be well construed of another.

But himself is so far from this Charity, that he misconstrues all things
against us, with set purpose to abuse us. When he says ( Pref. p. 34.) Hence We
(himself and Party) despise others, and are apt to censure them even unto Hell;
he says true to the Shame of himself and them: But when he adds, The Quakers
have damned all but themselves, he says false, and that it may appear he has
falsely charged us; pray Reader consider the following Quotation taken from one
of our Ancient Friends, Isaac Penington; in his Treatise, Entitled, An Answer
to that common Objection against the Quakers, that they condemn all but
themselves; which was writ early, and reprinted with his Works, Anno. 1680.
where, p. 310. of the first part of his Works, He thus speaks,

The Protestant Churches (as they are called in way of distinction from the
Church of Rome) the blessed Martyrs, who suffered for the Testimony of a pure
Conscience toward God, and all the Worthies of the Lord, in their several
Generations, who fought against the Scarlet Whore, were accepted of God, in
their Testimony against Her, and are not disowned by us, but dearly owned and
honored therein. He continues in giving Instances both of persons and things,
as Luther, Hus, Brute, and Fox, with whom we agree in these things; as against
deriving a Ministry from Rome, and maintaining it by Tithes, and denying
Swearing, etc. And then adds, p. 311. But all things were not discovered at
once. The Times were then dark, and the Light small; yet they being Faithful,
according to what was discovered, were precious in the Lord's Eyes; and what
through Ignorance they erred in, the Lord winked at, and overlooked; being
pleased with the Sincerity and Simplicity of Heart, which he had stirred up in
them toward himself. Thus he, as who please may read, with more to the same
purpose.

Now, pray Reader consider, whether this be Damning all but our selves, or
whether it be not of that Charity, which the Snake has made one Mark of Divine
Inspiration. And more Instances of this sort I could heap, but that I aim to
satisfy not cloy thee; and therefore come to the Snake's Second sure Mark, and
which is a Mark of Diabolical Inspiration; and that is Pref. p. 35. Heresy
Instilled, contrary to the Truth of the Gospel. Which, as applied to us, is
begging the Question. And the Charge is the same from the Church of Rome to the
Church of England, and from other Dissenters to her also: So that this his Sure
Mark, does, by such begging the Question, as surely hit himself as others. And
therefore I shall let this Mark rest, till I come to the Instances, which he
shall give, of Heresies we hold, contrary to the Truth of the Gospel; and may
then have opportunity to show, that the Snake is with the Papist, as ready to
bestow the name Heretic, as I have shown him to be Uncharitable, Proud and
Disdainful.

I come now to his third and last Mark, Pref. p. 36. viz. of Schism: upon which
our Adversary mentions that of the Corinthians, reproved by the the Holy
Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. where he says, To speak with the Tongue of Men and Angels,
to understand all Mysteries, etc. To which the Snake adds, Pref. p. 37. All
this would signify nothing to us, if we keep not in the Unity of the Body,
which is the Church. Pref. p. 38. And be not content with our Station, as
Members, though never so Eminent, as an Eye or a Hand, without making a Schism in
the Body, by withdrawing our due Subjection to the Head; our Spiritual
Governors, who are the Principles of Unity in the Body. Pref. p. 39. And now
Reader, stay and admire! That if even Miraculous Gifts were not a sufficient
Pretense for any to advance himself above his Bishop, or withdraw from under
his Government. And the Snake gives us a Reason, why this strict Subjection
must hold; Pref. p. 41. Because, Corruptions in the Church are better amended,
by living in the Communion of the Church; and there-by Exhorting, Admonishing,
and Showing Good Example to Reclaim. Thus the Snake. And Reader, Let me now
show thee how, in all this, he has combated the Reformation, and thrown down
the Church-Services, as Schismatical, which in Sect 22. he calls Divine
Enthusiasm. That I may show this: It has been acknowledged by Members of the
Church of England, in Dispute with those of the Church of Rome, That there is
Possibility of Salvation in the Church of Rome: She being truly a Church,
though Corrupt. Now, if so, according to the Doctrine of the Snake, the first
Reformers from Popery, how Eminent soever, nay, if endued with Miraculous
Gifts, had not sufficient Pretense to advance themselves Above their Bishop,
who being their Spiritual Governor and Head, they did owe a due Subjection to
him. And this the Snake endeavors to enforce, Pref. p. 40. That
notwithstanding the Wickedness of the Priests and People of the Jews. Yet the
Holy Prophets sent from God, set not up opposite Altars, to the Altars of those
wicked Priests, nor invaded their Office.

Readers, who are in Communion with the Church of England, See your Advocate is
gone to Rome in his Preface; and to his Power has struk at the Root of the
Reformation, not only here in England, but throughout Europe. By which Key we
may open his meaning in Pref. p. 42. where he would be understood to have a
Flaming Charity for the good of the Body, and the Unity of the Church. And now
for a Man that has in such large Characters Apologized for Rome, and
endeavored to weaken the Reformation, in the nullity of those Arguments, on
which it is partly built, to be so much in Passion, as in Page 189. he is, with
Josiah Coal, for Reprinting in a piece of his (what he calls) A Senseless, but
bitter Libel, against the Church of England; written by A. S. a Papist, is very
odd; it shows his Disposition to be very Uncertain, by the Unsettledness of his
Reason. But hitherto I have only applied his Doctrine to the Reformation: It Is
true, it fits not there, but there may be some Excuse, in that he might in
have, not think of squaring his Doctrine by that Rule. But then, let us Examine
his Doctrine by his own Practice, which being under his Daily Observation (or
else he is very forgetful) it is not so likely to run Counter to that: Yet such
is this Man's blindness, That, Reader, what he objects against us, called
Quakers, and all other Dissenters from the Church of England, for Instances of
Schism, are directly within the Line of his Practice: For this doughty
Champion, who with so much Confidence in Page 336. does Demand Reparation in
the Name of the Church of England, did yet withdraw himself from his
acknowledged due Subjection to his Spiritual Head and Guide, his Bishop; in not
acknowledging of the present Government, and has been more apt to Censure
others than himself, and to Divide than Heal; which in Pref. p. 43. he says,
We ought not. Hence his Momus-like Disposition in Ireland: And Hence the
Occasion of the Warrant for his Apprehension, while endeavoring to escape to
France, when at War with us; in which Practices I doubt not but he is disowned
by that Church, as that Church must be acknowledged to be disowned by those,
who, though in Corners, set up private Altars against her: Thus in Examination,
His private Practices run Counter to his public Pretenses, which is a Mark of
Hypocrisy, to which more may be spoken anon. But besides all this, If
Corruptions in a Church are best mended, by living in the Communion of it, and
there, by Exhorting, Admonishing, and Showing Good Examples. Does the Church of
England give Liberty so to do, to those that continue in her Communion? If not,
what is this but to sham and deceive the unwary Reader. But we are rather to
take the account of his disposition toward us, by the Character which he makes
of 30 or 40 different Sects (as he calls all Dissenters) Pref. p. 43. that they
are like the Spawn of the Viper. And I cannot think they, or he, would like the
Exhortation and Admonition of such Spawn.

Pref. p. 44. He advises, to be willing cheerfully to submit our selves to our
Superiors both in Church and State.

Here he would again impose upon the Reader, as if himself did both; when in
truth neither, which if he did, it might be hoped (in Charity) he would be more
a Christian, and a better Subject.

The Introduction considered.
HAving dispatched the Preface, before I reply to the Book, I shall here
observe to thee Reader, the Profaneness, Hypocrisy and Injustice of this our
Adversary, in some few collected Instances; that I may not postpone thy inquiry
to a distinct survey of the whole.

And first for his Profaneness: He does, in a style not Grave or Serious; but
Light, Airy, Deriding and Scoffing, treat of Matters most Grave and Serious; at
least herein equalling, if not outdoing the Stage: Hereby stirring up Levity in
the Wild and Wanton, and keeping the Reader from a Sober and Serious
Consideration of things; rather than make it his endeavor, to convince
Gainsayers, satisfy the Scrupulous, reduce the Erroneous, propagate the
Gospel, or to bring Converts or Honor to the Church he pretends to be of: And
it is not to be imagined, that Persons of solid Judgment, Sobriety and a
serious Sense of Religion, should endure, much less be taken, with an attempt,
running counter to these purposes: Of this sort is his whole 23 Sect. where, in
most Profane Manner, he redicules the Operations of the holy Spirit, calling
it, p. 330. a mad Joy; and p. 336. Enthusiastic Madness. And of G. Fox, says,
p. 330. he was a Liberal Cursing Prophet -- a Journey-man Shoemaker, the
Ground and Occasion of whose Enthusiasm, was Despair, p. 331. So Ignorant, p.
335. that he knew not before, but God dwelt in a Church, as Man does in a
House, so as to be locked up, and to be no where else when he is there. And
that George Magus (as he is pleased to call him) owned no other holy Ghost than
what was within himself, of which he was the possessor and owner, p. 150.

And speaking to George Whitehead, p. 42, 43. he does in scoffing Mood bid him,
by yea and by nay, hold up his Face, be Brisk and look like a Man. This with
abundance more scattered throughout the whole Book.

He says p. 6. he is forced to now and then, in answer to such senseless
Arguments and Pretenses, as deserve no otherwise to be confuted.

And on this account it is, that of Dissenters in general; he can afford no
better Character or Simile, than that they are like the Spawn of the Viper.

Now, sober Reader, pray consider, Do we meet with such Instructions for
Profaneness, in the Example and Precept of our Savior? The Examples and
Precepts of his holy Apostles? Or, in the Example and Precept of of such, who
in a true sense of Religion, have declared the end of their endeavors, were to
reclaim and reduce the Erroneous, and convince Gainsayers? Is it possible?
Reader, that supposing me in Error and Gainsaying; I should think a Man so
profanely Scoffing, should have any real Concern for the Salvation of my Soul,
so as to be reduced by him: Or, if I be not in Error, that he can have any
conscientious Concern for my preservation: Nor will the example of Elijah do
him any service here; he by a warrantable Irony, did confute the pretended
Godhead, which has Eyes and sees not, Ears and hears not; thereby to reclaim
the Idol-worshippers. But we, the Quakers, nor any other Dissenters in England,
that I know of, do, or ever did, acknowledge any other God, than that one
Almighty Being, the Father of all Things, and Jesus Christ his Eternal Son, and
the Holy Spirit, proceeding from the Father and the Son, who is one God,
blessed for ever. This has been so often declared, that the Snake could not be
ignorant of it; wherefore he is the more Inexcusable.

Secondly, Of his Hypocrisy, p. 2. I have (says he) great Charity for the
Generality of the Ignorant sort of them; some of whom I know to be very Honest
and Well-meaning Men, and Devout in their Way. -- I do freely own, that I have
a real Kindness and good Wishes for every one of the Quakers, that I have
hitherto been acquainted with; and I never received any sort of Disobligation
from any of them, in my whole Life. And yet treats the Quakers with all the
marks of Bitterness, Baseness, Contempt and Disdain, and with all the marks of
open Enmity, that can be shown in the most Scurrilous manner, insomuch that he
implicitly denies One Dram of the Spirit of Christianity to be in all the
Quakers, p. 182. and in p. 177. to George Whitehead, he says, Come George, we
are near an end, and we know not if ever we shall meet again; tell me in the
Plain, Downright Honesty and Simplicity of the Light within. See Reader, not
only the Profaneness, but the Hypocisie of Pretended Kindness and Good Wishes,
and the base Returns, for no Disobligation. Page 202. the Picture of the Quaker
Spirit, he says, he feels, sees and abominates, by the very Conviction of his
Sense. Then what grand Hypocrisy must it be, to pretend, as he does, that he
has real Kindness and good Wishes for such, whose Spirit he abominates? I have
shown before, from his Profane and Scornful Treatment of us, that he cannot
wish well to our Souls; and himself declares, he abominates our Spirit; which
being both absent, what would his kindness to our Bodies be? Why there is
sufficient Ground to believe, that his kindness to them is much what the cruel
Emperor's was to the Romans, when he wished them all but one Neck; and then
their dispatch would be speedy. And to show that it is not mere Conjecture, I
now proceed:

Thirdly, To his Injustice, which is manifest, not only in Wresting our
Writings, and Perverting our Plain Meanings therein, and that knowingly and
wilfully, since they have been explained by our selves; but also by false
Quoting our Books, sometimes by packing Sentences, which stand at distance,
close together, as one continued Quotation; or else only with the distinction
of a Break, without any regard to his breaking off the Sense of the Writer: Of
which, in my way through his Book, I shall show abundance of Instances. Add to
this his Injustice, in urging against us our Adversaries false Charges; some
upon bare hearsay, and often out of Books written against us by open Enemies,
and that without taking notice of our Answers; which is equally Unjust: As to
have urged the Writings of Celsus, Porphyry, or other Heathens, against the
Primitive Christians, or the Writings of the Romanists against the Protestants,
as Eckius against Luther, Harding againg Juel, etc. without any regard had to
their Answers: Which, whosoever should do, might have the name of a Bold and
Confident, but not Wise or Honest Man: Yet such is this Snake's Practice, and
that he might not come short in any thing, wherein he can be Injurious, he has
purposely misstated our Principles, that thereby he might make himself an
Advantage to fasten upon us (what in him lies) such Absurd, Extravagant, and
Impious Consequences, as he pleases. Of this sort, I shall have frequent proof
to show thee Reader, and now go on to the Book.

Page 1. The Controversy with the Quaker Dissenters has not been pursued by
the Church of England, with the like Zeal and Pains, as those against the
Presbyterians, Independants, and other Dissenters, because the Quakers were not
so considerable. -- But their Numbers (increased by being neglected) are become
Formidable.

It is not my business here to inquire what the Zeal and Pains of the Church
has been against other Dissenters; it shall suffice me, briefly as I may, to
show how warm her Zeal, and how great her Pains toward us: Though I here
declare, it is not pleasant to me, afresh, to object the Unchristian Treatment,
Zeal and Pains, wherewith very many Members of that Church have pursued us; and
I would rather have let it slept in Oblivion, than called to mind that Harsh
Treatment; had it not been necessary to remember it, and object it, for
Confutation, to the false Pretenses of one, who pretends to personate her
Cause, wipe his Mouth, say what Harm have we done, and to tell the World a most
Egregious Lie, how the Quakers have been Neglected, and thereby Increased. For
Confutation of this, I say, I shall briefly Hint to the Sober Reader, that we
have not come behind our Neighbors in Sufferings, in the several Capacities of
Name, Person, and Estate, and give some short Specimen of each. And first for
Sufferings in Name and Fame: The many Books written against us, even from the
very first, are Witnesses: For the Priesthood in many places, in the Days of
our Infancy, did, not only write against us themselves, but these encouraged
their Flocks, whereby there frequently came forth many Books against us;
insomuch that to the Year 1660. if occasion did require, I could produce a
Catalogue of many Hundreds, which is no mean Beadroll of Adversaries. And while
Pens were thus employed against us, Lying Tongues were not idle for Report and
Fame, spoke of us in blackest Characters, from the Envious and the Ignorant,
which yet has often been of advantage; for when some in Curiosity have been
inclined to see for themselves, what Monsters of Men they must needs be, of
whom such ill Fame and Report did go; and have seen and found that Fame and
Report false, they have been inclined to love what that was designed to have
made them to hate: Nay, so general has our Suffering in this sort been, I may
say, That we have been every where spoken against. Hence it appears, that great
Zeal and much Pains has been taken to blast our Reputations, which Increased,
not by being Neglected. I shall now as briefly speak of that Zeal and Pains,
which has been employed against our Persons, and that in both the Branches of
Life and Liberty; for in both these, the Fist of Wickedness has smote us: Many
of our Brethren have died by hard and cruel Imprisonments, and some by harder,
and more cruel Blows; the Blood of many has been spilt, even at our Religious
Meetings, and in the Streets: Nay, such has been the Zeal employed, that by
Military Force they have endeavored to Dragoon some of us to Church; which,
whether learned from France, or taught them, it may do well to consider. And
what Personal Violence could not do, has been attempted to be done, by
crowding us into Prisons, Holes and Dungeons, Suing some to Premunires and
Banishment. And when all this Zeal and Pains has proved ineffectual, they have
not Neglected to employ them both upon our Estates, that if by any means our
Increase might be prevented: And here many Branches of Pecuniary Penalties were
Inflicted, some for going to our Meetings, some for Preaching, some for the
Meeting House, some for not going to their Meetings, 20 l. per Mensem,
Sequestrations of whole Estates, and such like: Upon all which Pretenses, many
Dismal and Unchristian Seizures have been made, whereby abundance have been
Impoverished, and many Ruined in their Estates. Thus, Reader, Desolation has
ecchoed in all our Quarters, and possibly had taken place, had it not been
prevented by the Lord, and of one or other of these Severities many Thousands
of us have tasted, for our Conscientious Dissent; and that not once or twice
only: No, we were not so Neglected, but were Pursued a long Series of time.

Thus, Reader, our Enemies, if we were not Considerable, have made very
Considerable Havoc of us: And had it not been, that the safe Retreat of the
Faithful, was the Power of the Lord, who covered our Heads in the Day of
Battle, we must have fainted and fallen long ago: But Praised be his Name,
says my Soul, in a Thankful Remembrance of that Day, The Lord did afford the
Comforts of his Holy Spirit which was both Strength and Encouragement to us,
and did Support and give us Boldness to meet and bear whatsoever it pleased
him, to permit Men to do against us.

By these short Hints, Reader, thou will plainly see, that our Adversary
stumbles at the Threshould, makes his entrance like Satan, with a Lie; in that
there are not any People in England, distinguished by a Name, against whom more
Furious (hardly the like) Zeal and Pains has been employed, than against us;
of which I have been unwillingly Obliged, by his Lie, to give the foregoing
Account.

Page 2. It is wholly for the Love of Souls, that I have entered into this
Contoversie.

It is not likely: Nay, it is not possible, that it can be a true Christian
Love to Souls, for their Preservation from Error: Or if in Error, for their
Reduction and Restoration; that will deceive with Lies, those he pretends to
preserve, and abuse by the like, those whom he pretends to Reduce. There can be
no Lying for God's sake, nor bringing of Men to his Kingdom, by that which fits
them for the Devil, who was a Liar from the beginning.

Ib. p. 2. I name many of their Principal Leaders, because I have great Charity
for the Generality of the Ignorant sort of them; some of whom I know to be very
Honest and Well-meaning Men, and Devout in their Way.

That he names some, who for Charity and and Good Works, have been Eminent
among us, is very true; the far greater part of whom are at rest from their
Labors, having died in the Lord: And the Lot of such often is to be abused, as
now by this feigned Charitable Man, who, while he says of the Generality of the
Quakers, that they are Ignorant, is also forced to acknowledge, that they are
Honest and Well-meaning.

Now, Reader, how Hypocritical is this his pretended Charity, or his Assertion,
which I have already notic'd, p. 23. foregoing? There he says, Our Numbers are
Formidable: But here the Generality, are Ignorant, but Honest and Well-meaning.
What Terror! What Frights! can be justly grounded on the Increasing Numbers of
Ignorant, but Honest and Well-meaning Men: From such as these, there is no
gilded Hypocrisy (as in the Snake) to be feared, no Dishonesty, or
Ill-Meaning to be expected.

Ibid. p. 2. And therefore it is Chiefly for the sake of these, that I detect
the Errors of their Leaders and Ministers.

It cannot be Chiefly for the sake of these; for those this Adversary calls
Leaders and Ministers, were more known to the Generality of Quakers, in their
Lives, Conversations, Doctrines and Writings, than to the Snake. The Generality
of the Quakers looked, and do look on them, and their Actions, with a Good and
Honest, not an Evil Eye; do deservedly Interpret in well-meaning all those. Now
none of these the Snake can be supposed to do; for many of them, he knew not
their Lives, Conversations and Doctrines, though their Writings he may; but not
bringing Honesty and Well-meaning with him, which he does acknowledge, the
Generality of the Quakers have; he has belied them in all these, and if he
has any Degree of Reason left, he could not hope to impose upon the Generality
of the Quakers, contrary to their certain Knowledge.

Ibid. p. 2. Though they are generally thought the most Ignorant and
Contemptible Sect amongst all our Dissenters: -- Yet since I have perused their
Books, and conversed with some of them, I have much altered my Opinion, as to
that.

His Opinion is indeed altered very soon; for in the forgoing Paragraph, the
Generality of the Quakers, he said, were Ignorant, but Honest and Well-meaning:
But that Opinion being gone, let us see what his next Opinion will be.

Ibid. p. 2. I find them to inherit the Hypocrisy, as well as Heresy of the
Arrians and Socinians, who were the most subtle and hardest to be detected of
any of the Christian Heretics. And the Quakers do defend themselves with the
same distinctions, and even add to their Arts, as you shall see.

Here, Reader, thou see our Adversary will have us to have added to the Arts
of the most Subtle Heretics; and yet in Contradiction to this, he says, Page
32. that the Long and Intricate Mazes of the Romanists, in their pretenses to
Infallibility, requires no little Skill, to be able to follow them through
their various Subterfuges. And then adds, But the Simplicity of our Quakers has
deprived them of every one of these Helps. Great is the Hypocrisy, as well as
Contradiction, of this Man; who one while will Represent us the most subtle in
distinction, and hardest to be detected of all Heretics; another while, so
simple, as to be deprived of all the helps that others have: And yet as simple,
as in page 32. he says we are, in page, 3. he says, We speak Sense and English
-- have in a great measure reformed from the Errors of the Primitive Quakers.

Thus, as his Mood, Humor and Occasion Changes, we are with him, either
Subtle, or Simple, speak Sense, or Nonsense, Blasphemous to the hight, or in
some measure reformed: But after all, the Ipse Dixit of an Enemy, is neither
good Argument nor Conclusion, as will hereafter appear in the examination of
the several Heads of Doctrine.

P. 3. Many of them have really gone off from that hight of Blasphemy and
Madness, which was professed among them at their first setting up, in the Year
1650. and so continued till after the Restoration, Anno. 1660.

What the Snake does acknowledge is at present Sober and Christian in us, is
really no other, than what he calls at our first setting up, the hight of
Blasphemy and Madness, for the colorable Pretenses of these, are only the
spurious Brood of his own ill-forming Fancy, and as bad joining Fingers, which
have been employed in Mangling the Books of our Friends (in his phraise) not
unlike Rats and Moths.

Ibid. p. 3. Therefore they endeavor, all they can, to make it appear that
their Doctrine was Uniform from the beginning, and that there has been no
alteration.

And that endeavor has not been in vain, it having been often made so to
appear.

Ibid. p. 4. I would persuade them, openly and above-bord to Renounce George
Fox, and their first Reformers, and all their Blasphemous and Heretical
Doctrine.

Before this be done, two things are necessary:

First, to examine whether what our Adversary calls Blasphemy and Heresy be so
or not, and then to know what he would persuade us to; for the first, hard
names are no Proof: For, in the Way which some called Heresy, the Apostle did
Worship God, and our Savior himself, The Green Tree was called a Blasphemer.

And for the Last, it is not Good or Safe to be at all, much less easily
persuaded to forsake Truth for Lying Vanities.

Ibid. p. 5. And I must say it, they give the same Proof for their
extraordinary Inspirations, as the Quakers do, that is, none at all, but their
own confident averring of it.

And I must say, that our first Reformers from Popery, having urged for their
Separation, the Authority of the holy Spirit; and being asked for Proof of that
Authority, could give no other but what in the Language of our Adversary is
none at all, but their own confident averring of it.

The Apostle Paul, when questioned by the Corinthians for a Proof of Christ
speaking in him, did not evade the question, nor direct to an impertinent
Solution of it, when he advised them, Search your selves, try your selves, know
you not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you except you be
Reprobates, 2 Cor. 13.5. This Proof the Quakers also give, and that with reason
for the public Spirit of God, privately working in the Hearts of Men, is only
able to give those, in whom it does so Work, evidences of its proper effects:
The Apostle is positive to the same purpose, 1 Cor. 2.11. The things of God
knows no Man, but by the Spirit of God. And all Inspiration of the holy
Spirit, will, I doubt not, be owned to be some things of God; and of these, no
Man can make a right Judgment, but by the Spirit of God: Which, who want, it is
no wonder that by such this be called, as by the Snake, no Proof, but a
confident averring of it: Though, I doubt not but the Sober Reader will have
another sense of this Matter.

Ibid. p. 5. Now I would beseech Mr. Penn (who has more Wit than all the rest
of his Party) to let us know what ground he had for leaving the Church of
England, more than Muggleton.

What Muggleton's ground was, is not now our Business to examine, and what W.
Penn's was, he has often declared, many Years ago, which yet if I should here
repeat, the Snake might possibly mistake in Judging of it, as it is possible he
may also in the judgment he pretends to have of Wit: Nay, supposing it true,
that W. P. has more Wit than all the rest of the Quakers; yet this Snake, not
having had distinct Knowledge of every Quaker, and of every Degree of their
Wit, was not capable of more herein, than to give some Testimony of his
Confidence, not Judgment.

Ibid. p. 5. Why should we trust the Light within him, or G. Fox, rather than
the Light within Lodowick Muggleton?

W. P. and G. F. did never direct or desire Men to trust the Light within them;
but have constantly directed Men to trust in the Light of Jesus Christ, which
is given to each Man for himself, and is a sufficient Guide to the true
Knowledge and Worship of God; notwithstanding all that Men may speak against it.

Ibid. p. 5. Has Lodowick wrought no Miracles to prove his Mission? No more
has G. Fox, or W. Penn. To which I may add, No more has the Church of
England, nor the Snake in the Grass; unless we account that for one Miracle in
the Snake, when he at Billingsgate run away from the Messenger: Of which more
in its place.

Are they (G. F. W. P.) very sure that they are in the right? So is Muggleton.

If the Snake be not very sure, that he is in the right, he has but an
intention to deceive, when he calls others into Communion with him. Are they
Schismatics? So is he. And so is the Snake; and by the Snake's Doctrine, so is
the Church of England; as I have shown, p. 15, 16, 17. foregoing. Are they
above Ordinances? If they be, I know not; but that we (the Quakers) are not, I
know: For we own and use Preaching and Praying, which the Snake owns to be
Ordinances. Is he against distinct Persons in the Godhead? So are they.
Distinction in the Godhead we own, according to Scripture, but think the word [
Person] too Gross to express it. Is he against all Creeds? So are they. It it
false, we own the Matter contained in the Creed called the Apostles. Does
Muggleton deny all Church Authority? So do they. So does the Snake; that does
not please him: But that we do not the Snake has disproved himself, as see
Pag^ 61. Yet does he require the most absolute Submission to what himself
Teaches: So does the Snake. But we do not so, but (like the Apostles) commend
our Testimony to the Conscience, etc. 2 Cor. 4.2. Does he Damn all the World,
and all since the Apostles? So do they: So does the Snake, Ibid p. 6.
counting all others as the Spawn of the Viper. Does he make a dead Letter of
the Holy Scripture, and resolve all into his own private Spirit? So do they.
It Is false, we reject all private Spirits, acknowledge the Scriptures to have
been writ by Divine Inspiration, and to contain a Declaraion of the Will of
God, and do refer to the public Spirit of God for the understanding of them.

Ibid. p. 6. These are Twin Enthusiasts, both born in the Year 1650. (for then
it was Muggleton says, he got his Inspiration.

If Muggleton did come forth in the Spirit of Deceit, in the same Year that G.
F. came forth in the Spirit and Power of the Lord: What can be inferred from
thence? Theudas and Judas of Galilee came forth with their Impostors, Acts
5.36, 37.
Josephus, p. 426, 532. Printed 1683.
not much differing in time from our Savior's coming in the Flesh: Yet to
correct the Snake's Lying Chronology, the Reader may please to know, that G. F.
did come forth in the Power and Spirit of the Lord, some Years before the Date
the Snake assigns.

Ibid. p. 6. It will be proper, in this place, once for all, to obviate a
Prejudice, which some may take at a little Railery; I am forced to now and
then, in answer to such Senseless Arguments and Pretenses, as deserve no
otherwise to be Confuted.

The Sober and Judicious Reader will no doubt but be Prejudiced against such
profane Railery and manifest Contradictions, as frequently appear; of which
these Lines are one Instance. In page 34. foregoing, We are the most subtle in
Distinction of any Heretics; and it is not usual for such, who Distinguish
Subtly, to Argue Senslesly: But Contradictions of this sort are frequent with
our Adversary; who, throughout his whole Book, as the Sober Reader may
hereafter Observe, does frequently Contradict himself, that he may Belly Us,
Mistake our Principles, that he might have the Glory of a Triumph; and Pervert
and false Quote our Books, that he might have the Reputation of Great
Discoveries: Of all which, having gone through his Introduction, remains next
in order to be spoken.

SECT. I. Our Principle of the Light of Christ in Men, shown to be Scriptural,
and our Books herein agreeable thereto.
THE Light preached and testified to, by us ever since we were a People, is no
other than Jesus Christ the Son of the Father's Love, who, in due time was born
of the Virgin Mary, dwelt on the Earth, and was in all things like unto Us, Sin
only excepted: Who was Crucified under Pontius Pilate, died, was buried, and
rose again the third Day, and ascended into Heaven. This Jesus Christ, while he
dwelt on Earth, preached himself the Light and Way to the Father; and speaking
of himself to his Disciples, John 14.17. said, He Dwells with you, and shall
be in you. And of this Jesus Christ, John Testifies, He was the Word in the
Beginning with God; and that this Word was God, and that in him is Life, and
that Life the Light of Men; and that this Light Lights every Man that comes
into the World, John 1.1, 4, 9. This is that Glorious Truth testified unto by
us: which is not Notion; except to those only, who have barely an Historical
Knowledge hereof: For to those that do reverently attend its discoveries, it is
no more Notion, but a Homefelt Truth. With this Testimony it was, that it
pleased God to send forth his Servant George Fox, who though despised, mean, and
unlearned in the accounts of Men; was of God made an Apostle in this Age, and
has been instrumental in his hand, for the directing of Thousands to the Light
of Christ in Men. Upon which Light, as Men come to attend, it will fully teach
them their Duty to God, and enable them to perform it; it will discover to them
a System of Principles truly Orthodox, with more certainty than Council or
Synod can, not taught by it; for he is indeed a Wonderful Counselor. And this
not in Notion, not merely Historical, No! But in Practice according to their
Obedience to it. It will first, fully and truly (beyond any Casuist) show unto
Man what is his Sin; and if Man despise not this Discovery, but close with it,
it will beget in him a loathing of his Sin, and then proceed, to work in him a
repentance from Dead Works, which if unfeigned, it will go on to sanctify him:
and when Man by this Light, Spirit or Grace is sanctified, it will then witness
to his Spirit, that he is justified. So will Man truly come to be redeemed.
This in short, is the substance of what has been by us declared concerning
this Divine Light, Christ in Men, and which is not more than is witnessed of it
in the Holy Scriptures; in the words whereof our Friends have frequently given
their belief in this, as in other Articles; and that with good reason, for the
Spirit of God in his Church in this Age, can well agree with the Language of
the same Spirit, in, and to the Churches in the former Ages. And here I may
fitly observe, that too nice expressing, and minute particularizing of Articles
of Faith; has been frequently one ground of Heresy, and Schism, and occasioned
great disturbance in the World: and indeed it is no wonder; that when Men
forsake that teaching Grace which brings Salvation, they should set up that
Earthly Wisdom, which, in matters of Faith, breeds confusion.

Ibid. p. 7, 8. And this Notion of the Light within, as a Ray only, or
Illumination from the Holy Spirit, the Ingenious Mr. Penn, has let us see in
some of his late Books, to draw us insensibly off the Scent of the Quaker
Notion of the Light within.

This Adversary, that he may scratch, more undiscernedly, he Hypocritically
flatters W. Penn, of which, as we pass, shall meet with diverse instances. But
it is false, that W. Penn has in any of his Books, explained our Belief of the
Light within, in terms contrary to what G. Fox, or other our Ancient Friends
have done. He being a Scholar might use other terms, but not contrary, he might
vary from the express words of G. Fox, or others, but not from their sense. Of
this Holy Writ affords instances, The Holy Apostle Paul's rethorical forms of
Speech, might be more agreeable to the Rules of Art, but not of the Holy Spirit
than those of the rest of the Holy Apostles. Yet his Learning and their
Illiterature were both of excellent use, the minds of the Persons being under
subjection to the Spirit of God. This was their great Rule; so that though
according to the Humane helps they had had, they might use various, yet not
contrary terms in the same Article. Ibid. p. 8. And that is to make this their
Light within not only an Inspiration, or Illumination sent from God, but to be
it self the Essential God and Christ. What Christ has promised, and by the
Holy Spirit has dictated concerning God and Christ's Dwelling in Men, as in
these places referred to among many others it may be seen, is so experienced a
Truth as well as good an Authority, for such like Scriptural expressions, that
it will stand the Shock of any capricious Gramarian, who would pretend to speak
more properly, and distinguish more nicely, than it has seemed good to the
Holy Ghost to do, John 14.17, 20. Romans 8.10. 1 Cor. 10.4. 2 Cor. 15.4.10.6,
7.14.25.13.7. Gal. 2.20. Heb. 2.11. Col. 1.27.4.19.2.6.

Ibid. 8. And from hence (O Blasphemy to repeat it!) they call their Souls a
Part of God, of his Being and Essence. O Injurious Perverter! Christ who truly
lives in all that obey him, as say the Scriptures aforecited, has said of his
faithful followers, John 17.21, 23.14.20. I in them, and they in me, and has
promised, At that day, shall ye know, that I am in my Father, and you in me,
and I in you; and has prayed, That they all may be one, as thou, O Father! art
in me, and I in thee; that they also may be one in us. And when through
Obedience, this Oneness, for which Christ has prayed, comes to be witnessed by
any faithful Soul, such may, without Blasphemy, speak it to the praise of God.
But here, as in other places, the Snake imploys a critical pedantry about
words, not chosen by us, but used by our Adversaries: Such as are Essence,
Infinite, Infinity, Equal, Equality, and some others, not being content with
the plainness of Scripture Language; which words, when returned to them again,
it has mostly been with quotations of Scripture, thereby showing, that they
were owned only in a Scriptural Sense, of this sort, many instances will occur
herein, and which by great Perversion, the Snake has drawn, to purposes never
intended by G. Fox, or any other acknowledged Quaker. Ib. p. 8. This Monstrous
Notion of the Light within, is the ground and ^oundation of all their other
Errors and Blasphemies. Then this Ground being false, all the other vanish. Ib.
p. 8. They Laugh at us for confessing our selves to be Sinners, or praying to
God for Mercy. We ^augh not at all, at Men in Misery, nor at the Snake, when
confessing himself a Sinner, because we know he is such; but were it not in re
serie and tragica, it might occasion a Smile to think, that one resolving to
continue to do so, should pray and expect mercy, because we know, the
conditions on which Mercy is promised, are forsaking of Sin, and leading an
Holy Life.

Ib. p. 9. Alas, poor Souls! (says Mr. Penn of the Church of England) are you
not at, Have mercy upon us miserable Sinners, there is no Health in us, from
Seven to Seventy? And for this he upbraids the Church of England. W. Penn
upbraids not the Church of England, for confessing their Sins, or for praying
for Mercy: But when Men do go on from Seven to Seventy, in a round of sinning
and confessing, confessing and sinning, and not come to witness the work of
regeneration, and in some Degree a putting on of the New Man, who after God is
created in Righteousness, such confession is but mocking of God, who requires
Men, to put away their Sins before he will reason with them.

Ib. p. 9. Upon this account they reprobate and Damn all the Christian World,
from the Days of the Apostles to G. Fox. And since, all but themselves.

That this is false, I have already proved, p. 13, 14. and shall more largely
in reply to the Section bearing this Title.

Ib. p. 9. While at the same time, they commit wild Idolatry, to one another,
worshipping and adoring one another especially their Great Fox and other of
their Rabbis. -- All these things I will show in their order.

It is false, that any Idolatry, Worship, or Adoration has been given by us to
G. Fox or any other of our Friends; nor do I remember that I have ever seen or
heard any Quaker, has gone so far in this, as I have seen some Members of the
Church of England to their Bishops; with whom it is a frequent practice to
kneel at coming into their presence: which yet, they that so do (I do in
Charity believe) do it not with purpose of Idolizing them, though the reason why
they do it, is from a supposed Vice-Gerency they have under Christ, and that
they bear, and have greater marks of Divinity than other ^en. And if this be
not Idolatry, why is it Idolatry in any of us if one should say and
acknowledge, of a particular Man, That he is his Father in Christ, and
instrumentally his Savior; or to this purpose; for which also, Holy Writ is
sufficient Authority?

Ibid. p. 10. However I would ask them this Question, Whether a man may leave
that Light, without knowing that he does so? If he may, then all the Quakers
have left it, for ought they know; If he cannot, then all who leave it, do it
maliciously. I ask again, Whether a Man can Sin, while he follows the Light? If
he can, then that Light may lead him wrong, and so is not infallible. But if he
cannot sin while he follows this Light; and cannot leave this Light without
knowing of it (as in the first Quaere) then there can be no Sin of Ignorance.
Which is contrary to the Law, for there Expiations were appointed for Sins of
Ignorance. And it is likewise contrary to the Gospel; for Christ tells us of
those who know not their Master's Will. They know not what they do, said he of
those who Crucified him (Luke 23.34.) The time shall come ( said he to his
Apostles John 16.2.) that whosoever kills you, shall think that he does God
service. And it is said 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. That they should believe a Lie. Christ
has foretold (Mat. 6.32.) That the Light which is in some Men (that is what
they take to be Light) is Darkness. And if they be so mistaken, how great is
that Darkness? But there can be no such mistake as our Savior supposes, if the
Light within be infallible. -- Ibid. p. 11. St. Peter says to the Jews who
Crucified Christ, I wot that through Ignorance ye did it, Acts 3.17. and St.
Paul says, 1 Cor. 2.8. That had they known it, they would not have crucified
the Lord of Glory.

Reader, I have been thus large in my quotation of him, that our Adversary
might not object, that I had left out the difficult part of his Questions, or
Arguments arising from them; but chiefly and principally, that in a matter, of
so great moment: I might show the great evidence of truth, and necessity there
is, That man should certainly know his Duty; and knowing of it, should
certainly and powerfully (if he disobey not) be assisted to the performance of
it. Wherefore to the first Question I say, Man cannot leave the Light of Christ
in him, without knowing that he does so; and therefore all that do leave it are
self-condemned. That this is true, does appear as follows: First, Our Savior,
John 16.8. has promised, that his Light should reprove the World of Sin, etc.
And the Apostle testifies of this Light, Ephesians. 5.13. But all things that are
reproved, are made manifest by the Light; for whatsoever does make manifest is
Light. Hence it appears, that Jesus Christ by his Light does reprove for sin
striving with Men, by discovering it unto them; and during the Day of their
Visitation, by reproofs and discoveries, it is impossible for Man, to withstand
and leave the reproofs and discoveries of this Light of Christ, without knowing
that he does so. And if any Man does continue to withstand this his Day of
Visitation, in the reproofs and discoveries of this Light, it must of necessity
once come to pass as to the Jews, that it will be hid from their eyes; and in
this final impenitency, they will according to Isa. 5.20. call good, evil; and
evil, good; and of such the Apostle testifies, Ephesians. 4.18. They are strangers
from the life of God, through the Ignorance that is in them, because of the
hardness of their hearts. And that 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. They are given over to strong
Delusion, to believe a lie; because they received not the Love of the Truth
that they should be saved. But they were not given over to strong Delusion till
they had refused the Truth, and they could not refuse the Love of it
unknowingly.

To the Second Quaere, Whether a Man may sin while he follows the Light? It may
be safely answered, no! Because it is affirmed by the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.9. The
fruit of the Spirit (or Light) is in all goodness, righteousness and truth. And
the Christians were advised to walk in the Light, that they might become
Children of it. And if they are Children of it, they must of necessity bring
forth the fruits of it, for that it is sufficient, to make Men able so to do,
these Scriptures, among many others, testify, Luke 9.21, 22. Phil. 4.14. 2
Cor. 12.9. And as what is said herein, is agreeable to the Gospel, so it is not
contrary to the Law. Because, as the Apostle testifies, Acts 17.30. In the
times of Ignorance God winked: But now he wills all men every where to
repent. And Heb. 7.19. Though under the Law, which made nothing perfect, there
were expiatory Sacrifices for the Sins of Ignorance; yet now, there needs
not, for as much, as by the Gospel, the bringing in of a better hope made
perfect. For, the several Texts, urged by our Adversary, as Luke 23.24. where
Christ speaking of those who crucified him, says, They know not what they do.
It is no wonder they should be so stupidly blind, when we consider the
Testimony of Stephen, concerning them, Acts 7.51. Ye always resisted the Holy
Ghost. And in John 16.2. where Christ foretells his Disciples, the time shall
come, that whosoever kills you, shall think they do God service. But the
Snake has left out the reason of that Ignorance, which in the next verse, as
our Savior says, is, Because they have not known my Father nor me. The like
curtailing of the Text the Snake has practiced, with that of 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.
where he only quotes the words, They should believe a lie; but left out the
reason of it, which the Apostle says, was, because they received not the love
of the Truth. The Snake's Perversion of that Text, Mat. 6.13. is very
remarkable, where he quotes, That the Light which is in some Men is Darkness.
When our Savior said no such thing: But is here showing of us, How that by Sin
and Evil, Man becomes Darkened, and that a continuance herein leads into great
Darkness; and thus words it. If thine Eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full
of Darkness; wherefore if the Light that is in thee, be Darkness, how great is
that Darkness? The Eye is the Organ for Light: That being blinded, the whole
Body is in Darkness; so in the Mind, with this addition of unhappiness, that in
this Blindness they think they see, and therefore call good evil, and evil
good. But our Savior has no where taught, That though Men should fervently,
humbly and sincerely pray for the Gifts of his Grace, Light, or Spirit, that it
will still be so much a Guess, so much in uncertainty, as to be possible for
these, so sincerely seeking; To take the Devil for God, and his wicked Spirit,
and his bad Acts for the Holy Spirit, and Innocent Life of Jesus Christ. No! It
is a most abhorred imputation upon the Doctrine of our Savior, either to
suppose it contradictory to it self, or that he who according to Mat. 28.18.
Has all power in Heaven and Earth given to him, should yet be so short in his
Power, or in his Good Will, that he has not afforded to Man, a most certain
and infallible Guide to that Glory, to which he calls him. But further, If
herein, Man can without a Crime be ignorant or disobedient, The whole tenor of
the Gospel is overthrown, the New Covenant ( Joel 2.29.) is of no force; and we
may with the Apostle in another case conclude, 1 Cor. 15.14. Preaching is vain,
and Faith is vain. For if the Light of Jesus Christ is not an Infallible Guide
to Salvation, Men are in utmost uncertainty, of what concerns them most nearly,
viz. the Salvation of their Souls; and are herein more at a Guess, than they
would care to be in the state of their Healths, or the titles of their Estates.
But now if for Guide and Certainty (for it is necessary Men should herein be
certain) he will turn us to the Holy Scriptures, Traditions, Councils, Fathers,
Ordinances. We shall find all of them declared, (even by Men of that Church
this Snake says he is of) such as are not void of uncertainty, for that through
ignorance, iniquity and false pretenses, all these have been abused. So that it
remains of absolute necessity, for all that would have an Infallible Guide to
Salvation, to attend the guidings of the Spirit of God, which only can
infallibly witness to their Spirits, Romans 8.16. th^^ they are the Children of
God.

Ibid. p. 11. It would make one merry (were ther^ not too much of tragedy in
the miserable and distr^^ctive error) to see what pains G. Fox takes to
struggl^ from under this Objection.

If G. Fox's pains could make this Man merry the Priest's pains ought to make
him laugh out* because they were the greater of the two; for G. Fox has
answered 26 words of the Priests, b^ 25 of his own. As for the Tragedy, Misery
an^ Destruction, which the Snake supposes, in what h^ calls our error, there is
nothing in it. The Destructi^on etc. will be eminently so, to them, that sell
pretended Spiritual Ware, and among them it will make havoc; for when Men come
to feed upon that substantial Food, John 6.35, 48. The Bread of Life. They will
no longer give their Money for that which is not Bread, nor their labor for
that which profitteth not.

Ibid. p. 11. He (G. Fox) repeats the Professor's objection against him in
these words. The Apostle Paul thought to do many things against the Church, and
thought he ought to do so, and the Light within did not inform his Conscience.

To which G. Fox replies in these words; did not Christ say that it was hard
for him (Paul) to kick against that that pricked him, Great Mystery. p. 224.
and was not that within him that pricked him. The Snake cries out against this
Answer, Ibid. p. 11. saying, it is manifest perverting of Scripture; when
indeed the Answer is sound, and true, as appears by the verse immediately
following, Acts 9.6. And he trembling, and astonished, said, Lord, what will thou have me to do? -- Which shows his inward sense of Mind. But the Apostle,
Romans 7.9. is large in the account, of the Work of his Regeneration, and he does
acknowledge he was alive without the Law once: But when the Commandment came,
Sin revived, and I died. Which plainly shows, the Command was inward; and it
was hard for Paul to kick against this Command, which did thus slay him; as in
the 11th verse. Our Adversary does acknowledge, that the Pricks, there, are to
be understood the Power of Christ. And this Power it was, Acts 2.37. That
pricked them at the heart, who were witnesses of the sheddings abroad of the
Spirit at the time of Pentecost. And of this Power David speaks, Psalm. 73.21.
Thus my heart was grieved, and I was pricked in my reins. Whence, thus in
short, Paul, a zealous Man, and a Persecutor, is by the Power of Christ let
see, that he was opposing his Power in his Saints, by such Persecution. At this
in the Apostle's language, Sin revived, i. e. the sense of it, whereby he saw
his guiltiness, and then he died; from any further Life in it. And whether this
be not a heart work, all experienced Readers may judge.

Ibid. p. 12. Besides they are in great confusion and contradictions amongst
themselves, concerning their Notion of the Light within, denying and affirming
backwards and forwards, as you may see in Mr. Tho. Crisp his just and lawful
Trial of the Foxonian Quakers.

Reader, This is one of those Instances, wherein the great Injustice of this
adversary appears, in that, he takes this false Charge from a Book writ against
us by an open Enemy; and takes no notice of any reply by us: Which was largely
and fully given to this Adversary by our Friend Ed. Penington. And if after the
same manner, I should object and say, The Church of England are in great
Confusions and Contradictions, amongst themselves, in their Notion of the
Trinity, (which has been abundantly treated of here of late) affirming
backwards and forwards; and recommend for proof of this, some Book disowned by
that Church, the Proof were much the same. Or if I should object, and say, They
are in great confusion and contradiction in their Notion of any other Article;
and bring for proof, Harding, Stapelton, or any of the Romish Church, who,
being Adversaries, have so affirmed, having no regard to the disallowance of
the first, or answers to the last: I might deservedly be accounted a confident,
and prejudiced, but not a fair or reasonable Man: Yet, Reader, this is the
practice of this Snake with us.

SECT. II. Showing, that we do not make our Souls of the same Person and
Substance with God, nor aspire to an Equality with him.
I Shall here, consider and reply, to his Second and Third Sections together,
the Charge being the same, and the distinction unnecessary: For in his mode of
speaking, a Sameness of Person and Substance, imply an Equality; concerning
which, before I proceed to the Quotations in the Snake, I shall observe to
thee, Friendly Reader; That having in the beginning of the foregoing Section,
given a brief but real and true account of our Scriptural Belief concerning The
Light of Christ in Men. Showing that the Soul of Man, being subjected
thereunto; he may by the guidance and assistance thereof, (without it he
cannot) attain unto Salvation: I say, having shown thus much, concerning our
belief herein; it is impossible, that we, so believing, as we do, should make
our Souls (to use his phrase) of the same Person and Substance with God, or
Aspire to an Equality with him. Our Friends, according to Holy Writ, have
frequently said and writ, and may safely; That those, who by walking in the
Light, are become Children of it: are such for whom our Savior Jesus Christ
did pray to his Father, John 17.21, 22, 23. That they all may be one, as thou
Father art in me, and I in thee: That they also may be one in us; That they may
be one, even as we are one. I in them, and thou in me; that they may be made
perfect in one, and that the world may know, that thou have sent me, and have
loved them, as thou have loved me. This Oneness in the Holy Spirit, our Friends
have pressed, and contended for; in Opposition to the hurtful belief that had
too much prevailed upon Men; of an imagined Distance of God from Man at this
Day: and that Man, was now no more to expect the Revelation of the Holy Spirit,
without which, our Savior has testified, Mat. 11.27. And no Man knows the
Son, but the Father; neither knows any Man the Father but the Son, and he to
whomsoever the Son will reveal him. This testimony of Jesus Christ, with many
more to the same purpose, do show the certainty of Revelation, as in many
others, the absolute necessity of it is shown. First, By our Savior, who
says, John 12.50. And I know that this Commandment is Life Everlasting -- and
the Apostle 2 Cor. 13.5. -- Know ye not your own selves, that Jesus Christ is
in you except you be Reprobates? And for our acknowledging to, and witnessing
of the truth of these Testimonies, declared in Holy Writ, have we met with
great opposition, and misrepresentation, of which, Reader, there follows now
diverse instances in these Sections of the Snake's, which he thus begins, p. 13.
Thou say (says G. Fox to his Opponet, Great Mystery, p. 247.) Christ does
not dwell in them Personally. Does not Christ dwell in his Saints, as he is in
the Person of the Father, the Substance?

Reader, This our Adversary gives for a quotation from G. Fox his Great
Mystery, and that we might see, at what he carps, he puts it in Large Black
Characters, which yet are not blacker than his Envy and Injustice; which will
appear thus. First, In that he has left out the Priests Words, which are
unsound and unscriptural. Secondly, In that he has left out the beginning and
end of G. Fox his Answer. For thy more certain knowledge of which, I subjoin,
first the Priest's Words, and then G. Fox his Answer.

Priest. The Scriptures are the Word, except y^u dare to deny Christ is God.
Let the Word of God (meaning the Scripture) dwell in you richly.

To this G. Fox thus Answers. So he makes the Scripture Christ, and God: and he
does not say, Let Christ dwell in you; but means the Scripture, and God dwells
in you: The Apostle says, Let Christ Dwell in your hearts by faith; and God
will dwell in you: But thou say, Christ does not dwell in Them Personally.
Does not Christ dwell in his Saints, as he is in the Person of his Father, the
Substance? And are they not of his Flesh, and of his Bone?

Here, Reader, thou may see, that the plain meaning, and drift of G. Fox's
words, are to assert and maintain, that Spiritual Oneness of which I have been
speaking and showing, that Christ prayed, that his Followers might witness; and
not to make the Soul of the same Person and Substance with God, as the Snake
suggests. But to proceed; We have found the Snake biting off the Beginning and
End of G. Fox's words in the former Quotation; in the next place we shall find
him false quoting him. But here he is pleased to give the Priest's words truly
as they stand, p. 13. thus, There is a kind of infiniteness in the Soul, but it
cannot be infiniteness in it self. Against this G. Fox disputes, And no kind of
infiniteness will serve his turn, but infiniteness in himself, which is the
Infiniteness of God alone: For he only has Infinity in himself, as not being
given by any other. Thus the Snake's Remark, and now his Quotation.

Is not the Soul (says G. Fox) without Beginning? Has this a Beginning or
Ending? And is it not infinite in it self, and more than all the World?

This the Snake gives for a Quotation from G. Fox's Great Mystery, p. 90. when,
as by the following will appear, they are only Sentences, standing at
considerable distance in that Book, and packt together in his: and being so
packt, by him, are urged to prove what G. Fox never said. The place in Great
Mystery is thus, Is not the Soul without Beginning, coming from God, returning
unto God again, who has it in his hand? Which hand goes against him that does
evil, which throws down that which wars against it: And Christ the Power of
God, the Bishop of the Soul, which brings it up into God, which came out from
him. Has this ( viz. the Power, he means) a Beginning or Ending? And is not
this ( viz. the Power, as before) infinite (...) it self, and more than all the
World? Thus G. Fox, the meaning of whose words is no other than thus; Christ
the Power of God, and Bishop of the Soul, who can only bring the Soul into
acceptance with God, is infinite in his Power, and greater than all the World;
which plain sense of the place is vastly different from the perversion of this
Nibler.

The Snake's next Quotation in p. 14. He makes from Great Mystery, p. 91. and
gives it thus, Christ brings the Soul up into God, from whence it came, whereby
they come to be one Soul.

This like the Last, is miserably false quoted: The place in Great Mystery,
standing thus; So every one being turned to the Light, which Christ the Second
Adam has enlightened them withal, they shall see, Christ the Bishop of their
Souls, the Power of God, which is immortal, and brings the Immortal Soul in, to
the Immortal God. Christ the Sanctification, who sanctifies their Bodies and
Spirits, and brings the Soul up into, from whence it came, whereby they become
one Soul. Thus G. Fox, who herein is very plain, showing how the Work of
Regeneration, is began and carried on, till the Soul arrive at that Spiritual
Marriage-Union, and Oneness; for which our Savior prayed, that the Saints
might witness.

The Snake's next Quotation, p. 14. is from Great Mystery, p. 229. Thus, Who
are come up into the Bishop Christ, are one Soul. To which he goes on, and
adds, though cut off by this Snake, They know the hand of God which the Soul
lives in. And it is doubtless very true, for whosoever, through obedience to
the Holy Spirit, comes to be one in Christ, do certainly know his Power, by
which that Work is wrought, and in which they live.

The Snake's next Quotation in p. 14. is from Great Mystery, p. 273. thus, It
is not horrid Blasphemy to say, the Soul is a part of God, for it came out of
him; and that which came out of him, is of him.

Of this the Snake says, Fox does not say, that the Soul came from God, that
is, God Created it: But that it came of God, as a part of God, his Substance,
Person and Essence. But it is very false, for G. Fox does not so say, nor does
his words import more than that it is created by God; and the Last words, which
next follow, and which the Snake has bit off, do show as much: For G. Fox
says, it rejoices in him; and so certainly every regenerated Soul does.

But for further proof that G. Fox did not mean more, or other, than that the
Soul was created, and that such was his belief, see in the same Book, p. 337.
where speaking of the Soul, his words are these; God breathed into Man the
Breath of Life, and he became a living Soul, who has all Souls in his hand,
and the Soul is Immortal; and Christ the Bishop of it is Immortal, and God has
it in his hand, which goes against him that does evil, whose hand is Immortal:
But Man transgressing the Command of God, the Soul lies in Death: So Christ is
the Bishop of the Souls, and they that come to know Christ, their Souls rejoice
in God their Savior, Luke. 1.

Here G. Fox has very fully and expressly declared his Judgment in words
unexceptionable to the Cavils of the Snake, and contrary to his false
insinuations: Now in that I have brought another Quotation in the same Book, to
put out of doubt G. Fox's meaning in the former: I have herein used a rule
which the Snake lays down, p. 195. viz. To hear G. Fox explain himself in other
places of the same Book.

The Snake's next Quotation, p. 14. is from Great Mystery, p. 100. where he
has only taken these words (which I take to be wrong printed) of a passage. Is
not this of God's Being; when in the Book it self it is thus? And is not that
which came out from God, which God has in his hand, taken up into God again,
which Christ the Power of God is the Bishop of, is not this (Divine Life of the
Soul) of God's being? By the context of which words, it is plain G. Fox means
no more than as is above observed from p. 337.

The Snake's next Quotation, p. 14. is from Great Mystery, p. 248. Whence the
Snake does, but not fully give the Priest's words, which in that Book are these.

Priest. It is a false thing to say Christ's Person is in Man.

To which the following answer (at which the Snake cavils) is made by G. Fox,
which is as much as to say, None are of his Flesh, or of his Bone, nor eat it,
nor had his Substance.

From which words, I think, nothing is plainer, than that the Answer is
Scriptural, and the sense of it Spiritual, as see Ephesians. 5.30, 32. John 6.63.

The Snake's next Quotation in p. 14. is from Great Mystery, p. 207. in which
he has not given the Priest's Words, nor but part of G. Fox's Answer; but I
shall give both for the greater evidence of Truth.

Priest. God has a Christ distinct from all other beings whatsoever, whether
they be Spirits or Bodies.

G. Fox. God's Christ is not distinct from his Saints, nor their Bodies; for he
is within them, nor distinct from their Spirits, for their Spirits witness him:
And God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself, who is the head of
every Creature; and there is not any Creature, but it is manifest in his sight;
and he is in the Saints, and they eat his Flesh, and sit with him in heavenly
places.

This, Reader, is so plain Scripture; that it would raise an inquiry, how envy
it self cloaked with pretenses to Christianity, should carp at it.

The Snake's next Quotation, p. 14. is from Great Mystery, p. 88. Christ is the
Elect. The Reader may easily suppose G. Fox said more; but the Snake thinking,
from these, to draw some unsound sense left the rest behind him: In which he
being abundantly mistaken, I shall not trouble the Reader with a larger
Quotation, but only observe, that the Evangelical Prophet Isaiah 42.1. says of
Christ, Behold my Servant, whom I uphold, mine Elect in whom my Soul
delights. And the Holy Apostle speaking of Christ, says, 1 Pet. 2.6.
Wherefore it is contained in the Scripture, behold I lay in Zion, a Chief
Corner Stone Elect and Precious.

The Snake's next Quotation in p. 14. is from Great Mystery, p. 310. That they
who are of the Faith, are the Flesh of Christ, the Flesh of him who suffered.
Here he has false quoted G. Fox's words, which are these. No Man knows ( that
is savingly) the seed (Christ) that was offered, the Sacrifice of the whole
World, but as he knows it within, through the Faith; and who are of the Faith,
they are of Abraham: They are of the Flesh of Christ, the Flesh of him that
suffered. The Apostle says as much, and says true, Ephesians. 5.30.

I have now done with all the Snake's Quotations in his second Section; in
which, Reader, I doubt not but thou will observe the great injustice of the
Snake in several kinds; as first in false quoting G. Fox's words, which is a
practice so base, that it is impossible it can consist with a fair pretense of
being herein concerned in Love to the Souls of those he would pretend to
preserve or reduce. No, it is a practice directly opposite to all pretenses of
Humane Justice; and it cannot be less, but rather more, to pretend to do it for
God's sake. Next, his Injustice is not less, in perverting the sense and
meaning of the places, which he truly quotes; by cavilling at, and giving
expositions, quite contrary to the plain sense of the Writer. For it is very
plain, that the whole scope of all the Passages hitherto quoted, are such as
have relation to the Spiritual Union, and Oneness of Christ with his People.
Which both Christ himself, and his Holy Apostles have very frequently held
forth to us by Similies, which fall under the notice of sense; that thereby
mankind, might more readily come to apprehend them: Thus Christ said, I am the
Vine, I am the Door, and except ye eat my Flesh, and drink my Blood, etc. And
the Apostle, we are of his Flesh, and of his Bone, with abundance more such
like expressions; which, if in a litteral sense were to be expounded: Such
exposition would be plain perversion, and against it our Savior has given a
Caution; The words that I speak, they are Spirit, and they are life, John 6.63.

Snake p. 15. I will tell you before I go, Mr. Penn's excuse for G. Fox in all
these particulars. He lays it upon George 's extreme Ignorance. For Proof of
this the Snake quotes W. Penn's invalidity of J. Faldo's Vindication, p. 353.
where W. Penn's words are only these, He (G. F.) observes no nicety of
expression in his Writings, and it is therefore disingenuously done of any to
make this ill use of his plain and vulgar phrases. See, Reader, how apt this
Man is to tell lies; for W. Penn lays it not on (nor does not say it was) his
extreme Innorance: But W. Penn lays the fault upon J. Faldo's extreme
disingenuity, as I now do upon the Snake's.

Snake, p. 15. An indifferent Man would rather have said Ne Suitor ultra
crepidam -- That this Fox should rather have kept to his original Trade.

Here, Reader, see this Man's contempt, by a Profane Jest, upon the meanness of
G. Fox's Calling. What would he have said to Amos the Herdsman, Peter, James
and John, Fishermen, and the rest of those Holy Men, whose mechanic
Occupations were no hinderance to the High Offices in the Church, to which God
called them: It is not unlikely, that from men Spirited as this Snake, their
Entertainment was, Ne Suitor, etc.

But this need not trouble us, since we find that G. Fox, where he speaks of
the Soul (as in the places before severally quoted) does speak so distinctly of
it, as that he neither declares it to be God or Christ; nor does he confound
the Being of Man, with the Infinite Being of his Creator, as is falsely charged
by this Adversary. G. Fox has frequently said to this purpose, (and it is very
true) that the Spirit of Man is illuminated with a divine Light from God,
through the mediation of Jesus Christ: But he has never said, that the Spirit
of Man was God. No, he could not so say: but by wilful perversion, this
Adversary (as some former ones) perverts as well as mis-quotes him, and will
not have him to mean as his words plainly speak: For when he speaks of the Soul
of Man, both with respect to its original Life, as breathed from God; and
degenerated through disobedience, and also with respect to his spiritual
Restoration, by the Power and Spirit of his Creator, and has thereupon shown;
how that the Soul through disobedience, to the Power that Created it, became
estranged, and at enmity to it; and that this enmity and wall of Separation
could not be broken down, and the Soul brought into the Love and Favor of God,
but by Christ, who in Holy Writ is declared the Bishop and Shepherd. Our
Adversaries have then often perverted his words, and would have them to mean,
(which they cannot) That the Infinite Essence and Being (with other the like
terms) of the Life of God or Christ, were the Soul of Man. But these
perversions are our Adversaries, and as of G. Fox: So of all owned by us, it
never was believed by us, that the Soul of Man was the same Person and
Substance with God, as is most falsely charged by this Snake.

I come now to the Snake's third Section, Of the Quakers aspiring, etc. which
he says, p. 17. is in effect proved already; but yet he bestows nine pages upon
it, of which great part is taken up in Quotations, which I shall consider in
their order.

The first in p. 17. is from Great Mystery, p. 282. For Christ (says he) makes
no distinction in his words, but says, Be ye perfect as your Heavenly Father
is -- And as he is, so are we; and that which is perfect, as he is perfect, is
in equality the same. In this Quotation, that the Snake might bring the parts
of it together, as near as well he could, he has made a break for another
Text, which G. Fox used, viz. And be ye merciful as he is. And after all his
carping, it is the Doctrine preached by our Savior, and mostly in his words,
viz. as Mat. 5.48. Luke 6.36. and the last Scripture G. Fox there mentions does
show, 1 John 4.17. To which he might have added those other Texts, 1 John
2.6.3.3.7. where we are exhorted, to walk, even as he walked, to purify our
selves even as he is pure, and to be righteous as he is righteous. Which
exhortations it is impossible to witness fulfilled; otherwise than by the
Assistance of the Holy Spirit, which as G. Fox says, is in equality with God.
And the Expressions being Scriptural, it need not trouble us that he is angry:
Nor do we, nor never did we understand these expressions in Holy Writ
abovementioned, otherwise than to relate to the Operations of the Holy Spirit
in men. For we never imagined that ever any Man or Woman can be, even as God
is, or even as Christ is, quatenus, God and Christ.

The Snakes next Quotation, p. 17. is from Saul 's Errand to Damascus, p. 8. He
that has the same Spirit that raised up Jesus from the Dead is equal with God.
Which is (as declared by G. F. at his Trial, hereafter mentioned) to the
purpose before, for when Men are guided by the Holy Spirit, they are certainly
guided by God: For the Father, Son and Holy Spirit are one God, and therefore
equal, and that which is equal, as G. Fox often expresses it.

The Snake's next Quotation, p. 18. is from Great Mystery, p. 248. All that
have the Son and Holy Ghost, have that which is Equal in Power and Glory with
the Father.

This Quotation, Reader, is another instance of the great insincerity of this
adversary, in that he has placed the words here, as spoken and asserted by G.
Fox (which yet are sound and true) but they were not otherwise than thus. The
Priest had denied the Revelation of Christ in Man, otherwise than by Adoption,
and his ( Christ's) Equality with the Father: in answer to this G. Fox mentions
that passage in the Assemblies Catechism, The Holy Ghost and Son are equal in
Substance, Power and Glory with the Father; and then thus queries (not asserts,
though it be true) what? Then all that have, etc. See the Readiness of this Man
to misrepresent things.

The Snake's next Step, p. 18. is, to whom he floutingly calls the Renowned
Francis Howgil, who he says is yet more express in this Blasphemy, if more can
be. His quotation from F. Howgil, p. 232. of his Works is, The first thing thy
dark Mind stumbles at ( says he to his Opponent Edward Dodd) is that some have
said, they that have the Spirit of God, are equal with God. He that has (i. e.
obeys) the Spirit of God, is in that (Holy Ghost) which is equal with God.
The same says the Scriptures, and the same says the Catechism, as I have just
now noted; but F. Howgil goes on. He that is joined to the Lord, is one Spirit;
there is unity, and the unity stands in equality it self; there is equality in
Nature, though not in Stature. And now after all the Snake can say against it, it
is agreeable to those several Texts of Scripture, quoted p. 49, 50. foregoing,
and also to many others, though a Mystery to Men, not regenerated. And therefore
F. Howgil goes on, and bids learn what these things mean, the Understanding and
the Learned will know what I say, and this is neither damnable nor blasphemous,
but on the contrary, it is saving, and precious to them that believe.

The next, Reader, is another Instance of the Snake's Injustice, in urging
against us, a Book writ by one R. Gordon, an open Enemy, taking no notice at
all of any Answer of ours, in which practice I have already detected him in p.
48. foregoing and shall have occasion hereafter, and therefore shall not say
more of it here, nor take notice at present of the passages he urges from that
Book, which yet the sober and unprejudiced Reader cannot call a leaping over
it, because not urged upon valid Authority.

The Snake's next Quotation, in p. 18. is from Readiness Errand, p. 7, 8. Jesus
Christ, the Mystery passed before: The same Spirit now, takes upon it the same
Seed, where it is manifested. What pray? is this more than to say, Jesus Christ
the same yesterday, to day, and for ever; and is sound and true? For they who
obey his words, do know of his Doctrine, and they do experience him, to be the
same he ever was.

Snake p. 19. Having thus shown the Quotations of the Quakers, out of their
printed Books. I will now further prove my Charge in Legal Form against them,
by Evidence upon Oath.

Having hitherto detected the Snake in false quoting of our Books, and
perverting the plain Sense and Meaning of them; so as it is obvious to the
intelligent Reader. I shall now examine and detect his Legal Form, but first
will show what it is.

Snake p. 19. Which you will find in a Book printed 1653. Entitled, A Brief
Relation of the Irreligion of the Northern Quakers, etc.

Here, Reader, Is the Snake's Legal Form; A Pamphlet, writ by professed
Adversaries; (like the Snake) which pretends to give an account of two or three
Trials of G. Fox and J. Nayler for Blasphemy: and what is in this related, the
Snake says is proved by evidence upon Oath. When indeed it is only a great
Argument of the Snake's Ignorance or Malice (I rather think the last) to call a
private Pamphlet a Legal Form. A Charge of Fact done many years past, and
brought to Trial in Courts of Justice, cannot be said to be proved in Legal
Form, if the Conviction of the accused cannot be proved by the Records of the
Court. Which I defy the Snake to produce. Nay he cannot, because the Parties
were discharged from their Accusations, the Evidence proving insufficient
against them.

And now for the Snake, (in his own Language) Boldly and Impudently to give the
Lie to the Judge of the Assize: or other Magistrates before whom these Charges
of Blasphemy were brought against G. Fox and J. Nayler, and to say it was
proved, when it was not, argues Impudence toward the Magistrates, but Villainy
toward the memory of the Accused: For had it been proved, they must have been
convict, and have suffered the demerits of Blasphemy: And all this would have
been upon record. But besides this, one grand and notorious Lie of the Snake's,
viz. That the Charge was proved; there is in His Legal Form many other Lies,
which I shall detect as I come at them.

Snake p. 19, 20. There (the Snake directs to that Lying Pamphlet) p. 2, and 3.
You have an account how G. Fox did avow himself over and over to be equal with
God: being asked by Dr. Marshal, in the presence of Mr. Sawro, Col. Tell and
Col. West, Justices of the Peace in the County of Lancaster, at a Private
Sessions in the Town of Lancaster, whether or no he was equal with God, as
before that time he had been heard to affirm? His Answer was this, I am equal
with God.

Pray, Reader, observe, had this been true, that G. Fox had so answered as the
Snake says he did in the presence of three Justices, what need was there for
Marshal and Altam to swear it against him? since the Justices, if they had
heard it themselves, might have convicted him thereof upon their own personal
hearing, without other evidence. Or how likely is it that Col. West and Tho.
Tell, both Justices upon the Bench at this Trial should sign a Supersedeas
(which both of them did) for his acquittal: if either of them had heard him say
the words charged? Or how could he have been discharged for want of another
Evidence, when his Adversaries might have brought in the three Justices against
him, had it been true, that they had heard him themselves? But besides there
are two Lies in this Paragraph; the first is, There was not any Justice of the
Peace, or Colonel named Tell. Secondly, G. Fox did not answer that he was equal
with God. But thus it was; There were Eight several Charges against him; the
fourth of which was, that he had said he was equal with God; which, being asked
in Court, He made the following answer. G. Fox, That was not so spoken by me:
But he that sanctifies, and he that is sanctified, is all of one, Heb. 2.11.
It is God and Christ that sanctifies; and the Saints are all one in the Father
and the Son, They are of his Bone, and of his Flesh, Ephesians. 5.30. And the
Father and the Son are one, and they are the Sons of God, Gal. 4.6. And as they
that are joined to the Lord are one Spirit, so they that are joined to an
Harlot, are one Flesh, 1 Cor. 6.16, 17. This the Scriptures witnesses, and I
witness. This Answer is Scriptural, and is directly opposite to what he was
then charged with, as it also is to what the Snake's Pamphleteer, says he did
then answer.

Snake, p. 20. This Blasphemy has been attested upon Oath, by the aforesaid
Dr. Marshal, and Mr. Altam, School Master at Lancaster, before the Justices at
the last Sessions held at Appleby, the 8 th of January 1652. and before Judge
Puleston at the last Assizes held at Lancaster, the 18 th of March 1652.

This is false in both the parts of it. For G. Fox had not any Trial at any
Sessions in Appleby, in the year 52. Nor had he any Trial before Judge
Puleston, or any other Judge, at any Assize held in Lancaster, in the year
1652. These notorious Lies I charge upon the Snake, let him clear himself if he
can. But for the Readers satisfaction and information, I shall briefly say, G.
Fox was at Michaelmas Sessions, in Lancaster, in the year 1652. (at which time
was upon the Bench, with others, as Justices of the Peace, Tho. Tell and Will.
West) called to answer to Eight Articles of Blasphemy, etc* charged upon him,
by Three Witnesses, viz. Altam (but Marshal did not swear) Birkett and
Attkinson, (this last a young Lad) which Charge the Evidence did swear was
gathered by them, from words spoken by him at a Meeting some time before. But
when to the several particulars, they were by the Bench severally interrogated,
they were confounded; insomuch, that Birkett said, he could not answer
directly; but the other could say it. To which the Bench replied, Have you
charged the Prisoner upon your Oath, and now say, He can say it? It seems you
did not hear these words spoken your self. To this Confusion of the Evidence,
was also added the Testimonies of many People, who had been at that Meeting
where the words were charged to be spoken, and did then declare in the open
Sessions, that no such words as those charged were then spoken by G. Fox.
Besides all this, G. Fox did then himself go through all the several Eight
Articles of his Charge, and showed his Scriptural Belief, in opposition to the
Blasphemies they had sworn. By which means the matter issued thus; a
Supersedeas was granted against a Writ which had gone out for his apprehending,
though he was not apprehended upon it, but came voluntarily to this Sessions to
answer his Enemies false Charges.

Besides this, G. Fox had no Trial at Appleby or Lancaster, nor at any Assize
at all in Lancaster. in 1652. Thus, Reader, the Snake's Legal Form is false,
both in matter and form: and himself by these his Lies, must be scandalous,
much below the dignity of a Pleni-Potent, which by a ridiculous assurance he
arrogates; when in p. 336. He pretends to demand reparation in the Name of the
Church of England: By what Name must he be now impleaded, whose Legal Form has
only served to show that he is Truly proved a Liar? But the Snake has not yet
done with his Legal Form, Ibid. p. 20. p. 3. (He refers to the Brief Relation.)
It is likewise witnessed, That James Naylor affirmed, That he was as Holy, Just
and Good, as God himself.

It Is true, it was so witnessed, but falsely; wherefore when James Naylor was
convened at Appleby Sessions in January 1652. The Evidence proving
insufficient, he was acquitted, and did by the Answers he gave to the
Questions, put to him by the Bench, in matters of Religion, show himself
neither Blasphemer, or Heretic, as was charged.

Snake, p. 21. These Monstrous Blasphemies occasioned a Petition from the
Gentlemen of that County, to the then Council of State.

Forbear Lying, It was not monstrous Blasphemy, but monstrous Disappointment
did occasion that Petition. For when G. Fox and J. Naylor in the face of the
Country did appear Orthodox and Scriptural in their Faith, and the Persons that
Swore against them, insufficient in their Evidence, by which means they were
both cleared; Then it was, they ran to White Hall, with those Lies which they
could not prove at Lancaster against G. Fox, nor at Appleby against J. Naylor:
And of these Petitioning Gentlemen, there were of the Priesthood much about the
number mentioned, Acts 23.21. And they were no less disappointed. For the
Council dismissed the Petition, with its annexed Schedule. Wherefore I also shall
only consider so much of it as is yet not replied to. And first for James
Milner, mentioned in the Schedule. I shall speak of him in answer to the
Snake's 21st Section, wherein the Snake speaks more largely concerning this Man.

Another Article in the Schedule is; Leonard Fell, Professes that Christ had
never any Body but his Church. To this Article, The Honest Old Man, being yet
in health and strength, through the mercies of God, and preserved out of the
Jaws of Violence, he answers for himself.

I have not at any time professed that Christ had never any Body but his
Church; nor did ever speak any words tending to it.

Leo. Fell.

Snake, p. 22. G. Fox wrote an Answer to this Petition, and to every Article in
the Schedule, which he Entitled, Readiness Errand to Damascus.

It Is true, he did so, and a Pretty Book it is, and answers the End for which
it was writ.

Ibid. p. 23. Fox having produced so particular a Charge of Gross and
Abominable Blasphemies against himself and Partners, did it on purpose, that he
might the more exactly, and in terms most express and plain, Renounce and
Disown them.

The end for which G. Fox did in that Book entitled Readiness Errand, etc. set
down the Petition of some Priests, and others of the County of Lancanster to
the Council of State, together with the Crimes mentioned in their Schedule; was
indeed that he might fully answer them, in showing the Quakers Belief in
opposition to those false Charges. And this is done in that Book, in terms so
express and plain, as leaves no room for doubt, unless to such whom nothing
will satisfy. For to each particular Objection, he gives a distinct Answer;
and that in Scriptures quoted for that purpose. But this same Adversary seems
to be dissatisfied with such Answer; as no doubt he would have been with that
of our Savior to the Captious Jews, Mark 11.33. and 12.17. and with many
others of the like kind, which he may be pleased to say, are not in terms
sufficiently express and plain.

Ibid. p. 24. Nay, he downright owns, and justifies the greatest part of them,
as their preternatural Convulsions and Quakings, Foamings and Swellings of
their Bellies, which seized them at their Meetings, even Little Children who
could not counterfeit.

It is an unaccountable degree of Impudence, for a man, with so much assurance
as this Snake does, to say G. Fox owns and justifies Preternatural Convulsions,
Foamings and Swellings of Bellies, and that of Little Children: When G. Fox has
not in that Book one such word. That I may not herein impose upon the Reader,
as the Snake has done; I will here give entire G. Fox's Answer to that
Objection; and then the Reader may find whether I or the Snake be the Liar; the
page the Snake quotes is p. 5. of Readiness Errand, which is thus,

Answ. The Meetings of the People of God, were ever strange to the World; for
it was as though some strange thing had happened to the Saints, as we read in
the Scripture, Psalm. 71.7. 1 Pet. 4.12. Which shows they are in the same
Generation wondering and stranging at the Work of the Lord, despising and
casting Scandals, Slanders and false Reports upon them. And where the Works of
God are now, Acts 13.41. they think them strange things now, as was then, who
are alive in the Flesh. It would be a strange thing now, to see one fall down,
as Paul fell down and trembled, and as Daniel fell down and trembled, Dan.
10.9. And to see one as Habakkuk, his Belly to tremble, and his Lips to quiver,
Hab. 3.16. And as David, to lie roaring all the Day long, who cried till his
sight was grown dim, and his Flesh failed of fatness, and till he could number
his Bones: And to see one as Isaiah, to rent his Garment and his Mantle, and to
pluck his Hair off his Head, and off his Beard and sit down astonished. And
would it not be strange to see such an Assembly as came to Isaiah, Isa. 66.5.
Which had all trembling Hearts? Hear the Word of the Lord, all ye that tremble
at his Word; work out your Salvation with fear and trembling. Before their
faces, the people shall be much pained; all faces shall gather blackness, Joel
2.6. The Prophets and Ministers of God have all one Spirit (according to
measure) and did encourage those that did tremble: Wherein it shows, that you
have not the same Spirit, but seek to persecute and fix Scandals and accuse
them falsely.

Here, Reader, thou may see the injustice and falsehood of this Adversary, in
so boldly asserting what there is not a word of; though he says, p. 24. The
Matter of Fact Fox owns, p. 5. Thou have here G. Fox's answer from p. 5. Pray
see if it be as the Snake says it is.

The Snake has one Hiss more; In this Section, with which he concludes it: and
that is at James Milner, of whom I have reserved to speak in answer to the
Snake's 21st Section, As I have already hinted, p. 66. Wherefore I now come to
the Snake's 4th Section, of the Quakers Pretense, to a sinless Perfection.

SECT. III. We do own and believe, that it is our Duty to press on to
Perfection; which by the assistance of the Spirit of God we believe it possible
to attain unto.
REader, I have already shown thee in Sect. 1. p. 43. what we mean and
understand by the Light within, viz. Jesus Christ as testified of in Holy Writ;
where the Apostle testifies, 2 Cor. 5.19. That God was in Christ reconciling
the world to himself; and we say, that as Man, through obedience to the Holy
Spirit, comes to witness a being reconciled to God through Jesus Christ, he
will more and more witness a growing into that Holy Oneness, that Spiritual
Union and Communion which our Savior has prayed his Disciples might witness
(as is already shown, Sect. 2. p. 64. though misinterpreted by our Adversaries to
be an aspiring to Equality, etc. with God:) And all, who in their several
degrees of growth in Grace, do witness the going on of this Work of
Reconciliation, must witness a going on to Perfection. And I cannot see any
absurdity in this Scriptural Doctrine. For if I, through the Power of Christ,
have witnessed a Being by him set free from one vile Affection, or one
inordinate Lust. Have I not good reason to hope, that he that has began this
good work, is able to finish it? and so of the rest of Humane Infirmities,
which cannot be overcome but by the assistance of a Divine Power; which being
altogether Perfect in it self, will lead on to Perfection all who are obedient
to it. Yet this Plain and Scriptural Doctrine, professed by us from the first,
has met with great opposition and perversion, as now by this Snake.

Snake, p. 25. After having showed the Quakers claim to an Equality with God,
to be part of him, of one Soul, Being, Person and Essence with him: It may seem
a saying less, and going backward, to say, that they pretend to a sinless
Perfection.

How idle and false is it in the Snake to say, we pretend to be one Person with
God, when we reject the word Person as too gross to be applied to God or
Christ, or the Holy Spirit? But after having shown the falsity of that Charge,
as is plentifully done in the foregoing Section, I shall go forward to show
also, as is above hinted, that the Sinless Perfection we contend for, is only
in the Holy Spirit; and no further ours, than we come into obedience to it; and
through obedience to it it is possible, 2 Pet. 1.4. To be partakers of the
Divine Nature.

But because our Modern Quakers are abated somewhat from the Loud Blasphemies
to which they at first pretended, etc.

Here, Reader, Is an Instance of the Hypocrisy and Confusion of this Man. He
had charged us, Sect. 1, 2, 3. that at our first setting up, we were to the
Height, Blasphemous and Mad. For the proof of this G. Fox's Great Mystery is
quoted oftener than any other Book. But the Modern Quakers are abated, etc. and
for proof of this G. Fox's Great Mystery is quoted oftener than any other Book.
So that the same Book shall answer contrary purposes; and it is only owing to
his Viperine Love; or else from that Book he might have attempted to prove us
any thing, but what we are. But his Malice is seen and despised.

Ibid. p. 26. I have before quoted Mr. Penn upbraiding the Church of England,
as opposers of perfection, and rediculing us, for confessing our selves
Sinners, and imploring God's mercy.

And I have in answer to it, p. 41. shown that W. Penn neither upbraids nor
ridicules the Church of England for confessing of sin, and imploring God's
mercy. But he speaks against sinning and confessing, confessing and sinning;
and so to go on from seven to seventy: this He, and this all good Men must
speak against, because it is against the Law and Will of God.

Ibid. p. 26. Now hear G. Fox 's Great Mystery p. 101. It is the Doctrine of
Devils that preaches that Men shall have sin, and be in a Warfare so long as
they be on the earth.

What can it be, other than that? Because we know, not only from what was
promised, but by the fruits of true Faith, that it gives victory over the
World: And it is impossible for any Men to be Victors over Sin, while they are
in bondage to it.

Ibid. p. 26. A quotation from Great Mystery p. 111. They that pretend coming
to God and Christ, out of Perfection, they be in Error.

And it is doubtless true, for there is no coming to God through Christ, whilst
in sin; and according to this, God by his Prophet calls to the House of Israel
to put away their sins, Then come, let us reason together. But he would not
reason with them while they were led captive with the Love of their Iniquities.

Ibid. p. 26. From Great Mystery, p. 231. All who come to Christ, they come to
perfection.

It Is very true, for out of Christ I am sure there is none. Ibid. Great Mystery
p. 231. They attain to perfection in the Life of God.

There is no other way to attain it, than through that Life which is the Light
of Men. Ibid. Great Mystery, p. 271. For who are sanctified, have perfect
Unity, perfect Knowledge, perfect Holiness. Who are sanctified are in Christ,
in the Apostle's phrase have put on Christ; and who have him, have perfect
Unity, Knowledge and Holiness. Ibid. Great Mystery, p. 281. The Life of the
Saints is Christ, not sinful at all. The Evangelist has testified of the Life
of Christ, that it is the Light of Men: And the Apostle says, when Christ who
is our Life, etc. Col. 3.4. And this Life, Christ, is not sinful at all. And I
do hope, that the Snake will not be so impudently Blasphemous, as to say of
this Spiritual Appearance and Life of Christ in Man, as the Jews said of him
while he dwelt on the Earth, John 9.24. As for this Man, we know that he is a
Sinner.

Snake, p. 26. William Shown (a great Quaker Preacher, in his Treatise
concerning Thoughts and Imaginations, Printed 1685. p. 25. represents a Quaker
as Meeker than Moses, Stronger than Samson, etc. --

The Snake does here grossly pervert W. Shewen's words, which, by the comparison
he uses, are only to show, How that a Christian by following of Christ, the
Light, the Savior of the World, and Captain of Salvation, may be brought to
the Stature of a perfect Man in Christ. And least the Comparison should stumble
or offend any, he adds, "Least thou should stumble at these sayings, consider
that John was the greatest Prophet born of a Woman, yet the least in the
Kingdom of Heaven is greater than he, Matt. 11.11.

Ibid. p. 26. Their great Scribe T. Elwood in his answer to G. Keith 's
Narrative 1696. p. 202. takes upon him to justify G. Whitehead for denying,
that there is continual need of Repentance, upon this ground, that the Quakers
are free from all Sin, and therefore have not continual need of Repentance.

It is false, he did not justify G. W. upon this ground; Tho. Ellwood's words
are these, G. W's meaning only was, that there is no continual need of
Repentance, from a necessity of continual sinning; for where true Repentance is
wrought, and the Fruits of it brought forth, it is attended with a real
forsaking of Sin and Transgression; and this is unto Salvation, never to be
repented of.

Ibid. p. 26, 27. Edw. Borrough's ( the mighty Pillar of the Quakers, next to
the Old Fox) determines positively, p. 32. of his Works, Printed 1672. That God
does not accept of any, where there is any failing, or who do not fulfill the
Law, and does not answer every demand of Justice.

I suppose a main reason why the Snake is offended with E. B's so saying, is,
because himself has so many failings, does not fulfill, hardly any part of the
Law, and answers few or no Demands of Justice. But be that as it will, E. B.
for his so saying has produced good Authorities, viz. 1 John 3.8. 1 Pet. 2.9.
which if the Snake can refute, let him.

Ibid. p. 27. I could heap up many more Quotations to the same purpose; but
these will suffice till answered.

That Is now done, and thy deceit and falsehood in perverting and mangling our
Books, is herein, in some measure detected, and laid open, and therefore shall
proceed to his 4th Section.

SECT. IV. Concerning our Belief of Immediate Revelation.
BY what I have already said in the foregoing Sections, concerning the
beginning and progress of the Work of God in Man; how that it is wrought by the
Operations of the Holy Spirit: It may be well seen, what Immediate Revelation
it is of which we speak, and what we mean by it, viz. the Influences and
Operations of the Holy Spirit (which the Snake dare not deny; but owns that in
some sense, they may be called Revelations, and immediate too, p. 27, 28.)
which according to the Apostle's Doctrine, Col. 1.27. Is Christ in you, the
Hope of Glory? And we do say, that the first appearances of Christ, immediately
by his Spirit, in Men, is as himself has said, John 16.8. to reprove the World
of Sin, etc. This, as it is truly and properly Immediate Revelation. So in this
degree, it is universally given to Men, during the day of their visitation, in
order that they might know the Masters Will.

Snake, p. 28. But the Holy Prophets and Apostles had Revelations of a much
higher Degree than this, viz. To foretell things to come, to work Miracles, to
go with particular Messages from God. --

It Is very true, their Degrees of Revelation were much higher, but differed not
in Nature; and so it is at this Day: For, such whom Christ does now Prepare,
Fit, Furnish and Qualify, with, and by his Holy Spirit, and send them forth in
the Work of the Ministry; their Degrees of Immediate Revelation are much
higher, than that Degree of Immediate Revelation which I have above spoken of:
And in these higher Degrees of Revelation; God may give One to Prophesy or
foretell things to come, and send Another with a Message, as shall seem good in
his Sight; and all this by the Immediate Revelation of the same Holy Spirit,
which reproves the World of Sin; though in a Higher Degree; and by the Higher
Degrees of this Immediate Revelation, it may please God by his Servants (for
God has not, in his revealed Will, declared that he would not) to work
Miracles: But, as his Ministers at this Day have no New Gospel to Preach; so it
is not necessary that the Work of the Ministry should be commonly attended with
such external Credentials, if so, I may call Miracles.

Ibid. p. 28. And to this, G. F. pretended, even to Outward Visions and
Revelations (as in his Blasphemous Journal) particularly, upon a High Mountain
in Yorkshire, where he tells of his receiving Commission to Preach.

That G. F. had Visions and Revelations (some of which might be Outward) and
did receive a Commission from God to Preach, he has given more and better
Proofs, than the Snake has, that G. F's Journal is Blasphemous: For, of this I
find no Proof, but the Snak's own confident averring of it. But among the
Proofs of G. F's having received Commission to Preach, none of the smallest,
are the many, who, instrumentally by him, were turned from Darkness to Light,
and from the Power of Satan to the Power of God: To which Power of God, as they
did attend and grow up in, they were the Living Seals of his Ministry. And for
the Visions and Revelations, which G. F. has declared he had, there are none
of them that are repugnant to the Holy Scriptures, but are consistent with, and
agreeable to the special Manifestations of God to his Children, mentioned
therein, which nothing that is Blasphemous can be. Nay, further, God has
promised, Joel 2.28. That in the pouring forth of his Spirit, He would give
Prophecy, Dreams and Visions; and that it is fulfilled in the Gospel
Dispensation, the Holy Apostle Peter has testified, Acts 2.16.

Ibid. p. 21. Fox does plainly distinguish betwixt the Ordinary Experiences of
the Inward Operations of the Spirit of God upon our Hearts, and the being sent
Immediately from God, with such a Message as the Prophets and Apostles had.

And this plain Distinction of G. F's is warranted from Scripture, it being
wholly in the degrees of Operation, but the Holy Spirit which does so diversely
Operate, is the same. The Faith of the Woman cured of a Bloody Issue, Mat.
9.20. was begotten in her by a degree of the Operation of the Holy Spirit, and
by a much greater Degree of the Operation of the same Holy Ghost, Philip was
bid, Acts 8.29. Go near and join thy self to this Chariot: And abundance of
Instances, of these kinds, might be produced in Holy Writ, which do as plainly
distinguish (as any of us can) betwixt the Ordinary and Extraordinary Inward
Operations of the Holy Spirit upon our Hearts, yet both truly and properly
Immediate.

Ibid. p. 29. These are his Words. And show plainly what he meant by Immediate
Revelation, and how it distinguished him from the Professors.

Yes, Snake, it is very plain what G. F. meant by Immediate Revelation, when he
asked Four or Five Priests ( Journal p. 83.) Whether any one of them could say,
he ever had the Word of the Lord to go and speak to such, or such a People?
viz. that this is a Higher Degree of the Inward Operation of the Holy Spirit,
than that by which it Reproves the World of Sin. This Higher Degree of
Immediate Revelation, none of those Priests could say they had had, and
therefore might well be deemed such, of whom the Prophet says, They run and the
Lord never sent them. And to G. F's Question foregoing, the Priest made no
proper answer, when he said, He could speak his experiences. Because every
operation of the Holy Spirit does give some experience to the Heart, in which
it works: And if a Man thereby reproved of Sin, be obedient to that reproof; he
shall witness a forsaking that, for which he was so reproved: And this is a
good Degree of Experience. But this Experience barely, is no call to the
Ministry: To which, those whom Christ does Choose, Prepare, Fit, Furnish and
Qualify, as it is by a higher Degree of the Inward and Immediate Operations of
His Holy Spirit, so it does distinguish them from those, who can only speak of
Experiences, as is above declared.

Ibid. p. 29. And he Vouches this, by a company of Vile and Senseless Miracles,
to which he pretends in his Journal.

How shows the Snake, that the Miracles mentioned in G. F's Journal, are Vile
and Senseless? They are not therefore so, because an Enemy says it: And yet he
has given no other reason.

And now having gained what he meant by Revelation, and Immediate Revelation: I
will show you that he attributes it not only to his own Worthiness, but to the
Quakers in General.

They are (says he, in his Great Mystery, p. 242.) in the same Power,
Understanding, Knowledge, and Immediate Revelation from Heaven, that the
Apostles were in.

There is no dificulty to gain either what G. F. did mean, or any of us do
mean, by Revelation; it being in short, this, 1 Cor. 2.11. The things of God
knows no Man, but by the Spirit of God: And whosoever does know and
understand the Gospel of Christ, which is, Romans 1.16. The Power of God unto
Salvation; must receive that knowledge, and that understanding, by Immediate
Revelation from the same Spirit, from which the Apostles had theirs: The
Apostles have declared, that themselves did receive their Knowledge of the
things of God by it, and that without this Spirit no Man can know them: Yet we
do not from hence say, nor has G. F. said, that the Gospel of Christ is not to
be understood but by the same Degree of Power, Understanding, Knowledge and
Immediate Revelation, which the Apostles were in; or that himself, or any other
Quaker (as the Snake does falsely suggest) are in that same Degree, in which the
Apostles were: The Apostle Peter was in the same Power, Understanding,
Knowledge and Immediate Revelation; when he gave Testimony to the Divinity of
our Savior, Mat. 16.16. Thou art Christ the Son of the Living God; in which he
was, when he said, Acts 2.22, 23. Ye Men of Israel hear these Words, Jesus of
Nazareth, a Man approved of God among you, by Miracles, Wonders and Signs,
which God did by him in the midst of you, as ye your selves also know him,
being delivered by the Foreknowledge and Counsel of God, ye have taken, and by
wicked hands have crucified and slain, etc. But I suppose the Snake will hardly
affirm he was in the same Degree of Power, etc. And after all, it is false in
the Snake, to say that G. F. said this of his own Worthiness (as he floutingly
styles him) or of the Quakers in General; for G. F. does neither mention
himself in Particular, nor the Quakers in General: But after the words before
quoted by the Snake adds, That understand the Gospel. Instead of which words,
he has falsely added as above.

Ibid. p. 29. Quoted from Great Mystery, p. 241. Are not ye in the Presumption,
and Usurpt Authority, to Preach or to Teach, that have not the Immediate
Revelation as the Apostles had?

Yes, Doubtless they do run when they are not sent of God, to Preach the
Gospel: Who, before they Teach others the Things of God, are not themselves
taught them by the holy Spirit.

Ibid. p. 29. quoted from Great Mystery, p. 213. Thou can not know the
Scriptures, but by the same Degree of the Spirit, that the Prophets and
Apostles had.

The Snake has here altered the Form of G. F's Words, which as they stand,
are, Thou can not know Scripture, etc. And it is plain that by the Error of
the Press [all] is left out, for it ought to be, Thou can not know all
Scripture, etc. And to show plainly that G. F. did so write and intend. I will
produce p. 212. where speaking to the same Adversary, upon the same subject, he
thus says, every Man that has a Measure of the Spirit of God, in the least
Measure or Degree, it is infallible, and so far they may Teach infallibly, and
know Scriptures; but they cannot know all Scriptures, but as they attain to the
full Measure of the Spirit of the Prophets and Apostles.

Ibid. p. 30. Quoted from Great Mystery, p. 97^ They [the Quakers] says the
Snake, but says G. Fox, [who are come to the Lamb] They witness Immediate
Revelation, They are come to that the Apostles was in, the Spirit of Christ,
the Spirit of God, They witness Immediate Revelation.

And it is very true, for who are come to Christ, do witness his Spirit; and the
Apostles were in his Spirit.

Ibid. p. 30. Quoted from Great Mystery, p. 153. But the rest of the World have
never heard the voice of God, nor the voice of Christ, and have not the same
Infallible Spirit a^ the Apostles had, and no Immediate Revelation, nor
Inspiration as they had.

In this one Quotation, here is a twofold falsehood: First Forgery, next false
Quoting. For the Forgery it is this; These first words [But the rest of the
World] are not G. Fox's: next, he has left out a whole Sentence in the middle
of the Quotation, which is relative to, and explanatory of the rest. That the
falsehood and injustice of this Adversary may appear clearly to the impartial
Reader, I here subjoin the place as it is in the page quoted. The Spirit of God
(in the Apostles) being witnessed, it opens the Scriptures, is the Key, lets to
see what has been since the days of the Apostles, and ruled, and reigned, and
had the Dominion: The Wolf in Sheeps Clothing, which have deceived the Nations,
such as have led the World, and brought them all upon heaps, and have never
heard the Voice of God, and have published it to the Nation in Print, nor the
voice of Christ, and have not the same Infallible Spirit as the Apostles had,
and no immediate Revelation nor Inspiration as they had. Thus far G. Fox, whose
words are sound: For first it is certain, that the Spirit of God does not only
open the Scriptures. But will also discover the Devourer, and Wolf. This
discovering Knowledge, our Savior has testified is in his Followers, in that;
A Stranger they will not follow. And it is as certain, that Men guided by this
Devouring Spirit, have often brought heaps of Confusion. And lastly, I take it
for granted, That such who publish to the Nation, that they have never heard
the Voice of God, nor Christ, have not the Holy Spirit, nor its immediate
teachings; and it is no wonder, they have it not, for God has said, that his
Spirit should not always strive with Man; and he who resists the Day of small
things, and through the Crowds of Temptations and Vanities, will not hearken
nor hear, the fault is his own.

Ibid. p. 30. Quoted from Great Mystery, p. 321. Revelation is now witnessed in
our days, as it was in the Apostles, but not amongst you, who have inwardly
ravened from the Spirit of God, which have Apostatized from the Apostles. --
And so you be in the Diabolical Devilish, that expects not that now, which was
in the Days of the Apostles.

This Quotation which the Snake has jumbled together, only with the small
distinction of a break, Is, as it lies in the Book, Great Mystery, two Answers,
to things severally asserted, by a Priest (Josias Dorker) at Bransprith Castle,
Durham. The first part of the Quotation, to the Break, is part of G. Fox's
Answer to this following Assertion of the Priest's. Immediate Revelation, or
Inspiration is not to be expected in these days. To this false Assertion, the
words of G. Fox, quoted above by the Snake, are a proper Answer; because as G.
Fox, in the same Answer shows, (though left out by the Snake) according to our
Savior's words; None knows the Son but the Father, neither knows any man the
Father save the Son; and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. which
Doctrine, whosoever shall deny, are most certainly ravened from the Spirit of
God, and Apostatized from the Apostles.

But Secondly, This Priest, Dorker, did affirm it to be needless, and also
Diabolical (that is to say Develish) to expect any such thing now. To this, the
Latter part of the Snake's Quotation, is also part of G. Fox's Answer; which
Answer is true: As for [Diabolical and Devilish] they are the Priest's own
words, and were fittly by retorsion, given to the Priest. And it is a great
indication, that Men are in that Spirit themselves, which is Devilish; when
they call Good, Evil; and Evil, Good: and tell the World that that is needless,
or not to be expected now, which is the Covenant of the New Testament. And
here, Reader, is another Mark of that foul Hypocrisy and Envy which is in this
our Adversary; who pretends to quote the Offices and Services of the Church of
England for proof, that Inspiration is believed and prayed for, and which he
would have taken as an Argument, that himself does so believe and pray: Yet
here he is angry with G. Fox for telling the Priests that they were ravened
from the Spirit of God, even then, when they told the People, Inspiration was
not now to be expected. How will the Snake wind this into any agreement?

Himself says, Inspiration is to be expected and prayed for. The Priests whom
G. Fox answered, said, It is not to be expected, nor prayed for: Nay, they said
more, that it is Diabolical to expect it now. See, Reader, the Confusion of
these Our Adversaries, of former and later times. Who, no doubt, pretended to
be true, both now and then, though quite contrary now, to what they were then.
But if the Doctrine be true now, how comes G. Fox to be blameworthy for
asserting it then, and telling them then, that such who denied it, were ravened
from the Spirit of God. And after all the Daubing Hypocrisy of this Snake, let
him show if he can, that such who deny this Doctrine (which is essential to
Salvation) do not thereby show themselves ravened, etc.

Ibid. p. 30. Quoted from p. 30. of G. Fox's Answer to the Westmoreland
Petition. If ever you own the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles, you will own
our Writings, which are given forth by the same Spirit and Power.

The Liberty which this Adversary takes to himself, is very great; sometimes
supplying to our words what he is pleased to think they want, as at other
times, to bite and curtail them. And to show thee, Reader, what Supplements he
gives to our words; take the place as it is in G. Fox's Answer, etc. If ever
you own the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles, you will own them, which are
given forth by the same Spirit and Power. And it is very true; for whosoever
shall write from the movings of the Spirit, and grace of God upon his heart,
though in the least manifestation thereof, them Writings, so written, cannot fail
of being acknowledged in their Degree: By all, who through the Spirit of God,
are led to own the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles. And the Reason is plain,
because every Member, partakes of the same Spirit, by which the whole Body and
Church (of Christ) is kept living. And it is impossible for the Holy Spirit, in
one Member, to contradict the same Spirit in the rest of the Body. Thus,
Reader, thou may plainly see, that that Sinless Perfection, maintained in our
Books, which the Snake carps at, misrepresents, and wilfully lies against, is
no other than the Perfection of the Holy Spirit, and which is no further Ours,
than we walk in obedience to that Spirit; by Obedience to which, the Apostle
has testified, 2 Pet. 1.4. That by escaping the Corruption that is in the
World through Lust, we may be made partakers of the Divine Nature. It were a
foul and false imputation upon this Doctrine of the Apostles, to suggest that
he hereby advised the true Believers to pretend to any such equality of
Perfection, as that of God; who in his Wisdom and Power, etc. is Infinite. God
has promised to his People, I will dwell in them, and walk in them, 2 Cor.
6.16. And all who do witness this Holy In-dwelling of God, must of necessity
say, and confess, that he is able to give a perfect Deliverance and Freedom
from Sin. But have not, nor cannot say, That they are God, or they are Christ,
because of the In-dwelling of the Holy Spirit; never did any of us so say, as
falsely suggested by the Snake, which in reply to the foregoing quotations, does
(I think) evidently appear. Wherefore I now proceed to his 6th Section of the
Quakers Infallibility.

SECT. V. Showing that Infallibility is by us placed in the Holy Spirit, and
only is ours, as guided by that.
Snake, p. 31.
THis Section therefore is like opening the Jugler's Box, -- and you may expect
to see Rarities.

The Snake, is the Jugler, and this Section (or rather his whole Book) the Box.
The Rarities, which the Reader may expect to see, will, no doubt, be agreeable
to such a Juggling Undertaker. Before I come to open his Box, (this Section) I
will show thee, Reader, his Juggling Artifice on the Lid of it.

Ibid. p. 31. This Section may seem needless, as being included in the former.

That it is included in the former, is true; for, who claims to be equal, of
the same Being and Substance with God. Such, doubtless, claim to be infallible
as he: And then, why this needless Section? Why, the Jugler, doubting to put
the matter of Charge upon that Issue, multiplied this Section, though needless,
and drew it to a length near twice that of all his foregoing Sections, that he
might indeed, Jugler like, blind the Readers observation in the length of it:
And with respect to us, the Jugler might hope, it should, by its length, be
admitted as Billa Vera, rather than any should examine its Contents, and detect
its Lies. But to begin with the Snake's first head of Distinction.

Ibid. p. 31. 1. This their Infallibility was palm'd upon them by the Church of
Rome.

That the Snake may not palm this Story upon the World without proof, I do, on
the behalf of the People called Quakers, deny the Assertion, and put our
Adversary upon the Proof of it; which, if he cannot do, he is hereby registered
for a Liar.

Ibid. p. 31. Of which, They were so greedy, that they swallowed it down by
wholesale, and would have none of those Cautions, with which, the Church of
Rome used to defend themselves.

As we did not receive from the Church of Rome, or any other Society of Men,
our True Principle of the Infallibility of the Spirit, or Grace of God; so
neither did, or do we want any of those Cautions which the Romanists may have,
and use in their claim of Infallibility. That this may appear more plain to the
Sober Reader, I will show the vast difference between us and them herein. The
Papists, how much soever they differ among themselves, in placing of
Infallibility in their Church; as whether in the Pope, and in him Simply, or in
him in Cathedra, or with his Conclave, or him in General Counsel, or in such
Counsel without him, or in the Church diffusive, yet they do all agree herein;
that this Infallibility is possessed by Original Grant, made by Jesus Christ,
to one, or other, or all of them, in the Person of the Holy Apostle Peter, and
does descend by Ordination in a continual Succession not alienable. This, I
doubt not, will be allowed to be the declared sentiments of some of that People
in this point; and which do abundantly differ from what has been always
professed by us herein, which in Brief, is to the following purpose, viz.

First, We have constantly said, that the Holy Spirit of God is Infallible, and
that through the Mediation and Intercession of our Lord Jesus Christ, a
Manifestation of this Infallible Holy Spirit is given to every Man to profit
with.

Secondly, We have constantly said, that whoever is obedient to the Convictions
and Leadings of this Infallible Holy Spirit, as they are tendered to their
Souls, during the day of their Visitation, shall thereby be Infallibly lead,
into all Truth, necessary to Salvation, both in Principle and in Practice; for
it does not only Teach sound Doctrines, but also teaches to deny all
ungodliness, and has no fellowship with the Unfruitful Works of Darkness.

Thirdly, We have constantly said, that of such, as through their working
together with the Grace of God; are thereby become Strong in the Lord: Of these
I say, As Christ does now Prepare, Fit, Furnish and Qualify, with, and by his
Holy Spirit; those whom he makes Choice of to send forth and employ in the work
of the Ministry: So they who are so sent forth, have (or may have, if they
diligently attend to the Voice of this Infallible Holy Spirit speaking in them)
a certain Infallible Knowledge and Assurance of the Truth of what they so
deliver: And they who hear, have (or may have, if they duly attend to that
measure or manifestation of this Infallible Holy Spirit which they have
received) a like certain Infallible Knowledge and Assurance of the Truth of
what they hear: But, though they who so minister, and they who so hear, have, or
may have, this Infallible Assistance; Yet, this Assistance continues no longer
with any, than they to whom it is so given, do continue faithful to it; and
herein is one remarkable difference between the Law and the Gospel; the Law, in
its Offices, went by Succession to the several Ages of the People of the Jews,
and was not alienable from them, but fulfilled and so ended by Christ: Thus,
the Office of the Priesthood descended in that Tribe in which it was appointed
at the giving of the Law, so that in the execution of their Office, they had
the benefit of the promises made to the Priesthood at that time, though some of
them were wicked Men, an Instance whereof, is, John 11.51. in Caiphas, of whom
it is there said, He spoke not of himself, but being High Priest that Year he
prophesied. But in the Gospel Dispensation it is not so, the Gifts of the Holy
Spirit not being limited either to Person or Office in the Church; nor can Man
witness any Union with it, or infallible Assistance from it, but through
obedience to, and perseverance both in the Principles which it teaches, and
that Holiness of Life which it leads into: This, thus briefly stated, will
plainly and truly show the Inquiring Reader, the great difference between us
and the Romanists in this great Article of Infallibility.

Ibid. p. 32. But the Simplicity of our Quakers, has deprived them of every one
of these helps.

The Quakers as I have now shown, have no need of those helps; because their
Simplicity is Godly Sincerity; which, had the Snake had, he would not have
belied us as he does in the following words.

Ibid. p. 32. For as they place Infallibility in every single Quaker, so they
confine it not to matters of Faith, but extend it to all Persons and Things. To
know all Men's Hearts, and all things in the World; by their Inward Light,
without being told by any.

Which are Abominable Lies and Slanders, as will be further manifested in
detecting his Perversions and other Abuses of those quotations, which he makes
from our Friends Books, to prove this Assertion. Under the second head the
Snake makes diverse quotations.

Ibid. p. 33. he quotes from Great Mystery, this Objection of the Priest's:
That is another Error of the Quakers, that say, he who is not Infallible in his
Judgment, when he gives Counsel and Advice, is no Minister of Christ.

The Snake, has fairly, as above, put the Objection, but has falsely quoted G.
F's Answer, which is truly thus, Now he that is not Infallible in his Counsel,
and Judgment and Advice, is not he in Error? And are not the Ministers of
Christ, the Ministers of the Spirit? And is not that out of the Error, which is
Infallible in Counsel and Judgment? And are they Ministers of Christ that are
fallible? And is not the Power, the Gospel, Infallible? -- Which is briefly
thus, The Ministers of Christ, ministering from the Gospel the Power of God,
which is Infallible, are in such their Ministry Infallible: This, every Eye not
blinded with Prejudice and Envy, may by the context perceive to be the sense of
the place.

But this Adversary has here given a fair mark of his Prejudice and Envy, in
that he would rather false quote G. F's words, by leaving out sentences in the
middle of the Quotation, than by setting it fairly down, let it speak for it
self: Which practice of the Snake is base and cowardly, as well as unchristian.

He has posted himself, Knight Errant like, to Demand Reparation in the name
of the Church of England: And from this assumed Post, he descends to call G. F.
Valpoon, one of poor Understanding, etc. yet meanly and in very poor Manner,
false quotes his Books, that he may be sure of a Triumph; plainly enough
intimating, that G. F's words are sound till he has mangled them; and which
being restored, do plainly show that the Infallibility, of which G. F. speaks,
is that of the Holy Spirit, from which Holy Spirit, so far as any do Minister,
so far and no farther, are they Infallible in their Ministry.

Ibid. p. 33. quoted from Great Mystery, p. 89. They can discern who are
Saints, who are Devils, and who Apostates, without speaking ever a word.

Though the Snake injuriously stop here, G. F. goes on, and in his next words
shows, who they be that can do so, They that be in the Power and the Life of
Truth. Which does very plainly show, that G. F. did not attribute this
Knowledge or Discerning to the Quakers or any Man; but to the Power and Life of
Truth where it is manifested.

And if the Snake will take upon him, in his own name, or others, to deny, and
disown, that any of the Church of England have the word of God, or Christ, in
their Hearts; or will say that Christ is not Eternal, Infallible and Able to
Judge of Persons or things, which is the Doctrine that he opposes; let him do
it in plain terms.

Ibid. p. 33. quoted from Great Mystery, p. 96. Thou not being Infallible, thou
art not in the Spirit, and so art not a Minister, and art not able to Judge of
Powers that is not Infallible, nor Magistrates, nor Kingdoms nor Churches.

Here (as I have just now observed) the Snake breaks off too soon, having
purposely left out the very next following words, which are these, For who is
in the Infallible Spirit, is in the Spirit that Christ was in, etc. which words
do very fully show wherein the Infallibility of the true Ministry does stand.
And do as fully show the injustice of this Adversary in the curtailing of them.

Ibid. p. 34. Quoted from p. 7. of E. B's Preface to Great Mystery. The Snake
says, That E. B. says this Infallible Spirit was given to every one, and then
thus quotes him. To us (says he) every one of us in particular -- And this
Light gave us between Truth and Error, and between every false and right way,
and it perfectly discovered to us the true state of all things.

The Snake, in this Quotation, has treacherously abused and mangled E. B's
Words, and perverted his Sense; I will desire the Reader's patience to read
what I have transcribed from E. B. his clear sense, and true Gospel Doctrine,
will, I hope, answer the pains thou shall be at in doing it. And for the
detection of the Snake in this his nibling practice, I will distinguish what he
has taken, as above, in a different Character.

Pref. p. 7. of Great Mystery. First, The Lord brought us, by his Power and
Wisdom, and the Word by which all Things were made, to know, and understand,
and see perfectly, that God had given to us, every one of us in particular, a
Light from himself, shining in our Hearts and Consciences, which Light, Christ
his Son, the Savior of the World, had lighted every Man, and all Mankind
withal; which Light in us, we found sufficient to reprove us, and convince us
of every evil Deed, Word and Thought; and by it, in us, we come to know Good
from Evil, Right from Wrong; and whatsoever is of God, and according to him,
from what is of the Devil; and what is contrary to God, in Motion, Word and
Work: And this Light, gave us to discern between Truth and Error, between every
False and Right Way; and it perfectly discovered to us, the true state of all
things: And we thereby came to know Man, what he was in his Creation before
Transgression, and how he was deceived and overcome by the Devil; and his
estate in Transgression, and in Disobedience: And how he is drove and banished
from the presence of the Lord; and the Sorrow and Anguish which he is in, and
to undergo: And also by the Light in us we perfectly came to know the way of
Restoration, and the means to be restored; and the state of Man being come out
of Transgression, and restored. These things, to us, were revealed by the Light
within us, which Christ had given us, and Lightened us withal. What Man was
before Transgression, and what he is in Transgression, and what he is being
redeemed out of Transgression; and also the Light which shined in every one of
us, as to it, our Minds became turned, and our Hearts inclined; the perfect
estate of the Church we came to know; Her estate before the Apostles days, and
in the Apostles days, and since the days of the Apostles: And her present state
we found to be, as a Woman who had once been clothed with the Sun, and the Moon
under her Feet, who brought forth him that was to rule the Nations; but She was
fled into the Wilderness, and there sitting desolate in her place, that was
prepared of God, for such a season; which season, in the very end thereof, when
the time of her sojourning was toward a full end, then were we brought forth.
If any have an Ear, they may hear: So that all these things concerning Man, and
concerning the Times and Seasons, and the changing and renewing of Times, and
all things that pertain to Salvation, Redemption and Eternal Life, needful for
Man to know; ALL THIS WAS discovered, revealed, and made known to us, by the
Light that was in us, which Christ had lighted us withal. Thus E. B.

The Snake's next Quotation, is from E. B's Works, p. 862. and his quotation is
thus,

Every true Member of the Church, -- has certainty and infallibility of
Judgment, and discerning who are out of the Truth, and in the way of Error, and
are Heretics.

In this as in the last, he has abusively mangled E. B's words, which are
these, Every true Member of the true Church, has its particular Measure of the
Infallible Spirit of Christ, whereby he is certainly persuaded of the way of
Truth in which he walks, and knows and believes the Infallibility of the Truth
he professes, and is certain and secure of the way of his Peace and Assurance
in God, which he has received and believed; and has also certainty and
infallibility of Judgment, and discerning who are out of the Truth, and in the
way of Error, and are Heretics. Such are infallibly known and discerned by the
Spirit of God, in the true Church of Christ.

See here, Reader, the great perversion of words, sound as can be delivered,
and which I dare the Snake to deny if he can; for if he does, he must of
necessity through away all that Enthusiasm to which he says the Church, in her
Offices, does pretend.

Ibid. p. 34. Quoted from E. B's Works, p. 861, 862. So both the Lawmakers,
and the Judges of the Law, must be infallible in Knowledge and Judgment in this
case of Heresy; otherwise the Law made for that purpose, and the Judgment
given by that Law, are both false and unjust, and not according to God, and his
Truth; but are to be justly Judged and Condemned of the Lord God in his day and
season. This the Snake says dissolves our Laws, Damns the Lawmakers, and
infers necessarily the Quakers Opinion of their own Infallibility.

To this Charge let the Snake himself answer, whether or no his refusing
Swearing Obedience to the Present Government, dissolves the Law which requires
it of him, Damns the Makers of that Law, and does infer an Opinion of his own
Infallibility.

Ibid. p. 35. Quoted from E. B's Works, p. 198. where I have looked for the
words quoted by the Snake, but find no such; if he be mistaken in the page,
when that is rectified, it may be answered.

Ibid. p. 35. Quoted from Great Mystery, p. 107. Thou say that the Holiest
Man is not able to give an Infallible Character of another Man: Have thou not
in this discovered thy self to be no Minister of Christ, or of the Spirit, who
cannot give an Infallible Character of another Man, how can thou minister to
his Condition? How can thou see them that be turned from the Darkness, and
that be in the Darkness, and distinguish the one from the other, and an Holy
Man from an Unholy Man, that can not give an Infallible Character of any
Man's Estate.

Ibid. p. 36. Quoted from Great Mystery, p. 94. Have you given your selves a
Name of a Church of Christ, and is there not a Spirit of Discerning among you?
have you not manifested there, that you are Harlotted from the Church of
Christ, the Apostles were of, and how can you minister or teach People, if ye
do not discern their estates, how they stand before God, how can you commend
your selves to every Man's Conscience in God's sight? How can ye present the
Souls of Men to God, and see not their states how they are in his Sight? How
came ye to have fellowship in the Spirit? How can you, or any, minister to the
state and condition that people be in, and see where they are, and does not see
how they stand in God's sight?

From these two long Quotations, he draws two Inferences or Conclusions, which
I will briefly repeat, and then reply to them Here the Quakers have excluded
all from the Church of Christ, from having any fellowship in the Spirit, who
have not this Infallible Spirit of Discerning every Man's Heart.

Secodly, It is evident, they did not discern Keith and Bugg, whom for many
years they owned as true Quakers, thought them principal Pillars, whom now they
vilify as Apostates. Therefore by their own Argument, all the Quakers are
Harlotted from the Church of Christ, have no fellowship in the Spirit, because
none of them had this Spirit of Discerning.

To the first, That all are excluded, etc. Every Member of the Church of
Christ, must necessarily have a measure of the Spirit of Christ, else they are
none of his, Romans 8.9. And this Spirit of Christ, the Holy Ghost, as in its
fullness, it is Infallible; so every, even the least measure or manifestation of
it, is Infallible.

To the second, This Infallible Holy Spirit being of the THREE in the Godhead,
searches the Heart, and tries the Reins, Jer. 17.10. But though this Holy
Spirit, can discover unto one, the Heart and Thoughts of another, as of Ananias
to Peter, Act. 5. Yet as that is not usual, so neither is it necessary, nor is
it that, which we pretend to, nor has G. Fox, in the fore-quoted places
pretended to it. But that which G. Fox means, and which we pretend to, is, That
such who minister in, and by that Holy Spirit, which has an Infallible
Discerning of the Hearts and States of all the Persons ministered to. This Holy
Spirit does direct the ministry accordingly, that it may be suitable to the
states of the Auditory: Which they who pretend not to be led, guided, and
assisted by that Infallible Holy Spirit in their Ministry, cannot pretend to.
And as to his Objections, that the Quakers did not discern G. Keith, F. Bugg,
and other wicked Apostates.

There was a time when those Men (I in Charity think) were truly Quakers, as
they pretended, and to have discerned them Apostates, before they were such,
had not been true discerning.

There was a time when Demas walked with Paul, was owned by Paul to be a
Fellow Laborer with him in the Gospel, Col. 4.14. Phil. 2.4. There was a time
when through the Love of the World, he forsook the Apostles, 2 Timothy 4.10. so I
may say of these, and others, there was a time when they walked with us; and
now is the time, when through the Love of the World, and other things, they are
departed and fallen from that Unity and Fellowship they once had with us.

Ibid. p. 37. quoted from Great Mystery, p. 105. We, says he (the Pope) and you
(the Protestants, whom he calls Professors) are apostatized from the Infallible
Spirit that the Apostles was in, in which we are come -- For who witness these
conditions that they were in, that gave forth the Scriptures, they witness
Infallibility, an Infallible Spirit, which is now possessed and witnessed among
those called Quakers, Glory to the Highest for ever.

I shall first detect the Snake's base practice of mangling this, as other
places, by setting down G. F's words as they lie in that Book, and then show
plainly their Scriptural meaning. The first, viz. the Quotation, And we say,
the Pope is not Infallible neither, though he be your Father, the Ancient: Yet
we say, he and you are Apostatized from the Infallible Spirit that the Apostles
was in, in which we are come, with which ye are seen and judged; so not to have
the Spirit of Christ Jesus, not to have the Spirit of the Prophets and
Apostles, not to be led by the Spirit of Truth, into all Truth; not to be in
the Spirit, not to speak as ye are moved of the Holy Ghost. But to be such as
ravened from the Spirit of God inwardly, and have gotten the Sheeps Clothing,
ye and the Pope, and so have devoured Nations for this many hundred years, so
have all been like ravening Wolves: For who witness these conditions that they
were in that gave forth the Scriptures, they witness Infallibility, an
Infallible Spirit, which is now possessed and witnessed among those called
Quakers, Glory to the Highest for ever.

This the Snake says, Ibid. p. 37. Is Dreadfully Astonishing, but gives no
reason why it is so: but that his practice is astonishing, there are several
reasons to prove it. First, In so basely picking and mangling Books, that they
may thereby be suborned to speak, what the Writer never intended. Next, In his
wilful perverting, the plain and known sense, which they carry, and which their
Writers had. And upon Sober Inquiry what in this can be astonishing? That the
Pope is not Infallible, I suppose the Snake will allow: And that the Spirit of
Truth does see and judge, such who apostatize from it; the Scriptures teach:
And if the Snake does account it astonishing, that the Quakers should possess
and witness, according to Holy Writ, the manifestation of the Holy and
Infallible Spirit of Christ, he shows his Ignorance therein; though all who are
truly sensible of these manifestations, can in deep Humility of Soul give Glory
to the Highest. Yet to him, must be applied that of Hab. 1.5. For it is a Work
that God has wrought in this day, whether he will believe it or not. Hitherto,
Reader, pray Observe, that though the Snake, as quoted, p. 88. foregoing has
said, we placed Infallibility in every single Quaker, confine it not to Faith,
but extend it to all Persons and Things in the World by their inward Light. Yet
the Charge is notoriously false, and that the colorable pretense which he had
for this his false assertion, was owing to his own false quoting, curtailing,
and mangling of our Books, of which I have shown eminent instances, since that
assertion of his in p. 88. And that our Books in the instances produced, speak
according to Scripture, I shall leave with the Impartial Reader to Judge; only
adding, that the Forms of Speech, Try all things, Teach all things, Know all
things, and Judge all things, which are frequently found in the New Testament,
cannot without great perversion be applied otherwise, than to that Trying,
Teaching, Knowing and Judging, which are the proper effects of the Operations
of the Holy Spirit in the Hearts of all that are obedient to it: And that, in
order first, to their own Salvation, and then to the Service of God in his
Church: In this sense G. F. E. B. and others have used these Forms of Speech;
in this sense the Woman of Samaria testifies of the Messiah, our Savior, John
4.25. He will teach us all things. In this sense our Savior promised, John
14.26. That the Holy Ghost should teach us all things. In this sense John, the
Beloved Disciple, testifies of the Believers, 1 John 2.20. Ye know all things.
And in this sense the Apostle testifies of the Spiritual Man, 1 Cor. 2.10. He
judges all things. And in this sense the Beloved Disciple, 1 John 4.1.
advises to try the Spirits whether they be of God. Now these forms of Speech,
in these, and many more places, all things, are truly as E. B. p. 137.
foregoing has said, All things that pertain to Salvation, Redemption and
Eternal Life, needful for Man to know, all this was discovered, revealed and
made known to us by the Light which was in us, which Christ had Lighted us
withal.

Ibid. p. 37. But I was much more surprised to find the otherwise Ingenious Mr.
Penn, laugh at his Adversary for not being Infallible.

It is no surprise to find the disingenious Snake, both to laugh Scornfully,
Lie and Flatter, because he acknowledges not, for his Guide, the Holy and
Infallible Spirit of God. But that W. P. laughs not, as is falsely said, we will
now see.

Ibid. p. 37. W. P. in a sheet of his, Entitled A Winding Sheet for
Controversy ended, catches up Hen. Hedworth for saying he had been mistaken in
the good Opinion he had before of Mr. Penn 's Judgment and Conscience. How can
he choose (says Mr. Penn, who denis Infallibility?) But if mistaken before, why
not in the Quakers now? And so ad infinitum, being fallible.

Judgment and Conscience, in respect of Matters Spiritual, in Articles of
Faith, can only be certainly and knowingly judged of, by the Spirit of God; and
what Man soever shall judge of these things, without the assistance thereof,
must of necessity be mistaken, for the reason which the Apostle has given, 1
Cor. 2.11. -- For the things of God knows no Man, but the Spirit of God. And
if Hen. Hedworth did, by Opinion, not the assistance of the Spirit of God,
judge of W. Penn's Judgment and Conscience, no marvel if he were mistaken; and
if by the same medium he would Judge of the Quakers; he was equally liable to
be also mistaken in them, and so ad infinitum, in all his natural Guessings
about Spiritual Things; and so must this Snake also.

Ibid. p. 38. Quoted from p. 3. Sect. 2. of W. P's Winding Sheet, etc. He
vindicates what G. F. had asserted of the Quakers Infallibility; for having
repeated these words of G. F. (which were put as an Objection against him.) How
can ye be Ministers of the Spirit, and not be infallible? And how can they but
delude the People, who are not infallible?

He makes this reply I Answer (says he) G. F's words stand immovable for ever:
And he gives this strange reason to support himself and G. F. For, says he, He
that is a Minister of the Spirit is Infallibly so; and in that Ministry is
Infallible, otherwise the Spirit's Ministry is Fallible.

I have here been large in transcribing the whole Quotation, that the Reader
may see, whether the Wild Consequences which the Snake does falsely suggest, can
naturally follow from the Doctrine aforesaid: His Consequences are these.

Ibid. p. 38. That if any Man who is Lighted by the Sun, stumble, or miss his
way, the fault is in the Sun, which showed him a false Light; what else can be
the meaning of that saying? If a Minister be not infallible, then the Ministry
of the Spirit is fallible.

To make God himself Fallible, rather than we should be Infallible. O wretched,
false and perverse consequence of this Snake! But truly and easily following,
is this Consequence.

If a Man, who is Lighted by the Sun, stumble, or miss his way, the fault is
not in the Sun that showed him a true Light, but the fault is in his neglecting
of it. And according to this, the meaning of that saying, If a Minister of the
(here the Snake has basely and falsely left out the word) [Spirit] be not
infallible, then the Spirits Ministry is Fallible. The meaning is this, God,
the Holy Spirit is Infallible, and those whom he qualifies, fits and prepares
for his Ministry; such are Infallibly assisted to be Ministers of the Spirit.
But if any, who have been so assisted, depart from the assistance of the Holy
Spirit, such, in their Ministry, are not Infallible, though the Spirit is.

Ibid. p. 38. Quoted from Winding Sheet, p. 4. Sect. 3. He roundly checks his
Opponent, H. Hedworth, saying, I bestowed 32 pages to prove G. F's Spirit to be
Infallible; for that belongs simply to God alone, and then those that are Led
by it, which was my Question; in which sense he is, and all such persons are
Infallible, as he himself confesses, etc.

Here, says the Snake, H. Hedworth is made Infallible too. But that is false,
for the words are plain, that those that are Led by the Holy Spirit, are
infallibly Led. By this G. F. might be infallibly Led; by this, any other, may
be infallibly Led. This Hen. Hedworth has confessed; this is what W. P. says;
but he could not say, H. H. was infallible: Because he had quoted him in p. 37.
denying of infallibility.

Ibid. p. 39. Nay, the Devil himself is infallible at this rate, for he has his
Knowledge, as well as Being from God; Knowledge is Light: And if that Knowledge
which comes from God be infallible, then while the Devil follows that Light, or
Knowledge, he must be infallible: And if this be all the Infallibility which
the Quakers ascribe to themselves, it distinguishes them not from Wicked Men,
or Devils.

Profane perversion! The Almighty God by his Almighty Fiat, did create the
several Species of Beings and Creatures, and furnished each, according to the
order in which he placed them: To Angels and Men he gives Knowledge and
Understanding in their several Degrees; by which, they might answer the end of
their Creation. But some Angels, and all Men, have fallen, yet have not thereby
lost all that Knowledge, which by the Degree of their Beings they had. But in
their fallen estate employ what Knowledge they have, to other purposes, than
those for which it was given: Hence the Devil goes about seeking whom he may
Devour, 1 Pet. 5.8. And the Devil did follow his Knowledge, when in Mat. 4.5,
8. he tempted our Savior: And did know, that had our Savior worshipped him,
he had been conquered. Yet the Devil was not herein infallible. Nay, the Devils
believe and tremble, from the Knowledge which they have of the Eternal God, and
their own Eternal Damnation. How profane? Reader, must it be, to suppose that
this their Knowledge makes them infallible; that is, guided by the Holy Spirit
of God: Which none can be, unless obedient to it. But the Infallibility which
does distinguish us from Wicked Men and Devils, and which, we say, is possessed
by us: Is no other than this, That whereas all Men are fallen short of God's
Glory, and are by Nature Children of Wrath. Man cannot be restored out of this
estate, but by the benefits of the Propitiatory Sacrifice of Christ outwardly
slain; by which Sacrifice our High Priest, who was touched with the feeling of
our Infirmities, has put Man into a capacity of accepting his Mediation: And
in order to our reconciliation with God, has given to every one a
manifestation of the Infallible Holy Spirit, in which he did the Will of the
Father: To this manifestation, such as are obedient, are infallibly led in all
things that concern Salvation, Redemption and Eternal Life, which neither
Devils nor Wicked Men can be, because disobedient to it. See, Reader, how much
the Jugler, this Snake plays, in endeavoring to obtrude, under a show of
reason, a most dangerous notion, and directly contrary to all Revealed
Religion; which does agree, that the Light and Holy Spirit, proceeding from the
Father and the Son, is able, as our Savior says, to lead into all Truth. And
that to this Holy Spirit, Wicked Men and Devils are disobedient; yet still have
such degrees of Knowledge, which are the proper Distinction of their Being.

Ibid. p. 39. Sometimes it makes them as Infallible as the Apostles, nay, as
Christ himself. But at other times, when they are pressed, they bring down this
Infallibility to mean nothing in the World that does distinguish them from
other Men.

It is utterly false, no Quaker has said he was as Infallible as the Apostles,
or Christ himself. I demand an Instance. But without pressing, we have often
said, that a Manifestation of the Light, and Infallible Spirit, or Grace, is 1
Cor. 12.7. given to every Man to profit withal, without distinction. That which
makes the Distinction is Obedience to it, By this it was Paul could say 1 Cor.
15.10. By the Grace of God I am what I am; and by the same Grace we say we are
what we are.

Ibid. p. 40. But this will no more prove it to be Infallible, or sufficient of
it self to bring us to Heaven, than it will follow, that Man cannot die,
because God breathed into him the Breath of Life, or that he is omnipotent,
because his strength comes from God.

That the Holy Spirit is Infallible, and sufficient, for the purposes, for
which God has given to Men, manifestations of it, is very certain; from the
testimony of God himself, 2 Cor. 12.9. My Grace is sufficient for thee. But it
follows not from this, that Man cannot Die, or that he is omnipotent, because
his Life and Strength came from God. God has been pleased to give to Men such
Natural Powers, as are agreeable to the Nature of their Humane Being: And these
Natural Powers being employed according to that Great Law of Order in which we
stand in the Creation, we may act in them our appointed time. But the
Principles of our Humane Being, being finite, their power to act, is the same,
and must come to an end. With Spirits, It is otherwise, They are more simple
and uncompounded Beings, therefore of eternal Duration. And the God of the
Spirits of all Flesh, in Infinite Compassion; (when Man had forfeited his Title
to Happiness) to us, that this Eternal Duration might be in happiness, gave the
Son of his Love, that we who were afar off, might be reconciled to himself,
which cannot be; but as the Spirit of Man which has rebelled, and been in
Disobedience, comes, by the Operation of the Spirit of God upon it, to be
restored into obedience to its Guidings: Which if he will be in the day of his
Visitation; That Grace and Truth, which comes by Jesus Christ, will
sufficiently and infallibly lead him into Reconciliation with God; from whom,
through disobedience, he was fallen. And this, is not as the Snake says, p. 41.
Derogatory to the Satisfaction paid by Christ for our Sins. But on the contrary
places the true value upon it. It being that, by which we are put into a
capacity of being reconciled, and not by any power of our own. And when the
Apostle bids, Phil. 2.12. To work out our own Salvation: We never understood it
otherwise, than by the assistance of that Grace which comes by Jesus Christ to
Men, during the day of their visitation.

Ibid. p. 41. That does not make the Light within the efficient cause of our
Salvation, or give it any Title to Infallibility, more than verse. 13. of the
4th Chap. in the same Epistle, can entitle us to Omnipotence, because St. Paul
says there, "I can do all things.

That Christ in his Spiritual Appearance, the Light within, is the Efficient
cause of our Salvation: I need not give a greater proof than this same 13th
verse. which the Snake has quoted: For there the Apostle, Phil. 4.13. says, I
can do all things through Christ, which strengthens me; that is, all things
relating to his Ministry, as an Apostle; or his Duty, as a Christian.

I come now to the Snake's 4th Head of Distinction, which is little more than
Profane and Scornful Banter, after the first Paragraph, p. 41. But if any could
pretend to Infallibilty, -- They will be found to have the best title to whom
the Quakers would most unwillingly grant it: For it is written, Prove. 16.10. A
Divine Sentence is in the Lip of the King, and his Mouth transgresses not in
Judgment.

Why then does the Snake deny that best Title, and not obey that Divine
Sentence, which confirmed the present Government? Why would he flee the
Judgment of a Mouth, which transgresses not in Judgment? By fleeing and
denying, he loudly proclaims his unwillingness to grant it. But as for us, we
do not unwillingly, but readily grant, That God is ready to supply Kings with
Wisdom and Justice, suitable to their High Station, for the good of themselves,
and those they govern, if they in humility will receive it. But as with God,
there is no respect of persons; so we do as readily grant, That God by his
Spirit does as infallibly teach the Governed, in their private capacities, all
that is necessary to their Salvation, if they will but attend and learn.

Ibid. p. 42. Do you think that the Quakers infallibility is limited to
speaking only? They can make an Infallible Judgment of Men's Hearts, and tell
who are Saints, and who are Devils, by very winks and glances.

At the first glance, and so throughout, this appears to be a very Lie, for no
Quaker has so said. But we do say, that such who be in the Power and Life of
Truth, can discern between Saints and Devils; for all true Spiritual Discerning
is in the Holy Spirit. Not, but that there often are exterior marks of inward
wickedness. Hence Genesis 4.5. When Cain was very wroth, his Countenance fell.
Hence David says, Psalm. 10.4. The wicked, through the pride of his
Countenance, will not seek after God. And the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 3.9. The
show of their Countenance does witness against them: and in the 16th verse. the
Lord numbers up, among the exterior marks of inward wickedness, wanton Eyes,
mincing and tinkling with their Feet. Yet these exterior infallible marks, as
they have been declared by God himself, is, in the language of this Profane
Adversary, p. 43. Dwindled down to a mere Gypsy, a paultry Fortune Tellers, to
nothing but a little skill in Physiognomy.

Reader, Is it possible, for one who so profanely ridicules, both the Inward
Discerning, and the Outward Marks of Secret Iniquity, to advance the great end
of good Life and Conversation? No, such ridiculing is in direct opposition to
them, and is distructive to Exemplary Modesty; how great soever his pretense
may be of love to Souls.

I come now to his Fifth Head of Distinction, of diverse Stories of particular
Failings, which he brings, in opposition to that Infallibility I have so
largely spoken of; which Plea (the Snake says, p. 48.) leads us naturally into
this sort of Redargution. Though here, as before, he is altogether out. For
though, to give a Man a Fall, is, it is true, a plain Conviction, that he is not
Almighty. Yet when Man does fall, it is no plain Conviction, that he could not
have stood by an Almighty assistance. We have never placed Infallibility in
Persons, otherwise, than by the assistance of the Holy Spirit; to which, if Men
are obedient, it will infallibly guide them to Heaven; and so safely protect
them, that, as our Savior says, John 10.29. No Man is able to pluck them out
of my Fathers hand. But when Men depart from the Grace of God: They may, as
Samson, when he had lost his Strength, Judge. 16.20. say, I will go out as at
other times, and shake my self. And he wist not that the Lord was departed from
him. But their weakness will soon discover they are gone from their Guide. Thus
it was with the People of the Jews, and thus with all those Persons, whose
failings, the Holy Spirit has recorded in the Scriptures, when they departed
from the Lord, they left their Strength and fell, some very foully. Yet what
less than Blasphemy is it to say, That the Holy Spirit, had they been obedient,
could not have preserved them; as well as there are Instances, it did restore
several of them? And it is no breach of the Oath of God, made to Abraham and
his Seed; nor any argument of the Shortness of his Arm (as the Prophet's phrase
is) That they are become a Desolation, because they refused to hear and obey.
And should it, which God forbid, come to pass, that the Defection of the People
called Quakers, from the guidings of the Holy Spirit should be as general; as
is now, that of the Jews, who sometime were the People of God. Yet the Holy
Spirit of Christ were not at all the less infallible, or sufficient in it self
to be the Author of Salvation to all that do obey it.

His first Story, p. 44. is of one Christopher Atkinson, who he calls in
ridicule, p. 43. a Precious Brother, in p. 44. a Bright Lamp, with other such
marks of Scorn; insulting over his Miscarriage in the Lust of the Flesh: And
this Story the Snake makes a twofold use of, one to reproach the Memory of the
Person who fell, and the other to reproach the Principle and Practices of
those, with whom the fallen Person had walked: To both I shall say somewhat, To
the first, I know of no good use which can be made of raking in the Crimes of
the Deceased, unless for Cautions to the Living: But then, their Crimes are not
to be dressed in the Scornful Garb of a merry Andrew: Because, though that may
raise more Vanity, yet it can raise no Reformation, on such as are guilty, or
be any means of Preservation to those that are not yet so. And therefore we
find that the Holy Spirit in recording the failings of Noah, Lot, Moses, David,
Solomon, Peter, and others has done it in Language proper to these purposes.
And there is not a truer mark of a mean and base, as well as an unchristian
Spirit in a Man, than only for the Glory of Insult, and Liberty of Ridiculing,
to call back to the minds of the Living, the Crimes of the Dead. To the Second,
it can be no fault in the Holy Spirit of God, that Men are disobedient to it;
nor is it any argument that the Infallible Spirit of God does not preserve any,
because I, or another, may fall, but it is certain the Holy Spirit will teach,
and will preserve, all who will keep in Subjection and Obedience to it, and
they who do so keep, have a Godly Jealousy and Care, that the Practice of
those who make Profession of the Guidings of the Holy Spirit be according to
it, in all the Fruits of it; and accordingly, Richard Huberthorn, and some
others who were then at Norwich, did wait for the Counsel of God, that in his
Wisdom they might search out this evil, which C. A. had wrought, and by their
dealing with him, did bring him so to a sense of his Naughtiness, that he did
confess it and condemn it. And further, that it might not be supposed, that
such Naughtiness was tolerated and allowed by a Society professing
Christianity, it was communicated to the Public, that the guilty Person might
bear his own Iniquity, and the Holy Truth he had made profession of be cleared.
The like Laudable Practice, though called by the Snake, p. 45. A not regarding
the Sacredness of the Seal of Confession; was practiced by the Prophet Nathan
toward King David, and the Apostle Paul toward his Brother in the
Apostleship, and also by others recorded in Holy Writ, and yet the Holy Spirit
is not at all the less Infallible.

Ibid. p. 46, 47. There was much more tender regard showed to some Young Women,
who had given a Confession in Writing to John Bolton of their frailty in the
Flesh, as is told in the Spirit of the Hat, but it was hushed up, because it
touched many eminent Ones in the Ministry, who from day to day resorted unto
them, and giving them these appellations, Innocent Lasses and Daughters of Sion.

This Charge and Story, upon nameless Persons, is, Reader, another Instance of
the Injustice of this Adversary, in that he has taken it out of a Book written
against us, and Printed, Anno 1673. and which was answered in the same Year, as
the Snake well knows, and has not been since replied to; and what is an
aggravation of the Snake's Injustice herein, is that in the Answer to it, there
is a Certificate under the hands of John Bolton and Sam. Newton, testifying to
the contrary of this very Charge; and of this the Snake could not be ignorant,
because he makes Quotations from the same Book, and in or near the same Page,
in which this Certificate stands; which I shall here set down, as answer
sufficient to this nameless Charge.

Whereas, the Author of the Spirit of the Hat Insinuates, that our Ministry is
guilty of Uncleanness, Whoredoms, and such like beastly Practices, under a
feigned commendation of us under written, as prosecutors of such Persons, that
they may be brought to Judgment. We do declare in the Fear of the Everlasting
God, that though we abhor with our whole Souls such unrighteous Practices; and if
such things were, we should, we hope, clear our Consciences for God and His
Living Truth, and People: Yet, we do declare in the Uprightness of our Hearts,
that we know of no such, nor can acknowledge any such to be either of our
Ministry, or our Body, much less eminent among us (as has been wickedly
suggested by the Author of The Spirit of the Hat) whom we have found painful
and faithful to God, his Truth and People. Therefore to say we were hindered
from bringing them to Judgment, whom we never went about to charge, neither can
we, is a wicked, envious and false, suggestion of the Adversaries of the Truth;
and this in God's Fear we testify to the World.

John Bolton, Sam. Newton.


Ibid. p. 47. Instances can likewise be given of some of their She Preachers
(whom they call traveling Friends) that went abroad, etc. -- It is not good
manners to name Names upon such an occasion: Yet if the Friends will plead
Ignorance, something may be done for their Satisfaction.

That Women, as well as Men, may forsake the Guidings of the Spirit of God, and
run into Wickedness, is very true, but that any who have so run into
Wickedness, are Preachers, or (as such) Traveling Friends (as he in scoffing
Mood calls them, and intimates) is very false, and I dare him to name any that
are such.

I come now to his 6th Head of Distinction, which is a continuation of Stories
of particular Failings.

VI. But we may make a little more bold with the Men's Infallibility. And I will
not go to mean Ones. The Great James Naylor was brought upon his knees before
their Church, where G. F. presided, to acknowledge his Failings. -- This James
Naylor suffered himself to be Hosannah'd into Bristol, as Christ was into
Jerusalem.

Of this Adversaries Boldness and Scoffing we have great Proof, but of his
Honesty and Truth we have none; of his Lies here is also fresh Proof: For it
never was the Practice of any Church or Meeting of ours, to bring any
Transgressor upon their knees; nor did G. F. ever preside in them, or any other
Person. We neither have, nor own, in our Assemblies any Headship of Man or Men;
the only Head of them being Christ Jesus, who dignifies whom he pleases, with
fit qualifications, by his Holy Spirit, for the Service of his Church; and they
that continue faithful in their Gifts, such we with the Apostle esteem worthy
of double Honor.

But now, as to James Naylor, of whom the Snake often makes mention: I shall
here at once speak concerning him.

J. N. was a Man who had been highly favored of God with a good degree of
Grace, which was sufficient for him, had he kept to its teachings: For, while
he did so, he was exemplary in Godliness and great Humility, was Powerful in
Word and Doctrine; and thereby Instrumental in the hand of God, for turning
many from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan to the Power of God.
But he, Poor Man! Became exalted above Measure, through the abundance of
Revelations: And in that Exaltation, did depart from the Grace and Holy Spirit
of God, which had been his sufficient Teacher: Then blindness came over him,
and he did suffer himself to be accounted of above what he ought: Here he slipped
and fell, but not Irrecoverably: For, it did please God, of his Infinite Mercy,
in the Day of his Affliction, to give him a sight and sense of his outgoings
and fall, and also a place of Repentance. And he did with the Prodigal, weep
bitterly, and humbled himself for his Transgression; and he besought God, with
true Contrition of Soul, to pardon his offenses through Jesus Christ: God, I
firmly believe, forgave him, for he pardons the truly Penitent: His People
received him with great Joy, for that he who had gone astray from God, was now
returned to the Father's House, and for that, he who had separated himself from
them through his Iniquity, was now through Repentance and Forsaking of it,
returned into the Unity of the Faith, and their Holy Fellowship in the Gospel
of Christ. And I do hereby testify, that I do esteem it a particular mark of
God's owning his People, in bringing back into Unity with them, a Man who had
so dangerously fallen, as did James Naylor. And here let none Insult, but take
heed, least they also in the hour of their Temptation do fall away: Nor let any
boastingly say, Where is your God? Or Blasphemously suppose his Grace is not
sufficient for Men in Temptation, because the tempted may go from, and neglect,
the teachings of it: David and Peter as their Transgressions came by their
departing from this Infallible Guide, the Holy Spirit: So their recovery was
only by it. And for the Reader's further satisfaction, concerning James
Naylor's Humiliation and Repentance, I here subjoin his own Testimony.

Glory to God Almighty, who rules in the Heavens, and in whose Hands are all
the Kingdoms of the Earth; who raises up, and casts down at his Will; who
has ways to Confound the Exaltation of Man, and to Chastise his Children, and
to make Man to know himself to be as Grass before him, whose Judgments are
above the highest of Men, and his pity reaches the deepest Misery; and th^s
Arm of his Mercy is underneath, to lift up the Prisoner out of the Pit, and to
save such, as trust in him, from the great Destruction; which vain Man, through
his folly, brings upon himself: who has delivered my Soul from Darkness, and
made way for my Freedom out of the Prisonhouse, and ransomed me from the great
Captivity; who divides the Sea before him, and removes the Mountains out of his
way, in the day when he takes upon him to deliver the Oppressed out of the Hand
of him that is too mighty for him in the Earth, let his Name be exalted for
ever, and let all Flesh fear before him, whose Breath is Life to his own, but a
Consuming Fire to the Adversary. -- And to the Lord Jesus Christ, be
Everlasting Dominion upon Earth, and his Kingdom above all the Powers of
Darkness; even that Christ of whom the Scriptures declares, which was, and is,
and is to come; the Light of the World to all Generations: Of whose coming I
testify with the rest of the Children of Light, begotten of the Immortal Seed,
whose Truth and Virtue now shines in the World unto Righteousness of Eternal
Life: And the Savior of all that believe therein. Who has been the Rock of my
Salvation, and his Spirit has given Quietness and Patience to my Soul in Deep
Affliction; even for his Name's sake Praises for ever. --

But condemned for ever be all those False Worships, with which any have
Idolized my Person in the Night of my Temptation, when the Power of Darkness
was above; all their casting of their Clothes in the way, their Bowings and
Singings, and all the rest of those Wild Actions which did any ways tend to
dishonor the Lord, or draw the Minds of any from the measure of Christ Jesus
in themselves, to look at Flesh, which is Grass, or to ascribe that to the
Visible, which belongs to Christ Jesus; all that I condemn, by which the pure
Name of the Lord has been any ways blasphemed, through me, in the time of
Temptation; or the Spirits of any People grieved, that truly loves the Lord
Jesus, throughout the whole World, of what state soever. This Offense, I
confess, which has been sorrow of heart, that the Enemy of Man's Peace in
Christ should get this Advantage in the Night of my Trial, to stir up Wrath and
Offenses in the Creation of God; a thing, the simplicity of my Heart did not
intend, the Lord knows; who, in his endless Love, has given me Power over it
to condemn it; and also that Letter which was sent me to Exeter by John
Stranger, when I was in Prison, with these words, Thy Name shall be no more
James Naylor, but Jesus. This I judge to be written from the Imaginations, and
a Fear stroke me when I first saw it, and so I put it in my Pocket (close) not
intending any should see it; which they finding on me, spread it abroad, which
the simplicity of my Heart never occasioned: So this I deny also, that the Name
of Christ Jesus is received instead of James Naylor, or after the Flesh, for
the Name is to the Seed to all Generations; and he that has the Son, has the
Name which is Life and Power, the Salvation and the Unction, into the which
Name all the Children of Light are Baptized. So the Name of Christ, I confess
before Men, but not according to Men; which Name to me has been a Strong Tower
in the Night, and in the Day. And this is the Name of Christ Jesus, which, I
confess, the Son and the Lamb, in the Seed where he speaks in Male or Female;
but who has not this in himself, has not Life; neither can have by Idolizing
my Person, or the Person of any Flesh, but in whom the Heir is born, and has
spoken, or does speak; there he must not be denied the Mouth to spoke by, who
is Head over all, and in all his own, God blessed for ever.

And all those Ranting Wild Spirits, which then gathered about me in that time
of Darkness; and all their Wild Actions, and Wicked Words against the Honor of
God, and his pure Spirit and People: I deny the Spirit, the Power and the Works
thereof; and as far as I gave advantage, through want of Judgment, for that
Evil Spirit, in any to arise, I take shame to my self justly; having formerly
had Power over that Spirit, in Judgment and Discerning, wherever it was;
which Darkness came over me through want of Watchfulness and Obedience to the
Pure Eye of God, and diligently minding the Reproof of Life, which condemns the
Adulterous Spirit: So the Adversary got advantage, who ceases not to seek to
devour; and being taken Captive from the True Light, walked in the Night where
none can work, as a wandering Bird fit for the prey: And if the Lord of all my
Mercies had not rescued me, I had perished, for I was as one appointed to Death
and Destruction, and there was none could deliver me. And this, I confess, that
God may be justified in his Judgment, and magnified in his Mercies without end;
who did not forsake his Captive in the Night, even when his Spirit was daily
provoked and grieved; but has brought me forth to give Glory to his Name for
ever: And it is in my Heart to confess to God, and before Men, my Folly and
Offense in that day: Yet was there many things formed against me in that day to
take away my Life, and bring Scandal upon the Truth, of which I am not Guilty
at all, as that accusation, as if I had committed Adultery with some of those
Women, who came with us from Exeter Prison, and also those who were with me at
Bristol, the Night before I suffered there; of both which Accusations I am
clear before God, who kept me at that day both in Thought and Deed, as to all
Women, as a little Child, God is my Record; and this I mention in Particular,
(hearing of some who still cease not to reproach therewith God's Truth and
People) that the Mouth of Enmity might be shut from evil speaking, though this
touch not my Conscience.

And that Report, as though I had raised Dorkas Erbury from the Dead, carnally;
this I deny also, and condemn that Testimony to be out of the Truth; though that
Power that quickens the Dead, I deny not, which is the Word of Eternal Life.

And this I give forth, that it may go as far, as the Offense against the
Spirit of Truth has gone abroad, that all Burdens may be taken off with the
Truth, and the Truth cleared thereby, and the True Light, and all that walk
therein, and the Deeds of Darkness be condemned; and that all that are in
Darkness may not Act in the Night, but stay upon God, who walks in the Light,
who with the Workers of Iniquity has not fellowship; which had I done, when
first Darkness came upon me, and not been led by others, I had not run against
the Rock to be broken, which so long had born me, and of whom I had so largely
drank and of which I now drink in measure; to whom be the glory of all, and to
him must every Tongue confess, as Judge and Savior, God over all, blessed for
ever.

And this further is given me to say, to every particular Person to whom this
Writing shall come, Whatever is thy Condition, walk in the Light, which lets
thee see it; there is thy Counsel, and thy strength to be received; to stay
thee and recover thee: Art thou tempted to Sin? Abide in that which lets thee
see it; that there thou may come to feed on the Right Body, not on the
Temptation; for if thou mind the Temptation, it will overcome thee; but in the
Light is Salvation: Or having Sinned, art thou tempted to despair, or to
destroy thy self? mind not the Temptation, for it is Death that Sin has brought
forth; feed not on it, nor mind it, least thou eat Condemnation, for that is the
Wrong Body.

The Body of Christ is felt in the Light, in which is Life from Death, Grace
and Truth to Feed on; which will overcome for thee, being followed: but if thou
follow the Temptation, Fear and Condemnation will swallow thee up: If there
appear to thee Voices, Visions, and Revelations, feed not thereon, but abide in
the Light, and feel the Body of Christ; and there will thou receive Faith, and
Power to judge of every appearance, and Spirit; the Good to hold fast and obey,
and the False to resist. Art thou in Darkness? mind it not, for if thou do, it
will fill thee more; but stand still and Act not, and wait in patience till
Light arise out of Darkness to lead thee: Art thou wounded in Conscience? feed
not there, but abide in the Light, which leads to the Grace and Truth which
teaches to deny, and put off the Weight, and removes the Cause, and brings
Saving Health to Light: Yea, this I say to thee in the Name of Jesus Christ,
that though thou has made thy Grave as deep as the nethermost Hell, or were thy
Afflictions as great as Job's, and thy Darkness as the Depths of the Sea; yet
if thou will not run to vain helps, as I have done, but stay upon the Lord till
he give thee sight by his word (which commands Light to shine out of Darkness)
from thence will he bring thee forth; thy Eye shall guide thee, and thou shall
praise his Name, as I do this day, glory for evermore; and this word is nigh
thee, which must give thee Light, though Darkness Comprehends it not.

And have thou Gifts, Revelations, Knowledge, Wisdom, or whatever thou may
read on in the Scriptures of Truth, and do not abide in the Light, and feed on
the Body of Christ, whence the Gift springs, but feed on the Gift, thou may
be up for a while in thine own sight, but certainly thou will wither and die to
God, and Darkness will come upon thee, and thy Food will turn to Condemnation
in the Sight of God.

And this I have learned in the Deep, and in Secret, when I was alone; and now
declare openly in the Day of thy Mercy, Glory to the Highest for evermore, who
has thus far set me free to praise his Righteousness and his Mercy; and to the
Eternal, Invisible Pure God, over all, be fear, obedience and glory evermore.
Amen.

James Naylor.

Ibid. p. 48. These are much more Dreadful Failings than those of the Flesh,
than of Hallelujah Fisher of W. W. (the Saints know who I mean) and several
others whom I could name.

All those dreadful failings, which Men are overtaken with, whether the Lust of
the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, or Pride of Life, they all happen to Men, when
they are gone off their watch, and are departed from the guidings of the Grace
of God: This Hallelujah Fisher did, and this others may do, not through any
shortness in God, or weakness in his Grace, but through their own default; and
all that can be done by a Community professing Christianity, is, (after
endeavors to restore in the Spirit of Meekness, and their impenitency) to
reject that Brother who thus walks disorderly; this was done by H. F. and is by
any other, whatsoever when known.

Ibid. p. 48. But though God Omnipotent and Infallible, did create all things
that are, yet there is weakness, error and sin in the World.

Did God create Weakness, Error and Sin, as the Snake here insinuates? If he
dare so say, let him speak in plain terms. The Scripture says otherwise, for
Genesis 1.31. it is said, God saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was
very good. Though it is true, that through Disobedience to that Power, which made
all things very good, Weakness, Error and Sin are entered into the World: Yet it
is as true, that the end for which Jesus Christ came into the World, Suffered
and Died for Man was, (according to the Vision which Daniel saw, Chap. 9.24.)
To finish Transgression, and to make an end of Sin. And as many as come through
obedience to his Spirit, to witness the Power of his Resurrection, may
measurably say, they know him to be Binding and Casting out the Strong Man, and
spoiling his Goods. I come now to his Seventh Head of Distinction.

VII. But let such consider, that it is a just Judgment from God, etc.

It might indeed, with some show of probability, be objected against us by this
Snake, that the Defection and Failings of particular Persons, pretending to be
of us, were a Judgment from God upon the whole Body: Nay, and it might probably
be, that that Judgment came upon that Body, because of their Separation from
the Church. If that Church he pretends Membership in, could boast she had none
such; but the contrary is too true in the several instances which may be given,
as of himself and some others, Scandalous Members, who in their ill Practices,
are no Credit to the Church of England, which they may pretend to be of: Yet
this, by the Snake's Argument, is a Judgment upon the Church of England, Who
(they are the Snake's words) of their own Heads, durst to leave those Guides
(the Bishops of the Church) under whose Government God has placed them, and to
rend the Body of Christ by a causless and desparate Schism; of which see more,
p. 16, 17. foregoing.

This, Reader, is another Stroke at the Reformation, and will it not be a
pretty Argument for the Romanists against it?

Ibid. p. 49. So that even their Error, may in this sense, come from God, that
is, as a Judgment upon them.

I suppose truly, much in the same degree, for that it is a Judgment upon us,
to have naughty Persons under our Profession; and that it is not a Judgment
upon the Church of England, to have at least as many in her Communion, may be
boldly and impudently (as the Snake says p. 16.) averred, but not proved, and
as he cannot prove it a Judgment, so I have already proved it no Error in
Principle of Us, because I have abundantly shown that the Grace of God is
sufficient for the purposes for which God has given it, viz. the Salvation of
Man.

Ibid. p. 49. And for this cause (says St. Paul, 2 These. 2.11.) God shall send
them strong Delusion, that they should believe a Lie. And if the Prophet be
deceived (Ezekiel. 14.9.) I the Lord have deceived that Prophet. And it was the
Lord who put a Lying Spirit into the Mouths of Ahab's Prophets, 1 Kings 22.23.
Now whether it be such a Spirit or not, which is in the Mouths of the Quaker
Prophets, we have a plain rule whereby to know, Deuteronomy. 18.2, 22. the Prophet
which shall presume to speak a word in my Name, which I have not commanded him
to speak. -- even that Prophet shall Dye. And if thou say in thine Heart, How
shall we know the word which the Lord has not spoken? When a Prophet speaks
in the Name of the Lord, if the thing follow not, nor come to pass; that is the
thing which the Lord has not spoken, but the Prophet has spoken it
presumptuously, thou shall not be afraid of him. Here is a plain touchstone,
which cannot be mistaken, etc. Thus the Snake.

But the Snake is much mistaken in applying this touchstone, for the first
text, viz. 2 These. 2.11. He has done by that, as he does by our Books, cut off
the Conclusion: For, the Apostle does there give the reason why they were given
over to strong Delusion, because they received not the Love of the Truth, that
they should be Saved. And for the other texts, it is not to be concluded from
them, that every Prophecy spoken in the Name of God, is therefore false,
because not fulfilled in the terms pronounced; for then should those
Prophesies, mentioned, Exodus 32.10, 14. 2 Samuel 24.16. Psalm. 106.40, 44, 45.
Jer. 26.18. Amos 7.3. Jonah 3.10. be false, and the Prophets that gave them
forth be false Prophets; but that is not so: And the reason why the Prophets,
and their Prophesies are true, is given by Jer. 18.7, 8, 9, 10. At what Instant
I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, and
to pull down, and destroy it; if the Nation against which I have pronounced,
turn from their evil, I will repent, etc. And accordingly, God has (as is
recorded in Holy Writ) often repented himself of the Evil he has threatened,
and in great Mercy and Compassion, upon Sinners relenting, has lengthned out
their day of Visitation.

Ibid. p. 50. And the case of the Quakers is so hard, that if we can prove but
one false Prophet among them, the Infallibility of all, and every one, must be
a Deceit, because -- the Infallibility is asserted to belong to every one of
them.

Festina Lent, may be a useful Caution to one that makes such hasty and false
Conclusions. The Infallibility of all and every one, is the Holy Spirit, and if
every one that make profession of it, should fall from it, and turn from the
Grace of God, into Wantonness or Delusion; yet the Holy Spirit would be no
Deceit. I will give that Memorable Instance of the two Prophets, mentioned, 1
Kings 13. where both of them had true Prophesies; yet by giving way to Error,
both fell, the first, ver. 24. lost his Life: And of the last it is said, ver.
18. He lied. Yet it cannot be but falsely and wickedly concluded, that because
the Prophesy of one of them was false, and the other thereby led into Error;
therefore the Infallible certainty of all, and every one, of the Prophesies of
the Prophets, in the Old and New Testament, was a Deceit: Nay, from hence Holy
Writ does not conclude against, but confirm the Prophesies of them two
Prophets, which they delivered in their Obedience to God. This brings me to his
8th Head of Distinction of Prophesies, which he says are false.

VIII. But here, in this place, let me give two or three instances, to show
their false and wicked pretense to Infallibility. And I will not travel far for
an example: But I will be as merciful in exposing them as I can.

I will see the Instances before I make the like Conclusion. The first instance
is of (as he calls him) a Quaker Glover in Cheapside. The Snake did tell us he
would not travel far for an Example. This is some small hint that he Sculks
about the City: But if in his next, he will be more particular as to his place,
there is a Poor Man, formerly the King's Messenger, would gladly speak with
him; but at present to return to the Mercy of the Snake in Exposing.

Mercy when properly spoken, I know what it means; but when it proceeds from an
Adversary so Profane, Unjust and Hypocritical, as is this Snake, it cannot have
fewer alias's added to it, than has his proper name, it may be alias this, or
alias that, but that it is not Mercy in the true Signification of the word,
will in a few words be seen.

The Snake calls it Mercy in that he spares names; but that it is no such thing
may be seen by this, he calls one p. 51. Prophet John, and there was no such
Person of that name; and the true reason why he forbore others, was, because he
might err as much in them: But, be all this as it may, the Relation and Story
is false, and to show that his Mercy is rejected, the Quaker Glover speaks for
himself, and subscribes his name.

The Glover replies for himself, thinking it no favor to have his name
concealed under a true state of the Case, and minds his Author, it is not safe
nor warrantable, to publish by hearsay; for his account is almost in every part
false, containing at least twelve plain mistakes at best. A natural consequence
of being over officious, and meddling in other Men's affairs; which he is the
readier to let him know, that if he will please to appear Face to Face, and
has two Ears, may be better informed by him, who is willing to join Issue with
him in his great many more instances, as he says.

Not. Marks.

Reader, I have transcribed this out of G. W's Antidote, which he wrote in
Answer to the first Edition of the Snake, that I might not want an Answer to a
Story pompously, though falsely, set out in 3 or 4 Pages.

His second Story of Prophesies, is, p. 54. of Solomon Eccles, who (he says)
did denounce, concerning John Story, that he should Dye within one Year, and
that he meant it of a natural Death.

The Snake, who Glories in the miscariages of them that fall, does apply this
to the whole Body, though it can be with no more Justice, or Strength of
Argument, so applied, than the Lie of that Prophet, 1 Kings 13.18. which he
spoke in the name of the Lord, can be applied to all the Faithful Prophets, in
the Messages which from the Lord they did in faithfulness deliver. But further,
S. E. did himself find his words his Burden; and did under his own hand condemn
that Hastiness, Anger and Darkness of Spirit, in which he does confess he spoke
those words; and it is not unlikely, but the Snake has either seen or heard so
much, and if he has either, it is a manifest Lie in him, to lay that to the
Quakers, which they then did deny, and which also the Person offending, did
truly and justly take to himself.

His Words are these (in Babylonish Opposer, etc. p. 8.) As I was sitting
waiting on the Lord, on the 29th instant these things rose in my Heart, that I
should acknowledge my Offense to all the Brethren in London, and thereabouts,
and Bristol, and to all the Brethren North and South, that had been witnesses
against the Spirit of Separation; and am to let you know that it does truly
Repent me, and sorely Grieve me, that you that do bear a faithful Testimony for
God, should have any Prophecy thrown at you, which I spoke to John Story in an
angry Spirit: I do therefore acknowledge, as I have signified in my last Paper,
about two Years ago, that I have had little rest Day nor Night, at times, ever
since I spoke these words to John Story [That it was the word of the Lord that
he should dye that Year] which were mine own words, and soon became my Burden,
and were spoken in the Dark, and Darkness was upon my Spirit, and so under a
strong Temptation, which I was suffered to fall into, I not standing in the
Counsel of God; for which I bore God's Indignation: But I soon saw I should
have gone to him in a meek Spirit, to beseech him to be reconciled to his
Brethren. But I do judge and condemn that hasty Spirit that set a time for his
dying, and called it the word of the Lord. And do desire this may go as far, as
wherever it may have a service for Truth.

Solomon Eccles.

His Third Instance is, p. 55. A Prophecy of W. Penn 's against one Tho. Hicks.
So sure as the Lord lives, and I testify to thee from the Lord's Living
Spirit, If thou desist not, and come not to deep Repentance, the Lord will make
thee an example of his Fury; and thy Head shall not go down to the Grave in
peace.

Ibid. p. 55. Now Tho. Hicks did go down to the Grave in Peace, and no Visible
Example of God's Fury was shown upon him.

And (which the Snake has not mentioned) Tho. Hicks did desist, and did not (as
I have heard) (as the Snake falsely says he did. p. 56.) remain to his Death an
Opposer of the Quakers, which was the terms of the Denunciation. So that the
Quakers may be true Prophets still.

His Fourth and last Instance here, is, of whom in Scorn, he calls (the Great)
Edw. Buroughs, p. 57. quoted from p. 540, 535, 536, 537. of his Works, the
words he quotes are these, and stand in this order. The time is come, their
Church (meaning Rome) cannot stand long. And as sure as the Lord lives, so
shall it come to pass.

Here, the Snake, is himself to some purpose, having in as deceitful and false
manner, as well can be, represented the words of E. Buroughs in the pages
quoted. I will give thee, Reader, the several Instances, from the several pages
quoted by the the Snake. The first page he here quotes it 540. where the Snake
says he advises the Army to carry their Arms to the Gates of Rome. But minds
not, that he there tells the Army, That might be a work honorable in its day
and season. And that there is a Victory more honorable, to wit the Victory
over Sin and Death, and the Devil in your selves, and that you are to mind. And
at the bottom of p. 535. (speaking of the Romish Church.) But their Weapons are
Carnal and Devilish, and by Murders, Oppressions and Tyrannies, they do defend
themselves; and when these things are broken down, then their Church cannot
stand long. (He continues, p. 536.) And as sure as the Lord lives, so shall it
come to pass, a Generation shall accomplish it, and in the Generation of the
Righteous it shall be finished. And in p. 537. E. B. says thus, Whether the
Lord will revenge the grievous blood-guiltiness that lies upon them, by
himself, without an Instrument, or whether by you (speaking to the Army) or
others as an Instrument. Whether this way, or another, that God will do it, I
determine not. But this I know, that the time is not long, that he will one way
or other avenge and revenge the Blood of the Just upon the Murderers Head.

By all this, Reader, it abundantly appears, that E. B. does not assign Time or
Means, by, or in which it shall be accomplished, and so much any Good Man may
warrantably speak concerning the finishing, and putting an end to those Carnal
and Devilish Church-Weapons, of Murder, Oppression and Tyranny. Which, though
this Adversary would hug, yet thanks be to God, they are out of his power. So
that this Prophecy (if the Snake will have it one) must doubtless, in its
season, be accomplished.

I come now to his Ninth Head of Distinction, which is little else, than one
vehement Invective against the Authority of the Reformation. I will briefly
consider its parts, p. 58. Extraordinary Inspirations are not to be credited,
unless vouched by Miracles, which God always sent to attest his Extraordiry
Commissions.

The Inspirations of the Prophets, Joel, Amos, Obediah, Micha, and others
mentioned in the Old Testament, and of Agabus, Acts 21.11. were all of them
Extraordinary Inspirations. But I find no Miracles, that these their
Extraordinary Inspirations were vouched by. John the Baptist, the Greatest
Prophet, born of a Woman, his Mission was very extraordinary, yet not attested
by Miracles. Now let us see where the Doctrine of the Snake will lead us: Why,
he says, Extraordinary Inspirations are not to be credited, unless vouched by
Miracles. These Inspirations I have now spoken of, are not to us so vouched,
are they therefore not to be credited? This will break an Article of the
Snake's pretended Faith, and make imperfect the Scriptures, which he says are a
perfect Rule of Faith and Manners.

Ibid. p. 58. Let us take this one mark more, to judge when such Inspirations
are from God, or from the Devil.

Yes we will. Those from the Devil generally tend to Schism and Rebellion; as
in that of Jeroboam, and the Ten Tribes, who broke off from the Priesthood of
Aaron, as well as from the House of David; and set up opposite Altars to that
at Jerusalem.

This does deserve to be marked, in that, it,

First gives the Lie to the Scriptures, and then kicks against the Reformation.
It gives the Lie to the Scripture, for that God by his Prophet Shemiah, 2 Cron.
11.4. when Rehoboam would have fought against Israel, that he might have
brought the Kingdom from Jeroboam to himself; and that they were ready to
fight, they were of God forbid; and the reason God by his Prophet gives, is;
For this thing is done of me. But the Snake says it is done of the Devil. Thus
much for the Kingdom now for the Priestood.

That they broke off from the Priesthood of Aaron, and set up opposite Altars,
is a mark applicable at this day, or, to what purpose does the Snake make it?
And say that separation from the Priesthood at this day, is from the Devil. And
now if the Snake please, let him prove how many of these separations which have
been made within three hundred years from the Priesthood of the Roman Pontiff,
have been made by the Devil? and let him not forget the Reformation in England.
But of this kind of arguing we have more.

Ibid. p. 58. But as they paid all Dutiful Obedience to their persecuting
Kings, and suffered Martyrdom under them without Resistance: So did they always
keep in the Communion of those same Priests, whom they had provoked and
reproved, etc.

That Dutiful Obedience was paid by the Holy Prophets to persecuting Kings in
their Days; and has been paid by us, to persecuting Kings in our Days, is very
true. But as for the Doctrine of Resistance, if that be it the Snake quarrels
at, he may find Opponents enough in the Communion of that Church he pretends
Membership in; as he also may have the Voice of the Church of England against
him, Justifying themselves, in that they did not keep the Communion of the
Roman Priesthood, but did set up a Separate Communion and Opposite Altars. See,
Reader, this Doughty Champion (as he pretends) for the Church of England, under
the false pretenses of esteeming, and valuing her Communion, does in truth and
reality, as much as in him lies, scandalize the Reformation; by putting upon it
very gross imputations, as if it were from the Devil. But worse yet.

Ibid. p. 59. And when our Savior himself came into the World, he did not
separate from the public Worship, and Communion of the Jewish Church. -- And
to show that the receiving of Christianity it self was no exemption from paying
all Obedience to them, he commands his own Disciples, as well as the Multitude,
to pay them all manner of Obedience.

Our Savior is declared, Romans 10.4. the end of the Law. Then he must of
necessity be the end of that Worship and Communion which was grounded on the
Law: And that the receiving of Christianity was an exemption to Obedience, in
that Worship and Communion, The Apostle Paul is positive, Gal. 5.2. for
Christianity was not to be blended with Judaisims. And when our Savior said,
Matt. 23.3. Whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do. He did not
thereby continue the observance of the Ceremonial Law, beyond the date of the
Sealing his own Testament with his Blood: For if he had, then all who are not
in Communion with the Jews at this Day are Schismatics; and which is worse,
the Snake says, it is from the Devil.

Ibid. p. 59. And the Apostles, after our Savior, frequented the Jewish
Temple, Luke 24.53. And observed their hours of Public Worship, Acts 3.1.

This Adversary would here falsely and Hypocritically insinuate, as if the
Apostles hereby joined in Communion with the Jews, which was against the whole
Scope of their Commission. The Business of the Apostles in the Temple, and
wheresoever else their Lots were, was to preach up Faith and Salvation through
Repentance, in and by that Jesus whom the Jews had Crucified: For this purpose
they went to the Jewish Temple; and no wonder they went at the hour of Prayer,
because then they might find the People together: That this was the Reason, why
they went at the hour of Prayer, is fully seen by the Sermon of Peter, Acts
3.12. to the end of the Chapter.

Ibid. p. 60. But the Quaker-notion of the Light within, and their pretense to
Infallibility, as consequential to it, does totally root up and destroy all
Church Covernment and Order: For if the Light within be God, it must be
self-sufficient, and not to need the Rules and Directions of any other.

The Apostles, it is allowed, were infallibly assisted by the Holy Ghost, God in
them; yet this was so far from rooting up and destroying all Church Government,
that they by the Directions of the Holy Spirit did give Rules and Directions
for Discipline in the Churches, where they labored to bring the People to be
partakers, with them, of the same Promise, which was, Christ in them, the hope
of Glory.

Ibid. p. 60. Upon this Ground the Quakers broke off from the Church, and
refused to be under the Government of any outward Authority.

It Is false, the Quakers broke not off upon this Ground, but rather to carry on
that Reformation which the Church of England began here, when she broke off
from Rome. Neither did the Quakers ever refuse to be under the Government of
any outward Authority; for we always, for Conscience sake, have been Obedient
to Authority, by actively doing, what in Conscience we could, or by passively
suffering for what in Conscience we could not do. Let the Snake say so much for
himself, if he can, and prove it.

Ibid. p. 60. And thus they stood several years, in the Infancy of their State,
till they began to grow numerous and rich.

It Is false, we never were, even when first a People, without Government and
Discipline, such as might answer the good end of the Gospel of Christ. But that
there may be occasion, as the Community enlarges, to add some points of
Discipline, for the same good end for which the first were appointed, Holy Writ
does sufficiently justify. -- The Disciples, while in their Infancy, had* Acts
2.44. and 4.32. All things common, afterward, particular Churches, made
Contributions for the Poor, etc. When they grew more numerous, the Question of
the Circumcision began to trouble the Churches, in Syria, Antioch and Cilecia,
concerning which the Apostles sent a Determination by Paul and Barnabas, Acts
15.25. And in after times as the Churches and their Necessities did increase,
the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 8.4. and 10.25, 27. did yet enlarge the Borders of
that Discipline, which was before settled: And to other Churches according to
their Necessities; such was their prescribed Discipline. Thus at first, while
the Professors of Christianity were few, there necessities were so too; but as
their Numbers increased, so did their Necessities; and the Apostles and
Overseers of the Church did provide accordingly, that they might in all things
adorn the Doctrine of Christ, Tit. 2.10. who is a God of Order. And as the
fullest state of their Discipline was no contradiction, to their few first
Precepts, so neither was a contradiction, to the infallible Spirit of God, Tit.
11.12. to the Guidings whereof, the end of their Preaching was to bring People.
I come now to his Tenth and Last Head of Distinction, Concerning that Church
Government which is among the Quakers.

Ibid. p. 61. The Quakers pretense to Infallibility, has been disproved; First,
In particular Instances of several of their Prophets. -- Secondly, In whole
Floods and Parties; for F. Bugg and many others have come openly off from their
Communion, etc.

The particular Instances, which the Snake has brought, have been above
sufficiently disproved, being either falsely or insufficiently by him pretended.
But had they been all, such as the Snake has pretended, yet then they cou^^
not have answered his purpose, to overthrow the Infallibility of the Spirit of
God; as is also largely before declared.

Secondly, That whole Floods and Parties have left us, F. Bugg is, with the
Snake, an Instance; and indeed a particular, single, weak one. But had the
Floods and Parties been much greater, than ever yet any were, that did
Apostatize and backslide from us: They may indeed be Instances of such
Backsliders, as those mentioned 2 Pet. 2.22. but no Argument that the Holy
Spirit of God is not Infallible; for as by the power of that, in times past,
these backsliders were in some degree washed; so had they continued under its
Guidings, it would have made them altogether clean. Whereas, by deserting it,
they are returned to wallow in the Mire again. This Through Disobedience happened
to many in the Primitive times. Nay, so general was the Defection and
Backsliding of that People, that the Holy Spirit expresses it by the Church
going into the Wilderness: For Darkness and Apostasy did overspread all Lands.

Ibid. p. 62. Now if their above-told pretenses to Infallibility do hold, then
it will follow, that these their former Opinions, which the Separatists now
condemn, were true Then, and false Now. Nay, that they are both true and false,
even now; because some Quakers do hold them to be true.

A fine Conclusion! and spakes thus much. If the Declared Claim of the Church
of England to Loyalty do hold, then it will follow, that that Declared Claim
which the Snake, and other such Separates now condemn, was true then, and false
now. Nay, that it is both true and false even now; because that Church does
still declare that Claim. Thus, Reader, thou see the folly of this Snake's
reasoning; and it cannot be otherwise, when Men shall attempt to prove, by the
precarious and evil practice of Particulars, the Unsoundness of Principles;
Good Principles do always abide the same, whatsoever the Practice of their
Professors may be. Thus the Grace and Spirit of God continues Infallible, let
whosoever will backslide from it, and Loyalty continues to be Loyalty still, if
the Snake never practice it.

Ibid. p. 62, 63. But if Keith and Bugg were true Quakers, then true Quakers
are not Infallible: And then G. Fox, etc. (who said they were Infallible) were
led by the Spirit of Delusion, and not the Spirit of Truth.

Keith and Bugg, with whosoever else that can be named, that have Apostatized:
While they were led by the Spirit of Truth, were by that Infallibly led, and it
was no Delusion to affirm so much of them or others, while in their obedience
to that Infallible Guide. But G. Fox, etc. did never say, that any were, or
could be Infallibly led, but by the Holy Spirit: Therefore G. F. etc. were not
herein led by the Spirit of Delusion, but by the Spirit of Truth.

Ibid. p. 63. The Infallibility of the private Spirit, or of each particular
Quaker, is now damned by their Church; and their Infallibility is now reduced
by them, -- to that of their Church.

It Is a notorious Falsehood, that ever Infallibility was by us placed in the
private Spirit of any, or every Quaker, as it is by this Snake asserted, or
that it is now reduced to the Church. Infallibility is now by us placed, where
it ever was, that is, in the Infallible Spirit of God privately or particularly
working in the Hearts of Men.

Ibid. p. 64. All I am concerned for at present, is, that their Churches have
censured these Separatists, and given Judgment against the Light within
particular Persons; which was the Original Pretense, and only Infallible Guide
of the first Quakers. And upon this only ground, they exclaimed against any
Church, assuming Authority over any Man's private Spirit, or his Light within,
as Antichristian and Diabolical, and gave this as the reason of their
Separation from the Church of England.

One, but not the only, reason and ground of some that separated from the
Church of England, might possibly be Her Hierarchy and Government, or assumed
Authority over Conscience; as she in her turn, made it part of the reason for
her Separation from Rome, as see Apologia Ecclesiae Anglicanae, printed 1617.
But that bond of Union and spiritual Fellowship, which united us to be a
People, was, First and Principally, The Light of Jesus Christ shining into our
Hearts, whereby through obedience, we had and have Unity with all, who in any
measure are turned to it, and walk in it; and by this Union of Spirit, we were
gathered into one Body of external Fellowship and Society, in matters of
Doctrine and Discipline; and being so gathered into particular Assemblies or
Churches (with respect to place) at unity: The Authority which these our
Assemblies do claim toward them that do so declare themselves Members, and who
do believe and profess the same Doctrines and Principles of Faith, and are so
distinguished and denominated, is grounded in this: That every such Member is
gathered as above, and not by any external constraint or outward respect, but
only by the real force of Truth upon their Understanding. And of such as do
profess to be so gathered into Unity and Fellowship with us: If any shall
Innovate in Doctrine and Discipline, and make Defection from the Spirit of
Love, contrary to that Belief and Profession, which by the force of Truth, and
Convictions of God's Grace on their Hearts, they did make and declare at their
coming into Unity and Fellowship with us: Such, the Church or Assembly has
Power to declare Separated from the Body; because by this their Innovation and
Defection, they have dissolved that bond of Union, by which they became
Members; and when censure is denounced against these who are thus separated; It
cannot be accounted or esteemed, A giving Judgment against the Light within
particular Persons: Because the Light of Jesus Christ is not contrary to it
self; and if by the inshinings of that, it was, that they through obedience
came into Fellowship, and did profess and declare to believe as above; it does
necessarily follow, that their Innovation and Defection must proceed from being
darkened and decayed from that Life of Righteousness in themselves, which was
the first Principle of true Union. And when we have declared against any Church
assuming Authority toward any Man, and that Light of Grace which is in him; it
has been because such Church has assumed that Authority, without that
previous bond of Union which is above declared.

Having thus briefly, but truly, stated the Ground and Nature of that
Government which is among us, and the reason of our refusing Church Government
not so constituted; it will serve to dispatch all the Objections of the Snake
upon this head with greater speed.

I shall here, in fit place* acquaint thee, Reader, that the Snake takes up a
considerable part of the following Pages in this Section, and some in that
concerning Tithes; particularly about G. Keith and our Controversy with him, I
shall take little more notice of them, than as they relate to Government, that
being what the Snake says, p. 118. foregoing, He is chiefly concerned for:
Besides, that Controversy (which Books may be had of Tace Soul, in
White-Hart-Court, Gracious-Street) is in such hands, as, I doubt not, are still
ready to maintain the Justice of that Cause they are concerned in, if G. K. or
the Snake for him, shall think fit to reply to what they have written, that is
yet unanswered by him; and also the compass of this Tract will be too short, to
allow room for a matter so much controverted as that has been. Therefore, what
I shall chiefly say concerning him, and what the Snake is most concerned for,
will be (as above) with respect to his quondam Society and Fellowship with us;
and to show that the Judgment given against him, was not against that Light of
Jesus Christ, which he once acknowledged for his sufficient Teacher: The like
for brevity sake I would be understood concerning John Wilkinson, John Story,
Bugg, and others, who may have Separated, or Apostatized, as these have done.

From p. 64. to 68. The Snake is wholly employed on G. K. giving in them, some
short and false bits of Stories, relating to that difference with him in
Pensilvania; which I should have wholly passed by, but that in one Instance the
Snake is remarkably false: That is, p. 66. G. K. was accused for Preaching two
Christ's, i. e. a Christ without, besides the Christ within. -- This Sam
Jennings (after their manner of mumbling Thistles) will not confess, but dare
not deny.

That G. K. was so accused, Sam. Jennings does deny so far as it came to his
Knowledge; but the Snake carps at S. Jennings, because he does not affirm or
deny upon such incompetent Authority and Evidence as himself uses; which has,
as I have already shown, and may hereafter show, led him into notorious Lies,
and false Stories: For, S. Jennings says ( State of the Case, p. 6.) In the
Judgment given forth against him (G. K.) by Friends, they say, W. Stockdale
denied the words so spoken [as in the Charge above] and Ibid. p. 7. which I
have heard him [W. S.] often solemnly to deny.

Is this mumbling of Thistles, or does it not rather show, that S. J. took care
to speak Truth to the utmost of his Knowledge, and is a full denial of G.
Keith's Charge?

Snake p. 66. Why was this the business of so many Meetings, and so great stir
among the^? -- For G. Keith was not so much as accused for Preaching any thing
else but this.

But (now Snake, who mumbl^^ ^^istles?) was not he accused of very many
Turbulent, and Indecent Actions and Expressions, as is at large seen in The
State of the Case, which I have above quoted, and which the Snake also quotes
with perversion, as I have before shown.

Snake p. 67. Here is a many forked and involved Infallibility, one Meeting
Justifying, another Condemning, G. Keith, and all for the very same Doctrine.
-- Ibid. p. 68. This will not only overthrow the Infallibility in each
particular Person, but even of their Churches or Meetings.

That particular Persons may make Defection from the Guidings of the Spirit of
Truth, and may Apostatize from that Union and Fellowship which they had once
with the Friends of it: I have already largly shown, and what particulars may
do; Assemblies made up of such particulars, may also do: Floods and Parties (as
the Snake expresses it) may Apostatize as well as particulars; nay, a whole
Community may Apostatize, and yet the Infallibility of the Guide, of any one
particular Person, who continues Faithful and Obedient to the Holy Spirit,
remains firm and sure. Thus 1 Cor. 10.4. The Apostle testifies of the Jews,
They all Drank the same spiritual Drink, for they Drank of that Spiritual Rock
that followed them, and that Rock was Christ. Now this Rock could have as
Infallibly preserved, the whole Tribes of Israel from Egypt, through the
Wilderness to the promised Land, had they been Obedient to it, as it did Caleb
and Joshua, who were the only two of all the Thousands that left Egypt, and
entered in.

But further, that Assemblies or Churches may Apostatize and Backslide, the
Holy Spirit is sufficient Warrant, by the particular reproofs or cautions it
gives to the seven Asiatick Churches, mentioned Rev. 2.2. and 3. And sure the
Snake will not be so hardy as to say, that the Holy Spirit was able only to
give Reproof and Caution suitable to their wants and defects, but not to have
preserved them blameless, and to have guided them Infallibly in that way he
appointed them to go.

Ibid. p. 68. Besides this first proof in Pensilvania, there is yet another
more express and positive, called, The Barbados Judgment, etc. --

And besides the detecting the Snake's false conclusion in that, I have to say
to this, that according to his usual Injustice, he herein makes use of an
Adversary's Book ( Babel's Builders, etc.) without taking notice of the Answer
which was published to it (Entitled, A Babilonish Opposer of Truth reproved,
etc. By S. C. I. P. and R. R.) as he also passes over in Silence (though
mentioned in that Adversaries Book) a Letter of G. ^'s and others, writ to
Barbados concerning this very thing; wherein they are shown their cause is not
right that they had taken; which Letter, and the matter it relates to, is fully
spoken to in our Answer above mentioned; wherein is also S. E's condemnation of
his rashness in those words spoke by him to J. S. mentioned p. 125. foregoing.

Ibid. p. 69, 70. I was told by one present at the Quaker Meeting at Ratcliff,
on Sunday the 17 th of February, 1694/5;. That Mr. Penn having Preached, and
after G. Keith rising up, and expounding some Scripture in another manner than
Mr. Penn had done; Mr. Penn stopped him, and solemnly denounced these words
against him, In the Name of the Lord, I pronounce him an Apostate, over the
Head of him. Upon which occasion I have these few Questions to ask.

Q. Whether this was a Sentence from Mr. Penn himself, or from their Church? --

Whether by an Ordinary Commission of Succession to Christ and the Apostles?

Whether by an Extraordinary Commission such as the Prophets and the Apostles
had? --

To the first, W. Penn being in Unity with the Church, declared this, of one
who had broken Unity by making defection from that term of Union, which in time
passed, he had declared he was by the Light of Christ in him, led to profess
and believe.

Secondly, All who are kept living by the Spirit of Truth, in that bond of
Union which that did at first lead into, such have ordinary Commission
therefrom to testify against Apostates. And this not by such falsely pretended
Succession, as the Papal Chair, or others may pretend to from the Apostles: But
by succeeding, in a measure of that same Light and Holy Spirit which they were
in.

To the Last, W. Penn, though then knowing G. K. to have broken Union, as is
before expressed; he might at that time, in the Openings of the Spirit of
Truth, have a larger and fuller Sight of his Apostasy, and so a Warrant to
Declare it. And for this there needed no new Credentials, viz. Miracles, it
being no more than what has been confirmed by those the Apostles wrought.

Ibid. p. 72. But for the present, I only apply it to the point of their Church
Authority over the Light within particular Persons, their original and great
pretense.

The Light within particular Persons, is as much our Characteristick now as
ever; and we have no Church Authority over it, or repugnant to it, and that in
the case of G. K. no such Authority was used, Consider the following Lines.

G. Keith has often Printed and Declared, that he did believe and profess the
same Doctrines and Principles of Faith with us; and that he was led so to do,
only by the Light of Jesus Christ shining into his Heart. Through, and by which
Light he did profess to have true union and fellowship with us, and accordingly
he so was denominated and distinguished.

Now the Light of Jesus Christ, is not contrary to it self, and if by the
inshinings thereof, and his obedience to it, it was, that G. K. did profess as
above. Then it naturally follows, G. K's innovation, to the contrary of what he
has so professed, cannot proceed from that Light of Jesus Christ, from which
the above profession of Unity and Fellowship did.

Therefore to give Judgment against G. K. is not to give Judgment against the
Light of Jesus Christ, but agreeable to it, even in G. Keith against himself.
The like is to be said of J. Story, etc. and others, who have innovated and
made defection as these did, whose Works being bad; the issue is the same with
what Gamaliel shows, Acts 5.28. They are come to naught. And therefore after
all the Boast which the Snake makes about Separation and Faction: We may,
concerning all of them, now declining, and toward their end, hope and have
ground to believe, that as many as are yet in a Spirit of Separation, in whom
are any true desires toward God for his guidance in the Truth, such he will
restore to the Fold they have strayed from. And he will scatter them whose end
is not his Honor; agreeable to what the Psalmist said concerning the Wicked,
Psalm. 37.36. He is gone, I sought him, but he could not be found. And of as
many as keep in their first Love, E. B. has truly said with the Apostle, Acts
4.32. And the Multitude of them that believed, were of one Heart, and of one
Soul.

Ibid. p. 73. The very same Division is still kept up in the opposite
Quaker-Churches of Harp-Lane and Grace Church Street.

It Is false, the Meeting in Harp-Lane is dropped.

Ibid. p. 75. There is yet a Fourth Church of the Quakers -- It is true, they
are disowned by all the rest, but as much disowning them. We have the Snake's
Authority for it, that they are none of us: But however, consider them a little
further, and see to whom they do belong.

P. 76, 77. The Snake Relates (how truly, I know not) a great many bad Tenets
they hold, and bad Actions that they do: He says They Dance as well as Pray by
the Spirit. Their Ringleader whom he calls Tho. Case, he says Preached in a
Surplice. By the Principles I could not tell to what Church this Case belonged;
but for the Surplice we know what Church uses it.

Ibid. p. 78. And I can name one, who reasoning with one of these concerning
the outward Christ (Oh horror to repeat it!) he bid that Christ kiss his --

And if so, what relation has that to us? For the Snake had said just before,
that we disown them, and they disown us; so that he might as well have
mentioned, (for any relation it has to us) Julian the Apostates Blaspemies
against Christ, and insinuated, Snake like, that they were owned by us.

Ibid. p. 78. And it was not behind this, which a Quaker Preacher, now in
London, said to one, (I can produce) who was endeavoring to persuade him that
Christ was now a Man, the Preacher replied, The Man Christ, a F -- rt.

The villainy of this expression is indeed, not much behind his last. For I do
deny, that any Preacher, owned among us, has at any time so spoken; and Dare
the Snake to prove to the contrary if he can. We have now another Quotation,
how fairly made, the Reader shall see.

Ibid. p. 79. Quoted from Brief Examination, and State of Liberty Spiritual,
Printed 1681. p. 11. He tells those Quakers who stuck to their own Light
within, rather than the Orders of G. Fox, and his Church. And this I affirm
(says he) from the understanding that I have received of God, that the Enemy is
at work to scatter the Minds of Friends, by that loose plea, What have thou to
do with me? leave me to my freedom, and to the Grace of God in my self, and the
like. --

Here the Snake makes a break, leaving out three Lines, and then continues a
long Quotation. The Snake says, that W. P. speaks this, to those Quakers who
stuck to their own Light within. Now whether he did or not, pray, Reader, by
the following Lines, which the Snake left out at the Break, as I have before
hinted, thou may observe; they are thus -- And the like; but this proposition
and expression, as now understood and alleged, is a deviation from, and a
perversion of the ancient Principle of Truth. Thus, Reader, thou sees, what W.
P. objects to them was, that they did not stick to their own Light within, but
were in that Plea, and explanation of it, deviated from the Ancient Principle
of Truth, which in time past they professed. So that the Judgment was not
against the Light within, but against the deviation and perversion. This is
great injustice Reader, I doubt not thou will grant thus to curtail a Man's
words: but if greater may be, here is an instance for thee. The Snake by a
horrid perversion, quotes W. P's words to the direct contrary purpose to which
he uses them.

Ibid. p. 81. But what if these Quakers, whose Light within, should allow them
to take off their Hat, or Bow, etc. appeared by all other circumstances to be
Good, Honest and Conscientious Men? That would not do; For Mr. Penn in his
address to Protestants, p. 245. says, Holy Living is become no Test among us,
unless against the Liver. The Tree was once known by its Fruits, it is not so
now; the better the Liver, the more Dangerous, unless, if not a Conformist.

This, Reader, is the Quotation, and the perversion is this, If he be not a
Conformist in these things, to pull off the Hat and Bow, Holy Living is no
Test; nor is the Tree Known by its Fruits. A sense as remote from W. P's Mind
as any thing can be: And what shows it plainer, is the place it self, as it
lies in that Book; where having numbered up six several causes of persecution;
he proceeds. The Seventh and Last Cause I shall now assign for persecution is
this, That Holy Living is become no Test among us, unless against the Liver.
The Tree was once known by its Fruit, but now it is not so: The better Liver
the more dangerous, if not a Conformist: This has made way for Persecution.
There was a time when Virtue was venerable, and Good Men admired; that is
derided, and Opinion carries it.

The Snake, was in the wrong Box (considering how much he is used to play) when
he brought to remembrance by his perversion, this Quotation. For the
Persecution here spoken of, was that managed by the Church of England; and the
Conformity then required, was to her self, the Test, etc. and was not a Holy
Life; for Virtue was then derided, and Opinion carried it. It is one of her
Blemishes; and if this rebellious Son, had not herein been to her, what Ham,
was to his Father Noah, it might at this time have been covered for me.

Ibid. p. 82. But have they not worldly Coertion here? Yes, beyond what the
Church of England, or any other Church have in their Power. For they being
mostly a trading People, and chiefly among themselves, whoever is disowned --
By their Church, does, Ipso facto, lose his Trade among them; and there is not
one of an hundred of them, but must be thereby broke and undone.

We have not any Worldly Coertion, either to whip Men into the Temple, or keep
them there; for, as is shown, p. 135, 136, etc. All who are truly Members of
our Body, and are in true Fellowship with us, were gathered so to be; not by
Worldly Coertion, or outward respect; but only by the real force of Truth upon
their Understanding, and the Convictions of God's Grace upon their Hearts: and
we disown not any (in their fallings away) who have not first thus pretended.
But the Church of England, much beyond this, has (lately) claimed Power over
all the Subjects of the Realm, by whipping some into the Temple, and some for
going out; and by her pretended Spiritual Excommunication has deprived many,
who never were of her Communion, of their Civil Benefits: For one
Excommunicate, might not be an Executor, receive a Legacy, or sue for his Just
Debts. In fine, it deprived* him of his Property, and put him out of the King's
Protection. Now, Reader, see whether this Worldly Coertion be not beyond our
Power, as we know it to be beyond our practice and liking. For whoever is
disowned by us, for practices contrary to the Terms of their Union and
Fellowship, is not thereby broke and undone in his outward estate, (which the
Excommunication above has sometimes threatened) Because our disowning of
Backsliders, and Immoralists does only extend to testify against such Persons
and Practices; and it is the Duty of a Christian Community so to do: And I
herein charge the Snake with a Lie, till he can prove Fifty in one Hundred, who
have been broke and undone in their Trade, by such our Testimonies.

Ibid. p. 83. The surest method for a Young Man to step into an Abounding
Trade, and a Rich Wife, is to set up first for a Preacher -- of which many
Examples daily occur.

Though the Snake (in his own Language p. 16.) does boldly and impudently aver
this, yet no such Examples do daily occur, because we own not any for true
Preachers, who do so set up themselves: But who are thereunto inwardly moved of
the Holy Ghost: And this Call the Snake would have us think he owns, it being a
previous Question to Ordination, as himself says, p. 316.

Ibid. p. 83. G. F. had more Money at his Disposal than any Bishop in England,
he having the Command of the Quaker-Treasury.

It is a notorious Lie, G. F. never had the Command of the Treasury of the
Quakers.

Ibid. p. 83. There is a Topic behind, which if the former convince them not,
may at least shame them out of their vain pretenses to Infallibility; and is
the Pitiful and Childish Blunders which are daily seen among them.

This remaining Topic, will, on examination, like the rest, be turned Topsie
Turvy: for why should a real mistake be more prevalent, to make a Man
relinquish the guidings of the Spirit of Truth, which is able and ready,
infallibly to guide him in all that concerns his Salvation, Redemption and
Eternal Life? Then the Snake's false Suggestion of Heretical Opinions, which,
he says, we hold: Which if it were true, were a better Argument against
Infallibility, than the most Childish blunder that can be.

He quotes W. P. in his Christian Quaker, p. 104. repeated by Tho. Elwood, in
his Truth Defended, p. 167. Saying that Christ was born at Nazareth, it was a
Mistake: And what, will it thence follow, that the Holy Spirit is not able
infallibly to inform W. P. and T. E. all that pertains to their Salvation,
Redemption and Eternal Life? If the Snake so think, it is easy to know that he
blunders, and that very dangerously. The same is to be understood of the
mistake of G. F. if there be one; which I have not seen. He does also instance
one William Walker, who, he says, p. 84. did mistake John 14.2. In my Father's
House are many Mansions, for in my Father's House are many Manchets.

Ibid. 84. Another Preaching on Paul 's being bred at the Feet of Gamaliel; and
being asked by one in the Meeting, what that Gamaliel was, answered, a Town in
Judea.

These two hearsay Stories, I disbelieve till proved; and in his next, desire
it be not forgot, if it can be done.

Ibid. p. 84. But above all, his Battle-Door, a large Book in Folio, in defense
of the phrase Thee and Thou, out of several Languages, Greek, Hebrew, etc. of
which G. F. understood not one Letter: yet subscribes G. F. not only to the
Book, but to the several pages of this Poliglot.

That Book the Battle-door, is a Collection of Scripture-Examples, in the words
of the several People recorded therein, as the Medianites, Hittites, Sodomites,
etc. and also a Collection of Examples in the ancient and Modern Languages,
testifying, or proving their concurrence in the essential difference in
expressing one and many. This Compound work, is subscribed by G. F. J. Stubbs
and B. Furly. For Scripture Examples, it needed no greater Learning than
English, to collect them, and that G. F. had. For the other Languages, the
other Subscribers were qualified. But the Snake is angry that G. F. is
subscribed to the pages of this Polyglot: But if he had not been blinded by
Envy, he might have observed, That these words in the Handle of the
Battle-Door, The Light which Christ has enlightened you withal, believe in,
that the anointing within, you may know to teach you; which words are
subscribed G. F. in the first page, and are of the same signification in the
other Languages, throughout all the Battle-Door pages: So that the words in the
first page being G. F's, his Fellow Laborers in that Work, to do him justice,
did, in their translating his words into other Languages, still put his Name to
them.

Ibid. p. 85. But some Friends know the Jew, who had 60 l. in New Crowns, (as
himself told it) out of the Quaker-Treasury, for helping G. Fox 's
Infallibility, as to the Hebrew.

A Liar had need have the help of a Great Memory. The Book was printed in 1660.
And if a Jew helped he had earned his Money before that; and it is not likely,
if a Jew wrought for Bread, that he could trust; and I am sure there could be
no new Crowns before 1660. But what is better? there was no occasion for a Jew
to do that which John Stubbs and B. Furly could, and did do themselves, that
is, thoroughly understand the Hebrew Language. And if the Snake cannot prove to
the contrary, he has done like a Turk, in telling this Lying Story of a Jew.

Ibid. p. 85. He is angry that G. F. should say in the Preface to this
Battle-Door, That all Languages are to me no more than Dust -- But has basely
omitted to give G. F's reason why they are so; which is, being redeemed out of
Languages into the Power wherein Men shall agree.

Thus having Tract and Discovered this Snake through his many Lies, base
Insinuations and gross Perversions, in this tedious Section; I now proceed to
his Seventh Section.

SECT. VI. Concerning the Authority of the Holy Scriptures.
WE have always testified according to 2 Timothy 3.16. All Scripture is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness. And the reason of this is,
because according to 2 Pet. 1.21. The Prophecy came not in old time by the will
of Man, but Holy Men of God, spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. And
therefore it is, that we have constantly directed Men to the Holy Spirit for
the true understanding of them; by the movings whereof they were at first
written. For as they do contain a true declaration of the things of God, so
they are not to be truly understood, but by the Spirit of God. How much the
contrary of this can be proved by this Snake, I shall now examine.

Snake p. 85. The Quakers notion of the Light within (as before explained) must
necessarily out off our dependence upon the Holy Scriptures, as a Rule either
of Faith or Manners.

The Light within, Christ in us, as before I have explained; as it is not
contrary to the Scriptures: So it does not cut them off from being useful, as
before declared, viz. for Doctrine, Reproof, Correction, etc. For though the Holy
Spirit is as infallible now as ever, and it is the same Holy Spirit,
(manifested in the Hearts of Men at this day) by which the Holy Men did write
the Scriptures; yet the manifestations thereof to them, being in greater
degree, we justly give them the priority; this with respect to the Writings, of
any faithful Servant of Christ at this day. But with respect to the Holy
Spirit, that being (as I have just now said) as infallible now as ever; it must
of necessity also follow, that whosoever, through obedience, follows the
guidings of it, must have as sure (because the same) rule as the Prophets and
Apostles had. And this is no more contradictory, than the Parable of the
Talents, Matt. 25. In which our Savior shows the different proportions of
Trust of the same Treasure: And the one Talent had it been employed in the same
way which the five were, it would as certainly have gained Profit. Thus they
who, through obedience, improve their Talent, and are in the Apostles Phrase, 2
Cor. 6.1. Workers together with Christ, they shall witness a growth in his
Grace; and who do so grow, have the same sure rule of the Holy Spirit to read
and understand the Scriptures by, even the same sure rule which the Prophets
and Apostles had when they writ them. Hence it is, that he that has and obeys
the least measure of this sure Rule, the Holy Spirit in himself, will easily
and readily acknowledge and consent to the further Degrees of the revealed Will
of the Holy Spirit recorded in the Scriptures of Truth.

Ibid. p. 85, 86. But because the Scriptures are often brought in
crontradiction to the Quaker-Light, therefore they have made it their business
to depreciate and undervalue them; nay, sometimes to run them down as hurtful
and pernicious.

That Light of Jesus Christ, which we profess, cannot be in contradiction to
the Holy Scripture; and therefore when so brought, it has been by such, who,
as our Savior says, Matt. 22.29. Do err not knowing the Scriptures, nor the
Power of God. Nor did we ever depreciate, undervalue or run them down. The
Charge is false, as will more manifestly appear by the instances he brings.

Ibid. p. 86. To make them false in many things, that we may believe them, or
trust to them in nothing. To make their Authority Doubtful, by disputing their
Penmen, and raising all the evil Suggestions that can be against them. The
Quakers Refuge, Printed 1673. p. 17. States this as truly owned by the Quakers.

The Book, Quakers Refuge, does not State this as owned by us; that the
Scriptures are false in any thing; Nor does it raise evil Suggestions, nor
dispute the Penmen of them: That there have been very many Questions raised
concerning them, and the Penmen of some Books or Epistles; the many Treatises
on them Subjects are sufficient Evidence: But it not being profitable here to
remember them, I pass them by in Silence. Now several of these Questions, the
Author of The Quakers Refuge, numbers up, and concludes (p. 17.) It is not the
Subject of my Argument at this time. But that which he therein declares to be
the Subject of his Argument, is, The Authority of the Holy Spirit in Judging or
Discerning the Mind of God in the Holy Scriptures. This he says, Is as truly
stated as owned by us; and he declares it to be the concern therein under most
Serious Consideration.

This, Reader, is the true import of the Author's words; which the Snake has
as Injuriously perverted, as before I have detected him, p. 144, 145.
perverting W. P's words, and the Advantage he will get, is much the same;
because, I must hereupon show thee, Reader, that what seems to be the occasion
of the Snake's Cavil and Perversion, is, because we assert the Authority of the
Holy Spirit, in Judging or Discerning the Mind of God in the Holy Scriptures:
Which Truth, as it obtains upon the minds of Men, will rather incline them to
wait for the sensible experience thereof in themselves, than to depend
implicitly upon the guest Opinions of any, who deny the possibility of such
certain guide at this day.

Ibid. p. 87. Whitehead says that there were some Priests in the North, in and
before the Year 1653. when those Books (which Bugg quoted) were Printed, who
were thus Ignorant: And that this was the reason for those expressions in the
Quaker Books. First, this had been no reason for these Barbarous Expressions,
if it had been so: But, Secondly, I will join Issue with G. W. upon it, that
there never were such Priests in the North, or any where else, that were so
Ignorant. No George! This is an Arrant Lie without all doubt; did any Man ever
think or say, that the very material Paper, and Ink, and Letters, would endure
for ever?

That there were in the North, etc. Priests Scandalously Ignorant herein, I
will presently show; and if they were reproved herein, in such manner as they
might account contemptuous. The Expressions are not therefore Barbarous,
because so called by the Snake; as I may also show from Authority of Holy Writ,
and the Practice of (them esteemed by the Snake) the Fathers, as (that
expressions which seem contemptuous, are not therefore so, being in their end
directed to rectify the evil Practices of Men) related by John Daille. To the
First, viz. the Authority of the Holy Scriptures, we know that the Sacrifices,
Oblations and Offerings, mentioned in the Levetical Law, had a Divine Sanction;
and the promise annexed, Lev. 18.5. Ye shall therefore keep my Statutes and
Judgments, which if a Man do, he shall live in them, I am the Lord. These though
they had the Promise of this Life, yet the Jews through their Disobedience, made
these their Sacrifices not delightful to the Lord; their Oblations were Vain,
and their Incense an Abomination, and New Moons and appointed Feasts his Soul
hated, Isa. 1.11, 13, 14. And by their continuance in Disobedience, while in
performance of the Letter of the Ceremonial Law; the same Prophet, 66.3. tells
them from the Lord, He that kills an Ox, is as if he slew a Man; he that
Sacrifices a Lamb, as if he cut off a Dogs neck; and he that burns Incense,
as if he blessed an Idol. These in the Judgment of our Adversary, must be very
Barbarous Expressions of these Ordinances, and which there was no reason for,
though the People were departed from that true use, to which they were at first
appointed. Though this be an abundant Testimony, that through Men's misuse of
things, appointed by God to a determinate purpose, he has been pleased to show
and declare his dis-esteem of them: Yet I shall (not to confirm this Testimony,
for it needs it not) but for the Readers Satisfaction, also show the Practice
of the Fathers herein, as testified by John Daille, in his Right use of the
Fathers, first Book, p. 194. Whilst they beat down one Error, they seem to run
into the contrary Error: In like manner, as those who would streighten a
crooked Plant, are wont to bow it as much the contrary way, that so having been
worked out of its former bent, it may at length rest in a middle posture.

Now if our Friends have formerly met with those in the Priesthood, whose
crooked expressions did need streightning, they are not to be wondered at, or
condemned in their Christian endeavors for that end.

And whether there were such or not, I will now join Issue with the Snake and
show, from a much narrower compass than the extents of the Snake's Challenge,
which is, That there never were in any place such Priests.

I shall at present only give some few instances out of the Book, Great
Mystery, which the Snake does so often quote, which take as follows.

P. 16. John Timson did affirm, that the Holy Scriptures alone is to be the
object of Faith.

P. 38. Tho. Collier did affirm, that the Scriptures shall be our Judge, one
day, which we call the Letter.

P. 111. Jeremy Ives did affirm it to be an Error, to say the Letter of the
Scriptures was Carnal.

P. 247. Christopher Wade affirmed, The Written Word, is the Sword of the
Spirit.

P. 261. Roger Atkinson affirmed, That the Letter of the Scripture was God.

Ibid. Richard Stoakes affirmed, That the Scripture is God.

P. 280. Edw. Price affirmed, The Scriptures is the Power of God, and that all
Men shall be Judged by them,

Now, Reader, upon the Issue joined, in this little space, whether appears the
Arrant Liar? G. Whitehead in saying, There were in the North (where most of
these did live) Priests, who had so affirmed of the Letter of the Scriptures,
or the Snake in saying; That neither there nor any where else were such Priests?

For it cannot be allowed, I suppose, That the Written Word and Letter of the
Scripture, as above affirmed, is either God, or the Power of God, or the Judge
of the World, or Spiritual, or the Sword of the Spirit: These and the like
crooked Expressions, of some in the Priesthood, it was the necessary work of
our Friends, to oppose and straiten, according to the Authority of Holy Writ;
not that we then did, or now do, charge all the Men with whom these so
affirming have held fellowship, to have the same Sentiments, though this be the
Practice of the Snake against us, notwithstanding his distinction in the Title
page of his Libel.

Ibid. p. 88. How comes it, that since they are such bitter Enemies to the
Letter, they yet make a Conscience of saying Thee and Thou instead of You, in
the Singular, because these were old English words in the first Translations?

I need not ask How comes it? That envy and prejudice is Blind and Ignorant. We
are not bitter Enemies to the Letters, of which the Books of Scripture are
composed: No, Sober Reader, that which we have opposed (and for our so doing,
have the Authority of the Scriptures) is, that Men should only from them,
gather some account of the dealings of God with the Holy Men in past Ages, and
from their Declarations therein (nay sometimes contrary to them) make to
themselves Creeds, and herein Copy after those, to whom our Savior says, Ye
search the Scriptures, in them ye think to have Eternal Life, but ye will not
come unto me, that ye may have Life.

This we have opposed, and directed Men to the Spirit of God in them, to which
as they are obedient, they will find it to open the Scriptures to them, and
give comfort in the reading of them.

Thee and Thou instead of You in the Singular, are as well Modern English Words
as Old, from the Essential difference that there is, between the Signification
of One and Many; and upon this account, it is (according to the best
Information I can get) that there is hardly any Nation, whose Language does not
differently express that different Signification: And that which engages us,
Conscientiously to this Practice, is, not that they are Old English Words, but
that the same Holy Spirit in us at this day, leads to that same Simplicity of
Language, which it did lead the Servants of God into in former Ages: And in all
Ages of the World it has been the Language of the Holy Spirit to Man. And
accordingly, before our day, at the beginning of the Reformation, Erasmus and
others, whose Language was not Old or Modern English, did reprove that Vanity
of Mind, which did practice and acccept the contrary.

Ibid. p. 88. Is there any Immorality or Iniquity in these Letters, Y. o. u.
more than in T. h. o. u?

Foolish Question! Which may serve to please and tickle the Wanton: But, Sober
Reader, I doubt not, thou will perceive the Vanity of the Querist.

The Alphabet, which with us, according to its various joynings, does serve to
express the thoughts of our Minds, cannot have Immorality or Iniquity in the
Letters. Yet whosoever in evil Mind, by joining them, does express words,
either Blasphemous, Profane, Hypocritical, Unjust, as this Snake, or any other
way bad, in their Signification; of these, Men do pronounce accordingly. And
thus it is, if any to shun the Cross of our Lord Jesus, though in this small
matter of the plain Language, and to please the vain Mind, contrary to the
Convictions of the Spirit of Truth in themselves, shall say, You instead of
Thee and Thou, such will find that disobedience their Burden.

In p. 89, 90. Snake has gathered many instances from G. F's Writings, wherein
he says, This is the Word of the Lord; which the Snake puts in opposition to
G. F's Answer to Christopher Wade, Great Mystery, p. 246. They (the Scriptures)
are not the Word of God.

But this soon vanishes, for upon Examination of Christopher Wade's words, they
seem to imply, as if he affirmed of the Scriptures, that they were the Eternal
and In-dwelling Word of God, and therefore, and thereupon, G. Fox opposed him,
and asserted Christ to be the Word of God, p. 247. Great Mystery, which is
true, and from him the Eternal Word; the Servants of God have often said to the
People, Hear the Word of the Lord. And the meaning of it both in the Prophets
and since, is only this, Hear from the Eternal Word a Declaration of his Will.

Ibid. p. 91. They knew that the Holy Scriptures could not be discarded openly
and above-board, nor all at once: That the World has been long in the
possession of them, and of a just Veneration of them; and therefore would not
part with them, nor accept of any Fox 's Inspirations instead of them.

That the World has been long in the possession of the Books of Scriptures we
well know, but for want of being in possession of the Holy Spi-the Power of
God, they have erred not knowing the Scriptures, and therefore could not have a
just Value or Esteem for them: And God who knows the Sincerity of our Hearts,
he knows that our earnest Endeavor since a People, has been to direct to
the Holy Spirit to which, as the World comes to be obedient, it will certainly
raise in them a just value and esteem for the Scriptures, and a love and desire
to be conversant in the reading of them; by which, through Faith, they may
receive comfort, as we can abundantly testify we have found: And therefore the
Insinuation is false and envious, that we have ever sought, either openly or
secretly to discard them, or to set up the Inspirations of any instead of them.

Ibid. p. 91. They have taken upon them, not only to abrogate the most express
Ordinances of the Gospel -- But to set up and institute new ones, as Women's
Preachings (directly contrary to 1 Cor. 16.35.) and the Prelacy of the Women's
Meetings, an Invention never heard of in the World, till G. F. Cobled it out.

It Is false, that we have abrogated any Ordinances of Divine Institution. And
it is also false, that we have set up and instituted new ones. For under the
Law, and in the Apostles days, there were Women Prophetesses, and
Fellow-helpers in the Gospel. As for the Prelacy of Women's Meetings, we know of
no such thing; but for the good ends of looking after the Poor, and seeing
after such things as are Comely, Decent and of Good Report, do they meet, as
the Holy Women in ancient times did. And as it is no discouragement to us, so
it will not be of weight with the Sober Reader, that this practice is profanely
said by the Snake, to be Cobled out by G. Fox.

Ibid. p. 92. The Scripture remains of no Authority with them; because, if,
what the Scripture command be anew required by their Spirit, they are bound to
obey it, because required by their Spirit. But if the Scripture command the
thing, they are (by their Principles) not bound to obey it, unless it is
required by their Spirit anew.

None may, at this day, upon the Authority of Scripture, walk naked, as Isaiah
20.2, 3. nor go to the King's Chapel, as Amos 7.13. nor do any of these
special and particular things, which many of the Prophets, by the Special
Command of God, did do, unless they are thereunto commanded and required by the
same Holy Spirit, which did require them. This is what Edward Buroughs had
formerly said, and which W. Penn repeats and maintains, though very falsely
quoted by the Snake, who injuriously quotes W. P. in his Reason against
Railing, p. 150. in the following manner, That what was a Commandment to any
Servants of God in Old Time -- That such are not Commandments to us, unless
required by the same Spirit anew.

But W. P's words, as they lie in the Book and Page quoted, are thus. From our
asserting, that what was a Commandment to any Servant of God in Old Times, is
not so to us, because so to them; that is, such as Going to Pharaoh, as Going
Naked, Going to the King's Chapel, as Moses, Isaiah and Amos did; as also
those Elementary Types, Shadows and Figures appointed for a season, and to pass
off. That such are not Commandments to us, unless required by the same Spirit
anew.

It is not a little his endeavor, unrighteously to infer, that those, Moral,
Perpetual, and Eternal Holy Precepts (here W. P. mentions the Laws of the First
Table) are not binding upon us -- etc.

Here, Reader, behold the subornation of the Snake, who by a most unjust
practice, bites out so much of a Quotation as is not for his purpose, and
brings the remainder to speak against the sense of the Writer.

Ibid. p. 94. Thus it being Objected to G. F. that one of his Quakers had
pretended to an Immediate Call from Heaven to commit Theft, Robbery and
Sacrilege, in taking out of the Church an Hourglass, etc. --

It is false, it was not objected, that any Quaker did commit Theft or Robbery,
or Sacrilege. Nor does it appear by the Priest's words, that the Hourglass
was taken away. That which appears from the Priest's words is, That some Quaker
had signified to the Priest, that the Glass which he made the limit of his
Carnal Preaching, ought to be removed; and that the Holy Spirit was only that,
by which they that spoke from the Lord ought to begin and end their Preachings;
and G. F's answer is to the same purpose: So that herein the Snake is
egregiously abusive by perverting both the words of the Priest and G. F. and
also in his false and scandalous insinuations concerning what he calls the
Communion Plate.

Ibid. p. 95. Have they not by the same Light rebelled from Episcopacy?

Not unless it be proved by the Holy Scriptures, that Episcopacy, at this day,
be in the same Spirit and Government which the Apostles were in.

Ibid. p. 95. It is true indeed, the Church cannot subsist, -- without
Government. But it is as true, that the Quakers pretense to the private Light
in particular Persons, as a principle, overruling Scripture, and all outward
Ordinances, is Inconsistent to the Government either in Church or State.

It is false, that we have ever pretended, that the Particular Manifestation of
the Light of Christ in any of us, did overruled the Scriptures or Ordinances.
There cannot be Contradiction in the Spirit of God: By the movings whereof it
was, that the Scriptures were given forth, 2 Pet. 1.21. Nor do the Movings of
the same Spirit, privately working in particular Persons, at this day,
overruled or contradict what it did give forth, as above. And as the Light and
Spirit of Christ is thus agreeable to it self: So it is well consistent with
the Government of the State, in that it leads all that obey it, to be loving
and peaceable, not Seditious or Tumultuous. It leads to give Caesar the things
that are Caesar's, and unto God, the things that are God's. This it has taught
us to be our Duty, and our Practice has been agreeable; of which the whole
Kingdom are our witnesses. And it is not less consistent with the Government in
the Church, when the Government in the Church has its beginning and foundation
from it, as described, p. 135, 136. foregoing. But it cannot be consistent with
Government in the Church, when the Church is not governed by the Spirit of him,
whom she says is her Spiritual Head.

Ibid. Or any Security from all the Dismal and Enthusiastical Murders, Rapines
and Outrage of the Zealots among the Jews, who went upon the same principle.

The Holy Spirit of God, which by the coming of Jesus Christ, is given to Men,
is the Principle that we profess, and is the most effectual Security that can
be, against wickedness and violence of all sorts; because where that is obeyed,
it will finish Transgression, and make an end of Sin. Now did the Zealots among
the Jews go upon the same Principle? No, no more than the late Horrid
Assassines in Communion with the Snake (and with him, in Separation from the
Church) could be said to do. Murders, Rapines and Outrage are the Works of the
Devil, let the Snake's Charity be as it will to excuse them.

Ibid. 96. But if hard words are a Natural presage, and show an inward
Disposition to come to blows.

Then none can show a greater inward disposition to come to Blows,
Imprisonments, Premunires and the whole Train of Persecution than this Snake
has done.

Ibid. p. 96. For it is a very convenient Principle to be protected by other
Men's Swords, without running any of the hazard our selves; to enjoy the
Benefits of Peace equally with others, and to be freed, if not from the Charge,
at least from the Slavery and Dangers of War.

Why should the Snake envy this, to us? the Priesthood have the same.

Ibid. p. 97, 98. The Snake gives, from an Adversaries Book, (according to his
usual injustice) A Story, and two or three Quotations, without so much as
mentioning any Answer that was given to it. It is too tedious to follow him
always thus, through the Laborinth of his Lies and Injustice. And to repeat
several Answers to the same thing, as they are repeated in this Libel:
Wherefore, for what relates to Government in the Church, as owned and practiced
by us. I refer to p. 135, etc. where it is particularly treated of, as shall
also be in their proper Sections, these with other his Objections concerning
Tithes and Fightings; and doubt not therein to prove him no less injurious,
than hitherto he does appear to be; till which I dismiss these particular
things, and proceed.

Ibid. p. 98. Enthusiasts have no Principles. They have no Rule but their own
Fancy (which is Strongest in Madmen) and this they mistake for Inspiration,
etc.

How shall we then be assured, that the Inspiration and Enthusiasm, which, the
Snake says, the Church of England allows, is not Fancy? etc. This is
contradictory to what he has said, as quoted p. 10. foregoing.

Ibid. 99. No Quaker can deny, but that the Principles of Quakers is all
Enthusiasm.

Enthusiasm, when meaning a good Inspiration, we acknowledge and own it, and
have very good Authority for it; for the things of God knows no man, but by the
Spirit of God, as says the Apostle: And this is the same Infallible Spirit,
which the Holy Men of Old had; by which, first, they were informed of the Will
of God, and then thereby enabled to do it.

Ibid. p. 101. They know very well, that the giving of vile and contemptible
Names to any Writing, can be for no other end, but to render the Contents of
such Writing -- contemptible.

Did the Prophet Isaiah, then, render the Contents of the Ceremonial Law
contemptible, when (as I have shown p. 154.) he compared the Jews Sacrifices,
to slaying a Man, and cutting off a Dogs Neck, and their burning of Incense to
Blessing an Idol.

Ibid. p. 102. As to themselves, they scorn the Titles of Elders, Popes or
Bishops, or that their Meetings should be called by such contemptible Names, as
Courts, Sessions or Synods. --

The Reason why, in the Yearly Meeting Epistle, Slight and Contemptible Names
and Expressions, concerning either Men's or Women's Meetings, or the Testimonies
given forth by the Spirit and Power of God, through faithful Friends, or such
whom the Lord has made Elders in the service of the Church are blamed; is,
because they do strike at the Spirit and Power of God, by which those things
were appointed; and are designed, by them that use them, to bring those Things,
Persons and Services into Contempt. But no Expressions have been used by us,
concerning the Doctrines, or Holy Instructions contained in Holy Scriptures, to
that end, or with that intent. But whatever has been said of the Scriptures,
that is by our Adversaries thought mean, has been only intended to reprove and
bring back to the Spiritual use of 'em, those that have almost deify'd the
Letter.

Ibid. p. 104. But in all their Preachings and Writings before 1660. wherever
they had occasion to name the Holy Scriptures, they seldom or never gave them
that Epithet of Holy or Sacred --

Both before, and since the Year, 1660. Our Friends have frequently given, as
Distinctive Epithets, denoting the true and just Value and Esteem due to the
Scriptures as the Snake can do: And if in his, or other our Adversaries
occasions to name them, it is Emphasis sufficient to say, (as he and they most
frequently have done) The Scriptures; why is it not so in us? Do our
Adversaries do greater Honor to them, when they falsely say, we undervalue the
Seriptures, than we do when we say we do Highly Value The Scriptures. Has not
the word The as great an Emphasis from our Mouths or Pens as from theirs? I
think it has. But if the word The has either no Emphasis, or not sufficient;
then the Snake, as well as all former Adversaries, does seldom either give them
any, or sufficient Emphasis: Because they have most frequently only said the
Scriptures. But further, Our Friends have frequently said before 1660. The
Scriptures of Truth, The Holy Scriptures, etc. of which, (for I spare not time
to turn over Books for this purpose) there occurs at present R. Farnsworth and
T. Speed, without trouble of Seeking, who have so expressed them. So that this
false Insinuation of the Snakes is refuted.

Ibid. p. 104. And other Quakers did justify this Beast, and said, That he
might as well come into the Church with that Filth in his Hands, as the
Minister with a Bible.

If S. Eccles had, as Isaiah, a Command from the Lord to Go Naked, etc. (and
the Lord has no where bound himself, by promise, that he would give no such
Command to any of his Servants in the Gospel Dispensation) he had, in that his
obedience his reward. But for what the Snake has last alleged, I demand his
proof, and then that may be considered, if he can show any.

P. 105. Upon the 10th of August, 1681. at the Quaker Meeting House, in
Grace Church Street, one who had a greater reverence than the rest for the Holy
Scriptures, brought a Bible with him; and before the Meeting was gathered, or
their Preachers come -- he being in the Gallery, read part of a Chapter --
which so much moved their Indignation, that one of the Chief of them snatched
the Bible out of his hand, and -- thrust him -- all along the Gallery, down
several steps; Rich Smith was present and did attest it.

The Person, Richard Smith, said to be the Attestator, as above, the Reader
will (I think with me) conclude to be one of our Friends, or who does at least
frequent our Meetings. Now I know but one of that Name, and I have enquired of
him, and he declares as follows.

Whereas Richard Smith is said to have attested the Story above; and it seeming
to me, that the Relator ( The Snake in the Grass) does thereby intend the said
Richard Smith to be a Quaker. I do Declare, First, That I know no Person a
Quaker, named Richard Smith, in London, or the Suburbs, but my self. Secondly,
That I did never in my whole Life see any such action, as is above related, to
be done in Grace-Church-Street-Meeting. Nor did I ever attest to any such
Action,

As witness my Hand, Rich. Smith.

Ibid. p. 107. But to come to further Evidence, and give you even a Judicial
Determination of the Quakers -- about the Year, 1658. -- Thomas Padle accused
John Chandler -- at a Meeting of the Quakers at the Bull and Mouth, up one pair
of Stairs. I give it thus particularly, that the Friends may not pretend
Ignorance; and because I have Eye and Ear Witnesses to produce, if it be in the
least disputed -- for saying, That he preferred the Scriptures, before the
Friends Books; which accusation, John Chandler did not deny, -- but being
reproved for it by the Meeting -- said -- "The People urged him to it. -- One
Principal Reason they gave for preference of their own Books to the Scriptures,
was, That though the People had had the Scriptures many years, yet they had not
Converted so many to the Truth, as Their Books had done.

It is a strange degree of Assurance, which this Snake frequently shows, in
boldly and falsely averring that in Gross, and in the Lump, of which he can give
no Proof; thus in p. 62, 63, etc. foregoing, I have shown the nullity of that
Charge of his, which he says was proved in Legal Form, etc. against G. F. and
others: And that both He and They accused, were discharged, because the Matter
was not proved, as the Snake falsely has alleged, of which see more in the
place referred to. And now here with like false Assurance, he says, upon the
Credit of Eye and Ear Witness (such as himself) that the Quakers gave a
Judicial Determination and Solemn Judgment against the Scriptures. Yet shows
not, what this Determination and Judgment was. Which if there had been any such
thing, no doubt but his Witness would have obtained a Copy of the Determination
and Judgment, so Judicially and Solemnly made and given, as well as have
preserved any of the Reasons on which that Judgment was grounded. But of this
so necessary a thing, as a Copy of that Judgment is, We have not one Syllable;
the true Reason of which is, because there was no Original from whence to take
it. But then why the Snake should baulk at that, and not forge a whole Paper;
and give it the name of an Original, as well as forge the Title, viz. Judicial
Determination and Solemn Judgment, or as well, as he has forged that
Slanderous and False Charge, in a matter of this same nature against R. S. of
Wansworth, which thou will find in Sect. 8. hereafter, or as well as he has
with no less impudence (to use his own Term) related diverse other things which
have no footstep of Truth in them, of which the Reader may herein find many
Instances.

But after all, I also have Eye and Ear Witnesses to produce in opposition to
his Eye and Ear Witness, who do say, That that Meeting, wherein the Difference
between T. P. and J. C. was mentioned, did not give any Determination, nor any
Judgment against the Scriptures is as falsely said by the Snake. Nor did that
Meeting give any such reason as is mentioned by the Snake, or any other reason
why Books writ by any of our Friends, should have the preference to the
Scriptures of Truth.

Ibid. p. 108, 109. Edward Buroughs, p. 47. of his Works, determines clearly,
that the Scriptures are not now of any Authority at all to us at this Day.

Whether this be E. B's Determination, or the Snake's, pray Reader consider the
following true Quotation from p. 47. of E. B's Works. That is no Command from
God to me, what he Commands to another, neither did any of the Saints which we
read of in Scripture, act by the Command which was to another, not having the
Command to themselves. I Challenge to find an Example for it? They obeyed every
one their own Commands: One was sent to Baptize and to Preach the Gospel:
Another was sent not to Baptize but to Preach the Gospel; and thou J. Turner,
or any other who goes to Duty, as you call it, by Imitation from the Letter
without, which was Commands to others, in your own Wills and Time; your
Sacrifice is not accepted, but is an Abomination to the Lord; for you go
without the moving of the Spirit, in your own Wills and Strength, which God
Hates.

This Quotation the Snake has picked in two or three places, leaving out the
particular Instances and Examples, and put it together, that so it might answer
what he has boldly and falsely asserted as above of E. B. as before p. 160. I
have detected him in the same manner, upon this point, abusing of W. Penn.

Now, Reader, pray consider the Snake says, E. B. has determined the Scriptures
to be of no Authority to us at this Day; because he says, the particular
Commands from God to the Apostles, are not sufficient warrant for us to do the
same things, which they were so particularly commanded to do: But to do the
work of the Gospel, we must know the movings of the Holy Ghost to call us to it.

And now I will show thee, that if this be to determine clearly that the
Scriptures are not of any Authority at all to us at this Day. Then according to
the Snake's words, the Church of England have clearly so determined. For he
showing what Enthusiasm she owns, p. 316. speaking of their Church Offices,
says, This is the first Question demanded by the Bishop from those who are to
be ordained: Do you trust that you are inwardly moved by the Holy Ghost, to
take upon you this Office? -- Do you think that you are truly called according
to the Will of the Lord Jesus Christ?

Here is according the Snake's perversion, a clear Determination against the
Scripture; for if the Commands from God to the Apostles, were sufficient not
for themselves only, but for all succeeding times, to call them to the Work of
the Ministry; what occasion is there for the Bishop to ask, or any to know,
whether they are thereunto inwardly moved by the Holy Ghost? Or that they
thereunto are truly called according unto the Will of Jesus Christ? To do
thus, can it be faulty in us? and do we thereby deny the Scriptures, and yet
the Church of England not thereby deny them?

Ibid. p. 110. And therefore it was no strange thing to hear G. W. in his
Serious Apology, p. 49. Prefer not only their own Writings, but their Ex
Tempore Preachments, and even all whatsoever they speak, upon any account, to
the Holy Scriptures.

It would raise some Admiration in a Man, to find one (in his words, p. 16.)
thus Boldly and Impudently asserting so notorious a Lie, as the experience of
all that knows us must know this to be; Not only Writings and Ex Tempore
Preachments, but all whatsoever we say on any account, are preferred to the
Scriptures. So that according to the Snake, what is spoken in Common
Conversation, in the transacting our Civil Affairs, and Business of Life, is
thus preferred.

Reader, I cannot here omit, by a serious Appeal to thy self, on the great
Injustice and Falsehood of this Adversary: And if thou art one, who by
Conversation with us, or our Books, have any knowledge of us, thou do know
the Charge of this Adversary is false: And I do truly declare, that our Value
and Esteem for the Books of the Old and New Testament, is much greater than for
any other Book exstant in the World; and this G. W. does freely own, and has
declared as much. So also in this particular, I will show his falsehood and
perversion of G. W's words in the place quoted, which the Snake has injuriously
curtailed.

They are these, That which was spoken from the Spirit of Truth in any, is of
as great Authority, as the Scriptures, or Chapters are; and greater (intending
as received, and proceeding immediately from that Spirit, and spoken in the
sense thereof) as Christ's words were of greater Authority, when he spoke, than
the Pharisees reading the Letter, and they (in whom that Spirit speaks not)
-- and their speaking we deny.

So that according to G. W's words, that speaking or reading of the Scriptures,
which is denied to be of Authority; is, when spoken or read by such, in whom
that Spirit speaks not that gave forth the Scriptures, and we have good
Authority for this; for thus our Savior, Mat. 22.24. denied the Sadduces, when
they spoke and repeated the Law, mentioned Deuteronomy 25.5. and thus he also
denied the Devil, Mat. 4.6. when the Devil repeated the Prophesy of the
Psalmist, 91.11. and thus also he denied the Pharisees, of which are diverse
Instances.

Ibid. p. 110, 111. Mary Tucker, a Quaker Servant to W. Reyman, a Barber now
living in Queen Street, Cheapside, but formerly in Bread-street, where this
Mary, then his Servant, took the Bible, and in the open Day, publicly burnt
it, against the Church in Bread-street, to show her Zeal.

About 40. Years since, one Mary Tucker, then Servant to W. Reyman, not in
Zeal, but discomposure of Mind, did one Morning early, before her Master or
Mistress were stirring, burn the Bible: For which act, she was not only
reproved by them, but also by sundry of our Friends, and disowned, and among
others concerned herein, to reprove and disown this Mary Tucker, E. B. (as W.
Reyman does testify) was one; which by the way, Reader, is another Evidence
that E. B. had the Scripture in great Authority and Esteem. As it is also no
small mark of the Snake's Injustice, to relate a Lie, and say, that no Censure
was passed upon this Mary Tucker, when he might have been informed to the
contrary by W. Reyman, the place of whose abode he knew so well: But we find he
is rather willing to relate a Lie, than either know, or knowing speak the
Truth; not only in this Instance of Mary Tucker: And the Censure past upon her,
which he might, with little trouble have been informed of (so much as this
Snake hids in the City.) And in the Instance of Solomon Eccles, p. 124, 125.
foregoing; but also in diverse other before and hereafter to be given, wherein
he has affirmed egregious falsehoods; not from any necessity he was under to
depend upon false reports, but from a base Inclination in him, to shun the
Truth and to hate Justice: For had not this been his hinderance, he might with
the trouble of a few Lines, and the small additional Charge of the Penny-Post,
to W. Reyman of Queen Street, N. Marks of Cheapside, R. Scoryer of Wansworth,
(hereafter to be spoken) etc. have discharged these out of his Libel; and by
such other, not chargable nor troublesome (further than it is so to him, that
we should be in the right) means, he might have spared the rest.

Ibid. p. 111. Pursuant to this their Principle, in their Disputes among
themselves, they appeal to their own Writings instead of the Holy Scriptures.

Pursuant to this Snake's Practice, he has affirmed a notorious Lie; I dare
him to give any Proof that may be allowed by Impartial Men, that ever we did so
appeal. It can be no more Proof, to quote a Book, wherein G. Keith has said so
of us, than it is for the Snake to quote, Julian, Porphery or Celsus, for Proof
that the Primitive Christians were in the wrong, or to quote his own Opinion,
for Proof that the present Government is so. But if the Snake will confute the
Answer made to that Book of G. K's which he quotes, that may be considered and
replied to.

SECT. VII. His Charge of Idolatry refuted, and the Quotations restored from
his Perversions.
THat our Belief concerning the Light or Holy Spirit of Jesus Christ in Man, is
according to Scripture, I have before shown, and how that by a sincere
Obedience to it, it will lead to God and Christ whence it comes; and to have
true Agreement and Unity with the Declarations from the same Holy Spirit, which
are recorded in the Scriptures of Truth; and also with all the Manifestations
of the same Holy Spirit, wheresoever and in whomsoever appearing: For as God is
one, so the Holy Spirit leads all that obey it, into Unity and Oneness; and to
account worthy of double Honor, the Elders that rule well; especially they who
labor in the Word and Doctrine, 1 Timothy 5.17.

And in this Section I shall show, that what is by this Adversary, called, The
Quakers Idolatry, is not so, but only owing to his perversion, for as Truth
leads to give Honor to whom Honor is due. So it also leads to account of no
Man above what we ought.

Ibid. p. 112. They think it not Honor enough to stand before the Throne of
God, But G. Fox places them upon the Throne, p. 31. (I suppose Great Mystery,
for he mentions not the Book) The Quakers are in the Power of God, and in the
Authority of the Lamb, above all Houses, and -- are upon the Throne.

I shall first here detect the Snake's Evil Practice in mangling this
Quotation, by giving it as it is in the page quoted, and afterward speak to
the Doctrine of it.

To the first. The Priest ( G. Fox's Opponent) had said, That the Quakers
scorns to creep into Houses, (meaning when persecuted.)

To which G. F. replies. This does not agree with the rest of his Company, who
say they do Creep into Houses. The Quakers are in the Power of God, and in the
Authority of the Lamb, and into Houses creep not, but are upon the Throne; but
you that be in the Form that Deny the Power, creep into Houses.

These, Reader, are his words, and their sense is as plain; and nothing but
Envy and Ignorance (I suppose the first) in the Snake, could cavil at them or
it: For who knows not, that the word Throne, in Religious Matters, is a
metaphorical expression, denoting Spiritual Power and Dominion. Christ
promised, Mat. 19.28. That they who followed him in the Regeneration, should
sit upon Thrones. And to him that overcomes, will I grant (says he) to sit
with me in my Throne, etc. Rev. 3.21. And John says, he saw Thrones, and they
who sat on them, Rev. 20.4. And after all the Exception that the Snake may
take at it, it is true, that as many as through the Power and Authority of the
Spirit of Christ in them, do follow him in Regeneration, they shall sit upon
Thrones, metaphorically speaking, that is, in the Power of God, over that,
which heretofore while in Disobedience, they were in Captivity to.

Ibid. p. 113. The Snake quotes part of a Letter, said to be writ by G. F. but
for any proof that he has given, it may either be adulterated by the Snake, or
some Apostate, or forged by them. If they were G. F's, why did not the Snake
give the whole Letter? To what purpose has he made a break in it? And what is
left out at it. The Editors of the Journal had no Reason why they should have
left out or altered, (as p. 114. he says they have those words [ My Kingdom is
not of this World,] and those words, [ who is the Son of God,] which need not
have given offense if they had been in. For they whom Jesus Christ has washed
from their Sins, in his own Blood, are by him made Kings and Priests unto God,
Rev. 1.6. and to them, it is their Father's good pleasure to give the Kingdom,
( Luke 12.32.) which is not of this World. And for those last words, said by
the Snake, to be omitted; and instead of which, he says are added, [ I set my
Name;] what room or place was there for all that to come after his Name was
set? which the Snake has given and omitted with a --

Ibid. p. 114. In a Book called, News coming out of the North, p. 15. G. Fox
says, I am the Door that ever was, the same Christ, Yesterday, to Day, and for
ever.

Reader, if now upon view of G. Fox's words, they shall plainly appear to be by
him spoken of Christ, thou will, I doubt not, agree with me, that the injustice
of this Adversary must be very great, who has of set purpose traduced and
perverted G. F's words, insinuating, that he spoke them of himself, when in
truth it is no such thing. This will best appear by giving the Quotation with
the Marginal Scriptures, from the page quoted by the Snake, and is as follows.

P. 15. Now to all dear Ones, and dear Hearts I speak; The same Seed which is
Christ, the same Spirit takes upon it now as ever was, the same World is now as
ever was, the same Temptations, and the same Devils; and the same Worship of
the World, twining into one another, Form and Color: And Jesus Christ is the
Way, John 10.3.14.6.
the Truth and the Life, he is the Door that all must pass through, and he is
the Porter that opens it: I am the same Door that ever was, the same Christ
Yesterday, to Day, and for Ever. -- Look at the Captain Jesus Christ, who has
passed before, who was tempted; the Captain of our Salvation, and the same
temptation to Worship the Devil; and if thou will Worship the Devil, thou shall
have the Glory of the World, Luke 22.28. Mark 1.13. Mat. 4.6, 7. John 7.49.
but if thou will not bow down and Worship the Devil, thou shall have none of
the Worlds Glory, but be called a Devil as Christ was, and be called a Madman
as he was.

This, Reader, with much more of the like Import which I have omitted, G. F.
does there speak, concerning the Power of Jesus Christ, to preserve Men out of
Temptation, and the workings of the Devil to destroy Men by them. Yet this, by
the Snake, is accounted part of the Quakers Idolatry. The Snake's Quotation
from the Introduction to G. F's Battle-Door, I have already replied to, p. 149.
and therefore need not say more to it here.

The Snake 's next Quotation, (p. 114.) is from The Title Page of News coming
out of the North; from whence he insinuates, and charges G. F. with saying of
himself, that he was prophesied of. His Quotation is this, Written from the
Mouth of the Lord, from one who is Naked, and stands Naked before the Lord,
Clothed with Righteousness, whose Name is not known in the World; risen up out
of the North, which was prophesied of, but now is fulfilled. ( here the Snake
leaves off, but G. F. continues) The Army is coming out of the North against
you Terrible Ones, whose Weapons are not Carnal but Spiritual.

G. F.

Now from G. F's words it is plain, that those words [which was prophesied of]
relate to that Prophecy of Jeremy the 31.8. and not to himself, or any Person;
and are only an allusion to those Prophesies of the H. Prophets, concerning the
Armies of the North, which were to fight against, and overcome the Jews, and
other Nations, for their Disobedience and Wickedness. Which as they literally
did do, so (by a usual allusion) the People fulfilling this Prophecy, Jer.
31.8. will, through the Assistance of God's Grace (their Weapons being
Spiritual, not Carnal) go on in the Warfare of the Gospel-Day.

The Snake's next Quotation (p. 114.) is from Several Petitions answered, etc.
p. 60. And he gives it thus.

My Name is Covered from the World, and the World knows not me, nor my Name. G.
F.

Now who would not take this to be, either all that G. F. had here spoken, or
else the words last delivered? But, Reader, it is neither of these, for G. F.
is subscribed at the bottom of several lines more than these the Snake has
given; and are continued by G. F. thus. The Earthly Name, the Earthly Man
knows, and he is afraid of Reproach, and cannot bear it upon the Earthly Name;
he that overcomes has the New Name, and knows it. --

Now, Reader, what is this but the sense of those Scriptures? 1 Pet. 4.14. Rev.
2.17. and 3.12. which whether this Adversary did not know, or had wilfully
omitted to consider, are yet sufficient to show the falsity of his Charge of
our Idolatry herein.

The Snake's next Quotations are from an Adversaries Book, which was answered.

Yet such is his Injustice, that he takes no notice of the Answer, but objects,
as if they had not been replied to; wherefore it deserves not to be taken
notice of, till he shall have replied to that Answer, and disproved it. And any
Man may, with equal Justice, quote the Books of the Romanists, to prove the
Church of England Schismatical, Heretical, etc. without taking notice of the
Answers written to them Charges. But whether such practice would be reasonable
or not; not only the Agrieved Party, but all impartial Men can readily
determine. One of these Quotations is from part of a Letter, writ by Josiah
Cole, to G. Fox, and which had been formerly objected against by John Faldo,
and other Adversaries; to which Objections W. P. did Answer, in two several
Books, one Entitled, Judas and the Jews, the other Entitled, The Invalidity
of J. Faldo 's Vindication. Of the first of these Books, the Snake takes so
much notice, (p. 115.) as to say, that W. P. does in p. 44. Excuse and Justify
Josiah Cole in that Letter; but has taken no pains to refute the Arguments, nor
any notice at all of the Book last named, in which W. P. does justify it; but
only, Serpent-like would deceive his Reader, by giving the Words in old Black
English Letters; as if that was Argument sufficient to show, that the sense of
the Words were Black and Idolatrous. But that they are not, I shall, Reader,
entreat thy patience to weigh and consider the five following Paragraphs, which
are the words of that Letter, together with W. P's Defense and Explanation of
them, as they are in his Book, Invalidity, etc. p. 354, 355.

First, That he should call G. Fox, the Father of many Nations; but what is
this more than to say, that Men of several Nations have been begat unto Christ
through him? Thus Paul was a Father to the Romans, Corinthians, etc. 1 Cor.
4.15. For though ye have ten thousand Instructors, yet ye have not many
Fathers; for in Christ have I begotten you.

Secondly, That his Life has reached through his Children to the Isles afar
off, to the begetting of many again unto a lively Hope. But what of all this?
The Life of God is one in all; Paul lived by the Life of Christ, and so did
Peter; Paul was present in Spirit, though absent in Body, 1 Cor. 5.3, 4.

Thirdly, That Generations to come should call him blessed: But is not the
Memory of the Just blessed? Prove. 10.7. and did not God by Isaiah promise
concerning Israel, I will make thee an Eternal Excellency, and the Joy of many
Generations? Isai. 60.57. This belongs to G. Fox, J. Cole, and every Child of
God; yea, and J. Faldo too, if he were so good as he should be.

Fourthly, That his Being and Habitation was in the Power of the Highest: And
so it should be; for that is the Habitation of every Child of God; for others
dwell in the Power of the World. In short, we are exhorted to stand fast in the
Power of Godliness; and we read that it was the End of the Evangelical Ministry
to turn People from the Power of Satan unto the Power of God, which is the
Power of the Highest.

Fifthly, That he Ruled and Governed in Righteousness: This is but what Paul
exhorts Timothy to do in the Church of Christ, as both his Epistles inform us
at large; Every Elder, Overseer or Pastor in the Church of Christ is bound to
do so; If J. F. can prove he does otherwise, he may then charge him with
uncomely walking, but not J. Cole with Blasphemy for saying, that a good Man
governs in Righteousness.

The Snake's next Instance are some pieces of a Letter, p. 115. which he says,
was writ by John Audland; these I shall dismiss at present, because at the end
of his Libel, he pretends to give it entire, Spelt and Pointed according to the
Original: And I rather choose to consider what he calls the entire Letter, than
these parts of it; and therefore proceed to his next Instance, p. 116. which is
a Quotation from a Sheet, Entitled, The Quakers Challenge, p. 6. wherein the
Snake says, Solomon Eccles says these words of G. Fox. It was said of Christ,
that he was in the World, and the World was made by him; and the Word knew him
not: So it may be said of this true Prophet (George Fox) whom John said he was
not.

Here the Snake takes some pains to wrest, pervert and misconstrue these words
of Solomon Eccles, contrary to a Sober Explanation given of them by G.
Whitehead, in his Book Serious Search, p. 58. But has knowingly omitted to
accept, or refute Solomon Eccles his own explanation of them words: Contrary to
what he has in the like case, p. 195. said concerning G. F. viz. You will best
know his meaning from himself. Which, if true, why did not this Snake, either
accept or refute Solomon Eccles his meaning, which is given from himself, and
mentioned in p. 59. of Serious Search, abovenamed; and also in p. 75. of Judas
and the Jews, likewise before-named; and which for the Readers satisfaction I
here subjoin? I did not say, Nor did I ever believe, that the World was made by
G. F. but by Christ, who was in the World, and the World knew him not: So that
I say, it may be said of G. F. the World knows him not, though he be in the
World, as was said of Christ, He was in the World, though not of the World, and
the World knew him not: And he said of his Followers, Ye are not of the world,
as I am not of the world, and I have chosen you out of the world, John 17.16.
and 15.19.

Now, Reader, what Faith or Honesty can we expect to find in an Adversary, who
with deep Hypocrisy and Injustice, shall thus wilfully pass over, and not
accept, or refute a Man's own explanation of his words? What is become of his
Great Charity, Real Kindness and Good Wishes; which in p. 2. he pretended to
have? We may safely conclude they have no more reality than the Tears of a
Crocodile, which Naturalists speak of.

We come now to Hearsay Stories, p. 117, 118. wherein he says, He has it from
Eyewitnesses, who have seen them fall down to him, and saying to him, Thou art
the Son of the Ever-living God, the King of Israel, all Nations shall worship
thee, etc. -- And kneeling to his Wife Margaret, gave her an Ora pro Nobis in
these words. O thou my Heavenly Mother, Pray to my Heavenly Father for me.
These Adorations were common to G. F. and that Blasphemous Valpoon took it
Gravely without any Reprehension.

I do here charge the Snake with a Notorious Lie, in saying that G. Fox did
with Delectation ever accept of any Adoration; or to be styled King of Israel,
etc. or that his Wife accepted of any such Ora pro nobis, as above; or that it
was given by any in true unity with us.

Ibid. p. 118. At another time, a She Preacher arose, etc.

To this Story, thus boldly asserted, the Snake offers no proof; and I do deny,
that any She Preacher (as the Snake floutingly speaks,) owned by us, did so
accost G. F. in any Public Meeting of ours.

Snake, p. 119. Let me here only observe what an uncouth and preposterous piece
of Humility it is to deny the Title or Civility of Master or the Hat, while, at
the same time they worship one another with Divine Honor.

Let me, Reader, here only observe the Profaneness and Falsehood of this
Adversary, in urging for Truth, false and hearsay Stories against us, and at
the same time decry, as preposterous and uncouth, the Precept of our Savior,
Mat. 23.8.

The Snake's next Instance (p. 120.) is a Quotation from a piece Entitled, The
Guilty Clergyman Vnvail'd, writ by Thomas Speed, and Printed 1657. from which
he picks these two Lines in p. 17. That you will by no means be thence
cleansed, but by the same Blood which you so cruelly shed. And says, They make
the Quakers Blood to be the Blood of Christ, by which we are saved.

To which false and scandalous Charge, the Man himself (Thomas Speed) who writ
that Book, being yet Living; he answers for Himself and Us as follows.

For the satisfaction of all Persons, whom it may concern, I do make this my
following Solemn Declaration, (viz.) 1. I never knew, nor ever heard of any
Person or People of what Persuasion in Religion soever, that were of so sordid,
nonsensical and sottish an Opinion, that the Blood of any (though the most
righteous of Mortals) was the Blood of Christ, the Son of God, by which Men are
saved.

2. I do, and ever did, with utter detestation, abhor any such blasphemous
Principle as to assert, that the Blood of the Quakers, or any other sort of
Men, is the Blood of Christ by which we are saved: Which in the Power of Truth
I do openly and boldly assert, to confront the Snake in the Grass, who herein
appears to to be the Child of the Father of Lies, who was a Murderer from the
Beginning.

Bristol the 10th Month, School. Thomas Speed.



The next, and last Quotation which the Snake makes ( Ibid. p. 120.) in this
Section, is from p. 22. of the Book last mentioned of T. Speed's, which is, a
Reproof and Testimony against false and flattering Titles given to men. Upon
which the Snake bids, See what Tender Consciences are here! who, at the same
time wipe their Mouths, and excuse all the bloody Blasphemies beforementioned.

And I, Reader, may here in fit place, desire thee to see and consider, not how
Tender, but how hardened and feared is the Conscience of this our Adversary, who
has against knowledge, and against the true and plain meaning of our words,
and upon bare hearsay, frequently in this, as also his other Sections, accused
us falsely of matters, which we never did, spoke, or intended; which will also
be further manifested in the ensuing Sections, to which I now proceed.

SECT. VIII. Concerning Our Belief, in the Holy Three that bear Record in
Heaven.
IT has been an Objection often made, sometimes foolishly, sometimes
enviously, but always falsely; That we deny The Holy Three mentioned, 1 John
5.7. which bear Record in Heaven: Because we cannot but think the word [Person]
too gross to express them. We own their Distinction, in all the Instances of
it, recorded in Holy Writ; and have a thousand times declared our sincere
Belief in Almighty God, the Creator of all things, and in Jesus Christ his
Eternal Son, by whom all things were made, and in the Holy Spirit proceeding
from the Father and the Son. Yet this, because it is not given in the Terms of
Athanasius, or the Nicene Council, has been unreasonably refused as
insufficient. This refusal were the less strange and unreasonable, were it not
in Persons who pretend the Scriptures to be their only Rule of Faith, etc. But
as it is the refusal of such Persons, it is certainly a violent contradiction
in them, to damn as Heretical, an Article of Faith delivered in the very words
of that Rule. But be their Fault, in this matter, what it will, we are not
therefore to be moved from believing, That the Holy Spirit, by which it was
dictated, (as is acknowledged) did, and does, know all the weaknesses of men,
and the Designs of Satan; and has accordingly fenced the Article from his
Subtilty, and explained it to our Capacities. And I take it to be a great
aggravation of the former contradiction in this Adversary, (and our other
Opposers herein) that they would upon less Evidence of Truth, and a
Determination not Infallible, (which they will not affirm, either that of
Athanasius, or the Nicene Council to be) infallibly press their
Exemplifications made to the Article.

That such Practices are wrong, all Parties in their turns, as their several
Interests and Necessities have pressed them; have declared, and many excellent
Arguments by diverse Men, have been urged against it: I shall content my self
only with some part of what Jeremy Tailor, late Bishop of Down and Connor in
Ireland, has said on this Subject, in that excellent Treatise of his,
Entitled, Liberty of Prophesying, p. 47.

For it is (says he) most considerable, that although in reason, every clause in
the Creed should be clear, and so inopportune and unapt to variety of
Interpretation, that there might be no place left for several Senses, or
Variety of Expositions: Yet, when they thought fit to insert some Mysteries
into the Creed ( that called the Apostles) which in Scripture were expressed in
so Mysterious Words, that the last and most explicit sense would still be
latent; yet they who (if ever any did) understood all the Senses and Secrets of
it; thought it not fit to use any Words but the Words of Scripture,
particularly in the Articles of Christ descending into Hell, and sitting at the
right Hand of God; to show us, that those Creeds are best which keep the very
words of Scripture; and that Faith is best, which has greatest Simplicity; and
that it is better in all cases humbly to Submit, than curiously to inquire and
prey into the Mystery hid under the Cloud, and to Hazard our Faith, by
improving our Knowledge: If the Nicene Fathers had done so too, possibly the
Church would not have repented it.

And indeed the experience the Church had afterward, showed that the Bishops
and Priests were not satisfied in all circumstances, nor the Schism (of Arius)
appeased, nor the Persons agreed, nor the Cannons accepted, nor the Article
understood, nor any thing right: But when they were overborn with Authority,
which Authority when the Scales turned, did the same Service and Promotion to
the contrary.

Thus he, and as I doubt not but the Truth and Reason of his words, will weigh
with the Impartial Reader; so his Character of Bishop, ought to be of some
weight with the Snake.

Snake p. 121. The Quakers and Socinians acknowledge a Three, but deny a
Trinity; which is to confess the same thing in English, and to deny it in
Latin: For Trinitas is only Latin for Three. But the meaning is, they would not
have the Three in Heaven, to be Three Persons. Though they cannot make sense of
what Three they are, if not Three Persons.

What the Socinians acknowledge, is not my business to inquire: But for our
selves, We acknowledge the Three mentioned in Holy Writ, which bear Record in
Heaven; and we need not the Pedantry of the Snake to Translate the word into
Latin. And the sense we make of the Three so bearing Record, is the same which
is declared by the Holy Ghost; and when the Snake shall show, that the Holy
Ghost has declared them Three Persons, We will not fail so to express them.

Ibid. p. 121, 122. And the Quakers, who own the Divinity of Christ, are under
greater difficulties than the Socinians who deny the Divinity of Christ. For if
Christ be God, and that there is but one Person in the Godhead, it must
necessarily follow, that God the Father was Incarnate and dyed: And that Christ
was his own Father, to whom he prayed upon the Cross.

We own Christ, both as Eternal God, and as the Son of Mary; yet are under no
such difficulties as the Snake does falsely suggest: For we cannot express the
Godhead, by the word [Person] having no such Example in Scripture; and our
Belief being according to that, and expressed in the words of it, It must
necessarily follow, that the Snake does account the Declaration of Holy Writ in
this Article to have many Absurdities: Of which, let him clear himself if he
can, as also of inclining to Polytheism, which his words do seem to favor.

Ibid. p. 122. G. F. opposes Christopher Wade, for saying, That the Holy Ghost
was a Person, and that there was a Trinity of three Persons before Christ was
Born. It seems by this they do not acknowledge that there were Three in Heaven
before Christ was Born.

It does not only seem, but plainly appear, that this Snake is a Notorious
Liar: Holy Writ says, 1 John 5.7. There are three that bear Record in Heaven.
It does not express them, either by the word, Trinity or Persons; does it
therefore seem, that Holy Writ does not acknowledge that there were three in
Heaven before Christ was Born: Or that the Three in Heaven (as the Snake
Blasphemously does suggest) must be Three Creatures?

What G. F. opposed in Christopher Wade (in this Case) was the Unscripturalness
of his Language, which will best appear from G. F's one Words, not curtaild as
in the Snake; they are these, Great Mystery, p. 246. Thou know not him that
is in the Father, and the Father in him, Glorified with the Father before the
World began: And the Scriptures does not tell people of a Trinity nor Three
Persons, but the Common Prayer Mass Book speak of Three Persons, brought in by
thy Father the Pope: And the Father, Son and Holy Spirit was always one.

Ibid. p. 122, 123. The Snake shows (as himself says) what Muggleton did hold,
in that Blasphemous Whimsy of the Deputy-ship of Elijah, etc. and says of it:
It terrifies my very Soul while I repeat such dreadful and senseless Blasphemy.

But I am well assured that this Snake was under greater Terror of Soul, when
seized by the King's Messenger at Lidd in Kent. For, To repeat such dreadful
and senslless Blasphemy. He had no Necessity, was under no Constraint, but that
it pleased him to think, that he might slantingly throw it at us, though both him
and it we do utterly deny. But it was not in his Power to avoid being seized by
the Messenger, though he afterward found it in his Power to run away from him.
(Of which in its proper place.)

Ibid. p. 123. How far the Quakers differ from Muggleton, in what is here told
(excepting the Deputy-ship of Elijah) will appear by their allowing no
distinction between the Father and the Son.

It is an Abominable falsehood, G. F. did not say, there was no Distinction
between the Father and the Son, but denied such Distinction, as that Priest
contended for; and if the Snake think good; Let him openly declare, whether he
will stand by, and own, that Distinction for which the Priest did contend, and
which G. Fox did oppose: What the Priest did affirm, was this, as given in
Great Mystery, p. 293. The Father is a Distinct Incommunicable Being from the
Son, and the Son a Distinct Incommunicable Being from the Father, and the Holy
Ghost a Distinct Incommunicable Being from the Son.

See Reader, had not G. Fox reason to oppose this Polytheistical Doctrine, of
Separation and Incommunication; which plainly makes a Triumvirate of the Deity;
and thereby destroys not only the Simplicity, but the Foundation of Faith. And
this will happen, so long as Men will Hazard their Faith to improve their
Knowledge: And curiously inquire into what will still remain a Mystery; and not
be content with such Declaration of it, as we are Infallibly assured (in Holy
Writ) is according to the Mind of God, and sufficient for the necessities of
Men.

But to proceed, there needs not an Ingenious Stickler to show what G. F. did
oppose, but there wants an Ingenious Stickler (unless the Snake think himself
so) to reconcile the Priests words which I have above quoted, to the Holy
Scripture, which he pretends to be his rule, for at present they are as
contrary to it, as Light to Darkness.

I am not so much surprised to find this Snake p. 124. saying of George Fox. He
was a very Sorrowful beginner of a Religion, and could neither be separated nor
distinguished from a Tool, which Knaves do work with, called a F -- l. As to
find him so cautiously clipping the word Fool: Because it is greater Modesty
and Caution than he uses toward him in other places, where he calls him,
Valpoon, George Magus, and says he was one of poor understanding, and had an
Immoderate degree of Dullness. But after all this, his Serpentine Modesty; or
rather (as himself expresses it, p. 198) wicked and hateful Eubullition of
Soul, George Fox did herein justly and warrantably oppose that Distinction and
Incommunication in the Deity, which the Priest did as above contend for.

But again, he is angry with G. F. in Great Mystery, p. 246. Where (the Snake
says) he disputes against Christopher Wade for saying, God the Father never
took upon him Humane Nature.

But he is so far from replying to G. F's answer to Christopher Wade, that he
gives but three words of it, though the answer does consist of more than so many
lines and is as follows.

Great Mystery, p. 246. Answ. Contrary to the Scripture, which says, God was
in Christ reconciling the World unto himself. And art Ignorant of the Great
Mystery, God manifest in the Flesh; and his name is called the Everlasting
Father. As for the Word Humane, which is from the Ground, it comes from thy own
Knowledge which is earthly; and Christ took upon him the Seed of Abraham and
David according to the Flesh, and this is Scripture Language.

And if the Snake can show that it is not so, it will be better to confute the
whole, than to nibble, Rat like, at three words of it. And this brings me to
the end of this short Section.

SECT. IX. Concerning our Belief of the Divinity and Incarnation of Christ.
ACcording to what has been already spoken in the foregoing Sections,
occasionally, concerning the Divinity and Incarnation of Christ. I do here, of
set purpose, declare it as a Truth, which now is, and always has been (since
we were a People) believed and declared by us: That The Word which was in the
Beginning with God, by which all things were made; did, in the fullness of time,
according to the appointment of the Father, take Flesh, and was born of the
Virgin Mary, and that, in that Body of Flesh, The Fullness of the Godhead dwelt
Bodily. Thus in the largness of the Expression, and sense of Scripture, we do
truly and sincerely own, according to John 1.14. That The Word was made Flesh,
etc. dwelt on the Earth, and took on him, not the Nature of Angels; not any
Aerial or Fantastical Body: But the Seed of Abraham and David; and this he did,
for the same reason and behoof, mentioned by the Apostle, Heb. 2.17, 18.
Wherefore in all things it behooves him to be made like unto his Brethren, that
he might be a Merciful and Faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, to
make reconciliation for the sins of the People. For in that he himself has
suffered, being tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted. For which
Infinite Love of Jesus Christ, in being both the Savior and Reconciler of Men
to God, through himself, we sincerely say with the Apostle, Heb. 3.3. For this
Man was counted worthy of more Glory than Moses, in as much as he who has
builded the House, has more Honor than the House.

Reader, These and all other Testimonies recorded in Holy Writ, testifying to
the Manhood, as well as the Divinity of Jesus Christ, we do, and always did
sincerely own: So that should our Books, in which is treated directly on this
Subject, and abundantly more largely and particularly, than here it can be, be
collected. They would make many Volumes. Yet such has been, and is the
Inveterate Malice of our Enemies, that our Writings (no more than our Words)
must not mean, what we so often and solemnly have declared we do mean by them.
But what our Adversaries will have them to mean, that so they may not seem to
want proofs for these their false and envious Charges. What now remains for us
to do? But still to persevere in our True and Scriptural Belief; and to repeat
our Testimonies of it to the envious Objections of Enemies, and for the
satisfaction of the Sober Enquirer. And this, Reader, thou will find, in reply
to the false and envious Suggestions and Perversions of the Snake herein, in
this Section.

Snake, p. 125. The Quakers Heresy in this is taken from the Socinians; they
say, Christ took Flesh, but no otherwise, as they explain it, than as Angels
assumed Bodies; or as he, Christ (or the Word) did Inspire, or Dwell in
Prophets, or Holy Men of old, etc. --

What the Socinians hold herein, I neither know, nor is it my business to now
enquire: But this I know, that we do believe that Christ the Word took Flesh,
but not as Angels assumed Bodies. His Body which he took of the Virgin, was
really, truly and properly Flesh; and had the gradual and natural Growth of
Mankind, from Infancy, to Childhood, to the State of a Young Man, and so to the
degree of Perfect Man; and being Perfect Man, did Dwell, Eat, Drink, and
Converse with his Disciples and with the Multitude; did Preach, did work
Miracles, was Tempted, did Hunger and Thirst, was crucified, and did Rise
again, and Ascend into Glory. Thus did never Angels assume Bodies: Those
Ministering Spirits, when they have assumed Bodies; it has been upon particular
and short, but special occasions, at once appearing, without the gradual
degrees of natural Growth, or subject to the Infirmities and Accidents of
natural Bodies; and it could not be otherwise, they being only Aerial, and not
truly Flesh and Blood, as was that Body of Jesus the Son of the Living God.

Ibid. p. 125. But they deny any proper Incarnation of Christ, that is, that he
was made Flesh, or that he and Jesus was one Person.

It Is false, we own that He (the Word) was made Flesh, properly Incarnate, and
was in the form of a Servant.

Ibid. p. 125. Yet they allow Jesus to be called Christ, from the dwelling of
Christ in him.

And if the Snake will not allow so much, he contradicts the Apostle, who says
of Jesus Christ, With him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead Bodily, Col.
2 9.

Ibid. p. 125. But for the same reason, they take the name Christ to
themselves, and say, that it belongs to them, as well as to Jesus, etc.

Jesus Christ, when he ascended up on High, he led Captivity Captive, and did
give Gifts unto Men; the Gifts of his Holy Spirit, of which the Apostle has
testified, Ephesians. 4.7. But unto every one of us is given Grace according to the
Measure of the Gift of Christ. Thus much we have often declared, and that
truly: But it is falsely said, and charged, that we take the Name of Christ to
our selves; or say, it belongs to us, in any other manner than in these and
other Scriptures is mentioned. We say, that Christ by his Ascension into Glory,
has given the Gift of his Spirit to Men, to which as they are obedient, they
will witness the Power of the Spirit of Christ in them, to bring every thought
into subjection; and when through the assistance of this Spirit, they thus have
got the Victory over their own Corruptions and Lusts, they will truly say, it
is no more I, but Christ in me: Yet the name Christ cannot hereby be supposed
to belong ^o such, nor was it ever said by any of us, that it did belong to us,
in such manner as to Jesus; for to him it belongs by Origination, to us only by
participation through him: For, he by partaking of our Nature, made thereby
Mankind partakers of his Spirit (I say this, with respect to the generality of
the Gospel Dispensation, for there were many particular Persons, not within the
Covenant of the Law, in the time of the Law, who had manifestations of the
Spirit of Christ) and in no other sense have we ever taken the name of Christ
to our selves.

Ibid. p. 125. They say that Christ did raise up the Body if Jesus from the
Dead; but they say not, that Christ did carry it up with him into Heaven.

What then, do we say he did with it? Why, that the Snake shows not, and good
reason there is for this his Silence: But Reader, I will tell thee, that we do
say and believe, according to Acts 1.9. When he had spoken these things, while
they beheld, he was taken up, and a Cl^ud received him out of their sight.

Ibid. p. 126. They say there is no other Christ but what is within them, they
allow him no Humans Body but their own.

When we say there is no other Christ than what is within us, we say true,
because Christ, as God, cannot be divided, and the Measure or Manifestation of
the Spirit of Christ in us, is not another, but a Manifestation of the fame
Christ, which did in fullness and Bodily dwell in the Man Jesus: But when the
Snake says, we allow him no Humane Body (if he means Manhood) he says false, as
I have before shown, and as is very often testified in many of our Books.

Ibid. p. 126. One of their Preachers prayed at a Solemn Meeting, "O God, who
was Crucified, Died, and Rose again in us!

We know very well, that G. Keith did accuse Thomas Fitzwater, of so praying at
a Meeting in Pensilvania: But unless the Snake has better proof than that mere
say so? As the story may prove false, so till it be shown that it be not so, it
needs now no further Answer, than that it is none of our Doctrine, nor approved
of by us.

Ibid. p. 126. And G. F. says, That if there be any other Christ, but he that
was Crucified within, he i^ the false Christ, quoted from Great Mystery p. 206.
This Christ that was Risen and Crucified within. -- Devils and Reprobates make
a talk of him without.

It is, Reader, horrid Injustice in this Snake, so foully to pick and pervert a
Man's words, as he here does G. F's; as if he did by these words, deny that
Christ Jesus who was Crucified at Jerusalem; which that he did not, I produce
both the Priest's Words, and his Answer, and offer them to thy consideration.

Great Mystery, p. 206. Priest. It is a Scripture of the Devil's making, to
apprehend this Crucified Christ within.

G. F. Now, I say, if there be any other Christ but he that was Crucified,
within, he is the false Christ: And the Scripture holds forth this, and the
Devil never made it; but he and his Messengers are against it. And he that has
not this Christ that was Risen and Crucified, within, is a Reprobate, though
Reprobates and Devils may make a talk of him without. Thus G. F. and his Words
are sound; and, as himself says, according to Scripture; for it is not another,
but the same Christ, who was Crucified by the Jews, and is now by his Spirit in
the Hearts of Men, reconciling them unto God; and in as many as obey, he is
Christ in them, the Hope of Glory* And them who rebel, do crucify unto
themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to open shame, Heb. 6.6. Rev.
11.8.

Ibid. p. 126. And he (G. F.) disputes against those who say, that the Man
Christ, that was Crucified, his Body is now in the presence of his Father, or
that Christ is absent from them (the Quakers) as Touching his Flesh; Great
Mystery, p. 210, 211.

G. F. does warrantably dispute against, and oppose those Priests who declared
Christ was absent from his People, because he is present with them in Spirit.
And as G. F. in the pages last above quoted, does say, That the Apostle
declares of Christ, that he is the Head of the Church; and are of his Flesh and
Bone, and sit with him in Heavenly Places; and Christ says they must eat his
Flesh, and he is in them. If the Snake will oppose this Scriptural Doctrine,
let him do it.

Ibid. p. 136. The Snake makes his Quotation from Great Mystery, p. 254. They
that profess a Christ without them, and another within them, here is two.

See, Reader, the falsity and perversion of the Snake in this Quotation, by the
following true one; Great Mystery, p. 254. They that profess a Christ without
them, have a Christ without them and another Christ within them, here is two.
For, if it be not the same Christ that ended all Types and Figures, and
Shadows; if it be not him that is within, they have not the Possession, the
Substance, nor the Comfort of the True Christ. What plainer can be spoken, to
show, that is the same, and not another Christ who suffered at Jerusalem, and
thereby ended the Law, and is now by his Spirit in the Hearts of his People?

Ibid. p. 126. Robert Gourdon was the first among them, that I find, who taught
the Orthodox Faith in this Point of the Divinity of Jesus.

Whether owned or not the Snake finds not, because he seeks amiss; and I am
sure he did not seek right, when he pretended to find R. Gourdon the first
amongst us. For R. Gourdon, though once in Unity or Fellowship with us,
Apostatized, and with this Snake, became an Adversary to us. But the Orthodox
Faith, in this Point, of the Divinity of Jesus, has been Testified by us ever
since a People.

And from this R. Gourdon, the Snake, according to his usual Injustice,
transcribes in p. 127, 128, 129. diverse false and abusive charges, but takes no
notice of the Validity or Invalidity of the Answers of our Friends to that
Adversary's Book. He is indeed so triflingly just, as to say, p. 127. Against
this wrote G.W. with three other Quakers, but what they said, or how far they
did disprove R. G's false Charges the Snake takes no notice; wherefore I shall
take no further notice of what he so quotes from him, than to acquaint the
Reader what relates to S. Eccles Quaker Challenge, p. 6. is answered before in
p. 188, 189. as are also many of the other Bits of Quotations, which here as
mentioned by the Snake, have neither Book nor Page to distinguish them.

Ibid. p. 129, 130. The Snake borrows from himself out of Satan Disrobed, and
says of W. P. that he will not have the true Christ to be a Person, but only a
Principle, etc. and refers to that Book, wherein he says it is more at large
discussed with the Defenses of Thomas Elwood.

I shall not run back to that Book, Satan Dis^ob'd, it having already been
somewhat spoken to by G. Whitehead; since which there has been no additions to
it. But so far as it lies here, I shall reply, and show that W. P. in that Book
of his Christian Quaker, from which the Snake does so charge him, will have;
and does acknowledge and confess to Christ, both as God and Man; which will
fully refute what the Snake has alleged. To this purpose, Reader, consider
the following Quotations from W. P's Christian Quaker.

From p. 104, to 114. W. P. there makes a Confession to Christ's Redemption,
Remission, Justification and Salvation; distinguished into nine several Heads,
or Parts of Discourse. It would be too t^dious for my Reader, to have
transcribed them (...) hither, though all worthy of notice; wherefore I shall
only transcribe the first and seventh Heads or parts of Discourse, which are as
follows.

P. 104. First, We do confess, that though the Eternal Power, Life and Light,
which inhabited that Holy Person which was born at Nazareth, (Bethlehem it
should be) was, and is chiefly and eminently the Savior; For there is no
Savior besides me, says God, Hos. 13.4. Yet, that it was instrumentally a
Savior, as prepared and chosen for the Work which Christ had then to do in it,
which was actually to the Salvation of Some, and intentionally to the Salvation
of the whole World then, and in Ages to come; suitable to that Scripture, Lo,
in the Volume of the Book it is written, I come to do thy will, (O God) a Body
have thou prepared me, etc. Heb. 10.

P. 107. Seventh, But there is yet a further Benefit that accrueth by the Blood
of Christ, viz. That Christ is a propitiation, and redemption to such as have
Faith in it. For though I still place the stress, of particular Benefit, upon the
Light, Life and Spirit revealed and witnessed in every particular; Yet in that
general Appearance, there was a general Benefit, justly to be attributed unto
the Blood of that very Body of Christ, to wit, that it did propitiate. For
however it might draw stupendous Judgments upon the Heads of those who were
Authors of that Dismal Tragedy, and died impenitent; yet doubtless it thus far
turned to very great account, in that it was a most precious Offering in the
sight of the Lord, and drew God's Love the more eminently to mankind, at least,
such as should believe in his Name, as his solemn Prayer to his Father, at his
leaving the World, given us by his beloved Disciple, does plainly witness. Thus
W. P. Wherein I take it to be as plain as can be, that he does declare and
confess, that the true Christ was Man: And when he speaks of the Spirit of
Christ in its appearance in Man, under the Name or Epithet, [Principle] he
sufficiently shows, that he intends more thereby than any Moral Virtue. For in
p. 100. speaking of the Spirit of God under this Epithet of Inward Principle,
he says, And as in Wicked Men, God's Holy Light and Spirit, or that Principle
which is so called, has been deeply wounded, yea, as one slain; so in Good Men
that have had a sense of the Worlds Abominations has it also born many Burdens
and Weights; for the Light and Life is one in all.

Now, Reader, what clearer Testimony can there be, that W. P. does under the
name Principle, understand the Holy Spirit of God, and not any Moral Virtue, as
the Snake would basely and falsely insinuate? And for this his manner of
expressing the Holy Spirit, there are plenty of Examples in the Scriptures of
Truth; where under the Principle of Wisdom, Isaiah speaking of Christ, and his
Dispensation in the Gospel Times Chap. 33.6. says, Wisdom shall be the
stability of thy times. And our Savior says, Mat. 11.19. Wisdom is justified
of her Children. And the Evangelist, speaking of the growth of the Child Jesus,
says, Luke 2.40. And the Child grew and waxed strong in Spirit, filled with
Wisdom, etc. These with abundance more of like import, the observing Reader may
easily find in Holy Writ.

Ibid. p. 131. The Snake makes a Quotation from W. P's part of Serious Apology,
etc. p. 146. But that the outward Person, which suffered, was properly the Son
of God, we utterly deny. And perversely would draw W. P's words to say, or
mean, that the Body which Christ assumed, was but as a Cloak, or a Vail, like
the Body in which Angels appear for a time, and throw them off again.

Against this false and unjust Imputation, I shall first give W. P's words in
the page quoted, from whence the impartial Reader may be able to take W. P's
meaning from himself, and then observe somewhat upon the Snake's perversion. To
the first, Jenner (W. P's Opponent) had said, We deny that Person (the Son of
God) that died at Jerusalem, to be our Redeemer.

To which W. P. replys.

Which most horrid Imputation, has been answered more (I believe) than a
Thousand times, that is, that he that laid down his Life, and suffered his Body
to be crucified by the Jews, without the Gates of Jerusalem, is Christ the only
Son of the Most High God: But that the outward Person, which suffered, was
properly the Son of God, we utterly deny, and it is a perfect contradiction to
their own Principles: A Body have thou prepared me, said the Son, then the Son
was not the Body, though the Body was the Son's. This brings him more under the
charge of making him but a mere Man, than us, who acknowledge him to be one
with the Father, and of a Nature Eternal and Immortal; for he was glorified
with the Father before the World began. Thus W. Penn, whose plain meaning is no
other than that the Outward Person, that Body which our Lord did take of the
Virgin, was not properly the Son of God by Eternal Generation, and was not
Glorified with the Father before the World began: He is here distinguishing
between the Divinity and Manhood of our Savior, and that according to
Scripture. The Divinity was from Everlasting, the Manhood not so, that was
taken up in the fullness of time appointed by God; born of Mary, nourished and
increased in Stature, Strength, etc. according to Nature's Law and Course. This
Body, Christ laid it down for the Sins of the World, he did thereby consecrate
for us a new and living way, Through the Vail, that is to say, his Flesh, Heb.
10.20. and here the Flesh or Body of Christ is called a Vail; by allusion to
the Vail, mentioned Exodus 26.33. which did divide between the Holy Place, and
the Most Holy, and this the Apostle shows, Heb. 9.24. For Christ is not entered
into the Holy Places made with hands, which are the figures of the true, but
into Heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us. And in this
sense, and no other, have we ever used the words Vail or Garment, in this case,
and not as is falsely alleged by the Snake, to signify a Body, Ibid. p. 130.
in which Angels appear for a time, and throw them off again.

In like manner the Snake, p. 131. curtails and perverts a Quotation from a
Book of ours Entitled some Principles, etc. from which he quotes, p. 126.
thus, The Scriptures do expressly distinguish between Christ, and the Garment
which he wore -- And we can never call the Bodily Garment, Christ.

If the Scriptures do so expressly distinguish: Of which Instances are given;
why did the Snake injuriously make a Break in the Quotation, instead of giving
those instances? For upon the Authority of Holy Writ it is that we do thus
distinguish; and if our Distinction be bad, or weak, he should have given us a
better Exposition of the Scriptures, therein brought for that purpose. That he
may not omit it in his next, I here give some of the Instances from that Book,
wherein the Scriptures do expressly so distinguish.

Ibid. p. 131. I come now to a Quotation made from Isaac Pennington, in his
Question to the Professors, p. 25. which the Snake does not only break to
pieces, but also to the several pieces, joins some words of his own; that they
may (like his Brethen of the Inquisition) by them be forced to sound as he
would have them. It is in the manner following; Isaac Pennington, p. 25. Denies
that it was the Flesh and Blood of the Veil -- of the outward Earthly Nature
(as he calls the Body of Christ) by which we are cleansed, for, says he, Can
outward Blood cleanse the Conscience?

Thus the Snake gives it, and makes nonsense of it; for by the Pieces of the
Quotation, as he has placed them, he says, that I. P. calls the Body of Christ,
the Flesh and Blood, the Vail of the Flesh and Blood, or the Outward and
Earthly Nature: Thus making the Body a Vail to it self.

But, Reader, I will show thee from the Book it self, that I. P. is neither
Nonsensical in his Expression, nor Heretical in his Meaning, but Scriptural and
Orthodox, p. 25. q. 18. Seeing the Apostle speaks of purifying the Heavenly
things themselves, Heb. 9.23. It would seriously be enquired into, and the Lord
waited on to know, what nature these Sacrifices must be of, which cleanse the
Heavenly things? whether they must not of necessity be Heavenly? If so, then
whether was it the Flesh and Blood of the Vail, (Heb. 10.20.) or the Flesh and
Blood within the Vail? (John 6.53.) Whether was it, the Flesh and Blood of the
Outward Earthly Nature (first quoted) or the Flesh and Blood of the Inward
Spiritual Nature? (last quoted.) Whether was it the Flesh and Blood which
Christ took of the first Adam's Nature, or the Flesh and Blood of the second
Adam's Nature? Thus he, and is very sound, according to the Doctrine of our
Savior, who says, John 6.53. -- Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man,
and drink his Blood, ye have no Life in you. Of this many of his Disciples
said, John 6.60. This is an hard saying. And therefore our Savior expounds it
to their weakness, v. 63. It is the Spirit that quickneth, the Flesh profits
nothing; the words that I speak unto you, they are Spirit and they are Life.

From all which, this is the Sum of I. P's Question.

The Soul of Man is of Heavenly Extraction, which being fallen through Sin, is
not to be cleansed therefrom, but by the Spirit of Christ, which is shed on
Mankind, and univer^^lly tendered to them by Jesus Christ, having offered up as
a Propitiatory Sacrifice, his Body, and through the Vail, that is to say his
Flesh, has opened to the Kingdom (in the Apostle's phrase) A New and Living
Way.

Ibid. p. 131. The Snake makes a Quotation from C. Atkinson's Sword of the Lord
drawn, p. 5. Your Imagined God beyond the Stars, and your Carnal Christ, is
utterly denied. -- To say this Christ is God and Man in one Person, is a Lie.

Here the Snake has made a false Quotation, that it might not fail to answer
his purpose; which yet when set in its true Light, speaks quite otherwise, it
standing thus in that Book. Your imagined God beyond the Stars, and your carnal
Christ, which you would make appear through your Heathenish Philosophy, is
utterly denied and testified against by the Light which comes from Christ.

Now, if the Snake's God and Christ, can only be made appear through Heathenish
Philosophy, this he says, is utterly denied: And it is certainly true that the
Light which comes from Christ, does utterly deny all Vain and Carnal
Imaginations.

The words from the break are a position of his Opponents, to which he does not
barely reply: It is a Lie (but adds) He is not divided from what he was before
the Foundations of the Hills were laid, etc.

Ibid. p. 131. quoted from Great Mystery, p. 250. The Devil was in thee (says
G. F. to his Adversary, Christopher Wade) Thou say thou art saved by Christ
without thee, and so have recorded thy self to be a Reprobate.

Ibid. p. 132. From Great Mystery, p. 183. Such as have Christ in them, they
have the Righteousness it self without Imputation, the end of Imputation, the
Righteousness of God it self, Christ Jesus.

Thus the Snake first picks up bits to make Quotations, and then packs them on
heaps, that by this his false and confused jumbling of things together, they
might speak his own mind, not the mind of the Writer. As to the first, where he
brings in G. F. saying to Christopher Wade, The Devil was in thee, etc. It was,
because he had given Testimony of it (as this Snake has done) by stuffing (as
G. F. says) his Book with Lies. And though the Snake may think it is no
complement, yet I can tell him, it is Truth in much plainness, and agreeable to
the Sentence of the Lip of Truth; to the Jews, when he told them, Ye are of
your Father the Devil, John 8.44. and the lusts of your Father ye will do, etc.
So that where we find Murderous and Lying Works, it shows them to be of the
Devil.

As to the latter part of the first Quotation, Thou say, thou art saved by
Christ without thee, etc. It does plainly contradict the Doctrine of the
Apostle, and upon the Authority of that, G. F. or any other may safely declare,
that such who know not Jesus Christ in them are Reprobates; and if Chr. Wade
declared himself such, G. F. was no more to blame, than any other may be, if
the Snake now do the same. To the last Quotation, from p. 183* it is near all
of it Scripture; for Christ is declared, the Righteousness of God, and is the
end of Imputation to all that believe; which, as G. F. there says, Is owned,
and this Imputation is within; for he that believes is born of God.

Ibid. p. 132. Quoted from Readiness Errand, p. 14. Christ (says he, that is, The
Light within) is the Substance of all Figures, and his Flesh is a Figure.

To show the Reader this more clearly, it being not long, I will give it
entire, as in that Book, from whence the Reader may judge of the Orthodoxy of
the place, and the Malicious Parenthesis of the Snake.

It was a Query propounded to G. Fox:

Whether Christ in the Flesh be a Figure or not; and if a Figure, how, and in
what?

To which he answers, Christ is the Substance of all Figures, his Flesh is a
Figure; for every one passes through the same way as he did, who comes to know
Christ in the Flesh: There must be a Suffering with him, before there be a
Rejoicing with him. Christ is an Example for all to walk after; and if thou
know what an Example is, thou would know what a Figure is, to come up to
the same fullness. Thus G. F. and is according to these, and other Scriptures,
John 13.15. 1 Pet. 2.21. Romans 8.17. Heb. 2.9.

Ibid. p. 132. The Snake in like manner, minces the words of E. B. only quoting
from p. 149. (of his Works) The very Christ of God is within us; leaving out
what follows, We dare not deny him, and we are Members of his Body, and of his
Flesh, and of his Bone, as the Ephesians were, (Ephesians. 5.30.)

Ibid. p. 132. He does pick from Isaac Penington's Question to the Professors,
p. 27. Does not the name Christ belong to the whole Body, and to every Member
of the Body, as well as to the Head? And has left out what follows, which are
the Scripture Proofs, Are they not all one, yea all one in the Anointing; was
not this the great desire of his Heart to his Father? John 17.21, 23. That they
all might be one, even as the Father and Christ are one. And so being one in
the same Spirit (2 Pet. 1.4. (one in the same Life, one in the same Divine
Nature, even partakers of God's Holiness) Christ is not ashamed to call them
Brethren, ( Heb. 12.10.) nor is the Apostle ashamed to give them the Name of
Christ, together with him, etc. (Heb. 2.11.)

The Snake from a few words by him picked from this Quotation, very arrogantly
pretends to say, They (the Quakers) think, that the name Christ does belong to
every one of them, not only more than to that Body, but as well as to it, while
it was upon the Earth.

But what freedom soever the Snake has used to misrepresent I. P's words, which
as above quoted, say no such thing; yet it is intolerable, that he should
carry his Iniquity so far, as to belly our very Thoughts, and to tell the World,
that They (the Quakers) think, etc. what no Quaker did ever think. In fine the
Sum of I. P's words is only thus, in the words of the Beloved Disciple, 1 John
2.27. But the Anointing which ye have received of him, abides in you; and ye
need not that any Man teach you, but as the same Anointing teaches you all
things, and is Truth, and is no Lie; and even as it has taught you, ye shall
abide in him. Thus Christ the Anointed, Isa. 61.1. Luke 4.18. gives the
Anointing of his Spirit for a Guide to his Followers.

Ibid. p. 132. The Snake quotes from Great Mystery, p. 88. Christ is the Elect.
And falsely glosses upon it in this manner, Thus Christ is the Elect, and Elect
are Christ's: They make them convertible Terms.

The Prophet Isaiah, speaking of Christ, says, Isa. 42.1. Behold my Servant,
whom I uphold, mine Elect, in whom my Soul delights, etc. -- And also the
Holy Apostle, 1 Pet. 2.6. -- Behold I lay in Sion a chief Cornerstone, Elect,
Precious, etc. And we do say, He (Christ) was from Eternity, the Elect and
Chosen of God, by and through whom all who are made partakers of Eternal
Salvation, must be Elected and Chosen: Yet the Terms are not convertible,
Christ is the Elect Head of the Church; all who are obedient to his Spirit of
Grace are Elect Members. This is agreeable to a Cloud of Scripture Testimonies;
for the present take these following, Mat. 24.31. Romans 8.33. Col. 3.12. Tit.
1.1.

Ibid. p. 132. Quoted from Great Mystery, p. 207. A Priest had said, That God
has a Christ Distinct from all things whatsoever. To which G. F. replys, God's
Christ is not distinct from his Servants.

Reader, I have in the last Section shown thee, what kind of distinction G. F's
Opponents pleaded for, and what he opposed, viz. Separation and
Incommunication: And surely those terms, Distinct and Incommunicable, are not
fit to express the Deity; nor yet his Dwelling in Man, and in such sense Christ
is not Distinct, that is, Separate from his Servants.

Ibid. p. 133. They say a Man may tell a Lie so often, that he may come to
believe it himself at Last.

Of this, the Snake may likely be an Instance.

Ibid. p. 133. Who that had not his Head turned with such Enthusiastical
Delusion, could have imagined, that G. F. could not understand the Difference
or Distinction, betwixt Christ and himself! And that Men of sense should lick
up his Spittle!

Who that had not his Heart turned with Malice and Envy, and thereby his Eyes
blinded, could have failed to see, that G. F. does, according to Scripture,
understand the difference between Christ and himself? But the Positions of the
Priests were concerning not the Difference, but the Separation of Christ: What
else can the Sense be of this Position of the Priest ( Great Mystery, p. 293.
The Father is a distinct Incommunicable Being from the Son, and the Son a
distinct Incommunicable Being from the Father, and the Holy Ghost a distinct
Incommunicable Being from the Son? And if thus Distinct or Incommunicable to
each other, it is not to be expected the Deity should be less Distinct and
Incommunicable to Men: And against this false and Anti-scriptural Doctrine it
is G. F. has declared, as is before shown. And this is the Spittle the Snake
licks up and defends.

Ibid. p. 133. And I have shown several Instances, Sect. 8. where G. F. does
assume the Style and Names of Christ to himself; and that others do allow them
to him.

I have in all those several Instances in Sect. 6. shown that the Snake has
belied G. F. and others, for that he has not assumed them, nor others allowed
them to him, as suggested by the Snake.

Ibid. p. 133, 134. All which is excused by Mr. Penn, in the 11 th Chapter of
the Invalidity of John Faldo, etc. in such a wonderful manner, as will leave no
Blasphemy or Idolatry in the world, without a very fair pretense.

W. P. shows in that Book, that the Charges of our Enemies then were false (as
are now those of the Snake) and rescues the words of some of our Friends
therein, from their Perversion, as some others of them herein now are. He
speaks Scripture and Reason, and shows we are agreeable to both; and uses no
fair pretenses to excuse, but solid Orthodox Truths to show and explain, that
we are neither Blasphemous nor Idolatrous, as may be seen, p. 266. of that Book
Invalidity, etc.

Ibid. p. 134. These are the words of a great Apostle of the Quakers, Edw.
Buroughs, p. 273. of his Works. The Sufferings of the People of God (Quakers)
in this Age, is greater Suffering, and more unjust, than in the days of Christ,
or of the Apostles. -- What was done to Christ, or the Apostles, was chiefly
done by a Law, and in great part by the due Execution of a Law.

The Snake here, as is usual with him, has from several places picked these
words, and jumbled them together, that they might look as he would have them;
but as they stand in E. B. it plainly shows, that his Comparison lies not to
the Persons Suffering, or to the greatness of the Suffering in it self
considered; but only with respect to the several pretenses of those who were
the Persecutors; and E. B. does thereupon show, that the Persecutors in those
times, and also in the times of Queen Mary, had the color of unjust Laws; but
the Persecutors of his time had not (in diverse instances for which they did
Persecute) the Shadow of any Law at all, such as for not pulling off the Hat,
for using the plain Language, and such like.

The Snake next, takes up three or four pages upon a Quotation from Solomon
Eccles, which no Quaker did ever approve, much less justify, as has been
formerly observed by Thomas Ellwood to G. Keith; and therefore is of no weight
here. And although he would (p. 139.) fasten it upon G. Whitehead, by nibling
at his words, in that piece of his, Entitled, The Light and Life of Christ
within, p. 58. where he ( G. W.) says, that S. E. did speak of the Blood of
Christ, as more Excellent, Living, and Holy, than is able to be uttered, etc.
He adds, Which might have satisfied any spiritual and unbyassed Mind, I say,
though he would insinuate from these words, that G. W. does not disown this
Expression of S. Eccles; yet G.W. does in plain Words deny it, which yet this
Adversary, Snake-like, has omitted to deliver. His words are these, (Light and
Life, etc. p. 59.) I do not make S. E's Expression therein (especially as
construed by our Adversaries) an Article of our Faith. And G. W. for himself
does there declare, He did own the Blood shed to be more than the Blood of
another Saint. Thus says not only G. W. but thus also say the Quakers, who at
all times (since a People) have readily declared their true and scriptural
Sense of it. But with respect to S. E's words, having first informed my Reader,
that no Quaker did ever approve, much less justify them, and therefore surely
not make them an Article of our Faith (either of which, if the Snake can prove,
he is required to do it) I say, having first acquainted my Reader thus much, it
will not I hope be expounded, a defending of them words of S. E's, if I do
briefly show; that had this Snake had in himself any of that great Charity for
others, which (he says, p. 10.) is more apt to have a good opinion of others,
than of our selves; and which he makes one of the Marks of Divine Enthusiasm,
or Inspiration. He would have looked to see whether S. E's words would not have
born Sano sensu, some honest and innocent Construction, and accordingly have
judged; rather than put a bad Construction on words, which if not safely
expressed, were, however so intended. That S. E. did so safely and scripturally
intend them, is I think plain, in that he declares, He had no light esteem of
the Blood of Christ it self, as it was made by Christ a part of that blessed
Offering for Man; and that what he spoke of that part of the Blood, which was
let out by the Spear, (and which is that the Snake now makes his advantage of)
was with respect to the Soldiers Act, and the time of doing it, which was after
his Death.

So that I think it may in truth appear, That that upon which Solomon Eccles
did ground the difference he put between the Blood of Christ, in one respect;
and in another, was, that in the one, it was a voluntary Offering of Christ
himself, in and by the Eternal Spirit, before his Death: In the other it was
the forcible act of a Soldier after he was Dead, and the Sacrifice completed.
And this with much more our Friend Tho. Ellwood had heretofore said, ( Truth
Defended, p. 111, 112.) in reply to G. Keith, upon the same Charge; and which
the Snake might have replied to, if he could, before he had renewed it.

Ibid. p. 140. They have evaded the most express Texts for Christ's Humanity,
even that Genesis 3.15. his being the Seed of the Woman: They allegorize that too
into a Spiritual Sense, quite away from the Letter; and to mean nothing else in
the World, but their Light within.

We have not evaded any Text of Scripture for Christ's Humanity, therefore not
that of Genesis 3.15. wherein he is testified of, as The Seed of the Woman: Nor
have we allegoriz'd it into a Spiritual Sense, beyond the Authority of express
Texts of Scripture, much less quite away from the Letter; but as we now do, so
we, always since a People, have owned, that it did mean something more, than
the manifestation of the Spirit, or Light of Christ in Man. But the Snake for
Proof of this Charge, makes a Quotation from W. P's part of The Christi^n
Quaker, p. 97, 98.

The Serpent (says he) is a Spirit: Now nothing can bruise the Head of the
Serpent, but something that is [ Internal and] (the Snake has left out)
Spiritual as the Serpent is: But if that Body of Christ, were the Seed, then
could he not bruise the Serpent's Head in all, because the Body of Christ is
not so much as in any one? And consequently the Seed of the Promise, is an Holy
[ and Spiritual] (the Snake has left out) Principle of Light and Life [ and
Power] (the Snake has left out) that being received into the Heart, bruiseth
the Serpent's Head? And because the Seed, which cannot be that Body, is Christ,
as testify the Scriptures; the Seed is one, and the Seed is Christ (and which
the Snake has cut off, as not to his purpose and Christ, God over all blessed
for ever. We do conclude and that most truly, that Christ was, and is the
Divine Word of Light and Life, that was in the beginning with God, and was and
is God, over all blessed for ever. Thus W. P. From which the Snake says, p.
140. His consequence is, that the promised Seed was not any Person, but a
Principle. Which consequence is falsely drawn by the Snake from W. Penn's words,
the consequence of them being more truly, that the Promised Seed, was not only
that, but also a Principle, of Light, Life and Power, which I shall now further
show, as it is also declared by T. E. (Truth Defended, p. 113, 114.) that, The
Scope and design of W. P. in those words, was to prove against his Opponents,
that the Son of God, who in the fullness of time, took upon him a Body of Flesh,
in which he suffered on the Cross, was, and was properly called, Christ, before
he appeared in that outward Body; which his Opponents denied, not owning Christ
as Christ, to have any existence before that Body which was Born of the Virgin,
but confining Christ to that Body. And because all acknowledge the Promised
Seed to be Christ, W. P. used that as a Medium, to prove that Christ was before
that outward Appearance. Now this affirming Christ to be the Seed, and that
Seed to be Inward and Spiritual, is not a denial of Christ having a bodily
existence without us; for he may have, and has, a bodily existence without us,
and yet may be, and is, spiritually within us: It Is true, he denied that that
Body which Christ had from the Virgin, Strictly considered as such, was the
Seed, and he gave diverse reasons for it. And which are mentioned from p. 94. to
p. 99. of his Christian Quaker.

From the consequence which the Snake has falsely drawn from W. P's words, viz.
That the Seed is not a Person, but a Principle.

He goes on p. 141. fighting against the Bugbear which himself has conjured
up, and declares it to be, A Supposition of so pernicious a nature, that it
Vn-christians any who holds it: For the Faith of Christians is built upon that
Man Jesus Christ, as The Seed Promised to bruise the Serpent's Head.

His Supposition so far as respecting us the Quakers, and W. P. in particular,
is false: For we believe the Manhood of Christ gloriously united with the
Godhead, to be the Seed Promised, Genesis 3.15. and also, that that Seed being of
a Divine and Spiritual Nature, did inwardly work against the Serpent, and did
bruise his Head, and break his Strength and Power, in some measure, in the Holy
Men and Women in all Generations ( T. E. Truth Defended, p. 114.) and by this
their inward experience of his Spirit and Power, he was the object of their
Faith, to be made manifest in God's due time: And he is now the object of the
Faith of all true Christians; not only as born of the Virgin, etc. but also as
known and witnessed in his Inward and Spiritual Appearance in Man, to bruise
the Serpent's Head, Power and Strength, which has had Dominion and Rule in Man:
To this sense our Savior himself does also explain the Spiritual Nature of the
Seed, the Word of God, Luke 8.11.

Ibid. p. 143. The Snake brings from Christian Quaker another Argument to the
purpose foregoing; which is this, One Outward thing cannot be the proper Figure
or Representation of another, nor is it the way of Scripture so to Teach us,
etc.

To which the Snake says, All the outward Sacrifices under the Law, were Types
or Figures of the Sacrifice of Christ, the Outward Christ upon the Cross, etc.

The whole Legal Dispensation of the First Covenant, was a Figure of Christ,
and of that Dispensation of the New Covenant, Grace and Truth, which came by
him: But that it was not only a Type or Figure of Christ upon the Cross, I
shall show in several Instances. The Serpent which Moses made, Numb. 21.9. Our
Savior declares, John 3.14. that as that was lifted up in the Wilderness; so
must the Son of Man be lifted up: And this, in a sense may be understood to
have respect to our Savior's being lifted up on the Cross; but not only that,
for our Savior carries the Type further, and shows that it did respect that
Spiritual Obedience and Faith in him, which gives Eternal Life: For as the
Sting of the Serpents in the Wilderness were cured by looking to the Brazen
Serpent: So, by coming through Faith and Obedience to look to Christ, the Sting
of Sin and Death are taken away by him: Wherefore he says, v. 20.21. For every
one that does Evil hates the Light, neither comes to the Light, lest his
deeds should be reproved: But he that does Truth, comes to the Light, that his
deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God. In like manner the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 5.7. Christ our passover is crucified for us, may have respect
to Paschal Land as Type, and to Christ crucified as typified; but not
altogether that, for he carries it further, and shows, that whereas, verse. 1.
It was reported there was Fornication among them: And verse. 6. That they
gloried in what was not good: He advises them to purge out the old Leaven; and
from the advantages of Power from Christ received, he presses them to keep the
Feast, not with old Leaven, neither with the Leaven of Malice and Wickedness;
but with the unleavened Bread of Sincerity and Truth. The same Apostle to the
Colossians, 11.16, 17. Let no Man therefore judge you in Meat or in Drink, or
in respect of an Holy Day, or of the New Moon, or of the Sabbath Day, which are
a Shadow of things to come; but the Body is of Christ: And that they were
Shadows of the Spiritual Appearance of Christ, whose Dispensation to Mankind
was introduced by his outward Appearance, the Apostle to the Hebrews shows,
chap. 9. that the Service which stood in Meats and Drinks, and diverse Washing
and carnal Ordinances, did not make perfect as pertaining to the Conscience;
but was a Figure of good things to come, even the purging the Conscience from
dead works, to serve the living God; by the spotless Offering of the Blood of
Christ, through the Eternal Spirit. Thus, the benefit of that Offering cannot
be witnessed by Man, but through the inward Operation of the Eternal Spirit,
whereby the Conscience can be purged from Dead Works. And thus the Scripture
plainly teaches, That the Types and Shadows of the Law, and the Ministry of it
are the Figure of the Covenant promised, Jer. 31.33. which is also plentifully
shown by the Apostle to the Hebrews, throughout that admirable Epistle.

And agreeable herewith is W. P. in the place last quoted by the Snake; for
those words of his, One Outward thing cannot be the proper Figure or
Representation of another, etc. had relation to his foregoing words, which the
Snake has cut off, and are these: As Abraham Outward and Natural, was the
Great Father of the Jews, outward and natural, whose Seed God promised to bless
with Earthly Blessings, as Canaan, etc. And that they were figurative of the
one Seed Christ, and such as he should beget into a lively hope through the
Power of his Spiritual Resurrection, etc. -- Thus W. P. And as the Snake cannot
deny, that Abraham was figurative of Christ, and that to his Seed, as they
continued in his Faith, the Oath of God was to them, in that outward Covenant.
So it must of necessity follow, that this Great Father of the Jews, Outward and
Natural, does not herein otherwise Typify Christ, than as Christ is the
Spiritual Father of all the Nations of them that are saved, through Faith and
Obedience in, and to his Spirit in their Hearts.

Ibid. p. 143. They can, upon a pinch, subscribe the whole Creed, and yet not
mean one word of it of God or Christ at all; that is, of any God or Christ
without Men.

Reader, is not this a fair mark of what kind, that great Charity and real
kindness must be, which in p. 23. foregoing he pretends to have for the
Generality of us? Or is it not rather a mark of that Flaming Charity which
himself declares to have for the Church? But Charity and Truth are at an equal
distance from him, who can thus notoriously belie us, by charging such
Dissimulation on us, as is his own practice. That we can subscribe, not upon a
pinch, but heartily and readily, all the Testimonies of Holy Writ, and the
Articles of Faith therein contained is True; but that we do not mean one of
them Testimonies, of God or Christ without Men, is as great a falsehood as the
Devil can utter. And if Preaching, if Writing, if constant Profession in Words,
together with Practice agreeable from a People, can be a sufficient evidence
that they do so own and mean: I defy the Snake, with all his Confederacy, to
give better and greater evidence, that they acknowledge any of the Truths
therein contained.

The Snake next repeats a Quotation from Readiness Errand, p. 8. which is answered
before in p. 59. and another from the Sword of the Lord drawn, etc. p. 5. which
is also answered, p. 204. foregoing, and therefore need not be here repeated.

Ibid. p. 145. The Snake, speaking of W. Smith's Primmer, says, Here is an
Admirable Cue given to Young Children, to prevent their ever receiving the
least tincture of Christianity, that if they should at any time hear of a
Christ in Heaven, they might immediately stop their Ears, and believe all who
spoke of it, to be false Ministers.

That this Snake is a false Accuser, and has not the least tincture of
Christian Charity: there needs little more trouble to prove, than barely to
give truly (which the Snake has not, but curtailed) those Questions and Answers
which are in p. 8, 9. of W. Smith's Primmer, and which are as follows.

Child. But do they, (Ministers) not all preach Christ in words?

Father. Yes, the false (Ministers) can speak of the Name of Christ as the true
do, but they want his Power.

Child. But how may I then know which is true, and which is false, by their
words; seeing words may be the same?

Father. Why, they that are false, preach Christ without, and bid People
believe in him, as he is in Heaven above; but they that are true Ministers,
they Preach Christ within, and direct People to wait to feel him in themselves,
and so to believe in him, as he makes himself manifest in them; and this is
true Doctrine that brings People to mind that principle of God in their own
Consciences, which comes down from Heaven, and goes thither again; and such as
are in the earthly wisdom, they do not know Heaven above.

Child. This is a great Difference in their Doctrine, for one to preach Christ
without, and another preaches him within.

Father. Yes, it does make a great Difference, and has no more fellowship
together, than the East has with the West.

Thus W. S. And this is so far from preventing the least tincture of
Christianity, that it is a sound initiating Lesson for Children, it being no
other than a plain and short Paraphrase of diverse Texts of Scripture, and
particularly of 2 Cor. 5.16, 17. Wherefore henceforth know we no man after the
Flesh: Yea, though we have known Christ after the Flesh, yet henceforth know we
him so no more. Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new Creature, old
things are passed away, behold all things are become new. Col. 1.27. That God
would make known what is the riches of the Glory of this Mystery among the
Gentiles, which is Christ in you, the hope of Glory. In which places, according
to the whole tenor of the Gospel Dispensation, the Apostle labors to bring
People to give up to the workings of the Spirit of Christ in them: Yet does not
hereby slight or undervalue, much less deny Christ in his appearance in the
Flesh, nor the Office of his Mediatorship in Heaven; by whom it is, that the
Gifts of the Holy Spirit are given to Men. And agreeable to this was the Labor
and End of W. S. in that Primmer of his.

But further, if we make but a small amendment of the word [only] to the second
Answer, what will become of the Snake's Cavil? and then read it thus. They that
are false, preach Christ without, and bid People believe in him, only as he is
in Heaven above, etc. --

It will be past his Cavil, and he ought not* for such an Elipsis, to have
forfeited all his Pretended Charity, nor falsely to have declared it an
admirable Cue, to prevent the least tincture of Christianity. I expect that
this amendment may be opposed by him; and that he may urge that our Writings
are by no means to be added to. But if it be so urged, I would then answer: The
Church has given abundant encouragement to supply Eliptick Defects by her
Example, and Practice in the Holy Scriptures, in which there are a thousand (I
believe) Instances, of a word, or words added, with purpose (I would in Charity
think) of more fully expressing the Mind of the Holy Ghost: And what is so
familiarly done with Holy Writ, surely we may do with our Friends Books.

Ibid. p. 145. The Snake makes a curtailed quotation from p. 17. of E. B's
Preface to G. F's Great Mystery. thus, We differ in Doctrines and Principles,
and the one thou must justify, and the other thou must condemn, as being, the
one clean contrary to the other in our Principles.

E. B. in this place was speaking of those Doctrines and Principles, of the
Priests, which were opposed in that Book, some of which I have mentioned p.
155. but not indefinitely of all the Principles they did, or might hold; and
that there was reason to oppose them, I question not but the impartial Reader
will agree, not simply, for that they are clean contrary to us, but for that
they are so, to true Christian Doctrine. And of these, and such as these E. B.
speaks thus, p. 17. ut supra, And besides, their Petitioning (which the Priests
and others did) the Magistrates against us, and Preaching and Praying against
us, and all the evil and wickedness, in Work, Word and desire brought forth
against us from time to time. Yet here, sober Reader, thou have a Catalogue,
and whole number of Books printed and written against us, and abundance of
their Doctrines uttered against us, and in opposition to us, gathered up in
this Volume, in a sum, with our Answers to them. And if thy Mind and Heart be
single, thou may hereby understand, in measure the difference in Doctrine
between them and us, and compare each of them with the Scriptures, and see
whether their Doctrines and Principles, laid down as the subject of their
Books; or our Doctrines and Principles laid down in answer to theirs, be
according to, and and agree with the Scriptures. And if thou be impartial in
this business, and single in this Search and Judgment; I doubt not but thou will, in a great measure, satisfy thy self, and be resolved concerning their
Priests and Professors in England, and us who are called Quakers. And when thou
have thus done, own and deny whether them or us, for thou may fully perceive
we differ in Doctrines, etc. --

Now, Sober Reader, what just exception can there be to the trial of Doctrines
and Principles, where the Holy Scripture is assigned for the Touchstone, and
such persuasion as the Lord shall give, is to be Leader. But this is a Trial
the Snake dreads, because it wholly destroys Implicit Faith; and blind
Obedience.

Ibid. p. 146. And therefore this difference of Doctrine betwixt the Quakers
and us, which, they say, is as wide as from East to West, must be more than
concerning the Light within, etc. --

Yes, so it is, it is concerning the Separation and Incommunication of the
Deity mentioned, p. 189 foregoing. It is concerning the Holy Scriptures alone
being the Object of Faith: It is concerning the Letter of the Scripture, being
the Sword of the Spirit: It is concerning the Letter of the Scripture being
God: It is concerning the Scriptures being the Power of God, and the Judge by
which all Men shall be judged. And in fine, it is concerning many other things
mentioned in that Book Great Mystery; several of which I have referred to in
their several pages, as I have met with them.

Ibid. p. 146. The Quakers do positively determine their Light within, to be
not a Secondary Agent, or sent from any other; but that it is it self the
Principal.

The Quakers do indeed determine according to the Testimonies of our Savior,
and his Holy Apostles, Mat. 10.20. John 14.17, 20. and 15.4. Romans 8.9, 10, 11.
1 Cor. 3.16. and 6.19. Gal. 4.15. Col. 1.27. 1 John 4.4. That the Spirit of God
is measurably given or manifested to Men; in order for the purifying their
Consciences from Dead Works to serve the Living God. And if the Snake can, from
Scripture, prove these, with all the other Texts, speaking of the Spirit of God
in Man, are to be understood, of some Secondary Agent; or that the Holy Spirit
is such, then his term may be allowed; till then, we rather choose to keep to
the Language of Holy Writ; and must own that the Holy Spirit of God, measurably
manifested to Men, is to every particular Man in himself, the only true
Foundation and Principle of Religion. And such who have not this Foundation,
for their Religion, can do no more with respect to the things of God, than (as
the Apostle says) make a fair show in the Flesh. This is also plainly the sense
of W. S's Catechism, p. 57.

Ibid. p. 147. Yet to make it exceeding plain that the Quakers do not believe
that Christ has any other Body, or other Humanity, than that Spiritual, or
Allegorical Body, or what ever they mean by it, which they say he has within
them. In E. B 's works, p. 149. This Question is asked in these plain and
peremptory terms, Is that very Man, with that very Body, within you, yea or
nay? And the Answer is as plain, The very Christ of God is within us, we dare
not deny him. (And E. B. adds, which the Snake has cut off, as has been before
shown) We are Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bone, as the
Ephesians were ( Ephesians. 5.13.)

Now, I will grant the Snake that this Answer is not only plain, but also true,
and dare him to deny it if he can, we having for Authority herein, not only
Ephesians. 5.30. but a Cloud of Scripture Testimonies: But it is exceeding plain that
the Snake tells a Lie, when he says that E. B. does in this Answer say, that
the Manhood of Christ which Suffered and Dyed upon the Cross, was Buried, did
gloriously Arise and Ascend into Heaven, where he has now a bodily existence;
is in that bodily existence within us? No, E. B. says, Christ was in us, as he
was in the Ephesians, that is, Spiritually, unless the Snake will have it to be
exceeding plain, that the Holy Apostle does there mean by Body, Flesh and Bone,
that which he took of the Virgin: And if he will so have it, it will be
exceeding plain that he perverteth the Text, as much as he does E. B's words.

But further, Reader, as exceeding plain as the Snake does falsely say it is,
that we deny the bodily existence of Christ without us in Heaven: He confesses
his Ignorance of our Belief, not knowing what to determine herein, whether it
be, other Humanity than that Spiritual, or Allegorical, Body, or what ever they
mean by it: Yet, for all this, his Cloudiness and Ignorance herein, he does
exceeding plainly, and in most peremptory terms, belly and abuse us; for we do,
and always have acknowledged and believed the bodily existence of Christ
without us, as he ascended into Heaven, yet do also say, he is Spiritually
within us. Of which is further spoken, p. 213. foregoing.

Ibid. p. 147. They have of late brought G. F 's Blasphemous Journal into the
Public Meeting House at the Savoy, etc.

That G. F's Journal is Blasphemous, remains to be proved, unless we will take
for proof the Snake's having (as he says p. 16.) Boldly and Impudently, as well
as falsely, averred it, for better or truer he has not to give. That it was so
lately brought to the Savoy Meeting House, there is a very good reason; which
is, that it was but lately Printed.

Ibid. p. 148. This is an Honor they never yet vouchsafed to the Holy
Scriptures, which are not to be seen in their Meetings.

This is a notorious Lie, for it is no greater Honor than is frequently
vouchsafed (to use his terms) to the Holy Scripture.

Ibid. p. 148. And it was a bold effort in G. K. to bring a Bible into his
Meeting at Turners-Hall, and reckoned by his opposites as a sign of his turning
back again to the Priests way of Worship.

How bold G. K's effort was, in so doing, I shall leave the Snake and him to
agree, but what was, and is to us, a sign of his Backsliding, is, his having
very much turned his back upon that Profession of the Light of Jesus Christ,
which he has heretofore professed.

Ibid. p. 148. In their Public Schools, particularly that great one at
Wansworth, near London, Portions of this G. Fox 's Journal are enjoined to the
Scholars to be read every day; but never a Chapter out of the Bible, that is
Beastly ware with them, Dust and Death, and Serpents Meat! The Public ought to
take some care of this in pity to their poor Souls. This I cautioned before in
Satan Disrobed, but repeat it here because it is material.

It is indeed, Reader, very material, that a Man should with so hardened a
forehead tell Lies, and repeat them, and that with design, as himself declares,
to make the Public the Executioner to his wicked designs; and be himself thus
the Trumpeter to Disturbance. I say this is very material, but that nothing
material or true, is in what he has said as above, I shall, Reader, prove I
hope to thy Satisfaction.

And first Generally, for our Public Schools, which the Snake upon his own
Authority, without Proof, has so charged, I do as generally charge him with a
Lie in that his Assertion, and my single denial is at least of equal Authority
with his single charge, if he will name particulars, I shall also as in this
his particular Instance, disprove it by Certificates under the hands of Persons
(who are not Quakers) and who being near Neighbors, and in the School often,
do full well know the practice of it. The first Certificate, and which next
follows, is from a French Protestant, who Teaches the French Language in that
School.

Be it known unto all People, to whom these lines may come, that for more than
four Years, I have been conversant in the School of Richard Scoryer, at
Wansworth, in the County of Surry: My Station in his said School, is Teaching
the French Language. And I solemnly testify, that in the aforesaid School, the
Scriptures are frequently read by his Scholars; and I never did perceive the
least appearance of slight or disesteem showed, either by the said R. S. or any
belonging to his School, unto the Holy Scriptures. In Testimony to the Truth
hereof, I have subscribed my name, this 22 d day of August, School.

James Barhays.

The following is a Certificate, from several reputable Men, Inhabitants of
that Town (not Quakers) who have knowledge of the Laudable Practice of that
School herein.

We, whose names are hereunto subscribed, Inhabitants of the Parish of
Wansworth, in the County of Surry, do hereby Certify, that there is not in the
said Parish, any Public School, commonly called, or known, by the Name of the
Quakers School, except that of Richard Scoryer's. And we do also certify, that
some Part or Portion of the Old or New Testament is daily Read in the said
School; beginning at Genesis, and so Reading on in the said Scriptures, until
both the Old and New Testament are Read throughout.

Wansworth, 22 d August, School. Law. Ball, Edm. Phillips, Tho. Darking, Steph.
Webb, Nich. Lesow, Sam. Webb.


Thus, Reader, thou here have this Story, to a Demonstration proved a Lie, as
is also done in diverse others foregoing, and may be hereafter done in other
Instances. And if this our Adversary had not a natural propensity to tell Lies,
he could not thus err from Truth: For, hiding and sculking (as he generally
does) in the City, he might with small pains have gone by Water to Wansworth, 5
Miles, or with less cost have sent a Penny-Post Letter to many Persons of that
Town, who could have better informed him herein, if he had not been both
Hypocritical and Unjust, in that he pretends care to our Souls, while he
wilfully tells Lies with purpose to destroy us. This his practice leads me to
observe of him, that he is fitter, to all the purposes of Destruction and Hate,
than to that one great purpose to which he falsely pretends, viz. to promote the
Unity of the Church. (...) indeed pretends Great Charity, Real Kindness, and
Good Wishes, for the Generallity of us, yet tells Lies of us, which in their
end and design are to raise Persecution by influencing the Government against
us, if they would but take the Alarm from him. But as it has pleased God (who
has the Hearts of all Men in his hand) to incline the Government to give us
some security against the evil practices of ill designing Men, by affording us
a Toleration, in the matters of the Worship of our God; so we are truly
thankful to God and the Government herein; and are at no time backward to give
an account of the Faith, which is in us, and our agreeable practice, however
misrepresented by this Incendiary in Religion.

Ibid. p. 148. I will end this Section with showing that the Quakers have in
their Blasphemies against the Divinity of Jesus, and Humanity of Christ, only
licked up and improved the Ancient most Antichristian Heresies.

And I may fitly end this Section with showing, that whatsoever the
Marcionites, Manichees, Eutychians and Saturnians, might hold as to the
Divinity and Incarnation of Christ; yet we have always said, and believed,
according to Scripture, that Jesus, so forenamed by the Angel, and born of the
Virgin, in Bethlehem of Judea, was truly and properly Man, and in all respects
(Sin only excepted) like unto us; and that in this Man Jesus, the Godhead dwelt
Bodily, and that through the Power of the Godhead in him, he did open and
consecrate a New and Living Way, for Men to Salvation, and Eternal Life,
through the Veil, that is to say, his Flesh: And this Truth the Apostle does
not deny, when he allegorizes, Ephesians. 5.30. The Spiritual Union and Fellowship of
Christ with his Followers, under the terms of being Members of his Body, Flesh
and Bones, and in a like acceptance, are very many other such expressions in
Scripture to be understood, yet is it not thence to be concluded (unless
falsely, as this Snake does) that they are Heretically agreeing with the
Cerdonites, the Eutychians and Manicheans.

Ibid. p. 149. But lastly (because I must not stay here, to deduce and compare
all their Heresies) those Ancient Heretick^ the ^bonites and Na^areens, from
whom our Modern Socinians, and from them the Quakers do derive their Doctrine,
did mightily undervalue the Scriptures. Some of them pretended to mend the
Scriptures, and did boldly Adulterate them, and set up other Scriptures against
those received by the Church. And this the Quakers have done beyond any that
went before them.

The Snake does, p. 336. Demand Reparation in the Name of the Church of
England; insinuating his real or assumed Power; and if I should now do the like
for, or in the name of the People called Quakers; I may be as much to seek for
Reparation, from him, for this his abuse, as I am to seek for proof in this
Charge. However, I do at least demand a proof, where ever the Quakers pretended
to mend the Scriptures, or did boldly Adulterate them, or did set up other
Scriptures against those received? It Is no Proof of this Charge, to say (p.
150.) We have cannonized our own Writings: If that were true, it is no proof,
but it is false: We may have said, and said truly, that Writings given forth
from the movings of the Spirit of God in any, are given forth from the same
Spirit which gave forth the Scriptures. But we have always readily offered and
submitted our Words and Writings to the Testimony of the Holy Scripture,
because, though the Spirit of God in his People, at this day, is the same Holy
Spirit which was in the Holy Apostles, yet they had greater Manifestations of
it: So that though it is both now and then the same in kind, the Degree of
Manifestation differs. But to return, I do, as above, demand proof, where ever
we have pretended to mend the Scriptures, or have boldly Adulterated them, or
set up others against them? As, Eusebius. Hist. l. 5. c. 28. Theod. Haerit. Fab.
l. 2. c. 5. do mention instances of some that did; and as he says, we have,
beyond any that ever went before us; yet gives not one instance. The Snake's
Ipse Dixit is no Proof; and if he cannot give better, it will at least be a
fresh Proof both of his Impudence and Lies.

SECT. X. Concerning the Satisfaction of Christ in Opposition to the false
Charges of the Snake herein.
IN the Section immediately foregoing, the Divinity and Incarnation of Christ,
is largly treated of, and I have therein shown, that we own and believe both,
as declared fully and truly in the Holy Scriptures, and also that our Books,
rescued from the perversions of this our Adversary, do speak according to that
acknowledged Rule. It remains that in this, I now show, that we have always
owned, in like Scriptural sense; that Jesus Christ, in Life, Doctrine and
Death, did fulfill his Father's Will, and did offer up himself, a most
Satisfactory Sacrifice, for the Sins of Mankind; in opposition to the false
Insinuations of the Snake herein, who says, p. 151. Herein the Quakers are
direct Socinians, for they positively deny the Satisfaction.

Under which cloudy Charge, he insinuates as if we did deny, what the
Scriptures do declare herein: Which is false, and he might with equal Sincerity
have said, the Church of England do deny The Satisfaction. For to come nearer,
The Satisfaction which is positively denied by us, is as positively denied by
the Church of England, which is that rigid and strict Notion of Satisfaction,
which some had Doctrinally, but unscripturally laid down in the terms
following, viz. That Man, having transgressed the Righteous Law of God, and so
exposed to the Penalty of Eternal Wrath, it is altogether impossible for God to
remit or forgive without a plenary Satisfaction; and that there was no other
way, by which God could obtain Satisfaction, or save Men, than by inflicting
the Penalty of Infinite Wrath and Vengance on Jesus Christ, the second Person
in the Trinity, who, for Sins past, present, and to come, has wholly born and
paid it, to the offended Infinite Justice of his Father.

This, Reader, is the Satisfaction, or strict and rigid Notion of it which we
do deny, and which W. P. as quoted by the Snake, p. 154. does totally exclude,
as anon I shall have occasion more largely to show. But that we do from hence
deny the Satisfaction which Christ did make, and which the Father did accept,
as mentioned and declared in Holy Writ, is very false. For we do believe, that
as our Savior does declare, John 10.18. No Man takes it from me (speaking of
his Life) but I lay it down of my self: I have power to lay it down, and I have
power to take it again. This Commandment received I of my Father. I say, we do
believe, that as Christ had this Commandment and Power from the Father, so by
his pure, divine, free and voluntary Resignation, Not as I will, but as thou will, Mat. 26.42. he did thereby endear the Father's Love unto him, as himself
declares v. 17. Therefore does my Father love me, because I lay down my Life.
And this his free and unconstrained voluntary Offering of himself, as a Ransom
for all, did include his Agony on the Mount, and his Agony on the Cross, in
fine: It includes all his Sufferings both inward and outward, whereby he became
a complete, perfect and satisfactory Sacrifice, and as such was accepted of the
Father. This briefly, but truly, and according to Scripture, is a short account
of the Satisfaction which we do positively own; as the former is an account of
the Satisfaction which we do positively deny.

But though we have in terms, often more largely, but to the purpose above,
declared our Sentiments herein: Yet the Snake, that he may in some respects
imitate the grand Serpent and false Accuser, does with his usual assurance
(speaking of this Doctrine) say, p. 151. Mr. Penn Blasphemes it, as both
Irreligious and Irrational. But with his false Glossing, neither shows what the
Doctrine of Satisfaction is, nor wherein W. P. does Blaspheme it.

Now Reader, for thy fuller Information herein, I shall acquaint thee (and that
the rather, because W. P. is the only particular Person of our Friends, who the
Snake in this Section does Hiss at) briefly, with the State of that
Controversy, which will give at least some Light to thy Judging of it. About
the Year 1670 or sooner (as we have been seldom without opposition, as now)
there was a Combination of Adversaries, who writ many things against us; and we
then, as now, were not backward to inform the Honest Inquirer, and reprove the
Envious Slanderer, by making public our Scriptural Belief and Sentiments in
those things, wherein we were misrepresented and abused, as the several Books
of ours, Printed about that time, will plentifully show. Among other things,
wherein we were then falsely accused, the Doctrine of Satisfaction was one: And
the line, by which we were to be measured, was not the Scripture, but their own
wrong Opinions of it, which I have already mentioned, p. 231. foregoing. This,
among other things, gave occasion to them Books of W. P's Reason against
Railing, Sandy Foundation shaken; and the Serious Apology, etc. Innocence with
its open Face. Of which Books the Snake does make so much use, as here and
there to pick a Line or two; and what is more unjust? He heaps up 12 or more
lines (p. 152.) without naming Book or Page, and that must represent W. P's
force (though not his, as there laid down) and against this the Snake levels his
Artillery, and Determines of the whole Books, and all the Quakers. p. 154. They
exceed the Impudence of the very Socinians, in their bold Effrontry against
this most Fundamental Doctrine of the Christian Religion.

And notwithstanding a trifling excuse, which the Snake here makes, for his not
proving his Charge, I see not how he can avoid being thought exceeding
Impudent, so liberally to accuse, and then fob the Reader off, with saying,

Ibid. My business at the present, being not to enter into the large Field of
the Socinian Controversy, but to show the much misled generality of the
Quakers.

Are they much misled, because of his false Charge? No, himself is therein much
misled: But for proof against us, we may expect what he says, Ibid. He has
wrote at large upon this Subject (which may hereafter see the Light.) So that
till his Darkness come to Light, the Reader may, if he please, take our
Adversary's word, that we are much misled, and exceed the Impudence, etc. -- I
doubt not but to find a much more Impartial Judgment from my Sober Reader, to
whom I now apply my self; and do acquaint him, That W. P. in his Sandy
Foundation, etc. does in great part employ himself against that rigid and
unscriptural Doctrine of Satisfaction, which I have set down, p. 231.
foregoing* Against which W. P. does in p. 14, etc. cite at large, the
Scriptures hereafter referred to, and shows the contrariety of this Doctrine to
these Scriptures, and some absurdities which unavoidably follow thereupon. The
Scriptures referred to are these, Exo. 34.6, 7. 2 Chronicles. 30.7. Neh. 6.17. Isa.
55.7. Jer. 31.31, to 34. Micah 7.18. Mat. 6.12. John 3.16. Acts 10.34. Romans
8.31, 32. 2 Cor. 11.5, 18, 19. Ephesians. 1.7. 1 Pet. 5.10. 1 John 4.9. These
dispatched. He further shows, from reason under three Heads, that this rigid
Doctrine is not true, from distinct Arguments raised, that Jesus Christ did not
give such rigid Satisfaction, either as God, or as Man, nor as God and Man.
These, for brevity sake, I omit, and come to some of those Irreligious and
Irrational Consequences which W. P. does show, do arise from this their rigid
Notion of Satisfaction, the 5th, 6th, 7th of which are these which follow, and
by which, the Snake says W. P. Blasphemes the Doctrine.

5. It ( the Doctrine in p. 231. ut supra) represents the Son more kind and
compassionate than the Father: Whereas, if both be the same God, then either
the Father is as Loving as the Son, or the Son as angry as the Father.

6. It robs God of the Gift of his Son for our Redemption (which the Scriptures
attribute to the unmerited Love he had for the World) in affirming the Son
purchased that Redemption from the Father, by the Gift of himself to God, as
our complete Satisfaction.

7. Since Christ could not pay what was not his own, it follows, that in the
payment of his own, the case remains still equally grievous, since the debt is
not hereby absolved or forgiven, but transferred only; and by consequence we are
no better provided for Salvation than before, owing that now to the Son which
was once owing to the Father.

These, Reader, are some of those Consequences which W. P. shows, do naturally
follow that strange and rigid Notion, That it is altogether Impossible for God
to remit or forgive without a plenary Satisfaction; and that God could not, by
any other way, obtain Satisfaction, or save Men, without inflicting the Penalty
of infinite Wrath and Vengance on Jesus Christ.

And if the Consequences are Blasphemous, it is owning to the Doctrine; not W.
P's natural deducing of them from it, any more than the Glass that is truly Cut
and Ground can be in fault to reflect the Deformities that are set before it.
But whether true or false, the Snake says, p. 151. His Arguments are the old
Socinian Job-trot. But if, in the reverse, the Job-trotting proves the
Non-jurors, W. P's Arguments may be good still; and I think it will hardly pass
for sufficient reason, that Arguments are therefore bad, because either
Socinian or Non-juror, may have used such like to other purposes. If this be
so, then why not further, and reject all the true Articles, which they may
believe, as well as the Arguments which they may use? And if the Snake is
resolved to keep at this distance from us, and disbelieve an Article because we
believe it, he must resolve to deny God, and Jesus Christ, and all hopes of
Salvation by him: Together with all the Holy Doctrines which the Scriptures
teach, and which we firmly Believe. But how shy soever he may be of us herein,
yet himself is a notable Job-trotter; for that his Arguments, his Accusations,
his Stories, and numerous Perversions, are no other than what have often, from
Adversaries of many Names, been objected against us, and as often answered by
us: Yet as false, and as often rebuffeted, as this Job-trot has been. The Snake
has licked it up, and improved it, as is commonly observed, Lies do improve by
carrying.

Ibid. p. 153. But upon the Socinian and Quaker Scheme, one of God's Attributes
must fight with, and conquer the other: And his Justice must quit the Field to
his Mercy. This is great Nonsense, as well as Blasphemy, and utterly
inconsistent with the first Notions of a God.

It Is true, that they who believe and say, that God's Attributes combat and
conquer each other, do believe and say Nonsense and Blasphemy, because all Jarr
and Strife is utterly inconsistent with the Unity of his Being. But that the
Quakers have ever so believed or said, is false; and does yet remain to be
proved: Which it can never be; for we, as well as the Snake (p. 152.) do say,
That God's Justice is greatly exalted, in that it did require and accept the
full and complete Satisfactory Offering, which Christ did give of himself, to
offended Divine Justice. And that God's Wisdom and Mercy is also greatly
exalted, in finding out and affording that means. And we say also, That these
are fulfilled Infinitely in the wonderful Economy of our Salvation, in that
complete Satisfactory Sacrifice: All this, and more to the like purpose, we
believe, as well as the Snake. But the Snake, though with his false Glossings, he
would represent W. P. and the Quakers, as deniers hereof; yet, does not declare
himself to believe the Article, as it was propounded by W^ P's Opponents, and
opposed by him: Though insinuatingly, and Snake-like, he says, p. 151. W. P.
denies the Satisfaction. What Satisfaction? Why The Satisfaction? Which the
Snake has not declared himself to believe, That it is altogether impossible for
God to remit, etc. as above, p. 231. Now, Reader, Whether exceeds in Impudence,
the Snake in this his liberal Character and Charge, that we deny this most
Fundamental Doctrine, etc. or himself, in refusing them same terms, which are
the matter of his Charge? This shows the Snake did, by his own practice, make
that Judgment, which he has falsely given of us, p. 143. They (He it must now
be read) can, upon a pinch, subscribe the whole Creed, and not mean one word of
it, etc.

For the present, we have done with his Charge from Sandy Foundation shaken,
etc. and the Snake next quotes p. 154. a passage from W. P. (but names neither
Book nor Page) it is, I suppose, from Reason against Railing, etc. p. 91. If it
is our Duty to forgive, without a Satisfaction received; and that God is to
forgive us as we forgive them, then is a Satisfaction totally excluded. That
is, such a Satisfaction as his Opponents contended for. -- Yet of this the
Snake declares, He has exposed the poorness of this Argument in Satan
Disrobed. A poor shift, that his Reader must take his word: But to show that W.
P's Argument is not so poor as the Snake does suggest: Please to take some more
of W. P's Argument, which the Snake has by a poor cunning left out. It is thus,

Christ farther Paraphrases upon that part of his Prayer, v. 14. For if you
forgive their Trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you. Where he
as well argues the Equity of God's forgiving them, from their forgiving others,
as he encourages them to forgive others, from the Example of God's Mercy in
forgiving them.

Now, if this Exposer can also show the poorness of our Savior's words, not
only in this of Mat. 6.14. but also in that of Mat. 18.23. to the end of the
Chapter, he may then be deemed a thorough paced Exposer: Till then I must think
that his Exposing is much more poor, than the Arguments which W. P. does show,
do arise from Christ's words.

The Snake's last Quotation from our Books in this Section he makes from
Serious Apology, p. 148. in very false and injurious sort, he thus says and
quotes, p. 154. W. P. speaking of our Justification by the righteousness which
Christ has fulfilled in his own Person for us. But here the Snake has left
out these words in a Parenthesis, (wholly without us,) which is all that W. P.
did oppose, in the place above referred to, in these words; And indeed this we
deny, and boldly affirm it in the Name of the Lord, to be the Doctrine of
Devils, and an Arm of the Sea of Corruption which does now deluge the whole
World.

Yes, Exposer, it is still true, that we do deny, and boldly affirm it to be
the Doctrine of Devils, That Men are justified by the Righteousness which
Christ has fulfilled in his own Person for us, wholly without us.

And for our so denying, and affirming, we have the warrant of Holy Writ,
wherein is abundantly testified, of the Spirit of Christ in Man, to which he
must be obedient in order to his Justification; and the Apostle in express
words, speaking of the Righteousness which is of Faith, (which is Christ's)
says, Romans 10.8. The word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy Heart;
that is, the word of Faith which we preach. And to the same purpose see Romans
3.24, 28. Romans 5.1. Tit. 3.7. Then not wholly without us.

Ibid. p. 155. See this further enlarged upon, in Satan Disrobed. -- See
likewise Mr. Crisp, etc.

To which he might have added, See Bugg, see Keith, and so, see, see, see, till
he had referred to all our Adversaries, both Apostates and others. To which, I
doubt not, the Reader will Judge, I should give sufficient answer, in saying
See, G. Whitehead, W. Penn, E. Penington, etc. who have writ, in answer to them.

SECT. XI. Concerning the Resurrection of the Body.
THIS Adversary, the Snake, after the example of some former Enemies, does
charge us falsely with the denial hereof: And it is in some sort unaccountable
to me how they should make it a Charge upon us, to deny that, which is indeed,
so firmly believed by us -- and by which we are stayed, and supported under the
Evils we meet, and the reproaches which we suffer: For were our hope in this
life only, we might with the Apostle say, 1 Cor. 15.19. We are of all men most
miserable. But we have Faith and Hope in Christ, in whom we have believed, that
after having passed through this Vale of Tears, wherein we are encompassed with
Perils of many sorts, from Apostates and other Adversaries; and are accounted
Deceivers, yet True. We shall after this Life, receive, if we persevere in
Faith, and Obedience, a resurrection to a Glorious Immortality, through Christ
our Savior. Thus (and often more largely) have we testified our belief of this
Great Doctrine of the Christian Faith; but because we deny (as not being
Scriptural) that the same Natural, Fleshly Body shall rise. Our Adversaries do
thence unrighteously infer and conclude, that we deny the resurrection of the
Body in any sense. And thus does the Snake, who, in this Section, does chiefly,
(as in the last Section wholly) quarrel and pervert these Books of W. P's
Reason against Railing, etc. and the Invality of John Faldo 's Vindication,
etc. and so gross is he, in his perversion and abuse of them, that he begins
the very first line of this Section, with saying.

Snake, p. 155. This (viz. the Resurrection) the Quakers do positively deny.

Now, that this Charge is positively false, as made by the Snake, from the two
Books before mentioned, will best appear, by transcribing from the Books
themselves (not in Bits as this Snake has done) both the occasion, by which
this Doctrine came to be spoken to, and also pretty largely the manner in which
W. P. does, in them speak to it. And I doubt not Reader, but his Christian
Belief and Scriptural Expression, therein, will be so much to thy satisfaction;
that thou will find reason therefrom, to conclude in opposition to the Snake,
that we do positively own the Resurrection of the Body.

First, To the occasion, on which it came to be spoken to, it was this.

Tho. Hicks (an Adversary) had published a piece under the Title of Dialogues;
wherein, upon many of the Doctrines of the Christian Faith, he propounds
Questions: And then brings in, under the names of Quakers, generally such
Answers, as might answer his purpose, either to Refute, or Cavil at.

In the 57th p. of his Dialogues, he propounds a Question, whether the same
Carnal Body that Dies, shall rise again?

In Answer to this Question, he brings in G. W. saying, "Is it not written,
Thou Fool, that which thou sowest, is not the Body which shall be, but God
gives a Body as pleases him?

Thus (says T. Hicks) Whitehead replied, and G. Fox, the Younger, speaks to the
same purpose.

Fools, that say this Body of Natural Flesh and Bones shall rise: I say, the
Body which is sown, is not the Body which shall be.

I query (says T. H.) whether both these Persons, do not tacitly deny the
resurrection.

This, Reader, was the occasion, on which W. P. in his Reason against Railing,
etc. speaks of this Doctrine. I now come to the manner in which he speaks of it
in that Book. But will first only observe to my Reader, that as in the Proverb,
A Lie does not lose by Carrying: So the Snake has improved upon T. Hicks's
disingenuity. He was contented with querying, whether we did not tacitly deny
the Resurrection. But the Snake, scorning to mumble doubtingly, says, we
positively deny it, which, as above, and will also hereafter appear; is a
positive falsehood. But first I desire it may be observed, from the foregoing,
that the Question was whether the same Carnal Body that Dies, shall rise? etc.

In answer to which with the Appendices of the Question, as laid down in the
Dialogues, W.P. imploys eight pages of the Book Reason against Railing, etc.
and of all of them the Snake has taken about so many lines, by which,
according to his own words, p. 350. It was intended purely to have it say, that
there was an Answer to such a Book, or rather to this part of that Book. But to
show that the Snake has neither answered W. P. herein, nor that the Quakers do
therein deny the Resurrection, take the following Quotation from that Book, p.
132, 133. Now that T. H. has shown himself at once dishonest and erroneous
too; let it be observed, 1. That from our denial of the Resurrection of the
same Natural, Fleshly Body, he absolutely infers and concludes our denial of
the Resurrection of the Body in any sense; Which is great injustice to any
Adversary. 2. Let it be well observed, that he makes the Scripture it self to
deny the Resurrection, and so Heterodox, by accounting G. W. and G. F. their
Answers, in Scripture Language, to be a denial of the Resurrection: For if T.
H. does not intend by his arguing, that the same Body that died, without any
mutation shall rise again, what makes him to quarrel at the Apostle Paul's
saying, Thou Fool, that which thou sowest is not the Body which shall be; and
repute us Heretics for believing him?

Certainly his gross belief of the Resurrection is inconsistent with Scripture,
Reason, and the Belief of all Men, right in their Wits, in the point; Who can
have the Confidence to call the Scripture his Rule, and yet contradict it so
Egregiously, as when the Apostle tells us, It is not the same Body that is sown
that shall be, to assert, that it is the same Body, and that, who says the
Contrary, denies the Resurrection of the Dead, and Eternal Recompense? In
short, We do acknowledge a Resurrection in order to Eternal Recompense, and
that every Seed shall have its own Body, and rest contented with what Body it
shall please God to give us: But as we are not such Fools as curiously to
enquire what: So must we ever deny the Gross conceits of T. H. and his
Adherents concerning the Resurrction. -- p. 134. But he (T. H.) thinks he is
not without reason; For (says he) if the It in the Text be not the same Body,
how can that be called a Resurrection; for that supposes the same? Dialog. p.
58.

I Answer, if a thing can yet be the same, and notwithstanding changed, for
shame let us never make so much stir against the Doctrine of Trasubstantiation:
For the absurdity of that is ^ather outdone, than equaled by this Carnal
Resurrection. -- p. 135. Dialog. Ibid. And this Mortal shall put on
Immortality, this Corruptible shall put on Incorruption, 1 Cor. 15.53.

I grant that this implies a Change, but I deny that it so much as intimates,
that Men shall rise with those very Carnal Bodies that were buried. No, the
Apostle not only tells us, that Body which is sown is not the Body that shall
be, But that Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, verse. 50. -- If
T. Hicks should tell me no, it is meant that the Mortal Body should be changed
into an Immortal Body, it follows that he is gone from the Letter of the Text
into an Interpretation, as well as that it contradicts his absurd Identity or
Sameness of Body. If so, it is as lawful for me (and more, if in the right) to
construe it thus, p. 336.) That we, who are Mortals, respecting our Bodies, put
off the Mortal Part, and put on instead thereof Immortality: Suitable to that
weighty passage of the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 5.1. For we know, that if our
Earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a Building of God, an
House not made with hands, Eternal in the Heavens. Which as directly concludes
the Change, not of Accidents, but Bodies, from an Earthly House or Tabernacle,
to an Heavenly House or Building, as ever any thing can be spoken by Men or
Angels. -- p. 137. The third place he brings, is out of the Epistle, Paul writ
to the Philippians, He shall change our vile Bodies; upon which he says, This
cannot be meant of a New Created Body, because such a Body cnnnot be said to be
either Vile or Changed.

But what makes this for his Conceit? Surely nothing. For if the Vile Body be
changed, then it is not that Vile Body; therefore not the same Body* Again, To
say that Scripture cannot be meant of a New Created Body, because such one cannot
be said to be either Vile or Changed, makes much against him. For, 1. It is to
say that the Body that shall be, is Vile, else what means his saying, Because
such a Body cannot be said to be (not to have been) either Vile or Changed? 2.
Though the Body that shall be, may not be said to be either Vile or Changed, yet
it may be given of God in lieu of a Vile Body, and so the Vile Body changed for
one that is Glorious. -- But Tho. Hicks thinks, the Joys of Heaven imperfect
else.

P. 138. I answer, Is the Joy of the Ancients, now in Glory, imperfect? or are
they in Heaven but by halves? If it be unequitable that the Body which has
suffered, should not partake of the Joys Celestial: Is it not in measure
unequal that the Soul should be rewarded so long before the Body?

This Principle brings to the Mortality of the Soul, (held by many Baptists) or
I am mistaken. But why must the Felicity of the Soul depend upon that of the
Body? Is it not to make the Soul a kind of Widow, and so in a state of Mourning
and Disconsolateness, to be without its beloved Body? Which State is but a
better sort of Purgatory. See T. V. and T. D.

What made the Apostle willing to be absent from the Body, that he might be
present with the Lord? 2 Cor. 5.8, 9. If such a Dissolution brought Sadness
instead of Joy, as our Adversaries in the point of the Resurrection suggest, if
not boldly affirm? In short, If the Complete Happiness of the Soul rests in a
Reunion to a Carnal Body, for such it is sown? Then never cry out upon the
Turks Alcoran, for such a Heaven, and the Joys of it suit admirably well with
such a Resurrection. The Reasons I have to give against this Barbarous Conceit,
I thus Contract.

Because that the Scripture speaks of a Dissolution, and no Resurrection of
that which is Dissolved, being Earthly, and unfit for a Celestial Paradise,
and therefore hold forth a building of God, Eternal in the Heavens.

P. 139. 2. If the Body be the same, it must have the same Nature, otherwise
not the same Body: But if it have the same Nature, it will be corruptible
still. Mortal Seeds bring forth Mortal Natures, not Immortal; neither can
Mortal be Immortal, and yet the same Nature as before; for that Change made,
tell me what remains of the Old Earthly Body? -- P. 140. For our Parts, a
Resurrection we believe, and of Bodies too, unto Eternal Life. What they shall
not be, I have briefly said and proved: What they shall be we leave with God,
who will give every one a Body as pleases him, and Thou Fool belongs to the
unnecessary Medler.

Thus W. P. and also more large to the same purpose in the place referred to.
From which it may appear, that, that which he compares to Transubstantiation
and the Turks Alcoran. Is that Gross Conceit of the Resurrection of the same
Carnal Body, which is not Scriptural; and is exploded by Men eminent in the
Church of England. Which though the Snake, with his usual assurance, peremptorily
asserts, p. 156. No Christian ever held. Yet it does appear, that T. H. with
others, (whom if the Snake will not acknowledge to be such, he must prove them
otherwise) did so hold.

Ibid. p. 156. Some of them (the Quakers) suppose a perfectly New Body will be
made for the Soul; but others, that the Soul it self is the Spiritual Body,
which is mentioned 1 Cor. 15.44.

I do more than suppose, for I have proved the Snake a very false Relater of
our Actions and Words; and if he will name who them, some, or others are, whose
Suppositions he pretends to give; it is not unlikely but the Suppositions may
prove to be his own.

Ibid. And in consequence of this, these believe no General Resurrection; no,
nor some of them, any End of the World.

I have the greater reason to believe the Suppositions above to be the Snake's,
being well assured the Consequence is his: For I know of no Quakers who do not
believe the General Resurrection, as declared in Scripture, and also what is
there declared concerning the End of the World; and if he knows any who do not,
let him name them.

Ibid. p. 157. The Church of Rome owes Mr. Penn thanks for so very kind a
Representation of Transubstantiation, as to make it stand upon a better foot
than the Resurrection of the Body, which is an Article of our Creed, and
received by the Catholic Church in all ages.

For thanks merited from Rome, the Snake may out^ie W. P. For he alas, has only
represented Transubstantiation to be as easy in belief, as the Resurrection of
the same Carnal Body which Dies; which I may safely say, no Christian ought to
believe. But the Snake, as pro Aris and Focis, has Combated the Reformation,
opposed the Reasons and Arguments on which it is in part built, and has
absolutely condemned the setting up opposite Altars, and affirmed, that
necessary Reformation had been best carried on by continuing in their
Communion, as I have before shown: for all which, and more to the same purpose,
it may be supposed, the Church of Rome owes him many Thanks.

But what thanks soever Rome may owe the Snake, it is very plain, W. P. owes
him none, for charging him indefinitely with representing the Resurrection of
the Body upon a worse foot than Transubstantiation. What W. P. did so
represent, was the Resurrection of the same Carnal Body which Dies. Now if the
Snake will please to tell us, that this is an Article in his Creed, and has
been received by the Catholic Church in all Ages. It will be as easy to show,
that he says false with respect to the Catholic Church, as it will be to prove
that himself believes falsely in the Article. As for the Resurrection of the
Body, we, with the Catholic Church, do firmly believe it, and have always so
declared; and have at all times been ready to testify so much in the Language
of Holy Writ.

Ibid. p. 158. What does he think? Was not Christ's Body changed in his
Transfiguration upon the Mount?

The Snake has just before told us, that Transubstantiation supposes a Change
of Substance; upon which in my turn, I may ask, What does he think? Was
Christ's Body so Changed upon the Mount?

Ibid. p. 159. The Grain must die, or else it will not fructify or rise again.
In this Death it loses something, as the Husks; but it retains the Substance
which rises again.

And let it be observed, by way of addition, to the Snake's Agriculture, that
the Substance, the full Grain in the Ear, is covered, when risen, with much
such an Husk, the same for Nature with that which was lost in the Earth.

Ibid. p. 160. Death is a great Change, yet if William dies, it is William,
even the same William that Lived, who Died: And as sure it will be the same who
shall rise again.

That Death is a great Change, is doubtless very true; but to bring the
Question pretty near, if Charles dies, even the same Charles that lives, shall
Charles, the same Charles of Flesh, the same both for Substance and Husk rise
again.

Ibid. p. 160. But I am now to tell you a very strange thing.

Yet if it be true, its strangeness need not afright.

Ibid. Mr. Penn does understand that long and elegant Description of the
Resurrection of our Bodies, from the 35 th verse of the 15 th of the 1 st
Epistle to the Corinthians, only of the Spiritual State of the Soul in this
Life.

And if so, what then? Does W. Penn therefore deny the Resurrection of the
Body, because he has said, that the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.35. does here speak of
the Spiritual State of the Soul. If that be good Logic, then it concludes thus
against the Snake, that he denies the Spiritual State of the Soul in this Life,
because he declares the 1 Cor. 15.35. is to be understood of the Resurrection
of our Bodies. And this Conclusion is very Natural, till the Snake can give a
good Reason why W. P. has not as much liberty, as himself, to expound 1 Cor.
15.35. and that W. P's Interpretation is against the meaning of the Place.

But, Reader, for thy more full satisfaction, concerning W. P. as quoted by the
Snake from that Book of his Invalidity, etc. of which I have already given some
small hint, p. 239. foregoing. I shall here briefly, first, speak to its
occasion, and afterward pretty largely transcribe W. P's words, whereby thou will fully see, that he in this, as in Reason against Railing, etc. does only
deny that gross Conceit of the Resurrection of a Carnal Body, which was the
Question.

As to the first, the Occasion, it was this, J. F. published a Discourse,
entitled, Quakerism no Christianity, made up in great part of Quotations (as
the Snake is, so that he has not the Glory of being the first, though he may
stand in Competition with him for falsity in them) out of our Books. This W. P.
answered in a piece of his Quakerism a New Nickname for Old Christianity. And
therein shows how grossly J. F. had mistaken our Principles, perverted our Words
in his Quotations: And finally confirms our true sense with the Authority of
the Scriptures.

In Reply to this, J. Faldo published what he calls his Vindication; to which
W.P. did Rejoin, under the Title of the Invalidity of J. F 's Vindication, etc.
which is the Book now in Question; from which the Snake does suggest W. P. to
deny the Resurrection.

For utter confutation of which, I entreat thy patience, Reader, to consider,
what I shall transcribe from that Book, which will be the Substance of what W.
P. has there said on this Head.

Invalidity, etc. p. 368. We may guess how well he proved it in his Book, (the
Resurrection of the Natural Body of Flesh and Bones) by the strength he has
employed to maintain it in his Second. But let all Sober Men judge if this
Reply be pertinent to this part of my Answer; yet he promised he would answer
my Arguments. For the Scripture is clear, That corruption shall not inherit
incorruption, neither can Flesh and Blood inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor.
15.50. Thus Annot. cert. Divin. Anno 1645. upon the place; And if he will know
the true Resurrection, let him learn to understand this weighty passage; For we
know, that if our Earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a
Building of God, an House not made with hands, Eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor.
5.1. And I cannot but wonder, my Adversaries Understanding should be so
benighted, as that contrary to express Scripture, he should assert a
Resurrection of the Same Body that is Buried, Properly and Strictly so: The
Apostle (p. 369.) teaches us to believe, that it is not that same Body that is
sown that shall be; for though we shall be changed from Mortality to
Immortality, Corruption to Incorruption, 2 Cor. 5.1. and 1 Cor. 15.37, 50. (yet
Men's Bodies of) Flesh and Blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

For the word Resurrection, (...) does not strictly imply a taking up of the
same numerical Body, as he would have us believe from his new found relative It
(1 st Book, 2 part, p. 138.) for which Beza shall give him a release, both from
the Latin, and Original Greek, there being no word in either for his relative
It, on which he and his Factious Brother Hicks, have so relatively insisted,
indeed as their last and best refuge. The Text lies thus.

1 Cor. 15.44. (...). Seritur Corpus Animale, resuscitatur Corpus Spirituale.
i. e. A Natural Body is sown, a Spiritual Body is raised. That is, They lay
down a Natural, and take up a Spiritual Body, or in lieu of a Natural, receive
a Spiritual Body; not that the Natural Body shall be transubstantiated into a
Spiritual Body, or that admitting of such an exchange, that the Spiritual is
the same Numerical Body that was the Natural, for so the Natural and Spiritual
Body are the same.

But suppose J. Faldo's relative It to hold, I do utterly deny that this Text
is concerned in the Resurrection of Man's Carnal Body at all. I will recite it
with the 5 following verses, as they are in our English Translation.

Here W. P. at length gives the 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49. Verses, which I omit
for brevity, and then continues.

I say this does not concern the Resurrection of Carnal Bodies, but the two
States of Men, under the first and second Adam. Men are sown into the World
Natural, and so they are the Sons of the first Adam; but they are raised
Spiritually, through him who is the Resurrection and the Life, and so they are
the Sons of the second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, a quickening Spirit. The very
words of the Apostle undeniably prove this to be the Scope; How else could the
first Adam's being made a living Soul, and the second Adam a quickening Spirit,
be a pertinent Instance to prove Natural and Spiritual Bodies? Upon which
follows, that the Natural was first, that is, the first Adam; and then that
which is Spiritual, which is the second Adam, the quickening Spirit, the Lord
from Heaven, who came to raise up the Sons of the first Adam from their Dead,
to his Living, from their Natural, to his Spiritual Estate.

But perhaps it will be objected that the 47. v. The first Man is of the Earth,
Earthly. And part of the 49. v. We shall also bear the Image of the Heavenly.
Seem to imply a Bodily Resurrection; but let the whole verses be considered,
and we shall find no such thing. The first Man is of the Earth, Earthly; the
second Man is the Lord from Heaven. Who sees not that this is rather spoken of
earthly Mindedness than of the earthly Body of Adam? It was mentioned to show
the great Disparity (p. 371.) that is between the Nature and Qualification of
the first and second Adam. The following verses puts this Interpretation out of
doubt, As is the Earthly, such are they that are Earthly, and as is the
Heavenly, such are they also that are Heavenly.

For those words, We shall also bear the Image of the Heavenly. I cannot see
how they should relate to the Resurrection of the Carnal Bodies of Men; for the
Image of the Heavenly, is a renewed State to God, through the Operation of the
Spirit and Power of Christ: The first part of the verse clears it; And as we
have born the Image of the Earthly, we shall (or rather, let us) bear the Image
of the Heavenly (as Ambrose and Theophylact read it, and 6. or 7. Copies
besides have it) which is as much as to say, As we having born the Image of the
God of this World, by becoming his Children; so may we bear the Image of the
true and living God, by being redeemed from a vain Conversation, having our
Consciences sprinkled from dead works, and being born again of the
Incorruptible Seed, by the Word of God, which lives and abides for ever.

Thus far W. Penn, both with respect to the Resurrection of Carnal Bodies, and
in his Defense of his Interpretation of the 1 Cor. 15. to all which he adds,
from p. 374. to 380. some Testimonies from H. Moore, T. Collier, Farellus, H.
Hammond and Jerome (were not all these Members of the Catholic Church?)
against the Gross conceit of his Opponents, of a Carnal Resurrection: To which
I may subjoyn, that what efforts so ever our Enemies shall make against us,
concerning the Identity or Numericalness of Bodies in the Resurrection, with
those of Flesh and Bone, which we lay in the Grave: We shall content our selves
with answering them; not in the modes of Philosophy, but in the Language of
Holy Writ; and esteem it our Duty, as well as Wisdom, in a Question so
Mysterious, not to be wise above what is Written: And when our Adversaries can
produce any farther declaration herein, which they shall prove to be of equal
Authority with what is so already declared, we will not be backward in our
hearty acknowledgement of it.

Snake, p. 162. When I urged to a Quaker-Preacher toward a proof of the
Resurrection of Bodies, That Text, Matthew. 27.52, 53. He made Answer, that that
was not meant of the Litteral or Earthly Jerusalem, that any Dead Body arose
there: But of the Spiritual Jerusalem, which John saw coming down from Heaven.
And others told me they heard the same exposition in a Quaker- Sermon, at one
of their Meetings.

That any Quaker-Preacher so acknowledged by us, did so tell the Snake, I find
cause not to believe, on his bare word; knowing his readiness, both to pervert
words rightly spoken, and to tell false Stories of things that never were, as
is before shown: And what others told him, we are little concerned for; but if
it may be worth his while to produce better proofs, and be more clear in his
Charge, he will not want an Answer.

Ibid. p. 162. Here we have Spiritual Graves, Spiritual Dead Bodies, Spiritual
Jerusalems, Spiritual Resurrection and Spiritual Christ, whenever any Text
pinches them.

Pray what Text pincht the Prophet, when speaking from the Lord? Ezekiel. 37.13,
14. Ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I have opened your Graves O my
People, and brought you up out of your Graves, and put my Spirit within you,
etc. -- Did any Text pinch our Savior? When he bid his Disciple, Matthew. 8.22.
Follow me, and let the Dead Bury their Dead: Or the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.5, 6. Even
when we were Dead in Sins, has quickened us together with Christ (by Grace ye
are saved) and has raised us up together, and made us sit together, in
Heavenly places in Christ Jesus: Nor was John the Divine more pincht, when in
the Apocalypse he says, 3.12. -- The Name of the City of my God, which is New
Jerusalem, which comes down out of Heaven from my God.

Thus, would I be large herein, I am not pinched for Examples, which do
abundantly show, that Sin and Iniquity has been termed a Grave; and they who
are securely a sleep herein, have been accounted Dead; and when they have
witnessed the Power of God to break that false security, they have seen that
Grave and Death they were in; and many in this State have cried to God, that he
would make them partakers of his Resurrection from their Sin and Death, which
came by it: God in Mercy, and great Compassion, has heard and answered, and
has raised, and is raising, many; who through the Spiritual Power of Christ in
them, are measurably made to sit together in Heavenly places in Christ Jesus:
This without being pinched, we freely own, before God and Men; and do as freely
own, that there are in Scripture spoken of Outward Graves and Dead Bodies, an
Outward Jerusalem, and a Resurrection of Bodies, to General Judgment, and that
Christ has a Body glorified in Heaven; yet is Spiritually in his People.

Ibid. p. 163. These (Hymeneus and Philetus) in this Article of the
Resurrection were direct Quakers: These were they who as St. Paul tells of
them, 2 Timothy 2.18.) Concerning the Truth, have erred; saying, that the
Resurrection is past already. That is, they Spiritualized it away from the
Letter, and meant it only of the Spiritual rising of Christ in our Hearts;
which having obtained (as their Light within did assure them) their
Resurrection they supposed was past already, and they expected no other.

The Snake does in p. 161. Charge W. P. with making Arbitrary Interpretations
on 1 Cor. 15. but proves it not: But I do here charge, and shall show, that
this Interpretation of the Snake's is Arbitrary and against the sense of the
place. The Holy Apostle speaking of these Men, 1 Timothy 1.19, 20. advises
Timothy to hold the Faith, and a good Conscience: And he adds, Which some
having put away, concerning Faith have made Shipwreck; of whom is Hymeneus and
Alexander, whom I have delivered unto Satan, that they may learn not to
Blaspheme. And 2 Timothy 2.16, 17, 18. But shun Profane and Vain Bablings, for
they will increase to more Ungodliness, and their word will eat as does a
Canker, of whom is Hymeneus and Philetus, who concerning the Truth have erred;
saying, that the Resurrection is past already, and overthrow the Faith of some.

From all this, I would desire to know how the Snake does prove that Hymeneus,
Alexander and Philetus, did Spiritualize the Resurrection from the Letter. By
the Character the Apostle gives them, they do not seem to be such Spiritual
Men, for he says, they had made Shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience, and
were Profane and Vain Bablers. For Blaspheming, Profane and Vain Ba^^ing, they
could have no assurance from the Light (...), which they departed from, when
they made Shi^^rack of Faith and a good Conscience. And the ^nake by his
Blasphemous, Profane and Vain Flo^^^ at the Light within, Christ in Men, shows
him^^lf to have Shipwrack'd Faith, as by his notoriou^ ^alshoods he has
Shipwrack'd a good Conscience.

Ibid. p. 163. And as they deny any outward Resurrection, so consequentially
they deny any outward Heaven.

But as we own (as is plentifully before shown) what the Snake calls an Outward
Resurrection so consequentially we own an Outward Heaven.

Ibid. p. 164. Where repeating the above quoted words, in his (G. F 's) way,
that is never exactly, seldom truly, (though they complain grieviously) if but
a Comma be mis-placed in quoting any of their Words, etc.

That G. Fox has truly, if not exactly (which I cannot say, not having those
Books which he answered, to compare with) quoted his Adversaries Books, I take
for granted in the Snake's Instance: For if otherwise, why did he not detect
it? And a Quotation may be be said to be truly made, if it contains the whole
meaning of the Writer, in that place, though it may not be exactly in the words
of the Writer. But the grievous Complaint which we have made against former
Adversaries, as now against this Snake, is not for simple Comma's, but for
cutting assunder, and sometimes leaving out Sentences, for making breaks, that
break the sense of the Writer: But, if they happen to escape in all this,
(which the Snake has hitherto seldom done) then they pervert our words, and
will have them to speak their sense, not our own; and we must not be allowed to
mean by them, what we have always declared we did and do mean; but their
Comment and Glossings they will have pass for our Text; and that shall be
either Blasphemous, Impertinent or Ridiculous, according to the several
appearances in which they will draw us forth; either of Monstrous,
Insignificant or Foolish, according to their several Aims, in which they would
make us Obnoxious. This is what I now complain grievously of in this Snake; as
others my Friends have grievously complained of former Adversaries.

Ibid. p. 164. Quoted from Great Mystery, p. 214* There Is none have a Glory and
a Heaven but within them, which was before Man had a being.

And if the Snake had taken the pains to have consulted his Bible, he might
have found our Savior testifying, Luke 17.21. Behold the Kingdom of God (and
which is frequently called the Kingdom of Heaven) is within you. And this
Kingdom, 'tho it be in Man, yet it was before Man had being, and will always
endure; and whosoever are made partakers of this Kingdom of God in Men, and
continue obedient Subjects in this Kingdom (that is in the Power and Spirit of
Christ) they shall surely have their Lot and Eternal Inheritance in the
Father's House, in which there is many Mansions.

Thus, Reader, having followed this Snake, in his Entwinings and Foldings, and
in good degree (I hope) detected his ill practices, and rescued ou^ sincere
Belief from his perversions in his several Instances hitherto. I now proceed.

SECT. XII. Concerning Baptism and the Supper, commonly called Sacraments.
WE have not in this Section of the Snake, Entitled, Of the Holy Sacraments,
any Quotations, as in all the foregoing Sections: That was not now necessary,
because of our known disuse of them: But here, what he gives is a continued
Declamation against our disuse of them. This Declamation he has intersperst
with some false reasonings to prove their continuance. But he has not (as it
might have been expected he should) examined and refuted those very many
Reasons, and Scripture Defenses which we have frequently published for this our
disuse. But in Magisterial and Despotick Manner, would obtrude his Arbitrary
Interpretation, and Additions to the Text of Scripture, which he would have to
pass, and we must ask no Reasons. Wherefore I might justly pass by, without
further notice taken of this his idle and false Declamation, or at most, only
refer to those our Reasons, and Scripture Defenses, which have been so often
given, till he should have shown their Invalidity, and have established what he
proposes, beyond the strength of those Arguments, which we have offered. And
this I might likely have done, but for the sake of those, into whose hands this
may come, who possibly may not have seen them our Reasons and Defenses: Chiefly
for the sake of such it is that I am content to follow him through this his
Section, to detect his false Reasoning; and also to show, that by our Practice
herein, we are not unagreeable to the Scriptures; though we are so to him.

The Snake in his first Paragraph, as is his custom, has taken care to
prepossess his Reader with a false comparison concerning us, by joining to our
Description, Hymeneus and Philetus: That they did err, we have Apostolical
Warrant; and the Snake, the more easily to beguile his Reader, would explain
their error by a [ that is] and then does boldly assert, that what the Apostle
did condemn them for, is what this Snake does now condemn us for: But upon
Examination it will appear, that his abitrary Interpretation or Explanation of
their Error, has in it much confidence, but no certainty, of which now in order.

Snake, p. 165. That is, say they, with Hymeneus and Philetus, till his coming
Spiritually in our Hearts.

I have in p. 255. foregoing, briefly observed already, concerning these Men,
part of whose error was (and which is only taken notice of by the Snake) their
saying the Resurrection was past already. That they do not seem, by the
Character the Apostle gives of them, of being profane and vain Babblers; such
who had put away a good Conscience, and shipwrack'd Faith; I say, they do not
seem hereby to be such, who did contend for the Spiritual Coming of Christ in
their Hearts: Profaneness is Immorality, and what has that to do with the
Coming of Christ in the Heart? It is in direct opposition to it. And the
Apostle could not have made their Character as above; had they so contended for
Christ; because it was what the Apostle declares, himself did follow after,
Phil. 3.10, 11, 12. That I may know him, and the power of his Resurrection, and
the fellowship of his Sufferings, being made conformable unto his Death: If by
any means I might attain unto the Resurrection of the Dead. Not as though I had
already attained, either were already perfect; but I follow after, if that I
may apprehend that for which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus.

Reader, Think thou, that Hymeneus and Philetus, those profane and vain
Babblers, who shipwreckt Faith and a good Conscience in themselves, and did
overthrow the Faith of some, did do all these things, and expound that saying
of theirs, That the Resurrection was past already, in such manner: (as the
Snake says) Spiritually in our Hearts. No, it could not be, they were gone from
the Spirit of Christ in them, when they went into profane Babbling; and what
degrees soever they might have known (while in obedience) of the Power of
Christ's Resurrection: Yet that they quite lost, when they shipwreckt Faith and
a good Conscience. So that the Snake's explanation is not only arbitrary, but
contradictory to the Apostles character of them.

He goes on with great assurance, and pretense of familiarity with the Holy
Apostles, and of the purest Primitive Christians, and Blessed Martyrs; and
affirms of them all, in his frothy manner.

Ibid. p. 165. None of them dreamed of the time being thus expired.

For the observance of what he calls the Sacraments, but that they did think
them obligatory to the end of the World, the litteral Resurrection at the last
day.

It can be no small acquaintance, which this Snake pretends to have had with
this variety of Persons, who dare so boldly affirm of them all, while sleeping,
that they did never dream of their Expiration, and while waking, that they all
did think these Ordinances always were to continue. I suppose the observing
Reader will, with me, be apt to question how he came by this great Intimacy,
and desire him to give some proof of the truth of what he has so affirmed.

But if we should suppose, that he could prove (which he never can) that none
of them did so dream, that would not be ground sufficient to us, to prove that
the time of their continuance is not expired: For the Question being concerning
Ordinances, said to be appointed by Christ; we are not to look to Dreams, but
to consider the Appointment of Christ; for, from thence can only be truly
learned, both the things appointed, and the time for which they were appointed.

And here, of a sudden, the Snake has much abated of his pretense to know what
was not Dreamed by the Holy Apostles, purest Primitive Christians, and Blessed
Martyrs; and comes to lay his pretense upon the Commission given by our Savior
to his Disciples, mentioned Mat. 28.19, 20. And this Commission he gives by
piecemeal, so as that it might, if possible, be so large, as to take in the
Addition which he makes to it. For first, He would have it to be a Commission
for Water Baptism; next, He would have it to express the Continuance of the
Water Baptism to the end of the World. And having, in disjoynted sort, thus
given it, he draws this Pithy Conclusion, p. 166. For if this be the time,
during which Christ promised to assist his Commission, it must doubtless infer
the like continuance of the things required in the said Commission.

We say so too: But the Question is concerning something said to be required in
the Commission, which the Commission does not express; therefore we say, not
contained in it. And that this has been our frequent Objection to our Opposers,
in this particular, the Snake could not but know; and therefore if he would
have established his addition [ Water] to the Text, he ought to have refuted
our objections to the addition, and then to have given his better reasons for
it; but none of this is done. But he goes on begging the Question, and taking
that for granted, which we deny, viz. That when our Savior says, Mat. 28.19.
Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: He does herein Command them Disciples to Baptize
with Water. If the Snake had given us some reason why we ought to take this his
Addition of that wherein the Text is silent, that reason might have been
considered. And it will be yet of greater force, if he can prove from
Scripture, that our Savior is here giving to his Disciples, Commission
concerning John's Baptism with Water, and not his own, which is with the Holy
Spirit. But of this the Snake says, p. 167. The Holy Ghost is his (Christ's)
Gift only. It is true, that the Holy Ghost is originally Christ's Gift; yet it
is as true, that Men prepared, fitted, and quallified by the operation of his
Grace, have Instrumentally, as Ministerial Ofcers, given the Gifts of the Holy
Spirit.

Thus the Apostle, Romans 1.11. For I long to see you, that I may impart unto you
some Spiritual Gift. And the same Apostle tells the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 4.15.
-- For in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel. And he declares,
that his Commission was, Acts 26.18. To open their Eyes, and to turn them from
Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan to the Power of God. Now
strictly speaking, it is only Christ, by the Gift of the Holy Ghost, who does
these great Works, of which the Apostle speaks. The Apostle herein was
Instrumentally made the Minister of those things wherein God did appear unto
him. And at this day, those who are of God made Ministers of those things,
wherein he does appear by his Spirit unto them, such he fits, furnishes, and
quallifies, Instrumentally, to be able to impart Spiritual Gifts, and to beget
People to God, by turning them from Darkness to Light, and from Satan's Power
to the Power of God. Thus Spiritual Baptism and Teaching, mentioned in the
Commission of Christ, continues to be assisted by Christ, and will be so to the
end of the World.

Now this teaching, with respect to the sound of words, may be said to be
outward: But the end of that teaching was to the Soul, the inward Man; and
against Spiritual Wickedness in high places, Ephesians. 6.12. And this outward
Teaching in its end, and in its continuance is, that it may bring People, in
their several Generations, to witness the Spiritual Baptism of Christ with the
Holy Ghost, whereby they may be brought to witness, that they are begotten to
God.

Ibid. p. 168. This outward Baptism with Water was an Ordinance instituted, as
a means of Grace, whereby the Inward Baptism with the Holy Ghost was conveyed.

This is saying, but not proving: We deny that Baptism with Water was
Instituted as a means of Grace; for then had the far greater number of those
who were converted to Christianity by the Ministry of Paul, wanted the means of
Grace: Because they were very few, as himself testifies, that he did Baptize
with Water. And to them whom he did so Baptize, is was not the means of Grace.
Because, if it had been so, it must have perpetually attended his Ministry in
that Grace and Truth which comes by Jesus, or otherwise the Apostle Paul was
not completely as the rest of the Apostles, a Minister of the Spirit; which I
think this Snake will hardly venture to affirm. But himself declares it did not
perpetually attend his Ministry, 1 Cor. 1.17. For Christ sent me not to
Baptize, but to Preach the Gospel.

Ibid. p. 168. Upon all which accounts it was necessary, even where the inward
Baptism with the Holy Ghost was already attained, as St. Peter said, Acts 10.47.

If where the inward Baptism with the Holy Ghost be attained, the Outward
Baptism with Water, be still necessary, because the Holy Apostle Peter
commanded, Acts 10.48. Cornelius and his Family to be Baptized. Then why is not
Circumcision also necessary, because the same Apostle did compel the Gentiles
in general to be Circumcised; and concerning which, at that time when Cornelius
was Baptized, it was not determined whether they should be Circumcised. This
sufficiently shows, that the Apostles words, in this place, cannot be
understood, to Intend or Command Outward Baptism, with Water, to be a standing
and perpetual Ordinance in the Church.

Ibid. p. 169. It is very Observable, that among those things wherein St. Paul
was instructed, thus immediately from Christ, he tells us, 1 Cor. 11.23. That
one was the Institution of the Lord's Supper. Upon which he lays so great
stress, that he charges grievous Diseases sent among the Corinthians, and Death
it self, verse. 30. upon their Neglect and Abuse of this Holy Mystery.

It is very observable, that this Snake, by begging every matter in question,
takes them for granted, which we deny. And then in usual assurance, runs on in
his Doughty Manner, without so much as offering at any Authority to prove what
he says, or disprove what we have often said upon this Subject.

Thus he will have the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.23. delivering to that People, the
Institution of the Lord's Supper: Yet has not proved from the words, that they
are any Institution at all.

The words of the Apostle are these, verse. 23. For I have received of the Lord
that which also I delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus, the same night in
which he was betrayed, took Bread.

These words of the Apostle are plainly a Narration of somewhat done by our
Savior, but contain not any Institution, or Command, as the observing Reader
may find. And had the Apostle herein intended to deliver an Institution or
Command of something that was to be perpetually obligatory in the Church; and
not to deliver singly an account of matter of Fact; he had, no doubt delivered
it, in words whose import could not be questioned: But he says not, For I have
received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you; That as the Lord
Jesus the same night in which he was delivered, took Bread: So, etc. The
Apostle says not thus, but the contrary; and when he repeats the imperative
words of Christ to his Disciples on this Head, he seems of set purpose so to
have placed them, that they do not import any Command: For he says, verse. 25.
-- This do ye, as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. verse. 26. For as
often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lords death till
he come.

These, I say, do not import any Command or Institution; which, because the
Snake will have that they do, let him show wherein: If he thinks the words [as
often,] to have some imperative force; let him see if he can prove that that
imperative Force, is more than if one should say to him, As often as thou goes
to Westminster, call upon John Thompson, (late one of the King's Messengers.) I
easily think the Snake will conclude, the imperarative Force of these words
none at all, and will go, as occasion calls, to Westminster, and not think
himself obliged to make that Visit.

But the Snake goes on with wonderful assurance, and will have the Apostle lay
so great stress upon this Institution, That he charges grievous Diseases, sent
among the Corinthians, and Death it self, verse. 30. upon their Neglect and
Abuse of this Holy Mystery.

But from the place it self, it does not appear, that the Apostle lays any such
stress upon it. For, first, as I have already shown, the Apostle makes a
narration of Fact! Tells what our Lord did do, that Night in which he was
betrayed; but gives no Command; does not declare it to be instituted; makes no
Mystery of it as the Snake would suggest.

Secondly, The Apostle redargueth the Corinthians evil practices of Drunkenness
and Unseasonable Eating, even then when they were pretending to have in
remembrance the Death of Christ. And queries of them verse. 22. What! have ye
not houses to eat and drink in, or despise ye the Church of God, and shame them
that have not? What shall I say unto you? Shall I praise you in this; I praise
you not.

Thirdly, The Apostle does in the 30th verse show them some of the Consequences
which had attended their Irreverent, Greedy and Drunken practices, and tells
them, For this cause many are weak, and sickly among you, and many sleep. And a
very natural Consequence it is, and nothing strange, that Intemperance should
bring Weakness and Sickness, and finally Death. But the Snake would put the
Apostles words upon the Tenters and stretch them, to signify grievous
Diseases. All Weakness and Sickness may, in some sense, be said to be grievous:
But when we say Grievous Diseases are sent among a People, it does at least
imply something more than the common Infirmities which usually our Nature is
subject to, by way of Eminence, as a Judgment. This the Snake seems to suggest,
but offers not to prove, neither can he; or that those Corinthians were more
Weak and Sickly, etc. than what might be the natural effect of the Intemperance
above spoken of.

Ibid. p. 169. How then would he have censured the Preaching down this, and the
other Sacrament of Baptism, as Carnal and Hurtful.

And it may be asked, how he would have censured the appointing for
Institutions and Sacraments, what was not so appointed by our Savior himself,
or any of his Brethren the Apostles?

Ibid. And let me here seriously mind these Quakers, and admonish others how
their Neglect of the Outward Ordinances and Signs, has lost to them the
Reality, and the Thing signified.

This Snake, has (as before shown) pretended great Charity for us; yet here
sticks not to damn us all. See, Reader, his Hypocrisy; he pretends to object
against us, and has made a particular Section on that Head, That we damn all
but our selves, (of which in its place.) Yet here in great Charity (and as
himself says) seriously; we have lost the Reality, and the Thing signified;
which he will say is Christ, then necessarily Salvation, which is only by him.

But it is well for us, that this Snake, whether serious or scoffing, whether
profane or arrogant, (and at times he is all these) is still wrong, and false:
For we can in deep Humility of Soul, thank God, that through the Manifestations
of the Holy Spirit upon our Hearts, we are kept in fresh and living
Remembrances of the Love of God in Jesus Christ to us ward; and as we open at
his Voice, we do witness him to fulfill his Promise, Rev. 3.20. I will come into
him, and sup with him, and he with me.

Ibid. For it had been impossible for any, who had been kept in the constant
use and practice of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, to have forgot Christ's
outward Dying and Shedding of his Blood.

And is it not as much impossible, for those who witness Christ to fulfill his
Promise, Rev. 3.20. in them, to forget his outward Crucifixion, and shedding of
his Blood? I think it is not less impossible; and I am very sure it is not less
Beneficial, for a Man to witness the Spiritual Supper of Christ in, and with
him, than it is for a Man, without such Spiritual Knowledge, to have only the
Outward Remembrances of Christ by outward Bread and Wine. Now if the Snake will
say, and prove, that it is impossible for all such who have the Outward
Ordinances, to miss of the Spiritual Knowledge of Christ; that might be
somewhat to the purpose; but the Contrary is too plain. Yet it is absolutely,
and always impossible, for all those, who do Spiritually Sup with Christ, as
mentioned Rev. 3.20. while they do so Sup with him, to forget him: No, it
cannot be, but that Daily Bread, which he breaks to those who seek him, will
preserve the Soul which does receive it, alive to bless and praise his Name.

Ibid. p. 70. The Devil having stolen from us the Body, or Outward Part of
Religion, the Soul soon disappeared.

If the Devil, has done so by this Snake, it is otherwise than we may observe
he commonly does by Mankind. For it was the Complaint of God, by his Prophets
against the Jews of old, that they had lost the Soul of Religion while they
kept the Body, or Outward Part. The like Complaint our Savior made of the
Pharisees, who had clean outsides. The like Complaint was made against the
Romanists, by our first Reformers, viz. that they had the Body, or Outward Part
of Religion, but the Soul of it was disappeared: And for all the Snake's
suggestion, the Devil holds the same Course. And he may have as Gay an outside
as he will, while he continues so deceitful within as he is.

Ibid. Religion can no more live, and be preserved to us here, while we are in
the Body, without outward and corporal means, than the Soul can live to us
here, while we are upon the Earth, without our Body; and hence the Corporal
Service, Romans 12.1.

The Snake has here (as in many other places) advanced a false and dangerous
Tenet, little, if any thing differing from the opus operatum of the Papists,
which he would shroud under the Patronage of Romans 12.1. which Scripture is
directly opposite to his Assertion, as we shall presently see. He has asserted
Religion cannot be preserved without Corporal Means. Now it is an undoubted
Truth, that true Religion cannot be begotten in the Heart of Man, by other
means, than the secret and inward influences of the Holy Spirit; and as this
only, and alone can beget it, so it is this only and alone, that can preserve
it. When it is thus begoten inwardly in the Heart, it is indeed the means of
those outward services being acceptable to God: But outward services cannot be
the means of it; for we cannot present our Bodies a Living Sacrifice, Holy,
acceptable unto God, which is our reasonable service, Romans 12.1. By any other
means, than by having our Souls and Spirits, subjected to the Guidance and
Influences of the Holy Spirit; and therefore it was that the Apostle advised
Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.8. For Bodily exercise profits little; but Godliness is
profitable unto all things, having the promise of the Life that now is, and of
that which is to come. And to be sure, this Godliness must be first inward,
before it appear outward: And it is the means of all our outward reasonable
Service; but outward Service cannot be the means of inward Obedience.

But further, When the Apostle advises, Romans 12.1. I beseech you, Brethren, by
the mercies of God, that ye present your Bodies a living Sacrifice, Holy,
acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable Service. He is not bidding the
Romans take the Corporal Means, of Bread and Wine, no such matter; But is
directing them to an Inward Work, for he says, verse. 2. And be not conformed to
this World, but be ye transformed by the renewing of your Mind. And if this
Corporal Means (Bread and Wine) did thus transform and renew the Mind; this
Snake, with many others, who partake of it, could not be so wicked as they are.

Ibid. This is so necessary and plain a Truth, that those who take upon them to
abrogate the Outward Institutions of Christ, do at the same time invent and set
up others of their own, as has been before observed, of the Quakers Institution
of Women's Preaching, and Women's Meetings. --

Concerning Women's Preachings and Meetings, has been sufficiently spoken,
therefore need not repeat it here. But to his Argument, that they who abrogate
the outward Institutions of Christ, do at the same time invent and set up new
ones, etc. I have this to say, That if from the Commission, Mat. 28.19. Go ye
therefore, teach all Nations, Baptizing them, etc. must of necessity be
understood, Baptism with Water; and that Infants must be understood to be
within the Limits of it: It may be convenient for the Snake to show, without
taking to himself the liberty of a Despotick and Arbitrary Interpretation, why
Infants are not within the limits of 1 Cor. 11.25, 26. and that they must not
communicate of the Bread and Wine. If the Snake will take a liberty so
differently to interpret places of Scripture, and say they do appoint
Institutions, though the Matter of One ( viz. Water,) and the Manner of Both, as
now used, is not therein expressed; why has not another as much liberty? If what
he contends for, be not the Text, (as it is not) but an exposition of it; what
medium will he use to assure me his exposition is right; since all Outward
Means lie under the same Objection; which his own particular Exposition does,
and they are not a few? For I may object, to his understanding, to the Interest
he is in, and to the accidental means by which he came so to conclude. And thus
Men may grope in the Dark concerning the Mysteries of Religion, and the Way to
the Kingdom of Heaven; while they have only Outward and Corporal Means (for
which the Snake does so much contend) for their Guide. But if Men would once
come to implore the Assistances, and wait for the Guidance of the Holy Spirit.
That as it illuminated the Holy Men of Old, to deliver in Writing a Declaration
of the Deep Things of God's Kingdom; so it would illuminate their Minds, to see
and know the Meaning of the Holy Ghost in that Declaration. By other means than
this, there can be no certainty herein. But this means the Snake depends not
on, and would represent us as Criminal because we do: Wherefore we justly
refuse his Expositions, for being Inventions; which whether set up new, or of
old standing, makes little difference. And while the Snake is contending for
Inventions set up, he does abrogate (if not to use, be so as the Snake will
have it be) an Outward Command of Christ, delivered in (at least) as plain, if
not plainer terms than either of the foregoing; for here is both Matter and
Manner recorded. I instance in the Command of Christ to his Disciples, to wash
one another Feet; John 13.14, 15. If I then your Lord and Master have washed
your Feet, ye also ought to wash one another's Feet: For I have given you an
Example, that ye should do as I have done to you.

Yet here neither the Example, nor the declared Intent of it, is interpreted to
mean an Outward Institution: But it is an Allegory, and the Command fulfilled,
while the Sign is disused, if we walk humbly before God, and serve one another
with Love: We say so too; yet if practical Obedience is here the intent of an
Outward Command; Why might not Spiritual Baptism and Communion be the intent of
Outward Commands? Had there been any such, which those before mentioned are
not? As before I have shown.

Ibid. p. 170. Upon this poor pretense, that Baptism is not the putting away
the filth of the Flesh, but the Answer of a good Conscience, etc. 1 Pet. 3.21.
Which Text they so understand, as that the Outward Baptism is thereby
disanulled; because the Inward Baptism is preferred before it, and not reckoned
perfect without it.

This which the Snake calls a poor pretense, is but poorly assaulted by him;
and does remain to be a clear and very plain account of that Baptism which
Saves: In the Description whereof, the Apostle is very particular: First,
Negatively showing what is not; then Affirmatively defining what it is, viz.
The like Figure (or Antitype, as it may be truly rendered) whereunto even
Baptism does also now save us (not the putting away of the filth of the Flesh,
but the answer of a good Conscience toward God) by the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ. And according to this account of that Baptism which Saves, it cannot be
the Baptism with Water, because that is putting away the filth of the Flesh,
but it is the Answer of a good Conscience toward God. Now outward Water cannot
give this answer; for as the Apostle says, 1 John 5, 6. It is the Spirit that
bears witness, because the Spirit is Truth. And nothing but this Spirit which
is Truth, can wash and purify the Soul from its Corruptions and Lusts, and
having so purified it, can give to it the justifying Answer of a good
Conscience toward God; and therefore with great reason it is to be preferred
to John's Baptism with Water, which cannot add to the Perfection of Christ's
Baptism with Fire and with the Holy Ghost.

Ibid. p. 170. And so it was in the Institution of Circumcision under the Law;
The Outward Circumcision of the Flesh, was not the chief thing meant by it; but
the Inward Circumcision of the Heart, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 2.28, 29.
Will it follow hence, that there were no Outward and Litteral Jews? Or that
there was not an Outward and Litteral Circumcision under the Law? But though
the Outward Circision was not the Circumcision, i. e. not that alone, unless
the Inward did accompany it; yet the Outward Circumcision was commanded, and
that under pain of Death. Thus both Baptism and the Lord's Supper, etc.

As the Circumcision under the Law was Outward, so it was the Sign of an
Outward Covenant, Genesis 17.7, 8. And I will establish my Covenant between Me and
Thee, and thy Seed after thee in their Generations, for an Everlasting
Covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy Seed after thee. And I will give
unto thee, and to thy Seed after thee, the Land wherein thou art a Stranger,
all the Land of Canaan for an Everlasting posession, and I will be their God.

The Apostle who was a Minister of the Spirit, and of the New Covenant, does in
this Epistle to the Romans, show the Jew, that his Outward Dependence was not
Good; for he tells him, Romans 2.17, 21. Behold thou art called a Jew, and
restest in the Law, and make thy boast of God. Thou therefore which teach
another, teach thou not thy self. --

Thus the Apostle having here reproved that Spirit in the Jew, which our
Savior had before reproved in them, when they told him, We are Abraham 's
Seed, etc. and the dependencies which they had, because there was in their
Flesh, the Sign of that Covenant which God made with Abraham.

The Apostle brings the matter nearer from the Type, to the thing typified from
the Outward Jew and Circumcision, to the Inward Jew and Circumcision, verse. 28,
29. For he is not a Jew who is one Outwardly, neither is that Circumcision
which is Outward in the Flesh: But he is a Jew which is one Inwardly, and
Circumcision is that of the Heart, in the Spirit, and not in the Letter, whose
praise is not of Men, but of God.

The Apostle is here speaking what the Spiritual Jew is, not what the Legal Jew
was, for of him the Apostle had spoken before; and in the like manner it may be
spoken of them, who have dependence upon the Outward and Decreasing Baptism of
John, and the Outward and Temporary Commemoration of Christ's Death, by Bread
and Wine, and wait not to know the purifying and strengthening of their Hearts
and Spirits by the Holy Spirit of God.

Thus the Apostle shows the necessary Duty of Christians in the Gospel
Dispensation; which is to witness the Inward Circumcision of the Heart and
Spirit; this work the Law could not perform, because as the Apostle says, Heb.
7.19. The Law made nothing perfect: -- Nor can Outward Water, or Outward Bread
and Wine. That can only be done, by the Inward Operation of the Spirit of God
upon the Heart and Spirit. This is that which is as useful and indispensable to
Christians, as the Outward Law was to the Outward Jew: To which Outward Law,
Christ, who was greater than Moses, having put an end. He has established not
another Outward Covenant, but the Inward Dispensation of Grace and Truth which
comes by Him.

Ibid. p. 171. Only let me tell the Quakers, That their Objections which are
answered in that Treatise (a piece writ by the Snake particularly upon this
Subject) are mostly the same which the Socinians have set up.

And let me tell the Snake, that if the Socinians Arguments herein, were sound
and according to Scripture; it can be no Objection to ours, if they were not
only mostly but altogether the same: And it does not follow, that they who err
in some things, are therefore right in nothing.

But if what the Snake tells us of our Arguments, being mostly the same herein
with those of the Socinians. It will, I hope, be of as good purpose for me to
tell the Snake, that his Objections which are answered in this Treatise, are
mostly the same which the Romanists did make to the Reformation: And then his
Witty Remark may be of use to himself, To see out of whose Quiver those Arrows
came, which he has shot against us

Ibid. p. 171. Thus the Socinians, having thrown off or slighted the
Sacraments, have lost the true Faith in the Divinity of Jesus; and have
rejected him from being the Christ, or Word of God, which they say, only dwelt
in him, or inspired him, but was not Personally united to him. Thus say the
Quakers.

What the Socinians have thrown off, and lost, is not now my business to
enquire: But that the Quakers have not Thrown off, or Lost, the True Faith in
Christ, either as He is the Divine Word, or as he was truly Man, and dwelt on
Earth: I have already abundantly shown in the Section foregoing, wherein is
particularly treated of, and owned, the Divinity and Incarnation of Jesus
Christ.

SECT. XIII. That Popish Emissaries did not first set up Quakerism in England,
as is said by the Snake.
THE Snake, that he might be complete in all the parts of his false and abusive
Attempts against us; having before, by many ill practices, in vain endeavored
to make us Heretical in points of Faith, would here show that our Original and
Rise was from Popish Emissaries: But in this I hope to show his falsity and
abuse, as I have already done in those. In order to which, I desire my Reader
to observe, that the Snake's first Argument is drawn from the time of our
Appearance, which he makes to be about 1650. and 1654. And of these dates of
time he says.

P. 187. Then it was that Rome was reaping a plentiful Harvest, which they had
long been sowing; by setting up, in that Universal Toleration, Multitudes of
Various Sects, on purpose to Divide, and so Confound their only Substantial
Adversary the Church of England.

And here let it be observed that he imposes upon his Reader, and would have it
taken for granted upon his bare Word, that about them Years there was a
Universal Toleration; and that during that time of Toleration, there were by
Romish Emissaries, set up Multitudes of Various Sects. Neither of which is true
in Fact, but contrary to the Faith of the History of them times; and also to
the Experience of many who are yet living, who were eye witnesses of the
Transactions of them, and some who were Sufferers in them.

But first to the Toleration which the Snake calls Universal: I doubt not but
upon second thoughts, the Snake will allow, that at that time the Church of
England was in Exile; so that it was not Universal. And as to the Quakers then
Beginning, they were not included in the Universal Toleration: As our
Testimonies, easy to be produced, of Imprisonments, Blows, Fines, etc. which
our (then few) Friends, suffered and underwent, can testify.

These Instances I give (to which others it is like may add more) to show that
there was no such thing as a Universal Toleration.

Now to his Multitudes of various Sects, which he says were then set up. It is
only a Romantic Story of his own Brain, which has no truth in it: For should
it be supposed, that there were in them Years, People gathered into Religious
Societies, under Twelve distinct Denominations (though I know not of one quarter
that number) What Multitudes can Twelve be called? It may be he may say, that
Multitudes is an Hyperbole. And indeed so it is; for it so far beyond Truth,
that the Expression has nothing of Truth in it.

And now having briefly hinted at his falsity both with respect to his
Toleration and Multitudes, I shall proceed to show, That had there then been
that Universal Toleration, and such Multitudes of various Sects, as the Snake
has falsely alleged. Yet it does not follow, that these Multitudes or various
Sects were set up by Rome: Because there were various Dissents from the Church
of England, even from the first Reformation: And it was objected to Her, by the
Author of an Apology for the English Seminaries, Printed 1581. That there was
Contention and Dissension among themselves. This was not in 1650. but in 1581.
at such time, that if there was not Vnviersal Toleration; yet the Church at
least was Tolerated, and who sowed the Dissentions then? And if the Snake will
not be angry with me (as he is with Josiah Cole, p. 189. for Reprinting
something of a Papist's, which he calls a Senseless and Bitter Libel; though it
is his practice often to repeat part of our Adversaries Bitter and Senseless
Libels against us; for which it may be he would have us thank him) I will
briefly quote that Apology, Printed 1581. p. 60. His words are these, We charge
them with rebelling against Christ's Church, Laws, and Ordinances; with
disobedience to their Lawful Pastors, with contempt of Holy Councils, Fathers
and Doctors; with falsifying, corrupting, denying diverse Books and Places of
Holy Scripture: With Contention and Dissension among themselves, Disturbances
of Kingdoms and Countries, desire of Liberty and Novelty, in-constant and daily
change of their Opinions, Presumptuous, Arrogance, and Vaunting of their
Knowledge above all Antiquity, with Singularity, Sacrilege, Apostasy, etc. --
Thus he And now, what Reader, but would take this to be the Snake's Declamation
against the Quakers, were it not for its Title and Date of Print? And that we
know it to have been a Papist's Declamation against the Church of England. So
like the Snake it is, that (to use his words) we see out of whose quiver his
Arrows came.

But as we have now to this Snake's, so the Church of England did, to this, and
such like Charges of the Papists, print her answers, and particularly Her
Apology, which was published 1617. From which it will be necessary to give
(briefly as I can) her Answers to some of the Papists Charges aforementioned.
For it would take me up too much room and time to transcribe the Answers to
them all, though they are all well worth reading.

The Apology is writ in Latin, and divided into 61 several Articles, or
Answers. I shall give it as it is in the Book it self, and then render it in
English: In doing of which, if I hurt not the sense, I desire of my Reader,
that less faults may be overlooked. The first Answer that I shall transcribe,
is, to that Charge and Objection of the Romanists, that they had Contention and
Division among themselves: And is in these words.

Eant ergo sane, and pacem potius inter suos domi sanciant. Apologia Ecclesiae
Anglicanae, p. 21. art 51.
Vnitas quidem and consensio maxim convenit Religioni. Non tamen est ea and
propria nota Ecclesiae Dei. Summa Enim erat consentio inter eos qui adorabant
Aureum vitulum: and inter eos qui conjunctis vocibus in Servatorem Nostrum
Jesum Christum, clamabant crucifige. Neque quia Corinthii Dissensionibus, inter
se laborabant, aut quia Paulus a Petro, aut Barnabas a Paulo, aut Christiani
Statim sub ipsis initiis Evangelii, aliqua de re a se mutuo dissidebant,
idcirco nulla erat inter eos Ecclesia Dei? Illi quidem quos isti contumeliae
causa appellant Zuinglianos and Lutheranos, re autem vera sunt utrique
Christiani and inter se amici ac fratres. Non de principiis aut fundamentis
Religionis nostrae, non de Deo, non de Christo, non de Spiritu Sancto, non de
ratione Justificationis, non de aeterna vita, tantum de una nec ea ita gravi
aut magna quaestione inter se dissentiunt. Nec desperamus, vel potius non
dubitamus brevi fore concordiam; et si qui sunt qui aliter sentiant quam par
est, positis aliquando affectionibus, and nominibus, Deum id illis esse
Patefacturum, ut re melius animadversa atque explorata, quod olim in
Calcedonensi Concilio factum est, omnes dissentionum causae and fibrae ab ipsis
radicibus extirpentur, and (...) Sepeliantur Sempiterna, Amen.

Let them rather therefore go, and establish Peace among themselves. (For in
the forgoing Article is objected the variety of Dissentions amongst the
Papists, in their several orders) Unity and Agreement is indeed most seemly in
Religion; yet it is not a certain and proper Mark of the Church of God: For
among those who worshipped the Golden Calf, and among those who, with conjoined
Voices, cried out against our Savior Jesus Christ, Crucify him; there was
greatest agreement and accord. Neither because the Corinthians labored under
Dissentions among themselves, or because Paul from Peter, or Barnabas from
Paul; or that under the very beginnings of the Gospel, the Christians did in
some things differ among themselves: Was there therefore among them no Church
of God? Truly those, who they in reproach and taunt, call Zuinglians and
Lutherans, are really both Christians, and among themselves, Friends and
Brethren: For not concerning Principles, or the Fundamentals of our Religion;
not concerning God, or Jesus Christ, or the Holy Spirit; not concerning the
reason of Justification, and Eternal Life: Only concerning one, and that not
weighty or great Question: Do they differ among themselves? Neither do we
despair; but rather doubt not, that that shortly will be agreed. And if there
are, who think otherwise than is equal, which sometimes has its foundation in
Names and Affections, God will make it manifest to them; that the thing may be
better considered, and more certainly known, which was sometime done in the
Council of Calcedon, where were extirpated all Dissentions from their roots and
causes, and buried in a perpetual Oblivion. Amen.

Upon which, it may not be amiss to ask the Snake, what certain proofs he can
give, that the Divisions (since such there were) or (to use his own words) the
various Sects which were sown and set up, about the middle of the last Century,
were not sown and set up by Rome: And that these about the middle of this
Century were. It also will be proper for him to show why the Church's Answer,
concerning Dissension, does not suit us in answer to him, as it did Her in
answer to Rome. For it is no proof barely to affirm, as he does, p. 187. Of
this many Instances may be given, and Proofs undeniable. I say, this is no
Proof; and any further he does not offer; for he has not given one of the many
Instances, of which he, with great assurance, says, they are Proofs undeniable.
He expected surely that his Reader should take his Ipse dixit, and ask no
further Proof: But that, knowing it as I do, in this, as in many other
particulars, to be false and Scandalous: I do therefore, so far as his
Assertion relates to us, viz. That the Quakers were sown, and set up by Rome,
deny his Charge, and require him to prove it, by the best Instances which he
can; which, when he shall offer, if we cannot disprove them, I shall be content
to say with him, That Romish Emissaries did set up Quakerism in England: But
till then it must be accounted for one of his Falsehoods.

Ibid. p. 187. Enthusiasm, when it is a Delusion, or falsely pretended, is the
surest means to overthrow all Church Government and Order, and all Sobriety of
Religion; for it is no less than Blasphemy, falsely to pretend to extraordinary
Inspirations from God.

Enthusiasm, or Inspiration falsely pretended, is all this: But what is that to
the purpose? The Question is not now what Enthusiasm falsely pretended, is. But
whether that Enthusiasm, or Divine Inspiration, of which we speak, be false? If
the Snake prove not that (which he can never) he does but Plough the Air, or
strive to make Ropes of Sand. His attempts are foolish, as well as false;
because, that whatsoever Enthusiasm, falsely pretended may be; yet the
Inspirations of the Holy Spirit of God (which is the Enthusiasm that we own and
profess) does at this day, as in all the Ages of the World, first, beget a
People to be the Church of God; and having so begotten them, does lead them
into such Order and Sobriety, as does become that Holy Religion which it
teaches.

Ibid. p. 188. And this Doctrine of Enthusiasm, came chiefly from the Church of
Rome. Labade, a Jesuit, set it up in Holland; and Robert Barclay, the Quaker,
was tinctured with it in his younger Years, in the Stotch Convent at Paris; and
John Vaughton was a Roman Catholic, who is now a great Preacher among the
Quakers in London; and William Southby, a Preacher now among them in
Pensilvania.

As particular and positive as the Snake here is, concerning the place from
whence Enthusiasm came, and who set it up in Holland; he has left us to guess
who set it up in England: For he having enumerated some Instances in which
Enthusiasm is owned in the Liturgy and Offices of the Church: Does declare, p.
317. There is not one Book of Devotion used among us, that does not tell us the
same: What Same? Why the same Enthusiasm or Inspiration (p. 119.) Full as much
as any sober Quaker can mean by the Light within. Now if this same Enthusiasm
came chiefly from Rome, and Labade, a Jesuit, set it up in Holland; he will be
yet more particular, if he can help us to his Name and Character who set it up
in England. But the Snake says, R. B. was tinctured with it in his younger
Years, in the Stotch Convent at Paris. What it was R. B. tinctured with? If
with the same Enthusiasm that he says, is allowed and owned in the Church, full
as much as any sober Quaker can mean by the Light within. Can there be any
fault in that? And that it was not the same Enthusiasm, he has no where proved,
nor attempted to do it, no more than he has attempted to prove that it was the
same Enthusiasm with which R. B. (as he says) was tinctured, and which Labade
set up in Holland. But the Snake's Argument has yet another Branch to show,
that Popish Emissaries set up Quakerism, etc. viz. John Vaughton and William
Southby, formerly Roman Catholics, are now Preachers; one in London, the other
in Pensilvania. Therefore, etc.

Reader, It may be worth thy while a little to consider the unconcluding
Rodomantade of this our Adversary in this point.

Enthusiasm came chiefly from Rome, Labade, a Jesuit, set it up in Holland.
Therefore Popish Emissaries first set it up in England.

Robert Barclay, when Young, was at the Scotch Convent in Paris. J. Vaughton
and W. Southby were formerly Roman Catholics, though neither of them were more
than Infants, if born; when Quakers first appeared in England; yet he will have
it hence follow, that Popish Emissaries first set up Quakerism in England.

Besides, that his reasoning is false, I take it to be foolish; for if all the
Religious Societies of Men in England, who have in their Communion, Persons
formerly Roman Catholics, were set up by Popish Emissaries, it will be harder
for the Snake to show, which of them, Popish Emissaries did not set up, than
which they did; because there is hardly any Community in which there is not
one, or more, who have formerly been Roman Catholics.

And to carry his Folly to its full length, he might with as great force of
concluding, say, That the Quakers set up the Church of England; for Francis
Bugg, formerly a Quaker, is now a Member of that Church.

Ibid. p. 188. But God has punished them, by sending the same Spirit among
themselves, and has made a Great Fraction in the Church of Rome.

Here is a Soloecism, could Rome dress Enthusiasm in several Shapes, and set it
up in Holland, before they had it among themselves? I think they could not. But
as much a Novelty as the Snake would insinuate, Fraction to be in the Church of
Rome; If he will rub his Eyes, and look upon the Church of England's Apology,
before quoted, p. 21. Art. 50. He will find her there to object against the
Romanists. Vix enim unquam inter se convenient, nisi forte ut olim Pharisaei
and Sadducaei, aut Herodes and Pilatus contra Christum.

They scarce ever agree among themselves, unless perchance as the Pharisees and
Sadduces, or as Herod and Pilate against Christ.

This Character was given by at least as good an Authority as is the Snake's,
and that long before Robert Barclay was at Paris, or John Vaughton and William
Southby were Preachers; nay indeed many years before they were born.

Ibid. p. 188. The Quaker-Infallibility was contrived on purpose, to bring Men
back to the Infallibility of the Church of Rome.

It is both false and impossible, that there should have been any such
contrivance, because they stand in direct opposition to each other. For that
Infallible assistance of the Holy Spirit, of which we speak, we say continues
not with any Man or Men longer than they continue subject, and in obedience to
the workings of it. But the Infallibility to which Rome pretends, is from the
Person of the Holy Apostle Peter, by a Continual Succession, or by Ordination
not Qualification, not alienable from the Church: Concerning which I have more
largely spoken in the Section particularly treating of Infallibility.

Ibid. p. 188. First the Infallibility was placed by G. Fox, and all the
Primitive Quakers, in every single Quaker.

And all the Modern Quakers do continue to say, with the Primitive ones, that
not only every single Quaker, but every single and individual Person, has
given him from Christ, a manifestation of his Grace, Light or Holy Spirit, to
which, as People come to be obedient, it will infallibly guide them into all
Truth, in all those things that pertain to Salvation, Redemption and Eternal
Life. This, though the Snake, in his profane manner, calls a Ridiculous pretense,
yet it is a Gospel Truth, and will continue, when his Profane and Ridiculous
Attempts against it shall vanish.

Ibid. p. 188. And now there is but one step behind, and that is, to dispute
the Infallibility betwixt the Two Churches, that of Rome and that of the
Quakers.

Yes, there is one step more behind, and that is the Infallibility of the
Snake, which is also to be disputed. For it cannot be doubted, but he too, set
up for Infallible certainty, because of the frequent great assurance with which
he delivers himself in Matters utterly false. If the Snake had not an
Infallible certainty that what he calls the Qua-Quaker-Infallibility, was
contrived on purpose to bring back Men to the Infallibility of the Church of
Rome: (and that it was impossible it should be so contrived, I have shown) what
confidence must it be in him; to affirm that to another of which he has no
such certainty himself.

Ibid. p. 188. And the Issue of this who does not see, when their Succession,
and other Marks of the True Church, come to be compared together?

The Issue may with more certainty be seen, when the Dispute is ended, and the
Comparison made: Though for the present I can see, that if the Snake be the
Manager, Rome will not lose in any Question with any Protestant Dissenters
whatsoever.

Ibid. p. 189. Of all the Dissenters now in England, the Quakers have come
nearest to the Church of Rome: They only have taken the pretense of
Infallibility, (unless they will bring in Muggleton for a Third Man) none other
except Papists and Quakers do set up for it.

Neither any of the Dissenters, nor the Church of England, do hold more
Negatives in Doctrine, to Rome, than do the Quakers; for we do not only hold
all the Negatives which any of them do hold, but also more. And in the Doctrine
of Infallibility, as held by Rome, there is not any manner of agreement, or
likeness to Her in our Sense and Declaration thereof, as I have already largely
shown, Sect. 5. foregoing, to which it is unnecessary to add more, for the
conviction of him, whose Character, is in nothing so eminent, as in a
Dogmatical Falsehood, of which a Notorious Instance now next follows.

Ibid. p. 189. The Snake does implicitly charge Josiah Cole with Reprinting and
Publishing with great Approbation, a most violent Invective of the Church of
Rome against the Protestants, and chiefly against the Church of England, in a
piece of his, Entitled, The Whore Unvailed.

Now, Reader, for thy more particular Information, and the discovery of the
Hypocrisy and Falsehood of the Snake herein, I shall acquaint thee, That there
was a Book Writ and Subscribed, A. S. a Roman Catholic, against the Church of
England and other Potestants (among which, by the way, the Quakers were
included,) which he Entitled, The Reconciler of Religions, or a Decider of all
Controversies in Matters of Faith: In which Book there was diverse Reflections
upon our Principles, as well as upon others who he pretended to Reconcile.
Josiah Cole writ an Answer to it, which he Entitled, The Whore Unvailed, or,
The Mystery of the Deceit of the Church of Rome Revealed.

By this Title it should not seem to be Repinted by J. C. with Great
Approbation, nor indeed was it: For Josiah Cole, as he quotes several parts of
it, he subjoins his own Answer, detecting the Deceit of its Author, A. S. very
particularly. And there being in this Book of A. S's, a part, which he made his
14th Chapter, that did more particularly reflect upon, and relate to those, who
in the Title of his Chapter he calls Protestant, or Sectarian Ministers,
charging them not to be true Preachers, or sent by God. Josiah Cole, with
intent, that the Persons charged might answer that which related to themselves;
does put it at the end of his Book, and declares concerning it in his Title
Page. I thought meet to publish, (this) herewith, that the Sectarians or
Episcoparians may answer for themselves.

This, Reader, is the Reality of that Business, of which the Snake with so
great Confidence and Falsehood grounds that manifest Slander of his, in saying,
The Quakers have more barefaced than any, openly sided with the Papists against
the Protestants.

And I defy the Snake to produce any one piece written about that time which J.
C's was, that does more particularly detect and lay open the Deceit and
Falsehood of the Romanists than that of J. C's does. So little reason had this
Snake falsely, as he does, to bring in J. C. saying this Charge ( viz. the 14th
Chapter) against their Bibles and Ministers, whose Cause (says he) I am not
engaged in. When J. C. has no where said, that he was not engaged in the Cause
of the Bible: But said, he was not engaged in the Cause of them who A. S. had
called Sectarian Ministers. This, briefly, is the true state of that Matter on
which the Snake makes near two pages of most false and scandalous Insinuations
and Charges.

Ibid. p. 190. They have exceeded them in every thing, and improved the Errors
which they had learned from them.

Here the Snake will have the Quakers exceed the Romanists, and that they have
improved their Error, even in a Question, which himself determines, p. 32. that
our simplicity has deprived us of every one of these helps which the Romanists
have. But we having been from p. 32, to p. 190. under the Snakes hand, it is no
wonder if his Viparous Fancy, having formed a Monster at first, that he should
think the proportions increased.

Ibid. p. 190. G. W. asserts, that the Righteousness which God affects in us is
not Finite but Infinite* Voice of Wisdom, p. 36.

And the reason (which the Snake has left out) is this.

For Christ is God's Righteousness, and Christ is formed in us, Gal. 4.19. and
so that Righteousness which God works in us by his Spirit, it is of the same
kind and nature with that which works it; for the Saints are made partakers
of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4.

Ibid. p. 191. But if you will ask, how could Infinite Righteousness fall? G.
Fox will answer you, who wrote, That he was beyond the state of the first Adam
that Fell, in the state of the second Adam that never Fell.

But where G. Fox has so writ, the Snake tells not; yet if he has so writ,
what is it more than the Apostle 1 Cor. 15.22, 45. has said concerning our
Death by Sin, through the first Adam, and our Regeneration through obedience to
the Quickening Spirit the second Adam, the Lord from Heaven? And they, who
through the Operation of his Quickening Spirit, have witnessed a being
regenerated and born again; may truly say, that they are beyond the state of
the first Adam that Fell.

Ibid. p. 191. And in a Printed General Epistle of his to the Quakers, which I
have now here before me, he says, Who has any thing against my way, who never
fell, nor changed? And he concludes, This is the word of the Lord God to you
all, and spread this abroad.

The truth of the words is not less General than the Epistle, for it is a
General and a Standing Truth, that the second Adam that never Fell, Jesus
Christ the Just Man's Path, is the Everlasting Way to the Father, which did
never Fall, nor never Change: Therefore G. Fox might well ask, who has any
thing against this Way? And the Word and Command of the Lord, through all
Generations by his Servants, has been to call People to walk in this Way.

But that I may not forget, I would now ask for that Answer which the Snake
has just now said G. Fox will give to the Question; How could Infinite
Righteousness Fall? The Snake was willing to start some strange thing, but not
being then furnished with a seemingly probable Lie, (or forgetting to add such
an one) he has omitted to say any thing, which he calls G. F's Answer to that
Question.

But the Snake is not more forgetful in this, than he was in adapting the
Matter treated of in this Section, to the Title of it. The Title he gives it,
is, That Popish Emissaries set up Quakerism in England. And to prove his Title,
he brings in G. F. saying, That he was beyond the State of the first Adam that
fell, in the state of the second Adam, that never fell. That is, He was born
again by the Operation of the Quickening Spirit of Christ Jesus our Lord. See,
Reader, How far this proves, that Popish Emissaries set up Quakerism in
England. If this Argument be insufficient, he has others of like sort; of
which one is, That G. Fox has said of Jesus Christ his Way; Who has any thing
against my Way, who never fell nor changed? A fine Argument that Popish
Emissaries set up Quakerism in England. He has also given a Quotation from G.
W's Voice of Wisdom, p. 36. That the Righteousness which God effects in us, is
not Finite but Infinite. And this is another proof much to the same purpose,
that is, to no purpose of answering the Title; and for any relation the Section
has to it, he might have Entitled it, a Relation of his Escape from the
Messenger at Billinsgate: or, a Relation of his being seized by him at Lidd in
Kent, or any thing else in the World, which had no Relation to the Matter
treated of.

The Snake next makes a Quotation from the Spirit of the Hat, concerning G. F's
Marriage, and says, That G. F. did say concerning his Wife, (then somewhat in
years) She must not be Barren, but would, as Sarah, bring Forth an Isaac in her
Old Age.

To which I first answer, that that Book from from whence the Snake quotes, as
above, has been many years since answered: But in this the Snake is here
silent, that he might evade to reply to it. And I might, after his Example, be
as silent to his Objections from the Spirit of the Hat, as he is to the Answer
in the Books Spirit of Alexander, the Copper Smith, and Judas and the Jews. But
for the Readers satifaction, I shall further answer and say, that upon inquiry
of those who are most likely to know whether G. F. did say so or not, such as
his Widow, and other Relations, I am assured by them, and they do say it is
utterly false. But the Snake to corroborate one Lie, he adds another, and says,
that She ( Margaret Fox) growing big (p. 192.) The Midwife attended several
Weeks in the House, till Belly fell, the Figure, was spoiled, and the Quakers
disappointed of their Isaac.

That Margaret Fox, when in years, beyond the ordinary time of Childbearing,
should grow big, (as if with Child) is nothing strange nor singular, for that
the like does often happen, by means of Flatulencies, and Humors collected in
the Abdomen; which in their beginnings and progress, sometimes both the Party
affected, and the Physician have been in doubt to determine; and instances of
these Kinds are frequently met with in the Writings of Physicians. So that it
is foolish as well as false, to make any such mistake, a Legendary Story; as it
is also false where he says a Midwife attended several Weeks, because there was
no such thing.

Ibid. p. 192. This their presumptuous pretense to Miracles, and Foolish
Legends, is another instance wherein they have imitated and outstript the Roman
Catholics.

This, the Snake's great impudence, in calling the mistake of a Woman,
concerning her Pregnancy, in which Questions many Women, and also Physicians,
have been mistaken; a presumptuous pretense to Miracles and Foolish Legends, is
another instance of his Malice or Folly. For, could he enumerate Ten Thousand
such mistakes of Women amongst us, would this be good proof, that we have
imitated or outstript the Roman Catholics in Miracles and Legends? I think it
would not. For, besides the many Legendary Volumes which the Romanists have,
and which were calculated for to feed their Superstition (of which we have
none;) should it be allowed, that the mistakes of Women, in this Question, is a
pertinent instance. May it not naturally follow, that that Communion or Society
in which are the most Women, may not be likely to have the most of these
Miracles and Foolish Legends? And if so, it may then behove the Snake to clear
the Communion, in which he pretends Membership, from such like Presumptuous
Pretenses.

SECT. XIV. Showing that We do not Damn all the Christian World but our Selves.
THE Uncharitableness of them Principles, which Reprobate and Damn all besides
their Professors, must needs be very Obvious, both in their own Declaration,
and also in the Lives and Practices of their Professors, as influenced by them;
and need not the wiredrawing of strained and perverse Constructions to prove
it: Because at first sight it appears in the very Complexion and Tendency of
them.

But the Principles and Doctrines which are believed and taught by us, have a
direct opposition in their Declaration, and are of quite another tendency and
purport, than that Damning of which the Snake speaks: For as opposite as
Salvation is to Damnation, so opposite is that our Known Principle of free and
universal Grace, to that of Damning all but our selves. And to as many as have
read our Books, or shall hereafter be incited to read them, they know and will
find, that it is, and has been by us, constantly declared, that the Saving
Grace of God does appear unto all Men, affording them a day of Visitation,
wherein, through obedience to the Drawings of the Spirit of Grace upon their
Hearts, they may escape Damnation. And the Work of our Ministry has been to
call Men into obedience to this Grace and Spirit of God, declaring to them,
that if the Day of their Visitation, and the tenders of the Love of God,
through the Spirit of his Son, shall come to an end through their Impenitency,
that then they will have cause to say with them, whom the Prophet Personates,
The Summer is ended, and we are not saved,

But this Principle of free Grace, and this Work and Labor of our Ministry, to
call into Obedience to it, concludes not that we Damn them who fall short
through Disobedience; any more than Moses, the Prophets, our Lord Jesus and his
Apostles, could be said to Damn the People, to whom they declared their
Iniquities, and the consequents of their Impenitent abiding in them, which was,
That they should Perish, and be Cut off in their Sins.

And as this is the Doctrine, which has from the first been Believed, Preached
and Writ by us; so our Conversations and Practice, Influenced by this
Principle, has been agreeable to it. And I do appeal to all, who have
Knowledge and Acquaintance with us, whether they have not found us constantly
declaring, and showing forth great good will to their Welfare, and to our Power
promoting it; and often Warning and Admonishing against those things that might
hinder it: Nay, the Snake himself is so far Evidence against himself, that he
has declared, He never received in all his whole Life, any sort of
Disobligation from any of us. But it would have been a Disobligation in some
sort, if the Quakers with whom he has conversed had told him he was Damned. On
the contrary he testifies of the Generality, that they are Honest and well
Meaning: Is it any good meaning to Damn all but our selves? I think there is
not much in it: And I see not how the Snake can reconcile that Character to the
Title of this Section; I say the Title, because this Section in the Body of it,
does no more answer its Title, in the matter charged in it, than the last
Section did.

Ibid. p. 192. Having equaled themselves to Adam in his Innocence, as above is
shown, they must needs prefer themselves to all since the Fall.

But if this were true, which I shall show it is not, must they therefore needs
Damn all since the Fall. What the Snake by his Title was to speak to, was, not
to whom the Quakers did prefer themselves, but whom they did Damn. The Snake is
not herein shorter in his Proof, than he is false in his Charge; when he says,
They have equalled Themselves to Adam in his Innocence, as is above shown.

The Snake has indeed, as is observed, p. 290. foregoing, said that G. F.
Wrote, but where he has not told us, That he was beyond the State of the First
Adam that Fell: But if G. F. has so Writ, it follows not that he has equalled
himself to Adam in his Innocence. Cannot the Snake see a Difference between the
State of Adam in the Fall, and before the Fall? Beyond the State of Adam in the
Fall, it is the Duty of all Men to come, else they cannot witness the being
born again, by the Power of the Quickening Spirit, the second Adam, the Lord
from Heaven. This I say is our Duty and Interest; and they who measurably do
witness this Regeneration, do not therefore Equal Themselves to Adam in his
Innocence, nor prefer themselves to all Others since the Fall.

Ibid. p. 192. Thus while they themselves pretend to Infallibility of
Discerning, and Infinity in Righteousness, as shown before, they Arraign the
Apostles of Gross Error and Delusion, even where they speak from the Mouth of
the Lord, and in his Name.

That Infallibility, Discerning and Righteousness, which we own and contend
for, is that which is of the Operation of the Spirit of God, and which he gives
as pleases him, to all those who through Obedience follow on to know his Will:
And, which may be a strange thing to the Snake, they are necessary to Man's
Salvation: For, First, Our Savior speaking of his Faithful Followers, John
10.4, 5. They know his Voice, and a stranger they will not follow.

But they could not thus choose to follow Christ, and not the Devil, if there
were not an Infallible Evidence in the Voice of Christ, to testify that it is
his Voice; but such Evidence there is, and they who persevere to be Workers
together with the Grace of God, shall by the Infallible Evidence of the Holy
Spirit, have a true Discerning between the Voice of Christ, and the Voice of
the Evil One: And as they shun the one, and follow the other, they will come to
witness a being clothed in their Measure, with the Righteousness of Christ,
which is Infinite.

The Snake is not more false in his Charge, concerning Infallibility,
Discerning and Infinite Righteousness; as is above declared, than he is grossly
abusive and false, in saying, we Arraign the Apostles, etc. as will be seen by
examining the Instance which he brings. It is this.

P. 192, 193. When St. Paul said, 1 These. 4.17. We which are alive, shall be
caught up in the Clouds, etc. tho he said, verse. 15. This we say unto you by
the Word of the Lord, Yet T. Elwood, in his Answer to G. K 's Narrative, etc.
p. 162. supposes that St. Paul expected to be caught up in the Clouds himself,
and that the day of Judgment would come in his time, while he was Alive. And
that the same was the meaning of St. Peter, when he said, "The End of all
Things is at Hand, 1 Pet. 4.7.

This, Reader, is the Snake's Instance that the Quakers do Arraign the Apostles
of Gross Ignorance: But that there is nothing more in the Charge, but this
Adversary's Gross Lie, what follows will show.

G. K. had in a piece of his, Entiuled, Gross Error, and also in the Narrative
of 1696. said in opposition to G. W. The Apostles using the word We, there [ We
that remain] is an Enallage Personae, putting [ We] for [ They] like that of
James, Therewith Bless we God, and therewith Curse we Men, James 3.9.

To which Tho. Elwood replies, Though he ( G. K.) delivers it Possitively, and
like a Dictator, yet I see not why he must needs be believed: Why might not the
Apostle speak in the first Person [ We?] As supposing that great and
extraordinary Appearance and Coming of Christ (the certain time of which, no
Man knew, Matthew. 24.26.) was so near at Hand, that it might probably fall out
in his Life time: For as the Apostles accounted the Times they lived in, the
Last Days, or Last Times, and ordinarily called them so ( Heb. 1.2. and 9.26. 1
Pet. 1.20. 1 John 2.18.) so they thought the End of the World was not far off.
What else made Paul when he had told the Corinthians, that the things he had
related were written for our Admonition, add, Upon whom the Ends of the World
are come? 1 Cor. 10.11. Why else did Peter say, The End of all Things is at
Hand, 1 Pet. 4.7?

Thus Thomas Elwood, whose Querying the Snake calls Arraigning, though by a very
Gross abuse, in that the words have no such thing in them: For T. E. does here
Query, Why might not the Apostle speak in the first Person? etc. What else made
Paul when he had the Corinthians? etc. Why else did Peter say? etc.

It would have been more to the purpose, if the Snake had answered the
Questions, and shown why the Apostle might not speak in the first Person, etc.
why and what else (than the conjecture offered by T. E.) did occasion the
Apostles so to express themselves as is above quoted? But this he drops, and
stands at a distance from the Questions, and for answer flings Gross Lies.

Ibid. p. 193. And at a Meeting or Council of their Ministers, about the Year,
1678. which will be told hereafter.

Hereafter, when the Snake shall tell the Story at Large, I shall then
particularly reply to it; and for the present, shall here only reply to his
False and Scandalous Insinuations hereon, where he says, They (the Quakers)
proved themselves greater than Abraham, because Abraham was before John, and
that the least in the Kingdom, i. e. the least of the Quakers was greater than
John.

Here the Snake, by an i. e. does in most abusive manner, insinuate his Base
and Viper-like Exposition of the Text, Matthew. 11.11. to be our sense of the
place, which it neither is, nor ever was: And I do Charge him with Forgery
herein, and notorious Falsehood, unless he be able to prove, that the Quakers
have said, they were greater than Abraham, or that the least of the Quakers
were greatter than John. Which they I am well satisfied have never said.

Ibid. p. 193. Now they having treated the Prophets and Apostles at this rate,
we cannot expect that they should pay any great respect to the Ancient and Holy
Fathers of the Church; no, they run them down by wholesale.

Having hitherto detected the falsity of the Snake's Insinuations and Charges,
in that no such treatment is given the Prophets and Apostles, as is by him
suggested: I shall show he is not less false, when he pretends to give an
account of the respect paid to them, he calls, Ancient and Holy Fathers. From
T. Ellwood's Answer to G. K's Narrative, aforementioned.

G. K. had in that Narrative, abovementioned, p. 45. made a Quotation from T.
E's Further Discovery, p. 99. thus, In comparing the Books of Friends, to the
Books of them, called the Greek and Latin Fathers. He has not done as a Friend
and Brother, but as an Enemy, in supposing Friends Books to have been written
by no better Guidance, or clearer Sight, than theirs, who lived and wrote in
those dark Times.

Upon this G. K. remarked to his Auditory, You see how modest they are here.

At this Remark, G. K. says, his Auditors gave a Shout, signifying (as he says)
Their dislike that the Quakers Books should be preferred so far to the Greek
and Latin Fathers, next to the Days of the Apostles.

To all this, T. Ellwood in his Answer to G. K's Narrative, as above, in p.
177, 178. replies, One might wonder here at the cause of his Auditors Shouting:
For such of them, as could understand what was meant by Greek and Latin
Fathers, one might expect, should be Men of greater Wisdom and Gravity, than to
Shout in such Assemblies; and for the Undiscerning Mobb, it was a subject so
much above their Capacity and Pretenses, that it cannot be supposed they should
Shout at that, if they had not been excited thereunto, by some little Antic
Gesticulation from him. But to the matter.

They shouted, he says, signifying their dislike, that the Quakers Books should
be preferred so far to the Greek and Latin Fathers, next to the days of the
Apostles.

These are not my words; I did not refer to the Times next to the days of the
Apostles: But my words were, -- Who lived and writ in those Dark Times. Must
those Dark Times needs be next to the Days of the Apostles? See what an unfair
stretch is this. -- Thus T. Ellwood.

And yet as unfair as G. K's stretch was, the Snake has stretched beyond him,
and pronounces They (the Quakers) run them down by wholesale. But whether it be
so or not, I leave with the sober Reader to judge; and shall observe by the
way, that how jealously tender soever he is of the names of them he calls
Ancient and Holy Fathers. Yet Bishop Jewel, being pressed with some Authorities
brought from them, by his Opponent Harding the Jesuit, makes no scruple to (do,
what this Snake calls) run them down by wholesake; for, applying to his Reader,
he says, That Doctors in all Ages, and in all parts of the World, were brought
against him. (And the Bishop then queries) Who would not be afraid to see such
an Army come against him? Howbeit (gentle Reader) be of good Cheer, all this is
but a Camisado: These be but Vizards, they be no Faces; they are brought in
like Mummers for a Show, and say nothing. Jewel against Harding, p. 6. Printed
1566.

What will the Snake think of the light Character given of Doctors in all Ages,
and in all parts of the World? And were it proper in this place, I could add
plenty of Instances, that many of the Reformed have made so bold, with those
this Snake calls Ancient and Holy Fathers, as to run them down. If to discover
their Errors, and slight their Authority, as incompetent, when offered in
Contradiction to the Holy Scriptures, and the Holy Spirit which gave them
forth, be so.

Ibid. p. 194. But now, what Quarters shall we have?

If the Snake ask for himself, the answer is ready, if it be such as he
deserves, it will be none of the best. For one who tells Lies for Bread, and
can pawn all the pretenses of Religion, upon the Score of Malice and base
Design, may easily guess what value is to be put upon such an Undertaking.

Ibid. p. 194. How shall we be able to stand before them?

It is a Question the Snake may well ask concerning himself, after so many
Injuries of diverse sorts, and so great Injustice as he is guilty of toward us;
the weight of which may well be some pressure upon a Spirit, that is at all on
this side Obduration.

Ibid. They damn us all together to Hell, i. e. all Christians.

It is false, we Damn none; no not the Snake, much less all Christians.

Ibid. But they are more favorable to the Heathen, whom they think Worshippers
of the same Light with them, and not led to Outward Things, by the Belief of an
Outward Christ, and Faith in his outward Sufferings, Death, etc.

This Snake has an unusual degree of Impudence; for he is not contented only to
suborn our Books, and pervert our Words, and forge Lies, but he does belly our
very Thoughts, and say we Think what we never declared we did Think. For we
have never declared, That the Heathens (indefinitely speaking) were obedient to
the Light of Jesus Christ: But we have often said, according to the Apostle,
Acts 10.35. In every Nation, he who fears God, and works Righteousness, is
accepted of him. And concerning the Heathen in particular, with the Apostle,
Romans 2.14, 15. For when the Gentiles, which have not the Law, do by nature the
things contained in the Law, these having not the Law, are a Law unto
themselves: Which shows the work of the Law written in the Heart. --

And of such Heathens, who do thus show forth the Work of the Law written in
their Hearts, we may say, when considered and compared, with mere Nominal
Christians, who have not known the Inward Virtue of what they believe Christ
did Outwardly Suffer; as our Savior did say concerning the Pharisee and the
Publican, Luke 18.14. I tell you, this Man departed to his house, justified
rather than the other. For a Man may have a Historical Faith of all the Outward
Things, which are recorded in Holy Writ, that Christ did and suffered: Yet
through disobedience to the Holy Spirit, which Reproves for Sin, John 16.18.
he may never know that Faith begotten in him, which gives victory over the
World. Yet hence, it is not to be concluded, that such who are obedient to the
Holy Spirit, in its Reproofs for Sin, do therefore slight, much less
disbelieve, any part of what Christ outwardly did and suffered: No, they
cannot, but must and do highly value and esteem It, knowing the Benefits that
we receive by it; and do bless God, that it is our Lots to have the means of
the Knowledge of what Christ did outwardly do. So that the Snake is most
injuriously Abusive in his false Insinuations to the contrary.

The Snake now turns again to G. F's Great Mystery, from whence (not unlike the
Quacks of the Town, who of their pretended Panacea's, boast they will cure all
Diseases) he pretends to fetch proofs for every Charge, though contradictory to
themselves, (but how falsely I have at least in some measure shown.) As that the
Quakers, at first setting up, pretended to be equal, and of the same substance
with God. And it must also prove, that the Quakers now abated from that, and do
now only claim to be Infallible as Prophets and Apostles. Again, Great Mystery
must prove that there was a time when there was no God, (p. 122.) And also that
not the Divinity, but the Incarnation of Christ is denied by them. Again, Great
Mystery must prove that Popish Emissaries set up Quakerism in England. And it
must also prove, that the Quakers Damn all the Christian World but themselves.
Again Great Mystery must prove that the Quakers are pure and sinless. And it
must also prove, that they are Venomous and Nasty. These, with many other, no
less Contradictory, and for which the Book affords no true Ground, does the
Snake, by the help of a prolifick fancy, draw.

Ibid. p. 195. G. F. in his Great Mystery, p. 89. says, "That the Quakers have
a Spirit given them beyond all the Forefathers, since the Days of Apostles. In
the Apostasy. G. Whitehead would fain come off of this, and thus endeavors to
excuse it, in his Charitable Essay, Printed 1693. p. 5. in these words, The
very intent and meaning of G. F's words herein, was not beyond all the
Forefathers without exception, but beyond all in the Apostasy.

And indeed it is very plain, that G. F's meaning must be so, because the
natural import of his words show as much. But the Snake says, Here it would
have been incumbent upon G. W. to have named those, whom he or G. Fox did
believe were not in the Apostasy. Why so incumbent? To what purpose should they
be named who were not in the Apostasy. The prophet shows not any Incumbency
there was to have the Seven Thousand named, whom God said he would spare, and
for whom he testified, that they had not bowed their Knees unto Baal, 1 Kings
19.18.

Ibid. p. 195. Let us hear G. Fox explain himself in other places of the same
Book, you will best know his meaning from himself.

A Wonder! The Snake has once spoke Truth! But it mightily contradicts himself;
for in other places speaking of this very G. Fox, whom he here supposes capable
to explain himself. He says he was a Fool, one of such an immoderate degree of
Dullness, and lack of Understanding as could hardly befall any thing in Humane
Shape. But to proceed, let us hear G. Fox, as quoted by the Snake, from Great
Mystery, p. 217. He says, That since the Days of the Apostles, all the World
went after him, i. e. after those who (as he there expresses it) did inwardly
raven in Sheeps Clothing. And now (says he) are People but coming from them to
a Rock.

This the Snake calls hearing G. Fox explain himself, but is in Truth nothing
less, because the Snake has miserably cut assunder and disjointed G. Fox his
words; and by the help of i. e. he has put a meaning of his own upon them. To
prove which I shall only give the place as it is in Great Mystery, by which we
have the Snake's word; we shall best know his meaning; which, with the occasion
of them, is as follows. G. Fox his Opponent had said, False Prophets and
Christ's, and Deceivers many shall come, if it was possible to deceive the very
Elect.

To this G. Fox says, Yea, Christ said they should come, to his Apostles which
before their decease did come, and went forth from them; which Christ said
should inwardly raven, and get the Sheeps Clothing: And since the Days of the
Apostles all the World went after them, as thou may read in the Revelations,
and now are People but coming from them to the Rock; and now shall the
Everlasting Gospel be preached to them that dwell upon the Earth, over the
Heads of the Beast, and False Prophet, and they shall be taken, and the Lamb
and the Saints shall have the Victory.

This is what the Snake, blinded by the Dim suffusions of Malice, says, is to
condemn all the Christian World but our selves. But whether it be so or not, we
will now examine by Scripture, and there our Savior tells us, Mat. 24.24. that
false Christ's, and false Prophets should come. And the Apostle, 2 These. 2.7.
testifies, The mystery of Iniquity does already work, etc. and so great was the
increase of its workings. in the space of fifty years (for it was hardly more
from Paul's writing to the Thessalonians, to John's writing the Revelations)
that John in the Revelations 13.3. says -- all the world wandered after the
Beast.

I would here ask the Snake, Did John the Divine herein condemn all the
Christian World? Did he condemn all those, who at the writing of that Book, did
yet persevere in true Faith and Obedience to Christ? Surely he did not. Why
then must G. F. using the Apostles words, and having respect to the same
Apostasy, of which the Apostle speaks, be so understood? They cannot be justly
so understood; because their natural import, as used by the Divine, and from
him by G. Fox, is all the World, that is, all that were entered into the
Apostasy, which was foretold by our Savior should come; and declared by the
Apostle Paul was come in its beginnings; and which John testifies was more
generally come at his writing of the Apocalypse.

To the same purpose, with the Quotation last made by the Snake, he makes about
twelve more from several places of the same Book, in all which the Snake would
pervert G. Fox his words to be meant of such who were not in the Apostasy; but
offers not one Argument to show, that those to whom G. F. did speak were not
so. To which it may be convenient here to observe, that as the Apostasy from
the Spirit and Life of Christianity had its beginning very early, even while
several of the Apostles were yet alive, and was more generally overspread
before the death of John: So it did (by general confession) continue for many
Ages after. Nay, it is not yet quite done away; for all those who do resist and
withstand the Spiritual Appearance of Christ in People, and do endeavor to
keep them, from witnessing that Faith of which he is the Author and Beginner,
and which gives Victory over the World, may be, and are truly said to be in
that Apostasy, which did overspread the Nations through their forsaking the
right way of the Lord. And to such who are in that Apostasy, to tell them of
it, and admonish them to come out of it, is not to Damn them. No, it is the
Office and Duty of those to whom God gives the Ministry of his Word; as to the
Prophet Isaiah 58.1. Cry aloud, and spare not; lift up thy voice like a
Trumpet, and show my people their Transgression, and to the House of Jacob
their Sins. And this the Prophet did do, very sharply many times; yet he did
not therefore Damn them, nor include every particular of the People and House
of Jacob, under his Charge, no more has G. F. or any other of our Friends. For
fuller evidencing of this, past all the little tricks (by perversion,
insinuation or false quoting) of the Snake, I shall for conclusion to this
Section, subjoin somewhat out of a piece writ by Isaac Penington, which was
first Printed 1660. and reprinted in his Works 1681. p. 313. and bears for
Title, An Answer to that Common Objection against the Quakers, that they Damn
all but themselves. The words are these, This then is the sum of our Answer in
this respect, We are not against the Life and Power of Godliness, wherever it
has appeared, or yet appears under the Vail of any form whatsoever. Nay, all
persons who singly wait upon the Lord, in the simplicity and sincerity of their
Hearts, whether under any form, or out of forms (that matters little to us,)
are very dear unto us in the Lord. But we are against all Forms, Images,
Imitations and Appearances, which betray the simplicity and sincerity of the
Heart, keep the Life in bondage, and endanger the loss of the Soul. And too
many such now there are, which hold the Immortal Seed of Life in Captivity
under Death, over which we cannot but mourn, and wait for the breaking of the
Chains, and its rising out of all its Graves into its own pure Life, Power, and
Fullness of Liberty in the Lord.

This Testimony which has been published now near 40 years, and others of like
tendency, which I could produce, but that I would be as brief as may be, shows,
that from the first we have not Damned all the Christian World, as is falsely
said by this Adversary.

SECT. XV. The Holy Spirit, Professed by the Quakers, proved to be neither
Venomous or Nasty, as charged by the Snake; but proved to be his own True
Character.
HAving thus shown the falsity of the Snake's Charge of our Damning all the
Christian World, and on the contrary proved, that Love and Charity which we
have from the first had, and shown to all the sincere hearted under any Form:
So herein I hope to make appear, that the respect wherewith we have treated
Men, has been according to it; and that if Words and Language may be allowed
to discover the Furious, Spiteful and Envious Ebullitions of a distorted Soul,
that then the Snake has discovered so much.

Ibid. p. 198. Kind and Sweet Expressions are natural to Love and Good Nature;
as Furious, Spiteful, Envious and other Grating and Violent Passions do
naturally vent themselves in the like wicked and hateful Ebullitions of a
Distorted Soul.

Love and Good Nature have no doubt, expressions suitable to their Quality and
Occasion, which in their utterance are always Kind, but may sometimes not be
otherwise Sweet, than as Reproof and Rebuke may be said to be, when properly
and seasonably given. And on the contrary, Fury, Spite and Envy have ever
Expressions suitable to their Wicked and Hateful Nature, and are levelled
against Men in order to their Hurt and Destruction; and have falsehood for their
original; but are not always (though often) in violent manner, for they are
sometimes covered with Hypocrisy. Instances of both Violent and Hypocritical,
I shall anon show in the Snake, after that I have told my Reader, that as Words
and Language are the Servants of the Mind, so they are to be varied as the
occasions thereof require. Hence Kind and Sweet Expressions are properly to be
given to Men and Actions that are Good and Honest: And it is as proper, by a
Sharp and Kind Severity, to express the Just Indignation of the Mind against
the Evil Actions of Wicked Men.

A multitude of Examples in both kinds, we have in Holy Writ; where the
Dejected, the Disconsolate, the Mourner and the Penitent are comforted by the
Kind and Sweet Expressions of the Holy Spirit, speaking through the Holy
Prophets and Apostles; as does also our Lord himself: It being the way of the
Holy Spirit, by Love unfeigned, to seek and to save Mankind. But on the
contrary, to the Hypocritical, the Wicked and Impenitent, it has been the way
of the Holy Spirit, by sharp and severe expressions, (even such sometimes as in
ordinary discourse might not be seemly or convenient) to reprove them.

How severely does God, both in the Law and in the Prophets, threaten the
punishment of Idolaters, even in terms which the Rabinnical Scholiasts have
thought fit to alter, in obedience to that foolish rule in their Talmud, that
all words which in the Law are writ obscenely, must be changed to more civil
words? (Milton's Apology, Printed 1642, p. 25.) Much so foolishly wise would
this Snake appear, in refusing to allow what God at times, as occasion did
require, has thought fit to speak through his Servants. Thus the Holy Prophet
Elijah has pronounced from the Lord concerning Jezabel, the Daughter of
Eth-baal, King of Zidon, as mentioned, 2 Kings 9.37. And the Carcass of Jezabel
shall be as Dung upon the Ground. Thus also the Lord, by his Prophet Jeremiah,
threatens the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, Jer. 8.2. That they should be as Dung
upon the Earth. And the Prophet Malachi 2.3. Behold I will cast Dung upon your
Faces, even the Dung of your Solemn Feasts, and you shall be like unto it. And
the Prophet Isaiah, rebuking the Wickedness of the Priests and Prophets,
tells them, all Tables are full of Vomit and Filthiness, so that there is no
place clean, Isai. 28.8. The Prophet Habakkuk, when he objected to the People
their Secret Nakedness, he tells them -- The Cup of the Lords right hand shall
be turned unto thee, and shameful Spuing shall be upon thy Glory.

These, with abundance more Instances, there are in the Holy Scriptures, which
are sufficient to show, that Love and Good Nature (for such is the Holy Spirit)
does not always use such, as in the account of this Snake are to be called Kind
and Sweet Expressions: No, for though the Spirit of God is Purity and Meekness it
self; yet in the reproving the Iniquities of Men, it has often used severe
expressions. Thus John the Baptist calls the Hypocritical Jews, a Generation of
Vipers. Our Savior calls Herod, a Fox; and told the Wicked Jews, they were of
their Father the Devil. The Proto Martyr, Stephen, detects their Hypocrisy, as
Paul does the injustice of the High Priest.

The Snake will surely not be so Blasphemous, as to say, these were in them the
marks of Fury, Spite, or Envy, etc. Nor will it be answer sufficient, for him
to say, of all these, and others of like sort, recorded in Holy Writ, that he
believes them to be the immediate Dictates of the Spirit of God: But that all
such Speeches, since that time, are the effects of Fury, Spite and Envy, and
that they are the wicked and hateful Eubullitions of a Distorted Soul; unless
he can show, that God has promised, that he will no more, through his
Servants, in like manner rebuke the iniquities of Men.

This, as denied by the Snake, puts him upon a worse Dilemma; for all those in
him, which are not Kind and Sweet Expressions. (And some such I think he has.)
They must of necessity be Furious, Spightful and Envious, and the wicked and
hateful Ebullitions of his Distorted Soul; of which I will give some Instances,
when I have first shown, that if it be denied, that the Instances above are
Authorities for us to build on. Yet that there wants not Examples of the like
practice in the Reformation, I will content my self to instance but in two,
Martin Luther and William Fulk, who for the sharpness of their Style, hardly
come behind any.

Martin Luther being called before the Emperor Charles the Fifth, to answer for
his Books; Having divided them into Three Sorts; one of which was, those he had
sharply written, refused though upon deliberation given him to retract or unsay
any word therein; as we read in Sleidan; Yea, he defends his Eagerness, as
being of an Ardent Spirit, and one who could not write a dull Style; and
affirmed he thought it God's Will to have the Inventions of Men thus laid open,
seeing that Matters quietly handled are quickly forgot. Milton's Apology, p.
24, 25.

And William Fulk comes not much short of him herein; for it being objected to
him, that he had ill treated Allen, Stapleton, Martial, Staphylus and Bristow,
who were Papists; he defends the Treatment, and further says, I call not only
Martial, but all Papists, shameless Dogs, and Blasphemous Idolaters, who
maintain, and make Vows to Images, which travel to them, and offer up both
Prayers and Sacrifices of Candles, Money, Jewels and other things. Fulk's
Confutation of the Papists Quarrels, p. 9. printed at the end of his Edition of
the New Testament, 1633.

And upon a search neither strict nor tedious, it were easy to heap up
Instances of this sort, which as I am not inclined to do, so neither would I
have mentioned these, had not the mere necessity of Teaching this Adversary,
the practice of such, whom that Church will own, to which he is a Pretender.

But now this Snake, who denies the soundness of such reproof, as I have before
shown from Scripture, and from the Reformation; and will needs have it proceed
from a Spirit Venomous and Nasty, and that it is the effect of Fury, Spite and
Envy, and proceeds from the wicked and hateful Ebullitions of a Distorted Soul.
May yet, (nay doubtless is) when speaking of himself, be in the right. For it
is not impossible but he may know what Distortion of Soul, what wicked and
hateful Ebullitions they were in him: From whence proceeded his Fury, Spite
and Envy in the several Appearances which it has made, against the Government,
against Us and against Others.

It was a Venomous Libel which was writ in Answer to Dr. King, now Bishop of
Londonderry in Ireland. It savored of no small Envy, to endeavor to run over
to our Enemies; nor did it savor of less Nastiness, to run away from the
Messenger; who by the force of some Sweet and Kind Expressions (which were the
Covers of Hypocrisy in the Snake) was prevailed upon to let him go and ease
himself, upon the occasion of a Violent Looseness, which in Jesuitical manner,
he had before told the Messenger, He feared would carry him off. The Officer
not mistrusting the meaning of the words (carry him off) had no fear upon him
from them, till it was too late, and had found that his pretenses to a Violent
Looseness (and which received some color from the fear he was in) had afforded
him an opportunity which had indeed carried him off.

And now for the Libel, The Snake in the Grass, O! The Fury, Spite and Envy,
which his Love and Good Nature, or rather Wicked and Hateful Ebullition of his
Distorted Soul has vented, as Valpoon, Fool, Blockhead, Monster, Deluded
Wretch, George Magus, and G. W's plain words he calls, Rank Sophistry,
Equivocation, Jesuitical Confession, Diabolical Suggestion; and of all that
differs from him, he says they are like the Spawn of the Viper; and that the
Devil entered into the Herd of our Swine, the Beasts of the People.

These are a few of the many Instances which this Libel affords, which, whether
they are Kind and Sweet Expressions natural to Love and good Nature, or,
Furious, Spiteful, Envious and Grating, vented from the Wicked and Hateful
Ebullitions of a Distorted Soul. Let the Impartial Reader Judge.

But notwithstanding this his practice, he objects to G. F. p. 199. That he
calls William Thomas a false Prophet, and that he said to Christopher Wade, The
Devil was in thee. And of this, what greater Proof need any Man give, than
false Doctrine and Lies, which G. F. has shown they had uttered.

Ibid. p. 299. You be in the Diabolical Devilish (says he to some Priests in
the Bishopwrick.)

But the Snake has not told the Reader, that the words (Diabolical Devilish)
were not G. F's, but the Priest's, and G. F. did only show, that they
themselves were in that, which they had said the Quakers were in. Is there no
Venom in (Diabolical Devilish) when spoke first by Priests? And yet much Venom
when their own words are justly returned to them.

Ibid. p. 200. The Snake does from an Adversaries Book, take upon trust a great
many names, which he gives without further Proof, or attempting to show that
they are the words of our Friends; or that if they were, they were improper as
spoken: No, that would have been a difficult task. But it is easier for him to
pronounce, like one of Liberal Education: Much of this is owing to the mean
Education of these Scribes, which furnished them with such Mechanic Ribaldry
and Billingsgate.

And why owing to that? Pray don't beg the Question, since I have shown before,
that sharp and severe Expressions, have been the Immediate Dictate of the
Spirit of God: And that some, not of meaner Education, than possibly the Snake,
have used the like: If they were proper (as it may be the Snake will grant)
because properly applied; these may be so too, if the Snake cannot show that
they were improperly applied, let the Education of the Speakers be what it will.

Ibid. p. 202. You have seen the Venom, Fury and Nonsense of this
Quaker-Spirit, etc.

And why pray, the Venom, Fury and Nonsense? Names are no Proof, and other than
Names the Snake has not given.

Ibid. p. 202. That it may appear Uniform, and all of a piece.

After all the Deformity and Distortion, which the Snake, from a likeness of
it, to his own Mind and Soul, shall endeavor falsely to fix upon our
Principles; they will still when set in their true Light, have a perfect
Symetry and Proportion of Parts, and agreement to the Truths recorded in Holy
Writ.

Ibid. p. 202. These and such like were sent to John Wiggans, from the Quakers
in Letters open, etc.

A good token there was nothing sent but what was true, and if true? A good
means to have Truth Published; and if read by others, as the Snake says, it was
no hurt, while Truth: That which would have been of great Moment (if I may
inform the Snake,) after a Collection of these Characters, Descriptions or
Epithets, given in these Letters, said to be sent to John Wiggans, would have
been to have shown, that they had been Falsely and Nonsensically given; but of
this not one Syllable.

Ibid. p. 202. And this shows the true Picture of the Quaker-Spirit.

No, it cannot, because it is not only Cloudy, but it is Dark and False, to say
that words are Furious, Venomous or Nonsensical, and not give any Proof that
they are so. It is no help to the Snake to say as he does; There needs no
Argument to Discern betwixt Perfume and Stench. Because that if the Nose can
Discern (as his Philosophy expresses it) without Argument; yet the Mind is not
established, but by Arguments drawn from true Judgment and Reason, and none
such, nay none at all, does the Snake offer.

The Snake for Conclusion to this Section, has brought in two texts from the
Psalms, which he does improperly apply to the Quakers, as he has before falsely
charged them, with Venom, Fury, Spite, Envy and Nonsense. And till he can prove
that the words spoken by our Friends (which, whether these quoted were so or
not, remains to be proved, being only taken from Adversaries) were in their
Original from Fury, Spite and Envy, and in their delivery Nonsense.

The Texts of Scripture are but abused by him, as a Text in the same Book,
Psalm. 91.11. was by the Devil, when he repeated it to our Savior, Luke 4.10.
and it will be answer sufficient, if after the Example of our Lord, we answer
in the words of Scripture. Psalm. 101.7. There shall no deceitful Person dwell
within my House, he that tells Lies shall not remain in my sight.

SECT. XVI. Of Fighting and Loyalty.
I Have hitherto shown the falsity of the Snake's Charges, and his perversions
of our Words, Doctrines and Principles, and how Unduly and Unrighteously, he
would endeavor to infer from them, Meanings and Consequences, which neither
are, nor ever were ours, but which we Abominate, as destructive of and contrary
to those Doctrines and Principles of the Christian Religion, which the Spirit
of Truth teaches and leads into, and which we do sincerely Believe.

And what is thus already in the foregoing Sections made appear, will be
further manifested in this, and the following Sections; for that in these, as
in those, he has not shown what we are, but what he would have us appear to
be, under the disguise which himself has put upon us. In the pulling off which
disguise, there is at least this accidental Help and Advantage; that the
disguise in which he has represented us, is exceedingly unlike our true
Features.

I call it an accidental Advantage, because if his Malice could have been
satisfied, in accusing us with only an abundance of improbable things, they
might have found some unthinking People, who might have been misled into a too
easy belief of them. But as that could not be satisfied, but by charging us
with a number of Absurd and Impossible things: So all that shall consider the
ground and nature of our Principles; and the nature of his Charge, will with
little difficulty be satisfied of their Contrariety and Inconsistency.

And though from this Consideration, the sober Reader might and would have ground
sufficient to determine the Question in this particular. Yet for the detecting
his particular Charges, Perversions and Abuses, I shall (as in the former)
follow him through them: And for his more full and plain Confutation herein, I
will briefly hint our Principles as Influencing Men, with respect to Fighting
and Loyalty: The first of which, the Snake most falsely does Charge us to
approve and use, and that in the last we are short and defective.

And first as to Fighting.

We say the end of the coming of our Lord Jesus, as is prophesied of him, Dan.
9.24. was to Finish the Transgression, and to make an end of Sin: And in the
Room thereof, to establish Truth and Righteousness in the Earth. And as many as
do witness the Power of his Coming, by the Operation of his Holy Spirit in
them, do know that the work thereof is to take away, and cleanse from, all the
Fleshly Lusts that War against the Soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. which the Apostle makes
to be the ground of Outward Wars and Contentions, James 4.1. and as the Holy
Spirit, in all those in whom it does effectually work, does destroy and purge
away the very root from whence unjust Wars do proceed; so it prevents in them,
the occasion of all outward Wars.

And this our Savior did Teach, in that Sermon of his, upon the Mount, Matthew.
5.21, 22. Ye have heard that it was said to them of old time, Thou shall not
kill, etc. -- But I say unto you, whosoever is angry with his Brother, etc. --
verse. 38, 39. Ye have heard it said, an Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a
Tooth: But I say unto you, that ye resist not Evil; but whosoever shall Smite
on thy right Cheek, turn to him the other. Verse. 43, 44. Ye have heard it has
been said, thou shall love thine Neighbor and hate thine Enemy: But I say unto
you, Love your Enemies, etc.

And if Anger, Resistance and Hate, be taken away, What then can remain to
occasion Wars? Surely nothing. From a sight of this Gospel Dispensation it was,
that the Prophet in the Holy Vision, did foretell the peaceable practice of
those, who should come under the peaceable Government of Jesus Christ, -- They
shall beat their Swords into Plow-shares, and their Spears into Pruning Hooks,
Nation shall not lift up Sword against Nation, neither shall they learn War any
more, Isa. 2.4. And they who thus are redeemed, out of the Grounds and
Occasions of Wars, by the workings of the Holy Spirit in them: Such, if they
continue obedient, cannot any more take the Sword into their hands.

Hitherto with respect to those who are in, and under, the Administration of
the Gospel of Peace, concerning whom, we have from the first, since we were a
People, declared that God has taken the Sword out of their hands.

But though God has thus disarmed his peculiar People of the outward Sword, that
he might bring them to have a full and entire Dependence upon him for their
safety: Yet he has never disarmed himself of the outward Sword; and as he is
as well Sovereign of the World, as of the Church, and ought to have the command
of all Mankind; so he may put the Sword into the hands of those, who are not
yet brought under the Administration, which I have above spoken of; and he can
make them Instrumental in his hand, to Chastize his and his Peoples Enemies.
Thus Cyrus. who many years before he was born, was by name foretold of by the
Prophet, Isa. 44.28.45.1. is there called, in the Word of the Lord, Cyrus is my
Shepherd, he is the Lord's Anointed. These Titles were given, with respect to
the Services which God had fore-appointed he should do, viz. be instrumental in
the delivery of Jacob his Servant, his Elect. In like manner, and to the like
purposes, the Prophet Jeremiah in the Word of the Lord, does in three places
call Nebuchadnezzar the Lord's Servant: but neither of these were of the
peculiar People of God; but it pleased him to appoint the Sword into their
hands, to Chastize those, whose Iniquities were then full. And thus he can use
those who are not yet come in, and under the Administration of the Gospel of
his Peace, to pull down, set up, afflict, scourg and punish one another; as
also Vespasian in the Destruction of the Jews. And God can make known his Mind
and Will, concerning these Turnings and Overturnings, Afflictions and
Punishments, by such of his Servants, as he has redeemed out of that State War
and Destruction, which they are made to Proclaim.

Thus the Evangelical Prophet proclaimed a Summons, All ye Beasts of the Field
come to Devour, even all the Beasts of the Forest, Isa. 56.9. And for the
Iniquities of the People, he again denounces, 65.12. Therefore will I number
you to the Sword, and all you shall bow down to the Slaughter. -- Thus also the
Prophet Jeremiah proclaimed, Set up the Standard in Zion, prepare to flee, and
stay not; for I will bring a Plague from the North, and a great Destruction,
Jer. 4.6. and in like kind, have very many of the Prophets and Servants of the
Lord been made the Messengers, of those Wars and Bloodshedings (because of
Wickedness) which they were not called to have any hand in.

Thus far I have briefly shown thee, sober Reader, our Sentiments with respect
to Fighting and Wars, and the Messages concerning it, which may have been
delivered from the Lord, by those his Servants, who were or are redeemed out of
that State, which was and is the ground and occasion of these Messages, which
was and is Sin. I shall now as briefly hint concerning Loyalty, (as it is
commonly called.) By which Word I understand a faithful Performance of the
Duties of Subjects to their Governors; and in this faithful Discharge of Duty
in all Godly and Peaceable sort, it is impossible that they should be wanting,
who do in the first place give unto God the things that are God's. Because,
that in the Discharge of such their Duty to God, they are also taught by his
Spirit, to keep a Conscience void of offense toward Men. And this has been our
Practice from the first, in that we have always, since a People, been clear of
all Plots, Contrivances, and Combinations, to subvert Governments or Governors;
and in the many Changes which have been in the fifty Years last past, we have
been peaceable and quiet, waiting to see the Hand of God in and through them
all: For, as it pleases him, he sets up, and he can and has pulled down, when
those whom he has set up have not answered his Good Pleasure. And when Kings,
Princes, or Governors, have disobeyed the Lord; God in Mercy to them has often
laid it upon his Servants, to warn them in the day of their Visitation, that so
they might repent and be established. Of this sort we shall have many Instances
in this Section, which the Snake does diversely pervert, according to the
Purpose he would falsely draw them to. Though after all his Perversions, an
irrefragable Proof of our Loyalty or Faithfulness, is, That under none of the
several Changes in Government which have been, since we were a People, were we
ever found guilty of any Practices against any of them; yet have suffered under
them, (but in some more than others*) Not as Offenders against the Rights of
Men, but for our Consciences toward God, in matters relating to Eternity, and
always patiently endured those our Sufferings: And in the feeble Instances of
the Snake to the contrary, which will hereafter be examined, it will appear
that there is nothing more of this sort in them, but his Falsity: Of which now
in order.

Ibid. P. 203. I put these two together, because all their Fighting has been
chiefly against the King.

A Solecism: All includes chiefly; chiefly implies not all. But it is no wonder
that he should begin with a Solecism who ends with a Lie.

Ibid. Yet they have fought too, upon other occasions* of which there is a
pleasant Instance in the printed Trials of G. Keith and others.

What [ they] were those who fought? If (...) means Quakers, it is false; for
we fight not. But what adds to the Ambiguity of the Snakes Assertion, is, that
it is a pleasant Instance of Fighting. Then surely nothing tragical attended,
as Blood and Death.

Ibid. P. 204. They were in great pain how to save this Principle, (of not
Fighting) and their Sloop too: But that was impossible.

Great Pain cannot consist with the Terms of Pleasant Instance. The Snake as he
contradicts himself, must be a Liar in at least one of these. But the Quakers
were at no such strait as he does falsely suggest.

For as it is not impossible to take Offenders Prisoners without fighting, so
there is not any necessity that they who do so take them, should have great
Pain for the distinction. And thus it was in this Instance of the Sloop, which
was taken by Privateers, for there were Persons who did follow them, and
overtake them; among whom were some Quakers, none of which did bear Arms, yet
did retake the Sloop, and also some Prisoners, and that without any Bloodshed,
or Wounds.

Ibid. P. 204. Therefore they coined or borrowed a pretty Distinction, and said
that they did not use the Carnal Weapons as Quakers, but as Magistrates.

They needed no such Distinction; for if there had been fighting, it does not
follow that the Fighters were Quakers: There were other Persons, not only
Inhabitants, but also Magistrates, who were no Quakers, but Men of professed
fighting Principles. That Is well known, and himself says, p. 203. the
Government there is chiefly managed by Quakers, who are Justices of the Peace,
and in other Commissions there. Chiefly not only: The Government is managed by
others besides, and that not only in Commissions of the Peace, but other
Commissions also. So that the Coining or Borrowing is likely a Fiction of his
own, and may serve for the counterpart to his beloved Distinction, de Jure, and
de Facto.

Ibid. P. 205. And their Principle is, that such (viz. as oppose their Church)
may be resisted by Arms, whether their own Kings, or any others. This as
applied to the Quakers, is as false as malicious: And it is a strange degree of
(to use his own terms) Impudence and Boldness must be in a Fellow, to make him
run with so greedy assurance into the most contradictory Lies. It is but just
now that he says, the Quakers were in great Pain how to save their Principle of
not fighting, and here he says their Principle is to fight: But not only this
Contradiction, but also our Practice, has shown the Falsity of his Charge: In
that, for Conscience sake we have always refused to take Arms; nor did ever own
the carrying of Arms since we were a People, as we have frequently testified.

And after our being cleared from fighting Principles by his own words, and by
our Practice as is above observed; I may here fitly retort upon him, to own,
abet and practice a Principle of resisting by Arms, such as oppose his Church,
whether his own Kings or others. Whence else did proceed that Seditious Libel,
which I have before observed to be written in answer to Dr. King, etc? and if
it be not a Principle owned by the Communion he pretends Membership in, yet one
and he no small Member, did once publish a Sheet, entitled, An Enquiry into
the Measures of Submission to the Supreme Authority. In which is declared
something to this purpose, as it seems to me: His Words in that Sheet are
these, p. 5. Here is the true Difficulty of this whole matter, (viz. of
Submission) and therefore it ought to be exactly considered: First, all general
Words, how large soever, are still supposed to have a Tacit Exception and
Reserve in them, if the Matter seems to require it. Children are Commanded to
Obey their Parents in all things: Wives are declared by the Scripture to be
Subject to their Husbands in all things, as the Church is unto Christ: And yet
how Comprehensive soever these Words may seem to be, there is still a Reserve
to be understood in them; and though by our Form of Marriage, the Parties Swear
to one another, till Death them do part, yet few doubt but that this Bond is
dissolved by Adultery, though it is not named; for odious things ought not to
be suspected, and therefore not named upon such occasions; but when they fall
out, they carry still their own force with them. 2. When there seems to be a
Contradiction between two Articles in the Constitution, we ought to examine
which of the two is the most Evident, and the most Important, and so we ought
to fix upon it, and then we must give such an accommodating Sense to that which
seems to contradict it, that so we may reconcile those together. Here then are
two seeming Contradictions in our Constitution: The one is the Public Liberty
of the Nation; the other is the Renoun^ing of all Resistance, in case that were
invaded. ^^is plain, that our Liberty is only a thing that we enjoy at the
King's Discretion, and during his Pleasure, if the other against all Resistance
is to be understood according to the utmost extent of the Words. Therefore
since the chief Design of our whole Law, and of all the several Rules of our
Constitution, is to Secure and Maintain our Liberty, we ought to lay that down
for a Conclusion, that it is both the most Plain, and the most Important of the
two: And therefore the other Article against Resistance ought to be so softened,
as that it do not destroy this. -- Thus he.

Now I shall not hereupon Inquire, Whether herein is asserted a Principle of
Resisting by Arms, such as oppose their Church, whether their own Kings or
others; Nor whether they have so softened the Article against Resistance, as
not sometimes to lay it aside: These I shall leave to the observing Reader; and
only ask, Whether by the Declaration of the Lords Spiritual; etc. at
Guild Hall, 11 December, 1688. this same Article against Resistance was not
softened? or, as the Snake words it, Whether those Spiritual Lords did not Sign
it from a Principle of Resisting by Arms such as oppose their Church, whether
their own Kings or others?

That some few of them did afterward go back and grow stiff, is nothing to the
purpose; for as that uncertainty of Conduct in them could not abate the
Validity and Legality of the Present Established Government, so neither could
it clear them of having that ( viz. Resistance) in Principle, which some did
first practice and then deny; and others in the same Communion did first deny,
and then practice, Reasons for which has been, I think by both sides given.

Ibid. P. 205. Nay farther, they embrace the Principle of Mahomet, that they
may force their Religion upon others by the Sword.

When the Snake thus Painted the Heathenism of Persecution, by calling it the
Principle of Mahomet, sure he forgot past Practices, when they endeavored to
Dragoon us to Church, and force their Religion upon us, and others by the
Sword. Nay, and to this Day there are, that embrace this (if it be a) Mohammedan
Principle; of which there are Instances, of them that go to the utmost of their
Power in point of Force, though they cannot now use the Sword to cut the way for
their Religion. And the Snake was not more forgetful in this, than he is false
in the Charge upon us; considering his own Words. P. 204. Our so much cried up
Principle against using outward Force, for they are in direct Opposition and
Contradiction: How can they who in Word and Practice have always (to use the
Snakes Term) much cried up a Principle against using outward Force, at all
soften the Article against Resistance, much less force their Religion upon
others by the Sword? No, it cannot be; nor was it ever our Practice; but by
those whose Practice and Endeavor it has been, we have often deeply suffered.
So that if this be the Principle of Mahomet (which the Liberty the Turks give
to others, to retain and exercise their own respective Religions, and Ways of
Worship, even in and under their Dominions, does not bespeak) it is evident the
Quakers have never embraced it.

Ibid. Let me first begin to show how Active they were against their own
Natural Prince, joining with all the Usurpations upon him from their first Rise
in 1650, to his Restoration 1660.

That [ They] the Quakers, did act against the King, and join with all the
Usurpations upon him, from 1650, to 1660, is most notoriously false, for that
there is not any Instance to be given of such, who after they became Quakers
did so Act or Join. But the Charge is as well Malicious as False, for there
were but few Quakers in the Year 1650. And E. B. Dating his Epist. (Prefixed to
G. F's Great Mystery) in the Ninth Month, 1658, says, P. 7. It is now about
Seven Years since the Lord raised us up in the North of England, etc. And Id.
p. 13. he says, In the beginning we were but few in Number. And P. 17, he says,
It was in the Year 1654, that they entered into the South Parts. What Quakers
then were there in 1650, to act against the King, or Join with Usurpations upon
him?

Ibid. They approved of the Murder of his Father, and Gloried in it; and
justified all the Rebellions before their own time, as they joined with all
afterward.

It Is false, they (the Quakers) did not approve the putting the King to Death,
neither were they a gathered People when that was done; nor did they ever Glory
in it, though sometimes they had occasion to mention it to those who came
afterward into Power, by way of caution and warning to them, not of
Exprobation to the former. That they might not oppress the Righteous, and be
cut off also, as (if they refused to Hear and Redress) they were plainly told
they should be. And if the Snake will needs have such remembrances of that
Fact, to be approving of, and Glorying in the Murder of the King. Pray,
Reader, consider whether he does not bring this Charge upon his Son Charles the
Second, who in his Declaration, Given at his Court at Dunfirmlin, the 16th day
of August 1650. and in the Second Year of his Reign, (as it is there dated)
has in the Second Section of that Declaration, there said, Though His Majesty,
as a Dutiful Son, be obliged to Honor the Memory of his Royal Father, and have
in Estimation the Person of his Mother, yet does he desire to be deeply humbled
and afflicted in Spirit before God, because of His Father's heakning to Evil
Councils, and his opposition to the Work of Reformation, and to the Solemn
League and Covenant, by which so much of the Blood of the Lord's People has
been Shed in these Kingdoms, and for the Idolatry of his Mother. --

The King does here acknowledge very grievous Crimes; Evil Council, Bloodshed
and Idolatry; for which, with all the Sins of his Father's House, he there
Craves Pardon, as he says himself. But in the Language of the Snake, thus to
object Wickedness to his Father's House, and to remember the the Judgments that
came upon it, because of the abovesaid Evils, is to approve of the Murder of
His Father, and Glory in it. I question not but the Sober Reader, will have
another sense of this Matter; for that, remembrances of the Evils that have
befallen Princes, and denunciations of Evils that should befall them because of
iniquity, are most frequent in the Prophets, of which I shall have occasion to
mention some: And here it may be fit to ask the Snake, whether Elisha the Holy
Prophet did Approve of, and Glory in the Murder of Ben-hadad, King of Aram,
when he told Hazael the King's Servant, who did afterward commit the Murder,
2 Kings 8.10. -- Go and say unto him, thou shall recover; howbeit the Lord has
showed me he shall surely Die.

Ibid. They fought, as Rome, with Double Arms; the Spiritual Thunder, as well
as the Carnal Sword.

If by the [they] the Snake speaks of, he means the Church he claims Membership
in: It is then too true, that they Fought, as Rome, with Double Arms; viz.
Excommunicato's Capiendo's, as well as the Carnal Sword; and by both we have
deeply suffered. But if by [ they] he means [ they] the Quakers; it is
notoriously false, as hereafter in his particular Instances will be found.

I come now to the Snake's Instance (p. 206.) from E. B's Trumpet of the Lord;
in the first Edition of which Book there is, as the Snake says, a Part thus
directed, To all you who are, and have been always Enemies to the very
Appearance of Righteousness, who are called Delinquents, and Cavelliers.

And out of this, (as if it were allowable for him, an Enemy, to Quote and
Mangle as he pleases.) He leaves out all the Explanatory Part, and gives the
rest by piecemeal; yet not, but under the direction and explanation of his
Perverse Expositions, and i. e's: In which, whether he has done justice to E.
B. herein, We will first see and examine by giving the place entire as it is;
and next it may be considered from the Nature and Matter of it; whether it be
Hellish Thundrings from a Cursed Spirit, and like the very opening of the
Infernal Pit, as the Snake has very Imperiously (and as I hope to show) Falsely
Asserted. The words are as follows.

Thus says the Lord, My Controversy is against you, even my Hand in Judgment
is upon you already, and you are become cursed in all your Hatchings and
Endeavors; and from time to time my Hand has been against you in Battle, and
you have been, and are given up as a Prey to your Enemies: for the purpose and
intents of your Hearts have been known always to be against the Form of Truth,
and much more against my Powerful Truth it self. And because you attempted to
take my Throne (Conscience) therefore I rose in Fury against you, and will have
War with all your Followers herein for ever. And though my Hand has been
evidently against you, yet to this day you remain in Rebellion in your Minds,
in hatching Murder and Cruelty in your wicked Hearts; and though your Kings, and
Princes, and Nobles have been cut off in Wrath; and your cruel desperate
Inventions and Plots of Wickedness (conceived in your Cursed Womb) have been
broken, and you cut short in your Desires, yet you repent not, nor will see how
you are given to be a Curse and a Desolation, and a Prey in Houses, and Lands,
and Persons, to them whom I raised up against you, and gave Power over you, yet
you are hardened, and your Cruelty in the persecution of my Servants cannot be
measured; where you have any Power, you smite with the Fist of Wickedness, and
count it your Glory to despise my Name. In the Valleys of vain Hopes you feed,
and on the Mountains of Foolish Expectations, and conceive in your Cruel Womb
of Tyranny the overthrow of the Nations, but in the bringing forth, your selves
are overthrown, and it is not for well-doing that you suffer; but my Hand is
against you, and my Judgments are upon you, and except you repent, shall
continue upon Earth with you, and follow you, and pursue you to the Lake of
Destruction, where there is no Repentance, and you, and your Kings and Lordly
Power (by which you have thought to exercise Lordship over my Heritage) shall
be enslaved by the Devil in the Pit of Darkness, in Everlasting Bondage, where
he shall reign your King and Lord for evermore.

Thus E. B. who in this place does not otherwise speak, than against those same
evil practices which King Charles the Second, in the Declaration forementioned,
did desire to be deeply humbled for; and by means of which the Judgments that
did overtake were brought. And where E. B. says, You are become cursed in all
you Hatchings and Endeavors. It was not as the Snake falsely Glosses with his
(i. e. to Restore the King.) But as E. B. says himself, because you have
attempted to take my Throne, (Conscience.) And this is so true a saying, that
all who shall attempt to take the Throne of God, viz. the Consciences of Men,
will sooner or later find, that those their attempts will be rewarded with
manifest oppositions, and overthrow from the Hand of God.

But further, E. B. in this Book did not speak only or chiefly against the
wickedness of that Party: No, but he also speaks against the same Wickedness in
Oliver Cromwell; and tells him as plainly from the Lord, Thou have broken Truce
with me, and now thou suffers grievous and Heinous Oppression and Cruelty: And
to the Generals, Colonels and Commanders, and Officers, he speaks as plainly
concerning their Wickedness, and tells them, You are abundantly waxed fat, and
exalted through Victories and Deliverances, and now you kick against the Lord
that has handled you as Instruments, in his Hand to do his Will; and many of
you who have been raised out of the Dust, are set down in your high Nest of
Liberty, in the Lust, and Pride, and Filthiness of the Flesh. And in like
manner he goes through many of the then Parties, into which the People were
divided; and faithfully tells them their Trangression, and admonishes to
Repentance, that so, their then impending Destruction (and which did come)
might have been averted.

And this is so far from being the effects of a Cursed Spirit, or Hellish
Thundrings, and the opening of the Infernal Pit, that it has many Examples in
Holy Writ, in which, God by his Prophets has denounced and foretold grievous
Desolations and Destruction which should come because of Transgression. Thus
the Prophet Amos 8.11. Jeroboam shall die by the Sword, and Israel shall be led
away Captive out of their own Land. And the treatment he met with, was much
such as the Snake gives; for we read in the 10th verse. Then Amaziah, the Priest
of Bethel, sent to Jeroboam, King of Israel, saying, Amos has conspired
against thee in the midst of the House of Israel; the Land is not able to bear
all his words.

Thus Amaziah, and our Snake, are of the same Mind, who, when a Prophet from
the Lord declares his Will concerning the Disobedient; these will have such a
Prophet to Approve of, and Glory in their Destruction. Which horrid Imputation
cannot appear in any thing to be more false, than that these same Men, with
many of the Prophets of the Lord, who have been concerned in like Messages,
have called, in the Word of the Lord, to Repentance and Amendment, by which the
Impending Judgments, that they foretold should come might have been turned
away; and that there was need of Repentance. King Charles in the Declaration
beforementioned, has abundantly testified; but of that I care not to be more
large at present.

The Snake, p. 208. next carps at a Book Entitled, Good Council and Advice
(but mentions no more of the Title, lest it should betray and destroy the
purpose he quotes it for, and testify that the Writers of it were true
Prophets, it is thus,) Rejected by Disobedient Men. And the days of Oliver
Cromwell 's Visitation passed over, and also of Richard Cromwell, etc. Printed
1659. From which Book, p. 27, 36. the Snakes quotes thus, and begins, Oh
Oliver, arise and come out; which is an abuse and false Quotation; for these
words in that Book do stand twelve Lines assunder, and begins thus, Oh, Oliver!
had thou been Faithful? --

And of this the Snake declares they did (blow the Trumpet) to Oliver
effectually. But it is very false, for from the Title of the Book, (their
Visitation passed over) and from the event, viz. Oliver's Death, and Richard's
being Cast out, it appears otherwise.

Ibid. p. 208. And he further charges Oliver, not to turn Sober Men, and True
Hearts out of his Army.

And a very good Charge it was.

Ibid. So it seems they esteemed Fighting a Lawful, and a Good Thing, (in a
Good Cause) because they thought it consistent with Sober Men, and True Hearts.

According to what I have before observed, p. 138. God not having disarmed
himself of the Outward Sword, he may, and often has, for Causes seeming Good
in his Sight, put the Sword into the Hands of such, whom he has appointed to
be the Ministers of his Anger against wicked Men; and among these his
Ministers, we believe there very often is, and has been Sober Men and True
Hearts; according to those Discoveries of the Will of God which they have had.
And this we also know, that if Sober Men and True Hearts, who have been raised
up by the Lord, and made Instrumental in his Hand, by the outward Sword to
Castise His, and His Peoples Enemies, do humbly wait upon God to have further
discoveries of his Will, and thereby come into greater degrees of Obedience to
the Holy Spirit of Christ, the Peaceable Savior; they may at length come to
see, concerning them against whom God raised them up, as Joshua, in the word of
the Lord, recounts to Israel concerning their Enemies, Jos. 24.12* And I sent
Hornets before you, which cast them out before you, even the two Kings of the
Amorites, and not with thy Sword, nor thy Bow. For it is certainly true* that
those (...) do come to that Spiritual Marriage with the Lord, spoken of by the
Prophet Hosea 2.9. they will witness the completing of that Prophecy,
mentioned in the 18th verse of this Chapter. And in that Day will I make a
Covenant for them with the Wild Beasts, and with the Fowls of the Heavens, and
with that that creeps upon the Earth: And I will break the Bow and the Sword,
and the Battle out of the Earth, and will make them to sleep safely.

Ibid. p. 209. But since 1660. it is an Antichristian Doctrine.

Before and since 1660, even ever since we were a People, it has been our
Principle and Practice, not to use the outward Sword.

Ibid. One of the Orders given forth by their Yearly Meeting 1693. Commands
that none should carry Guns in their Ships.

Our Yearly Meeting did never give forth any Commands; but in Brotherly sort
has cautioned against those things which are not consistent with our Holy
Profession, of which this is one.

Ibid. p. 209. They presented G. K. as endeavoring to Subvert the Government,
which by their Law is Death, because that in the 9 th and 10 th Articles of a
Paper there Published, called an Appeal from the 28 Judges, etc. he queried
whether it was consistent with their Principle against using the Carnal Sword,
etc.

That it was not Because he Queried, etc. (as the Snake falsely says) he was
presented; but because of his indecent and tumultuary Behavior, the
Declaration of the Sessions it self will best show, which I shall here quote
from S. J's State of the Case, p. 50, 51. Their words are these, Therefore for
the undeceiving of all People, we have thought fit by this Public Writing, not
only to signify that our Procedure against the Persons now in the Sheriffs
Custody, as well as what we intend against others concerned, (in its proper
place) respects only that part of the said Printed Sheet (viz. The Appeal)
which appears to have the tendency aforesaid, (that is, Sedition, Disturbance,
Subversion of the Government, or aspersing the Magistrates) and not any part
relating to Difference in Religion, etc. --

Ibid. p. 210. But it is plain, that they are not against Force of Arms, when
they like the Quarrel; for they did not only encourage Oliver, etc. but they
fought themselves against the King, if you will believe G. F. who -- complains
of many Quakers being Disbanded out of the Army, and that for being Quakers,
though they were good Fighters.

It is false, G. F. does not complain that any Quakers were disbanded; much
less that they were disbanded for being Quakers: That which G. F. does here
complain of, is the Pride and Haughtiness of them to whom he writ; and as an
instance of their Apostasy, from that tenderness toward Religious and
Conscientious People, which they once did profess to have: He says thus, p. 5.
To the Council of Officers of the Army, and the Heads of the Nation, etc. Many
Justices of the Peace (faithful to the Lord God, to serve him in their
Generations, to keep Peace, to do the thing that is Just, and to keep down the
Unruly and Rude) you have put out, whereby you have been the cause of letting
all the Bruits upon them, that matters not Religion nor Law: That these Nations
have been in many Places, as though there were neither Law, Government,
Teachers nor Ministers, as though they never had God nor Scriptures taught among
them. And (Here the Snake begins his Quotation) many Valiant Captains,
Soldiers, and Officers have been put out of the Army, (by Sea and Land) of whom
it has been said among you, That they had rather have had one of them, than
seven Men, and could have turned one to seven Men; who, because of their
faithfulness to the Lord God, being faithful toward him; it may be for saying
Thou to a Particular, and for wearing their Hats, have been turned out from
amongst you, etc.

The Snake's remark upon this, is (p. 211.) Here it is plain, that they were
Quakers, while they were in the Army, because by this they were turned off for
being Quakers, for saying Thee, and not taking off their Hats.

And is it not here as plain, that they were Quakers while in Commissions of
the Peace? But neither of them is plain, as in the Snake's manner of
suggesting. Yet this is plain from the true natural meaning of the Words, That
as there then was an Apostasy in the Council of Officers, etc. from their first
Religious Tenderness, so there also was an increase of that Religious
Tenderness in the Hearts of many, who in their Commissions of the Peace, had
well discharged their Duty: And others, who in their Martial Affairs had given
proof of their Valor: And some of both these, had their Understandings so far
opened, as to see the Vanity and Evil, of respecting Persons with Tongue or
Hat; tho such were not come so far as to see the evil of, and deny, Fighting;
yet they forthwith turned them out. And if they were obedient to the
Manifestation of God, in these smaller things, yet they were not therefore
Quakers.

The noted Saltmarsh, who never was, nor pretended to be a Quaker, refused from
a Conscientious Tenderness to put off the Hat to Cromwell. R. Eccleston used
the plain Language to Oliver, and was no Quaker, and very many, besides
Quakers, use the plain Language. And therefore when G. F. says, p. 6. as quoted
by the Snake, p. 211.

Oh! How are Men fallen from that which they were at first, when Thousands of
Us went in the front of you, etc?

He does not; nay, it was impossible he should mean in them words [ Thousands
of us] Thousands of Quakers: Because at the first of the War, which is the time
he speaks of, which was 1642. there was no such thing as a Quaker spoke of, or
heard of, for he (who is willing, on this occasion to make us as old as he can)
dates the first Rise of the Quakers, 1650. therefore they could not be Quakers,
that then went in the Front of the Army.

Though it is true that many of Them, that at the First engaged in that cause, and
were forward and zealous in it, did afterward come to be of Us; and so did
some also that fought for the King, and were as forward and bold in his Cause.
But as they came to be really of us, they left off to Fight with Carnal
Weapons, as George Fox does plainly show in the very next lines to those last
Quoted by the Snake, and which he maliciously left out, they are these, p. 6.

Oh! The Lord's Truth, the Lord's Power, and the Lord's Arm is more dear to us
than all who, are not sat down in the Spoil of our Enemies, who are come to the
Lord, who has given us Victory, and has brought us to the Light that takes
away the occasion and root of Wars.

Here G. F. shows plainly, that those whose understandings God had opened, and
did grow up in Obedience to the Manifestations of God to them; they did
according to their gradual growth in his Grace, first leave off one thing, and
then another: And thus God discovered his Will to Men, not all at once, that
they might not be discouraged with the sight of too much work, or too great
difficulty.

Thus they refused first to set down in the Spoils, to pull off their Hats, or
to use other than the plain Language: And this their Conscientious Tenderness,
though despised by Men, as they did continue in it, it did please God to open
their Understandings to see and know the peaceable Dispensation of the Gospel
of Christ. And by giving them Victory over their Sins, did bring them into it;
whereby they could at last say, The Lord has given us Victory, and has
brought us to the Light that takes away the Occasion and Root of Wars.

And indeed so it is; for as many as through the coming of our Lord Jesus, by
his Spirit in their Hearts, do witness their Spirits to be subjected to him, So
as not to be Angry with his Brother. Not to resist Evil, and to Love Enemies;
do know the Root and Occasion of Wars taken away.

Ibid. p. 211. But if you would know in whom they make it unlawful to use the
Sword, he tells p. 4. where he threatens that God will overturn the World, and
all the Powers of the Earth, and all Swordmen that be not in his Power: That
is, the King and the Cavaliers, whom they damn to the Pit of Hell, as I have
shown.

But, Reader, if thou would know the greatness of this Adversaries Injustice,
Perversion and Falsehood, please to consider G. F's words immediately foregoing,
these last quoted by the Snake, they are these,

But the Lord is risen, who will plead the cause of the Innocent, not by Sword,
nor by Spear, but by his Power in which he will overturn the World, etc.

What plainer Testimony could a Man give, against his dependence upon an Arm of
Flesh, and his deliverance by it. But further, to show the foolish Malice of
the Snake in this false suggestion; it could not be the King and Cavaliers that
G. F. meant in those words [and all Swordmen that be not in his Power] because
this was printed in 1659. and they were overthrown before that. But the
Swordmen here mentioned, were those G. F. then wrote to, who had once felt and
known something of the Power of God with them, but were then departed from it.

Ibid. So that instead of their disowning the use of the Sword, their true
meaning is, that none have a right to it but themselves.

Upon all the foregoing, the inference is Malicious and without all ground:
There is no mention in the Sentence of Us or the Quakers, or that the threatened
overturn should be wrought by them; nay, expressly the contrary, not by Sword,
nor by Spear: And God, as he pleases, can overturn without the Sword, as well
as with the Sword: And the overturn here threatened, is not by Swordmen, but of
Swordmen.

Ibid. p. 212. The Snake has here injuriously made a Quotation, from, A
Declaration of the People called Quakers, etc. by leaving out the intermediate
lines, which are expressive of the sense of his whole Quotation; and which are
as opposite, to the Gloss the Snake puts on them, as can be. After his
Quotation from the Tract abovementioned, he says,

This is plain Language, they will not yet take Arms, nor for the present, not
till they see their time. But they have entered a Caveat, to secure their Right
and Title to it, till they think sit to set up their Claim.

That Edward Buroughs Language, in this place is plain Language, is very true,
and therefore so much the greater is the fault of the Snake, in perverting to a
wrong sense, what E. B. has delivered so plainly, as these his words, which the
Snake has left out in the Quotation, does show, p. 9.

But yet his Kingdom is not of this World, neither is his Warfare with Carnal
Weapons, neither is his Victory by the Murdering and Killing of Men's Persons,
neither has he Chosen us for that end, neither can we yet believe he will make
use of us in that Way, etc.

This is indeed such plain Language, that nothing but plain Malice could have
perverted: And though the Snake pleases himself by playing upon the words, yet
and for the present, and would basely insinuate them to be a Caveat entered,
etc. they are no such thing.

For, First, the word yet is not always an Adverb of time, as in the words
above, it appears it is not; for so would they absolutely destroy each other
(and the Snake don't seem inclined, that the last words should, for if they be,
then his pretense of their being a Caveat will necessarily vanish) and [ yet]
before [ His Kingdom, etc.] cannot possibly relate to Time, because our Savior
has assured us, without all bound of Time; My Kingdom is not of this World:
And by the way it is worth observing, that our Savior gives that as the
reason, why his Servants could not Fight, John 18.36. now this reason must
always continue, and the Kingdom of God (in the sense which our Savior speaks
it) can never be of this World, for that as the Apostle says, It is Enmity with
God; therefore can his Servants not Fight: and E. B. has said expressly,
Neither has he chosen us for that end.

Secondly, Those words [ for the Present] on which the Snake does with equal
Malice and Falsehood insult, have no Relation to Fighting, but to Suffering,
under which many of our Friends then were; and as the words immediately
following, those quoted by the Snake do show, they are these.

P. 9. But for the present, we are given up to Bear and Suffer all things for
his name sake; and our present glory and renown therein stands, till the
appointed time of our Deliverance, without the Arm of Flesh, or any Multitude
of an Host of Men, this we declare, etc.

What more notorious and wilful Perversion could an Adversary be guilty of,
than to suggest, and pervert, the meaning of these words, to be the Entering a
Caveat, to secure a Right and Title to take Arms?

What follows, p. 213, 214. Is already replied to, and therefore shall not
repeat the Answer, though the Snake does the Objection. It is with him an easy
way of making a great Bulk of Charge and Slander; but tho repeated a Thousand
times over, it is of no weight, when refuted in the first Instances as these
have been; and now the Snake laboring in that Mine of Lies his Brain, has met
with something, which in p. 215. he calls a Material Discovery, He expresses
it thus,

Because the Quakers, since 1660. would make us believe, that they had been
Loyal in the Rebellion of 41. and the Reason they give is, their Sufferings
under those Usurpers. But here it is plain, that their Sufferings were not for
their Loyalty to the King, but for their Principles destructive to all
Government.

Here, Reader, is (to use the Snake's expression) a Material Discovery of the
Snake's Lying Contradiction; for in p. 329. foregoing, I have observed him
saying, that we joined with all the Usurpations, etc.

And here he gives as a reason for our Sufferings under them, that our
Principles are destructive to all Government. How then could we Join with them,
that we were destructive too? Or if we were not destructive to them, How could
we Join with them, at the same time when we suffered under them all? No, it was
impossible, it could not be; nor did we ever so Join with them. For evidence of
this, take E. B's own words in the Declaration, etc. fore-quoted; where he
says, p. 8.

Neither are we for one Party or another, nor do we side with one sort, and
rebel against another, neither do we join our selves to this sort or the other,
nor do we War against any by Carnal Weapons; neither shall we ever provoke the
Nation against us, otherwise than by our Righteous and Holy Walking, etc.

This our Testimony, published 1659. had it been false, could then have been
easily detected and refuted, but no such thing we ever heard of then: But this
Snake now will have, that the Quakers did Rebel, did Join with Usurpers, and
Fight against the King, though the contrary is most true, as is above testified
by E. B.

We have for the present done with Edward Buroughs, and now the Snake turns to
Francis Howgill, in a Book of his, called, An Information, and also Advice to
the Army, etc. printed 1659. from p. 7. of which Book, the Snake in p. 216.
quotes, Them who were your real Friends, called Quakers, who gave you and the
Army Intelligence about the late Insurrection, etc.

This the Snake gives for proof that They (the Quakers) held out against the
King to the very last, and that not only in Talking, Writing and Fighting, but
in Watching, Discovering and Betraying.

And if this be proof sufficient for all this, then it may be also proof
sufficient, that the Priests did to the last hold out against the King, etc.
because that some of them did upon that Insurrection come up, and acquaint the
House with the same thing, and declared they had not engaged with the rest of
their Brethren (Priests) in Cheshire and Lancashire, and they had thanks con'd
them for their pains: But this, though mentioned in the same page, from which he
takes the foregoing Quotation, the Snake takes no notice; but when the Quakers
gave Information to the House, (as F. H. says) that they were Spoiled of their
Goods and Horses to a great Value: Oh! This is a great Crime, this is Watching,
Discovering and Betraying.

Ibid. p. 217. And as the King deviated, so (says he) the Parliament deviated;
and thereby Justifies the Committee of Safety against the Parliament. And so
every thing that is uppermost to the end of the Chapter. They too have stumbled
upon the Doctrine of Success!

No such matter, we have not so stumbled; for though we know that God can, and
will, bring his own works to pass; and he will cause to succeed that Work which
he does appoint. Yet every matter which does succeed according to the desire of
those who are Instrumental in the accomplishing of it, is not therefore
approved of God.

As to the Deviating of the King, I need not trouble my self to say more than
what his Son, King Charles the Second has declared in his Declaration, from
Dunfirmling, before quoted, p. 327. viz.

Sect. 2. Though his Majesty, as a Dutiful Son, be obliged to Honor the Memory
of his Royal Father, and have in Estimation the Person of his Mother: Yet does
he desire to be deeply humbled and afflicted in Spirit before God, because of
his Father's harkening to, and following Evil Councels, and his Opposition to
the work of Reformation, and to the Solemn League and Covenant, by which so
much of the Blood of the Lord's People has been shed in these Kingdoms, etc.
--

Now if the Snake will answer this Declaration, and show that the King did not
Deviate, I shall not engage to reply to it, no more than the Snake would to
those Tracts of the Royallists; which do affirm, that that Parliament deviated:
As they are Questions which concern us not in our private Capacities; so I
shall not pretend to meddle in them further, than under the good Authority of
what is given under the Hand of a King, as is the Testimony above: And in this
I had been wholly silent, had not the necessity of showing, that the Snake had
no cause to Cavil and Misrepresent Francis Howgill, for using the word Deviate,
while there was such public Allegations of it. For with respect to States, and
the unhappy differences which have sometimes happened in them, we do continue
to say with Edward Buroughs, as before quoted.

Neither are we for one Party or another, nor do we side with one sort, and
rebel against another, neither do we join our selves to this sort or the other,
nor do we War against any by Carnal Weapons, neither shall we over provoke the
Nation against us, otherwise than by our Righteous and Holy Walking, etc.

But now we come to a very Grievous Charge, which the Snake in his Romantic
Method, calls p. 219. A formal Association, the Quaker Solemn League and
Covenant, wherein they bind themselves, under their Hands, their Lives and
Estates, to Extirpate the Church, and the Laws and Government which support it,
etc.

Which most Scandalous and Impudent Assertion, will vanish, when I shall have
Informed my Reader, both of the Nature of that which he so Intitles, and the
Ground and Occasion of it, which are briefly these.

In the Year 1659, the then Parliament had, among other things under their
Debate, The Maintenance of Church-Ministers: And upon this occasion, there were
different Endeavors of the People in this Question, according to their
different Liking and Belief, by Petitioning, by Remonstrating, or otherwise;
for it being a Question then handled de novo, as to the manner of their
Maintenance, it appears each side did suppose they had an equal Right to
express their Sense of the Matter, and to endeavor their ease and safety in
the Conclusion of it. And when for this purpose the Clergy, etc. found
themselves so nearly concerned, as to procure and send up Petitions in the Name
of Six Thousand, or more, to pray The Parliaments Establishment of Tithes, and
had thus lead the way, by Solemn League and Covenant, into a Formal
Association, as the Snake will have it, then others found it their Season to
Remonstrate the contrary, and to show that great Spoil and Havoc, that had
been made by the Clergy upon their Conscientious Neighbors, and particularly
by Means of an Act which they had before obtained for the Recovering of
Treble-Damages (for they love an abundance) upon the Refusers of them. And
under that grievous Oppression, the Women who did find themselves included in
their several Capacities, did speak their Sentiments of the Matter then in
Question. Some might be sensible of the Oppression in their own Persons,
others, as Wives of those who did so; and some as the Children of Parents whose
Estates were impaired by that means; and as Sufferers, they from their several
Counties did send to the Parliament. And if a Petition from Six Thousand, or
more Men, might then be offered, as Reason why that Parliament should determine
the Question to their Sense, Pray, why might not the like be offered from Seven
Thousand, or more Women, showing their past Grievous Sufferings, which they, or
some of them had lain under? and therefore desire that the Question might be
determined to their future ease.

This Reader, is what the Snake calls a Solemn League and Covenant, but that
it is vastly differing in Nature from that which his Country afforded, the
foregoing brief Account does truly show. And as it was no such Association as
this Adversary does falsely Suggest, so neither was it in its Nature or Terms
binding under their Hands, Lives and Estates, to Extirpate the Church, and the
Laws, and the Government, etc. For while a Question is yet undetermined, and is
under the Cognizance of Superiors (as this then was) I cannot see that they
who Petition against it, do more bind themselves, Lives and Estates, to
Extirpate the Laws, etc. than they who Petition that that might be Enacted (
viz. the Establishment of Tithes) which was then a Question, whether it should
be so or not.

But that these Papers Subscribed by the Women were an Association, for the
Extirpating of the Government, the Snake gives himself the Lie; because they
were delivered to those, whom I doubt not, he will acknowledge were Usurpers:
And he has said, as I have observed, P. 326. foregoing, that we Joined with
all the Usurpations from our first Rise. And I think they give no great mark of
Joining with a Usurpation, who bind themselves under their Hands, Lives, and
Estates to Extirpate it. Yet thus Contradictory is the Snake.

Ibid. P. 220. They Exult, That Strafford 's Head was cut off, and Canterbury
's, and Charles Stuart 's, as Traitors, for endeavoring to Subvert the
Fundamental Laws. For these, and many more Scraps, picked here and there a
Line, he quotes The West Answering the North, Printed 1657.

But that there is no such Exulting as the Snake does Suggest, will soon
appear, both from the Form and Occasion of the Words.

First to the Occasion: This Book West Answering the North, was Writ to lay
open the Illegal Practices, and Grievous Persecutions which some then in
Authority did do and use, against many of our Friends in the Counties of
Cornwall and Devonshire (which was by the way no Mark of Joining with them) as
other Books Writ about that time do abundantly testify of the like evil
Practices in other Counties. And that they might the more effectually Convince
their Persecutors of the wrong they then did them, they Expostulate with them,
P. 78, 79. concerning the Pretenses on which these their Persecutors had
proceeded against others, for what they called Arbitrary Actings, while they
themselves were then found in Practices not less Arbitrary and Illegal. The
Words are these:

To what purpose have been the Hangings by the Neck, the Cuttings of the Throat
at Tyburn, the Imprisonments, Confiscation of Estates, and other exemplary
Punishments executed on Judges, Justices, and Ministers of State, for Arbitrary
Acting, of which the Records of this Nation speak? Why was Strafford's Head cut
off, and Canterbury's, and Charles Stuart's, as Traitors, for Endeavoring to
Subvert the Fundamental Laws of England; and what Justice was there in all
these, etc?

This, it is plain, is not Exulting, but Quaerying; not Praising, but
Questioning; yet the Snake by his Art in Splitting Sentences, puts it in
another face than this its true one.

Another Instance the Snake quotes, p. 221. from the Book aforesaid, p. 96.
Multitudes of People flocked up out of the City to Westminster, to complain of
their Sufferings, which Charles Stuart called Tumults.

But the place as it lies in that Book is thus: In the beginning of the Long
Parliament some such thing (viz. Guards) was set at White-hall-gate, to hi^^er
the Multitudes of People which flocked up out of the City to Westminster, to
Complain of their Sufferings by the Bishops, and Oppressions, etc.

The last Words it seems the Snake would have kept under the Thumb, and by no
means have it known, that the cause why the People then flocked to Westminster,
was their Oppression and Suffering by Bishops. No, by no means; the Snake can
much more willingly have it known, that King Charles the First was counted
faulty, than that those Bishops should stand Recorded for Oppressors and
Persecutors. This must not be Published in Gath; nor had I now revived it in
this Instance, but to Detect the Injustice and Falsehood of this Partial
Adversary.

I come now to a Book, Entitled, Several Papers given forth by G. Fox, Printed
1660. From which the Snake in the same manner, as from the last quoted, gives
many Scraps of Quotations, with purpose that they may Answer the Title of this
Section; and to prove his Solecism, That all their Fighting has been chiefly
against the King. But alas! his base and nasty practice of Splitting Sentences,
Curtailing Periods, and Perverting the Sense, Scope, and Purport of them, will
never be able effectually to do it; as, who shall read the Pages referred to by
him, viz. p. 8, 9, 12, 15, 16. and from which, in an interwoven manner, he has
placed the several Bits he picks, will more fully see: I omit to Transcribe
them, for Brevity; but their Purport is this: George Fox does in those Papers
(which were Writ long before the King's Restoration, though not Printed till
the Year before) fore-warn and reprehend those who would have Constituted and
Set Up an Oppressing King, which it was feared some in Oliver's Days would have
done, thereby to Establish and Impose their Religion upon the Nation, contrary
to their former great Pretense to the Headship and Kingship of Jesus Christ
over the Church: And thus much, as it has the warrantable Example of Precedent
from Holy Writ, so neither was it any Fighting against the King.

When the Jews, 1 Samuel 8.5. would have a King to Judge them, like all the
Nations; it is said in the very next Verse (according to the Hebrew) It was
evil in the eyes of Samuel; yet Samuel was not therefore accused of Fighting
against him whom God in anger gave them, to be their King. Samuel had a sight
of that Declension which was in the Jews, contrary to their former Practices in
this their desire; that displeased him, and seemed evil unto him, in that there
should be such Declension in them. Thus some there were, who once had some
beginnings of the Work of God in their Hearts, and while they continued under
that Sense, were willing that Jesus Christ should have his proper Headship and
Government in his Church; and that all should be persuaded in their own Minds,
in the Exercise of their Religious Worship toward God. But having declined
from this, they were endeavoring to set up the contrary, viz. a Governor and
Government, by which they might impose upon those, with whom they had formerly
Unity, as relating to the Freedom of the Conscience. Against this it is G. Fox,
in those Papers speaks, which shows the Snake, in his scornful Flout, p. 223.
Alas! wretched George; now must all Men know, that thou, even thou thy self,
did quench the Spirit, and deny the Light, etc. does of none speak so
properly, as of himself; concerning whom all Men that read him, must know, by
this his Falsehood and Malice, that he does quench the Spirit, and deny the
Light, which will further appear in the falsity of his saying.

P. 223. Thee (G. F.) did Change, just as the times did Change, and just as
soon.

The Instance which the Snake gives, that G. F. did so Change, is a Declaration
which he with other of our Friends did give unto the King at his Restoration,
importing their Truth and Fidelity to him: It Is thus Entitled, A Declaration
and an Information, from us the People of God, called Quakers, To the Present
Governors, the King, and both Houses of Parliament, etc. And was delivered to
the King, the 22 Day of the fourth Month, 1660. From p. 4. of this Declaration,
the Snake p. 224. quotes thus:

We therefore Declare, to take off all Jealousies, Fears and Suspicions, of our
Truth and Fidelity to the King, and these present Governors, That our
Intentions and Endeavors are and shall be Good, True, Honest and Peaceable
toward them, and that we do Love, Own, and Honor the King, and these present
Governors, (what follows the Snake has cut off) so far as they do Rule for God
and his Truth, and do not impose any thing upon Peoples Consciences, but let
the Gospel have its free passage through the Consciences of Men, which we do
not know that they have, by any Law, as yet imposed: And if they Grant Liberty
of Conscience toward God and toward Man, then we know that God will bless
them. --

So that the ground of that Love and Honor, which our Friends did then profess
to have for that Government, was their Ruling for God, and his Truth, and not
impposing upon the Consciences of Men. And I must needs say, that there never
was any Governors in the World, who have so Ruled, but the People of God, in
every Age, have loved and honored them, as they have been always True, Honest
and Peaceable toward all; and must continue to be so through every Age of the
World; and such Kings, Princes and Governments, God will bless.

But in all this, where is the Change the Snake speaks of, who says, that we
did Change just as the times did Change? Why indeed there is no such thing: For
to all the Governments, since we have been a People, our Endeavors toward
them, in much Truth and Fidelity have been, that they would Rule for God and
his Truth, and not impose any thing upon the Consciences of Men.

Thus the Long Parliament (1652.) was warned in their Day, not to persecute;
they not harkning, their Power was taken from them.

Thus the Council of State (1653.) was warned, but hearkened not, and the
Oppression was very great.

Thus the Little Parliament in the same Year was warned, but they received from
the Priests Petitions against us, whereby Bondage and Oppression continued, but
They ended.

Thus Oliver Cromwell, (who in the same Year was made Protector) and instead of
removing Persecution, he caused new Acts to be made to persecute by, of which,
he also was then warned.

His Second Parliament, called in 1654. were also warned, but they going on in
the same Road of Persecution, were soon stopped and laid by.

His Third Parliament in 1657. they also made Laws for Persecution, of which
they also were admonished, but they rejected, and they also were laid by.

Thus also Richard Cromwell, who in 1658. was made Protector, was also warned;
but no Redress ensued, for he, as those that went before him, harkned to the
Numerous Petitions of the then Priesthood, for the enslaving of Conscience.

His Parliament in 1659. continued the same Course, were warned but not
harkening, they were broken.

In the same Year succeeded the Long Parliament, who according to their very
great Pretenses for Liberty of Conscience, did set some free who were in great
Sufferings for their Consciences toward God; but they continued not herein, of
which they were warned, and laid by.

In the same Year the Army and Council of State set up, but they not receiving,
nor harkening to the just desire of Freedom in matters of Conscience toward
God, were laid by.

In the same Year the Long Parliament had another day; but the Fury of
Oppression being exalted among them, of which they being warned, and not
harkening, they were finally overthrown.

Lastly, the Secluded Members, who brought on the Restoration of the King; as
also the King and his Parliament were timely admonished; the first instance of
which was, the Declaration lately spoken of.

But here, Reader, it may be fit to remark to thee, that under all the several
Changes beforementioned, the Sufferings which our Friends underwent in Name,
Person and Estate, were very Great; for our Religious Meetings and our
Conscientious Obedience to God, who has called Us to be a People; which
Sufferings might have been prevented, could we have joined with them, as the
Snake has falsely said we did.

But that we neither did, nor could do; but were under all of them a suffering
People; who neither were for one Party or another, nor sided with one Sort or
another, nor rebelled against any, being brought out of Warring (with Carnal
Weapons;) to witness the Work of the Gospel of Peace, in which the Ground of
all outward Wars is taken away.

But to return to the Declaration above spoken of, the Snake says, p. 225. that
there was great Opposition to the first Draught of it; because of the words
Loyal Subjects. And the Opposition to these words he affirms to have been
grounded upon the Conscienciousness of some then present; that they (the
Quakers) had not been True and Faithful, which is a Gross Falsehood. First from
the Terms of the Declaration it self; for the Expressions in that, of Truth and
Faithfulness, are at least equally significant and expressive with the word
[Loyal;] which word, it is possible might be opposed, as a new way of
expressing our Constant Practice under all Governments. But if the word [Loyal]
was opposed from a Consciousness to the contrary, it may not be amiss for the
Snake to procure from his Informer (who at the time of the Drawing of this
Declaration, did declare himself to be one of the People called Quakers) some
Testimonial, that he the said Informant, whilst called a Quaker (and owned by
that People as such) was conscious to himself of Untruth and Unfaithfulness to
the King, or any of the former Governments; and give some Instances to
corroborate that Testimonial; and then it may be allowed a degree of Credit in
proportion to its Truth.

But the Snake comes off from this contending for the word [Loyal;] and in page
226. declares, This contest about the word [Loyalty] was perfectly needless,
since they suffered the words which I have quoted, to stand, viz. Truth and
Fidelity to the King; for these imply all that Loyalty can mean.

If the Contest about the word was needless, so also was the Snake's Long
Observation of near two pages upon it, more especially when it is considered,
that he has beat down all that he said before: For here he acknowledges that
the words, Truth and Fidelity mean all that [Loyalty] can: Very well; but then
it is to be considered, that had E. Billing, (whom the Snake says, was one of
open Sincerity and Courage) or others, who opposed the word [Loyal] known that
themselves, with the People called Quakers, had not been True and Faithful,
which the Snake says, is all that [Loyalty] can mean; they ought as much to
have opposed them, as this. And had this been the cause why the word [Loyalty]
was refused by E. Billing, it could not consist with the Character which the
Snake gives him of open Sincerity and Courage, to have accepted the words Truth
and Fidelity. So that let the matter be which it will, the Snake must still be
a Liar.

But he goes on in the same page, and says, They (the Quakers) had the Face to
upbraid others for their Changing and Trimming. Hear the words of their
Declaration; (that before mentioned) p. 6. And those Priests turned to every
Power and every Government, as it turned, and made Petitions, and Addresses,
and Acknowledgments to every Change of Government, (what follows, the Snake had
the face to leave out) and conformed to every Power, and showed much Love and
Zeal to every Present Power, for their own ends, though many of them were
Instruments to throw others out: Yet through their Deceit and Subtilties have
kept themselves in, in all these Times and Changes.

"Now let any Honest Hearted People Judge, etc.

This Conforming Deceit and Subtilty which was objected to those Priests, the
Snake had the Face to leave out, least it should seem too sharp a Lampoon upon
them: But this the Priests, who were then in being, could neither discharge
themselves from, nor lay it upon the Quakers; though there was opportunity
enough favorable for such an undertaking, could they have proved it.

But to go on, the Snake says, and quotes from p. 8. They (the Quakers) tell
the King, False Dealing we do utterly deny -- and speak the Truth in Plainness
and Singleness of Heart.

But though he was willing so much should be known, which is also a very great
Truth, that we have toward all Governors utterly denied all Fase Dealing, and
have dealt faithfully and plainly with every one, without favor or partiality,
reproving and blaming every one for their Faults, showing every one their
Dangers, and warning every one by the Fall of others that went before them, to
beware of, shun and turn from those Evils which brought ruin upon the former.
But they never joined with, fell in with, acted with, sought or accepted Places
of Profit or Trust from any of them, which the Fawning Priests, and some
Professors did; and therefore as with very great Truth and Boldness they might,
and did say, all that the Snake has quoted above: So with like Truth and
Boldness they say more, which the Snake has cut out; least while he remembered
their Faithfulness, his relucting Mind should object his own past Treachery.
The words as they stand in the place he quotes from, are these, Treason,
Treachery and False Dealing we do utterly deny. False Dealing, Surmising, or
Plotting against any Creature upon the Face of the Earth, and speak the Truth
in plainness and singleness of Heart.

If the Snake could for himself, in truth say so much, it would be a brave
Testimony.

I come now to a Book of George Bishops, Entitled, The Warnings of the Lord to
the Men of this Generation, Printed 1660. Under the Title of which Book,
because of Directions to two Places, at which it was then sold, the Snake says
they did industriously spread their Treasons. But I would know of him, why a
Warning to Peace, Love and Unity, and Caution against Persecution, (and such
this Book is) may not at least be disposed of at as many public Places as his
Defamatory Libels, or as his Seditious ones was at private Places.

But now from the Manner of its Disposal, we come to the Matter of the Book.

The Snake begins with p. 27. of this Book, and quotes thus, p. 228. Beware of
falling under this Spirit, or of thinking the Breach between you can be healed;
for I declare it to you from the Lord, That it is irreconcilable, it cannot,
it will not be healed. --

Thus far the Snake quotes, and by a dash strikes out about three following
Lines, which are these, Yea, the day will come, and now is, wherein it will be
said, we would have healed Babylon, but she would not be healed; let us depart
every one to his own place. And now upon a Consideration of these Lines, what
more can be the meaning, than that that separation and distance, which was
between the Spirits and Interest of the Conquerors and Conquered, was
irreconcilable? And the Breach of their Contention was such, as could not be
healed with the peaceable and quiet possession of those who were then uppermost
( viz. in the Year 1659.) which some might then either foolishly hope or wish.
But now the Snake, after his Dash, at which he left out the Lines
abovementioned, continues his Quotation thus, Therefore in the Power and Dread
of the Almighty, stand and bear over it, (viz. that Spirit of Persecution which
would vainly hope a Reconciliation) Crush it to pieces, (for that Spirit of
which G. Bishop is here speaking, had persecuted and afflicted, and in many
ways made Men to suffer for their Tender Consciences,) Stamp it to Powder, i.
e, that Spirit of Persecution. But the Forgery of the Snake is remarkable here,
for that after the words last above-quoted, he puts an etc. and then goes on,
as if what followed in his Quotation, did follow in the same order in the Book
from which he quotes it, but it is far otherwise; for the Lines which he here
makes to follow, do in that Book precede the beginning of his Quotation, eleven
or twelve Lines; and by the like packing and transposing of Lines, which this
Snake uses, a Man may make the Decalogue or the Lords-Prayer speak, to answer
any purposes which the wicked Projector shall design.

Ibid. p. 229. Yet in their Declaration to Him (the King) after his Return, p.
7. they Gravely tell Him, We are a People that follow after those things that
make for Peace and Unity, and (which the Snake has left out) it is our Desire,
that others Feet may walk in the same; and (here the Snake goes on) do deny and
bear our Testimony against all Strife and Wars, and Contentions, etc. that is,
(says the Snake,) when they were beaten, and could fight no longer.

First, It is notoriously false, that the Quakers did Fight or bear Arms in the
Year 1659. (or any other Year) to the opposing of the Restoration: Nor indeed
was the Restoration brought to pass by Fighting, but there was more
immediately the Hand of God in it; in that without outward Strength, the Powers
which then were, crumbled and broke to pieces; (as they were often by our
Friends foretold they should) having in their several Days and Times of Trial,
been found to increase that Yoke, which was the Original Pretense of their
First Opposition to the King. And that it was always our Principle to follow
after those things that make for Peace and Unity, and have desired that others
might walk in the same, and did bear our Testimony against all Strife, and War,
and Contention, etc.* George Bishop does in this Book of his ( the Warnings of
the Lord) testify; where, in p. 10. speaking to O. Cromwell, and showing him
in what, and how far he had regard to him: He says in behalf of Liberty of
Conscience, (which Oliver had before declared to be, a Natural Right, yet was
herein so far darkened, as not to establish this Right, which once was in his
power to have done; and therefore G. B. enumerates some of the Sufferings of
our Friends to him herein, and at the same time tells him, what was the nature
of that Dispensation which the Quakers were come to; which he tells him in
these words.) We, who through the unspeakable love of the Father, are come to
Witness the end of the Wars, the Son of God made manifest in the Flesh, whose
is the Kingdom, and the Glory, and the Dominion for ever; even his Immortal
Seed raised, and raising up in us; by which we are brought to testify against
the World, and all the Deceivers therein; and against the Fashions, and
Customs, and Works, and Deeds thereof, that they are Evil, as by his Light we
have been shown, and by his Blood redeemed therefrom, in our own particulars,
etc.

And in p. 14. G. B. enumerating some Instances of those, whom the Spirit of
Persecution had overthrown, and the pretenses on which they went, as Haman to
Ahasuerus, the Informers against Daniel and the Three Children; and the
Pretenses of the Elders, Chief Priests and Scribes against our Savior; as also
their pretenses against the Apostles, under which they would cloak their
wickedness, has these words, This is what that Spirit (viz. of Persecution)
suggested throughout all Ages, on Record in the Scriptures of Truth; and with
this, that Spirit blinded the Kings, Princes and Rulers, and set them against
the Lord, and against his Anointed, which proved in the Issue their
destruction. This is that the Bishops said of the Puritans to the Late King;
this is that which brought forth the Law in those days against their Meetings
to seek the Lord, upon pretense of Conventicles; and with this the Late King
they blinded, and set him against these People, which became the overthrow of
Him, his Posterity and Followers, and of that Generation, and of those that
joined with them. And this is that Spirit that is now blinding of thee, ( viz.
Oliver Cromwell) who wast the Lord's Battle-Ax, and Weapon of War, to the
cutting down of him and those whom after this manner it blinded and set against
the Lord and his People; and which is now setting Thee against the Seed of God,
which in this fullness of the Dispensation of times he is raising up to reign
for ever and ever; unto which Spirit, if thou continue to hearken and to
follow, and to be guided by, thou shall be cut off, the Mouth of the Lord of
Hosts has spoken it.

This is part of a Letter which is in that Book, and which G. Bishop did send
to Oliver, as it is there dated, the 16th of the 5th Month, 1656. By which, and
much more, such plain Dealing in the said Letter, wherein he tells him, p. 17.
Because thou have hardened thy Heart, and turned against him, He (God) has
turned from thee his Presence, Wisdom from thy Councils, Spirit from thy Men of
War, and Success from thine Undertakings; and is Stripping of thee of thy Fence
and Guard, and making thee naked and bare, and is coming against thee, etc.

It appears from all this, according as our Friends in their Declaration to
King Charles upon his Restoration had said, That the Quakers, even in the Days
of Oliver, etc. were a People that did follow after those things that made for
Peace, etc. in that they did faithfully warn the then Powers against that
Spirit of Persecution, which was (as they had foretold) their overthrow. And
that they did not fight, but were redeemed out of all outward fighting, and
through the Unspeakable Love of the Father, were brought to the end of the
Wars. So that it is false and malicious in the Snake, to say the Quakers were
Beaten, and could Fight no longer, when they gave that Testimony in their
Declaration, that they did Deny and Bear their Testimony against all Strife,
and Wars, and Contentions, etc. For had they been in that Warring Nature, there
was space and time, when that Letter of G. Bishop to Oliver Cromwell,
beforementioned, was writ, wherein he testifies, that the Quakers did witness
the end of the Wars, it being near four years before the Restoration of the
King.

But though there was time and space, yet the Quakers did never join with them,
or fall in with them, nor were they concerned in places of Trust or Profit
under them; but when those who were in such places, or in the Army, did in
their own particulars, come to be redeemed out of all outward Wars, and to be
obedient to that Convincement; they laid down such their Places or Arms, which
is more than can be truly said of many fawning Priests and Professors.

And what is more, the Quakers from the first, even all the time of those
several Changes in Government before the Restoration, were great Sufferers by
them, because of that Truth and Plainness which they witnessed forth, both to
Governors and Governed.

And thus G. Bishop not soothingly, but plainly told O. C. in his time, wherein
his safety and danger stood. Thus he told R. Cromwell in his time, wherein his
safety and danger stood. Thus he told the General Council of the Army, wherein
their safety and danger stood. Thus he told the then Parliament, wherein their
safety and danger stood. Thus he also told the Council of State, wherein their
safety and danger stood, viz. In Establishing that equal and just Liberty and
Freedom of Conscience in matters of Worship, which near all of them in their
turns promised and engaged to do, but did it not, therefore were they, as he
shows, overthrown.

And when the King was Restored, George Bishop did also Warn Him and his
Parliament, as in his piece, A Book of Warnings, etc. p. 2 it is seen, where
after having recounted the Mercies of God to the King and Them, he says, And
now what does the Lord require of you? -- That you take not upon you to rule
over his Kingdom, or to prescribe to his Dominion; whose Kingdom is an
Everlasting Kingdom, and his Dominion that which shall never have end, that of
him in the Conscience.

Thus, Reader, under the different Governments, his Advice was, that
Persecution might be taken away; and in great Plainness, without Soothing or
Flattering of any to whom his Messages were, he did, it appears, deliver them.

Ibid. p. 232. But after all this Sweetness, as soon as ever the King was
Restored, Anno. 1660. the Quakers stoutly deny that ever they had Complemented
Oliver, or they had forgot it.

What the Snake calls Sweetness, that (We) the Quakers did show to Oliver, we
take to be our Duty, as required by the Lord, to show to all whom it shall
please God come to have Government: That is, to Advise that they Govern for God
and his Truth; that all Profaness, Immorality and all Wickedness may be
discouraged, in which the Blessing both of Governors and the Governed does
consist, This, O. C. was frequently admonished of; but he rejecting his Vows to
God, his Pretenses to Men, and the Admonition which God by his Servants did
frequently send: Several of our Friends, in great Truth and Plainness, did
foretell him of his Overthrow, which none of those his Soothing and Flattering
Priests did dare to do.

The same plain Dealing our Friends did use to the other Changes in Government,
and also to Richard Cromwell, not Complementing nor Flattering any.

And when W. Caton, in his Truth's Character of Professors, said, that the
Priests and Professors did Sooth and Flatter O. Cromwell and his Son, and made
great Promises to him, the Proof was apparent by their Addresses to him, which
in that Book he does briefly give.

What less than Flattery was it, when the Priests, etc. of Suffolk, in their
Address to Richard Cromwell, upon the Death of his Father, told him, Although
our Sun is Set, no Night has ensued?

And what less was it in the Priests of Norfolk, who did solemnly Promise and
Engage Faithfully to serve and obey his most serene Highness (for so they then
called R. Cromwell) as his Liege People, in the Defense of his Person and
Government, with their Lives and Estates.

It Is true, they did afterward so soften the terms of their Allegiance, that
they found themselves ready to embrace another Shelter, when the Gourd was
withered; and thus they turned to the Rising Side. But after all, if all this
was done, but [Ironically] as the Snake says; and that they did not mean what
they said in their Address: The Snake instead of doing them a kindness, by
endeavoring so to bring them off; has given the Reader cause to suspect that
those Priests when they did so Solemnly Promise and Engage; if they did not
mean one word of what they then spoke, they were as well guilty of deep
Hypocrisy, as of Soothing and Flattery.

Ibid. p. 233. They (the Quakers) represent to him (the King) that the
Professors could not be good Subjects to him, because that in his Exile, some
of them called him only the King of the Scots, E. Buroughs 's Works, p. 762.

Edw. Buroughs, or any of the Quakers, had great cause to represent to the
King, that those Professors, who only for and because of our difference in
Judgment and Practice concerning Spiritual things: did Murder and most
Barbarously use some of our Friends in New England, could not be good Subjects:
Nor can any be good Subjects to a Government, who for such cause endeavor to
raise Persecution, disturb the public Peace, and raise Jealousies and Evil
Surmisings, whereby all Civil Prosperity is overthrown; and this had then been
the practice of the New-Englanders among themselves; and for their own excuse
and color of their wicked Practices, they did send over a Petition and Address
from the General Court at Boston, Anno. 1660. In answer to which, E. B. writ a
piece, entitled, Some Considerations, which was presented to the King: In
which, among other things, to show the changeableness of the Petitioners, who
in that Petition, styled him, High and Mighty Prince, and Dread Sovereign. He
gives an Instance, well known to him, of a Letter from Boston, subscribed by
some of these same Petitioners, wherein it was said, There is more danger in
these Quakers to trouble and overcome England, than in the King of Scots, and
all the Popish Princes in Germany: Of these it is E. B. did show they were
Changable.

As for the Snake's Charge, of Bloody and Diabolical Invectives against the
King by E. B. for which he refers to what he has said before. I have already
answered it in the order which it is first quoted in, and therefore judge it
needless to repeat my Answer to him here; either in this, or those many other
Instances, in which he does but repeat (to show the Strength of his Malice)
what he has said before: Of this sort are the many little scraps of perverted
Quotations, about which he spends near two Pages, to endeavor to prove
concerning E. B. That all his Fighting was chiefly against the King.

But that E. B. was not a Man of a Fighting Principle, it may for Conclusion,
to what I may say of him on this head, be proper to give a Testimony from
himself: It is in his Standard lifted up, etc. printed 1658. p. 28.

Again, all Kings, Princes, Rulers and People whatsoever, know ye assuredly,
that we are not Enemies against, but Friends unto all Civil Government, and to
all Just and Righteous Orders and Decrees, and wholesome Laws and Customs of
any Common Wealth, and no way (no not by the Sword) are we destructive to, or
destroyers of the Peace and Welfare, and wholesome Laws (which are according to
God) of any Nation whatsoever: But are preservers of the Peace of all People,
and wait in Patience for the establishment of Justice and true Judgment; and
that Righteousness may spring forth, and the Government of all Nations may be
according to the Law of God. Neither are we such who make void the just
Government of any Nation or City, neither are we such, who through evil
purposes, Plot, Conspire or Contrive, Evil in our Hearts against any Governors
or Government whatsoever, but wish Peace and Truth, and the fear of the Lord
unto all Men and Nations, and desire not the overthrow or evil to any People,
or their Government, but are Subject to just Government, every where by
Obedience to it; and Subject to evil Government, by Suffering in Patience under
it; and for that cause we Suffer patiently under our Enemies. Thus E. B.

This Principle, vouched by an agreeable Practice in E. Buroughs, F. Howgil,
G. Bishop, and all others who were truly Quakers, did occasion a Letter to the
Parliament of England, An. 1653. wherein is set forth a brief Account of the
Sufferings of our Friends at that time: And there, in p. 8. it is Testified by
the Author, Anthony Pearson, concerning the Quakers at that Day. They are (says
he) above all others (I know it) Innocent, Harmless, Peaceable; they Dispute
not Authority with any Man, nor Question Forms of Government, nor trouble their
Heads what becomes of the World; but as Strangers and Pilgrims, they have their
Conversation on the Earth, wandering to and fro, seeking another City, etc.

This Testimony, as it was given to the then Parliament, so had the above
relation concerning the Quakers, been false, it had been easy to have Detected
it, and shown the contrary. I could heap up Instances on this Head from our
Friends, would I be tedious, but I choose Brevity, where Truth easily appears:
Wherefore I shall here only add the following Testimonies of our Early
Peaceable Obedience to Magistracy and Government. The first is from James
Parnel, in his Book, Entitled, A Shield of Truth, etc. Printed 1655. p. 18.

We own it (Magistracy and Government) in its place, for while the Devil has
Power over Man there will be Transgression -- For this end was the Law given
forth, to Curb Evil Doers, and to Preserve and Encourage them that do well --
And all Magistrates who Fear God, and hate Covetousness, and are guided by the
Light of God in the Conscience, and executes the Law in its place, and this we
Own, and Honor, and are Subject to, for Conscience sake.

The next is in the same Year 1655. from James Naylor, in his Book, Entitled,
A Fool Answered according to his Folly, written as the former, of Ja. P's was,
In Answer to the Charges of our Enemies, among which one was: The Magistrates
to you are no Magistrates (viz. the Magistrates during the Usurpation, which by
the way I would desire the Reader to observe, is yet some Testimony for us,
against the direct contrary Charge of the Snake, who says we joined with them.)
To this J. N. Answers, p. 12.

Magistrates we own, and the Power of God, who bear the Sword of God, which is
a Terror to the Evil Doers, and is to be laid upon the Offenders, Ordained of
God for that purpose; and to this Ordinance, for Conscience sake, we are
subject.

Thus, Reader, thou have here some Testimonies both against Fighting, and of
our Subjection to Magistracy, during those Years from which the Snake falsely
Suggests the contrary; and with these do concur those Testimonies which the
Snake Cites out of the Declaration of our Friends, An. 1660. and in the Quakers
Plea, 1661. And all of them are no more nor less, than we have held and
practiced, ever since we were a People. And therefore where it is said, p. 235,
236. Such of us whose Principles were once so (viz. for Fighting) are changed,
etc. the meaning is (not as the Snake would pervert it, that such were for
Fighting, though of us, before the Restoration, but are changed now since that,
but) that such of us, whose Principle was once for Fighting, before they were
of us, are now (since they came to be of us) changed. And whereas it is there
also said, We are all of that mind -- that in the Administration of the Gospel,
it is, on all Occasions whatsoever, Unlawful to War and Fight with Carnal
Weapons. This respects those who are in, and under the Gospel-Ministration, of
which I have already spoken, and not those who are not yet come under it. But
the Snake thinks, now he has a full Proof, for he says, p. 237, 238. When a
fair occasion seemed to offer toward the Re-asserting the Good Old Cause, in
Monmouth 's Rebellion, 1685. several of the Quakers in the West, where he
Landed, took Arms, and Fought -- Yet we heard nothing of their Repentance, or
that they were any way Censured for it by their Yearly Meeting, or any other
Authority of theirs.

That Seeming Fair Occasion (as the Snake calls it, for Rebellion) was (I doubt
not, he will own) snatched at by many, who did profess to be of his Communion,
but whether they were therefore Censured, I shall not inquire; it is sufficient
for us, that if any who had pretended to be of us, did do so, that they were
therefore disowned. And if the Snake has neither heard this, or whether they
Repented, it had well become one who pretends (though herein, as well as in
many more Instances, it appears falsely) to so much Charity, to have Inquired,
Whether either of these had been. But since it appears not that he has, I will
here subjoin, concerning this Matter, the Testimony against, and Denial of
such, who were so concerned, and their Practices, as given from our Friends in
the Counties of Somerset, Devon, and Dorset, and then Presented to Authority,
in the Terms following.

A Faithful Testimony, from the Peaceable People called Quakers, in the
Counties of Somerset, Devon, and Dorset, upon Occasion of the late Insurrection
and Rebellion. Humbly Presented to Authority.
WE, whose Names are Subscribed, do hereby Solemnly Testify and Declare, on
behalf of our selves, and the People of God called Quakers, with whom we have
Christian Society, in the aforesaid Counties: And that in the Presence of
Almighty God, who knows our Hearts and whom we Reverence and Trust in; His Son
Christ Jesus our Lord, being our Foundation, on whom we Build and Believe in
Him for Wisdom and Power, to enable us to do and suffer, whatever He requires
of us, in whom is our Life and Salvation, manifest by his Spirit, Light and
Grace given us, in which we Worship God, as Christ our Lord has Ordained: We
being Taught to Deny all Ungodliness, and Worldly Lust, and to Live Godly,
Righteously, and Soberly, in this present Evil World: By the same we are taught
to be Subject to that Government, and those Governors which it has pleased
God to set over us: To the King, as Supreme, and those in Authority under him,
Praying for them, that they may so Rule, in Mercy and Truth, as God thereby may
be Honored, and they Everlastingly Happy; and we, under them, may lead our
Lives in Peace, Godliness and Honesty, utterly denying all Plotting, Sedition,
Contriving, or Assisting, in any Insurrection, or Rebellion, or to use any
Force or Violence whatsoever, to relieve, defend, or deliver our selves, from
any Suffering we lie under; It being our Christian Persuasion and Principle, to
yield Active or Passive Obedience unto Authority, without Resistance.

And if any particular Person or Persons, under our Profession, or Reputed a
Quaker, etc. either as not being grounded in this our Peaceable Principle, or
through the Temptation and Subtilty of the Evil One, or Unfaithfulness, have
been overcome to Join in the late Insurrection and Rebellion, the same are
wholly disowned and testified against by us; and their Miscarriages and Evil
Actions, whatever they Profess, ought no more to be charged on us who are
Innocent, than the Treachery of Judas on the Faithful Disciples of Jesus
Christ.

And further, To manifest our Innocence as a Christian Society and People, from
having any Hand in the late Insurrection: At a Public Meeting of the said
People called Quakers, near Taunton, the same Day that the late D. of Monmouth
Marched with his Army thither, it was Testified by the said People, That
whatever our Sufferings were, we must not expect Deliverance by the Arm of
Flesh, but look unto the Lord, from whom our Salvation comes; and who will not
Save us by Sword, nor Spear, but by his own Spirit. And therefore our Friends
were Warned not to concern themselves in this War, and all Unanimously
consented thereunto.

So that if any one has followed the Counsel of his own Will, or Instigation
of Satan, contrary to our peaceable Principle, Profession, and our Christian
Advice and Counsel so openly given, such a one has excluded himself from our
Society and Fellowship, and must bear his own Burden; whose Offense, as it
cannot be justly charged upon us as a People, much less upon the peaceable
Truth professed by us.

And moreover, to manifest our Care and Innocence on this occasion, it deserves
to be noted, That some of our Friends being Prisoners at Ivelchester, for
Conscience sake (as they have been for several Years past) a Party of the late
D. of Monmouth's Horsemen, on the 18th of the 4th Month, last past, Rid
thither, and turned out of Prison several that were detained on his account,
and also forcing out one of our Friends, left him in the Marketplace; but he
immediately returned to Prison again; and though they strictly charged the
Keeper no more to detain our Friends, yet they took no Advantage of that
Liberty, but continues Prisoners, as formerly; which plainly shows they did not
own that Authority, nor accept of their Liberty in such an indirect way.

This Testimony and Account have we given forth, in the Sincerity and
Singleness of our Hearts, in Vindication of Truth, and the Lord's innocent
People, to clear them from such Scandal and Reproach, as may through Mistake,
Ignorance, or Envy, be cast upon them, by any Person whatsoever; and as much as
in us lies, to remove all occasions of Stumbling and Offense, against our
Principle or Profession, committing all to that God that Searches the Heart,
and Tries the Reins, and knows our Integrity herein; with full purpose and
resolution to Persevere in this our Peaceable Principle and Profession, as
before Declared, through the Assistance of our God, while we have a Being in
these Earthly Tabernacles; in full Assurance, That when our Testimony is
finished, and this Mortal Life ended, we shall have a Dewlling Place in that
Kingdom of Glory, which Christ Jesus has prepared for us, and purchased by his
own Blood, by whom we only expect to enjoy the same; where we shall Rest from
our Labors and Sufferings, and give Glory to our God, and to the Lamb, who is
worthy of Honor and Dominion, for ever. Amen.

Signed in the Behalf of the People called Quakers, in the Counties aforesaid.
Will. Laurence Will. Reeve Manassah Orchard Roger Brown John Gannicliff Will.
Gravett John Colsworthy John Chapel Robert Ford Peter Leman John Smith Thomas
Powell Rich. Lincoln John Hopkins Thomas Martin Thomas Comb Jas. Batt Tho.
Bagg Humph. Spragoe Edw. Collyer Samuel Sprake John Nicholls William Ellet
William Ferris Edw. Gunning Will. Smith, jun. Rob. French.


This, Reader, is in good earnest, an Account of our Principle against outward
Force; and we do continue to think, that it leads us to lay aside all War and
Fighting; of which the above Instance is a better Proof, than the confident
Imposing of the Snake, by Lies and Perversions, is to the contrary.

And though I would not be tedious to my Reader, upon this Point of our
Non-Resistance, by bringing in all the many Certificates which our Friends then
had, as Testimonials of their quiet and peaceable Behavior, from the Towns and
Places then immediately concerned in the War, or adjacent to it. Yet I will
take leave to Transcribe one, because it is amongst others, Verbo Sacerdotis,
and that sure, must be allowed by the Snake. It is as follows: To the King's
Most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Certificate of us the Inhabitants of the
Parish of High Littleton, in the County of Somerset,
Humbly Certifieth to Your Sacred Majesty,
THAT the several Persons, commonly called Quakers, Living within the said
Parish of High Littleton, was not in the least manner Assisting, Aiding, or
Abetting the late James Duke of Monmouth, in the late Rebellion, with Arms,
Ammunition, or Money, to the best of our Knowledge.

Witness our Hands, this Third Day of August, in the First Year of Your
Majesty's Reign. Phil. Marsh, Vicar. Sam. Jones, Churchwarden. Joseph Dando,
Overseers. Will. Yourge, Overseers. James Carter, Tithing-Man. Edward Jones.
Thomas Rudduck. Robert Langford.




The Snake next turns to William Penn, and in hypocritical sort says, p. 240. I
do earnestly invite Mr. Penn to follow this Chase, it is most incumbent upon
him of any other, because (I think my self obliged to tell it him) he is
suspected by some of his Fellow-Quakers, as favoring this Principle of using
the Carnal Sword. To which the Snake adds part of a Letter, said to be sent
from Philadelphia, and says, he will make no Comments, but leave it to Mr. Penn
himself to Own or Deny the Matter of Fact.

Whatsoever may be the Groundless Suspicions of some Apostatizing Quakers, or
the Forgery of the Snake herein; it cannot be incumbent upon W. Penn to be
accountable to Scandalous Nameless Libellers, for what past betwixt him and so
many Persons of Quality of the King's Council Board: His Demand was a plain
Demand of Right, and as such had their Concurrence; the Registry whereof, as it
is his sufficient Justification, so, had not this Snake for his security, the
meekness of that Principle which he reproaches, he might be corrected for his
Insolent Sawciness, to meddle with the Determinations of those, before whom he
would dread to pass an Examination.

Ibid. p. 242. I hope this dismal Prospect of the Birth and Growth of
Quakerism, will cure those Quakers of Honesty and Sense, who have a just
apprehension of the Heinousness of Schism in the Church, and Rebellion in the
State.

I hope, that such who have a just apprehension of the Heinousness of those
many Slanders, Forgeries, Lies and Perversions which are hitherto detected in
the Snake, will from that Prospect see, that he has neither Honor nor
Honesty, whatsoever degrees of Sense he may have: To which I need here only
add, that by his Notion of Schism, he has made the Church (to which he
pretends) Schismatical and Rebellious. But whether or no She be so, He is both,
of which I have already spoken.

Ibid. p. 243, 244. Let them Produce and Publish such their Condemnation of
Fox, Buroughs, etc. for their False Prophesies and Traitorous Abetting of
Oliver and the Rump, and that in the Name, and from the Mouth of the Lord, etc.

That the Prophesies of G. F, E. Buroughs, etc. were False and Traitorous, is
not yet made appear; nay the contrary is plain, for they, with others, did
truly and largely tell Oliver, with all the other Governors, during the time of
the Commonwealth, (of which I have above given some proofs) that for their
Refusal to do Justice, relieve the Oppressed, and for their Pride and
Exaltedness, God would otherthrow them, as accordingly it came to pass. This
for their Truth; next for their Peaceable and Faithful Obedience, though great
Sufferers, under all those Governments, I have already so largely spoken of it,
as prevents the labor of saying more, and therefore shall here close this
Section, which is already swelled unproportionable to the rest, and proceed to
the next Section of Tithes.

SECT. XVII. Concerning Tithes.
Snake, p. 244. THere is no Point wherein the Quakers are more Positive and
Fierce, than in Opposition to Tithes.

That Is for their Credit; for Tithes (as drawn by the Romish Church from the
Levitical Law, and Practice, and by others taken from the Church of Rome, along
with other of her Errors and Superstitions) is a Legal Right abrogated by
Christ; the Re-establishment whereof is an Implicit Denial that Christ is come
in the Flesh; which, together with the Unreasonableness, Inequality and
Oppression thereof, and the unsuitableness of Tithes, to a Gospel Ministry, is
the true reason why the Quakers are so Positive and Zealous in Opposing of them.

But the reason which the Snake gives, is not much for the Clergy's Credit,
which is, (Ibid.) Because if they (Tithes) were once taken away, the Clergy (as
they suppose) would sink of Course, being deprived of their Subsistence, and so
the total ruin of the Church would follow.

This Supposition is either true or false: If it be true, it concerns the
Favorers of that Clergy to consider, what sort of Clergy that is, how unlike
the True Primitive Ministry of the Gospel, and how unworthy to be held up,
which would sink of course, if deprived of Subsistence by Tithes. And also
whether that is likely to be the true Church of Christ, whose Total Ruin would
follow, for want of Tithes to support it. The Apostles and first Preachers of
the Gospel, had nothing to do with Tithes. The Gospel Ministry in the First
Ages of the Christian Church meddled not with Tithes, had not their Subsistence
by them; yet these did not sink, but stood upright and firm; much better and
faster than those that came after in those corrupter Ages, wherein Tithes were
hooked in again.

The Christian Church was more pure in its Primitive Simplicity, before Poison
(to use the words of an Historian) was poured into it by settling of Worldly
Riches and Temporal Revenues upon it. How can they, who read and believe that
saying of Christ, Mat. 16.18. The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against his
Church; believe that Church to be His, whose Total Ruin would follow if Tithes
were taken way? Now least the Snake should glide away, and make his Escape
through the words in his Parenthesis [ as they suppose:] (which I suppose he
left for a starting hole) Pretending, that it is only a Supposition of the
Quakers, that if the Clergy be deprived of their Subsistence, (Tithes) they
would sink of Course, and so the Total Ruin of the Church would follow. It
will be convenient to remember, That one of the Clergy, in a Book writ on
purpose in Defense of Tithes, Entitled, The Right of Tithes Asserted, etc. p.
13. compares Tithes to the Oil that nourishes the Lamp, without which the Lamp
would not burn, nor give any Light at all; and comparing the Priests to an
Army, says, Because they dare not engage this Army, they attempt to force them
to disband for want of Pay.

And p. 15. From a saying of Tacitus concerning the State, (which he says, May
be applied to the Church in this Case,) viz. [There can be no Quiet to the
Nations without Soldiers, no Soldiers without Pay, nor no Pay without Tribute,
on which therefore the Common Safety does depend:] ( He infers) Even so, no
Peace in the Church without Ministers, no Ministers without Maintenance, nor no
Maintenance without these Public Contributions, (namely Tithes) on which
therefore the safety of Religion does depend.

I hope the Reader will here consider, that it is not [as they (the Quakers)
suppose,] but, [as they the Clergy suppose,] that the Total Ruin of the Church
would follow; as also I would desire my Reader to consider what Religion, what
Church, what Clergy that is, that does so depend on Tithes, that if Tithes were
taken away, these must sink in Course.

Ibid. p. 245. And this R. Barclay does not conceal, That Antichristian
Apostatized Generation (says he) the National Ministry have received a Deadly
Blow by our Witness against their forced Maintenance and Tithes. -- So that
their Kingdom, in the Hearts of Thousands, begins to Totter, and shall
assuredly fall to the Ground. Anarchy, etc. p. 41. Printed 1676.

This is a Truth, which it was not proper to Conceal; for it is fit their
Kingdom in the Hearts of People should fall, because they have but usurped it;
they have no Right to have a Kingdom in the Hearts of People; and the Reason
why it Totters, and why it and they will fall is, because they are not built
upon the Rock Christ Jesus, but depend upon a forced Maintenance by Tithes, of
which, if they be deprived, the Clergy will (it seems) sink in Course.

Ibid. But what if the Light within some Quakers should allow them to pay
Tithes, and think they ought in Conscience to do it, as being Legally
Established? etc.

Whether Tithes be Legally Established, is neither my business nor purpose here
to discuss; but supposing them to be Legally Established, is a Legal
Establishment, by Civil or Human Authority, a Bond to bind Conscience in things
relating to Religion and the Worship of God?

Time was, when the Sacrament of the Altar, Auricular Confession, the Caelibate
or single Life of Priests, and the rest of the Six Articles, were in this
Nation, Legally Established: Did that Establishment bind the Conscience to the
performance of those things? Unhappy Martyrs then! who gave their Bodies to be
burnt rather than they would comply with those things, though so Established!
Legal Establishments are of equal force, in one Country as in another. Are not
these Six Articles, not only practiced by the Popish Party, but reputed to be
legally established in Popish Countries, and vigorously imposed and pressed in
some, particularly in France? Are the Poor Protestants there, to be Condemned
as acting against Conscience, while they have suffered such Ravages and
Inhumane Cruelties, for not complying with those things which are there Legally
Established? Who but a Snake would thus hiss at them, in his envy against Us?

But (says he) if the Light within some Quakers should allow them to pay
Tithes. -- Would the Quaker Rulers allow them Liberty of Conscience, and give
them leave to follow their Light within?

The words [ Quaker Rulers,] as scoffingly used by him, I reject and know of no
such; that the Light within ought to be the Rule for every one to walk by I
assert: But it is not impossible for some, who, may pretend to walk by it, to
put Darkness for Light, and take that to be the Allowance of the Light to them
(especially in a case where either advantage or danger outwardly is likely to
follow) which is contrary to the Light. This is not to be wondered at,
especially by them who call the Scriptures their Rule of Faith and Manners,
since there is hardly any thing more common, nor more evident, than that some,
in all Communions of them, do think and are persuaded, that according to the
Scriptures, they ought to believe and practice such things, and after such
manner as others, not only of other Communions owning the same Rule; but those
of the same Communion with themselves, deny to be the meaning of that Rule, and
oppose or condemn them for.

If a Bishop or other Clergyman of the Church of England, or any Minister or
Member of any other Religious Society, should so far mistake himself, as to
think the Scriptures (which he takes for his Rule) does allow (not to say
require) him to say Mass, to pray to Saints departed, or other distinguishing
Doctrines of Popery, or to practice any abrogated Jewish Rite, as Circumcision,
or the like; would the Church of England, or any of the other Communions allow
such an one the Liberty of his Conscience therein, and give him leave to follow
that which he says is the sense of the Scripture, and yet continue to be of the
Clergy of the Church of England, or a Minister or Member in those other
Communions? If not, but that they would (as they ought) disown or deny such a
one to be of them, let not them condemn themselves in condemning us who have
done no more, as we ought not to have done less.

This I judge sufficient answer to his Idle Cavil about T. Crisp, and other
Apostates from us, whose pretense to an allowance from the Light within, to act
those things, which are contrary to the General direction and Testimony of the
Light within, has been fully laid open in several printed Treatises.

The Snake to swell his Libel, not strengthen his Argument, here brings in two
Quotations, from G. Fox and R. Hubberthorn, nor relating to Tithes; to which I
need say little, being already before answered, and therefore shall here only
add to what is already said, that if he intend hereby to deny the Hypothesis
only: That any of our Writings are given forth by the same Spirit, by which the
Holy Scriptures were given forth, I am content to leave it to the Witness of
God in the Consciences of them, that without prejudice, and with an equal mind
do read them: But if he denies the Thesis, viz. That God can speak and make
known his Mind now to Men Immediately by the same Spirit, in and by which he
spoke to the Holy Prophets and Apostles: Let him show when and where God has
imposed that Silence upon himself, and bound himself to speak no more in that
Immediate manner by his Spirit to Men.

Ibid. p. 246. And from the same Mouth of the Lord, Tho. Ellwood denounces,
that they who pay Tithes, etc.

How knows the Snake that? Thomas Ellwood did not say he delivered it from the
Mouth of the Lord: Yet what he there delivered is true: But if T. E. did not
deliver it from the Mouth of the Lord (but laid it down as a plain proposition
deduced from Scripture) and this abdicated Snake positively says he did: From
whose Mouth did the Priest denounce that Lie? Unless from the Mouth of him who
is the Father of them; which is the more likely, in that he wrongs T. E. in the
Quotation also, which he gives thus, T. E. denounces, That they who pay Tithes,
-- thereby deny Christ to be come in the Flesh, which is a Mark of Antichrist.

But T. Ellwood's words are, They who pay Tithes, do therein uphold a Legal
Ceremony abrogated by Christ, and thereby deny Christ to be come in the Flesh,
which is a Mark of Antichrist, 1 John 4.3.

The Snake by leaving out those words [do therein uphold a Legal Ceremony
abrogated by Christ] has concealed from his Reader, that part of T. E's
proposition, on which the remaining parts depended (which he has also done, in
p. 254. and repeated the same again with some addition in p. 273. to make the
more noise) for the proposition consists of three parts.

1. That they who pay Tithes, do therein uphold a Legal Ceremony abrogated by
Christ.

2. That by upholding a Legal Ceremony abrogated by Christ, they deny Christ to
be come in the Flesh.

3. That to deny Christ to be come in the Flesh, is a mark of Antichrist; for
proof of which, Tho. Ellwood quoted, 1 John 4.3.

Now if the Snake can without nibling, and taking T. E's words by piecemeal,
disprove them, or the Authority on which they are built, it may answer his
purpose; otherwise the Conclusion is Firm.

Ibid. G. Fox in his decretal Epistle, bearing date the 3 d. Month 1677.
commands, Severely, that the Friends Testimony against Tithes be kept up with
Vigor.

And yet none of these words [Command] [Severely,] nor Vigor] are in that
Epistle, which this Scoffing Snake calls Decretal. The Quotation he gives out
of that Epistle, begins thus, For any to cry against the Priests in words, and
yet to give them means, and put into their Mouths (he has left out here [that
they may not prepare War against you] as not willing to publish that their
Unchristian Practice) is a Contradiction. And is it not so? Then he goes on,
And therefore take heed, for if the Lord God do bless you with outward
Creatures, and you do bestow them upon Baal 's Priests, the Lord may justly
require the Outward Things from you again.

Here the Snake stops, and covers with a -- what follows in the Epistle thus,
Who (i. e. the Lord) says that his Christian Ministers, should freely give, as
they have freely received of Jesus Christ.

This the Priests don't love the People should hear of; no, by no means, giving
Freely is what they care not for: And if for a Reason, they offer and say, they
have not freely received, though it be Truth, yet it will be of no great
Advantage. But it seems by the Snake's quarrelling with this Quotation, that he
would have God's Creatures bestowed upon Baal 's Priests; for which I should
want a reason, had I not this, viz. That he himself might hope to get a share
of them.

But we have not yet done with G. F's Epistle: The Snake goes on with the
Quotation thus, So all the Preachers for Tithes and Money, and the Takers and
Payers of Tithe, must be testified against in the Lord's Power and Spirit.

Here he leaves off again, dashing out several lines, which mention the Spoil
that had been made by the Tythe-mongers upon such as refused to pay them, and
the Judgments that have come upon those Persecuting Spoilers. And therefore
said G. F. in the next words, In the Power of the Lord maintain the War against
the Beast (that is, that Persecuting Spirit in the Priests) and do not put into
his Mouth, etc.

To pervert this passage, the Snake has printed it [Beasts] in the Plural, that
he might make way for a false and wicked Comment of his own, that is (says he)
as well Payers as Receivers of Tithes, and that (adds he) is the whole Kingdom,
King and Parliament.

Whereas, by those words [and do not put into his Mouth, etc.] which the Snake
has left out; it is very plain, that G. F's words in that place related to
those that exacted, not to those that paid Tithes.

But as he has perverted this Quotation, to render the Quakers Obnoxious to
the Government, by insinuating as if they set up an Outward Authority against
it: So he craftily, but falsely says, G. F. concludes his Epistle abovesaid with
these words, Keep your Authority and Dominion.

Whereas, that is not the Conclusion, but after those words, Keep your
Authority and Dominion, it follows, in the Power, and Spirit, and Name of
Jesus: Which shows, the War before mentioned was a Spiritual Warfare, to be
maintained by a Suffering Testimony, and this also shows the Malice and
Falsehood of this Adversary.

Ibid. p. 247. There they would persuade us, that all they have said against
the Payment of Tithes, was only meant by them against the Payment of them to
the Popish Clergy: But by no means, against the Right of the Church of England
to their Tithes, as settled upon them by the Civil Government.

This is false, and the words he quotes from that Paper, Signed on the Behalf
of Friends, and their Yearly Meeting, do not say, or imply it: There is not in
them, any acknowledgment of any Right the Church of England has to Tithes.

He goes on and quotes from that Paper, We are not convinced, that it can be
against the Fundamental Laws of the Land, either to deny Tithes [What, when the
Law enjoins them?]

The Law (and that made in the same Reign, and not much after that which was
the first express Statute Law for Tithes) enjoined, owning of the 6 Articles,
viz. Transubstantiation in the Sacrament of the Altar, Auricular Confession,
etc. Was that a Fundamental Law of the Land? The Martyrs that then chose rather
to suffer Death in Flames of Fire, than keep it, did not think so.

Again, are not all Acts of Parliament, though made in Popish Times,
Fundamental Laws of this Realm? Though such as were made about Religion; for if
they had, either the Popish Religion must have yet stood, or the Reformers must
all be guilty of breaking the Fundamental Laws of the Realm; which is a Charge,
that the Modesty of this Snake will hardly forbear to put upon them, after
having so warmly endeavored to prove them Schismatics, as I have before
shown. But while I am upon this point of Fundamental Laws, I would ask the
Snake to give, if he can, some Reason, why the Act of Parliament made in the
27th H. 8. for setting out of Tithes, was more a Fundamental Law of the Land,
than the other Act made in the 31st. of the same Reign, for Establishing the 6
Articles.

Tithes are rightly deemed Antichristian, as imposed by Popes and Popish Laws,
because they were so imposed by virtue of the Levitical (abrogated) Law:
Besides, by Popish Laws there mentioned, I take our Friends to mean, not Acts
of Parliament made in Popish Times (which the Snake would craftily twine it to)
but Decrees, or Constitutions of Popish Bishops or Councils* because Popish
Laws are joined there, with Popes [ imposed by Popes and Popish Laws] not
Papists in their Civil Capacities only, but Papists, quatenus Papists, in their
Ecclesiastic Capacities; and for Establishing not Civil Government, but the
Popish Religion and Church: And indeed the Stature in the 27th H. 8. was not
properly imposing of them, for they were imposed by the Lateran Council long
before, and the Impositions of them was entirely Popish.

And upon that Imposition, Tithes being supposed to be due to God and Holy
Church (as the Preamble of that Statute shows) the manner of Payment, and
direction for Recovery, were appointed by that Statute; and the other Statute
made in the 2 d Edw. 6. is grounded on that of H. 8. and refers to it, and
expressly declares, it is made to the intent the said Tithes may be hereafter
truly paid, according to the mind of the makers of the said Act.

And that being made by H. 8. and his Parliament, about four Years before the
Act for the Six Articles was made; sufficiently shows, what the mind of the
Makers of that Act was, and whom they would have Tithes then paid to, who
professed Communion with the Church of Rome; though they quarelled with the Pope,
and burnt the Protestants as fast as they appeared; so that if it should be
supposed, that Tithes were imposed by those Statutes, it will be hard to free
them from being a Popish Imposition.

Ibid. p. 248. There were no Tithes paid to any Popish Priests in England, ever
since Quakerism appeared amongst us.

Nay, rather, was there any Tithes paid to any Priests, but what in their
Original here in England were demanded by Popish Priests? Are not all Priests
that take Tithes, what ever other Denomination they may go under, in that, and
so far at least Popish? And this may serve for Answer to his Interrogative in
the same Page, Why do you not now pay your Tithes to the Ministers of the
Church of England?

Ibid. Why do you boast of your Sufferings and Imprisonments? etc.

We do not boast, nor have we any thing to boast of, that we can do or suffer,
it is the Lord that has carried us through our Sufferings (as he did his
People in former times) and the Glory belongs to him, which it is fit we should
give unto him, by Commemorating his Goodness therein toward us.

But it is an Aggravation of Cruelty, and an unusual sort of Barbarity, to put
Men to pain, and then blame them for Groaning; to oppress Men, and not suffer
them to Complain or seek Redress.

Ibid. p. 249. Why do you Persecute and Disown those of your Communion who pay
their Tithes? etc.

We Persecute none; but in disowning such as pretending to own our Principle,
do act contrary to it, we do but our Duty.

Ibid. Why are you so Zealous herein, as not to leave them to their own
Conviction, or Light within? etc.

We leave them to take their own way if they will persist therein, after
frequent Admonition and Endeavors to bring them to the right way.

Ibid. Why will you not allow them what your selves so much plead for, Liberty
of Conscience in this Case?

We do allow all such, the same Liberty we our selves plead for: For we don't
plead for a Liberty to act contrary to the Principles of any other ^ociety, and
oppose them, and yet require them to receive and own us as Members of that
Society we oppose. We meddle no further with any of those who have deserted our
Principle, than to declare they are gone from us, and are no longer of us; and
to Defend our Principle and us against Assaults: And if other Societies which
we departed from, had done no more, nor otherwise by us, we should not have
complained of them.

Ibid. The Quakers are not fewer, by the lowest Computation, than One Hundred
Thousand, here in England.

I wish he speak true. Let Joab's wish, 2 Samuel 24.3. go with it. The Lord add
unto the People (how many soever they be) an hundred fold. But since the
Quakers are known to all, and acknowledged even by their Enemies, to be an
Industrious People, it may be hoped this Intimation of their Numbers may
occasion our Governors to consider, How much more useful an Hundred Thousand
working Bees may be to the Civil Government, than Ten or Twenty Thousand Drones.

Ibid. If the Tithes, first of all the Quakers, and then of all those, who to
avoid Payment of their Tithes, will pretend to be persuaded by them herein,
were Subtracted, there would not be Sufficient left to keep half the Clergy in
England from Starving.

By this one would think, either that there are great Numbers of those who Pay
their Tithes with an ill will, and would gladly be eased of the Payment of them
(which I hope we may be allowed to say, is very good News, because it bespeaks
a growing Sense of the Oppression and Evil of Tithes.) For, since the Clergy
(as they love to call themselves) are not the hundredth part of the People, if
the Tithes of the one half of all those who Pay to them were Subtracted, they
should have, instead of the Tenth, but the Twentieth, nay the Thirtieth Part of
the Increase, they would have more than double, or near treble to their
Proportion, than all the rest of the Inhabitants besides, of the danger of
whose Starving, this Snake seems not at all apprehensive.

What he says (Ibid.) was Threatened or Prophesied (he cannot tell which, it
seems) by Rich. Huberthorn, seems to be a Reproof of the Priests Pride and
Luxury, who would be likely rather to Beg, or suffer want, than set their Bones
to Work for their Living, as others are glad to do. And this being spoken of
the Priests of that time, when that Book was Written, before the Year 1660, who
were not of that Church, which is now called the Church of England, when they
were turned out, and the Law of the Land ceased to maintain them (which came
sooner upon them than they expected) they might have begged their Bread, or
Perished for want, for any Care, or Pity, these Priests (who call themselves
the Clergy of the Church of England) took of them, or showed to them.

Ibid. p. 250. They did not think it sufficient to Preach and Print against
Tithes, but they went about and got Subscriptions of many Thousand Quakers
throughout all England, against Tithes, and sent them to the Parliament, in a
Humble Threatening Manner.

By this he must mean, That this was Subscriptions of Men: For he adds:

And, as if this had not been sufficient, the Women too must be Assembled --
And they too must sign the like Subscriptions.

Yet this Subscription of the Men, which he says, they sent up in an Humble
Threatening Manner, he confesses in the next Page, he had not seen. I have not
yet seen the Subscriptions of the Men, p. 251. So that he throws out his
Scoffing Lie [ of an Humbling Threatning] at a venture, on hearsay from others,
or his own bare Surmise, of which when he brings truer Proof, it may be further
considered. And for the Subscriptions of the Women, I have already spoken to
it, p. 345, 346, foregoing: Yet for further Discovery of the Malice and
Falsehood of this Adversary herein, I will Remark upon his Quotations, from
those Papers of the Women's Subscriptions against Tithes, concerning which he
says, p. 251. The Women do positively declare for Annulling of Tithes, if the
Parliament would not alter the same. He begins his Quotation thus:

The Commands of Men (say they, p. 3.) must be Annulled, that takes Tithes, and
not be obeyed by them that live in the Covenant of God.

Here he stops, and dashes out what follows, as he left out what went before
these Words: The Commands of Men must be Disannulled. How? By the Covenant of
Life, which Abrogates the Levitical Law that gave Tithes. And if the Covenant
of Life has Abrogated the Levitical Law that gave Tithes; which Law was given
by God: Shall it not also Annul the Commands of Men, upon that (Abrogated) Law?
I think it must. But how? Must it be as the Snake says? If the Parliament would
not alter the same: (Insinuating, that they then would Rebel; which is a most
false Insinuation) Yes, if they would not, it must be Annulled to as many as
are in the Covenant of Life; because such Witness (as the Words in p. 3.
immediately foregoing the Snake's Quotation, are) the End of the Command of God
to the Jews, that gave Tithes.

Thus much for the Words left out at the beginning, which sufficiently shows
the Malice of the Snake: Now for what he has dashed out at the end of this
Quotation, which is this:

Now if you (the then Parliament) act in the same Power that has held up
Tithes since the Apostles Days, which has taken away many of our Friends
Lives, that have been Imprisoned till Death, in nasty Holes and Corners, for
bearing their Testimony against that unjust Oppression of Tithes.

This the Snake Conceals; it is not with him worth minding, if Quakers are
Imprisoned till Death: But whether he will mind it, or not, I think it did very
highly concern them, who were exposed to such Sufferings, for their Testimony
against an Abrogated Jewish Law; to represent as they did, to the then Powers
their Case, and warn them that they stood not in that same Power, by and from
which they had known such Sufferings.

The Snake continues thus: And they tell, p. 4. That they bear their Testimony
for the Lord Jesus Christ (in Opposition to Tithes) against the Commands of
Man, set up in Opposition to him, since the Days of the Apostles, etc. which to
you (say they) is the Word of the Lord God.

In the Compass of this short Quotation, here are three Abuses, which the Snake
was willing to do to this Place, that thereby he might twine it to his purpose.
The first is, he gives for our Friends Words: Bear their Testimony, etc.
Whereas it is Printed, Bearing. But that would not suit his purpose, therefore
it must be changed, for that would have spoiled his Connection, and given cause
to suspect, that it was Relative to something that went before, which he was
very desirous should be concealed; but now it must out: It is this:

There are many in Prison at this Day, in nasty Holes, bearing their Testimony,
etc.

I find the Snake would have us lie so close in Nasty Holes, as neither to be
seen nor heard of.

His Second Abuse, is his Parenthesis ( in Opposition to Tithes) which he puts,
as looking with a better Grace, than the Words which really are in a
Parenthesis, in this Quotation in the Book it self, for they are these: ( That
Disannulled the Command that gave Tithes.) But he thought that it was not
proper to have it seen, that the Reason why our Friends did lie in Nasty Holes,
was for bearing their Testimony for the Lord Jesus Christ (that Disannulled the
Command that gave Tithes.)

His Third Abuse is after these Words; since the Days of the Apostles, etc. (he
adds) which to you is the Word of the Lord God. Now these last Words stand not
thus in that Page, but five or six Lines higher; and are a Warning from the
Lord to that Parliament, in these Words. Let not the Nation be ruined, and the
People Imprisoned to Death, and the Blood of the Innocent be drunken, as
abundance of it has been within these few Years, which lies upon the Heads of
some; therefore keep it clear from off your own Heads, we warn you, which to
you is the Word of the Lord God, etc.

The Snake now takes for his Quotation, from p. 21. these Words: The shout of a
King is amongst us, the Lord God omnipotent. And then gives a Dash, instead of
these Words which follow: Who will throw down all that is come up, since the
true Church went into the Wilderness.

And it is no doubt a great Truth; That when Jesus Christ, the Spiritual Head
of the true Church, comes to take that Power which of Right belongs to Him, He
will throw down, and deliver his Church, from all that Deceit and Oppression,
which has come up since his Church went into the Wilderness. And it is the
Duty of all true Christians to bear their Testimony accordingly.

Ibid. p. 252. He quotes thus (from those Papers of the Women's Subscriptions)
p. 40. This Priesthood which takes Tithes now (this was not the Popish
Priesthood, says the Snake) we in the Power of the Lord God deny them.

And a very good Reason is, in this p. 40. given why we do deny them; which is,
Because there was never no Priesthood that took Tithes, who was made by the Law
of God, but what was in the time of the Law, etc.

And if the Priesthood now taking Tithes, are not so Constituted by the Law of
God under the Gospel: Is there not very great and good Reason why it should be
denied?

Ibid. He goes on, and quotes from the aforesaid Papers, page 63. We Declare
with our Hands, and with our Lives and Estates, against the Ministry that takes
Tithes, and the Setters of them.

Here the Snake gives a Dash, instead of the immediately following part of
their Testimony, which is in these Words, And the first Author of them up. He
was not willing it should be known, That the Quakers do with Hands, Lives and
Estates, testify against (by Suffering in both these) the Popes, who were the
Setters up, and Authors of the bringing into the Church, the Levitical
(Abrogated) Law for Tithes. No, instead of this their peaceable Meaning in
these Words, Hands, Lives, and Estates, and that proved, and attested by their
agreeable Practice, the Snake would Suggest, our Violent, and Forcible
Opposition, which is an Insinuation as False as Malicious. For our Friends laid
their Grievances before the then Parliament, which was the then only visible
Power, which could relieve them, which was both Regular and Reasonable, and
shows that they neither attempted, nor sought to relieve themselves, in a
tumultuous or violent way. They in these Papers, quoted by the Snake, set their
Hands against that Oppression, and had before (from their being first a People)
given up themselves in an innocent, peaceable, Suffering Testimony, to the Loss
of Estates and Lives. For Proof of which, did I care to bring back to
remembrance, particular Instances of cruel Sufferings of our Friends, I could
draw a very large Catalogue of their Sufferings, by Whippings, by Stonings, by
Stocks, Dungeons, Confiscations, and other such like. And as the Quakers were
then, as since then, a People which Suffered so much, and did never Resist, so
nothing but utmost Baseness, Folly and Hypocrisy in this Snake, could lead him
to affirm, of a Testimony given from People so Suffering, was a Formal
Association, a Solemn League and Covenant, to Extirpate the Church, and the
Laws, and the Government, which Support it; more especially, when it is
remembered, That the Church and Government that then was, at the time when
those Subscriptions were given in (which he dates to be the twentieth of the
fifth Month, 1659.) are disowned by himself to be either true Church, or true
Government, and that he has said, p. 326. foregoing, We joined with all the
Usurpations upon our Natural Prince.

The Snake calls those Women that subscribed against Tithes, These Seven
Thousand who had not bowed to the Baal of Tithes. Whether Seriously or
Scoffingly I matter not, but then let him not blame any for calling him, and
those others, who plead for Tithes. Priests of Baal, since the Baal of Tithes
is so valued by them.

His Cavil, and what depends upon it, from p. 256, to 261. concerning Rule,
Order, and Good Government in the Church, as agreeable to the Belief of the
Light of Christ in Men; of which I have already spoken, in the Section
concerning Infallibility, I need not here repeat, but only add, concerning this
his Cavil, That it is no more than a Porphery or a Julian (had they had equal
Malice or Impudence) might have objected against the Apostles, and first
Christians, from the Opposition they had from Alexander the Copper-Smith,
Diotrophes, Hymeneus, Philetus, Phygellus, Hermogenes, and other the Apostates,
or False Christians of their Day.

And as for his Malicious Quibble, (p. 257, etc.) upon the word [ Universal,]
it is grounded on a wilful Fallacy of those words of W. Penn's Preface to G.
Fox's Journal, p. 27. The Quakers known Principle for an Universal Liberty of
Conscience, which plainly relate to all Persons of Differing Societies and
Persuasions; and it is true, that this our Principle denies not that Liberty to
any Man, Men, or People. But the Independency and Vnaccountableness in Practice
and Conversation, which W. Penn there says we dislike, is, such as is
inconsistent with the Terms and Communion of the Society: But it were the last
degree of Madness to suppose that Universal Liberty of Conscience, must let Men
loose to all Lewdness and Immoralities, to beat out one another Brains, to dig
down the Bank of Society, and let in the Sea of Disorder upon it, or to do any
thing that tends to destroy the Communion of the Society. This Liberty, or (to
speak more properly) Anarchy, as it can have nothing in it really
Conscientious; so those Members that plead for Independency and
Vnaccountableness in any thing tending thither-ward, are certainly, by the
terms of their Membership, the Subjects of that Power in the Church which is
there placed, (as W. P. has there truly said) for the promotion of Holiness
and Charity, that Men may practice what they Profess, live up to their own
Principles, and not be at Liberty to give the Lie to their own Profession
without Rebuke.

Ibid. p. 261, 262. The Greatest Zeal which Christ ever showed, was to preserve
the Honor and Reverence due to Outward Institutions of Religion, even to the
Material Temple of Stones and Lime, Mat. 11.16. Psalm. 69.9. John 2.17. And if
he thus Reproved the Jews Profanation of their Outward Temple -- How would he
have scourged those who durst despise and contemn it at the Vile Quaker-rate,
and Ridicule it by the name of a Steeple-house, etc.

Here, the Snake, by a noted fallacy, would make [ Theirs] the Jews Legal
Temple, to be it which we call a Steeple-House, which is very false. And that
his Deceit and Hypocrisy may appear more clear herein. It may be considered,

1. Their, the Jews Temple, was a Temple of God's own appointment, as were all
the Legal Services which he appointed in it. And this Act of Zeal in Christ,
was shown in the time while that Temple, and the Worship of it were ( de Jure,
as well as de Facto) standing and in force.

2. His Zeal, was not more (if so much) for the Temple it self, as for God's
Command, with respect to the then Holy Services appointed in it: For with
respect to the Temple it self, he foretold that it should be (as not long
after, it was) destroyed, not one Stone thereof left upon another. But now it,
viz. that House, or those Houses, which this Snake calls Churches, and we
Steeple Houses, could never pretend to a Divine Institution, and are far from
being God's House, 1. For that since the ending of that Legal Dispensation, we
have Divine Authority, God Dwells not in Temples made with Hands. 2. These
are so far from being God's Houses, that they are for the most part in their
first Erection, dedicated, some to Heathen Deities, and some to Popish
Men-made-Saints.

And if any have called any of those Houses a Bawdy House, a Whore House,
(which yet I never heard, and do much question the Truth of, and which he
reports upon bare hearsay) I suppose it was not meant or expressed in a Litteral
but Spiritual Sense, as Houses wherein Spiritual Whoredom (which False Worship
was of old compared to by the Prophets) had been committed.

Ibid. They value themselves, -- from this Contempt of God's House, and of all
outward things dedicated to his Service, -- as if they were more Spiritual than
Christ, or Wiser than he, to think that Outward Institutions were not
necessary, to Guard, to Preserve and to Improve the Inward and Spiritual part
of Religion.

That a Steeple-House cannot be God's House, I have above-shewn, to which I may
add, that it is below Christianity, and the Gospel Dispensation, to talk of, and
call one of these God's House now, since the Legal Temple is forsaken and
destroyed: The Saints are now his House, 1 Cor. 3.16. and 6.19. so for Outward
things dedicated to God's Service; they did belong to the Legal Dispensation;
and if Christ had judged Outward Institutions necessary to Guard, Preserve and
Improve the Inward and Spiritual part of Religion, he would not have abolished
those which God had so Divinely and Solemnly Commanded. The talking of Tithes
and Tribute due to God, now under the Gospel, (for which that affords no
Warrant) is a mere Artifice, and Knack of Priestcraft: Our detecting and
opposing of which, is the chief Ground of the Priests pouring forth their Rage
and Fury upon us; and indeed it is no wonder, for it is not easy for them to
part with what the Snake calls, the Baal of Tithes.

What he prates, Ibid. of Sacrilege, Robbing of God, in this Gospel-Day,
seizing his Tithes, and Tribute due to him, etc.

Is only a noise of Words without Sense; and the Course of his Jewish
Expressions show, that he understands not the Gospel-Day. They who were not to
appear empty before the Lord, were to bring Outward Sacrifices and Offerings,
Oxen, Sheep, Turtles, Flower, Wine, Oil, etc. If they must not now appear (in
that Sense) empty before the Lord, but must have something to offer, must that
be Outward, as under the Law? If so, why not the same? Pray where did Christ,
or his Apostles appoint any Commutation of those, for these now in use, as
Easter Offerings, Women's Churching (as it is called) with a whole Train of such
Ceremonial Fragments, from which there is no need to produce any discharge,
until he shall have shown how they became obligatory in the Church at this Day?
And after all his Idle Tattle, how little does, (or rather did) he (because of
his Abdication) or do too many of the Priests, regard how empty of the
Spiritual Sacrifice the People appear before the Lord, provided they appear
full-handed to them? They may Sacrifice to the Lord that which cost them
nothing; (if Prayers ready made, and read out of their Book, or repeated by
rote may be said to cost them nothing,) so they do but offer to the Priest that
which will yield him something; if he may but have a Calf from the Stall, it is
much better to him than the Calves of their Lips; if he may but have the Sweat
of their Brows, it will serve such Priests turn, tho God be not in all their
thoughts.

Ibid. p. 263. No, not so much as a tenth part, though we acknowledge that to
have been God's Tribute, universally paid to him, both before and under the Law.

That the Tenth was universally paid, etc. Is but begging the Question, which
never was, nor can be proved. Before the Law it was never paid, nor but once
given as appears, and then expressy called a Gift, Genesis 14.20. Heb. 7.2, 4.
Under the Law it was paid by virtue of a Legal Command for it, which extended
to none but those that were under the Law, and to them only for the Tithes of
Canaan, and that only during that Law and Priesthood. We can and have produced
a fair and full discharge from it under the Gospel, viz. Heb. 7.12. though there
was no need of an express discharge for that which was instituted but for a
certain time.

Ibid. Yet they are afraid of the Face of Man, etc.

There is indeed little sign of it, for had they been afraid of the Face of
Man, they had not been Quakers, nor had ever been able to hold out in their
Testimony against what he calls the Baal of Tithes, as it is well known they
have done.

Ibid. It was said of Hannibal, that he never Fought without an Ambush, so the
Quakers never write without a Reserve.

It is said of a Slanderer, He that hides Hatred with Lying Lips, and he that
utters Slander is a Fool, Prove. 10.18. This Snake has made sure of that Title
to himself, for his Hatred has opened his Lying Lips, to expose his Folly, by
uttering a Slander, against the Quakers, of such a nature, as every Body that
reads our Books may Convict him of, nothing being written more plainly, singly
and free from reserve, or double meaning, than our Writings, and that in the
case of Tithes, wheresoever they are treated of.

Ibid. p. 264. I see the starting Hole that they have left, whereby to escape
from what I have before quoted, viz. That their Testimony against Tithes, does
rather affect a Popish Clergy, than a Protestant Civil Government.

True, it does so; and yet affects both: It does rather affect a Popish Clergy,
as 1st, reputing every Clergy (however otherwise denominated) which exacts
Tithes, in that (and so far) Popish: And 2 dly, it affects the Clergy
principally, as those that have abused the Civil Governments, and drawn them to
Spoil their Honest and Peaceable Protestant Subjects, for not feeding the
Clergy with Tithes.

But that we never endeavored to Smooth it to the Government, as he words it,
or to persuade them that we refused Tithes to one sort of Priests, or of Men
only; our constant practice in denying to pay Tithes to any, and therefore
Suffering does sufficiently disprove.

Ibid. They grievously accuse F. Bugg, in that he most shamefully Quarrels with
the Quakers, for renewing and asserting his (Wickliff's) and other Famous
Protestants and Martyrs Testimonies, against the Corruption, and Priests, and
Popish Imposition and Oppression of Tithes.

And not without very good reason; for Wickliff's Testimony, as ours is, was
against the Corruption of the Priest, both in Life and Doctrine, against the
Imposition of Tithes, or any forced Maintenance, which he would have had left
free.

Ibid. p. 265. But will the Quakers be tied to the Opinion of those Men in
other things? No, surely. -- Why then should they think to tie us to their
Opinion as to Tithes?

This is extremely Shallow, will the Priests of any sort, or this Snake
himself, who quote the Opinions of those they call Fathers (as Origin,
Tertullian, Cyprian, Chrysostom, Augustine, Jerome, etc.) be tied to the
Opinions of those Men in all things? If not, why then should he think to tie
others, against whom they allege the Opinions of those Men, to those Opinions
for which they allege them?

Ibid. p. 266. Tithes were paid to Melchisedec, long before Levi, etc.

Tithes were not paid to Melchisedec, but given (that is the word used both by
Moses, Genesis 14.20. and by the Apostle, Heb. 7.2, 4.) and that but once, viz. by
Abraham, Genesis 14.20. and that, not of Corn, etc. but of the Spoil of War.

Ibid. The Evangelical Priesthood is after the Order of Melchisedec, and
therefore they claim Tithes, as being due to that Order of Priesthood.

That Tithes were due to Melchisedec, or to the Order of his Priesthood; is
gratis Dictum, a begging of the Question, which I deny the Snake to prove. That
the Evangelical Priesthood is after the order of Melchisedec, is a false
Notion, denied and disproved by some of great Note in the Church of England.

I instance for the present, Andrew Willet, in his Synopsis of Popery, fifth
General Controversy, p. 315. where writing against the Popish Priests, who
claimed by this same Plea, which the Snake now claims, says, It is great
Blasphemy to say, that every Popish Priest is after the order of Melchisedec.

And that none may think he says this only of Popish Priests, because they are
Popish, he afterward adds, The Scripture makes this difference between the
Priesthood of Aaron, and the Priesthood of Melchisedec, that the Priests of the
Law were many, because they were taken away by Death: But Christ 's Priesthood
is Eternal, he Dies not, Heb. 7.23. But if there should be many Priests after
Melchisedec 's Order, there should herein be no difference at all. Wherefore
seeing Melchisedec's Priesthood only rests in Christ, and is not translated
to any other, etc. -- Thus far he, which plainly shows, that he excludes all
Priests, even the Gospel Ministers, from being of the Order of Melchisedec,
which he confines to Christ only; and herein he has the Warrant of Heb. 7.24.
Where the Apostle speaking of the Priesthood of Christ after the order of
Melchisedec, says, But this Man, because he endures ever, has a Priesthood
which cannot pass from one to another.

To the same purpose, Edw. Reynolds, Bishop of Norwich, in his Works, printed
1658. p. 528. speaking of the Priesthood of Christ, and showing that the Popish
Priests (who, as well as the Priests in the Reformation, pretend to the
Evangelical Priesthood) were not after the order of Melchisedec, says thus,
The Priesthood of Melchisedec as Type, and of Christ as the Substance was
(...), a Priesthood which could not pass unto any other, either as Successor or
Vicar, to one or the other, and it was only by Divine and Immediate Unction.
But the Papists make themselves Priests, by Humane and Ecclesiastical
Ordination. Thus he.

And if the Snake follow his own Principle, viz. That a Bishop be to be
followed as Christ's Vicegerent; I see not how he will avoid throwing away his
idle and false notion, That the Evangelical Priesthood is after the order of
Melchisedec, because the Priests of England are made such by Humane and
Ecclesiastical Ordination.

Thus, Reader, by the Testimony of two Eminent Doctors of the Church of
England, one of them a Bishop, is refuted his bold but groundless Assertion,
that the Evangelical Priesthood is after the order of Melchisedec, and
consequently his Claim to Tithes, as due to that order, does of necessity fall
to the Ground with it.

Ibid. p. 267. Nor is Melchisedec 's Tything of Abraham, mentioned as the
beginning or first rise of Tithes, but it is told only occasionally, and as a
thing well known and received in those early Ages.

How proves the Snake that it is not there mentioned as the beginning of
Tithes, or that it was then well known and received, since this of Genesis 24.18.
is the first mention of Tithes in the Bible?

But it may here be observed, that though the Snake would place himself, and the
rest of the Priesthood, ( Blasphemously as Dr. Willet aforequoted styles it) to
be Priests after the order of Melchisedec, yet he would have Tithes given them
after the order of Aaron: Why else would he, by a little piece of Priestcraft
persuade us, that these Scriptures, Numb. 18.24. Deuteronomy. 18.1. and Levit. 27.32,
33. which appointed the Ty^he to Aaron's Priesthood, are now payable to his
falsely pretended Evangelical Priesthood after the order of Melchisedec?

But further, if we should suppose (according to his Blasphemous, as before
observed, pretense) that the Evangelical Priesthood were after the order of
Melchisedec, and that Tithes were payable to them after the order of Aaron
(which is most absurd and ridiculous to believe) let us a little see how the
payment of Tithes at that day, quadrate with the Exaction of Tithes in this:
For the better clearing of which, I will set down those four Texts which the
Snake quotes (but gives not the words, because that would have done him
Disservice as we shall see anon) for this purpose.

The first, Numb. 18.24. But the Tithes of the Children of Israel, which they
offer as an Heave Offering unto the Lord, I have given to the Levites to
Inherit: Therefore I have said unto them, among the Children of Israel they
shall have no Inheritance.

The second is Deuteronomy. 18.1. The Priests and the Levites, and all the Tribe of
Levi shall have no part nor Inheritance with Israel: They shall eat the
Offerings of the Lord made by Fire, and his Inheritance.

The third and fourth are, Levit. 27.32, 33. And concerning the Tithe of the
Herd, or of the Flock, even of whatsoever passed under the Rod; the Tenth shall
be Holy unto the Lord. He shall not search, whether it be good or bad, neither
shall he change it at all, then both it and the change thereof shall be Holy,
it shall not be redeemed.

From these Texts of Scripture it appears, First, that the Tithes were
Ceremonial, in that they were not given to the Levites, till they were first
offered as an Heave Offering unto the Lord.

Secondly, The Priests and Levites, who had a portion of the Tithes for their
use, after they had been so offered as an Heave Offering, had not that portion
only for their Service in the Tabernacle, etc. but because Among the Children
of Israel (God said) they shall have no Inheritance.

And when thus by a particular Command of God concerning them, they were cut
off from their portion of Land, a twelfth among the Tribes, it pleased God to
appoint them a Tenth, for that their Deprivation.

But then it is also further to be considered, that Tithes were of two sorts, 1
st, those of every Year, Deuteronomy. 14.23, 24, 25, 26. of these every one that paid
them, was also to eat his share, ver. 23. Thou shall eat before the Lord thy
God, in the place which he shall choose to place his Name there, the Tithe of
thy Corn, of thy Wine, and of thine Oil, etc. And if by reason of distance from
the Tabernacle, or Temple, the Person paying his Tithes, could not bring them
in kind, he was then at Liberty to turn it into Money, ver. 25. and bestow that
Money (ver. 26.) for whatsoever his soul lusts after, for Oxen, or for Sheep,
or for Wine, or for strong drink -- And thou shall eat thereof, before the Lord
thy God, and thou shall rejoice, thou and thine Household.

This for the Tithes of every Year; Then Secondly, There was those of every
Third Year, and they were not only given to the Levite, but also to the
Stranger, the Fatherless, and the Widow, ver. 29. -- And the Stranger, the
Fatherless, and the Widow, which are within thy Gates, shall come and shall
eat, and be satisfied; that the Lord thy God may bless thee, in all the work of
thine hand, which thou do.

This is a brief Account of these Ceremonial Tithes, and the manner of their
Payment, according to that Law from whence the Snake pretends to fetch his
Authority for their continuance at this Day. Now, according to this Rule, let
me ask the Snake;

Whether the Tithes at this Day claimed by the Priests, be first offered as an
Heave Offering unto the Lord, which those in the Law were to be, before they
were given to the Levites: And to offer these Tithes as an Heave Offering, does
necessarily infer both a Sacrifice and an Altar, without which the Tithes given
by that Law were unholy?

2. The Priesthood at this Day are under no Sentence of Deprivation, from
Inheritances in the Land, as were the Tribe of Levi; they may and do (many of
them) acquire large Possessions.

3. Do they let the Stranger, the Fatherless, and the Widow (to whom of Right
they did belong, as well as to the Priests and Levites) partake with them of
the Tithes? Or do the Priests at this Day let the Persons, with their
Households, from whom they exact the Tithes, partake of them, with themselves:
For to them that paid the Tithes, it is said, Numb. 18.26. And thou shall eat
thereof, before the Lord thy God, and thou shall rejoice, thou and thine
household.

Indeed, The Snake says (p. 266.) all their Arguments, as to the Law and
Levitical Priesthood being superseded, operate nothing against Priests of a
Superior and more excellent Priesthood.

But they are not superseded, for the Objections still remain; and the
Arguments heretofore offered by our Friends, are Unanswered; as are these I
have here already given, and more that follow: So that they do operate
effectually against the claim of Tithes, from the Law and Levitical Priesthood,
upon the false and vain pretense of being Priests after the Order of
Melchisedec; to pretend to which, Bishop Reynolds, p. 528. says, Is Most
Sacrilegiously to Rob Christ of his Honor.

Ibid. And there being as Ancient mention of Tithes, as there is of Priesthood
in the World, I have no manner of doubt but they are as Ancient as Priesthood
it self, that is as Adam.

^ have already observed, That the earliest mention of Tithes in the World, is
in Genesis 24.18. concerning Abraham and Melchisedec, less ancient than Adam, by
more than Two Thousand Years; and therefore I have no manner of doubt (which is
Answer Sufficient to such Insufficient Arguing) that the Snake is quite out in
making Tithes as ancient as Adam: But if Tithes were as Ancient as Adam, who
paid Tithes? To whom were they paid? And when were they paid?

That the Knowledge of Tithes, as of Sacrifices and Priesthood, descended from
Adam,

Is Gratis Dictum, much of Confidence and Assurance, but no Proof.

That the one was the Maintenance, the other the Office of the Priesthood; and
therefore one must be as Ancient as the other,

Is no true Consequent. For in those elder times, and before the Levitical
Priesthood was Instituted, every one was (in a Sense) his own Priest, and
offered for himself, as appears in the first Recorded Instances of Sacrifice
offered by Cain and Abel, each in his own Person, and so downwards: whereas
after the Institution of the Levitical Priesthood, it was peculiarly the
Priests office, to offer the Sacrifices for all the People: And till the
Priesthood was settled in Levi's Tribe, there was no need of a settled
Maintenance, nor does there any footsteps of any such appear.

Ibid. They were all alike received by the Heathen World, by an Immemorial
Tradition, from the beginning.

Immemorial Tradition! A Fable, which in many things has been long and often
falsely pretended in the Church, of which in the lump, hear Bishop Tailor, in
his Liberty of Prophesying, p. 95. Printed 1647. To Dispute (says he)
concerning the Truth or necessity of Traditions, in the Questions of our Times,
is as if Historians Disputing about a Question in the English Story, should
fall on wrangling, whether Livy or Plutarch, were the best Writers: And the
earnest Disputes about Traditions are to no better purpose. For no Church at
this Day admits the one half of those things, which certainly by the Fathers
were called Traditions Apostolical; and no Testimony of Ancient Writers does
consign the one half of the present Questions to be, or not to be Traditions.

Thus he, which as it shows the light esteem and little dependence which is to
be had on Tradition, pretended Apostolical; so necessarily it includes, at the
least as great, if not greater uncertainty, and as little, if not less
dependence, on pretended, Heathen Immemorial Traditions. But for his more full
Conviction herein, I shall add one more Authority, particularly respecting his
pretense of Heathen Immemorial Tradition, upon this Point of Tithes. It is
Richard Hooker's, Ecclesiastical Polity, Printed 1622. Book V. p. 427. Sect.
79. His Words are these.

And as Abraham gave voluntarily, as Jacob vowed to give God Tithes; so the Law
of Moses did require from the Hands of all Men, the self same kind of Tribute,
the Tenth of their Corn, etc. Insomuch that Paynims, being herein Followers of
their Steps, paid Tithes likewise.

And that the Heathens were herein, as in several of their Religious
Performances, borrowers from the Jews, is not only the Opinion of this, but
many other Learned Men.

Ibid. p. 267. God reserved the Tenth Part of our Substance, as the Seventh of
our Time, to be paid as a Tribute, and an acknowledgment to Him, from whom we
receive all, etc.

Non constat. No such Reserve ever was, or can be made appear, from Adam to
Moses. By Moses it is granted, God made a Reserve of a Tenth part, not of our
Substance, but of some part of the Substance of his then peculiar People, the
People of Israel outwardly, of the Increase of the Land of Canaan, when they
should come into the Possession of it. And this Reserve he made (as I have
before shown) for the Maintenance of the Tribe of Levi, the Poor, Fatherless,
etc. which Tribe he then Consecrated wholly to the Priesthood, and excluded
from their share of the Land, at the Division thereof among their Brethren. And
as this is the only Reserve of the Tenth, which it appears God did ever make.
So neither the Heathens at that Day, nor the Christians in this, were, or are
at all obliged by it, or concerned with it.

The Heathens were not obliged by it, or concerned with it, because, what the
Law said, it said to those that were under it, Romans 3.19. which the Heathens
were not.

The Christians are not obliged by it, or concerned with it; because the Tenth
was appropriated to that Priesthood, Worship, and Economy of the Jews, which
lasted no longer than till the time of Reformation, Heb. 9.10. till Christ was
offered up, the Author and Institutor of the Christian Religion. And this by
the way shows, that Tithes are now so far from being a part of God's Worship,
that it is an Implicit Denial that Christ is come in the Flesh: To which I may
add, that Tithes were so particularly restricted to the Land of Canaan, that
though the Jews had Substance before they came into that Land, yet they paid no
Tithes, before they came into possession of it, as they pay none since they
were dispossessed of it.

Ibid. The Priests being made the Receivers (because we cannot Pay them to God
immediately) is but a secondary Consideration.

And a third necessary Consideration is, who made these Priests the Receivers?
If the Snake can, for the Priesthood, produce an express Commission from God to
them to receive the Tithes, as due to him now under the Gospel, let the Snake
do it? He knows he can produce no such Commission, no Warrant, no Authority,
and therefore would Infer it from the Impossibility of paying Tithes to God
immediately: But the Inference is false; for if it were granted that Tithes
were now due to God (which nothing but an express Reservation now, as
heretofore in the Levitical Law could make) yet it would not thence follow,
that the Priests must be the Receivers, unless God as expressly had Nominated
and Deputed them thereunto.

The Divine Wisdom did not think such an Inference sufficient to make the
Levitical Priesthood a Title to Tithes, for having made a Reservation then of
the Tithes of that Land to Himself, Levit. 27.30. He transferred that Right to
that Priesthood by express Donation, in these Words. I have given the Children
of Levi all the Tenth in Israel for an Inheritance, Numb. 18.21. And this
express deed of Gift extended no further, nor to any other Priesthood, but that
which was to do, and did the Service of the Tabernacle of the Congregation,
ver. 23, Let the Snake, who now claims Tithes for the Priests, show such a Deed
of Gift, make such a Title to Tithes for them, if he can.

Ibid. p. 267. Therefore the Substraction of Tithes, as of other Offerings, is
called a Robbing, not of the Priest, but of God, Mal. 3.8.

He should have said was called, not is called, as speaking of Malachy's time,
the time of the Law. Tithes were then his peculiar Right, by virtue of his
special Reservation thereof for his Priests, in that Dispensation: But since
that is ended by Christ, once Offering of himself, the Substraction of Tithes
is no more a Robbing of God now, than the Substraction of those other Legal
Offerings can be so called.

Ibid. p. 268. It is invading what God has reserved peculiar to Himself, that
we may not touch it, etc.

It was so after the Reservation of them was made, which began with the
Levitical Priesthood, and it continued to be so, so long as that Reservation
continued, which was, as long as that Priesthood stood, and no longer. In the
time of the Law, the Offerings which were by God assigned as a part of the
Priests Maintenance, were not to be touched, not to be taken by the People from
them, any more than the Tithes from the Levites: And it was as much a Robbing
of God in withholding those Offerings then, as in withholding the Tithes
then: For Tithes and Offerings are joined together, in Mal. 3.8. and the
withholding of either called Robbery then. And it is no more a Robbing of God
in withholding the Tithes, than in withholding those Offerings now. For as
with respect to positive Command, they both came in together, so by the
Abrogating that Law which required them, they both went out together; that
Dispensation being ended, to which they were adapted and subservient.

Ibid. Of all the other Trees of the Garden we may freely eat.

The Comparing Tithes to the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, is a whimsical
conceit in the Snake. The Fruit of that Tree was forbidden at the first, and to
all Mankind; so that by his Comparison of Tithes to it, the Priests ought not
to eat of Tithes any more than other Men.

Ibid. And this is the same Sacrilege, as to taste of the forbidden fruit.

Was it Sacrilege then to taste of the forbidden Fruit? Yes, says the Snake:
That was the first sin. It was Sacrilege. A bold Fellow at Dogmatizing: But how
proves he that? Is Adam any where in Scripture taxed with Sacrilege, or only
with the Sin of Disobedience, in breaking God's Command, that he should not eat
of the Fruit of that Tree? Or, is the breach of every Negative Precept
Sacrilege?

Ibid. And I am not afraid to say, that all are Guilty of it, who have seized
upon the Tithes of God, and pay them not to his Priests.

Reader, Here Is a Doughty Clerk, who says he is not afraid, yet is afraid to
say it with his Name to it: A Bold Fellow in the Dark, while he may think no
Body sees or knows him, so as to detect him, and can by Lurking, keep out of
danger. But is this Man fit, if we deserved it, to tax us with Disloyalty, who
is so eminent herein, as to have lost decent respect to the Government, by thus
impeaching all the Protestant Princes that have sat upon the English Throne
since Henry the Eighth, with being guilty of the sin of Sacrilege?

He begins (p. 269.) with Henry the Eighth whom he charges with instead of
restoring Tithes to the Secular Clergy, more Sacrilegiously impropriating them
to the Laity. And yet this was in the latter part of that King's Reign, when
(for whatever reason at first) he was less obsequious to the Church of Rome,
and gave some way to the Reformation.

Edward the Sixth and Queen Elizabeth, placed by History among the best of
Princes, as they went further than their Father in the Reformation; so they
persever'd in Impropriating to the Laity those Tithes which they found in the
hands of the Popish Regular Clergy, (as they were then called) or which from
his time remained in the Crown. Nor can any one Prince, from Hen. 8. to this
time, escape the Snake's Impious Sentence of Sacrilege; unless happily Queen Mary
(who is said to have at least desired and endeavored the restoring of Tithes)
may obtain his absolution, as having, perhaps in his sense, thereby
sufficiently atton'd for that Sea of Martyrs Blood which She shed. But this
high Impeachment stops not at the Throne; No, but takes in almost all Ranks and
Degrees of Men. For what was done in taking those Impropriate Tithes from the
Clergy, had the Concurrence and Confirmation of both Houses of Parliament. Nay,
he impeaches such of the Martyrs as were Bishops in King Edward's time, (as
Cranmer, Ridly and Latimer,) who as Members of the Upper House, must be
supposed to be then sitting, and thereby Parties to those Acts of Parliament
for Impropriations. Nor does his Charge extend to the Men of that Age only, but
to all ever since, whether Prince, Lord or Commoner, who has, or ever had any
Estate in Impropriate Tithes, and have not paid them to the Priests; (of which
among the Nobility and Gentry especially, there are very many.) He Proclaims he
is not afraid to say they are Guilty of Sacrilege. And what must be their Doom,
^his next words tell, where he says, This Sin will not be forgiven, without a
Severe Repentance and Restitution. What course they will think fit to take, who
are yet living I know not. But if this be true, (which is the concluding part
of that which he says he is not afraid to say) Woe be to all such of them as
are Dead. For as while Living, they made no Restitution to evidence to
Repentance: So being Dead there is no Repentance in the Grave. And since
without Repentance, and that Severe too, as well as Restitution, he will not
have this supposed Sin of Sacrilege to be forgiven; what must become of all
those Kings, Lords, Commons, Nobility, Gentry, People of all sorts, who since
the first Dissolution of Abbeys: and in H. 8. time were possessed of Tithes,
and are Dead! Has he not damned them to all Intents and Purposes? And he that
is not afraid to say this of them that are Dead, what would he be afraid to do
to those of them that be alive, if he had power to his Will?

Ibid. (p. 268.) And let this be added to all that I have said, that several
Kings of England, who had then the sole right and property in all the Lands of
Enland, have anew dedicated, by Particular Vows, as Jacob (Genesis 28.22.) all
the whole Tithes of the Land of England to God, etc.

And to this of the Snake, let this be added, that had he not made further
addition, he had said untruths enough before: Several Kings of England! Let him
instance if he can, any one King of England, who had the Sole Right and
Property in all the Lands of England. And next, that any King, either singly or
jointly, with his People, did dedicate all the whole Tithes of the Lands of
England to God. And when he has done that, or (rather) something toward it
(for what he has here said he can never make Good.) Let him also set forth the
Grounds on which any such Vows were made, that they may be compared with that
of Jacob; and that the Reader may see what Religion and Principles those Kings
were of, and for what reasons they made those Vows, and dedicated Tithes, as he
says. When this be done, what he shall offer, may be further Considered. But
his saying in the Close of this Paragraph, That the same has been confirmed by
several Acts of Parliament, shows his Partiality and Hypocrisy who can urge
Acts of Parliament for Confirming, but Damn not only Acts of Parliament, but
Parliaments and Kings too, for putting any of those Tithes into Lay-hands.

Ibid. p. 269. It was the Friars and Schoolmen who first set up the Notion of
Tithes being Eleemosinary. -- And they (the Quakers) have only licked up the
Spittle of the most Corrupt part of the Church of Rome; and gone into the
Scandal of our Reformation, etc.

That Tithes were Eleemosinary, was asserted, maintained and defended, not only
by our Countryman Wickliff, but by John Huss, Jerome of Prague, the Churches of
Bohemia, the Waldenses, and others, first Reformers from Popery: Did all these
Lick up the Spittle of the most Corrupt part of the Church of Rome? What
Protestant can hear that, and not spit him that says it, out from amongst them?

Ibid. But the High Places were not taken away.

The High Places among the Heathen and Corrupted Jews, to which he here
alludes, were the Groves and Oratories where their Altars stood; where they
offered the Sacrifices, and performed the Ceremonies of their Superstitious
Worships. Parallel to these (in his Allusion) must be those Houses which are
commonly called Churches, in which the Papists had their Alta^^* and were wont
to offer their Idolatrous Sacrifice of the Mass, and perform the rest of their
Superstitious Devotions. These were not taken away: Is that it he complains of?
Reader, can thou pity him that he had that occasion left him to Grumble?

Ibid. Our Iehu Reformer, destroyed indeed Baal out of the Land, (2 Kings
10.28, 29.) but he departed not from the Sin of the Golden Calves.

Whom can he here mean, by Iehu Reformer, not Hen. 8. sure? For he did not
destroy Baal out of the Land, (if either by Baal, the Snake here means the Idol
then worshipped; or, as he has before expressed it, the Baal of Tithes,) But
left the Mass standing, and the Popish Priests in the Exercise of it. If they
that came after, whether Edw. 6. or Q. Eliz. when by suppressing the Mass, they
Destroyed Baal, departed not from the Sin of the Golden Calves, (which were
Idols set up to be worshipped instead of Baal) the more's the Pity. Thus this
allusion of his, to the Golden Calves, with his former to the High Places,
makes not for the Credit of the Reformation, or particularly of that Church
which he pretends to be of.

Ibid. p. 270. They Simper with half a Mouth, and say they mean it not against
a Civil Protestant Government, when no longer since, than in their Yearly
Epistle, -- 1693. -- It is positively enjoined, That none should Pay Tithes,
but refuse the payment thereof, as an Antichristian Yoke of Bondage.

Which is least offensive, to Simper with half a Mouth; or tell a Lie with a
whole Mouth, as he does? But setting aside his simple Flout, of Simpering. It Is
false, that we did ever tell, or endeavor to persuade the Civil Government,
that we refused Tithes to one sort of Priests, or Men only, (for we have always
refused them to all sorts of Demanders.) And therefore when in the Yearly
Epistle 1693. it was advised (not as the Snake says, positively enjoined) That
our Christian Testimony, which we have greatly suffered for, be born against
the grand Oppression and Antichristian Yoke of Tithes. It was but agreeable to
our Practice since we were first a People; and very good advice it was, because
agreeable to the Apostles Doctrine.

Ibid. Where do they find any Law of Christ against Tithes? no, they are not
able to produce one word, or any thing like it.

Hebrews the 7th affords enough (if he will allow what is there written to be a
Law of Christ) against Tithes. There are words enough to manifest that Tithes
were abrogated by Christ, as well as Circumcision, Sacrifices, and other things
depending on the Ceremonial Law. There it is said expressly, verse. 12. The
Priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a change also of the Law.
If it be asked, what Law? He had said before, verse. 5. They that are of the
Sons of Levi, who receive the Office of the Priesthood, have a Commandment to
take Tithes of the People according to the Law. Hence it appears, that by the
Change of the Priesthood, there was made also a Change of that Law, according
to which the Sons of Levi, who received the Office of the Priesthood, had a
Command to take Tithes of the People. What can be plainer? Yet more, if needed,
might be urged from verse. 18* where it is said, There is verily a disannulling
of the Commandment going before, for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof.
What Commandment was this which was disannulled? That Carnal Commandment
mentioned verse. 5, 16. after which the Levitical Priesthood was made and
maintained. Here then, that Law, that Commandment by which the Levitical
Priesthood took Tithes of that People is declared to have been changed, and
that Change explained by the word Disannulled: If this be not one word against
Tithes, or any thing like it. Let the Reader Judge.

Ibid. But on the Contrary, there are plain Intimations in the Gospel of their
Continuance, particularly, 1 Cor. 9.13, 14.

Intimations? Oh! Oh! is it come to that, must the world be Decimated by
Intimations! Does God's Right, God's Due, God's Tithes depend upon Intimations
at last! Must all our Kings and Parliaments, from Hen. 8. till now, all the
Nobility, Gentry and others concerned in withholding Impropriations from the
Priests be Damned for Sacrilege upon Intimation only! This sufficiently
Intimates what sort of Fellow this Snake must be. Well, let us see how plain
his Intimations are, 1 Cor. 9.13, 14. The words of the Text are, Do ye not
know, that they which Minister about Holy Things, live (in the Margin, feed) of
the things of the Temple? And they which wait at the Altar, are Partakers with
the Altar? Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which Preach the Gospel,
should live of the Gospel. Here Is not so much as the Name of Tithes, and will
he call this a plain Intimation, that Tithes should be continued! So far from
it, that this place neither speaks of Tithes, nor the Levites who took them:
For to the Levites were the Tithes given, Numb. 18.21. (not to the Priests,
they were to have but the Hundredth Part; the Tithes of the Tithes, verse. 26,
27, 28.) and the Levites were so far from Ministering about the Holy Things,
that they were not permitted to touch them, Numb. 4.15. No, nor to see them,
verse. 20. on pain of Death. But Aaron and his Sons, the Priests, were commanded
to take down the Tabernacle upon any remove, and to pack up, and cover close
all the Parts and Utensils thereof, verse. 5, etc. before the Levites might come
near to take up and carry their Burdens; which was the service of the
Tabernacle they were appointed to. But it is evident that the Apostle, 1 Cor.
9.13. spoke not of the Levites, but the Priests, them that Ministered about Holy
Things, them that waited at the Altar, them that Lived, Eat or Fed of the
Things offered on the Altar, and so partook with the Altar. Hence this place is
so far from Intimating a continuance of Tithes, that if a continuance of any
thing were intimated here, it must be a continuace of those Offerings at the
Temple, and at the Altar, which belonged to the Ceremonial Law; which, as on
all occasions the Apostle shows, was abrogated, so he would in no wise Intimate
the continuance of it. But further, if the Apostle had spoke of the Levites,
and mentioned the Name of Tithes in his comparison, yet his Allusion to those
Legal and Shadowy things, would still have (as what he mentions has) served
his purpose very well, to convince the Corinthians, that since Christ had
ordained, Luke 10.7, 8. that they who preach the Gospel, should live of the
Gospel, as well as they, who, under the Law, ministered about Holy Things, and
waited at the Altar, were then to partake with the Altar. And thus he, and the
rest of the Apostles might freely, and without blame, live of the Gospel, while
they preached the Gospel, by receiving such necessaries as were freely offered
them, by those that received and embraced the Gospel.

Ibid. p. 271. But we need no new Commandment for them in the Gospel, if they
are not forbidden, and abrogated by Christ.

The contrary way of arguing is of more force, viz. There needed not a positive
or express Prohibition, or verbal Abrogation of Tithes, in the Gospel. For if
they are not expressly Commanded to be continued under the Gospel, they are not
of force, that Law being temporary by which they were Commanded, and now
expired. It was adapted to the Economy of the Jews, made to answer that
Dispensation, appropriated to that Levitical Tribe and Typical Priesthood,
restrained to the Land of Canaan, (no other spot of Ground, under the Sun,
being Tythable by virtue of that Law,) and all this limited to the Time of
Reformation, Heb. 9.10. The coming of Christ in the Flesh, and offering up
himself to his Father, on the Cross, an Atonement for Mankind. So that an
Express Abrogation of Tithes in the Gospel was no more necessary, than an
Express Repeal of an Act of Parliament, which was but Temporary, and would
expire of course at the end of that Term for which it was appointed.

Ibid. They are no part of the Typical or Ceremonial Law; and nothing else of
the Law was abrogated by Christ.

Indeed, Snake, this is striving against the Stream, and giving the Lie to
Protestant Writers, both at home and abroad. For the Readers satisfaction I
shall mention some.

Dr. Fulk on Heb. 7.. 4. says, The payment of Tithes, as it was a Ceremonial
Duty is obrogated by Christ.

Dr. Willet, in his Synopsis of Popery, (before quoted) Fifth General
Controversy, p. 314. arguing against the Rhemists, who (with the Snake)
affirmed, that the payment of Tithes is a Natural Duty, that Men owe to God in
all times, and to be given to his Priests in his behalf for his Honor, says,
St. Paul says in flat words, If the Priesthood be changed, of necessity also
there must be a change of the Law, Heb. 7.12. But the Priesthood of the Law is
altered and changed, ergo, also the Law of the Priesthood, and so consequently
the Ceremonial Duty of Tithes.

Thomas Wilson, in his Christian Dictionary, on the word Tithes (tho a zealous
contender for them) acknowledges that they were a Shadow and Figure, as other
Oblations were figuring Christ.

Among Foreigners, I shall first instance Chemnitius, in Harm. Evang. C. 109.
He having distinguished Tithes into Political and Ecclesiastical, says of the
Ecclesiastical Tithes thus, Porro, quia ex hac Disputatione Christi cum
Pharisaeis patet, Christum decimarum solutionem inter Ceremoniales Leges
rejecisse, opponit enim iis Judicium and Charitatem Dei, hoc est forenses and
morales Leges, Ceremonialis autem Lex per adventum Christi est sublata, -- ideo
non inepte quaeritur, etc.

Moreover seeing by this Dispute of Christ with the Pharisees, it appears that
Christ threw off the payment of Tithes among the Ceremonial Laws (for to them
he opposes Judgment and the Love of God, that is, the Judicial and Moral Laws)
and the Ceremonial Law is taken away by the Coming of Christ, -- therefore it
is not unfitly inquired, etc.

I shall next Instance Peter Martyr, of great Note in the Reformation, who in
his Common Places, Clas. 4. l. 13. De Magistratu,. 18. says, Primum debemus
Intelligere, Decimas olim pertinuisse ad Ceremonias idque tam in Melchisedech,
quam in Levitis, i. e. First we ought to understand, that Tithes did of old
belong to Ceremonies, and that as well in Melchisedec as in the Levites.

Then having showed how and wherein Tithes were Typical, and having also
declared that the Ministers now, do not receive Tithes by the Ceremonial Law,
but upon a Moral Account as a Compensation for work, he says,

Proinde Ministris sive persolvantur ex agris, sive ex aedibus, sive pecunia
numerata, sive in Decimis, nil refert: Modo non sordide sed honest
sustententur, i. e. Therefore whether their Wages or Maintenance be paid out of
the Feilds, or out of the Houses, or in ready Money, or in Tithes, it is all one
to the Ministers; so they be maintained creditably, not meanly. To this he adds,

Retinent quidem alicubi Mercedes istae vetus nomen Decimarum, in multis autem
Locis, non appellantur Decime, sed Stipendia and Salaria. Et sane potius revera
sunt Mercedes, quae Laboribus Ministrorum debentur quam Decime, i. e. In some
Places those Wages retain the old Name of Tithes, but in many Places they are
not called Tithes, but Stipends and Salaries. And truly they are in reality
rather Wages, which are due for the Ministers Labors than Tithes.

Of all which, this appears to be the Sum, Peter Martyr, though he thought
Ministers Maintenance might be given them in that Proportion of a Tenth: Yet he
positively concludes Tithes as Tithes, and in their own Nature to be a part of
the Ceremonial Law abrogated by Christ.

The third Witness from abroad, which I shall bring, is Zanchius. Tom. 4. l. 1.
c. 116. De Cultu Dei Externo. Where, distinguishing between the Quota and the
Alliquota of Maintenance, between Maintenance in General, and Maintenance
particularly by Tithes, etc.

He says, Considerari enim possunt omnes illae Leges de Primitiis, Decimis and
Votis, bifariam quoad Substantiam and Accidentiam seu Circumstantias. Ad
Substantiam quod attinet ad nos etiam pertinent: Nam summa and finis illarum
Legum haec erat, ut Populus Gratitudinem suam erga Deum harum rerum
Oblationibus declararet idque in utilitatem Ecclesiae, Ministerii silicet
Ecclesiastici Ministrorum and Pauperum quemadmodum jam ex Legibus ipsis
ostendimus. Annon autem Lege Naturae jubeamur idem facere? Ut Ministri
sustententur sumptibus fidelium Ecclesiae demonstrat Apostolus non solum ex
Lege Mosis, sed etiam ex Lege Naturae. Ut Viduae alantur and Pauperes and
Perigrini, passim Docetur in Novo etiam Testamento. Nec minus liquet ex iisdem
Libris conservandum esse totum Ministerium Ecclesiasticum. Quomodo autem ista
fiant? Contributione bonorum, sive sub nomine Primitiarum, sive Decimarum, sive
Votorum, sive alio nil refert. Ergo ad Substantiam quod attinet and finem harum
Legum de Primitiis, Decimis and Votis, illae Leges tanquam naturales at nos
etiam pertinent, i. e. All these Laws concerning First Fruits, Tithes, and Vows
may be considered in a twofold respect, as to the Substance, and as to the
Accidents or Circumstances. As far as concerns the Substance, they belong to us
also: For the sum and end of those Laws was this, That the People might declare
their thankfulness to God by the offering of these things; and that for the
profit of the Church, that is, of the Ecclesiastical Ministry, the Ministers
and the Poor, as we have now showed out of the Laws themselves. And are we not
commanded by the Law of Nature to do the same? That the Ministers should be
sustained at the Costs of the Faithful Members of the Church; the Apostle
demonstrates not only from the Law of Moses, but from the Law of Nature also,
that the Widows, the Poor and the Strangers, should be maintained, is
frequently Taught in the New Testament too. And as clear it is from the same
Books, that the whole Ministry of the Church ought to be kept; but how shall
all this be done? By a Contribution of Goods, whether under the Name of
First Fruits, or of Tithes, or of Vows, or under any other name it matters not.
Therefore as to what concerns the Substance and End of these Laws, of
First Fruits, Tithes and Vows, those Laws as Natural belongs also to us.

Thus Zanchius, who in all this, pleads only from the Equity of the Law, for a
Sufficient Maintenance to the Ministers, from the Faithful of the Church. And
of what Nature he accounts Tithes, may be easily seen, by his coupling them
with First Fruits and Vows, which none I think, doubt to have belonged to the
Ceremonial Law: But if any shall yet suppose, that he did not suppose Tithes to
be part of the Ceremonial Law, he puts it beyond doubt, that he did so esteem
them: For he says,

At vero Circumstantiae considerentur illarum Legum, -- Leges illae nihil ad
nos, ut qui Legibus Ceremonialibus and Politiis istius Populi, non Sumus
Subjecti, i. e. But if the Circumstances of of those Laws be considered, --
those Laws do not at all belong to us, who are not Subject to the Ceremonial
and Political Laws of that People.

And treating further upon the same subject, p. 485. he says, De Decimis etiam
solvendis, Mandatum certum est fuisse abrogatum per Christum, i. e. Certain it
is, that the Law concerning the paying of Tithes also was abrogated by Christ.

This, with more to the same purpose, the Inquiring Reader may find in him, and
which I omit not being willing to be too prolix: And besides the Testimonies
above cited, I could also add from Oecolampadius, on Ezekiel. 44. from Melancton,
De Liberate Christianae, with others; whose joint Testimonies do overthrow the
false and bold Assertion of this Snake, who is so remarkably Eminent in a
Confident Assurance, as to say of Tithes, They are no part of the Typical or
Ceremonial Law.

And though to the knowing Reader it might seem superfluous to bring witnesses
further to prove Tithes a part of the Ceremonial Law: Yet I shall take leave to
add one witness more, if not for his Information in so known and received a
Truth, yet for the more full detecting of this our Adversary.

This Witness, is the Snake against the Snake, who in p. 267. says expressly,
They were part of the Offerings to God under the Law, for which he cites Numb.
18.24. (as I have observed, p. 403, 404, 405.) Where they are indeed called an
Offering, and an Heave Offering unto the Lord, the words of that Textare, But
the Tithes of the Children of Israel, which they offer an Heave Offering unto
the Lord, I have given to the Levites to inherit.

And as the People were to make an Heave Offering of the Tithes which the
Levites received of them, so the Levites were to make an Heave Offering also,
of the Tenth of the Tithes, which the Priests received of them, ver. 26, 27,
28. So that both the Tithes from the People to the Levite, and the Tithe of the
Tithes from the Levite to the Priests, were appointed to be made an
Heave Offering to both, which fully proves, they were in each respect a part of
the Ceremonial Law: For what else but a Ceremony was either the Heaving, or
Waving of the Offering? the difference whereof (as Goodwyn in his Moses and
Aaron, chapter 6. l. 2. shows) was, that the Heaving was performed by Elevation,
lifting the Oblation upward and downward: the Waving was performed by
Agitation, waving it to and fro, from the right Hand to the left. Now since the
Snake has from Scripture brought by himself, proved that Tithes were an
Heave Offering under the Law; let him Solve, if he can, his Contradiction, in
Asserting, that Tithes are no part of the Typical, or Ceremonial Law.

But to find this our Adversary in Contradictions is no wonder, no more than it
is to find him not sound in Expression, I had almost said Heretical; for so he
would have called a Position not half so Erroneous from us, as is that of his
which I am now about to discover: It is this saying:

Ibid. Nothing else of the Law (but what was Typical or Ceremonial) was
Abrogated by Christ.

Pray then are the Judicials in Moses Law in force still, and binding now unto
Christians? If an Ox that has been known to push with his Horn in times past,
should not be so kept in, but that he should kill a Man or a Woman, must the
Owner of necessity be put to Death, as well as the Ox? Exodus 21.29. Must it
still be Eye for Eye, Tooth for Tooth, Hand for Hand, Burning for Burning,
Wound for Wound, Stripe for Stripe (as in Exodus 21.24, 25.) notwithstanding
what Christ has said, Mat. 5.38, 39, etc? Must the old Law of Jubilee still
take place, that Lands may not be Sold for ever, but that they must return
again from him that bought and paid for them, to the Seller? And (to touch the
Snake more nearly) may not a Priest now take a Sup of Wine, or strong Drink,
when he goes into the place he calls his Church, lest he die (Levit. 10.9.) Or
was not that a Judicial, but Ceremonial Law, fit enough in the Snake's Judgment
to be Abrogated?

Ibid. They (Tithes) were before the Law; and the Reason of them is Eternal.
That is, Honoring the Lord with our Substance, Prove. 3.9.

They were no more before the Law than Circumcision and Bloody Sacrifices, or
Burnt-Offerings were: And there is no more Reason that they should continue
after the Law, than those which all acknowledge to be ended by Christ.

And if Honoring the Lord with our Substance, were only to be done by paying
Tithe, it would be a very mean way of Honoring the Lord, to Honor Him with a
Tenth Part only, and our selves with Nine times as much.

The rest of this p. 271. and most of 272, he spends only in Quibling, and
Repeating his false Charges and Suggestions, which are before Answered, and
Confuted from the places were they are first met with.

The Snake now turns to his old work of mangling Quotations, and so gives for
one, from E. B's works, p. 780. these Words, Tithes, as received and paid in
these Days -- are of Antichrist, which though so mangled, are Sound and True;
for Edw. Buroughs shows the Reason why they are so, viz. That they were
brought at first into practice in the time of the Gospel, by the Appointment
and Ordinance of Popes, and are grounded upon the Jewish Law, for paying Tithes
to Levi, in which respects they are highly Antichristian.

Ibid. p. 273. The Snake here again repeats a Quotation (which is a frequent
practice with him) from T. Ellwood, which he had before given (with some little
variation) in p. 246, and also in p. 254. to which Quotation I have already
Answered, p. 381, 382. foregoing, and therefore need not repeat it here, but
refer the Reader thither.

Ibid. p. 273. As to the Tenth Part of our Substance, that was determined long
before the Law; and was the universally received Notion of the World in all
Ages, etc.

He who is not afraid, or ashamed (so far as I see) to say any thing, may, if
he please, say that the Quantum of a Tenth was determined as soon as the Moon
was made. And also he may say, if he please, that it was paid to the Imaginary
Man in that changeable Planet; but they had need be more than common Lunaticks
that believe him: He begs what we deny, and affirms what he cannot prove; but a
confident Assurance is his Talent.

Ibid. p. 274. He goes on in the same strain, and takes for granted (which is
utterly false) that Tithes were no Legal Ceremony, and adds, So neither (says
the Snake) were they any Type of Christ.

As well as that it is false in fact, as I have already shown from the
Scriptures, quoted by himself; so also Peter Martyr, as before quoted, is of
another Mind, where he says: Et enim in utroque Sacerdotio referebantur ad
Christum: i. e. for in each Priesthood they referred to Christ. So also, when
he asks, Sed quid sibi decime volebant in utroque Sacerdotio? Non sane aliud
significabant, quam veteres omnia sua debuisse ad Christum refer illa
Ceremonia populus Christum ipsum venerabantur: i. e. But what did Tithes
signify in either Priesthood? Truly (says he) they signified nothing else, but
that the Ancients ought to refer all they had to Christ. By that Ceremony the
People Worshipped Christ Himself.

Ibid. p. 274, Sacrifices, and all other Types of Christ, are fulfilled: For He
only is now our Sacrifice, but He is not our Tithe.

An idle Whim! He is not our Tithe: Did Christ by his coming end no Types but
those that were immediate Types of Himself? But that even Tithes also were a
Type of Christ to come. Thomas Wilson, where I have before cited him, p. 420.
does acknowledge they were a shadow and figure, as other Oblations were; and
what pray is that less than a Type?

Ibid. As Tithes are no Legal Ceremony nor Type, so neither are they Abrogated
by Christ, as T. Ellwood affirms, but cannot prove, etc.

Both their being a Ceremony, a Type, and Abrogated by Christ, T. Ellwood has
not only affirmed, but proved also: And the same is now again plainly proved,
in every part in this foregoing Discourse, by Argument, Scripture, and
Authority.

Ibid. We desire any one Text to show it, etc.

It might be Abrogated, and that Abrogation shown and proved, from the nature
of the thing, without a Text. Yet so much according to the Snake's desire, it
happens that I have before-going shown diverse Texts for that Abrogation, and
particularly Heb. 7.12. compared with ver, 5. and 18.

Ibid. He (T. Ellwood) quotes 1 John 4.3. which has no more relation to it,
than Neh. 10. to the 28 ver.

Did not the Snake sit playing at Tables (a Sport he uses by him) till his Eyes
were dim, when he read it, he might one would think have seen that T.E. did not
quote that Text, 1 John 4.3. to prove Tithes abrogated by Christ (which he
needed not do in that Controversy, his Opponent then owning it) but to prove,
that to deny Christ come in the Flesh, is a Mark of Antichrist, which that
Text was aptly urged to prove, and followed immediately after those Words [is a
mark of Antichrist.] So that both his foolish Cavil at T. E. for 1 John 4.3.
and his frothy Squib upon the Prophet Nehemiah, shows as well the weakness of
his Cause, as the levity of his Temper.

Ibid. p. 275. The Snake summons a great many Names, without naming Books or
Pages where to be found, which he says F. Bugg (an Apostate) produces out of
our Books; but that Bugg's Charges upon us, and Quotations from our Books, have
been repeatedly Answered, not one Word. No; it will serve the Snake's base ends
better, either to be ignorant of our Answers, or else knowing them, not to
consider them as they are, but wickedly to pervert and false quote them; of
which two Instances now next follow. The first is a Quotation borrowed from
this same Bugg, out of the Guide Mistaken, by W. P. Printed 1668, p. 18. which
the Snake says was for the Church of England, but it may appear otherwise by W.
P's Words, which are left out in this Quotation: they are these:

But lest I may be Censured by the Reader, for too Severe, let me beseech thee
to Inquire throughout the Story of the World, where any kind of Religion has
been, or is Established by Authority, and thou will doubtless find upon a
diligent Search, that the People's Judgments have ever been, and are fast
Chained in the Priest's Inquisition, etc.

And of these Priests it is, who through all Ages have thus Chained the Peoples
Judgments in their Inquisitions, that W. Penn does here speak. And I think the
Snake will hardly more own, that they have done this; than he can make it
appear, that the Church of England, as now denominated, has been through all
Ages: If he can, he will help her to one Mark which the Romanists say is a mark
of the true Church: And to another Mark, which all will say, is a mark of the
false one.

The Second is a Quotation which he makes from W. P's Quakerism a new Nick
Name, etc. p. 165. which the Snake says is, For the Dissenters (for he deals
his blows round) so Insinuating, as if what W. P. there said, did relate to all
Dissenters, which is notoriously false; his Words are otherwise, and do fully
show, that they were only Relative to such grossly abusive Men, as his then
Adversary was, (to which I may add) and as the Snake now is. For his Words are
these.

Is this the Man that must be thought fit to vaunt it over us with such
Impudent Scurrility, ungodly, as well as unmannerly Reflections? But in the
Earth there is not any thing so fantastical, conceited, proud, railing,
busie-body, and sometimes ignorant, as a sort of Priests, to me not unknown
(among whom our Adversary is not the least) who think their Coat will bear out
their worst Expressions for Religion, and practice an haughty Reviling for
Christ, as one of the greatest demonstrations of Zeal.

And of such as these it is, that W. Penn said, and said truly, that they are
an ill bred Pedantick Crew, the Bane of Reason, etc. for so they really are.

And of such as these it was, that W. P. in his Serious Apology speaks, p. 156.
as quoted by the Snake, p. 275, 276. And how strange soever he may make of it,
the Holy Prophets in the Scriptures do abundantly show and denounce Woes and
Plagues, to those who made the People Drink, and laid them to sleep on Downy
Beds of soft Sin-pleasing Principles.

To such Isaiah spoke, Chap. 28.7, 8. -- The Priest and the Prophet have erred
through Strong Drink, they are swallowed up of Wine -- they err in Vision, they
stumble in Judgment: For all Tables are full Vomit and Filthiness, so that
there is no place clean. And therefore he denounces from the Lord, verse. 18.
And your Covenant with Death shall be disannulled, and your Agreement with Hell
shall not stand, when the overflowing Scourge shall pass through, then ye shall
be trodden down by it: And verse. 22. he tells them, I have heard from the Lord
God of Hosts, a Consumption even determined upon the whole Earth.

And in like manner, Jeremiah 6.13, 14, 15. -- And from the Prophet, even unto
the Priests, every one deals falsely. Also the hurt of the Daughter of my
People slightly, saying, Peace, Peace, when there is no Peace. Were they
ashamed, when they had committed abomination? Nay, they were not at all
ashamed, neither could they blush. And for this the Prophet says, verse. 26. --
For the Spoiler shall suddenly come upon us. And the same Prophet, Reproving
the Great Wickedness of the Priests, etc. Jer. 23. denounces from the Lord,
verse. 19. Behold a Whirlwind of the Lord is gone forth in Fury, even a grievous
Whirlwind, it shall fall Grievously upon the Head of the Wicked.

These, with abundance more, of the Just Denunciations of God's Judgments upon
the Wicked, and such who pervert the right way of the Lord, are to be seen in
the Scriptures of Truth. And it is not unlikely, that those to whom these
denunciations were sent, did, as this Snake now does, ask, What flaming Ovens
are the Hearts of these Men! Belching forth nothing but Hell and Damnation.
They who are hard enough, through Rebellion against God, to draw down
Judgments, seldom fail of being hard enough to Ridicule and Despise the
Monitors of them.

Ibid. p. 276. Bugg tells us, in the same place, how industriously these Books
are spread amongst the Quakers; insomuch that a Poor Widow-Quaker, to whom he
administered, whose Substance did not amount to Ten Pounds -- had more than two
hundred of them.

And in this place I do tell the Snake, that we should be wanting to our
selves, if we were not as industrious to spread our Defenses, as the Snake, or
any Apostate may be, to spread their Defamatory and False Charges: As to what
Bugg may brag of having Administered to a poor Widow-Quaker, I have no need to
question the truth of it, nor what the Substance she left really was, tho if it
was but ten pound, yet it was a Real tho but small Substance; which if himself
could have pretended to no more, his Debts being paid and discharged, I see not
what just account, or reason he can give for his compounding with his
Creditors: And if this Quaker-Widow had 200 of them, Books of ours, (which I
take to be false,) she was the better stored; so if he did not reckon them any
part of her ten pound Estate, he might, if he had sold them, somewhat increased
that.

Ibid. p. 277. Nihil Dicit, is Confessing of Judgment, etc.

Supposing Nihil Dicit to be Confessing of Judgment; yet that is not our Case,
we have been far from saying nothing, for we have replied (I think) to all that
Bugg has writ against us, at least while he pretended to bring a Stock of new
Charges; and so Contentious a Man deserves not to be hearkened to, or answered,
only for his noise sake.

But now to Nihil Dicit, which the Snake says is Confessing of Judgment. Sure
he unluckily forgot the Suspicions he lay under, to which he never yet dare
appear to make answer, so that Nihil Dicit is Confessing of Judgment.

Ibid. If they could prove Tithes to be Abrogated by Christ, then indeed Bugg
's Impeachment would appear to be Malicious.

Very well! I am contented to put it to that Issue, because they have not only
been proved heretofore, to be abrogated by Christ, in the Writings of several
of our Friends; but herein also (as I take it) it is fully proved that Christ,
by coming in the Flesh, and offering up himself, has abrogated Tithes: And
that confirmed by Scripture, Reason and Authorities.

Ibid. It is no Objection that Quakerism has not been voted in St. Stephen 's
Chapel, (as bad things have,) etc.

What he means by Quakerism being voted in St. Stephen 's Chapel, may seem
doubtful; yet that the Parliament have given us a Christian Liberty we are
truly thankful, tho I question not but this Malicious Abdicated Priest is sorry
for it. But why, Snake? that scurvy and saucy flurt upon the House of Commons,
[ as bad things have.] Cannot the Parliament escape the Lash of this Lurking
Snake, who by the base treatment he has given to the Reformation, in England,
from Popery, and also to the present Government, seems to intimate both these
to be some of the bad things he flurtingly means to have been voted in St.
Stephen 's Chapel.

This brings me to the end of this Section of Tithes.

SECT. XVIII. Showing that the Pretensions of the Present Quakers (as of the
Former,) to the Spirit of Prophecy, Infallibility, etc. is according to, and
agreeable with the Scriptures of Truth.
THe Snake, that he may increase the Bulk, though not the Weight of his Charge,
does in a Multiform manner repeat the same thing: We have before had one
Section, and that not a very short one, Concerning the Quakers Infallibility;
and another Section Concerning the Quakers Pretense to Immediate Revelation:
And in both these are included this Section, Entitled, The Pretensions of the
Quakers to the Spirit of Prophecy, Infallibility, etc. In almost every
particular Instance, which he has here mentioned; so that to be distinct and
particular in this, to all the Parts of it, were but to say the same thing over
again; which would be equally unnecessary both for my self and Reader: But if
in my way through it, I meet with any thing new, and not answered before, I
shall not willingly escape it, or pass it over.

The three first pages (and it has but seven) are near all taken up in
quibling, and foolish unprov'd Reflections, not worth a Confutation, when they
are not dressed in a false show of Reasons Garb; and then only for this Cause,
that by Derecting an Enemies false Reasoning, he may not be able to deceive or
impose upon his Readers, which this Snake does frequently endeavor, both by
false Relations of fact, by false Quotations from our Books, by gross known
Perversions of our Words; and giving meanings to them which were never ours;
and also by boldly affirming of things utterly false: As where he says, p. 280.
Our present Obstinate Quakers -- refuse to be brought to disown their own False
Prophets.

We have not refused to Disown and Testify against any who have spoken falsely
in the Name of the Lord: No, but have (according to the Examples of like kind,
recorded in Holy Writ) denied them; of which I have already in the Section
concerning Infallibility given some instances.

Ibid. But do still fearlesly go on, and pretend themselves, to the same
Extraordinary Commission of Immediate Divine Revelation.

That Divine and Immedate Revelation, to which we do pretend, is no other than
that which is declared and held forth in the Scriptures of Truth, as I have
already shown Section IV. and which the Snake does acknowledge, p. 27, 28. In
some sense they may be called Revelations, and Immediate too: And as to
Extraordinary Commissions, or the Special Manifestations of God to his Children
in the Higher Degrees of Immediate Revelation; those which we own, are not
repugnant to the Scriptures, but are consistent and agreeable therewith, as I
have there more largely shown; to which I shall only add, that God has not in
the Scriptures of Truth declared or bound himself, that he would not any more
manifest himself to Men in such special Manifestations, or extraordinary
Commissions; which it is recorded he did give to his Ministers in the breaking
forth of the Gospel Dispensation. Nay, on the contrary; the Apostle Peter
showing the People what was the Dispensation of God to Men, in the Gospel-day,
Acts 2.17, 18. he says (having reference to the Prophecy of Joel 2.28.) And it
shall come to pass in the last days, (says God) I will pour out of my Spirit
upon all Flesh; and your Sons and your Daughters shall Prophecy, and your
Young Men shall see Visions, and your Old Men shall dream Dreams: And on my
Servants, and on my Handmaidens I will pour out in those days of my Spirit, and
they shall Prophecy.

Are not Etraordinary Commissions herein promised? I think there be; so that
there is not any uncertainty or doubt to know, whether such Commissions may be
or not: Which though the Snake would suggest, yet he dare not undertake to
prove. And therefore chooses to oppose the Spirit of Prophecy in the Servants of
God at this day, by saying they affix God's Seal, Thus says the Lord, to
whatever their Rage, their Malice, or Folly shall suggest. This is to affirm,
but not to prove; and unless it be proved, it deserves not be believed.

Ibid. This is nothing short of Blasphemy, Rank, Wild Blasphemy,

To affix Thus says the Lord to Rage, Malice, or Folly, it is indeed as the
Snake says, nothing short of Rank Blasphemy. But that the Quakers do affix Thus
says the Lord to Rage, Malice, or Folly, is nothing short of Rank Lying in the
Snake to affirm, unless he can prove it. It is no Objection to give particular
Instances of some that have been called Quakers, and have spoken falsely in the
Name of the Lord, and thence conclude and say, therefore none of the Quakers
speak truly in the Name of the Lord. For by such undue Inference, all the True
Prophesies in the Old and New Testament are at once denied and refused, as not
from the Lord; because some false Prophets did also speak in his Name, and say,
Thus says the Lord, when he sent them not.

Ibid. p. 281. This is the Prince of the Spirits of Delusion; and this Prince
they worship, -- for God, who mistake his Inspirations for God's.

Very well! I say so too; but that the Quakers are they who mistake his
Inspirations for God's, is Gratis Dictum, it is saying, but not proving; as more
particularly will appear, upon the several Instances which the Snake brings.

The first Instance (in this Section) is what he calls a Prophetical verse of
George Whitehead's, with which he says G.W. pursued George Keith, after he was
denied by us. He gives it in these words.

Thus says the Lord, Because thou have poured out great Contempt and Reproach
upon my Servants and People, I will assuredly pour out, and bring great
Contempt and Confusion upon thee.

Of this the Snake says, p. 282. Copies were given out amongst the Friends,
that they might admire these Prophetical Gifts; and if any thing unfortunate
should in all George Keith 's Lifetime befall him, that it might certainly be
esteemed as the Consequence of this Curse.

What Proof is this, that (what he calls) G.W's Prophetical Verse, did proceed
from Rage, Malice, or Folly? Or, that G. Whitehead has therein mistaken the
Inspirations of the Prince of the Spirits of Delusion, for God's. See, Reader,
how forward the Snake is to give hard words, and how backward to prove them.

That G. Keith has, with great Contempt and Reproach, treated the Quakers is
very certain; and not only so, but has Contemptuously and Reproachfully spoken
many things of that way of Truth which they profess, and which himself did also
for many years profess with them; which practices, as it is an apparent mark of
Confusion in him; so it n^^essarily draws after it Contempt upon the Actor,
from all Observing Men.

So that the Prophetic Verse (as the Snake calls it) of G. W.'s carries with
it many evidences of Truth; which plainly show, he did not therein mistake the
Inspirations of the Prince of the Spirits of Delusion, for God's: And which is
further seen, in that there is no proof given by the Snake, that it did proceed
from Rage, Malice, or Folly in G. W. as is falsely and maliciously suggested by
the Adversary.

And as there can nothing more unhappy fall out to G. K. in all his Lifetime,
than to continue and go on from one degree of Confusion to another; so that
Confusion is not the Consequence of (what the Snake calls) George Whitehead's
Prophetic Verse: But that Verse was the Consequence of Confusion began in G. K.

Ibid. Mr. Penn did own before the Yearly Meeting, That the Glorious Power of
God, which he felt, did so transport him, that he was carried beyond himself,
and knew not whether he was Sitting, Standing or Kneeling, when he pronounced
that Sentence (of Apostasy concerning G. K.) This was like St. Paul's, whether
in the Body, or out of the Body, he could not tell. --

Well! Suppose it is like it, I would ask the Snake, whether he dare affirm,
that at this day, it is altogether impossible for the Spirit of God to
influence any to that degree of Ecstasy or Rapture. If he will deny that, or
(which will answer the end of our Present Inquiry) if he will allow that, but
deny this to be so, it will then be necessary for the Snake to produce the
marks, by which he proves it to be, what in p. 283. he has so confidently said
it is, viz. the Violent Transports of Passion.

But if the Force of this Mad Spirit of Malice, had not governed the Snake, he
might have seen that while he does acknowledge, what he there says W. P. does
speak of himself, to be like the Apostle ( This was like (says he) St. Paul,
whether in the Body, etc.) and calls W. Penn's words, The force of this Mad
Spirit of Enthusiasm: He does then Intimate that the Apostles words proceeded
from the like force: And how far this may expose Religion and the whole
Scriptures, to Loose and Atheistical Wits; may concern some to see, who are
more truly concerned for the honor of both, than he, who while he is
inquiring, How great is the force of this mad Spirit of Enthusiasm? Observes
not how great is the force of the mad Spirit of Atheism in himself.

But further, I do own (with the Snake) that this Ecstasy or Rapture of W. P's,
is like that of Paul, Whether in Body, or out of Body he knew not: That is,
they are a-like in Kind, but not Degree; W. Penn's, as the Snake says, did
relate to the Posture of the Body, but the Apostle's was much higher, even so
as to forget the Body.

Ibid. p. 283. And he is thus far toward it, -- that he must either make out
his own Inspirations to be from God, in as High a Degree as those which were
given to the Prophets and Apostles, or otherwise that he has no Authority to
inscribe the name of God upon them as they did.

The Snake does here (as before) allow the Inspiration to be the same; but
falsely supposes W. Penn under a necessity to make it out, to be in as High a
Degree; which he is not, because the Operation of it on W. Penn, the Snake
says, was not in so High a Degree, as on the Apostle.

And while the Snake does falsely suppose, that the Inspirations from God, at
this day, must be made out to be in as High a Degree, as those which were given
to the Prophets and Apostles: Or else, his name is not to be inscribed on them.
Besides that, the Snake does hereby overthrow, what in Pref. p. 31. he calls,
The greatest Flights and Ecstasies of Devotion, and which he there advises to
let Rise as High as they can, the Higher the better! He does also overthrow all
that Enthusiasm, which he says the Church of England owns; for these he has
acknowledged to be Revelations, and in some sense immediate too: Yet here he
says they are not so to be inscribed, unless they are in as High a Degree, as
those given to the Prophets and Apostles: Which I think he will hardly presume
to affirm.

But although this Adversary is thus Contradictory to himself, by denying and
affirming the same thing; yet Truth remains unmovable, and the Inspirations of
the Holy Spirit at this day, in what Degree soever they are given; are truly
the same in kind, with those given to the Holy Prophets and Apostles: In that
now as then, God by the diverse Gifts of his Spirit, does fit, furnish and
qualify, his Children and Servants, to the several Duties and Services in his
Church, to which he calls them.

Ibid. He must likewise justify all the False Lying Prophesies before told; or
otherwise he must unherd.

W. P. is not obliged to defend False Lying Prophesies, but deny them; nor does
he Herd (as the Snake scornfully speaks) with any such.

Ibid. p. 284. Gives two Quotations, one for G. F's Answer to The Westmerland
Petition, p. 5. the other from his Readiness Errand, p. 7. which are both to this
purpose, All that speak, and not from the Mouth of the Lord, are false Prophets
and Diviners.

At this the Snake is wonderfully offended, and taking his Copy from other
Adversaries (for he is not the first herein, no more than in his other Charges)
makes many false Inferences from them: As for the Assertion of G. F's it was
(as I have just now hinted) objected against in the Year 1656. by Jeremy Ives,
and answered by James Nayler, in a Piece of his, printed that Year, Entitled,
Weakness above Wickedness: In p. 12, 13. of which Book answering to this
Charge, he says, What is done now, by such Diviners as deny the Faith of
Christ, and his Call, and Spirit in them; what such raises must needs be
Conjuration, who denies the Faith and Spirit of God.

And in like manner we find, God by his Prophets has often rebuked them who
spoke Lies in his Name, and who were Strangers to his Holy Spirit, by the name
of Diviners, Jer. 27.9. Micah 3.7. Zach. 10.2. And their False Prophesies are
frequently called, Lying and Flattering Divinations; which were Truths they
could hardly bear, any more than those, to whom this was spoken. But whether it
can be born by them or not, it will remain a Truth, that such who deny the
Faith and Spirit of God, and shall yet pretend to speak in his Name; it can be
no other than the Lying Divinations of their own Brain.

Ibid. p. 285. If all the False and Foolish Miracles which G. F. tells of
himself. -- If all these were not from God, then was he and those who
recommended that Journal all Conjurers.

That the Miracles there related, are False or Foolish, is Gratis Dictum; it is
boldly said, but not proved, Prove them False and Foolish, and then there needs
no [If they were not from God] but till they be so proved, their Authority and
Being from God remains a Truth.

SECT. XIX. The Charge of Visible Possessions by the Devil, Examined and
Refuted.
HAving hitherto traced the Snake through the Twinings of his several Charges,
and discovered (at least in some measure) his Falsehood, Hypocrisy and Malice,
in them, I am not less in hope to perform the same in this.

His Charge is, that many Quakers have been Visibly Possessed by the Devil: A
Charge, which if upon Inquiry, it prove not true upon the Quakers, will at
least prove some such thing in the Charger; who from a collected Malice, could
with so much Confidence and bold Effrontry, pretend to tell such Visible
Falsehoods.

Ibid. p. 286. A Visible effect of this (Possession by the Devil) was that
extraordinary Shaking and Quaking like Fits of Convulsions, which these Quakers
at the first either acted, or like the Heathen Priests of old were possessed
with.

If the Snake will venture to affirm, that all Extraordinary Shaking and
Quaking, is a Visible effect of Possession by the Devil: I can give him two
Instances, wherein himself has been so possessed. The one was when he was
seized at Lidd, in Kent, by Tompson the Messenger; and the other was not very
long since, in the City, when he was under some Apprehension of being retaken
by the same Person, from whom he run away. And I make no Question, but he has
frequently been attended with the like visible effects of Possession; which
whether he will attribute to the strong Impression made by the Devil upon his
Imagination, as I know not, so I shall not trouble my self to inquire, nor
should I have in this place told this Truth, but to redargue the Confidence of
one, who from a course of Clandestine and Base Practices, shuns Daylight, and
is thereby justly subjected to the Frights which the ugly shapes of Fear can
terrify him with, from his Superiors; yet not that I might thereby pass over
his False Allegation, which I shall now consider.

And here, concerning Quaking and Shaking, I make no Doubt or Scruple to own
and acknowledge, agreeable to the Instances thereof Recorded in Holy Writ: That
God by his Power sometimes in this Age, has brought Holy Fear, Trembling,
Quivering, and Quaking, upon the Bodies of some, as in the former Ages we read
he frequently did, of which some few follow: Thus the Israelites in the Camp,
Exodus 19.16. Trembled. Thus Moses, Acts 7.32. Trembled. Thus the Psalmist, 119,
120. says, My Flesh trembles. Thus Habakkuk, 3.16. says, My Lips quivered.
Thus God Commanded the Prophet Ezekiel, 12.18. Son of Man, eat thy bread with
Quaking. Thus Daniel. 10.7. testifies of the Men that were with him, Great
Quaking fell upon them. And many more such Instances there are of the visible
effects of God's ower; which howsoever Ridiculed or Stigmatis'd, by such who
are Strangers to it, are not to be despised, or profanely contemned by any, who
are at all acquainted with the Work of Christ in them. How much less then ought
they Blasphemously to be called the visible effects of possession by the Devil,
which are really the visible effects of the Power of God?

And it is nothing strange, that when God by the Discoveries of his Light in
the Heart, lets Men see their undone Estate without him; that then they should
be in trouble, and cry out with the Apostle, of that Body of Sin and Death, by
which they are held in Bondage. And as many as have come to this Discovery, and
patiently abode under the Judgment of God's Grace, by which they might be made
Victors, do know, that through the gradual workings of the Power of God, in the
binding of the strong Man, in the spoiling of his Goods, and finally, in
casting him out of the Heart: they can say, it was the Day of Jacob's Troubles;
and these oft-times are such as do affect the Body.

And while the Soul is in this Conflict, and the Creature groaning to be
delivered, the Tempter, who as he always opposes the Work of God in Men, so in
this Day of Trouble, he aims to Subvert the Soul by his Stratagems, sometimes
by Imitating the Discoveries of God; and endeavoring to lead the Mind into
Imaginations and False Appearances, thereby to lift it up above the Sense of
the Operation of God's Grace: Sometimes by Imitating the Judgments of God, and
by endeavoring to lead the Mind down into Despair, and a Distrust of God's
Mercy.

An Instance of this sort is Martin Luther, concerning whom, Harding the Jesuit
objected to the Bishop of Salisbury, That the Devil in a Night- Vision did
reason with him, against the Sacrifice of the Mass (as the Jesuit calls it) and
the Jesuit quoted for this a Book of Luther's, entitled, De Missa Angulari and
Unction Sacerdotali, and infers from it, that the Reformation sprung in the
School of Satan.

The Bishop, in his Reply to Harding, Printed 1565, p. 2, says; D. Luther
shows what terrible Temptations the Devil has to trap Men withal, taking
occasion sometime of well-doing, sometime of Evil, sometime of Truth, sometime
of Falsehood. And, for example, he shows that the Devil on a time Assaulted
him, not in visible Form, but by dreadful Suggestions in his Conscience, as it
were thus calling him to remembrance. These many Years thou have said Mass,
thou have showed up Bread and Wine to be Worshipped as God, yet now thou
know it was a Creature, and not God; thereof followed Idolatry, and thou
were the Cause thereof.

All these things he saw to be true by the Testimony and Light of his own
Conscience, and therefore confessed he had offended, and yielded himself unto
God. The Devil's purpose was to lead him to Despair; but God mercifully
delivered him -- If he think it so heinous a Matter for a Godly Man to be vexed
by the Devil, perhaps he will also find some fault with Christ, who was carried
by the Devil into the Mount; or with St. Paul, that had the Angel of Satan to
buffet him.

Thus the Bishop, who seems to have had another Sense of this Matter, than this
our Adversary. I shall only add to this, (before I come to his particular
Instances) to my Reader, That if any Person Professing Unity with us, in whom
was began the work of Reformation, has not abode Faithful, but run into the
Temptations of the Enemy; and has had freakish Actions and Gestures, and loose
and wild Imaginations, and have Falsely and Blasphemously Ascribed them, to be
the Operations of the Spirit of God. We are not accountable for them, as the
Apostle was not for those in his time, who were given up to strong Delusion,
because they received not the Truth in the Love of it. All that we find the
Apostle did to them, that we have done to such, that is, testify against them
and their ways: For we do not own such Inspirations, as have not for their
Origin, the Holy Spirit, and are warranted by the Scriptures of Truth.

I come now to the Snake's Instances. His first is thus, p. 288.

John Gilpin of Kendal in Westmerland, has given us a strange and wonderful
account of his own Possession by the Devil, while he was a Quaker, in a Book
which he Entitled, The Quakers shaken, Printed 1653.

In Answer to this, there was Published in that same Year 1653, a Book
Entitled, The Standard of the Lord, etc. to which Book E. Buroughs writ the
Epistle to the Reader: In which, speaking of this same John Gilpin, p. 2. he
says; By hearing of the Truth declared, through the Witness in his own
Conscience, he was Convinced of the Everlasting Truth, etc.

This was very well; but it seems he continued not under that Convincement, for
he ran out into Airy Imaginations and Imitations, as E. B. says; who speaking
further of him says: I was moved to go to see him, and his Will was at liberty,
got above the Judgment, though the Judgment was upon the head of the Beast in
him, and a true Power working; but his Will not being kept in Subjection, it
led him into Impatiency, and into Rebelling against the Lord, who was made
manifest, to destroy the unruly Will, and wandering Mind: And then I did declare
against him, and showed him the deceit, where it lodged in him.

Thus E. B. who it hereby appears, did show the Man his state, and did also
deny him and his doings: But the Matter issued thus: This Gilpin continued to
go on, in that same Rebellion of which E. B. speaks; so that he quite run from
under the Judgment; and Gilpin in this his worst Estate, endeavored, with the
help of the then Priest of Kendal (in a Book Published under Gilpin's Name) to
charge the Wicked and Blasphemous Actions and Sayings, which he had been guilty
of, upon that Principle of the Light of Christ in Men, which the Quakers
Professed; though Gilpin being Charged with it, did deny it, in these Words: I
have neither written, nor spoken, any thing against the Quakers. So that by
this it should seem the Book was writ by the Priest, and Gilpin's Name put for
a Cover: And if it had not been so, but that Gilpin did really write it, there
was a fair opportunity given them to have proved it; because the Words
abovementioned, spoke by Gilpin, were Published in the Answer
beforementioned, Entitled, The Standard of the Lord, etc. which came forth in
the same Year, which that Book Subscribed by Gilpin did.

Ibid. Attested by the then Mayor of Kendal, the Minister of Kendal, and
several other Persons.

It was not strange that the Mayor of Kendal should be procured to Subscribe,
what the Priest had so eminent a Hand in, though he owns it no further than a
Fellow Subscriber. But as this was an early Instance ( viz. 1653.) wherein the
Priest did lead the Civil Magistrate into such a Mistake, which a prudent
Inquiry would have prevented; so we have often since found, they have
endeavored to Ride the Civil Power blindly into Mistakes, and Prejudices
against us; and where such have been able to Hood-wink a Magistrate, we have
seldom found so little disadvantage from it, as is the setting his Name to
Partial and Untrue Relations of Fact.

In fine, the Case is thus; Gilpin, as before related, was once under a
Convincement of Truth, but he abode not under the Judgment of God manifested in
him for Sin, but started aside as a broken Bow: He got into Wild Blasphemous,
and Airy Whimsies and Notions. In all this he was presently denied and
testified against. For Edw. Buroughs did, while this Gilpin was under these
Extravagancies deny him, and we were sufficiently discharged of him: And what
may further show the Degeneracy of the Man, was the Dissoluteness of his
After-time; for some Actions of which, a Warrant was (it seems) Issu^d out for
his Apprehension; but he, like this Snake, ran away from it, as is expressed in
the Book aforesaid, which was writ in Answer to him.

The Snake's next Story is, of one James Milner, mentioned p. 66. foregoing.
This Man, and some others, did as the former; start aside from under the
Judgment, but the Event was not the same, as is seen in G. F's Journal, p. 103.
where speaking of this Man, and his Condition, he says. James Milner, and some
of his Company, had true Openings at the first; but getting up into Pride and
Exaltation of Spirit, they run out from Truth. I was sent for to them, and was
moved of the Lord to go and show them their Goings forth. And they came to see
their Folly, and Condemned it, and came into the way of Truth again.

That he did see and condemn his Folly, was very well, and it was yet better
for him, that he returned into the way of Truth.

Ibid. p. 289. But then, as an Excuse for his false Prophesies, and his
Blasphemies, in calling himself Christ, etc. he (G. F.) makes this Comical
Apology: In some things his mind runn'd out, and that he Condemns; and yet
these wicked Men will go tell the Nation of it. Great Mystery, Page 298.

It is not very Comical, but very Provoking, to find one who pretends to be a
Lover of Souls, to be really a Hater of Truth, and a gross Perverter of Words.
Is it any Excuse for False Prophesies, or Wild Whimsies, to say of those who
are guilty of them, That they are got up into Pride and Exaltation of Spirit,
and that they are run out from Truth? I think it is not, but is on the
contrary, a Sound and Substantial Denial of them, as it was an evidence of
their Return, who had so been guilty; when from a sight of, and sorrow for the
Wickedness they had been guilty of; they did Condemn their Wickedness, and
return into the Way of Truth, which they had forsaken; and when Erring Persons
are so returned, it is no less than Wickedness, imperiously, and by way of
Taunt, to object to them their past Miscarriages; and much more so, to throw
them Evils so forsaken and repented of, at a Community for their Scandal.

Ibid. p. 289. I will trouble the Reader but with one Instance more.

Then we are not like to have very many, for we have had yet but two: And were
I disposed to vie Numbers with the Snake, I could enumerate more pretended
Members of the Church of England, who have in Wicked and Freakish manner
pretended falsely to Revelations and Inspirations.

Ibid. John Toldervy has Printed a very Punctual Narrative of his Conversion to
Quakerism; and of the most Astonishing Possession of the Devil, in which he was
held after his said Conversion, even to the Apparitions of Evil Spirits,
dancing and Singing about him, and directing him what he should do, and
encouraging him in the Principles of Quakerism.

The Snake has taken up near three pages with the story of this Man, of which
the foregoing words are the substance, which are a complex of falsehoods, as I
shall presently make appear.

But first, I shall desire my Reader to observe, that the Snake affirms, that
the Astonishing Possession of the Devil did encourage this J. Toldervy in the
Principles of Quakerism; which is so venomous a falsehood, that nothing short of
Envy could lead him to affirm it; and that in opposition to the Authority he
quotes, viz. the Book, Foot out of the Snare, which is the Book which the Snake
here calls a Punctual Narrative, and also quotes in p. 290.

I will give my Reader some account, both of the Man J. Toldervy, and his Book
abovementioned; from both which it may fully appear, how far the Astonishing
Possession of the Devil, or bewitched Imaginations in which he was, was from
being either owing to, or encouraging of the Principles of Truth which we
profess.

And first for the Man; He was one, who (I shall anon give my Authority for
what I say) had been zealously affected in diverse ways of Worship; at length he
made a show of a Convincement upon his Spirit, and did come to our Meetings,
but it was not long before he did discover himself not to have any true work of
Regeneration upon his Mind, but run out into very strange and wicked
Imaginations; for which he was soon reproved by the Quakers; Foot yet in the
Snare, Printed 1656. p. 6. Jam. Nayler.
but he persisting, they did separate from him, and deny him both by Word and
Writing, because of his following a Bewitched Spirit.

The Quakers being thus discharged of him, his Wild Imaginations turned to
Envy, and he endeavored to charge his Crimes upon the Principle of the Light
of Christ in Men, professed by us; in order to which he writes a Book,
Entitled, Foot out of the Snare; and to give it greater Grace, it has Eight
Warrantees or Subscribers for the truth of it: Wherein they pretend to set
forth the Manner of his Separation from the Quakers. In answer to this of
theirs, James Naylor wrote a Piece, entitled, as above, Foot yet in the Snare;
in which he shows, (and often repeats it) that J. Toldervy was denied by the
Quakers, and that they had Testified against him: And for the fuller evidencing
that the Quakers had denied him, he does in p. 21, 22. refer to their Book,
Foot out of the Sare, and says. In p. 33. Do you not confess, that when he came
to the Meeting, at the place where the Quakers were, showing the holes he had
made in his Thumbs, and telling of those Lying wonders which he had been
acting, many of the Quakers being there, all of them Judged him with one
Consent, charged him to be silent, and told him that he was in Darkness, and
had slain the Witness of God in him?

Thus by their own Testimony; nay, by the Testimony of Toldervy himself, (for
he was it seems the Author.) The Quakers had denied him, of which we can
desire, sure, no better proof than his own Confession, attested by Eight
Witnesses, of which Tho. Brooks, Tho. Jacomb, Geo. Cockaine, Joh. Tombs, and
Will. Adderly were part.

Having thus shown, that the Quakers did deny, and therefore not chargeable
with him, nor his Actions, I shall further show from the same Authority, which
has testified our denial of him, as above; that those his strange and wicked
Imaginations, were neither owing to, nor encouraging of the Principles of
Quakerism in him, as the Snake has wickedly said. For proof of this, see Foot
yet in the Snare, p. 20. where James Naylor, clearing our Principles from this
suggestion, says thus, quoting their own Book beforementioned. And have not
you confessed, p. 49. the Cause of these Distractions and Confusions in his
Mind was, having been zealously affected in diverse ways before? There was
begotten in him much Fleshly Wisdom, in which his Hope did rest, believing it
to be the Holy Spirit revealed in him, and that he was covered with Deceit, and
could glory in that Condition.

Here, in their own Testimony, they say, he was Covered with Deceit, did rest
in Fleshly Wisdom, and believed it to be the Holy Spirit; and in this he had
been zealously affected in diverse ways; which was, as themselves say, the Cause
of his Distractions and Confusions; and all this before he came among us, (and
staid not long when he was come.) But yet further, James Naylor does in p. 26.
quote them more amply, clearing the Quakers Principle from his Delusions, where
they clear the Truth, and say, He (J. T.) being fully persuaded, by what he
learned from the Quakers, of the Truth which was made known by the Light in us,
which Light is Spiritual, and guides out of the Work of the Flesh, to worship
God in Spirit and Truth; he was then to wait out of Thoughts and Imaginations,
etc. And his Understanding being now thus opened, he was possessed with much
Joy in the Sense of that Love he had received; whereupon he was resolved to
give all diligence, that his Calling and Election may be made sure. But being
naturally of a hasty and forward Mind, and his Resolution, in part, being a
Covenant of his own, there was speedily begot in him an extreme Fiery Zeal; so
that in the general he was hastily carried forth before the true Light, by
which in a short time he became lost in his Understanding, and so the Disputer
was raised to Life; and that which was for Condemnation, having darkened the
Light of the Sun, formed it self in the shape of the True Light; and so Deceit
got the Power, and led out of the true Obedience in things before related, by
which the Simple bebecame exceedingly deceived. But when he was restored by the
Clear Light of Life, being guided in that Obedience, which was professed by
those People, among whom he was, being the Quakers, and his Witness.

Here is a Clear Testimony, that the Truth and Light professed by the Quakers
leads out of the Works of the Flesh, to worship God in Spirit and in Truth. And
that by this J. Toldervy's Understanding was opened. What hindered then, that
the Work of Regeneration did not go on in him? Why, they say, that he being of
a hasty and forward Mind, it was, in part, a Covenant of his own, which raised
a Fiery Zeal, by which he lost his Understanding, and thereby the Sun was
darkened; a very natural consequence of that Covenant which was his own, and not
of the Spirit of God; and here it was, that that which was for condemnation,
formed it self in the shape (as they express it) of the True Light. And thus
indeed the Enemy of Man, the Devil, works in a Mystery, to drive Men to make
Covenants in their own Wills, for their Regeneration; which as they can never
last, so according to the various Disposition of the Person so Covenanting, are
the extremes which they run into. Thus they acknowledge, in direct opposition
to the Snake, that, that Deceit which was in J. Toldervy was so far from
encouraging him in the Principles of Quakerism, that it did lead him out of the
True Obedience to that Prinliple, which they say he learned from the Quakers.

Ibid. p. 291. He made a sort of a half Vindication, and half Recantation, not
of the matters of Fact of his aforesaid Delusions; (for these were undeniable)
but to free the Quakers from the Imputation and Scandal of them, and to clear
himself to have been, and still continue a true Quaker, which makes the Cause
much worse on their side.

Supposing John Toldervy did endeavor to clear himself to have been, and still
continue a true Quaker, at a time, and in things wherein we had by Word and
Writing denied him. I pray how shall that make the Cause much worse on our
side, any more than it makes bad of the side of the Church of England? because
the Snake, a former Scandalous Member, does pretend to have been, and still
continue a True Member in her Communion.

But to proceed, the Snake is here forced to acknowledge, that J. Toldervy did
free the Quakers from the Imputation and Scandal of his Delusions; which
whether he had or not, the Quakers had freed themselves from them, by denying
of him, both by Word and Writing: And as he stood thus denied by them, so they
could not be chargeable with any of his after Actions. But if he had sincerely
repented of his great Wickedness, and thereby found favor in the sight of God,
to have restored to him the Light of his Countenance, and had so been received
again into fellowship with those from whom he had been separated; this would
have been far from making the Cause much worse on their side: For with respect
to their own satisfaction it would make the Cause much better. Because the
People of God in all Ages did always rejoice, when one that had erred and
strayed from the Fold, did by sincere Repentance return into it again.

Ibid. p. 292. That same Year, viz. the 24th of October 1656. all the Good and
Evil Spirits entered into Naylor himself.

Profane Snake! why must both Good and Evil Spirits be thus flouted? It shows
no true Sense of Religion, in one who can with so much ease ridicule both the
beginning of all true and saving Religion in Man, viz. the entrance of the Good
Spirit of God; and the beginning of all Misery, viz. the entrance of the Evil
Spirit into Man.

But with respect to Jame Naylor, and his Great Fall, and yet greater
deliverance from it, I have already spoken from p. 111, to 118. and therefore
need not enlarge further here.

The Snake now turns to Quotations again, where in p. 295. he quotes Patrick
Levingston, in a Piece of his, Entitled, Plain and Downright Dealing with them
that were with us, and are gone out from us; in p. 10 of which Book, P. L.
makes an Allusion of the Operations of Physic upon the Body, to the Operation
of the Spirit or Power of God upon the Soul; and shows thence, what melting
into Tears, and Shakings he had known upon his own Body; and also what some
others had known, when the Lord did first appear with a mighty hand (as he says
p. 9.) to bring his People out of Spiritual Egypt in this our Age.

And he here goes on and shows, that these emotions of Body, and terrible
breakings the Soul were but for a little time, and that the Voice of the Lord
was not distinctly discerned there, they being only preparatory of that way of
Peace, Stilness and Quietness in which as they continued obedient, they came to
be established. This briefly is the substance of what the Snake has picked and
quoted from p. 10. And I will now show thee, Reader, his strange perversion of
all this.

Ibid. p. 296. Now here is a Comparison made betwixt the State of the Quakers
from 1650, to 1660. and from thence to this time.

No, Snake, the Comparison does not lie in any date of Years, but in the
Progress of the Work of God in Men.

Ibid. Their first State was their time of Physic.

The first State, of all who have been Regenerated and Born again, may by
allusion be called a time of Purging or Cleansing; and so it has been
frequently termed in Holy Writ. Our Savior speaks of this first State in such
Pathetick Terms, ( Mark 3.27.) as does evidently denote it to be a State of
Trouble. For the binding the Strong Man of Sin, by the Stonger Power of God, is
not to be effected while the Soul is at ease, and secure in Sin: Nor can the
Strong Man's Goods be spoiled, in Man, unless, through Obedience, he comes
under the Workings of the Power of the Holy Spirit; and that will not give
Deliverance to Man, before he sees the great necessity he is in of a Deliverer.

Ibid. But there was worse than that, For as Levingston here informs us, -- The
Voice of the Lord was not distinctly discerned among them, the Mind was so
Hurried and tossed, so that there was not a clear discerning what might be done
or left undone in many things. This is a very sad Reckning! For what will
become of the first Quaker Infallibility?

This is nothing so Sad a Reckning, as the Snake is like to make, when he shall
account, for all that Profaneness, Injustice and Hypocrisy, which he has
delivered under the gilded pretense of advancing the Glory of God, the Unity of
the Church, and the Good of Souls.

But to his Flouting Question; What will become of the First Quaker
Infallibility?

I Answer, Nothing but well; because as I have largely shown in the Section
particularly treating of Infallibility, neither the First Quakers, nor the
Present, have ever placed Infallibility in any Man or Men, but only in the
Spirit of God: And the Manifestations of this being given by the Mediation of
Jesus Christ, to lead Men to Heaven; it is absolutely necessary, that it be
able, on it is part, Infallibly to answer the End for which it is given.

Well, but if it be asked, How comes the Voice of the Lord not to be distinctly
discerned? Since the Spirit of God is Infallible in its Manifestations to Men:
Why, the Answer is ready, because when the Mind is Hurried and Tossed, and in
the deep Exercise and Affliction, because of its condition; it cannot yet come
to have so clear a discovery, and so distinct discerning of the Voice and Will
of God, as afterward in its further Growths in his Grace and Truth: And the
different seize of such who are turned into the Way of the Lord, the
Apostle has expressed by going on from one Degree of Grace unto Another.

Ibid. p. 297. It seems these Hurryings and Tossings -- did not come from the
Holy Spirit of God.

The Effects of the Work of the Power and Spirit of God, binding the Strong
Man, and purging out the Old Leaven, does much agree with that which is
described by the Prophet, 1 Kings 19.11, 12. and has sometimes been as with a
Great and Strong Wind, sometimes as with an Earthquake, sometimes as with a
Fire, before the Still Small Voice has been heard.

And the Rage of the Enemy (as P. L. says) is not small against the Soul,
which is redeeming from under his Captivity, but endeavors to raise Hurryings
and Tossings, whereby the mind might be so darkn'd, as not distinctly to
discern the Voice of the Lord.

Now again for Stories: And there the Snake bestows 3 Pages about a Story,
bearing date the 19th of the 8th Month, 1654. related by one whom he is
contented, pro hac vice, to call a Minister, because his Narration is against
the Quakers. But when that is over; then with all the rest of the Dissenters,
he is (with the Snake) but as the Spawn of the Viper. But to take him in his
Character of Minister: He was a Seventh-Day Baptist, named Tho. Tillam,
sometime Resident in the County of Durham, where he was Pastor to a People; but
they, because of his Wickedness and Filthiness, did cast him out, and deny him.
This same Minister (such a one in many respects, as the Snake) came up to
London, and wanting Induction to some place, he applied himself to the then
Commissioners for approving and giving Induction (such as they then used) to
Ministers; this T. Tillam from them gets a Place in Essex, about Colchester,
and here it is that he spreads this Report: This Report one Gyles Firmin
(another such Minister) takes up and puts at the end of a Book of his, which he
writ against the Quakers, and printed 1656. To this Edw. Buroughs did writ an
Answer, printed the same Year; wherein he does positively deny both this Story
of Tillam's, and that other of Firmin's (which the Snake mentions) and says it
is a Lie. Then it was Incumbent upon the Snake's two Ministers, Tillam and
Firmin, to have brought out their Testimonials of the Truth of what they had
said, but no such thing came; nay indeed one of them could not stay for that
purpose, for he Scandalously run away from his Charge here in Essex, to which
he had been Inducted, as before he was thrown out of his Charge in Durham,
because of his Scandalous Carriage in it: As Witnesses yet living, do testify.

Snake, p. 304. Since the Publishing the 1st Edition of this Book, there has
been published an astonishing account of some Quaker- Witches, who prosecuted
one Henry Winder and his Wife for their Lives, -- accusing them of Murder, from
the Mouth of the Lord.

And since the Publication of the Snake, an Answer has been published thereto,
entitled, An Old Apostate Exposed, manifesting the great Wickedness and
Uncleanness of the said H. W. to his lasting Shame and Confusion of Face; and
had he not been under strange Delusions and hardness of Heart, he could hardly
have been drawn by his abettors, to have given such occasion to make his
abominable Actions public. -- But so great is the Malice of the Snake, and
such like envious Men, that even their own Shame will not deter them from
venting their Malice, but let them reap the Fruit of their doings, and let us
hear the Snake further.

Ibid. One of them being examined, how this Revelation came to her, said, she
could not tell, but she was sure it began in her Feet.

See what Idle and Ridiculous Stories this Snake licks up; surely if Satan's
Delusions had not began in his Malicious Heart, he had never been brought so to
vent it with his Pen.

Ibid. But the Snake goes on to give an account of matters notoriously
infamous, of which the said H. W. was by these two Women accused: Wherein,
whether the Women were altogether Wrong, and how far the said Winder was
Guilty, God knows. However for some satisfaction to the Moderate Reader, hear
the said Winder, and his Wife, what they said then ( viz. about 1674.) under
their hands, as it is related by T. Came in the aforesaid Answer, p. 6.

We acknowledge and confess, that we have sinned and transgressed against the
Lord God, and against his People, who have born grievous Burdens for us, we
must needs confess before you. But this know, dear Friends, that the Enemy
wrought in a Mystery in us, to the persuading of us, that we might do such
things and yet live: Then through the weakness of the Flesh, Sin took occasion
and overcame us; then Sin being finished, it brought forth Death to the
Innocent Life which we once lived in.

Here it is plain from H. W's own Confession, he had been about some foul piece
of Work then, though now a fit Tool for the Snake's turn.

However let us a little further view the account of H. W's matter, as we have
it in the Old Apostate Exposed, page 9, 10.

I shall now add what is so notoriously known in the Neighborhood, that though
the said H. W. be greatly hardened, yet I presume he cannot have a Face to deny;
relating to their great Uncleanness, for which they were denied of us, etc.

So that it seems before H. W. was fit for this Snake's Communion, he was fit
to be expelled ours: But since the Snake has him, let us show him further what
he has got, Old Apostate Exposed, p. 10.

The said H. W. had her, that is now his Wife, so great with Child in his first
Wife's days, that there was but about Six Weeks betwixt the Death of his first
Wife, and the Birth of that Child.

However, a good Champion in the Snake's Army, and well enough to serve to
Revile a People more Righteous than himself; and for whom, his Iniquities would
no longer admit him a Companion, and was therefore denied by them, p. 10. And
though now he is grown so hard in Impiety, as to revile them that denied him
for his Uncleanness.

Yet while some little tenderness was remaining, he agreed to the Judgment of
our Friends against him, as may further appear by his own acknowledgment, cited
also, p. 7, 8.

(Thus) Be it known to all People, unto whom these presents shall be read, that
I H. W. and A. my Wife, do acknowledge and confess before the living God, and
all People, that we have sinned, and done that which we ought not to have done,
in suffering the Temptations of Sin in the Flesh to overcome us. -- So this
know all People, that it was not because the Quakers Judgment, or Doctrine, or
way of Worship, is false, that it caused us to fall from them, But our Fall was
of our Selves.

So here is H. W. and his Wife against the Snake, his reviving this false
matter, was to vilify the Quakers and their Holy Doctrine; H. W. confesses to
his Shame, there Fall was of themselves. -- And on their Heads and his let it
rest, till they Repent and Ask Pardon of God, they for their Transgressions,
and he for his Revilings on their behalf.

SECT. XX. Of Enthusiasm or Inspiration, as said by the Snake, to be Owned by
the Church of England.
Ibid. p. 314. THe Word Enthusiasm signifies Inspiration, and may mean a good
as well as an evil Inspiration.

I am no more in doubt of the Truth of this, than I am certain that the Snake
did affirm falsely, when in Pref. p. 43. he said, There is no Enthusiasm where
there is not Pride.

Ibid. These poor misled Quakers -- are made to believe that the Church of
England does wholly throw off all Inspiration of the Holy Spirit.

The Snake has told us (as above quoted) there is no Enthusiasm where there is
not Pride. And if he would so mislead the poor Quakers as to believe, that she
does wholly throw off all that; it would be in him no less a fault, than it is
to belly the poor Quakers, and mislead his Reader, concerning what the Quakers
do, or do not believe.

Ibid. I will here briefly set down the Doctrine of the Church of England in
this Point.

To which if the Snake could have truly added [and my Agreeable Practice] as it
would have been for his Credit, so it would have dwindled his Libel to a much
less bulk, than that which his numerous and many fork'd Falsehoods have swelled
it to.

But now he spends 4 or 5 Pages in giving Instances from the Service and
Liturgy of the Church of England, concerning her Doctrine in this point of
Inspiration of the Holy Ghost; with which I am so far from being displeased,
that I could with pleasure have read them all over, if he had given as many
more, and am glad that so Essential a Truth, as is the Inspiration of the Holy
Spirit is owned by her (though this is not the first Knowledge I had of it, for I
have some Years since read the same in her Liturgy.)

And after the Instances he has given of the Inspiration of the Holy Spirit, he
says, p. 319. It is made necessary to every good word and thought, and the
Cause of all the Good that is in us. And we are directed to it, to Follow and
be Guided by it; and are assured that it will lead us to all Truth that is
requisite and necessary for our Eternal Salvation: It is this which opens the
Scriptures to us, and our Understandings rightly to apprehend the true sense
and meaning of them, etc.

In all this, the Snake as he has said, what is agreed to, and believed, by
every Sober Quaker: So he has herein declared the Inspiration of the Holy
Ghost to be as Infallible as we believe it is. And now before we part, from a
point in which we do (as he says) so exactly agree; let us a little reason upon
it, and examine, whether he has Squared his foregoing Sections by this
Infallible Rule.

And first I shall observe, the Snake says, We are directed to it to Follow and
be Guided by it, and are assured (no doubt by a certain Knowledge) that it will
lead us to all Truth that is requisite and necessary for our Eternal Salvation.

Supposing this to be true; the Snake did very Scandalously (not to say worse)
when he made the Devil as Infallible as any of their Church. For in p. 39.
speaking of that Light or Knowledge which comes from God (which is the
Inspiration of the H. Spirit) he says:

If that Knowledge which comes from God be Infallible, then while the Devil
follows that Light or Knowledge, he must be Infallible: And if this be all the
Infallibility which the Quakers ascribe to themselves (it seems it is all the
Snake ascribes to the Church) It Distinguishes them not from Wicked Men or
Devils.

This is very hard; but there is worse yet. For though he does here say, That
the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, will lead us to all Truth, requisite and
necessary to our Salvation, (and so consequently will bring them that follows
it to Heaven. Yet this (they are his own Words, p. 40.) will no more prove it
to be Infallible, or sufficient of it self to bring us to Heaven, than it will
follow, that Man cannot die, because God breathes into him the breath of Life;
or that he is Omnipotent, because his Strength comes from God.

These Instances from the Snake, though they clash, yet in some that follow,
they will be found to cut one another up by the Roots: For here, in p. 319. He
is very confident, That the Church of England does agree with us, concerning
what we mean by the Light within. And I must needs say the same. Yet in p. 60.
He gives the Light within (in which he says we do so much agree with the Church
of England) a very evil Character, and says, It does totally root up and
destroy all Church Government and Order.

Nay, in p. 96. speaking of this Enthusiasm, he says, It is Inconsistent to the
Government, either in Church or State, or any Security from all the Dismal and
Enthusiastical Murders, Rapines, and Outrage of the Zealots among the Jews,
who went upon the same Principle.

Fie Snake, what the same Principle with the Church! These are very ill
Characters to recommend that Inspiration, in which he is Confident the Church
of England does agree with us. Indeed, he endeavors with a strange
Contradiction to make all whole again, by adding in the next Words; yet showed
no evil signs of it.

I would not willingly tire my Reader with Observations of the Snake's
Contradictions upon this Head, and therefore I shall but gather, and add a few
more, of which this is one worthy of notice. That though here, in Page 319. he
has made every True Son of the Church an Enthusiast: Yet in p. 98. he says
Enthusiasts (indefinitely) have no Principles; they have no Rule but their own
Fancy, which is strongest in Madmen.

Reader, Is it not very Comical to see this Adversary dealing his Blows with so
much blindness and malice thus to wound himself, while he thinks he is hitting
of others: which is a very great Argument, that whatsoever Inspiration he may
pretend to believe to be in the Church, yet that he has little benefit from
any, because of his repeated Contradictory Assertions in the same thing. But
besides the propense Malice herein Legible, it is like he used less guard and
caution, and cared not how he put upon us, since he declares his Assurance, p.
32. That the Simplicity of our Quakers has deprived them of every one of these
helps, which others might have to detect him*

But, be that as it will, let me here add one Observation, to show yet plainer,
if plainer can be, whether this blindness has led him.

He would have us believe, nay, he says (p. 319.) We are assured that it (the
Inspiration of the Holy Ghost) will lead us to all Truth, that is requisite and
necessary for our Eternal Salvation.

Now, if the Snake does here speak both the Churches Sense, and his own; I will
show, that notwithstanding he has writ a Section of Tithes, as payable to her;
yet he has absolutely cut them up by the Root, while he does positively affirm,
that Teaching does cease; nay, that it is inconsistent with the Sufficiency of
the Light within: But if this Light within, or Inspiration of the Holy Ghost,
Leads us to all Truth requisite and necessary for our Eternal Salvation, as
both himself, and as (he says) the Church do confess. I think it has
Sufficiency enough, for all the wants of Men.

For Proof that this Sufficiency supersedes all Teaching, and necessarily
Tithes, which are the Reward of it, turn to p. 166, 167. where speaking against
us, upon this very Head of the Sufficiency of the Light within, he says.

Teaching does in its own Nature cease, when Men are sufficiently Taught,
therefore to those who hold the Sufficiency of the Light within, outward
Preaching must be wholly Inconsistent.

How far this agrees or contradicts what I have above quoted from him, in p.
319. the Reader may easily Judge.

Now again to Quotations; and the first is, from p. 38, of W. P's Preface to G.
F's Journal, and is this.

We have seen the Fruit of all other Ministries, by the few that are turned
from the evil of their ways.

And let the Snake think as he please, it will always be one good Mark to Judge
of a Ministry by its Fruit, those that are turned by it from the evil of their
ways. It was the end of the Commission which God gave to his Apostles, to turn
Men from Darkness to Light; and it is the end of the Commissions which he gives
at this Day; and where this end is not Answered, there Fruit is not brought
forth.

His Objection, p. 320. is besides the Point, where he says, Men's being evil,
may proceed from their own perverseness.

For I know none that doubts it: But what is to the present Case, is; That
Men's continuance in Evil, is often too much owing to the deadness of the
Ministry they are under, as in Hosea 9. And there shall be like People, like
Priest.

Ibid. And to Justify rather the Ministry of Theudas, Acts 5.36, 37. who got
above 400 to follow him.

No, it is to Justify rather the Ministry of Peter, from the Holy Spirit, Acts
2.41. by which there was, at one Sermon, added to the Church, about 3000 Souls.

Ibid. p. 320. quoted from p. 21. of the Preface before mentioned; where the
Snake has given a notable Stroke of his Art in -- I will give the Quotation
first as he has made it, and then from the Preface it self.

They (the many Ministers in the World) declare of Religion, say many things
true in Words, of God, Christ, and the Spirit, of Holiness, and Heaven, etc.
but which of them all -- ever directed a Man to a Divine Principle, or Agent,
placed of God in Man to help him, etc.

Thus the Snake has given it; but in the Book it self it is thus:

They declare of Religion, say many things true in Words, of God, Christ, and
the Spirit, of Holiness and Heaven; that all Men should Repent, and mend their
Lives, or they will go to Hell, etc. But which of them all pretend to Speak of
their own Knowledge and Experience? Or ever directed Men to a Divine Principle
or Agent, placed of God in Man, to help him, and how to know it, and wait to
feel its Power, to work that good and acceptable Will of God in them.

Thus he; So that when the Snake Answered the Question, as himself had split
it, and said, p. 321. Not one of them as I know of. He did but Answer one half
of it; But if he will Answer the Question as it lies above, in W. P's Words,
and say: Not one of them Ministers, but have so directed Men, as is
abovementioned; there may Thousands be able to Confront him, and say his
Answer is false.

In like manner he abuses a Passage in p. 39. of the forementioned Preface;
Where W. P. directing his Words to those in the Ministry, says:

For even those that have received the Word of the Lord, had need wait for
Wisdom, that they may see how to divide the Word aright; which plainly
implies, that it is possible for one that has received the Word of the Lord,
to Miss in the Division and Application of it, which must come from an
Impatiency of Spirit, and self-working, etc.

What the Snake carps at in this, is the Word Miss, and among other things
says, p. 321. H^w did he know they could Miss, but by their having Miss^d?

I Answer; Very well. For as the Apostle does not Charge Timothy with having
missed, when he gave him that Caution, 2 Timothy 2.15. to which W. Penn has
respect in them Words [ which plainly implies, etc.] So I think the Snake will
not be so hardy as to say, That either the Apostle or Timothy had missed in the
Division of the Word.

Ibid. p. 322. Will they give no body leave to miss but themselves?

We give none leave to miss in the Division and Application of the Word: W.
Penn has truly said (as above) it is from an Impatiency of Spirit and
Self-working. And if the Snake will not allow of that to be missing, it is
easy to know that himself does miss exceedingly.

Ibid. p. 324. The Snake makes a Quotation from p. 83. of G. F's Journal, which
is but a Repetition of what he has before quoted, in p. 28. and which I have
already Answered, in p. 76, 77, foregoing, and therefore need not here repeat
it.

Ibid. p. 325. But when, p. 29. of his Preface (beforementioned) Mr. Penn
would persuade us, that this Fox had outward Revelations, and Visions from God
-- This Obliges us to look more narrowly into the Matter.

If the Snake, by narrowly looking, can prove to the contrary, of what W. Penn
would persuade us; then he will look to some purpose. But if he Misses, in
judging of Revelations and Visions, and that he may, as well as Miss in
Dividing and Applying the Word: Then while he confidently calls G. Fox a
Wizard, he proves himself to be Possessed with an Evil Spirit.

Ibid. p. 326, 327. It is desired that Mr. Penn would now Publish his Register
of Quaker Prophecies, or for ever after hold his Peace.

By whom is it desired? The Snake: To what purpose? That we should contradict,
with respect to himself, the Advice of our Savior, Mat. 7.6.

But besides, There are already Published in the Journal, and other of our
Books, so many, that if the Snake can but prove them false, he will go a great
length to prevent the Credibility of all others.

Ibid. p. 328. When Tho. Ebbit, another Prophet of theirs, came out of
Huntington-shire to London, a Day or two before the Fire -- to warn them of it;
the Quaker Sanhedrim of their Elders at London took him to task, and having
Examined his Gifts, rejected him, etc.

That Tho. Ebbit did come to London, a Day, or two before the Fire, and go
through a great part of the City, and declare of that Judgment which did so
speedily follow, is very true: And it is also true, that three or four Friends,
seeing the Man, they did Caution him, That if he had a true Vision, he might
not go beyond it. The Caution was good and useful; but it is wholly false, that
there was any such thing as a Quaker Sanhedrim, or that they took him to Task,
or that they rejected him, for that his Prophecy. Indeed, there was no room to
reject the Vision, which soon came to pass: For the Man came to Town on the
Sixth Day, commonly called Friday, Employed that and the next Day, in going
about the City, and Publishing his Vision: And the Fire broke out on the First
Day Morning following (commonly called Sunday) and was indeed a dreadful
Judgment.

Ibid. p. 328. But now to S. Eccles, ( who I suppose is the Prophet Mr. Penn
Points at) I refer the Reader, for a Taste of his Prophetic Talent, to what is
said before of him, p. 52.

And for Answer to this, and such Objections, I refer my Reader to p. 122,
where they are already spoken to.

Ibid. In the mean time let all Impartial Men Judge, betwixt that Sober and
Christian Enthusiasm which is Professed, Taught and Prayed for in the Church of
England; and that Mad and Blasphemous Enthusiasm which is set up among the
Quakers, etc.

Impartial Men Judge! What could the Snake mean when he said so? For he has
constantly, carefully avoided their Judgment, and been glad to run, when in
danger of being brought before it. Impartial Men, When they shall consider,
That this Snake was so sure of what we mean by the Light within, and that we
did agree with the Church of England, p. 319. that he delivers it with a
seeming Gusto: I am Confident: I say, when this shall be considered, Impartial
Men must say, he is Impudent, in p. 328. to say, The Enthusiasm among the
Quakers is Mad and Blasphemous, when he has not so much as attempted to prove
it so, since he said directly the contrary.

SECT. XXI. His Falsely Entitled Impartial Comparison, shown to be Profane,
and such as does equally affect the Church of England.
THE Snake, as he says, p. 329. began this his Profane Comparison, in p. 5.
of his Introduction: In Answer to which, so far as he there speaks of it; I
have replied to it, p. 33, 34, 35. foregoing, and shall here go in my Reply,
to what he says further on this Head.

Ibid. p. 332. This was the first Instance we find of a Prophet, who submitted
to be cured of his Inspiration by Physic.

It is Profanely False. G. F. did not Submit to be cured of his Inspiration by
Physic. G. F. does in p. 5. of his Journal, speak, how that in his Youth (for
he was then in the 21th Year of his Age) being in very great Affliction of
Spirit, he went to several Priests, that from them he might have received some
Spiritual Comfort: But they were so far from being Spiritual Comforters, that
one of them was in great Rage with him, because (as they were walking in the
Priest's Garden) he accidentally set his Foot upon the side of one of the Beds
in it. Another would needs give him some Physic, and did endeavor to let him
Blood: This G. F. mentions, to show how much they were estranged from that Work
of God, then in him: And he there further speaks, How that his Body was, as it
were dried up, with Sorrows, Grief and Trouble, that he could have wished he
had never been born: And the reason which G. Fox there gives, why he could have
so wished, was, because of the Vanity and Wickedness, and the Blaspheming of
the Name of the Lord, which was among the People. And the Snake, by his light
esteem of this concern, does show, That he is of them that glory in doing
wickedly; and does profanely mock with those, who did occasion the Prophet's
Complaint, Jer. 15.18. Why is my Pain perpetual, and my Wound incurable, which
refuses to be healed -- And from this same Cause proceeded the Complaint of
the same Prophet, Jer. 4.19. My bowels, my bowels; I am pained at my very
heart, my heart makes a noise within me --

And notwithstanding the mockery of the Snake, it is always Matter of Sorrow,
Grief and Trouble, to the Righteous, to see and hear the wickedness of the
Wicked, and more especially and eminently to those, whom God does immediately
by his Spirit and Power, call and lay a necessity upon, to reprove and testify
against it.

Ibid. p. 132. And (as he tells us, p. 8.) when all hopes in them (Priests) and
in all Men was gone, so that I had nothing outwardly to help me, nor could tell
what to do.

Here the Snake cuts off the next Words of G. Fox, wherein he says, Then, O
then, I heard a voice which said, There is one, even Christ Jesus, that can
speak to thy condition.

And instead of giving these Words, which are of moment, and are a sound Truth,
he does profanely add: In this most dismal of all Conditions, quite overrun,
and given up to despair (the blackest Fury in Hell.) So that it seems the Snake
does, by a most Blasphemous Implication account it the most dismal of all
Conditions, and to be quite overrun, and given up to Despair, to hear the
Joyful Tidings (to a weary Soul) There is one, even Christ Jesus, that can
speak to thy Condition.

But to G. F. this was Glad Tidings of great Joy, and as he gave up, to learn
of this Wonderful Counselor, Jesus Christ, who does indeed speak to the
Conditions of all Men: He did, as he relates, p. 17. Come up in Spirit, through
the Flaming Sword, into the Paradise of God, etc.

And I do Testify, there is no other way to come into it, than by obeying the
Teachings of Jesus Christ; and this Obedience is so far from raising any mad
Joy, as the Snake does Blasphemously call it; that it is Impossible for a Man
to have more evident Demonstration of any thing in the World, than he may have
of his future Happiness, if he grows up in Obedience and Faithfulness to Jesus
Christ, the way that leads to it.

Ibid. He tells as a wonderful opening, (to repeat his Cant) which the Lord
gave to him -- thus, p. 5. About the beginning of the Year 1646, as I was going
to Coventry, and entering toward the Gate, a Consideration arose in me, how it
was said, That all Christians were Believers, both Protestants and Papists: And
the Lord opened to me, that if all were Believers, then were all born of God.

Here was a mighty Discovery!

And after all the Snake's Profane Banter, of Wonderful Opening, and Mighty
Discovery; It is a great Truth, and it was a wonderful Opening in John the
Apostle, where he testifies, 1 John 5.4. Whatsoever is born of God, overcomes
the World, and this is the Victory that overcomes the World, even your Faith.

This Divine Truth, when it was again opened to G. F. by the Openings of the
same Holy Spirit, did well deserve to be mentioned by him, to show the Unity
and Harmony that there is in its Discoveries; the same may be said with respect
to that other Opening from the Lord, mentioned by the Snake, p. 334. which G.
Fox mentions, p. 5. of his Journal, That being bred at Oxford or Cambridge, was
not enough to fit and qualify Men to be Ministers of Christ.

Which is agreeable to what the Apostle testifies, Gal. 1.11, 12. But I certify
you, Brethren, that the Gospel which was preached of me, is not after man; for
I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the revelation of
Jesus Christ.

What the Apostle does here certify the Primitive Christians concerning his
Commission, it pleased God to open to G. Fox was the way and means by which all
that were truly his Ministers came to be such. And though the Snake would suggest
and insinuate as if the contrary was never the belief of any one Man in the
World.

It is false, nor can those who receive their Ordination from Men, either after
the mode of the Church of England, or otherwise, say they neither received it
of Man, nor were taught it, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ.

Ibid. p. 335. He tells, p. 6. at another time it was opened in me: That God
who made the World, did not dwell in Temples made with Hands: And this at the
first seemed a Strange Word; because both Priests and People use to call their
Temples or Churches Dreadful Places and Holy Ground.

Thus G. Fox, upon which the Snake adds a Profane Lie: It seems Fox, did not
know before, but that God dwelt in a Church, as a Man does in a House, so as to
be locked up, and to be no where else when he was there.

No, Snake, there seems no such thing of G. F. but if the People, who continue
to call them Dreadful Places and Holy Ground, do know no better; their
Superstitious Ignorance, (if it be as described by the Snake) will much of it
be laid to the Priests Charge, who have so blindly led the People.

But if none of all this Gross Blindness, there is yet a Reprovable
Misapprehension, not grounded upon any Example or Authority from the
Gospel-Day, so far as it is recorded in the New Testament: That is, calling
their Churches Dreadful Places and Holy Ground, from a supposition, that after
their Consecration, there is a kind of Inhabitation, or more Immediate and
Powerful Presence of God in them by virtue of it.

This Reprovable Misapprehension, as Peoples Minds did continue under it, so
they were therein liable to let it increase to a Superstitious Reverence. And
God, in the Calling Forth of his Servant, did in this, as in other things, open
his Understanding, and let him see, according to the Testimony of the
Proto-Martyr, Acts 7.48. The Most High dwells not in Temples made with hands.
And he there further shows, that Consecrations of Houses are vain: Nor indeed
is there, from the Authority of the New Testament, any Holiness to be
attributed to Place. The Doctrine there delivered is 1 Cor. 3.16. Know ye not
that ye are the Temple of God; and agreeable to this is 1 Cor. 6.19. 2 Cor.
6.16.

Ibid. And such are all his Discoveries, all his New Light; even this
Fundamental Distinguishing Principle of the Quakers, of the Light within.

The Discoveries beforementioned, I have shown to be agreeable to the
Scripture; and the Snake has been so far from offering to prove them
otherwise; that he would have it supposed they are the Concessions of every Man
in his Right Wits. Where is then the Objection? Why they are Truths of Common
Notice; or, in the Snake's Profane Railery, they are Notable Discoveries, the
Commonest Notions in the World, which G. F. has here taken for Supernatural
Revelations; and because the Snake supposes them to have been the Common
Knowledge of Mankind; therefore he Concludes, they were no Openings from the
Spirit of Truth in G. Fox.

But this is a false Conclusion, because he may find in Holy Writ, that the
Supernatural Revelations, Discoveries and Openings which it has pleased God to
give to particular Persons; have frequently been such Truths. Thus the Apostle
Paul had a Supernatural Revelation in answer to his Petition: My Grace is
sufficient for thee, 2 Cor. 12.9. And I would know of the Snake, who then there
was, that had received the Christian Faith, that did not believe as much. And
had the Corinthians been as Blasphemously Profane as this our Adversary, they
might have queried in his words, p. 335. Why so sottishly Ignorant as to take
the Commonest Notions in the World for such Wonders, such Supernatural
Revelations.

But how common or mean soever this Snake may judge many of those Truths to be,
which the Holy Spirit has, and does at this day reveal and discover upon the
Spirits of those who are obedient to it, in the Openings which it gives of the
Scriptures; I must needs say, that were it possible for a Man, Distinctly to
remember and repeat the whole Old and New Testament; so that all the Truths
therein contained were of easy and common notice to him, yet the advantage he
would thence reap, would be nothing in comparison to the advantage he may reap
from having but some of the Truths therein recorded, opened upon his Spirit, by
the Holy Spirit, which did at first Dictate them.

And the Reason is, because men cannot be made Holy by Imitation, but only by
Regeneration; which as it is the work of the Holy Spirit, so that work is
began, in what the Scripture calls the Day of Small Things. The first
Discoveries are often small, not only to try the Obedience, but to encourage to
Faithfulness. And they who will not thankfully receive its lowest
Manifestations, and obey the Discoveries of the Light of Christ, in the
forsaking and denying vain Honors and Language are not likely to be obedient
to greater Discoveries, if they had them.

Ibid. p. 332. But G. Keith for his Christian Doctrine of a Christ without, was
condemned by their Late Yearly Meeting in their Bull of Excommunication.

It was, not for Christian Doctrine, but Unchristian Practice, which G. Keith
was denied, as the Testimony given against him, does fully show in these words,
George Keith, of late has been, and yet is acted by an Unchristian Spirit,
which has moved and led him to stir up Contention and Strife in the Church of
Christ, and to cause Divisions, Separations and Breaches amongst them that
Profess the Truth; and that the tendency of Diverse of his late Writings and
Actings, has been to expose the Truth and Friends thereof.

What has Christian Doctrine to do with such Unchristian Actions? They have no
agreement; and this was the Cause there assigned of our denying him.

The Snake now gives (p. 333.) part of a Letter, which he says W. P. sent to R.
Turner of Pensilvania, in which, speaking of G. Keith, are these words, I love
his Spirit, and honor his Gifts, and his Peculiar Learning, especially Tongues
and Mathematics, his Platonic Studies too; all being sanctified to the
Truth's Service, which is worthy to have the Pre-eminence.

Upon which the Snake says, here will be a sad account of that Infallible
Discerning Spirit which the Quakers do appropriate to themselves.

To which I shall first say, that it is utterly false, that the Quakers have
ever appropriated to themselves the Spirit of Discerning. It is only
appropiated to the Holy Spirit; and what true Discerning of Spirits is given to
Men, must be from that Fountain.

Now as to the Letter, the words above quoted do well consist with that Spirit
of Discerning; because in order of Time it appears not, but that that Letter
was writ some Years before the Testimony of the Yearly Meeting against G. K.
which I have before quoted. And if G. Keith's accomplishments in Learning had
continued to have been all sanctified to the Truth's Service, as it is there
expressed, which was the ground of that Love therein declared. He could not have
stirred up Contention and Strife, nor caused Divisions, Separations and
Breaches, which was the reason of his being denied.

But further, If that Letter was writ, when there was some small beginnings of
Misunderstanding betwixt G. K. and those in Pensilvania: Yet the words of that
Letter, referring the Love declared to his Spirit and Learning, to be, as all
are sanctified, etc. they are very safe; as G. K. would also have been, had he
kept to the Holy Spirit which sanctifies; and that would both have prevented
further Disturbance, and removed all Misunderstanding.

Ibid. p. 336. I do here demand Reparation in the behalf of the Church of
England. -- But particularly in behalf of one whom they have most Scandalously
Robbed; The Person wronged is Mr. Seldom, and the Thief is Francis Howgil.

A Snake turn Knight Errant, the Scandal of the Church, presume to set up for
her Representative: O Monstrum!

But to his Ridiculous Arrogance: I do here demand, etc. What mighty I is this?
What Rattling Snake? Why, an Anonymous, who is as fear full of putting his Name
to his Demand, as he is to appear before Justice. One, who Jugler-like, plays
Tricks in the Dark: Therefore sure no true Pleni-Potent of the Church, not one
Legally Delegated by Her.

And he is not less the Church's Delegate, than he is John Selden's, who, in
his time, was one of the Glories of this Nation; one whose Living Labors may
at once endear and preserve his Memory, with those who know his Works. And with
what Forehead, one so differently qualified as is the Snake, should pretend to
demand Satisfaction, (if the Demand were just) in his Behalf, is no small
wonder? But the Demand is Arrogant, Trifling and Impudent, in that he says F.
Howgil has stolen whole Paragraphs verbatim out of J. Selden's History of
Tithes. I have with what care I can, examined the Charge, by comparing the
Books, and cannot find one whole Paragraph so taken. I find that F. H. does in
some places treat of Tithes, in the same manner as J. Seldom does; and the
Books which are his Authorities he puts mostly in his Margin: And among others
which he quotes, J. Seldom, by Name, is one in his History of Tithes: and upon
this Subject of Tithes he is twice quoted by F. Howgil, viz. p. 482, and in p.
567. which is sufficient to show, that F. H. is no Plagiary.

But since the Snake has thus taken upon himself to be a Knight Errant, I will
direct him to a piece of Work of the sort he here speaks of, and if he can get
satisfaction, he may pretend to be Captain of the Band of Knight Errants. He
may find it in John Daille's Treatise of the Right use of the Fathers, first
Book, p. 104. In these words.

St. Hilary, St. Ambrose, and others; who robbing poor Origin without any
Mercy, Vid. Hierom. Apol. adv. Ruff. ad Pammach, and Marcel. and Ep. 141. ad
Marcel.
do not yet do him the Honor so much as to name him scarcely: This is certain,
that you shall find in St. Ambrose many times whole Periods, and whole Pages
too, taken out of St. Basil; but unless my Memory fail me very much, you shall
never find him once named there. Thus he.

I spare to give more such Instances till the Snake shall here have demanded
Reparation in due form. But now we are speaking upon the vice of Stealing, it
may not be improper to remind him, that it had been highly necessary for him to
have surveyed himself, and considered with what Face he could unjustly object
Theft to F. Howgil, because he speaks of the same Subject in the same manner
with John Seldom, whom he also names: While himself, if he had been duly
prosecuted for Theft, must of necessity have been hanged, if at least the Law
of the Country where he stole the Virgin, whom he made his Unhappy Wife, be in
that case agreeable to ours.

But as to the Punishment I shall not now enquire, nor yet what Reparation he
made to the injured Parents or Relations. But as to the Fact, it had the Forms
of Theft, in that he had not their good leave before he took her; and whether
the Canons do not declare the Theft of Souls, the Stealing of a Wife to be in
the same Class of Crimes, in which himself puts Obedience to the King de Facto.
It may be proper for him to consider, which if he find, and that he squares
himself in his Repentance for that, by his practice in this; his Repence will
be as singular, as his tenacious Disobedience has been observable.

But of this, now no more, nor had there been so much, nay here none at all;
had it not been thrown in my way, by his first crying out Thief, Thief.

The Snake has in this Section made very many scornful and false Comparisons
(according to his title) between G. Fox, Muggleton and Oliver's Porter, which
is but a repetition of somewhat of the same kind in the beginning of his Libel,
and which I have replied to, from p. 33, to 36. it being there somewhat
Argumentative; and the Enlargement which he here makes, together with the
Addition of Oliver's Porter in the Comparison, has so much of Scandal to all
the Pretenses of Religion, that his Impudence deserves no other Answer than
Silence, nor himself any other treatment, than as a Person very Contemptible,
even as the Scandal of Religion, and the bane of Society: In that against the
Experience of many Thousands of our Friends, against the knowledge of very many
Persons of all Ranks, amongst whom are some of Chief Note and Dignity who are
not of Us, before whom, and with whom G. Fox for Forty or more Years, even to
his Death, had occasion to converse: Toward all which Persons, his Sobriety of
Life, Peaceable Behavior, Exemplary Conversation in Godliness and Humility,
was evident Demonstration, that he acted both as became a Man and a Christian:
Should yet after his Death be by this Incendiary, listed with a Known Madman
and Professed Libertine.

I come now to Consider of a Letter which the Snake gives at the end of his
Libel, which he says is Spelt and Pointed according to the Original, and of
which he gives some bits before in p. 115.

And here I have to say, that what he calls John Audland's Letter, I have many
Reasons to believe is none of his.

For, First, Some former Adversaries have (as the Snake, p. 115.) pretended to
give some Pieces of it; but have contradicted one another, as to the Matter of
it; by which contradiction, in terms, it is fully shown, that they could not
all be right, as they have pretended they were.

Secondly, As to the Spelling and Pointing of it, it is so far from being
agreeable to John Audland in other of his Writings; that it has many plain
marks of being Spurious, because he was Correct in both; and did understand
Orthography better than is shown in this pretended Letter.

Thirdly, This Pretended Letter from J. Audland to G. Fox was not so well
contrived, but that the Forgers, who have heretofore given it with a date, have
made it bear date from Bristol, Anno, 1665. This was a very unlucky oversight,
which as it cannot be now mended, so it absolutely overthrows the pretense of
its being his; because John Audland was buried in Westmerland the 24th of the
1st Month, March 1663. being the last day of that Year. So that it appears he
was dead about two years before the Date of the Pretended Letter.

But Lastly, John Audland, has in a Collection of Books and Epistles writ, some
by himself, and some by him and John Camm, and of which we have undoubted Proof
that they are genuine, giving very many Testimonies of his Clear and Christian
Principle, Holy Reverence and Honor to Jesus Christ according to Holy Writ,
which do effectually show that it was far from him, to attribute Divine Honors
to G. Fox, or any Man. Some of which Testimonies I shall here subjoin from that
Collection, etc.

Collection, etc. p. 180. I must walk according to the Commands of Christ and
his Apostles.

Ibid. p. 188. Walking in the Spirit which mortifies the Deeds of the Flesh,
being subject to the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, here is rest to the Soul.

Ibid. p. 190. We see the way of Life to all that believe in the Name of the
Lord Jesus.

Ibid. p. 202. The Jews had a Law, by which they judged the Holy One that he
ought to die.

Ibid. p. 222. We find acceptance with God through Jesus Christ.

Ibid. p. 287. They (the Holy Prophets) Prophesied of Christ, who was born, not
by the Will of Man, supposed to be the Son of Joseph, which was the Son of God.

These, with very many more Plain and Voluntary Confessions of J. A. to the
very Christ of God, in that Collection of Books, etc. do fully show, that he
was very far from owning any such Blasphemy or Idolatry as the Snake does
suggest. Besides, what I have now here said both in opposition to the Pretended
Letter, and also by Quotation from that Book of John Audlands, has been before
spoken to by G.W. in his Just Inquiry, printed 1693. which the Snake ought to
have invalidated, if he could, before he repeated these Objections of other
Adversaries. What I have herein said, has been with purpose to remove that
False and Envious Covering which the Snake, in his several Charges has
endeavored to cover Us with.

Reader, As thou shall have read it with an Impartial Mind, thou will then be
able to make a true Judgment how far my End is Answered. As for what follows,
it is G. W's own Defense in Answer to the Snake's particular Objections to him,
in what he calls Remarks upon G. W 's Creed, and a Supplement upon Occasion of
G. W's Answer to the Snake in the Grass, lately Published.

A Supplement, upon occasion of what the Snake calls, Remarks upon G. W 's
Creed; and in Reply to the Supplement in the Snake, upon occasion of G. W's
Antidote, etc. in Answer to the First Edition of The Snake in the Grass. By
George Whitehead. SECT. XXII. A Reply to what the Author styles, Some Remarks
upon George Whitehead's Creed, Relating to some of the Particulars beforegoing,
taken out of the Antidote, etc.
THe nameless Author of the Snake in the Grass, having vented his and others
Venom, and great Spite against the People called Quakers in General, and
diverse Particulars by Name: Now, to complete his Design of great Envy, he must
put forth his Sting, and have a fling and fit of Hissing like an angry Snake,
or as one that Whispers out of the Dust, Isa. 29.4. against the said G. W. I
being the Person aimed at, may now briefly answer for Truth, and for my self,
as concerned.

2. The word Creed he imposes upon me: 'Twas no formal Creed or Summary of our
Faith, though real Truths by way of Positions in the affirmative, as a
Christian Testimony, in direct Opposition to F. B's great Abuse, false Charge
and Perversions, which with a negative Testimony against him therein, are both
adapted to answer his own Terms, Words and Phrases, that our Testimony and
Positions might be the more apparent against his Abuse and Perversions; for I
know no Adversary that I find fault with, but I can freely and in good
Conscience assert my own Sense in the Matters in Controversy, as well as
oppose his, though it be not in the manner of a formal Creed, yet true in it
self; for we should have numerous Creeds, if all Positions we write in
Opposition to Opposers, must be esteemed Creeds, or Summaries and Confessions
of our Faith; nevertheless, we believe what we assert and vindicate in each
particular.

Snake p. 175. My Accuser presently shows his Prejudice and Enmity against me
without cause, As with a new Confession of Faith, in such dubious and general
Terms, as may at first sight deceive the unwary Reader; though I gave it in as
plain and as much in scriptural Terms as I could, and as the Matters concerned
would admit of. And I know my own Sincerity therein better than my Accuser, who
insincerely calls me Honest George, whilst he is aspersing me and casting Dirt
at me, as Deceiving, keeping off, contradicting the Heart of the Heresy, still
preserving it safe and untouched; and not only so, but often with a slily,
insinuated Excuse and Defense of it. So that my confessing Jesus to be the
Christ, and both his coming in the Flesh and in the Spirit, according to holy
Scripture-Testimony, and also to the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament, namely, the Holy Doctrine and Divine Precept therein, as given by
Divine Inspiration (on which much of my said Confession against F. Bugg
depends) this has no beter Acceptance or Resentment with my Accuser, than as
no Contradiction to the Heart of Heresy, but as still preserving it safe and
untouched; and which is worse, a slily insinuated Excuse and Defense of it. Oh
sad Stuff! Whither will not Pride and Envy precipate some Men? What
scripturally to confess Jesus Christ and the holy Scriptures (as above) is this
no Contradiction to Heresy? But to preserve, excuse or defend it? What Is
Heresy then, pray? Is it to confess Jesus Christ come in the Flesh, etc.
according to holy Scripture-Testimony of him? Oh! For shame, leave off such
blind Envy and blasphemous Abuse.

And now to come to the Point, How or wherein have I slily insinuated Excuse
and Defense of it (i. e. of the Heart of Heresy, as before?) p. 175. Thus
(says my Accuser) in his first Article he confesses Jesus to be the Christ,
even the same Jesus Christ who was born of the Virgin Mary at Bethlehem, etc.

I confess this is part of my Confession, but cannot believe this is either not
contradictory to the Heart of Heresy, or that it is any Excuse or Defense of
it. Nor that our confessing God or Christ to be our Light, can be any such
Excuse or Defense. Neither do we attribute the Name Christ to any (much less to
every one) of our selves, as we are often falsely accused, as here, whence he
also most unjustly infers, That then this will appear that this Confession of
Whitehead 's is a mere Fallacy, while it attributes no more to Jesus Christ
than to G. W.

Which is a very foul and absurd Falsehood and, notorious Lie in Fact, and
contradiction to my said Confession (even so far as it is cited by himself as
before) which is, 1. We sincerely own, profess and confess Jesus to be the
Christ, even the same Jesus Christ who was born of the Virgin Mary, at
Bethlehem in Judea, Mat. 2. suffered Death upon the Cross, without the Gates of
Jerusalem, was quickened and raised again by the Power of God, and ascended
into Heaven and Glory, according to the Scriptures.

Now have I herein attributed no more to Jesus Christ than to my self, as he
says? Where did I ever attribute this to my self? Where is the mere Fallacy?
Not in my Confession to Jesus Christ, but in this Horrid Abuse, and Gross
Perversion thereof. Did I ever say that I am Jesus Christ? Or, that I was born
of the Virgin Mary? Or, that I suffered Death upon the Cross at Jerusalem? etc.
Oh! For Shame, who cannot see such Malice and Madness as my Adversary has
vented against me in this Matter?

Again, I find no Fallacy in my Confession to Christ, as without; nor is there
any, unless I had denied the Virgin Mary (of whom Christ was born) to be
without, or Bethlehem, and Judea and Jerusalem, to be without us; nor does
Christ, being without, prove him not to be our Light within; for the same
Christ said, I am the Light of the World; therefore he is our Light, yea the
Quakers Light (as he calls it) they being included in the World. Does not the
Sun shine in our Houses, because the Body and Fullness of it is without them?

My Accuser Quibbles and Quarrels with Art. 10. of my Confession, viz. Our
Ministers do not Teach that the Name of Jesus and Christ belong to every Member
in the Body or Church, as amply as to Christ the Head.

And here he leaves out all the following explanatory part of the Article, (as
he calls it) and Scornfully descants upon the Word amply being in a different
Black Character, lest (quoth he Ibid.) you should mistake and think that George
was Christ as amply as Jesus. And then goes on scoffing, That was modest
indeed; but then George thou art Christ as well as Jesus, though not so amply:
Which is both a false Implication, and foreign to my Intention. The word amply
in that place, was only used and intended in direct opposition to F. Bugg's
falsely saying, The Quakers Teach, That the Name Jesus and Christ belong to
every Member in the Body, as amply as to Christ the Head, New Rome Arraigned,
p. 47. But even in the same 10 Art. quoted against me, I do not allow any
Member to be called Christ, but expressly disallow it, though I confess how
Christians have some Interest in his Name, but not to be called Jesus, but
Christians. The explanatory part of my Confession in the said 10th Article,
disingenuously left out by this Scoffer, is in these Words, viz. But that the
Divine Anointing (to which Name Christ has relation) virtually is in some
measure or degree afforded to every Member of his Body, but not so amply as to
him the Head; nor for any Member to be called Christ, but a Christian; because
Christ received the Anointing, the Holy Spirit, not by measure, but in fullness;
and because he is the Head of the Body, the Church.

And this very Matter is more fully explained in my Charitable Essay, in Answer
to F. Bugg, p. 4. as before. It was far from my Thoughts or Intention to imply
any such thing, as That I am Christ as well as Jesus; for I have often written
my self A Servant of Christ; and so I am, I Humbly Bless his Name that is above
every Name. Therefore I am still very unjustly accused (Ibid.) with Rank
Sophistry, Doging and Deluding, and casting a Mist before the Eyes of Poor
Deluded People, or Leading them into the Mystery of Iniquity, or of any
Equivocation or Jesuitical Confession of Faith. I have a Conscience toward God
in what I confess, and in good Conscience testify, That thou my scornful
lurking Adversary, have cast manifold false and gross Defamations upon me, and
many others of my Christian Persuasion.

And in the true Sense of Scripture, I have both confessed Christ's coming in
the Flesh, and as he the Word was made (or took) Flesh, John 1.14. And more
than the Socinians, I do still confess, That as the Reasonable Soul and Body is
One Man, so He that is God and Man, is One Christ. And whether this will give
Satisfaction to an Implacable Adversary or no, I value not; knowing my
Conscience Clear in the Sight of Him who Judges Righteously, which I am sure
this my Unjust Judge, and False Accuser, is not, who presently after he has
styled me Honest George, unjustly Brands me with Infamy, as Sophistry,
Delusion, Depths of Satan, Mystery of Iniquity, Equivocation, Jesuitical
Confession, etc. Oh! Rank Malice, Bitter Envy, etc.

As for my Confession in the 7th Art. alleged against me, it stands good and
true, viz. We own no such saying, as that the Holy Doctrine, or Divine Precepts
of Scripture, is either Dust, Death, or the Serpent's Meat, but truly
profitable to us by the Assistance of God's Holy Spirit given to us, etc.

And this was in direct Opposition to F. Bugg's saying, These Quakers, who
pretend to own the Precepts and Doctrine of the Bible to be Holy and Blessed,
yet say it is Dust and Death, the Serpent's Meat, etc. Apol. Introd. p. 18. to
his New Rome. [We do not believe any of these Quakers ever so said of the
Precepts and Doctrine, nor do they own any such Saying, I wholly disown it.]
But then to beg the Question, What was it you called Dust and Serpents Meat?
Was it nothing else but the Ink and Paper? Did any Body ever say, That these
were not Dust? Or, Is that any part of the Controversy betwixt us? Snake, p.
177.

Here he yields the Point; he grants the Ink and Paper to be Dust. I said, Will
decay and turn to Dust; but so will not the Word, the Gospel, nor the Holy
Doctrine contained in Scripture. And it has been confessed by F. B. and others,
That Holiness is not ascribed to the Paper and Ink (or Inky Characters) that
will decay, but to the Holy Doctrine and Precepts which will not decay, but be
permanent and endure, and therefore are called the Holy Scriptures, with
respect to the Holy Matters therein contained. That the Books and Writings in
Ink and Paper will wear out, so will not the Word, is evident. Jehoiakim, King
of Judah, could burn Jeremiah the Prophet's Roll, or Book, writ with ^nk by
Baruch, but not the Word of the Lord, nor properly the Words thereof; for the
same Word caused all the former Words to be written again, after the Roll was
burnt, Jer. 36. If then the Books, the Paper and Ink be combustible, or will
decay and turn to Dust, but not the Word, nor the Doctrine; where is then the
Controversy indeed, when the same thing is granted on both sides?

He quotes Gr. Mist. p. 302. as saying, Paper and Ink is not Infallible, that
will come to Dust; unto which the Word, Christ, and the Spirit, is preferred,
in the same place quoted. And in the said Gr. Mist. p. 78. by Letter, he there
means Paper and Ink; but the Scripture, the thing it speaks of, is Spiritual,
the Word is Spirit. And further, p. 127. the Scripture (or Writing) it self,
without the Spirit that gave it forth, is a dead Letter in it self. The Spirit
is that that gave forth the Scriptures.

For my part, as I am not in the least conscious to my self of the least
Contempt of Holy Scripture, nor yet of the Bible; for I have always preferred
it to all other Books extant in the World, and more affected Reading therein,
than any other Book, even from my Childhood; and often bless Divine Providence,
for preserving to us the Scriptures: So I know of none among us guilty of
contemning them: Neither is what is said, from any Contempt of Scripture, no
more than it is of the Earth and the Heavens, to say, They shall wax old and
perish, but the Word that made them endures, Psalm. 102.25, 26. Heb. 1.11, 12.
But say what we can in this Case to clear our selves of any Contempt to the
Holy Scripture, this our uncharitable Judge and Accuser will not believe us:
He Is bent to asperse, he has swallowed down so much of the sour Leven of the
Malice of a few false Brethren, Persecutors and Apostates, from whom he derives
much of his Authority; and thus scurrilously and most falsely imposes upon me,
viz. And therefore George, notwithstanding all thy meally Modesty, it is; it is
indeed George, it is the very Doctrine of the Scriptures which you blaspheme as
Dust, and Death, and Serpents Meat, on purpose to bring Men off from trying
your pernicious Heresies, by those Sacred Oracles, Ibid.

This is a pernicious Abuse and Calumny, against my self, and others of us (to
outface us against our very Sense and Consciences) and in good Conscience I
Testify against it; it never entered into my Intention or Thoughts, so to
blaspheme the Doctrine of the Scriptures, as to term or deem it Dust, Death or
Serpents Meat: the Lord rebuke this lying, envious Spirit.

Neither do I vilify the written Doctrine and Precepts of God, in comparison
of our New Light (as he falsely calls it, p. 177.) but reverently esteem them:
The Man makes no Conscience of Defaming us. Neither do we quarrel with the Law,
and the Testimony, nor yet with Writing or Scripture, as it is in Ink and Paper,
but distinguish between the Writing, and the Things written, which is no
contempt to either. We are thankful to Divine Providence for both the
Scripture, or Writing, and the Holy Doctrine and Divine Precepts therein
written; for they testify unto Christ our Light, and our Light to the Truth of
them.

And to what he says, If any do not teach the same, i. e. according to the Law
and the Testimony, or written Word, it is because there is no Light in them,
Isa. 8.20. And then puts this Emphasis upon it, No Light, George! Mark that:
Your false Pretenses to the Light within are here overruled, Ibid.

I deny that our Pretenses to the Light within is either false, or are here
overruled; if they speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no
Morning to them. If he will see the Note from the Hebrew in some Bibles, he may
see no Morning in the Margin, over against no Light: Then let him Mark that.
But is there no Light in the Creation before Morning, either inward or outward,
pray? Did not the Light shine in Darkness, before it shined out of Darkness?
And had not the Believers a more sure Word of Prophecy, whereunto they did well
to take heed, as unto a Light shining in a dark place, until the Day dawned,
and the Day Star arose in their Hearts? 2 Pet. 1.19. And are not many reproved
by the Light in them, for telling Lies, and speaking contrary to the Word? etc.
And therefore there was some true Light in them, before the Morning appeared to
them.

And though my Accuser says, Ibid. These, and suchlike Texts, detect and
explode the miserable Ignorance and Blasphemy of these Pretenders to Light. For
which we have his own ipse dixit, and much such Raillery, but know no plain
Texts of Scripture yet produced by him, that so detects us; but his own
Falsehood and great Ignorance about the Light, is very apparent.

Again, he falsely defames and reproaches me, from p. 28. Of Innocence
Triumphant, with excusing and justifying Diabolical Suggestions in the
Quaker-Refuge (he says) against the Authority of the Sacred Scripture, by
saying, That it questioned but some, not all.

This Accuser has a most odious, injurious course of defaming and perverting,
as well as curtalizing our Words, wherein he has taken part with his famous
Author, F. Bugg, to whom the Answer was given, on which he grounds his black
Charge against me, Of Justifying Diabolical Suggestions, etc. In which Answer I
expressly declare thus, viz. His Accusation that the Quakers Insinuate, in a
Book called The Quakers Refuge, That What the true Prophets spoke was false,
and What the false Prophets spoke was true, p. 47. New Rome Vnm. p. 23. We
disown these Expressions, and I think they are not duly inferred from the said
Book, questioning whether some Words were not spoken by wicked Men, some by
wise Men, ill applied; some by good Men, ill expressed, etc. Now, at my saying,
Yet this questioned but of some Words in Scripture, not all; he takes occasion
to Rail fearfully against me, as a Justifier of Diabolical Suggestions. When my
Answer was not with the least intent to oppose or lessen the Authority of the
Sacred Scriptures; but in direct opposition to F. Bugg's Calumny, in these
general, odious, and false Expressions, viz. That the Quakers insinuate, that
What the true Prohets spoke, was false. Which Expressions we utterly deny, as
both in themselves grossly false, against the true Prophets, and falsely charged
on the Quakers, to defame them.

And as to the Questions cited out of the Quak. Refuge, at which Offense is
taken, 1. They are not mine. 2. I do not believe they are the Author's of that
Quak. Refuge, though Cited by him. 3. It is apparent he does not espouse them
as his own Judgment, nor make them the Matter in that present Controversy, nor
resolve them in the Affirmative; but seems to recite and wave them, as
Originally proceeding from some other Person, as I understand. The furthest
that can be drawn from my said Answer to F. B. that may seem offensive (which I
should be sorry for, if 'twere really so) is my seeming to grant the Question,
That in some Words some true Prophets were mistaken. And if this be made an
Offense, I think it is no real one, for I designed none: However, I still
confess, I believe the Record of Scripture to be true. Good Men, and some true
Prophets also have been, and may be mistaken in some things, and have had their
Weaknesses and Failings truly recorded in Scripture; and also their
Deliverances, for good Ends and Admonition to others. Was not Samuel a good Man
and a Prophet, and yet mistaken, when he took Eliab for the Lords Anointed? 1 Samuel 16.6, 7. And in the Argument upon Job in the ancient Bible, is marked,
That Job maintains a good Cause, but handles it evil. Again, his Adversaries
have an evil Matter, but they defend it craftily. Moreover, he was assured that
God had not rejected him; yet through his great Torments and Afflictions, he
burst forth into many Inconveniences both of Words and Sentences. See the
Argument at large.

And was not the Prophet Elijah mistaken when he thought himself alone, or none
in Israel but himself, that was zealous for the Lord God of Hosts? But what
says the Answer of God unto him? I have reserved unto my self seven thousand
Men, that have not bowed the knee to Baal, 1 King. 19.10, 18. Romans 11.3, 4. And
to say but little of the Old Prophet that persuaded the Young Prophet, contrary
to the Word of the Lord, 1 King. 13. I could instance Jonas, David, and several
others that were good Men, who had some Weaknesses and Mistakes in Words and
Actions, yet the Lord was good to them and helped them, according to the
Integrity of their Hearts toward him. And these Things being truly recorded in
Scripture for Instruction and Admonition, we truly esteem the Scripture-Record
thereof. And even where the Words, Lies, Blasphemies and Actions of the Devil,
wicked Men and Persecutors, and the Judgments which befell them, are recorded in
the Scriptures, we own the Record or History thereof to be true, and highly
esteem it for Instruction and Warning to Men. And to distinguish between the
Words of God in Scripture, and the Words of the Devil, is but what the
Scripture it self does, which can be no Contempt to it; for I have known some
stumble, by some of the Priests making no distinction, but calling all that is
written in Scripture the Word of God; as one that was the Mayor of Thetford
near forty Years ago, told me, That a Priest wanting Induction into the vacant
Benefice, and preaching there for Approbation, took his Text out of the Words
wherewith the Devil tempted Christ, Mat. 4. And bidding the People hearken to
the Word of God, as they should find it written in such a Chapter and Verse;
whereupon this Person that told me of it was so offended, that he would not
give his Voice to choose the said Priest, because he had told them, that was the
Word of God, which was the Words of the Devil. Now let none be so disingenuous
as to take this as in Contempt of the Holy Scripture, Doctrine or Precepts
therein; for where either the Words, Blaspemies, wicked Actions or Persecutions
of the Devil or Men, are therein mentioned, the Record thereof is true, and in
Testimony against them, and the intent of such Record holy, just and good.

Farther my Accuser tells me, Nor is my Salv^ more ingenuous in the Eleventh
Article. And why so? It is really, say I, contrary to our Faith and Principle,
to make Christ Jesus himself Only a Figure, a Veil or Garment, p. 178. Which
was in direct opposition to his Author F. Bugg's falsely saying, The Quakers
would make Christ only a Figure, a Veil, a Garment, implied by way of Question,
p. 58. New Rome Ar. Here he quarrels with the word Only as with the word Amply,
and accuses me with Equivocating, and that this is but a Negative Confession:
But really George (quoth he) this is not re-assuming your Christian Testimony
in the Affirmative, as thou did promise, etc. still hiding your self in the
Dark in Negatives: But we would know affirmatively, what it is you do profess;
and this thou did promise, and this thou have not performed, p. 179.

Here he accuses me with breach of Promise; but very falsely, as in the said
11th Article it is plain, that my Confession of Christ Jesus himself, is not
only Negative but affirmative, namely, He being the Substance and End of all
Figures, Types and Shadows. Is not this Affirmative, pray? And as remote from
Truth is his accusing the Quakers Books of calling Christ Jesus a Type or
Figure of their Light within, p. 183. I know no such Books of the Quakers that
so call Christ Jesus A Type of our Light within, but that he is our Light,
which has inlighten'd us among the rest of Mankind.

It Is implied by way of Question, That Christ clothed himself in Flesh and
Blood, and that he took Flesh, etc. for so (quoth he) it may be said that our
Soul is clothed with our Body, as with a Garment or Veil. It is not Words, but
the meaning that we contend about, says he, p. 180.

We know best our own Meaning, being well satisfied that it is according to Holy
Scripture. Where Is then the defference? he then quarrels with our Meaning, not
with the Words here, but elsewhere; he does as his Author F. Bugg has done with
the words Veil and Garment, in J. P's Question to Professors: But this Author
yields the Point, he assents to both; As our Soul is clothed with our Body, as
with a Garment or Veil; and so of Christ. Which warrants J. P's Question
against his Author F. B. and himself, at least so far as not to make a Subject
of any further Contention against us.

Again, my Accuser brings a heavy, black Charge upon me in these Words, Ibid.
p. 180. viz. In this same 11 th Article we are now upon, after your full and
Affirmative Declaration (before he would have it Negative) you s^bborn Two
Texts as Favorers of your damnable Heresy before-told, yet (say you, slily)
his Flesh was called the Veil, Heb. 10. And he took upon him the form of a
Servant, and was made like unto Men, and was found in the (...), Shape or
Figure of a Man, Phil. 2.6, 7. And then exclaims, Ah George! George! I could
forgive thee any thing but this: What! put upon us at this rate!

It seems my citing those Two Texts, and alleging them to prove that the word
Veil was applied to Christ's Flesh which he took upon him, and the Word (...),
Shape or Figure of a Man, to the form of his Manhood or outward Man, though I
intended no other than that, without the least Contempt to Christ: Such Words
might be used as they had been by some of our Friends. For this it seems I have
committed such a heinous and unpardonable Crime or Sin, as this my Severe Judge
cannot forgive: This is represented as my highest Offense; and truly I shall
not need seek to him for Absolution or Pardon, nor to be my Confessor: I have a
merciful and faithful High Priest to apply and appeal to; I need not go to
unmerciful and implacable Ones for Pardon; especially such a one as has so
shamefully calumniz'd me with subborning Two Texts as Favorers of damnable
Heresy. How comes this Accuser, in his Fallibility or Uncertainty, thus
severely to condemn me, when he cannot refute Matter of Fact about the Two said
Texts, being alleged in behalf of my Friend's meaning; and not at all with the
least Intention to lessen the Dignity or Glory of the Son of God? No, far be it
from me. And where is my unpardonable Sin in the Application of the Text, Phil.
2? Why he says, George Whitehead brings in the word Figure, which is not in
the English Translation. And what then? But let him have it, he himself makes
it syn^^nimous to Shape, p. 183. And he is forced to let me have it, because he
cannot well deny it, without disparagement to himself. But herein he would
place on me a Mis-application of the Words, [ Who being found in the Shape or
Figure of a Man, etc.] And therefore says, what relation has this to the
calling Christ Jesus a Type or Figure of their Light within, which I have shown
(...) ^ut of the Quake^s Books? And I have denied this as a ^alshood before,
and now declare against (...) manifest Perversion and Injury to me, and m^
Words herein. For as I sincerely disown the Word^ charged, Ibid. viz. The
calling Christ Jesus a Type or Figure of our Light within, so I could not apply
the Words before in the Text, Phil. 2. to have any relation thereto; and much
less as proof of that which I never held: And I know none of us that does so
call Jesus Christ A Type of our Light within, he being the Fountain thereof.
Nor that Christ is Only a Figure, as falsely charged by F. Bugg. Which
Perversion, so far as I can find, was first forged from these Words, in the
Book Readiness Errand, viz. Christ in the Flesh without them, is their Example or
Figure; which is both one. For his being their Example, 1 Pet. 2.21. and 4.1.
and 1.15. and John 13.15. are quoted. See also Luke 2.31. he was called a Sign.
Now hence to say he was Only a Sign, were a Gross Perversion; Christ was our
Example. Now hence to say he is nothing else but an Example, were an Abuse and
to lessen his Dignity, and a variation from the Sense; as our Adversary has
done upon Trus^ of his Author F. Bugg; upon his False Report, which is besides
all Justice, Morality and (...) Proceedings. Now the Question is, Whether
Figure may be made synonimous to Example, for the words Example or Figure, as
before? I conceive it may. For Type or Figure sometimes points a thing to come,
as in Romans 5.14. who was the (...), Figure of him that was to come. And
sometimes Type or Figure denotes a present Example or Pattern, as in Phil.
3.17. Mark them which walk so, as ye have us for (...), Example. And the same
word is used in 2 These. 3.9. and 1 Timothy 4.12. and Titus 2.7. and 1 Cor. 10.11.
only in different Cases or Terminations. And the word (...), an Example or
Type, John 13.15. Heb. 9.23. Thus Example or Type are made synonimous in T. C's
Lexicon, and the like in Crit. Sacr. but more fully explained; for there (...),
i. e, Exemplum, Exemplar, Triplicem habet in Scriptura significatum. 1.
Significat Typum seu Figuram rerum, vel praeteritarum, Heb. 8.5. vel futurarum,
Heb. 9.23. 2. Exemplum imitationis, John 13.15. 1 Timothy 4.12. Titus 4.7. 3.
Exemplum Monitionis, sive Cautelae, ut 2 Pet. 2.6.

i. e. Exemplum, Exemplar, has a threefold Signification in Scripture. 1. It
signifies a Type or Figure of Things, either past or to come. 2. An Example of
Imitation. 3. An Example of Warning or Caution.

Now see how synonimously the Terms Type, Figure, Pattern and Example, are
rendered in Scripture, and of what extent, not only in relation to the Types
under the Law, but in some respect to Christ and his Ministers, though he be also
confessed to be the Antitype, Substance and End of all Legal Shadows, Types and
Figures. But I have not called Christ himself a Type of our Light within, nor
justified the same.

As to my Accuser's Offense at my saying Christ's Flesh is called a Veil, Heb.
10.20. it was to remove an Offense taken against my Friend J. P. for using the
same. And it would have become this Adversary to have forborne his blasphemous
Scoffing at my Light; as, George, if thy Light has hitherto forgot to tell
thee, I bless the Lord my God, who is my Light, Life and Salvation; he has
shown me the new and living way of the New Covenant, which our blessed Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ consecrated, prepared or set open through the Veil, that is
to say, his Flesh; yea, through his Sufferings and Death, as being the
Testator, he has enforced that New Testament or Second Covenant; he took away
the First, that he might establish the Second; and so has opened the Passage
into eternal Life, into the Holiest of Holies within the Veil, and beyond all
the Shadows and Veils under the Law.

It was in the most Holy Place within the Second Veil in the Tabernacle, which
was called the Holiest of all in the Old Covenant, that the golden Censor and
Ark of the Testament were put, and the Golden Pot which had Manna, and Aaron 's
Rod that had budded, and the Tables of the Testament, and over the Ark the
Cherubims of Glory shadowing the Mercy-Seat, Heb. 9. Exodus 26. So the most
excellent things were within the Veil, though there was a Beauty and Glory also
without it.

All which, I doubt not were Shadows of the New Covenant, and the Spiritual
Dispensation thereof in Christ Jesus, in whom the Most Holy Place of that
Divine Service and Worship (in the New Covenant-Sanctuary which the Lord has
placed in the midst of his People) is in the Spirit and in the Truth. And all
our Spiritual Blessings and Heavenly Treasures are in Christ Jesus, who is our
Sanctuary and Hiding Place.

And it is in the inmost, or most inward and Spiritual Dispensation of the New
Covenant, that Mercy and Forgiveness is received, and Christ most livingly and
effectually known to us and enjoyed; and in him the most holy and heavenly
Places, wherein the true Spiritual Believers sit down with him; and as being
washed from their Sins in his Blood by his Spirit, are his Church and Sanctuary
also, and thereby have boldness to enter into the Holy Place, even by that new
and living Way (which Christ has prepared for us through the Veil, that is to
say, his Flesh, Heb. 10.) that we may follow him therein into Heaven it self.
And what entrance through Christ our Mediator we have here in Measure received
into this new and living Way, and Holy and Heavenly Places in him, we doubt not
but it is to us an Earnest of a more full Enjoyment of Heaven and Glory
hereafter, with Christ Jesus our Forerunner, Leader and Captain of our
Salvation, we continuing faithful to the end in this his new and living Way, as
true and constant Followers of him.

God in his great Love and Wisdom has afforded several Dispensations, one
higher and more glorious than another, in order to bring Man nearer and nearer
to himself; as that of the Law, and of Shadows and Types; that of the Prophets;
that of John the Baptist; that of Christ in the Flesh, and that of Christ in
the Spirit and New Covenant, which is higher, more powerful and more glorious
than the former, and therein a more clear knowledge of Christ than in all the
former, wherein there was some Sight of him through Shadows and Veils, but by
his Divine Light shining in our Hearts God is pleased to give us the Light of
the knowledge of his Glory in the Face of his dear Son Christ Jesus, that we
all with open Face, as in a Glass, may behold the Glory of God, and be changed
into the same Image from Glory to Glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor.
3.18. and Chapter 4.6, 7.

Now, though our Adversary has made a deal of Dispute and Quarrel with us about
calling Christ's Flesh the Veil, as in Heb. 10. yet he is fain to grant, That
Christ's Body is called a Veil in Relation to its Type, the Veil of the Temple,
p. 182. but he will have this not to be in the Quakers Sense. They call it a
Veil; that is (says he) a Garment, in contra-distinction to its being Christ's
Substance, and of his Nature. Whereas it is rather in contra-distinction to its
Being, his Divine Nature, or to its Being in the first place, or principally or
chiefly Christ himself (who is the Son of God) for whom the Body was prepared,
because he did pre-exist it, or was in Being before he took upon him that Body,
even in his Father's Glory before the World began, wherewith he is Glorified.
However, the Veil, which was Christ's Flesh, (through which he set open the new
and living Way) we never deny to be Christ's Body, or to be a real Body, but
own it was; and never believed it be a Fantastical Body, as I have often said;
but that Christ the Son of God took upon him real Flesh and Blood of our
Nature, yet pure and incorrupted in him. And as his Flesh was called the Veil,
it answers its Type or Figure, i. e. the Veil of the most Holy Place, or Oracle
where God gave Answers, 1 Kings 6.20. and 8.6, 8. and 2 Chronicles. 3.10, 16. And
these Most Holy Places in the Tabernacle and Temple, being Places of Divine
Service, then peculiar to the High Priest to enter into, their Antitype is in
Christ Jesus, the New Covenant, where in Spirit and in the Truth, God is truly
worshipped, and meets with (and speaks to) his People, even by Christ Jesus
their High Priest, who is present in the midst of his Church and Assemblies of
his People, the true and Spiritual Worshippers, who meet in his Name, Spirit
and Power, whose Light and Truth brings its Followers unto his Holy
Tabernacles, Psalm. 43.3.

And as to Christ's Substance and Nature, what does our Opposer mean thereby?
how has he distinguished in this Point? Christ has in him a Divine Nature, as
well as that of Man, which he has also in the purest Sense. But which is the
greatest? Is not the Divine Nature, the Deity in him, greater than the Manhood?
As he said, My Father is greater than all, greater than I, John 10.29.
Nevertheless, as our great and only Mediator and Intercessor, it was necessary
he should be Man, as he is the most glorious, heavenly Man; and as the Christ
of God he is Spiritually in Us, in the Saints and Members, in some measure, by
his Spirit, Light, Life and Power, even as the incorruptible, immortal Seed in
Man is of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost; and therein all true spiritual
Believers do in measure partake of the Divine Nature, being born again of this
incorruptible Seed.

SECT. XXIII. Some Reflections by G. W. upon A Supplement, pretended, upon
occasion of his Answer to the Snake in the Grass, p. 343.
THE very Entrance into the said Supplement consisting of diverse Falsehoods, I
need take the less notice thereof, and spend the less time in its strict
Examination, besides the Reproaches, Detractions, Contempt and Scorn, cast upon
my self, by the Author, are of less value or weight as to me, seeing the
Rancour, Envy, and Foulness of the Spirit from whence they proceed. And I
always thought my self more obliged in Truth's Vindication, than my own
Personal Reputation* having long been armed with so much of Christian Faith,
Patience, and Good Will to my Enemies, as Patiently to endure Persecutions by
Reproach, and cruel Mocking, as well as I have endured by Imprisonments, and
other Hardships.

And now I do not believe the Author of the Snake says true, That he is very
well pleased with the said Answer. I am persuaded the contrary, That he is very
much vexed, by having his Falsehoods in many things so much detected, as they
are in the Answer or Antidote. His following Reason for his being so very well
pleased with the said Answer, is as notoriously false, as the rest of his Lies,
viz. Because it confirms all the Matters of Fact to every purpose and intent,
for which they were produced. To evince the Falsehood whereof, I refer the
Ingenuous Reader to the said Antidote, for his Impartial Perusal. I doubt not
but this Man's Purpose and Intent, in producing the Matters of Fact alleged
against us, was chiefly, that they should be given Credit to, and that the
People called Quakers, (their Ministers especially) might lie under all his
gross and foul Imputations and Defamations, of being Diabolically Inspired and
Possessed, Deluded, Bewitched, Blasphemers, Rebels, Traitors, etc. How
monstrous and improbable then is it, that I by opposing these Matters of Fact
charged, should write to confirm them against our selves? And his following
Words are most notoriously false, viz. That he (i. e. G. W.) had not detected
One False Quotation, of all that I have brought out of their Books.

With what Conscience could this Person so confidently thus Assert, That G. W.
has not detected One False Quotation, etc. Either he has read my said Answer,
or he has not; If he has read it, he must be a shameful Man herein: if he has
not, he must be guilty of great Folly and Injustice. And farther to Detect his
notorious and foul Falsehood in this, I Will produce a few Instances of his many
more false Quotations, detected in my Answer, Antidote, p. 15.16. That one of
the Orders given forth by their Yearly Meeting, 1693. Commands, that None shall
carry Guns in their Ships.

This is proved a false Quotation in my Answer quoted.

2. Antidote, p. 17. That in the Answer to F. Bugg 's Impeachment, they (i. e.
the Quakers) would persuade us, That All they have said against the Payment of
Tithes, was Only meant by them to the Popish Clergy, but by no means against
the Right of the Church of England to their Tithes.

This is plainly detected as a False Quotation, as in my Answer it is declared.
This is Partially and Wrongfully Stated. Our Answer to F. Bugg plainly shows
our Conscientious Dissatisfaction with Tithes in general, and the forcing
thereof now in this Gospel-Day, by any Clergy whatsoever, as not consistent
with the Practice of Christ's Ministers, or Testimony of diverse Martyrs, etc.
See Antidote, p. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.

3. Antidote, p. 25, 26. That G. Fox Professed and Avowed, that he was equal
with God; that he Professed himself to be the Eternal Judge of the World.

Which is also a False Charge and Quotation against G. F. who being charged by
his Persecutors with Professing himself to be equal with God, Positively denies
the Charge, as not so spoken, as that G. F. was equal with God, but that the
Father and the Son are one, and that Christ and the Holy Spirit are equal with
God. Readiness Errand, p. 5, 6. Vid. Just Enquiry, p. 12.

4. Antidote, p. 35, 36. Abusing the Scriptures by the contemptible Names of
beastly Ware, etc.

Which is false both in Charge and Quotation, and over and over detected in
Answer to his Author F. Bugg.

5. Antidote, p. 43. That G. Whitehead, in his Serious Apology, p. 49. prefers
not only their Writings, but their ex tempore Preachments, and even All
whatsoever they speak, upon any account, to the Holy Scriptures themselves.

This also is notoriously false, both in Charge and Quotation, as is manifest
in my Answer, Antidote, p. 43. viz. He very perversely wrongs G. Whitehead, in
all these Expressions; for there is not a Word of Preferring our Writings to the
Holy Scriptures, much less of all whatsoever we speak thereto; but a preferring
the Holy Spirit, and its Immediate Teaching In Man, to the Letter of the
Scripture: and Preaching in the true Sense of the Spirit, with Divine Power and
Authority, (according as Christ did) to the bare reading the Letter, as the
Pharisees did. I may further add, without offense, or under-valuing the Holy
Scripture, or Godly Doctrine therein contained, that I verily believe St. Paul,
and other Apostles Preaching in the Demonstration of the Holy Spirit and Power
of Christ, was of far greater Efficacy, Power and Authority, for the Converting
People to Christ, than the Priests reading their Writings, or making a Trade of
them, as they do in these Days.

6. Antidote, p. 59, 60. That they (i. e. the Quakers) give to themselves, and
to one another, the most peculiar Titles of Christ, as that of the Branch, and
the Star, and the Son of God, which (he says) are Attributed to G. Fox, and
which he takes to himself, Quoting New Rome Arraigned, p. 33, 34. And the
Quakers Unmasked, and New Rome unmasked: Referring the Reader to those Books of
Fran. Bugg's, which he has Quoted upon the Margent, as he says.

Here this Credulous Adversary has accepted and promoted Bugg's False Quotation
and Charge against us, though over and over detected, as his Notorious Refuted
Lies, which this Adversary is (as it is told him in the Antidote) so shamefully
credulous of; and that we positively deny giving those peculiar Titles of
Christ to our selves, or to one another (as he falsely Prates) and Bugg has been
over and over Charged therewith, and cannot Prove them ( i. e. that we) give
those said Titles either to G. F. or to one another, and that G. Fox is not so
much as mentioned in that Epistle of E. Buroughs, out of which those Titles,
the Branch, the Star, and the Sun of Righteousness, are taken, which are
peculiar and intended to Christ, and no other.

Serious Reader, these few Instances of our Adversaries false Quotation
(besides many more which are clearly Detected in my said Antidote, in Answer to
him) I hope are sufficient to evince his Falsehood, in Asserting, That Geo.
Whitehead has not detected One false Quotation that he has brought out of our
Books. When the contrary is evident, that he has both made and accepted many
false, even grossly false Quotations, pretended out of our Books, etc. And if to
detect such was the only proper Answer that could have been given (as he says)
then he had that proper Answer, at least in a good degree in the Antidote, and
now more fully since he has so much altered and magnified his Structure ( i. e.
the Snake) therefore the Reader may not now securely depend upon the Quotations
he has produced (as he would have him) if he should think he may securely
depend upon them, he is very insecure, and will be deceived, and greatly Err,
in depending upon such an inveterate Adversary's false, partial, and unjust
Quotations, as many of them are proved to be, upon a more full Examination and
Detection. And if his Quotations, is in Effect the whole Cause (as he says)
then his Cause is fallacious, rotten and naught; it is of no value or credit. If
his Quotations in diverse principal Matters and Charges against us, be found
false, partial and unjust (as they are) what is become of his whole Cause? whose
Cause is it to belie, slander, defame, and foully misrepresent others, but the
Devils Cause; which in the Snake in the Grass is strennously prosecuted against
us?

And so insulting and slighting he is of G. W's Answer, casting his Contempt
and Scorn upon both him and it, that a Body would think, 'twere below his
Highness, Learning and Parts, to take so much notice of them, as he seems to
intend. He tells us G. Whitehead's Answer consists of bitter Railing and
Threatening, of very poor and guilty Excuses for some things that are objected
against them; and a total Silence or Forgetfulness of the most Material Points
wherein they were accused of calling this a severe Persecution against them, of
Pleading not Guilty to the Charge, without disproving any part of the Evidence,
p. 361, 362.

To Detect the Falsehoods herein contained, I must refer the Impartial Reader to
my said Antidote, however invalid and impertinent he renders my Answer therein.
How well consistent is he with himself in this his declared Intention? viz.
When I have leisure to consider this Answer of the Quakers, (...) ( step by
step, I suppose he means) which for their Good I do intend, I hope by it, to
put an end to my Pains in this Controversy. But if the Answer be so
Insignificant, very Poor, and without disproving any part of his Evidence, what
need of his further leisure so particularly to consider it, or pains in the
Controversy? But if my Answer require such deep and exact Consideration, it is
an Indication that it is of some weight and validity, and that it does not
consist of such Railing Threats or Evasions, as it is rendered, he must have
leisure farther to study the Points in Controversy, and not to shift them off
with false, partial, and curtailed Quotations; nor with his using Railery, as
he has confessed. If he makes Replication, he should write more cautiously,
than to accumulate Lies against us, which he appears very prone to.

In short (quoth he) It was intended (i. e. G. W's Answer) purely to have it to
say, That there was an Answer to such a Book (meaning to the Snake in the
Grass) and that is enough with the Quakers, who are not permitted to read the
Books that are written against them, and receive as Gospel whatever their
Rabbis Dictate.

This is Ridiculous and False, as all that know us will own.

1. As if our Answer were no Answer at all, but only intended to have it to say
there was an Answer.

2. And that this so saying (though no Truth in it) is enough with the Quakers:
Thus credulous he unjustly renders the Quakers.

3. That they are not permitted to read the Books that are written against
them, is such a notorious known Lie, that Thousands of the Quakers can testify
against it; besides, many think themselves obliged to understand, what our
Adversaries write against us, whether any new Matter, or only what is old,
obsolete, rusty, nasty Stuff, that has been long since thoroughly Examined and
Answered, like such Stuff as Bugg and the Snake have frequently reiterated, to
spit and vomit abroad their Venom, Rancour, and Deadly Malice against the
People of God, in derision termed Quakers.

And how can we, the said People, reasonably suppose that such inveterate
Adversaries can (in such their Pains against us to reproach us) design any such
Christian Duty toward us, as to contribute their Pains to open our Eyes, and
save us from destruction both of Soul and Body? p. 351. (as this bitter
Adversary says for himself) supposing us under Delusion and Blindness, by our
Infallible Guides, as he often derides them. Or, with what Conscience can this
Envious Adversary say, That he has (...) other Design (or sincerely say so
before God) (...) our Good and Salvation? When he has publicly defamed and
reproached us; as Blasphemers against God, Christ, and Holy Scriptures; Enemies
to Government, deluded, bewitched, possessed with the Devil: as if we were not
fit to live upon Earth, or under any Civil Government, then demurely to tell
us, I will venture their Displeasure, rather than fail in my Christian Duty
toward them, to contribute my Pains to open their Eyes and save them, etc.

Oh Snake! thou have shown thy Venom, thou have been long hissing at us, we'll
not believe this thy now Fawning and Hypocritical Pretenses; whose Treatment of
us, like as if Rude Persons should smite us on the Face, and gather all the
Dirt they can out of Kennels, and throw on our Faces, Eyes and Clothes, and
then tell us, Oh! we love you; what we do unto you, and all this Pains we
bestow upon you, it is all in Christian Duty to you, to open your Eyes, and
save you from Destruction, both of Soul and Body; we have no other Design than
your Good and Salvation! And to make us believe they are Sincere herein,
Presumptuously so tell us before God.

And now that the Reader may not take the Man's Supplement wholly upon Trust,
he pretends here to give him a Specimen of the Truth of what he says; behold
what special Specimens he gives against G. W. viz. p. 351.

I. First then, he wholly passes by what one would think a Material Objection
against them of the manifest Possessions of many of them, and some of their
chief Preachers, by the Devil, which was in the beginning of the Preface: But
he (i. e. G. W.) says nothing to this, nor reckons it as any of the Mistakes,
Abuses, or Calumnies in the Snake; for having made a Catalogue of these (as he
endeavors to prove them) he begins at Page 93. of the Preface, and so goes on;
whereby we may reasonably suppose he found none such in what went before.

To which I reply, This his Specimen is as false as his material Objection and
Charge, Of Manifest Possessions by the Devil. For, 1. It Is false that I wholly
pass by, and said nothing to the same in my Answer. 2. That I did not reckon it
any of the Mistakes, Abuses, or Calumnies in the Snake, etc. For though I made
a Catalogue of some of the great Mistakes, Abuses, and Calumnies in the Snake:
It was but of some of them in that Catalogue, beginning at Page 93, of his
Preface to the Snake: and before that I begin at Page 7, 8, 9, 17. of the first
Edition of the Snake; and was so far from passing by his said Objection of
manifest Possessions by the Devil, etc. that I declare his great Injustice,
false Reflections, black Characters and Charges upon the Quakers therein,
together with his absurd way of Arguing, and Falacy to prove the same, as
evidently appears in my Answer ( i. e. my Antidote) from the second to the
twelfth Page thereof, to which I refer the Reader for Satisfaction, and how far
short he is of Proof, that either we, or our Preachers, are Possessed by the
Devil, because of any of their Quaking or Trembling (alleged against them) as
both Holy Prophets and other Saints, and Christians have done, by the Word and
Power of God, and not from any Diabolical Possession: And he can no more prove
such Exercise among us to proceed from the Devil, than he can prove the visible
Possessions of many Quakers by the Devil (as he falsely styles his 21. Sect.) or
than his Mr. Firmin, or Thomas Tillam, whose Story is quoted in the same
Section, p. 297, 298, 299. could demonstrate his seeing the Devil shake the
Quakers, like as a Dog does shake a Hog, etc.

But if this Author has ever seen any visible Possessions of Quakers by the
Devil, I would ask him in what Shape or Form he saw the Devil at any time so
visibly Possess or Act them? I never heard that T. Tillam could tell, when
questioned about it at Colchester, though he raised the Story, as Richard Thomas
of Hartford, who was present, can give further account.

II. As to all he objects in his 18th Sect. of The Quakers manifold Treasons
against the King, of their taking Arms and Fighting against him for Oliver and
the Rump, etc. their vigorous opposing the Restoration of King Charles to the
very last, etc. p. 352.

Hereupon G. W. is blamed for Answering all this in a few words, p. 24. of his
Antidote, viz. We need but answer these with Negation and Detestation, as being
most foul Raileries, proceeding from a Spirit of Persecution and deadly Malice
which the Righteous Lord will Rebuke.

Which I am still persuaded he will, though the Snake-Author hereupon thus
Reviles, viz. They cannot refrain their Trade in blasphemous and cursed
Prophecies; which among many other odious Revilings, I leave to the just
cognizance of the Great and Righteous Judge of all: The Man's charging manifold
Treasons, taking up Arms and Fighting, etc. upon the Quakers, I still deny as a
general and gross Calumny upon that People; yet supposing some before they were
Quakers, or so reputed, and before they were in Society with that People, were
in Arms against the King, as many of other Persuasions were, and yet some were
dissatisfied with Monarchy, or afraid of the consequence thereof; whilst they
were under a Common Wealth's Government and Principles: it follows not that the
People called Quakers must be concluded thereby, as either guilty of manifold
Treasons, Fightings, Murder or Regicide; such absurd kind of unnatural
Inferrences against the Quakers, I had reason to give my Negation against, as
neither Just nor Reasonable, but altogether the contrary. And the Truth of it
is, I looked upon his said 18th Sect. so extremely Malicious, and so Repugnant
to the Act of Indemnity; even that of King Charles the Second, and diverse
others since (if any charged were culpable.) And much of the Substance of the
said 18th Sect. being answered in my Book, Entitled, Christ's Lambs defended
from Satan's Rage. That I thought my self the less concerned, again to enter
into the Particulars of the said extremely Malicious Section, but to refer him
and the Reader to my Treatise of Christ's Lambs, etc. However in my Antidote,
referring thereto, there is more of Answer in this case, than is cited in the
Snake, being full of Partiality and Curtailizing in Citation, as well as of
Perversion, and Absurd Defamation.

And if no authority of Bugg's be quoted at all, for the charges before
mentioned, (as he says) it is for diverse others, which are very false.

I find in his said 18th Sect. Quakers Unmasked, p. 4. Is quoted on the same
Subject. And if this Quaker's Unmasked, was John Pe^nyman's, and not F. Bugg's,
then 'twas my oversight (which I shall not excuse) which might easily happen
from the near resemblance they have upon the same subject. J. P. begun it
against us, and the other follows it in diverse Books, upbraiding us about O. C.
and his Army and the Government.

And the Snake in his 8th Sect. quotes F. Bugg's New Rome Arraigned, and New
Rome Vnmask^d, p. 109.111. and note that two Years after F. B. left our
Communion, and joined himself to the Church of England, he published a Book,
styled The Quakers Detected, wherein he confesses to the Truth of our Doctrine
and Ministry of the Light, as a Dispensation of the Love of God, sent as a
Visitation to Mankind, and to our Christian Communion, Love and Conversation,
and that God blessed our Meetings, with the comfortable enjoyment of his
Presence, etc.

But being gone from the same, he complained against our Friends, p. 8. as if
they had Sold him into Egypt as Joseph was, applying to himself his words to
his Brethren, Genesis 50.20. and 45.4, 5. viz. But can say (i. e. F. B. can say)
as Joseph did to his Brethren, Genesis 50.20. But as for you, ye thought Evil
against me, but God meant it unto Good, now therefore be not Grieved, nor
Angry, with your selves that ye Sold me hither. Thus F. Bugg after he was
turned into the Church of England.

And finding both J. P. Bugg and Crisp, run much in one strain of Enmity
against us; and their Authorities quoted and so much valued in the Snake; 'twas
the more easy to mistake one for another, as to the Titles of their Angry
Books: However, their work so much agreeing and resembling, to take one for
another in Writing quick, as it is no great Crime, so it is no great Damage to
any of them, supposing Quakers Unmasked, be put for Quakers Detected, or for
New Rome Unmasked: And so Bugg's authority for J. Pennyman's; his excuses not
his Partial credulity of either of them, wherein they are a-like invective. But
a greater Injury than this is done the Quakers in Quotation. I find a Pamphlet,
styled, Some of the Quakers Principles, over and over quoted against us in the
Snake, Sect. 7. Which being thus quoted as The Quakers Principles, some may
therefore take it to be a True and Real Account of our own, when that Pamphlet
(as I take it to be the same) is but a nameless Libel, to abuse us with Partial
Quotations and Perversions; and it is answered in my Just Inquiry, Printed,
1693.

And that I have not endeavored to deceive the Reader, as p. 354. in that I
did not perceive he took notice of my Answers to F. B. or J. P. in their black
Charges relating to Treasons, etc. my Conscience excuses me; and that the
mistake the one for the other, was no designed Injury to either, nor yet to
this their Credulous Advocate.

And as to my Answer to John Pennyman, Entitled, Christ's Lambs defended, etc.
However slighted by this Adversary, as Impertinent Shuffling, etc. There is
more in it to purpose and to the same subject of his 18th Sect. than he is able
to answer, I am persuaded, though not to all he quotes upon G. Bishop, which I
had not read out of his own Books, that I remember, neither have I those Books
or Papers of G. B's relating to State Affairs or Government.

And what though John Pennyman does not mention his large Quotations out of G.
B's Works, Ibid. It follows not that my Book, Christ's Lambs, etc. contains not
an Answer to the Substance or most Material part of his said 18th Section,
which I still think it does.

It is very Remarkable how confident the Snake is in notorious Falsehoods, as in
what follows, p. 355. viz. For to tell thee the Truth, George I have undergone
the Penance of reading over thy ^edious Answer to John Pennyman, Even thy
Christ's Lambs, and there is not one word in it, from Top to Bottom, one tittle
to the purpose; but such Shuffling and Cutting, as in this present Answer to
the Snake. Only thus much it serves for, that you may have it to say, there is
an Answer to such a Book, etc.

Thus by the Lump he has passed his false Sentence upon my said Answer to J. P.
as not one word or tittle of it to the purpose; but as if both it and my Answer
to the Snake (i. e. my Antidote) were made up of Shuffling and Cutting, etc.
and that only they may serve ^s for the Name of an Answer: But if the first was
so very Impertinent, Why did not John Pennyman make Reply, and clear himself,
by showing its Invalidity? And if the latter, i. e. the Antidote, be so very
silly, and of no V^lidity, (...) comes i^ that this Author is so deep^^ (...)
at it, as that when he has leasur^ (...) ^onsider it, (...), he intends it, p.
350.

It appears he has passed judgment on it by wholesale, without such
consideration, but what need of any such strict and particular consideration or
replication, if it be so si^ly and impertinent, ^s he renders it, Liars have
need of good Memories, to make all their Falsehoods hang together.

His Black Charge of Traitorous Principles and Actions, Blasphemies and
Treasons, Blasphemers and Traitors, etc. which I took notice of in the
Antidote, p. 24. was not only upon particular Persons, but as extended against
the Quakers in General, wherein he showed the greater Injustice and Malice,
seeing what he calls Their Traitorous abetting Oliver and the Rump, many
Thousands of the People called Quakers were then Unborn in his day, and chose
that warred under him, though they did it from a Principle of Conscience, it was
before they were Quakers, and those of them that believed, there was for a time
a Providence of God with him, and his Army, in a way of ^^dgment* whereby they
were a Terror to their Adversaries; their (...) therein, is no ways (...) the
Snake's Hissing at, or against them on that account, unless he can prove that
God had no hand in that Judgment, and those Revolutions, and over-Turnings.

That the then Clergy abetted Oliver, and highly applauded him and his Son
Richard, as their Moses and Joshua, etc. He denies not, but says, As for the
then Clergy (as he calls them) let the Quakers and them reckon about their
Equal Treasons and Rebellion. The Clergy of the Church of England are not
herein concerned, they then suffered for their King and with him, p. 356.

Observe here, 1st. In the first place the Quakers still without Exception are
charged with Treasons and Rebellion, and the then Clergy charged Equally with
them therein, so that those of his Brethren do not escape his foul hands, no
more than the Quakers, though the latter cannot be justly charged with those high
applauses which the other gave to O. C. and his Son.

2 d. In the next place, he will not now own them for the Clergy of the Church
of England, who were the Clergy in their time; but only those few that suffered
for the King, and with Him: And what then does he think of the Clergy now? Who
are the Clergy of the Church of England, but those that have the Tithes, and
get into the Pulpits, as did those in O. C's time? But perhaps this Incendiary
may have as much against the present Clergy and Government, as against them;
only he hides and dares not utter it as yet: What he and such Sowers of Discord
may hereafter do (if they have opportunity) may be nearly guessed at by the
course he now takes.

He Quarrels with us now about Past-times and Pro^idence, which neither he, nor
his Brethren of the Clergy, nor we either could avoid, no nor help; if he were
now more disposed to a peaceable and charitable Mind, and Conversation toward
others; it would bespeak more of Christianity, than to Quarrel and upbraid
others about former Transactions and Revolutions, wherein Divine Providence
overruled Men's Contrivances and Actions; considering, that the most high Rules
in, and over the Kingdoms of Men, and he gives them to whomsoever he pleases,
Dan. 4.6. and none can stay his hand, or may say to him, What do thou? None
may charge him with Treason or Rebellion; neither do the Instruments (he makes
use of) act merely of themselves, nor is it just to upbraid or condemn others
unconcerned for their actions as this Incendiary does us.

And it is observable what a Valliant Warrier this Author of the Snake appears,
in his so severely Cudgelling Cromwell, and Banging the Rump, and Paying off
the Old Army, and Insulting over them, now so many Years after they are Dead
and laid Aside; and not only so, but upbraiding the Living, and unconcerned
with their concerns, when as he and his Brethren of the now Clergy, should
rather be humbled, and humbly consider the Cause and Reason of those
Revolutions, and of the Judgment of War, and Devouring Sword, why they came to
pass, or were suffered, Had God no hand therein think they? Many Men of
Judgment and Valor have other considerations thereof, than now to Boast and
Insult over the Dead. I doubt not but some yet alive can remember upon what
Principle, and for what end they acted, whom he bitterly commemorates and
inveighs against, and how Religiously inclined in their way, I have had
credible Information from some of that Old Army, and how they were often
Preaching and Praying, when many of the other were Drinking, Swearing, Cursing
and Damning, and what Service did they thereby do for the King when they came
to Engage? Were not such sometimes upon a Shout ready to run for it? Did God go
forth with their Armies then? What was the cause of Israel's Fleeing before
their Enemies when they Fled? Was it not their having forsaken the Lord, that
he went not forth with their Armies? Psalm. 44.9.

But, says the Man, The Clergy of the Church of England then suffered for
their King, and with him?

Did they so; how many of them pray? Did not many of them turn Presbyterian,
and from Episcopacy? And many of them since, from Presbytery to Episcopacy, to
save their Benefices? Are such then steady Pillars, or Martyrs of Jesus Christ,
under any Suffering? Or, did the Suffering of some few, for and with the King,
prove them such Martyrs? And if any Quakers have told the World they were
always Loyal and True, I don't believe that they, as a People, are justly
chargeable with Lying or Dissimulation therein, but that they were sincere in
their Minds and Intentions; and do bear no Ill Will, Hatred or Treachery, in
their Hearts toward the King, or any Man else, but Love and Good Will.

This Adversary thus Query's: But what means George by bringing me under the
Lash of the Act of Indemnity? What Quaker, or Quakerly affected Council, drew
up this Answer for him? p. 356.

Answ. 1. I meant ad hominem, to show this pretended Loyal Person, how disloyal
he is, in violating the Act of Indemnity, in case any among us were Indemnified
thereby, from any former Misdemeanors: Let him retort as he pleases, I look
on it as a very unwarrantable Act in him (without occasion given him by us) to
violate that Act, and the Reason and good Intention thereof, in his Strenuous
Endeavors, to stir up Animosities against us, as a People, from those old
Transactions and Offenses (though not ours) which were Indemnified or Pardoned
long since.

2. And I had no Quaker, or Quakerly affected Counsel (as he scornfully calls
it) in my Lashing him with the Act of Indemnity, but singly I argued, Secundum
Hominem, to show and check the Man's Presumptuous Folly and Envy against us, as
a People, when we had given no real occasion of Offense or Provocation.

And as to his retorting, viz. But if past Faults must not now be so much as
remembered, was it not as great an Incroachment upon the Act of Indemnity, for
the Quakers to upbraid the other Dissenters, the Presbyterians, Independents,
etc. with their Treasons and Rebellions, fighting Principles, the Quakers being
as Guilty in all these as themselves. etc. p. 356, 357.

Rep. The Quakers still! he must needs show his Spite and Venom against the
Quakers still in general, and without exception; suppose any one formerly,
either upon some Provocation or Occasion of this kind given (as by some
enviously charging the Quakers with Justifying the late War against the King)
has somewhat Retaliated upon them their Fighting Principles, etc. This is not
justly chargeable upon the Quakers, without Exception, neither do they own
those Fighting Principles, nor do I allow of upbraiding others with those
former Transactions of War, which are Legally Indemnified, unless it be upon
occasion first given to stop their upbraiding others, when they themselves were
more deeply guilty and concerned; or upon occasion of their former Persecutions
against us, and putting our Friends to Death in New England, which
Blood-sheding for Religion no Act of Indemnity can justly Indemnifie.

But First, As I deny that the Quakers do so upbraid the other Dissenters with
Treasons and Rebellions.

2. So I deny that the Quakers themselves are guilty in all these (i. e.
Seditions, Treasons, Fighting Principles, etc.) as we are unjustly aspersed.

Though his Beloved Confederate, Associate, G. K. in his Way cast up, p. 23,
52, 53, 54. In p. 23. He tells of Presbyterians so much using the arm of flesh
and blood, to carry on that which they judged a Reformation. And how much
Garments were rolled in Blood, by the Instigation of the Presbyterian Teachers,
the whole Nation was a Witness; so that many thousands were made Widows and
Fatherless, by that War they stirred up the People unto, expressly contrary to
the Nature of the Gospel. And in p. 52. he farther charge them thus, viz. And
the Presbyterian, Nonconformist Teachers, have generally manifested base and
unchristian Cowardice, in running away from their Flocks, through Fear of
Suffering, and exposing them to those they judged Wolves, and some of them are
fled beyond Sea, others lurk in Corners here and there, and keep private
Conventicles, where many times they Preach Sedition against their Lawful
Prince, by Instigation of whom that Insurrection happened, 1666.

And in p. 53. He further adds, viz. And some of them have Printed Books in
Defense of the Lawfulness of making War against the Supreme Magistrate, in
order to Re-establish the Presbyterian Government, a way flat contrary to the
nature of the Gospel, to the express Commands of Christ.

And in p. 54. G. K. goes on with a more general, and very high Charge, viz.
And in very Truth (quoth he) the Presbyterian Church will never be able to
purge her self of the Iniquity of the Killing of many Thousands in the Three
Nations, by the Occasion of a most bloody War, raised up through the
Instigation of the Presbyterian Teachers. I am fully persuaded of it, that the
Presbyterian Church has as much blood-guiltiness lying on her Head, unwashed
off, as any People called a Church, that I know of, in the World, next unto the
Bloody Church of Rome!

Thus far G. Keith, against the Presbyterian Ministers and Church.

However, seeing the Snake-Author does not deny, but such kind of remembering
former Animosities and Offenses, as are Indemnified by the Acts of Indemnity,
must needs be to offend and incroach upon the said Acts: How then does he save
himself from Self-condemnation, in the case for his own Presumptuous and
Insolent Incroachment and Violation thereupon? Is not the Snake herein as deep
in the Mire, as he thinks others are in the Mudd? but enough of this (as he
says)

As to that great Charge of the Snake against us, That the height of our
Self-advancement, is to be equal even to God, to be one Person, Substance, and
Soul with God, etc. p. 357.

To this he renders my Answer also defected, as not denying one of the
Quotations; when he has produced no Quotations out of the Quakers Writings,
that either say, they so advance themselves to be one Person with God, or one
Substance with God, or that they themselves are one Soul with God. I asked him
when did ever the Quakers so advance themselves to be One Person, Substance,
Soul with God? We positively deny the Charge, [and the words themselves, (but
only as we are United or Joined to the Lord) we are one Spirit.] This
Parenthesis of my Answer, the Snake now leaves out, to make my Answer
deficient, and his Charge seem good against us. But I further Challenge him to
prove where we, the People, or Persons called Quakers, have so advanced our
selves in these words, namely, that we our selves are One Person and Substance
with God, (and by consequence Essentially Equal even to God.) I still in good
Conscience deny the Assertion; and such self-advancement of the Creature unto
such Equality with its Creator, whatever any among us has said of the Divine
Spirit or Breath of Life, (which made Man a Living Soul) as for the Equality
thereof with God, and as of his Being. I deny that this was ever intended of
the Creature Man, that he was either one Being or Substance with God, or
Essentially Equal with God; for that were to confound Created Beings with the
Increated: Though Man, as made a Living Soul, and created in the Image of God,
had in him something of that Divine Nature and Being, which gave Him, his Life
and Being.

I really think I have sufficiently and briefly answered this matter in my
Antidote in diverse places; being a reitterated charge of Blasphemy (falsely)
against the Quakers, that they so advance themselves as aforesaid, to be One
Person and Substance with God. A body would think the Man should have proved
these very words of the Charge upon us, or else not so often repeat it, with
aggravations, as he has shamefully done in such Expressions as these, viz. that
he does not think that any humane Government can be secure of Men, in whose
Power it is to scrue themselves up to such blasphemous heights of Enthusiasm,
(which he deems the height of Madness) which I took notice of, and justly
reprehended in my Antidote, p. 87, 88.

And I dare further add, in order to clear our Principle of Sinless Perfection,
as attainable through the Grace of God in Jesus Christ: That although we own an
Essential Equality between our Heavenly Father, His Son and Holy Spirit, and
not such an Equality between the creature Man and his Creator; yet such a
nearness and likeness between the Heavenly Father and his Dear Children, as
perfection of Holiness and Purity, if they attain to the fulfilling of these
Doctrines, Be ye Perfect, (or as some have it) ye shall therefore be Perfect,
even as your Father which is in Heaven is Perfect, Matt. 5.48. And be ye
merciful as your Heavenly Father is merciful, Luke 6.36. And every one that
has this Hope in him, purifieth himself even as he is pure, 1 John 3.3. And if
any among us has writ of them who are perfect in Christ Jesus, being led by
his Spirit, as in that sense Equal; I understand Equal only as like unto God,
or in Union with him, being united unto him by his Spirit, as he that is joined
to the Lord is one Spirit. Our own Principle and Distinction in these matters
justly considered, I do not think that either my self, or any Friend, whose
sense I explain, deserves Bedlam, as the Snake would infer upon me, p. 358.

III. It Is a positive falsehood, that G. Fox, and the rest of us, do positively
assert all these things charged on him and us before in the Snake (or assent to
his pretended Proofs thereof) p. Ibid. Where does he or we positively assert of
our selves, that we are One Person or Substance with God? I find not these
words asserted, but the contrary.

Neither is his Reprinting all his pretended Proofs in his Second Edition of
the Snake, any full Reply to my Answer; wherein I detect his fallaciously
Imposing such Words and Terms upon us, as are none of ours, nor agreeable to
our Principles, as in the beforementioned, and many others.

And as positive a Falsehood it is, That G. Whitehead has omitted all the Proofs
in the Snake, that is almost of the whole Book. The Judicious or Serious Reader
that shall peruse my said Antidote in Answer to the First Edition of the Snake,
may clearly see the Contrary.

But because (quoth he) the Quakers shall not complain of being thus put off, I
do intend to make a particular Reply, and to follow G. Whitehead through every
single Point that he touches for this End especially, that this being the last
cast of the Quakers, and all the defense they have to make, I may so plainly
detect it, as to leave them without Excuse, and by the blessing to convince all
of them except those who are resolved not to be persuaded, though they were
persuaded, but hope to disarm them, etc. p. 358, 359.

Upon all which it is observed, First, On the first part of these pretenses, and
boastings: How comes G. W's Answer either to need or deserve such a particular
Reply, or to be followed through every single Point that he touches. If his
Answer (or said Antidote) be no Answer but the name of an Answer, and nothing
to the purpose but shuffling, etc. as he has already given judgment, p. 355.
though before conviction; it seems it is so much to purpose, that it will make him
some work, if he still think it worthy to prosecute his intention upon, and
that through every single Point too.

Secondly, He Is Egregiously mistaken to conclude it is either the last cast of
the Quakers, or all the defense they have to make; neither may I take upon me
the sole defense of the Quakers (so called) nor do I so abound in my own sense,
as if no other were capable of making any further, or other defense: For God
having diversities of Gifts, has raised up many in defense of his Gospel and
Truth, according to their several Gifts among us, blessed be his Name; and I
hope he will raise up more faithful Witnesses.

Thirdly, What detection or conviction this boasting Person can make or work
upon us by his fallible and lying Spirit may be easily supposed! How shall we
believe that he can work or effect such great matters upon us by his scoffing
at us about the Light and Infallibility, as the Quaker Light and Quaker
Infallibility.

Fourthly, And by what Power or Force thinks he to disarm us of our Armor of
Light, or our Spiritual Weapons? No, no, Neither he, nor the Devil his Master,
the Prince of Darkness shall ever be able to disarm any one that believes in,
and sincerely obeys the Light of Christ amongst us, who are true Children of
the Light. These his empty Boastings, and fruitless Attempts will evaporate and
vanish like Smoke: Let God arise, and his enemies be scattered. Let them also
that hate him, flee before him, as Smoke is driven away, etc. Psalm. 68.2, 3.
and 37.20.

IV. To his Alleging, G. W. in his Answer to Satan Disrobed, bestows not two
leaves upon the Discourse of Water Baptism, nor attempts to answer so much as
one single Objection, or to remove one Stone of that Foundation, upon which the
outward Baptism is built, p. 359.

This is as frivolous and impertinent, as many other his Reflections are false;
for he may see, that upon that Subject I have bestowed five leaves in the
Antidote, p. 116, to 126. wherein his Arguments are detected, and the
Invalidity thereof; and the great Stress he lays upon the Type discovered, and
the thing opened according to Scripture; but his sign of Sprinkling Infants, by
him evaded, and left without defense.

V. My passing by many of the Snake's dirty Stories, and rambling Stuff,
against us; argues not the Quakers way of Answering Books to be Fallacious
Methods; nor that their cause would bear a fair and clear Answer, nor yet any
danger of falling into any Snares the Snake had laid against us, p. 360. For
the reason of my passing by much of his foul dirty Stuff, was singly because I
thought it not worth spending my time, (not having then so much to spare) in
repeating the same, or to follow his frequent repetitions thereof, though I
designed not to prevent any other (that had more time) from a fuller scrutiny
into his abuses, My Antidote was against the Venom, (or most Virulent Parts and
Foul Abuses) of the Snake in the Grass, and not to every Paragraph, nor to each
Section: I finding many (if not most) of them in substance, fully answered long
before in diverse Books of ours. Neither was mine a General and Evasive Answer,
but special and particular, to many particular and chief Objections and
Falsehoods forged against us, as a People, and against diverse and particular
Persons abused by this Adversary: Besides, I have the less reason to value his
Work so far as to take cognizance of every particular Babble, Tattle and Story
in it, seeing he durst not show himself, or his Name to his Work as the Author
thereof. But if he has gone under sundry Names (as some say) 'twill be the more
difficult to find out his true Name.

He tells of the wrathful Proud Spirit of the Quakers, and that there (i. e. in
his First Edition, Sect. V. and Sect. XVII. of his Second Edition of the Snake,
there are some of the most senseless and venomous Expressions against their
Adversaries, that ever came out of the Mouth of Man, while they pretend to be
the very meek of the Earth, etc. But G. W. in his Answer says not a word to
this matter, etc. p. 361.

This Man casts his own Faults in the back end of the Wallet, and those he
thinks he sees in others in the fore end; he forgets what venomous Expressions,
and furious Defamations he has used against others, more especially against the
Quakers, (so called.) Let him review his 18th and 21st Sections, and diverse
others in his Second and Third Edition; and see what sweet Expressions and mild
Language he has treated the Quakers with, as Bloody Devils, Furious Cursed
Spirit, Possessed by the Devil, Quakerism, Conjuration, Witchcraft, and
Conjuration, Enthusiastic Madness, Blasphemers, Traitors, Rebels, etc. cum
multis aliis. Is not this sweet Language trow ye? and rare courtly Treatment to
convince and regain us into the Arms of his Mother Church? and these with
abundance more expressions from a Person, that as he would be thought a Man of
a very Good Nature and Sweet Temper, he commends unto us Kind and Sweet
Expressions, as natural to Love and Good Nature, as Furious, Spightful, Envious
and other grating and violent Passions, do naturally vent themselves in the
like wicked and hateful Ebullitions of a distorted Soul, as in his 17th
Section. But what most senseless and venomous Expressions have the Quakers used
against their Adversaries? He recites some of them (as he thinks them such) in
the same 17th Section of his Second Edition; to show the venom and nastiness of
the Quakers Spirit (as he venomously asperses them,) as the Devil was in thee,
given up to the Devil's Power, Raveners from Christ, Wolves, Dogs, Equivocating
Deluding Hypocrites, Conjurers, Thieves, Robbers, Antichrists, Witches, Devils,
Serpents, Vipers, Ministers of the Devil, etc. And these he puts down as some
of the most Venomous of Quakers Expressions against their Adversaries, to show
the venom and nastiness of their Spirit: Though the most of these Expressions
were Characters given in Holy Scripture to some sorts of wicked People, who
were so greatly degenerated from good Nature and Innocence, as they are said to
be of their Father the Devil, and others were termed dumb Dogs, and greedy Dogs
too, Isa. 56.10, 11. and Ravening Wolves, Generation of Vipers, Serpents, (Mat.
23.33.) Thieves, Robbers, Evil Beasts, Sons o^ the Sorceress, Seed of the
Adulterer and Whore, Isa. 56.10, 11. and Chap. 57.2, 3. And did not Paul say, O
Foolish Galatians who has bewitched you? Gal. 3.1. I would ask this Adversary,
if these Characters were venomous expressions, or proceeded from a nasty
venomous Spirit? Let him answer in his next against the Quakers, and see if any
of them has used worse Expressions than his own, or so hard as Bloody Devils,
Traitors, Witches, etc.

VI. It is not inherent in the Quakers to use such hard Expressions against all
their Adversaries, (as he would insinuate, p. 361.) but only some have given
Invidious and bitter Enemies of Truth, their due Characters suitable to their
Extremely Degenerate State, as Dogs, Wolves, Generation of Vipers, Serpents,
etc. as to Fury and Implacable Malice of Spirit: It Is unjustly cast upon us,
it is his own Spirit that appears both Furious and Implacably Malicious against
us: He Is not willing to see his own bitterness and invectiveness, whilst he
unjustly charges me therewith for telling him his own, as a Scandalous Liar,
Impudent Sculking, Vile Mercenary Dissembling Hypocrite, through whom the Devil
and Malice does invent and produce Terms and Characters, (i. e. against us the
People called Quakers.) These, no doubt, touch and offend him: But I am fully
pursuaded never an Adversary that I have read has writ more bitterly and
maliciously against us, nor more in reviling Treatment, scurrilous and
contemning Language, than this Author of the Snake has done

To my charging him with shamefully defaming us, as a People under as Gross
Terms and Characters, as the Devil and Malice could invent, Antidote, p. 44.

He Answers, Ay, But the Devil is in it (George) he has proved them too, and so
plain that thy Excuses confirm it the more, p. 362.

See the Levity of the Man, and how he Glories in his Shame, in his work of
Envy, which (he grants) the Devil is in, who is the Author of Lies, and Father
of Liars; he writes now against me like one in a great Rage and Fury. Ibid.
accusing me with Senseless Ribaldry against him (comparing me to a Dog that
Breaks his Teeth upon the Stone thrown at him) Senseless Lies, Ranc^r and Venom
of Spirit, Effeminate and ungovernable Passion.

Which Reviling does not touch me, to move me to any such Passion, Anger and
Malice, as he falsely Imagines of me: Having long since learned Patiently to
suffer Reproach, and to Rejoice when Persecuted and Defamed for Christ's sake.
I bless his Holy Name and Power, wherein my Life and Safety is over my
Persecutors.

His pretending To speak in behalf of G. Keith, only so far as he maintains the
true Christian Doctrine, against me and my Friends; is to render us Opposers of
the True Christian Doctine, which is a General Aspersion without Conviction;
and G. K. has given contrary Testimony of me, and my Friends, both before and
since his coming over from America, as I can produce and prove, if there were
necessity.

His saying, He Disputes against G. Keith, as well as me, where he thinks
George Keith to remain in an Error, Is no small Reflection upon G. K. after so
long time of Intimacy, Society or Correspondency together.

Though I looked on the Author of the Snake, not to write like a Man of
Conscience against us, but like some Mercenary Agent, that might expect some
considerable Reward for his work of Envy and Deceit, against the People called
Quakers (as we hear he has some such Benifactors, and Gratuities afforded him)
yet I never said, that He wrote for Hire from those who adhere to G. Keith,
whom he calls, The Poor Church of the Quakers, p. 362.

He is as very Impertinent in this, as Envious in other points besides; and it
is new News to us, that G. K. has a Poor Church, and that of Quakers too,
adhereing to him: With what Conscience can he, or his adherents (if there be
such) esteem themselves Quakers? Since he has appeared an open Adversary
against his Quondam dear Friends, called Quakers? I would fain know if he still
owns himself to be a Quaker? And if his adherents do own themselves to be a
Poor Church (or any Church) of the Quakers?

But now I think on it, I may suppose the Merits of this Author of the Snake, to
the consideration of his Church, for whom he Advocates against Dissenters; as
to what Gratuities or Compensation he has deserved for pleading his Church's
cause, Pref. p. 42, 43. (whether he means the Church of Rome, or the Church of
England, we may Question) where he says, In the late Bloody Revolution of 41.
there arose Thirty or Forty different and opposite Sects and Heresies, more
abhorrent to the Presbyterians (who begat them, and begun that Rebellion) than
Episcopacy it self, against which they first took Arms. These like the Spawn of
the Viper, eat into the Bowels of their Mother, and destroyed her, who first
gave them Breath. [Thus the Snake.]

Hence observe, his sorrowful complaint against those many Sects, and the
Presbyterians, who, he says, begat them, as what Injury they have done to the
Church (as he calls her) That these, like Vipers Spawn, have eaten into the
Bowels of their Mother (i. e. the Church) opposing their lawful Bishops, and
tearing the Body of the Church by Schism, (as he has) p. 41, 42.

This is a sad complaint indeed, and his comparison looks as black upon that
Mother of his; by representing her a Mother of such a Brood of Vipers, as have
eaten into her Bowels, torn her Body and destroyed her: Alas! Poor Mother, How
art thou beholding to this thy Son and Advocate, for representing thee as such
a Mother of Vipers? What art thou then? Can thou be Christ's Spouse, or the
Bride, the Lamb's Wife? Or can the Mother of Vipers (as he renders thee) be any
other than a Viper her self? How well art thou (Oh! Mother) helped up by this
thy pretended Dutiful Son and Officious Agent? Will it redound to thy Good
Fame, to allow such Agents for thy Advocates who thus Defame thee, or such to
espouse thy Cause, or to Hiss and Quarrel against all Dissenters on thy behalf?
It concerns thee and thy Reputation well to consider it, and either to
discountenance this Advocate, or else his work may turn to thy greater Infamy
and Disgrace. I Quaery who supports and rewards him for this his undertaking?
Such a Trade will not hold among sincere honest People, who are not willing to
take up reproaches against their Neighbors but to follow those things which
make for Peace and Amity.

As for that Christian Advice of W. P's, in his Address to Protestants, p. 242.
which this Man recommends to me; I have observed the matter contained in it,
before and without his Recommendation of it, I wish he would better observe it
himself, for it does not affect me, as one conscious of being Angry for God,
Passionate for Christ, or Calling Names for Religion, etc. For one that is
indeed a Malicious Incendiary, a Persecutor, a False Accuser, a Liar, a Rayler,
a Reviler, may be justly reprehended as such, and yet not in Anger, Passion or
Railery; such wicked Persons, who wrongfully Abuse, Defame and Disguise their
quiet Neighbors or others, may be justly detected and lawfully reprehended,
and duly admonished, and that for Christ, and his tender Religion sake, and
their own poor Soul's Good, without any dishonor to him, or the Christian
Profession.

And what names have I called Men for Religion, in telling a Malicious Person
of his Malice, or a Persecutor that he is such a one? I don't look on them to
be really Religious, who are short of common Civility, who will not live
quietly by their Neighbors, nor suffer their Neighbors to live quietly by
them; but will be Aspersing and Persecuting of them, by Reviling, Reproaches
and bitter Calumnies, as this Snake has shamefully done.

And to his reminding W. P. and my self, of 1 Cor. 6.10. That Revilers shall
not Inherit the Kingdom of God, and James 1.26.

Let him withal remember, Rev. 21.8. That all Liars shall have their Part in
the Lake of Fire, etc.

VII. In his 7th Specimen, he tells of a short Test of the Quaker Sincerity and
Soundness in the Faith, viz. That they would begin their answer to the Snake
with a plain Yea or Nay, to two of the 7 Quaeries presented to their Yearly
Meetings, 1695.

And because we would not be imposed upon under such limitations, as to Yea or
Nay to each Question: He accuses us with Falacious Answer, and Doging,
otherwise that we never intended a fair Answer, and were not Sound in the
Faith, p. 376.

He has with great Aggravations, passed severe Sentence and Condemnation upon
us already, though very unduly and unjustly, as no People either Sincere or Sound
in the Faith, but contrariwise, as Blasphemers, Heretics, Diabolically
Inspired and Possessed, etc. yet now urges a Test to try whether we are Sincere
or Sound in the Faith; thus he first condemns, then proceeds to Trial, and not
only thus preposterously deals with us, but aforehand concludes they ( i. e.
the Quakers) will not Answer so much as to one of these two short and easy
Quaeries proposed, p. 365.

So by this prejudicate Procedure, it seems we must remain under his severe
Condemnation as Mutes.

But hold, is he sure we will not Answer? No, not to one of their Quaeries: Who
made him such a Positive Confident Prophet? However, to make him appear a
Notoriously False One in this, I may yet adventure to give him a plain and
direct Answer to one of his Two Quaeries, if not to both; seeing they are in
the Conclusion of the Snake, i. e. the First and Sixth Quaery. The First is, Do
you Believe in a Christ without you now in Heaven? p. 348. But in his
Supplement he has thus varied the Question, viz. Whether they believed in
Christ, as without them, without all other Men? Ibid.

Not to be Critical upon his Variation and Uncertainty, as to the Terms, I
Answer to both states of the Question; First Yea: Secondly, We believe in
Christ, both as he is without us, and all other Men; and as he is within us.
Thirdly, And that though He, our High Priest, is set on the Right Hand of the
Throne of the Majesty in the Heavens, He is a Minister of the Sanctuary, and of
the true Tabernacle, which the Lord Pitched, and not Man, Heb. 8.1. Such an
High Priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners,
and made higher than the Heavens, Heb. 7.26.

Quaery 6. Is Christ now at this day, and for ever, to come truly and really a
Man, in true and proper humane Nature, without all other Men.

Answ. 1. To the first part Yea; I Believe Jesus Christ is now at this Day to
come truly and really a Man; as he is the Heavenly Glorified Man, without all
other Men, even the Man Christ Jesus, the great and only Mediator between God
and Men. 2. And no doubt, his coming will be in his own proper Nature, in whose
else should he come, but his own? When as the Son of Man, he comes in his
Father's Glory, and all his Angels with him. 3. But to the Words in the
Question, Is Christ for ever to come? etc. How shall we say Yea to this? For if
we should say Yea, he is ever to come, truly, and really a Man: might not some
Reflect, and question us, and say, Do you believe he will never so come then?
For how is that ever done, that is ever to do? But this Man can impose Questions
in what Terms he pleases; and if we don't Answer directly Yea, or Nay, then it
must with him be Falacious, Dodging, and we insincere, and unsound in the
Faith; such is his Test; and he, and such Quaerists, ca^ scarce fix or please
themselves in Wording their Quaeries or Tests; as they are not content with the
Question, Is Christ to come truly and really a Man? So as to accept our Yea to
the same, but also they must add, In true and proper Humane Nature: As if he
might come truly and really a Man, and yet not in his true and proper Nature as
Man, if by Humane they mean proper to Man: What sincere Christians will be
bound to have these Men's Quaeries the Test of their Faith or Sincerity? Men
may spend their time in doting about Questions, and strife of Words, and be far
remote from proving themselves in the Faith of Christ thereby. And though we,
as well as many others, believe and own the Man Christ, as without us, and all
Men; yet how can we, or any else know or prove, that we are in the Faith, but
by truly knowing Jesus Christ, as he is in us? they being Reprobates that do
not so know Christ in them, 2 Cor. 13.5. Yet Christ is but one, and not
divided, though both without us, and within us. But I cannot see any Pretense
for these Men so much to Question our Belief of Jesus Christ, as without us,
and all Men, unless they imagine that we do not believe the Man Christ (who was
Crucified) to be in Being; or that they think we suppose Him Annihilated, which
was ever far from us so to imagine of Him, who is our Glorious Head and
High Priest. But let us draw toward a Conclusion, passing by many of the Man's
bitter Smitings, Aspersions, Drolls and Jeers.

VIII. I must tell him again, It Is a great (and gross) Untruth, That the
Quakers damn all the World to Hell, all since the Days of the Apostles, but
themselves. He has minced this his false Aspersion, and my Answer; I told him,
It Is Men's own wickedness (in hating the Light) which carries them to Hell; and
that we believe there were many good Men, and Saved, since the Apostles Days,
Antidote, p. 59.

In my Answer to this Scandalous Charge of taking the very Attributes of God to
themselves (i. e. the Quakers) there is more to detect the Falsehood thereof,
than only Retortion (as he minces the Matter) had he been so honest as to have
given the Reader a true Specimen of my Answer to that, and other Aspersions, he
might have seen how fairly his Author, F. Bugg, and himself were Answered, and
Detected of Falsehood, in this their black Charge (as in others) as in my
Antidote, p. 99, 100, 101.

But instead of clearing himself and Brethren from what he says I Retort, as
the Titles of Your Grace, and my Lord, given to Bishops, [leaving out, their
going down upon their Knees to them, as their Reverend Fathers in God.] And to
my asking thereupon, Do these import Divine Honor, and Divine Attributes, or
Earthly, pray? He puts me off with Scoffs, Flouts and Detraction; as, Some
Charitable Body help this poor Petitioner in this difficult Point, which
puzzles his Understanding! I would advise thee, George, to go to thy Friend
William, who understands Courts better than thee, etc. p. 378.

And further, upon the same Point before, about their Homage to the Bishops, I
asked, Where did ever Christ's Ministers or Apostles do such Homage to Timothy
or Titus, or call either of them, My Lord Timothy, or, My Lord Titus, or, Your
Grace? etc. And what thinks he of Godfathers, and Godmothers? Are not these
Divine Attributes, and very high ones too? To all which I have no sober or
rational Answer from the Snake, but a sort of Hissing, Contempt, and Scorn,
under a feigned Pretense of Pity; in such Expressions as these, viz. The Lord
help him, and restore him to his Wits! Reader, What shall I do with such a Man
as this? Greater Extravagance is not in Bedlam! And Men may be mad, secundum
quid. p. 367.

But Reader, his pretense of Praying in Compassion for me, as a mad Man, does
not hang well together with his Reproaching and Vilifying of me, as he has
often done, nor yet with his Intention to follow me (by Reply) through every
single Point that I touch, etc. as he pretends, p. 358. What! by reply follow
such a Madman as he renders me: what Reputation will he gain by that upon his
own Proposition, trow he?

I hope his black Charge of Idolatry, and Transferring Divine Attributes and
Worship to themselves, (i. e. the Quakers) p. 379. As it is utterly rejected by
us, 'twill be farther detected, and the Malice thereof. I supposing it is
already Answered by another, I do at present forbear Publishing a Full and
Particular Answer, I have to his Eighth Sect. about that Point, as I have so
many others at large; besides, he being a Lurking Adversary, that lies hid,
smiting in the dark, I am not willing to spend overmuch time about him, he
being also fallen into another hand to deal with, who I doubt not has traced
the Snake in his crooked Windings and Turnings.

IX. In this last Article of his Specimen, he recites these Words, as he says,
out of a Quaker's Book, Entitled, The Sword of the Lord drawn, p. 5. viz. Your
Imagined God beyond the Stars, your Carnal Christ, is utterly denied -- That
Christ is God and Man, in one Person, is a Lie. To which he says, G. Whitehead
does not deny the Quotation, but says, p. 145. We do not affect the Terms, Then
he adds; Was not this a Terrible Rebuke; a full Condemnation of the Author, and
such damnable Heresy, p. 357.

See how grossly Abusive and Partial this Snake Author is; as if we do not
affect the Terms, were my whole Answer to those foregoing Expressions quoted
by him, wherein he appears (as in many other things) very unjust and injurious;
for I call them offensive Words, in my Answer (i. e. as quoted by him) saying,
As to those Offensive Words, your Carnal Christ, your Imagined God, etc. we do
not affect the Terms, neither are they proper to the True Christ, or
Omnipresent God.

Antidote, p. 145, 146. (but his Falacy in the Quotation, I refer to the
foregoing Treatise, p. 204.) I further add, That an Imagined God, and Imagined
Christ, is not the true God, nor the true Christ, which all mere Imaginations
fall short of; and of the true Knowledge thereof: However, I neither liked the
said Offensive Words, nor the Person that wrote them ( i. e. C. A.) for he
neither writ all he did in true Reverence toward God, neither did he abide in
His Fear or Council, but was disowned by us: Therefore the Snake's Insinuation
against me, That he was a Friend in saying of them, and had a good Intention
(as if I would so excuse him, and his said offensive Words) is utterly false,
for I never designed to excuse or plead for him therein, or in any other rash
or irreverent Expressions.

And the Snak's Inferences against the Quakers in general, As that all the
World cannot excuse them from being the most Outrageous and Blasphemous
Heresy! And that all Men must look upon the Quakers, as Monsters, and no
Christians; and their Ancient Friends with Blasphemies, Heresies, Treasons, and
damnable Doctrines, etc. p. 368.

Thus concluding with a Storm of Railery, when he has taken occasion to
Calumniate and Condemn us all by Wholesale, from a few rash and offensive
Expressions of one Person, and perhaps from some other Words or Passages, which
many Thousands of us were never concerned in, besides his many foul
Perversions, and partial and false Quotations and Citations. And lastly, he
makes this Apology; He must not surfeit the Reader with a Breakfast, lest he
lose his Stomach to his Dinner.

But should the Reader be so unwary, as to make his Breakfast of such Cookery
as the Snake's Railery, Foul Abuses, and dirty Stuff, as he has Cooked against
the People called Quakers, 'twould be enough not only to Surfeit, but to Poison
the Reader.

Now that I would not seem to conclude with harsh (but mild) Expressions, as
well as Matter of Moment, I may a little farther take notice of his Profound
Questionary Test, to try if we are sound in the Faith, viz. Whether they (i. e.
the Quakers) believe in Christ, as without them, without all other Men?

Seeing our Adversary, and his Confederates, so much Insist upon the words
without us, Christ as without us (and sometimes gives him the Character of an
Outward Christ, as if he were not an Inward Christ, Inwardly Anointed) I may
take leave a little to follow them in their terms; yet with a real Respect and
Honor to the True Messiah, the Very Christ, the Anointed, of God, of whom all
his Holy Prophets gave Witness, Acts 10.4. namely, we believe and confess, that
this very Christ of God, the Only Begotten Son of God, was conceived by the
Holy Ghost, and Born of the Virgin Mary without us, that he was Born in
Bethlehem of Judea without us, that he lived an Innocent Sinless Life, preached
most Blessed and Excellent Doctrine without us, that he wrought most Eminent
and Wonderful Miracles without us, that he went about doing Good without us,
that he was Crucified and put to Death, by wicked hands (without the Gates of
Jerusalem) without us, that by the Power of God, he revived and rose again the
third day, without us, that after he was raised from the Dead, he showed
himself Alive after his Passion, by many Infallible Proofs, unto his Disciples,
without us, being seen of them forty days, after which he Ascended into Heaven,
being seen to Ascend without us, and a Cloud received him out of their sight
who beheld him Ascend. Unto whom it was said, by the 2 Angels present, This
same Jesus which is taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come in like
manner, as ye have seen him go into Heaven, Acts 1.3, 9, 10, 11. and doubtless
when he so comes, and all his mighty Angels with him; it will be in great Glory
and open Triumph; and he will in that day be greatly glorified in his Saints,
and admired in all them that believe, 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9, 10.

But now I must not stop here, we must not leave this same Jesus Christ all
without us, we must humbly consider, and own him, as He is within us also.

As Christ is the Word of God, that true Light, which enlightens every Man
coming into the World, John 1.9. He is within us.

As in Him was Life, and the Life was the Light of Men, He is within us; his
Life, as the Light of Men is within us, John 1.4.

As Christ is the Light of the World, given to lead Men out of Darkness, and to
give the Light of Life to all who follow him, John 8.12. He is within Men,
within us, to lead us out of that Darkness and Corruption that was in us.

As Christ is given for the Light of the Gentiles, and for a Covenant unto the
People, and to be God's Salvation to the Ends of the Earth, Isa. 42.6. and
49.6. Acts 13.47. He must be known as such within them.

Seeing his coming was, that we might have Life, and that we might have it more
abundantly, John 10.10.

This Life we must have within us. Jesus said, If a Man love me, he will keep
my Words, and my Father will love him, and We will come unto him, and make our
abode with him, John 14.23. which must be within us.

Abide in me, and I in you (says Christ) as the Branch cannot bring forth
Fruit of it self, except it abide in the Vine, no more can ye, except ye abide
in me, John 15.4.

Therefore if we abide in Christ, he abides in us. The Branches must abide in
the Vine, to partake of the Life and Virtue thereof in them, to cause Fruit.

John 14.18. I will not leave you comfortless, I will come to you (said
Christ.) Ver. 20. At that day ye shall know that I am in my Father, and you in
me, and I in you.

Therefore we must know Christ within us, if we be his true Followers.

John 17.22, 23. Where Christ says, And the glory which thou gave me, I have
given them, that they may be one, even as we are one.

I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one, that the
world may know that thou have sent me, and have loved them, as thou have loved
me.

And Ver. 26. And I have declared unto them thy Name, and will declare it, that
the love wherewith thou have loved me, may be in them, and I in them,

What Is more clear, than Christ's own Testimony for his Being within us i. e.
within all his true Followers especially.

2. Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the Faith; prove your own
selves: Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye
be Reprobates.

Therefore, they who are not Reprobates, but in the Faith, know that Jesus
Christ is within them.

Colos. 1.27. To whom God would make known, what is the Riches of the Glory of
this Mystery, which is Christ in you the hope of glory.

Therefore the Saints know Christ within them to be the Hope of Glory to them.

Gal. 4.6. And because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son
into your hearts, crying Abba Father.

The Son of God is therefore, by his Spirit within us, who are Sons of God.

Galat. 4.19. My little Children, of whom I Travail in Birth again, until
Christ be formed in you.

Romans 8.29. For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate, to be
conformed to the Image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn in many
brethren, (...), In multis fratribus. Therefore the Son of God is within them.

Rev. 3.20. Behold I stand at the door and knock, if any Man hear my Voice, and
open the door, I will come In to him, and will sup with him, and he with me.

Was not this the Son of God, the Faithful and True Witness, who thus spoke,
ver. 14? And where is that Door that must be opened unto him?

Many more Instances might be shown for the nearness of Christ, with, and In
his Faithful Followers and Members: And Blessed are they who truly Believe in
his Name, and follow him in the Regeneration.

FINIS.

