Of Christian Magistracy.

A SERMON Preached in the Cathedral-Church OF St. PETER in YORK, AT The ASSIZES
Held There, July the 26 th, 1697. Before the Right Honorable Mr. Justice
Nevill and Baron Turton.

By CHRISTOPHER WYVILL, D. D. And Dean of Ripon.

LONDON, Printed for B. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons in Cornhill, and F.
Hildyard Bookseller in York. 1697.

TO THOMAS PVLLEINE, Esquire HIGH SHERIFF OF THE County of YORK.
SIR,
YOU have been pleased to set too great a Value upon my serving You at the last
Assizes, by thinking my Sermon fit to be made Public in so Critical and
Judicious an Age as this is. However, in compliance with Your Request, I have
suffered it to appear in Print, and do Dedicate it to You, not only because I
Composed it for Your Service, (to whom therefore in right it does belong,) but
because I Respect and Honor You for that You are a true Lover of Your Country,
of the Church of England, and of His Present Majesty's Happy Government: The
real Good and Prosperity of all which is aimed at and intended in the ensuing
Discourse, and is most heartily prayed for, and shall upon all Occasions be
sincerely endeavored after to the utmost of his Power, by him who is,

Your most Obedient, And Most Humble Servant, Chris. Wyvill.

Of Christian Magistracy.
1 COR. vj. 1, 2, 3. Dare any of you, having a matter against another, go to
law before the unjust, and not before the saints?

Do ye not know that the saints shall judge the world? And if the world shall
be judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters?

Know ye not that we shall judge angels? how much more things that pertain to
this life?


THAT which is the great Blessing and Happiness, as well as the main stay and
support of any Nation or Society of Men, next under Gods Providence and
Protection, is the right Administration of its Civil Government; whereby the
Public Safety is provided for, every Man's Rights and Privileges are secured
to him, and wholesome Laws put in execution for the good of the whole
Community. Which great Blessing there have been some who would deprive all
Christian Societies of; who under the specious pretense of Christian Liberty
have taught that Christians were under no obligation to any Humane Ordinance,
that Courts of Judicature are not necessary in a Christian State, that the
Christian Religion has abrogated the Authority of Civil Powers, and that the
Office of a Judge or Civil Magistrate is inconsistent with the Profession of a
Christian.

These were the wild Fancies of the Gnostics in the times of the Apostles, and
of the Anabaptists and other Sectaries in this latter Age. Thus by pulling down
Magistracy they would erect a Babel of Confusion, and by making way for Liberty
introduce Licentiousness and Disorder.

For the confutation of which fond Conceits, besides many other passages that
might be produced out of the Holy Scriptures, this Chapter of my Text may be
sufficient: Wherein although St. Paul does indeed blame the Christians of the
Church of Corinth for impleading one another at the Bar of Heathen Judges, yet
he allows them to do so before Judges that professed the Christian Faith; and
for that purpose would have them constitute and appoint fit and proper Persons
amongst themselves, of their own Religion, to be Judges of their Lawsuits, who
should hear their Causes, and determine their Controversies, and to whose
decretory Sentence they were to submit. Which Permission we may be sure he
would not have granted unto them, if to be a Christian and to be a Judge were
incompatible, or if it were unlawful for Chirstians to make use of or to apply
themselves unto a Christian Court of Judicature.

For dare any of you, (says he) i. e. will any of you, having a matter against
another, i. e. against another Christian, go to law, i. e. implead or accuse
one another before the unjust, that is, before Heathens or Unbelievers, (as
they are called in the 6th Verse) and not before the saints, i. e. before
Christian Judges? For by the word Saints we must in this place understand no
more than Believers or Professors of the Gospel, that is, Christians: Of whom
he says, Do ye not know that the saints, i. e. Christians, shall judge the
world, i. e. all wicked Men? And if the world shall be judged by you, are you
unworthy to judge the smallest matters? Know you not that we, i. e. that we
Christians, shall judge angels, i. e. the Apostate Spirits, how much more
things that pertain to this life? These Interrogatives do imply so many strong
Affirmatives: As if he should have said, You ought not to go to Law before
Heathen Judges, but rather before Christians. You know very well that you shall
one day judge these Infidels and Unbelievers, and all wicked Men, and therefore
surely you are fit to judge in matters of less moment, you are not unworthy of
smaller Judicatures. You cannot be ignorant that you shall judge even Angels,
and therefore you are now much more worthy of Inferior Seats of Judgment, to
judge of matters which pertain to this Life. He attributes, you see, a sort of
a Judicature to the Saints hereafter, and therefore would have them to be
Judges now: He advises them to set out those amongst them who should try their
Causes, so as that they need not go to Heathen Courts: Wherefore (says he, in
the Verse immediately following my Text) if ye have judgment of things
pertaining to this life, that is, if ye have any secular Controversies, set
them to judge who are least esteemed in the church, v. 4. Which Expression may
perhaps at first sight, or at first hearing, seem very strange and unreasonble:
For what? Would he have the Judgment-seats filled with Persons who were the
least esteemed in the Church? When St. Paul advised them to set up Judges
amongst themselves to hear and determine their Causes, would he have them to be
the refuse and scum of the People? When the Office of a Judge requires the
greatest Wisdom, Knowledge, and Experience, (which gains him Esteem, and
Reputation, and Honor in the World) would he have such to be Judges amongst
them who are destitute of those Qualities that must make them fit for so high a
Calling, as those who are least esteemed in the Chruch must be presumed to be?
No surely; this could not be the meaning or intention of the Apostle: We must
not conceive that he spoke this by way of Precept, commanding them to set the
weakest and the simplest of their Brethren to judge betwixt one Christian and
another, but it must be supposed that he spoke this only by way of comparison,
that they had better do so, than implead one another at the Bar of Infidel
Judges. But what if we should make another construction of the words, different
indeed from the common interpretation, but more agreeable to St. Paul's meaning,
and to the Original Greek? What if by (...) we should understand (not the
causes or things pertaining to this Life which are to be tried and judged, as
most Interpreters seem to understand them, but) the secular places or seats
where such Causes are tried, and Judgment given? What if by (...) we should
understand, not the meanest and simplest Christians, but the Heathens and
Infidels who are of little or no esteem in the Church? So as that the Apostles
meaning may be this, ( viz.) If you esteem these Men, the Heathens and
Unbelievers, to be of little or no account in the Church (as you have no Reason
to think otherwise of them) then set up Secular Judgment-seats amongst your
selves, and fill them with fit and proper Persons. For, as he proceeds in the
next Verse, ver. 5. I speak to your shame Is it so that there is not a wise man
amongst you? no not one, that shall be able to judge between his brethren? By
which words he clearly intimates, that he ought to be a Wise Man, and no
contemptible Person, who should have the Authority of a Judge in the Church.
Far therefore was it from the Apostles meaning to bid them set contemptible
Persons, those who were least esteemed in Seats of Judgment: But he rather
checks and reproves them for that although they were generally great Pretenders
to Knowledge and Wisdom, yet they would choose to appeal to the Courts of
Infidels, as if there were not a Wise Man among them who might try and judge
their Causes.

It may be very likely indeed, that the Persons I speak of were to be but in
the nature of Referees or common Arbitrators, to whose Judgment the Christians
were by joint consent to submit their Differences. For what else could the
Apostle grant to Christians who at that time were destitute of public
Authority? And if in the Circumstances they were then in, he gave them a
permission to choose Christian Arbitrators for the decision or composing of what
Causes they had to bring before them, we may be sure that when a Nation became
Christian, when the Christian Faith should be not only countenanced and
encouraged, but by Law established and upheld, he would much more allow of
Christian Arbiters or Judges appointed by Public Authority for the ends of
Common Justice.

What therefore I have farther to say upon this Subject, and from the words of
my Text, shall be comprehended in these following Particulars.

First, I shall enquire for what Reasons St. Paul would not have the Christians
make their Appeals to the Bar of Unbelieving Judges, at the Tribunal of Heathen
Magistrates.

Secondly, I shall consider that Reason which he gives, why a Christian may be
a Judge, why he should undertake the Office of a Civil Magistrate, with what
other Reasons may be assigned for it.

Thirdly, When Christian Judges are set apart and appointed by Public
Authority, I shall consider the Matters that may be brought before them; which
according to my Text are said to be things pertaining to this Life, and those
are commonly of two sorts:

1. Matters of Civil Controversy betwixt one Man and another engaged in Suits
of Law. And,

2. Criminal Matters, or Things done contrary to the Laws by such Offenders and
Evildoers as are to be punished according to their Deserts.

With respect to the first of which, I shall consider how far and upon what
accounts a Christian may go to Law, and with what Tempers and Dispositions of
Mind he should do so when there is occasion for it.

With respect to the second, I shall consider the Reasonableness and the
Necessity of it.

Lastly, I shall conclude with some Inferences from the whole, such as may be
suitable to our present Solemnity, and by Gods Blessing profitable to us all.

First, Then I shall consider for what Reasons St. Paul would not have the
Christians make their Appeals to the Bar of Unbelieving Judges, at the Tribunal
of Heathen Magistrates. For what? Was it because he thought it a Sin to do so?
That cannot surely be supposed, because he himself appealed unto Caesar, Acts
25.11. and offered his Cause to be tried at the Bar of one of the worst of
Heathens. Was it because he thought, as some have since imagined, that Dominion
is founded in Grace, and that consequently the Heathens being destitute of
Divine Grace and the means of obtaining it, should have no Dominion, nor
Authority, nor Power in the World? No such matter; for he knew very well that
Dominion, in whomsoever it is lodged, is Originally of Divine Right; and that
there is no power but of God, that the powers which be (whether they be Heathen
or Christian) were ordained of God, Romans 13.1. and that Christ himself
acknowledged the Authority which Pilate, a most Graceless Heathen Judge, had
over him, John 19.11. Was it because Christianity has abrogated the Power of
the Civil Magistrate, has divested him of all Right to Rule and Govern, and
absolved all Men from Submission unto him, unless he becomes Christian? No
certainly; for the Rights and Privileges of Temporal Rulers and Governors,
whether they be Kings as Supreme, or other Inferior Magistrates authorized and
sent by them for the ends of Public Government, are no where better secured
than in the Christian Religion, Rom 13, 5. all Persons by the Rules of its
Doctrine being enjoined Obedience to those in Authority, not only for wrath but
also for conscience sake, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. It designs indeed, and earnestly
desires their Conversion to the Christian Faith, and their professing the
Gospel of Christ; but if that cannot be effected, it leaves them the exercise
of their just Power notwithstanding.

It was not therefore for these or any such like Reasons that St. Paul
prohibited the Corinthians to whom he writes from appealing unto or impleading
one another before the unjust, the unbelieving Magistrates: But it was because
great Scandal was thereby raised upon themselves, and an ill Report upon the
Church of Christ; and great occasion was thereby given to the Heathens of being
offended at Christ's Religion, and of standing farther off from making
profession of it. For the Christians of the Church of Corinth, to whom St. Paul
writes, were very much given to Contentions and Litigations amongst themselves,
and would do wrong and defraud one another, 1 Cor. 6.8. whereupon a Suit of Law
was presently commenced, which it is likely they prosecuted with no small Heat
and Passion, and therefore the Heathens, before whom they brought their Causes
to be heard and tried, could not but discern how much they were addicted to
Fraud and Violence which for the most part occasioned their Suits, how
impatient of Injuries and Wrongs done them, how desirous of Revenge, how
Covetous and Worldly-minded, how very Litigious and Quarrelsome they were. Upon
which accounts the Christians were exposed to their scorn and derision, and
their very Religion brought into contempt and scandal, as if it authorized or
permitted such Irregularities and Disorders. And therefore our Apostle, for the
avoiding of Scandal and for fear of giving Offense to the Enemies of the
Church, had great Reason to forbid them going to Law before the Unbelievers,
and making their Appeals to the Bar of Heathen Judges. In which prohibition he
may be conceived to have had respect to a common and known saying amongst the
Jews, (viz.) That he who prosecuteth an Israelite at the Tribunal of the
Gentiles, profanes the Name of God.

Besides, there is one thing farther to be considered in the case, namely, That
the Heathen Judges being already sufficiently prejudiced against the
Christians, when they had them in their Power by having them at their Bar, they
would be sure to treat them with the utmost Rigor and Severity.

Nay moreover, they by being Heathens and Unbelievers might be presumed to be
also Unjust in the strictest sense of the word, like the unjust Judge in the
Gospel, who neither feared God nor regarded man, Luke 18.2. and then what
Justice or Equity could the poor Christians expect from them? And therefore St.
Paul had good Reason to say unto them, Dare any of you, having a matter against
another, go to law before the unjust, and not before the saints, rather?

There may be also another Reason why he forbad them to appeal to Heathen
Judges, and that was because it reflected upon the Wisdom and Authority of the
Church, and looked as if none of themselves were worthy of or fit for such an
Honor; therefore, says he, bring not your Causes to be tried before the
Infidels, give them not that occasion to triumph and exult over you; but if you
must go to Law, let it be done before the Saints. And this prohibition we must
look upon to concern chiefly the Plaintiffs who are not bound to sue, and not
to belong to the Defendants who if prosecuted are bound to stand to Trial.

Secondly, And thus I come in the second place to consider the Reason which our
Apostle gives why a Christian may be a Judge, why he should undertake the
Office of a Civil Magistrate. For although there needs no Reason to be given
for it, (the thing it self being so very evident and plain, the general
practice whereof declares its Reasonableness and Necessity too,) yet that which
the Apostle gives is a very considerable one, and deserves our particular
remark; and that is, Because the Saints shall judge the world, yea even Angels
themselves: For do you not know, says he, that the saints shall judge the
world? And if the world shall be judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge the
smallest matters? Know ye not that we shall judge angels, how much more things
that pertain to this life?

Now the proper signification of Saints is Men of Holiness, such as were all
the Faithful Servants of God under the Old Testament, such as all under the New
are supposed or required to be. And being that all Christians are called unto
an Holy Calling, and without great and apparent Reason to the contrary ought in
Charity to be presumed to live answerably to their Calling, therefore they may
very well be accounted and called Saints. And although it be true that not all
who are called Saints shall hereafter judge the World, but they only who have
lived according to that Calling, yet if any shall, the Argument holds good that
therefore they may be Judges and Magistrates here.

For the better understanding of which it will be necessary that we should
consider what kind of Judicature the Saints shall exercise, and in what sense
they may be said to judge.

Now although there may be several ways whereby this may be understood, yet
waving all the rest, as thinking it needless to trouble you with a particular
enumeration and discussion of them I shall at present mention but one, as being
most plain and natural, and most apposite to what St. Paul intends; and that is
this, viz. That when our Lord Christ, (who by Gods appointment is designed to
be the Supreme Judge of all the World,) when He shall descend from Heaven at
the end of the World to judge the Quick and the Dead, the Saints of God shall
first be judged and absolved themselves, and then be assumed as assessors unto
him, and bear him company in Judging and Condemning the rest of the World, that
is to say, all Wicked Men and all Apostate Angels. This Explication seems to be
the most Reasonable, and is what the best Expositors are agreed upon, and which
seems to be the meaning of what our Savior said to his own Apostles when he
told them that when He the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his glory,
they also shall sit on twelve thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel, Mat.
19.28.

Now if the Saints of God, if Christians who have lived here according to their
Holy Profession, if they in the Great and Final Judgment of all the World shall
be vouchsafed that Honor as to be Assessors with Christ, and to sit in
Judgment with Him on the Wicked World, if they shall have any thing to do in
matters of so high importance, they may Reasonably enough be accounted worthy
to have the Judgment of inferior things committed to their trust; well may
they take upon them the Power and Authority of Judges and Magistrates now, who
shall hereafter be concerned in adjudging the Eternal Being both of Angels and
Men. This is that Reason which St. Paul gives why a Christian may be a Judge,
why he should undertake the Office of a Civil Magistrate; and if there be any
who are yet unsatisfied with it, if there are still any so unreasonable as not
to admit of a Legal Magistracy amongst Christians, other Reasons there are not
unworthy our Consideration that may be alleged for it.

For 1 st, We find it no where mentioned in the Gospel of Christ that so high
and useful a Calling is inconsistent with the Profession of it. And if it were
Unlawful for a Christian to bear that Office we may be sure that either Christ
himself, or some of his Apostles, would have expressly forbidden it. Which being
they have no where done, we cannot but conclude their Censure rash and foolish
who do condemn it. Nay, so far is the Christian Religion from interdicting it
to Christians, that there are many things in it which make manifestly for it.
All Civil Magistrates and Rulers are by St. Paul said to be the Ministers of
God, Romans 13.4. even they who do not profess the Faith of Christ, much more
Reasonably therefore may they be esteemed so who really do. We read in the New
Testament of some Eminent Persons in great Power and Authority who were
Disciples of Christ and converted to his Religion; but we no where find that
they laid down their Offices when they became Christians. Besides, if there
were to be no Christian Magistrates or Governors, or Judges amongst
Christians, they must then either be exposed to all the Confusion and Disorder
which an ungoverned Society is liable unto, (which we cannot imagine that our
Lord did ever design they should be) or they must be governed by those who are
not of their Religion, by such as are either enemies of it, or at least no good
friends or well-wishers to it. And then what favor, or kindness, or
protection, could they expect from them? Nay would not their condition be
rather very calamitous and deplorable? Would Magistrates and Judges who are no
Christians, give encouragement or countenance to the Christians Religion? Would
they promote the real Interest of the Church of Christ, and make it prosper and
flourish? It Is scarce imaginable that they would. It was under the Government
of Heathen Rulers that the Primitive Christians suffered the greatest
Persecutions, nor could they hope for or expect much Peace and Prosperity till
Christianity became the Prosession of their Kings and Emperors. It is therefore
for the good of Christians, for the benefit of Christ's Church, for the
furtherance of his Gospel, and for the increase of true Religion and Piety,
that a Christian Magistracy is not only expedient but necessary too. To which
we may also add, that a Christian is of all others the fittest person for so
high a Calling, and the better Christian a Man is (provided that in other
respects he be but duly qualified) the more fit he must needs be for it, as by
instancing in those Christian Virtues, which are the great Ornament as well as
the necessary Endowments of a Magistrate, might be easily proved, were it
necessary to be done. I come therefore now in the Third place,

Thirdly, To consider the Matters that may be brought before Christian Judges;
which according to my Text are said to be things pertaining to this Life; and
those are commonly of two sorts, whereof the first are Matters of civil
Controversy betwixt one Man and another engaged in Suits of Law; with respect
whereunto there are two things which I design to do:

(1.) To consider how far and upon what accounts a Christian may go to Law.

(2.) To show with what Tempers and Dispositions of Mind a Suit of Law should
be managed when there is occasion for it.

(1.) Then I shall consider how far and upon what accounts a Christian may go
to Law. And this ought to be seriously observed, and very well understood,
because there are some Persons so very scrupulous and nice as to think it
utterly Unlawful for a Christian upon any account whatsoever to go to Law at
all, and others on the other hand are so very Contentious and Litigious that
they will sue their Neighbor upon every slight and trivial occasion, and
pretend to justify their doing so by alleging that the Law is open and free,
and think that they do no harm if they have the Law on their side.

Now in the first place that it is not Unlawful, i. e. not sinful, for
Christians to go to Law, is plain enough from this place of my Text, where for
the decision of emergent Questions St. Paul allows of Christian Judges. He
tells the Christians indeed in the 8th Verse of this Chapter, that it was a
fault that they went to Law. But that may be supposed to be spoken with respect
to their going to Law before the Unjust, the Unbelieving Magistrates; which is
the chief thing which in this place he reproves them for: Or perhaps it was
because they impleaded one another for small and trifling accounts, such as
might easily have been put-up and past-by. However it be, he calls it but a
Fault, i. e. a defect or a failing, but not such as can be accounted a Sin. He
does not call it (...) or (...), but (...), that is, a diminution or a less
degree of Christian Perfection, and that is all that is meant by those words.

But then on the other hand although it be true that the Law is free and open
for all Persons, and that the Christian Religion has not absolutely forbid
Christians to go to Law, yet it is certain that it does not become a Christian
to take all that advantage which the Law will give him, nor to have recourse
unto it upon every petty wrong or slight injury done him. It is very much
distant from the meekness and forbearance and gentleness of a Christian to
commence a Suit, or to contest with his Neighbor for mere trifles. There are
many sorts of small and supportable wrongs and injuries which a good Christian
ought to forgive and put up without appealing to the Laws for redress. It is
more becoming a Disciple of Christ to bear with some Damages, to overlook some
Trespasses, and even wholly to forgive inconsiderable Debts, then to trouble
Courts of Justice about them. Nor can this I hope give any Reasonable Cause of
Offense to the Gentlemen of the Law (whose Profession I honor) since they
themselves cannot but be offended to have Matters brought before them which are
unworthy of or below the Gravity of Laws and the Solemnity of a Court. Besides,
it is but what is agreeable to our Lords Doctrine in the 5th of St. Matthews
Gospel, ver. 39, 40, 41. where he obliges all his Disciples and Followers to
remit all smaller and tolerable Injuries, so as not to make them Matters of
Complaint or seek for a Legal Reparation, whether they be such as concern our
Body and Reputation, or our Goods and Possession, or our Freedoms and
Privileges.

But now although the Christian Religion obliges us to forgive Injuries and
Wrongs, and would not have us prosecute all sort of Offenses, although it
restrains a Man from making the utmost advantage of Humane Laws, and allows him
not to sue his Neighbor upon every trifling and pitiful account, yet it leaves
every Man free to seek for redress by the benefit of the Laws for great Wrongs
and less supportable Injuries done him, or even to secure himself against them
in case he be threatened with them, or have just Cause to fear them. There is no
doubt therefore but that when great Injustice is offered or considerable Damage
is done us, it is Lawful to provide for our Security against the one, and to
endeavor to repair the other by a due Course of Law.

But besides the Cases of great and considerable Injuries, it is certain also
that is Lawful to appeal to the decision of the Law in Cases of Disputable
Right, when the Matter is of great weight and moment. For Men do not always go
to Law because either Party has done Wrong to the other, (thou that oftentimes
is the occasion of most of our Suits) but because neither Party can determine
the just Right and Title to the Thing they contest about, so that each Party
thinks himself in the right, and neither of them has wronged the other. Now in
this case the Law is the fittest and indeed the only Umpire betwixt them; and
if the Matter cannot otherwise be decided, recourse may Lawfully be had thereto.

We may then go to Law upon great and weighty accounts, such as are great
Indignities and Wrongs, for our guard against them, for our reparations of
them, for the recovery of our just Rights, and for a Legal determination of
what is right or wrong in Disputable Causes that are or may be of great concern
to us. And in vain it would be to have either Laws or Magistrates, if this use
might not be made of the benefit of those and the ministry of these.

(2.) But Secondly, be the Case what it will upon which we enter an Action at
Law, or be the occasion of it never so justifiable, yet we ought to take great
care that we manage it with due Tempers and Dispositions of Mind. First then;

1. In the commencing of every Suit at Law we should in the first place
consider, that by Christian Charity we are obliged to manage it with all
possible calmness, meekness, and kindness, forbearing all manner of
uncharitable Invectives, bitter Railings and malicious Accusations of one
another. We should quietly leave the Matter to be fairly and equally decided by
a due Course of Law, and the Sentence of the Judge. And in the mean time we
should embrace one another with a friendly and courteous Behavior, and
amicably converse together. It is without doubt Lawful for any Man to sue for
what may be his own, or what he thinks to be so, especially if it be a matter
of concern, and will admit of no other decision: But then to proceed in it with
a rough and surly Demeanor, to bespatter each other with scurrilous and
spightful Words, to raise Reflections and foment Suspicions extrinsecal to the
Business in dispute, is neither the right way to obtain the Cause, nor
agreeable to that Charity which the Gospel enjoins us.

2. Moreover; in all Suits of Law we should discharge our Minds from all
inclinations to Revenge, and beware of a bitter and passionate Spirit. We must
not hale our Adversary to the Bar of the Magistrate on purpose to be revenged
on him, but to right our selves and redress our Wrongs, nor must we design any
more harm to him than what is necessary for our own Lawful Vindication, and for
the ends of Public Justice.

3. We should consider also farther that it is not becoming us either as
Christians or Men, when we have carried the Cause and got the better of our
Adversary, insolently to boast and triumph over him. We should not mock or
abuse him, nor aggravate his loss by reproachful or scornful Language. We
should rather remember and observe the Advice of Solomon, Rejoice not when
thine enemy falls, and let not thine heart be glad when he stumbleth, Prove.
24.17.

4. Lastly it is the duty of both Parties in all Actions at Law to rest
satisfied with the definitive Sentence and Determination of the Judge. He that
has obtained his Cause, to be sure will; he that has lost it, in right Reason
and Prudence ought to do so too. He should be patient if he thinks himself
injured, and charitable if he be wronged. He should not envy the Adversary that
got the better, nor murmur at the Jury that brought a Verdict contrary to his
mind, nor suspect the Integrity of his Counselor, as if he had not pleaded
for him to the best advantage, much less speak ill of the Judge that gave the
Cause against him. He should quietly sit down and submit to peace, if he thinks
his just Cause is rejected and oppressed: His just Cause? Nay he should rather
suspect his own Judgment, and conclude that his Cause was neither right nor
just, but that he himself was in the wrong, since in a Court of Justice before
Wise, and Understanding, and Impartial Men, the Cause was carried against him.
Thus humbly and meekly should he carry himself, rather than rail at or accuse
any of the adverse Party, and he should depart the Court without regret, and
quietly rest contented with the loss of his Pains and Cost. To do otherwise
will but discover a revengeful malicious Spirit, inconsistent with the meekness
and patience and humbleness of a Disciple of the meek and the patient and the
humble Jesus. And thus much may suffice to be spoken with respect to the first
sort of Matters that may be brought before a Christian Judge or Magistrate, and
those are Matters of Civil Controversy betwixt one Man and another engaged in
Suits of Law.

2. The second are Criminal Matters or things done contrary to the Laws by such
Offenders and Evildoers as are to be punished according to their deserts; with
respect to which I shall show the Reasonableness and the Necessity of it.

Now although it be true that the Christian Judges, of whom my Text speaks, had
not the Power of Judging in Criminal Matters nor of punishing Offenders with
the Civil Sword, because the Civil Power was at that time in the hands of the
Heathens; yet when a Nation is become Christian, and the Civil Power is lodged
in the hands of Christian Magistrates, it is but very fit and reasonable that
they also should have the cognizance of Criminal Matters, and award Punishments
according to the Malefactors deserts. Without this Power the Christian
Commonwealth could not subsist in safety, nor the particular Members of it be
protected from Violence and Oppression. And therefore even a Christian Ruler
has the Power of the Sword committed to him, which he ^eareth not in vain, for
he is the minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil,
Romans 13.5. And the Governors or Magistrates who are deputed and delegated by
him are sent for the punishment of evildoers as well as for the praise of them
that do well, 1 Pet. 2.14. And though there be a Judgment to come hereafter,
when the Wicked shall be condemned to endless Punishments, for the Crimes they
have committed in this Life, yet for the security of Public Peace and Order in
the World it is not safe to leave Men to Terrors at such a distance, but to
commit to Magistrates the Power of executing Vengeance on Evildoers here, that
others by their Examples may learn to do well, at least that they may be
withheld from offending for Wrath, if not for Conscience sake.

Now there are diverse sorts of Criminal Matters that may be brought to the Bar;
and several sorts of Offenders against the Law that reasonably may and most
justly ought to be punished by it. But of all sorts there are some so notorious
and so very remarkable, that I cannot but mention them, not barely to excite
the Government against them, but to show the Justice and Equity of its
Proceedings in Punishing them, together with the Reasonableness and the
Necessity thereof, and to deter others from following their pernicious Examples.

1. The first sort of those Offenders which I shall take notice of, are those
amongst our selves, who being the natural born Subjects of this Land do most
unnaturally endeavor to disturb our Peace by Commotions and Rebellions, who
seek to subvert our Laws and Government by promoting a Foreign Invasion; and to
that end and purpose do plot and contrive the most barbarous Murder of our King.

It is a great Blessing of God which we of this Nation do enjoy, that although
we are engaged in a Just War with our Enemies Abroad, yet we are at Peace
amongst our selves at Home, and free from those distresses and hardships which
our Neighboring Nations that are made the Seat of the War do groan under. But
how desirous are some amongst us to disturb this our Peace? How industrious
have they of late been (and may perhaps be still) to procure our Enemies to
invade us, and bring great Miseries and Calamities upon us, and to overwhelm us
all in Blood and Confusion? For what can be the end and design of calling in
the French amongst us? Is it out of good Will toward us? Is it because they
love us, and have a kindness for us, and design to do us good? Let them believe
it that can. Is it not rather through the side of our King to give a deadly
wound to our Church and State? Is it not through a stream of Royal Blood to
make a passage to our own Bowels? Is it not to subvert our present Peace and
Tranquillity, our Quietness and Security, and utterly to subvert and ruin
whatsoever is near and dear to us?

It Is easy to imagine, it is natural to believe that the French, those sworn
and implacable Enemies to our Church and State, would endeavor an Invasion
upon our Land with a design on purpose to extirpate our Religion, Laws and
Liberties, and to make our Nation become Tributary to their own. But that any
Englishmen, the natural born Subjects of this Kingdom, should solicit them to
it, should be aiding and assisting therein, that in order thereto, and to the
facilitating thereof, they should contrive to assassinate the Person of an
Anointed and Crowned King, of that King who so often and so bravely has
hazarded His Royal Person in the defense of this Kingdom, and for the
vindication of the Common Liberties of Mankind against the Power and Violence
of the Common Enemy and Oppressor, that Protestants should join with Papists to
bring about a Popish Invasion for the destruction of a Protestant King and
Nation; this is that which we cannot but with horror stand amazed at.

It is our great Happiness that we live under the Government of a King whom we
may, without Flattery, reckon to be one of the best of Princes, by whom we have
our Laws, our Liberties, our Properties, our Religion, all entirely preserved,
and through Gods Goodness secured to us. Concerning whom we may, without a
Compliment, make use of those words of Tertullus the Orator to Felix the
Governor, Seeing that by thee very worthy deeds are done unto this nation by
thy providence, we accept it always and in all* places most noble Felix with
all thankfulness, Acts 24 2, 3. Even those very Persons who through Prejudice
or Ignorance, or a misinformed Conscience, cannot or will not comply with the
Oaths to His Government, even they, if they please, may live quietly and
peaceably and undisturbedly under it. And therefore with what horror and
indignation can we but think upon, what Punishment can we think too great for
those Miscreants who by a treacherous and bloody Assassination would deprive us
of the benefit of His Life?

These are certainly Malefactors in grain, Offenders of the greatest size, and
justly deserve that Vengeance which some of their Associates have already
suffered; the unsuccessfulness of whose Attempts and the example of whose
deserved Punishment may serve to deter all others from the like Treasonable and
Base Designs.

2. Another sort of Evildoers there are, who, although they have no design
against the Kings either Life or Government, do deface His Image and
Superscription, and impose upon the Nation with Counterfeit ones, whereby they
do great injury to the Public, and deserve Punishment as well as common
Highway-men and Robbers. And though several of these Evildoers have of late
been taken off by the Justice of the Laws against which they so highly
offended, yet the spawn and generation of them is not yet extirpated, but it is
rather to be feared that they still grow more numerous, as if the great
Blessing of God to the first Race of Mankind had been designed for them, Be
fruitful and multiply, Gen 1.28. And therefore it is every good Man's concern and
interest to discover, so far as he can, these enormous Criminals, and to bring
them to the Bar of Justice, that, if it be possible, our Land may at last be
freed from those Defacers and Counterfeiters of Majesty.

3. Another sort of Offenders whom I shall take notice of, are the common
Debauchees of the Nation, they who trample under foot the Laws both of God and
Man, and are so far from being ashamed of their Lewdness and Impieties that
they openly talk and brag of them, and make a glory of that which should be
their greatest shame. These are the worst Enemies which the Government has,
how great Friends soever they may pretend to be to it, forasmuch as for their
notorious Sins and open Impieties the Great and Just God may be highly provoked
by unforeseen and unthought-of ways to unhinge the Government, to weaken the
nerves and sinews of it, to blast the public undertakings for our good, and to
deprive us utterly of our Religion, Laws and Liberties, since we make no better
use of them But now the Power and Authority of the Civil Magistrate may avert
those Judgments by causing condign Punishments to be awarded upon these impious
Offenders, which perhaps may be more available to a public Reformation than
the best Discourses and Sermons of the most able Preachers, and we may then
hope for and expect the Blessing of God upon the Nation, when by good Laws and
Statutes, (such as are already made, such as the Wisdom of the Government shall
hereafter think fit to make) and the due execution of them, the floodgates of
these common Impieties shall be stopped up.

Other Criminals and Evildoers there may be whom the Justice of the Laws may
find out: But whosoever they are that will not obey the laws of God, and the
laws of the King, it is but fit and right, reasonable and necessary (for the
discountenancing of Vice, for the encouragement of Virtue, for the preservation
of Peace and good Order in the Christian State) that Judgment should be
executed speedily upon them, whether it be unto death, or to banishment, or to
confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment, Ezra 7.26.

Now from all that I have hitherto said we may discern.

1. That we have great Reason to bless and praise the great Mercy and good
Providence of Almighty God, for that we are now blessed with Judges and
Magistrates who are not only Christians, but Professors of that Christianity
which is the purest and the best reformed in the World. You see that St. Paul
would not have the Christians to whom he writes to have any thing to do with
the Heathen Judges, with Infidel Magistrates; and have not we then great Reason
to think our selves happy that we are not under the Power of Popish ones? Would
Popish Judges put the Protestant Laws in execution? Would a Popish Magistracy
promote the good and welfare of a Protestant Church and Nation? Just as much as
the Heathens would that of the Primitive Christians. 'T would suit neither with
their Interest nor their Principles. And therefore we have great Reason to
thank God and the King that we are not concerned with them.

2. We may from hence also discern the great Unreasonableness and the great
Injustice of private Revenge and personal Vindication of Injuries. For it is an
usurping of the Power of the Civil Magistrate, who is Gods Representative and
Deputy, appointed under him to be the public avenger; and therefore it is
written, Avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath; for
vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord, Rom 12.19. Deuteronomy. 32.35. He
does it by his Ministers, the Judges and Magistrates, and therefore no private
Person ought to intermeddle with it.

3. We may moreover, from what I have said, perceive how great encouragement we
have to live answerably to our Holy Calling by walking in Holiness and
Righteousness of Life, and by becoming truly Saints here, since if we do so, we
shall be advanced to the Honor of sitting with our Lord among the Saints in
Judgment hereafter.

4. And lastly, We may from hence take an occasion very seasonably and
profitably to meditate upon that great and general Assize which shall be at the
end of the World, when we shall all appear before the judgment seat of Christ,
that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he
has done, whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5.10 Let us therefore from the
Formalities of a Court of Judicature here fix our thoughts upon that which will
be hereafter, when we shall all be summoned before the Tribunal of that
Impartial Judge who even now keeps a private Sessions in every Man's Breast.
Here the Earthly Judges, Men like our selves, come unto us with indeed some
little show of outward Pomp and Slendour, as it is fit they should: But what is
that to the coming of our Lord himself, who shall descend from heaven with a
shout, with the voice of the archangel and with the trump of God? Even the
Lord Jesus himself shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels in
flaming fire, taking vengeance on those that know not God, and obey not the
gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8, 9. Here indeed Malefactors of
all sorts may so sculk and hide themselves, as that they cannot be found out
and discovered, and consequently may avoid the danger and shame of being set to
the Bar to be tried: But there every Man shall make his personal appearance,
and nothing shall hide them or cover them from the presence of the Judge. Here
we have need of Witnesses and Informers to prove the Indictment; but there our
own Consciences shall testify against us, and God himself will set before us
the things that we have done. Here through collusion and prevarication the
Truth may be concealed; but there all things will be open and manifest to him
with whom we have to do: Who both will bring to light the hidden things of
darkness, and will make manifest even the very counsels of the Heart. Here a
notorious Offender through Partiality and Favor, or through Bribery and
Foul-dealing may escape the Punishment due to his Crimes; but there nothing
shall avert the execution of that dreadful Sentence, Go ye, cursed into
everlasti^g fire, Mat. 25.41. The utmost Punishment that the stroke of Justice
can here inflict on Evildoers may be perhaps but Banishment into another
Climate, or Confiscation of some perishable Goods, or some Pecuniary Mulct, or
some Corporal Castigations, or Imprisonment during Life, or Temporal Death at
the farthest; but they that shall be condemned at that Bar shall be banished
from the Glorious Kingdom of Heaven, shall lose the most durable and most
desirable Goods, shall undergo never ceasing Pains, shall be detained in
Everlasting Chains of Darkness, shall suffer the second Death both of Body and
Soul for ever. Here the acquittal from the Judge is only a restitution to our
former state of Life; but there it will extend to a new, far better, much more
glorious condition. O therefore let such Thoughts as these sink down into our
Hearts, and produce in us an answerable Conversation. This is that good use
which we may all make of these Inferior Courts of Justice, seriously
considering what will be the sad and most deplorable case of all wicked and
impenitent Sinners at the terrible Bar of that irrespective Tribunal, where
their Appearance will be certain, the Sentence of Condemnation irreversible,
and the Punishment consequent thereupon intolerable. Wherefore let us make it
our business so to behave our selves here that we may appear with comfort when
that great and terrible day of the Lord comes. Let us endeavor to make our
peace with God whilst we live, by a sincere Repentance of our former Sins, a
firm resolution to lead a new Life, and a steadfast Faith in his Son Jesus; that
so at the general Resurrection of the Dead when we shall all appear at that
Judgment Seat, we may be set on the Right Hand, and receive with joy that
blessed Sentence which the Lord the Righteous and Eternal Judge shall then
pronounce to all that love and fear him, saying, Come ye blessed children of my
Father receive the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world,
Mat. 25.41. Which God of his Infinite Mercy grant unto us all, through the
Merits of Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost,
the ever-blessed and adorable Trinity, be all Honor, Glory and Praise, now and
for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Brabazon Aylmer at the Three Pigeons against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil.
A Brief Exposition on the Creed, the Lords Prayer, and Ten Commandments: To
which is added the Doctrine of the Sacraments. By Isaac Barrow, D. D. and late
Master of Trinity College in Cambridge. This on the Creed never before
Published; being very different from the Volume of Sermons on it in 8 vo.

A Defense of the B. Trinity. By Isaac Barrow, D. D. late Master of Trinity
College in Cambridge. Never before Printed.

The Council of Trent no Free Assembly: More fully discovered by a Collection
of Letters and Papers of the Learned Dr. Vargas and other great Ministers, who
assisted at the said Synod in Considerable Posts. Published from the Original
Manuscripts in Spanish, which were procured by the Right Honorable Sir William
Trumbull's Grandfather, Envoy at Brussels in the Reign of King James the
First. With an Introductory Discourse concerning Councils, showing how they
were brought under Bondage to the Pope. By Michael Geddes, LLD. and Chancellor
of the Cathedral Church of Sarum.

Twelve Sermons Preached on several Occasion. By Richard Lord Bishop of Bath
and Wells. In 8 vo.

A Seasonable Vindication of the B. Trinity. Being an Answer to this Question,
Why do you believe the Doctrine of the Trinity? Collected from the Works of the
Most Reverend Dr. John Tillotson, Late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. And the
Right Reverend Dr. Edward Stillingfleet, Now Lord Bishop of Worcester. In 8 vo.


