THE GREEK and ROMAN HISTORY Illustrated by Coins and Medals.

Representing their Religions, Rites, Manners, Customs, Games, Feasts, Arts and
Sciences.

Together with A Succinct Account of their Emperors, Consuls, Cities, Colonies
and Families.

In Two Parts.

Necessary for the Introduction of Youth into all the useful Knowledge of
ANTIQUITY.

By O. W.

Licensed and En^^red according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by G. Croom, for William Miller at the Gilded Acorn in St.
Paul's Churchyard, and Christopher Wilkinson at the Black Boy against St.
Dunstan's Church in Fleet street, 1692.

To William Charleton of the Middle Temple, Esquire
SIR,

YOUR very great Civility in Perusing, and in some Particulars Animadverting
upon these Collections, have given me the Confidence to recommend them by
prefixing your Name. Besides your Eminency in this Study, and your Plentiful,
and not without great Skill and Difficulty, well chosen Treasure both for this
and other parts of Natural History; and your unparalleled Readiness to further
and assist all Ingenious Lovers of this most Copious and Gentile Study, do
justly challenge a more Universal and Public Testimony of your Singular Worth
and Eminent Goodness. For what more Honorable Intention can be proposed, than
to endeavor the Introducing the Knowledge of the former Ages of the most Wise
and Powerful Empire, out of their most Authentic Records? And what does not he
deserve, who labors a Resormation of the most Ingenuous part of the Nation?
But this is not my Business at this time: the narrowness of this room will only
permit me to present to your self, and the Candid Readers, th^se few
Considerations.

1. The Catalogues of the Greek and Roman Coins discover to any one minded to
furnish a Cabinet, which are in either sort most Rare and Curious, i. e. which
are not yet described in Print. It is true, there are many Families not found
amongst these, but the Collections of that most Learned Ant. Angustinus, will
give a great Essay toward completing that Number.

2. It was not proper for my Design, to take notice of all the Criticisms
amongst Authors learned in this Art; but to prescribe general Directions for
Interpreting the greatest Number and most common, as is done in the first part,
wherein they are reduced to the most ordinary Topics; and in the second, to
give so far an account of the greatest Actions of the Romans, when come to
their Maturity under the Emperors; for though not all performed by them in
their Persons, yet the Princes attributed them to themselves, rationally
enough, because they paid for them. And amongst these I have only chosen those;
wherein seems contained the most useful Erudition. And herein I have chiefly
made use of those very eminent Persons, Onuphr. Panvinius, and the excellent
Conte Tristan, whose first Volume only seems completely finished according to
his Intention; the second is not so well labored, but the third is little
better than Adversaria. I thought it not necessary to proceed much lower than
Constantine, because after Aurelian very few, but after Constantine's Family I
know not whether any either of good Masters, or considerable Erudition. The
Greek Emperors, which have, till of late, lain Fallow, chiefly because thought
unintelligible, have now at length, by the great Industry of a most Learned
French Gentleman, found their Interpretation; and we despair not also of
understanding those few of the Caliphs found amongst us, by the help of another.

3. It may be some Invitation to this Study, if we consider the great
Obligations this Country had to the Romans, not only for their improving it in
Buildings, Highways, Artifice of War; but also by rendering a great part of it
Habitable, which before was Lakes and Bogs. Romney seems to have been the first
Essay and Pattern of their Draining; for which reason to this day it retains
the Name of the Roman Island, or their Dry-land, which before was Bog and
Water. The working of our Minerals, especially Iron, which the ordinary People
attribute to the Danes, seems to have been the Romans Diligence. Not long ago I
have seen diverse Coins, fresh and rough, as if newly then coined, taken up
under a great Mountain of Cinders, which were wrought over again to good
Profit, finding that the first Miners were not furnished with sufficient
Instruments for drawing out the finest parts of the Mettle. To this I add, that
though very many Roman Coins be found here, yet not many of great Rarity; they
being generally of those, who setting up for themselves, against the
lawfully-esteemed Emperors, were called Tyrants, especially such as reigned
here and in France. Such were Carausius, Alectus, Marius, Maximus, Postumus,
Tetricus, Victorinus, etc. till the time of Constantius Chlorus, who dying at
York after diverse Years reigning; and his Son Constantine here taking up the
Empire, there are many of them and their next Successors, till the entry of the
Saxons, which was about Four hundred and fifty Years after Christ.

4. Many Particulars may be interposed, but I shall here take notice only of
that wherein this Discourse differs from most Authors; who say, that because
the Tribuneship was Annual, therefore the TRIB. POT. was so likewise, and
consequently the Years of the Emperors Reign to be accounted by it; which to me
seems a great Error. Be pleased to take notice of these Instances. It is
confessed that Tiberius reigned not full Twenty three Years. But in Gruter's
Inscriptions, P. 235. conc. Tiberius TRIB. POT. XXVIII. and P. 236. TRIB. POT.
XXXIX. The same is in a Coin of Patin's Edition of Sueton. in Tib. c. 18
wherefore he had TRIB. POT before he was Emperor, together with Augustus.
Accordingly Suetonius in Tib. c. 16. Data rursus Tribunitia potestas in
quinquennium. Again in Gruter, p. 295. You have

AUG. TRIB. POT. XXX. both in the same Year. TIB. TRIB. POT. IX. AUG. TRIB.
POT. XXXI. both in the same Year. TIB. TRIB. POT. X.

So Augustus's XXXII. with Tiberius's XI. and Aug. XXXV. with Tib. XIV.
Augustus had in all TRIB. POT. XXXVI. Years, as Tacitus says, Annal. l. 1. And
so, if Augustus's XXXV. was Tiberius's XIV. then Augustus's last or XXXVII was
Tiberius's XVI. and Tiberius's XXXIIX. was the last of his Reign.

Commodus was Emperor not full Thirteen Years, but there is a Coin of his TRIB.
POT. XV. COS. VI. and in his seventh Consulate he died; so that he had TRIB.
POT. XVII. Years, which was four Years with his Predecessor.

SIR,

I will not trouble you any more with the like Particulars, perhaps some other
Opportunity may be offered for them also: Mean while most heartily wishing you
an Addition of new Happiness with the renewal of the Year; I take leave and
remain,

SIR, Your Humble Servant, O. W.

A Table of the Chapters contained in this Book.
PART I.
Chap. 1. OF the first Coin amongst the Romans Page 1 2 Of Medals p. 14 3 Of
False, Counterfeit, Modern and Rare Medals. p. 20 4 Of Greek Coins p. 27 5 Of
Family or Consular Coins p. 45 6 Of the Reverses of Medals p. 63 7 Of their
Religion, Priests, Days and Assemblies p. 94 8 Of Countries, Colonies, Places
p. 139 9 Of their Magistrates p. 144 10 Of their Wars, Victories, Rewards, etc.
p. 152 11 Of their Games p. 160
PART II.
Chap. 1. OF Julius Caesar the Trium Viri R. P. C. Marc. Antonius p. 161 2 Of
Augustus p. 168 3 Of Tiberius, C. Caligula, Claudius p. 171 4 Of Nero, Claudius
Macer p. 184 5 Of Servius Galba, Salvius Otho, A. Vitellius p. 188 6 Of Flavius
Vespasianus, Titus Vespas. Domitianus p. 193 7 Of Cocceius Nerva, Ulpius
Trajanus p. 201 8 Of Hadrian. p. 208 9 Of T. AElius Hadrianus, Antoninus Pius,
Aurelius Fulvius, Boionus Antoninus p. 215 10 Of Marc. Aurel. Antoninus and L.
Aurel. Verus p. 220 11 Of Commodus p. 226 12 Of Helvius Pertinax, Didius
Julianus, Pescennius Niger and Clodius Albinus p. 230 13 Of L. Septimius
Severus, Bassianus Caracalla, Septimius Geta and M. Opilius Macrinus. p. 236 14
Of Varius Avitus Lupus, Elagabalus, Severus Alexander p. 249 15 Of Julius Verus
Maximinus and Maximus p. 261 16 Of M. Anton. Gordianus, Father and Son p. 263
17 Of D. Caelius Balbinus, M. Clodius Pupienus, Ant. Gordianus p. 264 18 Of M.
Julius Philippus, Father and Son, Carvil. Marinus, G. Messius Quintus Trajanus
Decius, Q. Hetruscus Messius Decius, Caius Valens Hostilianus, Messius Quintus,
C. Julius Valens Hostilianus, C. Vibius Trebonianus Gallus, C. Vibius
Volusianus, C. Jul. AEmylianus p. 269 19 Of P. Licinius Valerianus, M.
Cyriades, Ingenuus, Q. Nonius Regilianus, M. Fulvius Macrinus, (Father and Son)
Quietus, Balista, Odenatus, Moeonius, Herodes, Valens, Piso, AEmylianus,
Saturninus, Trebellianus, Celsus, Victorinus p. 276 20 Of Licinius Gallienus,
Cornelius Saloninus Valerianus, Q. Julianus Saloninus Gallienus, P. Licinius
Valerianus p. 284 21 Of M. Cassius Latienus Postumus, his Son, Lollianus, M.
Aurelius Marius, Lucius AElianus, Cecrops, Appius Claudius Censorinus, M.
Acilius Aureolus, M. Aurelius Claudius, Claudius Quintillus, Victorina,
Zenobia, Herennianus, Timolaus, Vaballathus, Septimius, Domitianus, Firmius, C.
Tetricus and his Sons. p. 289 22 Of L. Domitius Aurelianus, Claudius Tacitus,
Annius Florianus, Sempronius Saturninus, Bonossus, AElius Proculus p. 300 23 Of
M. Aurel. Val. Probus, M. Aurelius Carus, M. Aurel. Numerianus, J. Sabinus,
Aurelius Carinus, Eugenius p. 306 24 Of Diocletianus, Valerius Maximianus, C.
Carausius, Allectus, Constantius Chlorus, Galerius Maximianus, Valerius
Severus, Alexander, Maximinus Daza, Valerius Maxentius, Bassianus, C. Julius
Valens, Licinianus Licinius, Valerius Licinianus Licinius, Calocerus, Fl.
Delmatius, Jul. Delmatius, Claudius, Hanniballianus p. 311 25 Of Fl. Valor.
Constantinus Magnus, Fl. Jul. Crispus, Fl. Jul. Constantius, Fl. Claud.
Constantinus, Fl. Jul. Constans, Flavius Popilius Nepotianus Constantinus,
Vetranio, Magnentius, Magnus Decentius, Fl. Jul. Gallus, Silvanus p. 333 26 Fl.
Jul. Constantius, Fl. Claudius Julianus, Fl. Jovianus. p. 350
Corrigendo.
P. 215. Line 4. should be read thus, Fulvius. 1. Boionus Antoninus called
before Arrius, Son of Aurelius

PART I. Of COINS and MEDALS.
CHAP. I. Of the first Coin amongst the Romans.
1. IT is agreed by all Authors, that before the use of Money all buying and
selling was Commutation of one Commodity for another. But this manner being
found inconvenient; because, First, It was almost impossible exactly to adjust
the values of things; neither, Secondly, Could Commodities be so easily
transported from place to place; many times also, Thirdly, The Owner of what
another stood in need of, did not value what that other had to spare; they
devised and agreed upon one Commodity, which might be a common measure for the
just estimating of all others. And this at first amongst the Romans (for the
Eastern Nations had the use of Silver and Gold-Money long before, as appears by
the Story of Abraham, Genesis 23. 16.) was Copper.

2. Now they made choice of a Metal rather than any other Material, because it
was frameable easily into any weight or figure; it would also endure longer,
and not be so easily broken as Wood and many other things; and was in
sufficient quantity, which Jewels were not, and yet not so plentiful as other
Stones.

3. And amongst Metals they made choice of Copper, I suppose, because there was
greater plenty and greater use of it than of other Metals; most of their
Utensils, and Arms, defensive especially, being made of it.

So that it being of universal use, every one was ready to exchange for it what
he had superfluous. And at first it was exchanged by weight in equality to the
value of the thing received for it: Whence it comes, that in paying, spending,
etc. the words of Weight, impendere, expendere, appendere, etc. are still used.
Hence also (i. e. from Copper, being the only money at first) comes aes, aes
alienum, obaerati, aerarium, etc. to signify not for Brass, but Money in
general.

4. But because they found it very inconvenient still to be weighing, Posterity
devised to set a public Stamp on certain pieces, which should declare their
weight; and this in Rome was begun (as some say) by Numa Pompilius, from whose
Name they will have it called Nummus: But as Pliny, l. 18. c. 3. by Servius
Tullus, who marked the Images of an Ox, a Sheep, a Swine; either in imitation
of the Athenian Coin, or in reference to their value; that so many of such a
Mark ordinarily bought an Ox, a Sheep, or an Hog. Hence it was called Pecunia.
The pieces thus stamped (whereof none have been of a long time extant) were of
diverse weight; some of one pound called As, some of two pounds called
Dupondium, others of the parts of an As, which had each their several names.
For their As or pound was divided into twelve parts, one Ounce was called Uncia.

Sextans was 2 ounces or 1/6 of an As. Quadrans was 3 ounces or of an As.
Triens 4 ounces or of an As. Quincunx 5 ounces. Semis, Selibra 6 ounces, half
an As. Sextunx 7 ounces, or 6 and 1 ounce. Bes 8 ounces or of an As. Dodrans 9
ounces or of an As. Dextans 10 ounces or Sextans subducted from an As. Deunx 11
ounces or Uncia de Ass.
5. Nor had the Romans any other Brass Money than this, which was very
inconvenient by reason of the weight; so that they were wont to bring their
Contribution Money to the Treasury in Carts, and it was deservedly called aes
grave, [which was the reason that they were not so much concerned who coined
Money; and that they took thence Money for public occasions; which, if in
Bullion, was coined to make it current amongst the people] for any thing I can
discover, till the first Carthaginian War; when the Treasury being exhausted,
and the Commonwealth much indebted; they raised the value of their Coin,
ordering that an As should but weigh 2 Ounces, and so be Sextantarius; so that
of every As was made 6, of which the Commonwealth got five. And then, as it
seems, began their Money (probably after the Example of Sicily, some parts of
Greece, and most of Italy) to be stamped with the Image of two-faced Janus on
the one side, and the Beak of a Ship in the greater, and the Stern in lesser,
pieces of Coin.

6. But afterward when they were brought to that great distress by Hannibal,
Q. Fabius Max. being Dictator, they were again lessened; and the As was made of
the weight of one ounce, and after a while by the Papyrian Law of half an
ounce: and of these they coined not only ounces, but halves s s for the greater
ease of the people, as appears by the Marks which we see upon the Consular
Brass Money, (tho this Money be now found rarely) amongst the which was the
Quadrans ratitus, paid ordinarily for their passage by water from the City to
Mount Aventine, then separated by a Ponds or Marshy Lake; upon this was the
Stern of a Rates or Ferry-boat, as upon the As was that of a Ship.

7. In the Year V. C. (of the City's building) 484. five years before the first
Carthaginian War, was coined the first Silver after the Pattern of the
Sicilians; and the Denarius was made equal to 10 Asses, and therefore had this
Mark X or, which Priscian calls Perscriptum, the Quinarius or Victoriatus to 5,
and Sestertius to 2, and or of a Denarius, which seems very strange that 1/84
of 1 l. at most in Silver, should be of equal value to 10 l. of Brass, that is,
one pound of Silver to 840 l. of Brass; and this disproportion probably caused
the lessening of their Brass Coin beforementioned, which was done not long
after.

8. But afterward in the great necessity of the City, in the second
Carthaginian War, as they raised the value of their Brass Money, so did they
also of their Silver; making the Denarius equal to 16 Asses, the Quinarius to
8, and the Sestertius to 4, as by the Marks on some of those Coyns appears.
And I know not whether those Rates were much altered till Justinian's time.

9. Concerning the Weight of the Denarius, Peireskius was of Opinion, and
perhaps not without Reason; that the first Denarii were six to an ounce, or 72
to a pound or Mna Attica; but the latter were manifestly 7 to an ounce, or 84
to a pound. Al^ e pondere subtrahunt, cum sit iustum 84 E libris signari, says
Pliny l. 33. c. 9. and tho the Denarius of the Emperors was changed according
to the Exigences of State, yet seldom exceeded the seventh part of a Roman
Ounce, nor less than an eighth, making sometimes 86. 88, and so to 96, rarely a
100 Denarii in 1 l. and that only after Nero's time.

10. In Valuation as Coin, the Denarius and Dram Atticum was all one, tho
not so in weight; the Denarius weighing about 63 of our grains, the Dram
about 67, of the same weight is a Dram of Gold, such were the Aureus
Philippicus, Daricus, etc. (...) was 2 Drams, Stater was 4 Drachmaes equal
to a Shekel, 10000 Drachmaes were equal to one Talent. An Attick Ounce made 8
Drams; so that it should seem that the Attick and Roman Ounces were
different. A Drachme of Silver is worth of English Money 8, qa q. The Denarius
Consularis 7d ob. qa allowing 8 grains to an English Penny at 5 s. per Ounce.

Villalpandus says, that the Roman Ounce, Pound, etc. are the same which are
now used in Rome, but Savot contradicts him, tho I cannot make out the
difference; for he says only, that an ancient Roman pound was equal to 10
ounces French.

Mr. Greaves says, that an old Roman pound, etc. weighs 5246 English Grains,
of which our pound Troy weighs 5760; so that the difference of these Pounds
is 514 grains.

11. LXII years after the Coining of Silver, i. e. anno V. C. 546. (tho Pliny
in another place says it was, and it is more probable it should be only XIII)
anno V. C. 496. they began to stamp Gold, also (Plin. l. 33. c. 3.) muchwhat
with the same Stamps as the Silver, but one Aureus, or Denarius aureus, for so
it is also called, weighed ordinarily 2 Denarii of Silver, or 6 Scrupula (the
Silver Denarius weighing 3) and was ordinarily worth 24 Denarii; so that that
Ration of Gold to Silver was 12 to one. But it should seem that the number of
Aurei out of 1 l. varied as the Denarii of Silver, for when there were 96 in 1
l. of Silver, there were of Gold 48: and tho diverse Authors say 50, yet it
should seem those 2 were only for the coining or clipping Money; so that tho
the Gold in an Aureus was worth but 24 Denarii, yet an Aureus coined was
current for 25 Denarii or 100 Sesterces. And this was the ordinary proportion
and manner in the time of the Emperors, but at first (as Pliny says) this
proportion was not the same, but the Gold was heavier, and they made fewer out
of one 1 l. I think it not worth labor to examine this obscure matter any
further; and also if in this whole Discourse I have not every where hit this
Truth, I beg your pardon; I have to my best ability set down what I found most
probable; but the value of their Money was so often changed, their counting
also by Sesterces so obscure and intricate; Authors also making use of numeral
Letters in transcribing and printing are so corrupted, besides the difficulty
of the Matter it self, that Learned men in these later Ages cannot agree about
either the number or weight of their Coyns, as you will see if you please to
take the pains to read amongst many, these the most Eminent, Budaeus, Geor.
Agricola, Hottoman, and our Mr. John Greaves.

12. Till Severus Alexander's time there does not seem to have been any Pieces
coined but the Aureus, but he began to coin Semisses and Tremisses, and then
probably began the Aureus to be commonly called Solidus (tho the word be found
also in Adrian's time) in respect of the others, which were but parts; till his
time also the Gold was very good near 24 Caracts fine, which was called
Obrizum, atque illum, ut qui simili color rubeat, says Pliny, quo ignis,
Obryzum vocant. But in Sueton the word is otherwise; for he says, Nero exegit
nummum asperum (rospo) [the roughest, best and newest Coyn]; Argentum
pustulatum [which the French call Argent de Grenaille, and that is thus; When
the Refiners take Silver once refined, melt it again in a Wind-furnace, keeping
it melted a long time, scumming still the Litharge from it, (which they make to
rise by casting in Coal-dust) so long till they see their Silver fine and
clean; they then cast it into a Pale of clean water, which makes the Silver
fall down in little drops and bubbles, which they call Grenaille, we call it
garbled, and the Latins Argentum pustulatum] and Aurum ad obrusam [i. e.
purisied or perfectly fined, which now adays they call 24 Caracts sine] but he
[Severus Alexander] (tho in his Medals called (for what reason I know not, tho
I am consident that admirable Prince did nothing in ostentation) Restitutor
monetae) abased it; and coined sometimes Electrum, which is about 19 Caracts;
P. lin. l. 33. c. 4. says, it is a fifth part Silver, quod [Argentum] si
quintam partem excesserit, ineudibus non resistit. His Silver also was bad,
some of it not above 4 ounces fine; yet I find not but that he kept the former
weight of the Aureus, as did the succeeding Emperors till Constantine the
Great, who made 84 out of a pound. But Valentinian heightened them somewhat
again, making 72 out of 1 l. which is the reason why in the later Latin Authors
Solidu^ is called Sextula, because six of them were made out of one ounce.

13. At first the Denarius had on one side the Head of Roma, on the other
Castor and Pollux, as the Victoriatus had a Victoria. Afterward retaining the
Head of Rome, or some other God, they stamped the reverse with a Biga or
Quadriga, i. e. Chariots drawn with two or four Horses, whence they were called
Bigati and Quadrigati. But afterward [as it seems to me] (for it is generally
affirmed by Learned Authors, that the stamping their Names or Devices upon the
Coin was granted as an Honor by the Senate to such Persons as had done some
famous Exploit, or notable Service for the Commonwealth; which tho perhaps it
may be true in some very-very few Causes, as for instance, Sueton, c. 94.
speaks of Augustus consulting an Astrologer together with Agrippa: Tantam mox
fati fiduciam Augustus habuit, ut nummum argenteum nota Sideris Capricorni, quo
natus est, percusserit; then was Augustus under nineteen years old. Great
persons, which were no Magistrates (and not Magistrates only) had liberty to
coin Money; or at least Medals or Donaria: and if thus, it will follow, that
they made such Donaria upon several occasions, as Birth of Children, etc.
Perhaps the Triumviri coined the ordinary Money, what other persons stamped was
for Donatives and extraordinary; or not much unlike to what is now in Moscovy,
certain Officers to coin the public Money, but every man might coin his own;
yet in the general, as I said, it seems to me that the Officers of the Mint had
liberty to put what stamp themselves pleased upon the Coin; which was
frequently somewhat to their own Honor. For besides that, we find very few or
no Coins of the famousest men, as of Scipio, Sylla, Marius, Flaminius, etc.
before Julius Caesar (who indeed, says Dio, l. 44. had that Privilege given
him by the Senate, to have his Image upon the Coin in his life time) so have we
still the Names of one or more Mint-masters, with Reverses sometimes alluding
to their Names, as the Lartch-tree to Lariscolus, an Ox or Calf to Vitellius,
somewhat of Medicine to Acilius, and the like; or to the Honor of their Family
or Country: as Pomponius put upon his Coin Numa Pompilius; Titurius stamped
Tatius the first King of the Sabines; or somewhat of their own Exploits, as
Metellus stamped an Elephant, diverse others Victories, and the like. And this
continued a good part of Augustus's time, even as long as the Triumviri put
their Names upon the Coin with Augustus's Head.

14. There were in the City certain Officers on purpose to overlook the Mint,
who were Magistratus minores. Cic. de leg. lib. 3. called Curatores Denariorum
flandorum: how many at first I know not, but afterward there were three of
them called Triumviri: A. A. A. F. F. F. i. e. AEre, Argento, Auro, flando,
feriendo, faciundo till Julius Caesar's time, who increased their number,
making them IIII- Viri, and so that number continued till after the Victory of
Augustus at Actium; when the Quatuorviri were again reduced to Triumviri, and
so they continued. These Officers were chosen ex ordine Equestri, and coined
sometimes the public Money, which is expressed thus EX A. P. sometimes also
(tho as I said, seldom) the Senate ordered the Inscription, and then there is
SC upon it; but it should seem most commonly the Bullion of private persons,
and the Inscription at their own discretion.

15. These were Officers in the City, but there was also Money coined in diverse
Provinces, Colonies, and Municipia; and it was a Privilege granted to them, as
also to some private men, if that place in Suetonius Tiber. c. 49. be so to be
understood. Plurimis civitatibus and privatis veteres immunitates and jus
Metallorum (which if not coining, I know not what it is) and Vectigalium
adempta. Particularly the Officers General of their Armies coined Money very
frequently (as it should seem) for speedy payment of their Soldiers; as at
Apolonia, Cic. Ep. fam. C. 13. L. Planco: and then the Duumviri or annual
Governors of those places (representing the Consuls at Rome) marked II viri or
H viri; or the chief Magistrate of the place was Mint-master; as we see it
frequently in the Greek Coins of the Roman Emperors.

16. It is also probable, that till Aurelians's time it was lawful, if not for
all, yet for very many Persons and Cities to coin; perhaps all those who had
Charges of high Priesthood and Sacrifices: which is the reason of such
diversity of Coins and Medals before his time. It should seem also, that
Aurelian reduced the Privilege of Coining to a few Cities, perhaps to those
named in notitia Imperii; which might be the cause of the great and difficult
War he had with the Monetarii, of whom 40000 perished. Hence in and after his
time, and not, or rarely, before, Sacra Moneta, i. e. which belong to the
Exchequer to coin: few Greek Coins also after that time, few or no Medaillons,
and little variety of Reverses; the Exchequer coining all of a bigness, and
with the same Stamps.

Now to what Cities the Minting was restrained, is very uncertain: In the times
of the later Emperors the Cities, which had the Privilege of coining, put their
Names to the Coin, or some other Mark with Letters; for what else those Letters
in the Coins of the later Emperors should denote, I cannot imagine. Of such as
set their Names, I have observed these: All with S. C. or with R, seem to have
been coined at Rome, and commonly by good Masters.

Con. Constantinopolis. Scis. Sciscia. Sir. Sirmium. Tr. Treviri. Arl. Arelate.
Ln. I know not to which of these two it belonged.
Lon. Londinum. Lug. Lugdunum. Nem. Nicomedia. Ant. Antiochia. Al. Alexandria.
TES. perhaps Thessalonica.
Yet I am not satisfied with this Interpretation of the Letters on the Reverses
of the later Emperors, as if they signified the place where coined, for I see
some of them that no man can so apply; and therefore, as I said, I suppose them
rather Marks or private Notes.

SM. NM. perhaps Sac. Moneta Nova Mediolanensis.

S. M. Sacra Moneta, Ob. obsignata, P. percussa, S. signata.

17. Some think that the Jews, till the destruction of the City, had liberty of
coining their own Money, and with their own Stamp, which, say they, is the
reason that we see so many Shekels. But I find in the New Testament only
mention of Grecian, or Roman Money; and I am afraid many of those Shekels are
counterfeit, Scaliger thinks by the ancient Christians; but I am sure both by
ancient and modern Jews, who are the greatest Falsifyers of ancient Coins, both
Roman and Grecian as well as Jewish in the World, and this themselves have
confessed to me.

18. Diverse Colomes (as Patrae and many others) had the Privilege granted
them, sometimes by the Senate, sometimes by the Emperor to coin Brass Money, as
appears by diverse Spanish Medals in Ant. Augustinus: and in some of Augustus,
and in those Medals D. D. signifies those Medals to have been coined Decreto
Decurionum, or the chief Magistrates of such Colonies or Municipia.

CHAP. II. Of Medals.
THE later Italians call all those ancient Pieces Medaglie, quasi Metaglie,
because made of Metal; which Name is still used to signify such, whether
Money, or other stamped or coined Pieces, as are reserved from Antiquity.

1. And of those, as I doubt not but (as AEneas Vicus, Savot, and others say)
some were current Money; such were those which had sacra Moneta, or three Women
representing the three Materials of Coin; or some one or more of the III- virs
Names with A. A. A. Those which have the Mark of any part of an As, and
generally all the lesser sizes; all very much worn; all of bad Masters, as are
most of those by the Grecian Cities of the Roman Emperors, and such also (says
Cellini) as have but a shallow impression; for Medals (as being for ornament
more than use) were made with greater care and expense.

So they will also confess, that not all, which now we have, were ordinary
Coin: as, 1. Not the greater sort, which the Italians call Medaglioni, many of
which weigh 2 ounces and. 2. Not such as have about them a Circle of some other
Metal than the Medal it self, which the Italians call Cotorniate, or
Contornate: those (as they say) were either Missilia, Donatives, or Testimonia
probatae Monetae, which the French call Pieds forts, or Essays of their
Workmanship presented to the Prince and Persons of greatest Quality, which is
the reason there are so few of them; especially those so accurately wrought,
that some have thought that they made no more than one with one stamp. The
reason why I conceive those not to be Coin is, because they cost more making
than they could be worth in common usage; and for the same reason they must
also grant that all of extraordinary Workmanship; as also those of Corinthian
Brass (if any such, of which by and by) and in fine, whatever would not quit
cost were also for other uses than current Money. And this is also confirmed by
what is confessed of the Writers of those matters; that the Medals of the
former Emperors were not current in the times of the later, who yet restamped
many of them: and it is observed, that some of the Emperors after Severus,
probably Gallienus, stamped a new Medals of all the consecrated Emperors, yet
not so lively as the former, but having their Faces somewhat mingled with the
Tracts of the then present.

2. It is worth inquiring what uses they made of them, and to what end they
coined those beautiful and costly Medals, I shall propose: 1. That they were
much taken with the Excellency of the Workmanship, and that afterward they
wore them about their Necks: D. L. 7. tit. 1. l. 28. Nomismatum aureorum vel
argentorum veterum, quibus pro gemmis uti solent, ususfructus legari potest.
Glossa; animi voluptatem, delectationem, and recreationem pro fructu haberi.
And tho here be mention only made of gold and silver ones, yet it is not
improbable those also of Corinthian Brass, if any such, or other Brass gilt (of
which sort there are many) were also for the same use: Suet. Aug. cap. 75.
Saturnalibus and si quando alias libuisset, modo munera dividebat, vestem, and
aurum, and argentum, modo nummos omnis not^ etiam veteres, regios, and
peregrinos; therefore Medals in that time were in great request; which also is
collected out of his Tib. c. 58. Capitale esset nummo vel annulo Effigiem
Augusti impressam Latrinae aut Lupanari intulisse; wherefore either he speaks
of some extraordinary Stamp, and not of the Money ordinarily stamped with the
Image of Augustus; but that those so stamped were of more Respect and Dignity,
and for Donaria; or that there was great quantity of other Money not so
stamped. Besides see in Nero, c. 11. the great profuseness of Nero in his
Missilia, Vest is, Aurum, Argentum, etc. But this could not be the principal
intention of their making. Besides therefore the formerly mentioned purposes; I
conceive the Princes themselves caused them to be made for the conservation of
their Names and great Actions. For which they chose Brass rather than Iron,
because more easy to work, not so subject to rust, and more beautiful; rather
than Gold and Silver, because the Workmanship being of more value than the
Metal, was likely to escape the Goldsmiths fire, the prodigal hand of a
careless Heir, the subtlety of the Thief, and the transportation of the
Merchant. Now I conceive this to be their intention, because we see them so
excellently wrought; all signal Actions with the exact observation of Time,
etc. and many times the Authority of the Senate fixed upon them; which being
frequenter (S. C.) upon the large Brass Medals than upon Silver and Gold,
intimates that there was some greater value set upon these than the other.
Besides, few Inscriptions there are either in Gold or Silver, which are not
also in Brass, but many in Brass, which are neither in Gold nor Silver. The
Cotorniate also are all in Brass; the Figures in Brass are better cut; the
Erudition also greater; to which add, that few, if any, Greek Medals, and
Medals of Colonies of the Emperors in any but Brass; and then you have also the
reason why greater account is generally made in these times of Brass-medals
then either of Gold or Silver.

3. Medals of Copper are of diverse sorts, chiefly three, Red, Yellow, and
White. Red is ordinary Copper, of which there were diverse sorts, as you may see
in Pliny, l. 33. c. 1, 2. I think it not worth time to stand upon them. White
was either Copper silvered over, or mingled with Tin, and that either whitened
after they were coined, perhaps as we do now Studs and Nails, etc. as it is
manifest in some of Aurelian, Probus, and that time, or else before; of which
sort there are some in the first part of the Empire, chiefly in the Coins of
the external Cities of Augustus, Tiberius, Nero, and so to the Antonini, the
which also are not of any good Master, and therefore not counterfeited. Yellow
also is of several sorts, 1. Red or Copper gilt, 2. a real Gold-colour
throughout, 3. Brass or Kettle-metal, 4. bright yellow Copper gilt, 5. Brass or
Kettle-metal gilt. 6. Pot or Candlestick-metal which is mingled with Tin or
Lead. Till Severus Alex. most of the Coins are of some of the five first, but
after him almost all of the last sort and worst. The second and third sort are
they which go under the name of Corinthian Brass, concerning which Authors
disagree. For Savot says plainly, there are none extant either of true
Corinthian Brass (i. e.) such as was made accidentally at the burning of
Corinth by L. Mummius, where all the Statues of Gold, Silver and Brass running
together, made a very beautiful and much-prized Composition, or of such as was
made in imitation of it; but those that seem so, says he, are either Brass
gilded, and not mingled in the melting; or else such as have that beautiful
yellow color from the Calaminaris, which some Copper imbibes better than
other; as Pliny, lib 34. c. 2. observes of Livianum and Cordubense, which,
says he, were near as good as natural Orichalcum (which before his time was
failed) and of these he notes, that smaller Money was made, but the Asses of
Cyprus-Brass. But other Authors affirm, that there are Medals extant of
Corinthian Brass, and those of three sorts: The first is of diverse colors,
white and yellow, as it were inlaid; caused probably, because the Metals
mingled in pieces, the fire not being sufficient to melt them down; of this
matter very few, yet some of Tiberius, C. Caesar and Claudius they say they
are. The second sort is white, in which the Silver predominated, these also
very rare. The third sort is of the color of Gold, of which (says AEneas
Vicus) there are many of Tiberius and till the Antonines, but none afterward.
These Medals also are, as he says, of Excellent Masters, and are also much
prized. How to determine the Controversy, I know not, I confess I never saw
any of the three sorts to my best remembrance, yet methinks it is hard to
maintain a Negative against them, who pretend to know and to have seen them.

4. Amongst the Silver-coins many are found of Iron and Brass within, and
covered with a thin Plate of Silver; which was the reason, that to discover
this fraud, they filed them in small notches, and called them Serratos; and (as
Tacitus notes) were in reputation amongst the Germans. Pecuniam probant
veterem, ac diu notam, Serratos, Bigatosque. De Moribus Germ. Tho Full. Vrs.
interprets Serratos such as had Saws stamped upon them, of which sort are very
few, if any. M. Antonius is noted to have used this fraud, as also Livius
Drusus to have mingled of Brass with the Silver; but in later times Princes
have taken care to make their Coin thinner, for the avoiding this Abuse.

CHAP. III. Of false, counterfeit, modern and rare Medals.
1. IN the late renovation of Learning diverse persons, inquiring into
Antiquity, took notice of the advantage to be received from Medals, toward the
perfecting History, and understanding the ancient Customs of the Romans, began
to search after them with great curiosity; and procured them at very great
Rates, which was the cause that several Workmen, in hope of gain, set their
minds to counfeit them. Such were Victor Gambello; Giovanni del Cavino, and his
Son called Padoani, very excellent, yea the best Workmen, and whose
Counterfeits are better than the Originals many times, by which and by their
forked Letters they are discovered; Benevenuto Cellini that excellent
Goldsmith; Alexander Greco; Leo Aretine; Jacopo da Tresso; Frederick Bonzagna,
and Giovan-Jacapo his Brother; Sebastian Plu^bo; and Valerius de Vicenza,
Gorlaeus also; and it is now a Trade amongst the Jews more than the Christians.
But these are more tolerable, who did only remake ancient true Medals, than T.
Annius Viterb. who himself, besides Medals, framed Inscriptions of his own
imagination, and buried them in convenient places, that when they seemed
ancient, he might find, present, and vend them to the World, as he did his
Berosus, etc. The same abuse of describing false Coins for true is also said to
be in Guevara's Epistles, Jov. Pontanus his Venditionis Formula; Pompon. Laetus
his Will, Joh. Camers, Cyr. Anconitanus called the Antiquary and the
Promptuarium Iconum, by which two last many Authors, especially the Spanish,
have been misled.

2. The first who set out the Effigies of the Emperors and other famous
Persons, was Card. Sadolet, or (as some say) Fulvius Ursinus (for under his
Name the Book goes) under the Title of Illustrium Imagines printed Andreas
Fulvius, not Fulvius Ursinus. Vide Ge^neri Bibliot. a Simlero edit. and Phil
Labbe Bibliothecae Nummar^ae. Part 1.
anno 1517. or perhaps next to him Joan. Huttichius put out a Book called
Imperatorum Romanorum libellus un^ cum imaginibus, etc. at Strasbourg, anno
1525. and in other places afterward, the Figures nothing like those upon their
Medals. Jac. Strada, anno 1553. at Lions published his Epitome Thesauri
Antiquit atum. This Work was again imitated at Zurich, anno 1558. and
afterward by Rouille at Lions under the name of Promptuarium Numismatum.
Strada is but indifferently faithful, and this Edition especially has added
many false Images and Medals: by the way also note, that the Book of
Inscriptions printed at Rome in Leo X's time, is censured to be corruptly
printed.

3. Now the ways of falsifying them are these: 1. By filing of the halves of
two Medals, whereof one side is wasted, and sodering them together. This is
discerned easily, because many times the two parts do not belong to the same
Emperor, nor are of the same Master; but chiefly because the conjunction
appears by a white or silver Thread (for their Soder is made of that Metal)
round about the Edge. 2. If an ancient Medal be almost consumed by working it
over again with a Burin or graving Tool, and reingraving the worn Figures; if
well done, these are not ^uch inferior to true ones: but are known, because the
middle is more hollow than the edges. 3. By restamping a Medal worn on both or
one side; or by stamping a new Medal, by which means most of the modern ones
are made; if on one side, they lay a Felt under the other side, notwithstanding
which, that side will be flat and battered whilst the other is fresh and rough:
if both sides be new stamped, the Traits will be crude and apparent, besides
that the new Sculpture is of another Mine than the ancient: the Letters made
with another proportion, the Ms straight down, whereas all the Ancients are M.
And by the writing are they well discerned, for the Letters of the ancient are
not uniform, nor very decent: Seeing, as Cellini very acutely observes, they
graved all their Molds with Chisels or Burins, whereas the late Counterfeiters
struck theirs with a Punch. But the best way is that which Pliny says, l. 33.
c. 9. by comparing them with other modern and counterfeit ones. In hac artium
sola Vitia discuntur, and falsi denarii spectatur exemplar, pluribusque veris
denariis adulterinus emitur. 4. By casting a new Medal upon an ancient one; to
distinguish these, you must take notice, that Learned men do conceive the
manner of coining, especially great Medals, was anciently to melt the Metal,
and cast it into Molds like a Ball, or Bullet, and then being hot, to stamp
them flat with a great and heavy Hammer (such a one as we see upon some Medals)
whence it comes, that most of the Medals have clefts in the Edges, caused by
the force of the Instrument, which the cast ones do not well represent.
Besides, the melted Metal does not so well and distinctly receive the minute
Traicts of the stamp. Again, be the Spaud never so fine, there will appear
small roughnesses as of Sand upon the cast Piece; nor can the best Caster in
the most accurate flaskes hinder, that there shall not be little Edges of Metal
to be filed away; the cast ones also are lighter than the true. 5. Lastly, by
filling up a corroded Medal with a certain strong Paste, and casting over all a
thick Varnish made of Sulphur, Verdigrease and Vinegar; which when you see you
must suspect, and trying with any sharp Instrument easily discover the fraud.

4. To give Rules sufficient for discerning of all false Medals is impossible,
yet some few I will set down. 1. All which have moral sentences upon them; as
Festina lent; Veni, vidi, vici, and the like, are false: there being
ordinarily nothing but the Names, Titles, Time, Offices, etc. of the Prince,
etc. 2. All or the greatest part of the Ancients, who were not Sovereign
Princes, or who lived in Commonwealths are counterfeit, as of Hannibal, Plato,
Alcibiades, Nero, which Petrus Galilaeus sold to Paul IV. at a vast rate,
Artemisia, Fabius, Scipio Africanus, and the like: also Medalions of Priamus,
Dido, etc. also the large ones of Carluas M. with a long Beard, and Gothic
Inscription. 3. Diverse of the Augustae in AEneas Vicus (i. e.) such as he
confesses to have taken out of Promptuarium Iconum. 4. All the ancient gold
Coins were fine, and if not fine, not ancient. 5. To say somewhat of the Value
of them, observe these Rules: 1. Modern Medals well cast upon ancient ones, if
cleansed and hansomed, are the best of all counterfeits, and may serve very
well to fill up a Series. 2. Modern Medals stamped of a good Master after
ancient ones, and of a good representation are the next best, and are more
worth than a common ancient one. Modern ones also stamped upon an ancient one
defaced, are better than of modern Metal. 3. Of all modern Counterfeiters the
Padoani are the best, and their Works, especially such as were stamped when the
Stamps were fresh, are much esteemed.

5. It is very hard to cleanse a Brass Medal from Earth and Rust, some boil
them half an hour in Water with Tartar, and a little Alom, after they are cold
rub them well with Tanners Oaze or with Bran; others pass them over lightly
with Aqua fortis, but this is dangerous, and by no means to be used in such as
are of mixed Metals; others put them in the fire, but that commonly spoils
them; others rub them with Tripoly or a Wire-brush; but the best way is with
the Burin or Graving tool for them that know to use it and have the patience.

6. Medals are esteemed, 1. for their Antiquity, 2. for the goodness of their
Master; the best Masters were from Nero to Pertinax, a time of long Peace, 3.
for their well-conservation, cleanness, and beauty, 4. for their greatness, 5.
for their Erudition, 6. for their rarity, 7. to make up a Series. Now these
Rules are observed by men of the Trade concerning their rareness and value.

7. The Medals are rare, when of a Person who reigned but a short time; or but
few made of him, or one that is singular of an Emperor of whom there are many
common. Medals Contorniate, tho of a bad Master, are rare and very much
esteemed, so are they which have the Face hollow, such also as have two Heads
upon them, whether on the same or diverse sides; such as have the bust or good
part of the Body with the Head; such are many of those who were only Caesar's,
and not Augustus's, which have no Reverses, save only an Inscription. The
Medals of the lower Emperors in great, and of the higher in little, are rarer.
Great Greek Medals of the Emperors are not much more esteemed than the lesser,
because of their ill Masters. Great Consular Medals rare, if any at all.
Medaglions of Gold and Silver very rare, if any at all, of Brass also rare:
Which to understand, take notice there are four bignesses of Medals, 1.
Medaglions, 2. great Medals which have frequently S. C. upon them, 3. mean, 4.
small ones. The exact bigness of each, tho both Goltzius and Ant. Augustinus
set down, yet I think them not exact enough to give them here. Note also, that
they are dearer in some places than others; either according as they find
Chapmen, or are known, or that the Emperors lived there; as here Carausius and
Allectus are not scarce, which in other places are counted very rare.

CHAP. IV. Of Greek Coins.
1. BEfore we come to the Roman, it will not be amiss to speak somewhat of the
Greek Coins, supposing what we hinted before, that those with the Figures of
the ancient Athenian and Lacedaemonian Generals, the large ones with the Temple
of Diana, Mausolaeum, Q. Dido, Priamus, and the like, are all false; and that
there is no true Medal of Moses, or the Kings of Caldaea, Judaea, etc. we will
speak only of the unsuspected.

2. The Gold-Coins, whether Darici, Philippei, Alexandrei, or others, were much
what of the same Value and Weight, to wit, about 133 gr. English, or 179 gr. of
Holland equal in weight to the Didrachma, but in value 20 Drachmae of Silver.
So that it appears their Gold had decuple Ration to their Silver, and that five
Darici were worth a Mna or Mina which was 100 Drams. The Attick (...) was of an
ounce; and somewhat heavier than the Roman Denarius, tho among the Romans (the
(...) being a Foreign Coin) they passed promiscuously one for the other. The
Dram contained (...) (Scruples) 3. (...) (oboli) 6. (...) (lupuli) 9. (...)
(siliquas) 18. (...) (aereola) 48. (...) was two Drachmaes. And (...) 4 Drams
was called Stater. The Dram weighs less than 70 English gr. and the best
(...) (Pallas a noctua) about 268 gr.

3. The Greek Coins were either of Kings and Princes, or Republics; for I
shall speak of such as were coined under the Roman Emperors in their proper
places Nor will I distinctly set down the Grecian from the Sicilian and
Italian-Magna-Graecia ones. The Coins of the Kings are more rare in Brass than
in Silver, but of the Republics rarer in Silver than in Brass. The Greek ones
of the Roman Emperors are very rare in Silver, and I know not whether any at
all in Gold; all in a manner of bad Masters: Some there are, but rarely, which
are Greek on one side, and Latin on the other: Some, tho Greek, have Latin
Inscriptions, as Suessano, M^nturnens, etc. This Catalogue I have taken chiefly
out of Goltzius. Paruta (who has written of the Sicilian Medals) I have not
yet seen.

(...), only found in Reverse to Geta and some other Roman Emperor. (...), King
of Macedon. Antigonus in Silver not very rare, but not known of which of them.
(...), rarely with his Head, ordinarily Juno a Thunderbolt. (...), King of
Macedon, rare. (...). (...), King of the fews, rare. (...). (...), very common
with great variety of Reverses with the Lions Skin, is to be understood Ludi
Alexandrei in honorem Herculis; the Arabians call him not Alexander, but by a
name that signifies Bicornis. (...). (...), not rare, except with an Elephant,
or his Wife Cleopatra. (...). (...). (...), King of Syria, rare. (...). (...).
(...), (filius, sc) King of Epire, Brother of Olympias, Uncle of Alexander the
Great. (...). (...). (...), King of Syria, rare. (...). (...), Amyntas third
King of Macedon, very rare. (...), King of Macedon, rare. (...). (...), King of
Bithynia, his Head a Goddess with Arms expanded. (...), King of Macedon. Areta,
Rex. (...), King of Pergamus, rare. (...), King of Cappadocia. (...), King of
Chalcis, Brother of Herodes Agrippa King of Judaea, of whom Acts 22. (...),
Queen of Egypt. (...), Queen of Caria. (...), King of Pergamus, rare. (...),
King of Judaea. (...), Queen of Egypt, rare. (...), the Sun in Faccia, a man
with a twoedged Ax on his shoulder, and a Spear in his hand (...). Probably
money of Caria, where Hecatomnus the Prince left five Children, 1. Mausolus,
who married his Sister, 2. Artemisia, who both dying, 3. Idrieus succeeded, who
married, 4. Ada his Sister. He dying, she was deposed, and banished by 5.
Pexodorus the youngest Son, but was restored by Alexander the Great. (...),
very rare. (...), King of Sicily, very rare. (...), frequent, but not known of
which. (...), rare. (...), King of Syria. (...), King of Syria. (...), King in
Sicily, common. (...), King of Syracuse, very rare. (...), King of Sicily,
rare. (...), King of Mauritania, on one side Roman, on the other Punick
Letters, common; with any other Inscription, rare. and Cleopatra Daughter of
Antiochus M. Wife of Euergetes or Physcon. (...), Son of the former. Cleopatra,
the Daughter of M. Antonius by the Egyptian Cleopatra. This was the famous
Historian, very rare. (...), King of Macedon, common; his Head with Jupiter
Hammons Horns; usually the Kings of Macedon, after Alexander so decypher'd.
(...). his Head, the three Graces, (...). (...), her Head, and a Lobster.
(...), King of Caria. (...). (...), Daughter of Antiochus King of Comagenae,
and Wife of Alexander Son of Tigranes, made King of Armenia by Nero. (...).
(...), King of Macedon. (...), King of Macedon, rare. His Head Jupiter
thundering. (...), King of Caria. (...), Queen of Egypt, rare in Gold, rarer
with M. Antony. (...), King of Cnossians. (...), (the great) common, his Head a
Stag. (...). (...), rare. Cesarion, rare. (...). very rare (...), probably
(...) Daughter of Ptolomaeus Philometor, (...), King of Caria. (...), King of
Macedonia. (...). (...), King of Macedonia. (...). (...). (...), King of
Bithynia, common. (...), King of Epire and Macedonia. (...), King of Macedon.
(...), King of Syria. (...), King of Macedon. (...), King of Syria. Ptolemaeus,
King of Egypt, very common, not known of which, the ordinary Head is Jupiters,
not Ptolomy' s, an Eagle. (...). (...). (...). (...), King of Egypt. (...),
King of Macedonia. (...), not very rare. Seguin has set out one with the Heads
of (...)* and Berenice on one side* (...). on the other Ptol. Philadelph.
Arsinoe and (...). (...), King of Armenia, rare. (...), King of Syria, very
rare. Sir J. Marsham had one. (...), not very rare. (...), King of Pergamus, in
Silver not rare, an Eunuch. Lysimachus seized upon his Treasures and the City
Pergamus, and began the Monarchy of Pergamus or the Atta^ci. (...). (...).
(...). (...), King of Syria. Coin is commonly of a Dram, the other Philips,
more commonly Didrachmes. (...), King of Macedon, the last but one: his Apud
Seguinum. (...), a barbarous Head, with a Beard and a Diadem. R, a young man on
horseback. (...), a King of Thrace, who fought a sore and doubtful battle with
Lysimachus presently after Alexander' s death. There are also, tho very rare,
extant, Coins of Rhaemetalces, Cotys, and Rescuporis, Kings of Thracia:
probably also of (...), or Pythonice Wife perhaps of Cotys. Ininthymenou,
(...).


A Catalogue of the Coins of the Grecian Commonwealths, chiefly out of
Goltzius. I have taken in all that Goltzius has both in his Graecia, Insulis
Graeciae, Asia, Sicilia and Magna Graecia, and some others.
(...) * (...) * (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) * (...) * (...) (...) *
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) * (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) * (...) (...) (...) * (...) (...) * (...) (...) * (...) * (...)
(...) * (...) (...) (...) (...) * (...) (...) (...), Jupiter and Juno. an Ox
upon his guard. (...) * (...) * (...) (...) * (...) (...) (...) (...) * (...) *
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...), the head of Jupiter from whom they pretended
their original. (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) * (...) (...) * (...) * (...) *
(...) (...) * (...) (...) * (...) (...) * (...) * (...), a Be E (...). a
Stags-head near a Palm tree. (...) (...) * (...) * (...) * (...) (...) * (...)
* (...) (...) * (...) (...), an half-Goat, because that Creature first
discovered the Oracle there. Nonius. or because the great Sacrifice there. Paus
in Phoc. (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) * (...) * (...) * (...) (...)
(...) (...), an Ox which in that Country was of extraordinary (...); they were
called Py^ Boves. (...) (...) * (...) * (...) (...) * (...) * (...) (...) (...)
(...) * (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) * (...) * (...) (...) * (...) (...)
(...) (...) * (...) * (...) (...) * (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) * (...) (...) (...) (...) * (...) (...) * (...) (...) (...)
(...) * (...) (...), an old head supposed to be Charondas's their Lawgiver,
buried at Catana; and his Monument found not many years ago as Fazello says.
either a winged Thunderbolt, or Scepter, or Caduceus; between two Patera's or
Sacrificing Dishes. (...) (...) (...) * (...) (...) * (...) (...) * (...) *
(...) (...) (...), All Coins with twisted Serpents were Cretan. (...) * (...) *
(...) (...) * (...) (...) * (...) (...) (...) (...) * (...) (...) * (...) (...)
(...) * (...) (...) * (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...), a young head
of (...) King of a Country lying upon Propontis, slain accidentally by the
Argonauts. He gave name to the famous City of Cyzicum given by Jupiter in Dowry
to Proserpina who was the chief Goddess of that City. (...) * (...) (...) (...)
* (...) (...) (...) * (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) * (...) * (...) (...) (...) (...) * (...) (...) * (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) * (...) (...) * (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) * (...) (...) (...) * (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...),
Naples and all Campania worshipped Deum Hebonem, who was the same with Bacchus,
Beccapeus, etc. and is indeed the Sun in the figure of an Ox with a man's face.
(...) * (...) (...) (...) * (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) * (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) * (...) (...) * (...) * (...) * (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
* (...) * (...) (...) (...) * (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) * (...)
(...) (...) (...), A Woman's head towred with a double axe upon her shoulder;
probably the head of Smyrna an Amazon Foundress of that City. (...) * (...)
(...) (...) * (...) (...) * (...) (...) * (...) * (...) (...) (...) * (...) *
(...) (...) (...) (...) * (...) (...) (...) * (...) (...) (...) * (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) * (...) * (...) (...) (...) * (...) (...) (...) (...) * (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) * (...) * (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) *
(...) (...), A Sphynx. Homer probably born there. (...) * (...) (...) * (...)
(...) (...) (...)

These which are Asterisced are not in Goltzius's greater Work, but in that
which is as it were an Index to all the rest; howbeit tho they are not
described in his Book, yet diverse of them are not very rare: As also there are
diverse Coins of those Cities he sets down not described in him. As,

Catana in Sicily had on one side the two Brothers carrying their aged Parents
upon their shoulders out of the burning.

Tenedos, a double or two-edged Hatchet; an Head of a Man and Woman, in Memory
of a Law made by King Tennes, that a man and woman taken in Adultery should
have their heads struck off with an Hatchet; his own Son being afterward taken
in the fact, he was consulted what should be done with him, and answered, Let
the Law be executed, which accordingly was, and this Tennes afterward Deified.

Corinth had Bellerophon killing a Chimaera. Bellerophon was a beautiful young
Man of Corinth, who being tempted by Stenobaea; or, as some call her, Arria the
Wife of Praetus, and refusing her, by her was accused to her Husband, as if he
had endeavored to have forced her; Praetus sent him to Jobates his Father-in
law, who, to rid himself of him the more handsomely, sent him to subdue
Chimaera, a Mountain in Lycia, the lowest part whereof was infested with Lions
and Serpents, the middle part was good Pasturage, and the top flamed as
Vesuvius; but the young Man returned with Honor, having rendered the Mountain
habitable, and was therefore very much honored by his Countrymen. Where you
see twisted Serpents, it is commonly, if not always, a Cretan Coin.

Greek Coins commonly have the Name of the City that coined them set upon them,
and therefore are easy to be known. Besides what are here named, they find
others very frequently.

CHAP. V. Of Family or Consular Coins.
1. THere are very many Roman Coins, the age whereof is uncertain; but are
generally supposed to be before Julius Caesar, to which difficulty we shall
speak by and by: and they were at first collected by Fulvius Ursinus in his
excellent Work; who found no other advantage, beside the Reverses to be made by
them, and that to discover the Roman Families; and according to those Families,
he ranketh them Alphabetically, which is the reason they are called Coins of
the Families: And so great was his diligence, that I have not read nor met with
any could scarce add one Medal of any one Family, he has not set down; except
one Betiliena and two or three lately added by Monsieur Seguin: Gorlaeus indeed
has pretended an addition to him; but he has only more Coins of the same
Families, and such are not rare; but of another Family he has not added any
Monsieur Patin since the writing of this, has somewhat augmented Fulvius
Ursinus's Collection; and Morellius in his late Book, promises to add a Third
Part more.
And the Architetto Generale of the Kingdom of Naples, a very Curious and
Ingenious Gentleman, has given us hopes that he will discover some others. But
Goltzius coming after, and thinking this an inferior and by intention, was
ordered by his Patron Marc. Laurinus to reduce them to the Consuls; and so they
come to be called Consular Coins. An undertaking, which was indeed impossible
to come to good effect; for this he does, when he finds upon the Coin any Name
which in the Fasti he finds to be the Name of a Consul, he immediately
attributes that Coin to him. But, First, The Power of Coining was not in the
Consuls, but in the Triumviri; and therefore the Names upon the Coins, are in
all probability, the Names of some of the Triumviri that coined that Piece;
because that upon many of them it is so set down; and we have no reason to
imagine, that the rest were any others. Secondly, The Romans had very
frequently diverse men of the same Name: and therefore, though sometimes, it is
possible Goltzius might hit upon the truth, yet it is then but by accident,
only when the Mint-Master was afterward made Consul; for he could not have any
good Conjecture (much less Certainty) that such a Coin belonged to such a
Person. Thirdly, Besides there was no intention in the Coining, to refer them
to Consuls, since there is ordinarily upon them but one Name; and many times Q.
or P. (i. e.) Quaestor or Praetor, which were Offices incompatible with the
Consulship. Now it is likely, that either the Triumviri had some of those
Offices also; or that some of their Families or near Relations had born those
Offices; and done also those eminent Actions, which are diverse times described
upon the Coins: So that the Inscription was in the Power of the Mint-Master,
except where something was particularly ordered by the Senate; and then S. C.
is set upon it.

2. Yet there are some Learned Men, who think none of these Coins ancienter
than Augustus Caesar; and that they were Coined in the Municipia, upon occasion
of their Solemnities, as Games, Sacrifices, etc. because we find sometimes
II-Vir upon them; and they seem to be of a later and better Letter. But it
seems to me, that many of them were ancienter, and coined at Rome: for the
III-viri were Officers in the City only, as the II-viri were in the Municipia;
and where we find II-viri, that Money was indeed stamped there; and commonly
the Name of the City, is expressed or intimated upon it. 2. The Bigati and
Quadrigati were certainly ancient Money of Rome: So Tacitus calls it pecuniam
veterem ac diu notam. 3. Neither is the Name nor Head of the Emperor upon
them, as was usually upon such Money as was Coined in their times, but the Head
of Roma. 4. If the Municipia Coined such, and so many that remain, why not Rome
many more? Then what is become of those infinite numbers of Denarii stamped
before the Emperors? 5. The Names of Offices, as Praetor, Quaestor upon some,
and S. C. upon others, are sufficient Arguments, that they were Coined at Rome:
to which add, that there is no Sign nor good Argument, to show they were
stamped any where else. Nor is the goodness of the Letters, sufficient to prove
them Modern, since sometimes there were better, sometimes worse Masters:
besides, many other occasions might intervene for the making the Stamps better
or worse; tho indeed many of them are very bad: besides that, it is difficult,
if not impossible, to assign a short time, for the change of the Letters of a
Language, one hundred years many times scarce making any difference.

3. I shall set these Coins down in the same order, as I find them in Fulvius
Ursinus, that it may be easily known what is in him, and what Coins he omits;
and consequently, are most rare. But for the better understanding of them, I
will premise certain Considerations: as, First, That the Romans had ordinarily
three Names. Proenomen, imposed at the taking the Toga Virilis (as the nomen
was at the Dies Lustricus) ordinarily said to have been at first thirteen.
Appius, Decius, Aulus, Caius, Cnaeus, Lucius, Manius, Marcus, Publius, Quintus,
Sextus, Spurius, Titus. Others add Cossus, Tiberius, Caeso (the praenomen of
the Fabia Gens). Numerius, Mamercus (the praenomen of the Gens AEmilia.) Their
nomen or Name of their Family, all of which, or very few excepted, end in ius,
as Tullius, Vipsanius, Julius, etc. which was the same as of Tullus, of
Vipsanus, of Julus, etc. Their cognomen or After-Name from some Action,
Country, or Accident: and this was used to divide the Family into its branches,
as Caesar, Cicero, Agrippa, etc. Some also had an Agnomen or Nickname, but
that was but seldom. 2. Before the times of the Emperors, the adopted was
ordinarily called by the Name of the Family of the Adopter; but afterward they
put the Names of their own Familes first, and after that of the Adopter.

3. At the foundation of Rome, Romulus divided all the Families of the Citizens
into Patritios and Plebeios. Patritii were afterward of two sorts, Majorum
Gentium, which some say were only of those hundred Families made Patritii by
Romulus; or, as others say, all that were admitted into the Order by any of the
Kings. 2. Minorum Gentium, which some say were all not called Patritii by
Romulus; others, those only, who were created after the time of the Kings.
Nobiles were such, whether Patritii or Plebeii, as could show the Images of
their Ancestors; now none were suffered to have their Statues made, except such
as had born the Offices to which belonged a Sella Curulis. All the rest, who
obtained Offices, how great soever, and could not show those Images (ordinarily
made in Wax) were called No^i, new or upstart persons. Colonia Patritia was
such a one as consisted of Persons of better quality.

4. Romulus again divided the People according to their Wealth, for (...)
Esta^e worth so much, was obliged to find a Horse, to serve on horse back in
the Wars, and were called Equites, of which (...) (...), others Plebeii.

Familia Aburia pleb. Coins in Fulvius Ursinus of C. Aburius Geminus. M.
Aburius Geminus.

Acilia pleb. Mu. Acilius Triumvir. the Reverse ordinarily somewhat in order to
Health; the Name being derived from (...).

AElia. AILIA. Allia pleb. Q. AElius Lamia Triumvir. P. AElius Poetus. C.
Allius Bala.

AEmilia patric. had diverse Families known by the Sirnames Scauros. Paullos.
Lepidos. Bucas. M. AEmilius Scaurus. M. AEmilius Lepidus. Paulus Lepidus. M.
Lepidus Triumvir. R P C (reipublicoe constituendae) with Augustus and M.
Antony. L. AEmilius Buca IV. vir. in Julius Caesar's time.

Afrania pleb. Sp. Afranius. L. Afranius literis Antiquis Graecis perhaps
Pompey's Lieutenant in Spain.

Alliena. pleb. A. Allienus.

Annia. pleb. C. Annius T. F. T. N. (Titi Filius, Titi Nepos) Silius.

Annius Lamia Triumvir.

Antestia, sive Antistia. pleb. was divided into Reginos and Veteres. L.
Antestius. C. Antestius. C. Antistius Reginus Triumvir. C. Antistius Vetus
Triumvr^.

Antia pleb. C. Antius Restio.

Antonia had two Families, Merenda, patric. the other pleb. the Surname not
known, M. Ant. Triumvir. R. P. C. of him very many. L. Antonius Cos. Pietas:
ita dictus ob pietatem erga fratrem. M. Anton. C. Antonius M. F. Q. Antonius
Balbus.

Apronia. pleb. Sisenna Apronius Gala Messalla Triumvir.

Arria pleb. M. Arrius Secundus.

Asinia pleb. C. Asinius Gallus Triumvir.

Atilia had Families both patr. and pleb. M. Atilius Saranus pleb. C. Atilius.

Aurelia pleb. branched into the Cottae and Scauri. M. Aurelius Cotta. L.
Cotta. M. Aurelius Scaurus.

Axsia pleb. L. Axsius Naso.

Boebia pleb. M. Boebius Tompilus.

Betiliena. AE. Betilienus Bassus Triumvir, This is not in Fulv. Ursinus.

Caecilia pleb. M. Caecilius Metellus. Q. Metellus. Q. Metellus Macedonicus had
four Sons, three of whom seem to be expressed upon Coins. Marcus triumphed over
Sardi^ia; his Coin has an Elephants Head, perhaps for the famous Victory of L.
Metellus over the Carthagians in Sicily. A. V. C. 503. Caius surnamed
Caprarius. Quintus called Balearicus because he triumphed over those Islands.
Lucius called Dalmaticus, because he also t^iumphed over Dalmatia. P. Cornelius
Scipio Nasica, was called Q. Caecilius Metellus (...) Scipio, because adopted
bv Q. Metellus (...). Cn. Foul. (Cn. Fulvius) M. Metellus C A (Calictus) Q.
Metellus. M. Metellus.

Caecina. A. Caecina.

Caesia. L. Caecius.

Calidia patric. M. Calidius.

Calpurnia patric. branched into three Families, Pisonum, Bibulorum, Pisonum
frugi, dicta a Calpo filio Numae regis. L. Piso. L. F. frugi, L. Piso frugi. C.
Piso. L. F. frugi. M. Piso. M. F. frugi. L. Bibulus. C. N. CAEP. C. N. Piso. C.
N. Piso Triumvir. Q. Piso Coepio.

Caninia had the Rebili Reguli. Galli and Labeones. L. Caninius Gallus
Triumvir. L. Caninius Agrippa Duumvir. Corinth. Tempore Galbae.

Carisia. T. Carisius. P. Carisius.

Cassia had Sirnames Bicellini, who were patric Iaeni and Longini Plebeians: Q.
Cassius. C. Cassius Longinus Triumvir. L. Cassius Q. F. C. Cassiu^ Celer.
Triumvir.

Coestia pleb. L. Caestius.

Cipia. M. Cipius.

Claudia had the Pulchri patric. Min. Gent. and the Marcelli Plebeians. M.
Marcellus Cos. qui^ quies. C. Marcellus. AP. Cla. T. M. Q. A^ Ti. Claud. Ti. F.
AP. N. P. Clodius. M. F. C. Cl^dius. C. Pulcher. Taurus Regulus Pulcher
Tri^umvir.

Clovia. C. Clovius.

Cloulia, Claelia patric. C. Cloulius.

Cocceia, M. Nerva.

Coelia, pleb. C. Coelius Caldus. Caldus Triumvir C. Coil. Called. L. Coil.

Considia, pleb. C. Considius Paetus. C. Considius N^nianus.

Coponia, C. Coponius.

Cordia, M. Cordus Rufus.

Cornelia, patric. had many branches, as the Blasiones, Lentulos, Scipiones,
Cinnas, Sisennas, Aquinos and Sullas. Cn. Blasio. Cn. F. P. SULLA. L. Sulla,
Sulla Cos. Felix Faustus. Marcellinus (i. e. Cn. Corn. Lentulus Marcellinus.)
Lentulus MR. F. Lucius Lentulus Marc. Cos. Sisena Cn. Cornelius. L. F. Cinna.
Lentulus Spinter. P. Lent. P. F. Cossus Lentulus. Cossus Cn. F. Lentulus
Balbus. P. Cornelius Blasio. The fifteenth and sixteenth Coins of this Family
in F. Ursinus, seem to be not of Sulla's Son, but of Jugurth. The one and
thirtieth seems to be the Image of Corn. Cossas, who An. U. C. 325. slew Lartes
Tolumnius King of the Veientes.

Cornificia, pleb. C. Cornificius Augur.

Cosconia, L. Cosconius M. F.

Cossutia, Q. Cossutius Maridianus Triumvir. L. Cossutius Sabula.

Crepereia, Q. Crepereius. M. F. Rocus.

Crepusia, P. Crepusius.

Cupiennia, L. Cupiennius.

Curiatia, pleb. C. Curiatius.

Curtia, Q. Curtius.

Didia, T. Deidi. T. Didius Imp.

Domitia, pleb. habuit Calvinos and Ahenobarbos. Cn. Domitius. L. Lic. Cn.
Domit, Cn. Domitius Ahenobarbus. Domit. Cos. iter. Imp.

Durmia, M. Durmius Triumvir.

Egnatia, pleb. C. Egnatius. Cn. F. Cn. N. M. Egnat. Q. Oct. Duumvir.

Egnatuleta, L. Egnatuleius C. F.

Eppia, Eppius (Scipionis Legatus in Africa.)

* Epria ap^d Seguin. Eprius Marcellus.

Fabia patric. had Labeones, Maximos and Pictores. Q. Fabius Labeo. Q. Maximus.
N. Fab. Pictor. C. Fab. C. F. L. R. Q. M. L. Fab. L. F. Hisp.

Fabrinia. M. Fabrinius.

Fannia, pleb. M. Fan. C. F. M. Fan. L. C R I.

Farsuleta, L. Farsuleius Mensor.

Flaminia, pleb. L. Flamin. Cilo. L. Flamin. Chilo L. Flamin. IV- vir.

Flavia, pleb. C. Flavii H^is.

Fonteia, pleb. C. Fontei. MV. Font. P. Fonteius Capito. Triumvir.

Fufia, pleb. (Q. Fufius) Kalenus.

Fulvia, pleb. Cn. Foulvius.

Fundania, pleb. C. Fundanius.

Furia had Purpureones, Crassipedes, Philos patric. and Luscos and Brocchos,
pleb. Pur. (L. Furius Purpureo) P. Fourius Crassipes. M. Fourius L. F. PHILI.
L. Furi. Cn. F. Brocch.

Brocchi or Bronchi, were such as had prominent Teeth.

Gallia, G. Gallius Luper^us Triumvir.

Gellia, Cn. Gellius. L. Gellius (Poplicola Quaestor Antonii.)

Herennia, pleb. had Balbos and Gallos. M. Herennius.

Hirtia, A. Hirtius.

Horatia, patric. Cocles.

Hosidia, C. Hosidius. C. F. Geta Triumvir.

Hostilia, L. Hostilius Sasernas: some of them IIIVIRI, their Reverse commonly
the Head of Tullus Hostilius King of the Romans.

Itia, L. Itius.

Julia had Caesares patric. and Bursiones. L. Julius. Sex. Julius. C. Caesar
Dictator. Caesar Triumvir. R. P. C. Julius Bursio.

Junia was divided into diverse Families, whereof some were Patrician, others
Plebeian: particularly into the Bruti and Silani. Brutus. M. Juni. C. Jun. C.
F. D.

Silanus, L F. M. Silanus Brut. Imp. Q. Coepio Brutus. Posthumous Albinus.
Bruti F. (Decius Jun^us Brutus (one of the Murderers of Julius Caesar) was so
called, because adopted by Pohumius). M. Silanus.

Labiena, pleb. Q. Labienus Parthicus Imp. (Son of that Labienus, who was
Julius Caesar's Lieutenant) who in the Civil Wars betwixt Caesar and Antony,
invited and conducted the Parthians into Asia and Syria, etc. and recovered
those Countries from the Romans.

Licinia, pleb. had Crassos, Nervas, Murenas, and Stolones. L. MVRENA. L. Lic.
P. Crassus. P. Nerva. A. Licinius Nerva Triumvir. A. Licinius Nerva Silanus
Triumvir. P. Licinius Stolo Triumvir. C. Licinius L: F. Macer. P. Crassus
Junian (Scipio's Lieutenant in Africa, seems to be adopted by P. Licinius out
of the Familia Junia.)

Livineia, P. Livineius Regulus. L. Regulus. Pulcher Taurus Regulus.

Livia, pleb. L. Salinator (so called, because he in his Censorship introduced
the Gabel o^ Salt.)

Lollia, pleb. (M. I^llius) Palikanus (a seditiou^ Tribune of the people) L.
Lolli^s Servius.

Lucilia, pleb. had Balbos, Bassos, Longos. Capitones. Blaesos. Rufos. M.
Lucil. Rufus.

Lucretia, was subdivided into other Families some whereof were Patrician,
others Plebeian Cn. Lucretius Trio. L. Lucreti. Trio (pleb.)

Luria, M. Lurius Agrippa Triumvir.

Lutatia, pleb. Q. Lutatius.

Maecilia, patric. M. Maecilius Triumvir. P. MEA^ (P. Moecilius Tullus) P. ME.
NT. M. F.

Maiania, Mainia. Maenia. C. Mini.

Mamilia, pleb. C. Mamilius Lineatinus.

Manlia had both Patricians and Plebeians. A. Manlius. Q. F. T. M. A. P. C. L.
Q V R. (Tit^ Manlius cum Appio Claudio Quaestor Urbanus^ L. Manlius. L.
Torquatus. L. Torquatus Triumvir.

Maevia apud Seguinum. non extat apud F. Ursinum. L. Pollio Maevius the Head of
the young Augustus. a Star between the Horns of the Moon.

Marcia had Philippos, Censorinos, and Libones pleb. descended from Ancus
Martius. Philippus. L. Philippus. Q. Philippus. L. Censorin. C. Censor. C.
NARCI. Cens. C. Marc. L. F. Censor Triumvir. Q. Marc. Q. NARC. F. L. R. Q.
Marc. Libo.

Maria, pleb. had Gratidianos and Capitones. C. Mari. C. F. Capito. (Marius.
Pro-Triumvir. C. F. Tro. Triumvir.

Memmia, pleb. C. Memmius C. F. L. Memmius Gal. L. C. Memmius Gal.

Mescinia, pleb. L. Mescinius Rufus Triumvir.

Mettia, M. Mettius.

Minatia, M. Minatius Sabinus.

Mineia, Elius Mines. M. F.

Minutia, at first Patrician, afterward went into Plebeian, F. Minutius C. F.
Augur. C. Aug. Q. Minutius Rufus. L. Minutius. Q Thermus. M. F. (Q. Min. M.
Thermi filius.)

Mucia, pleb. had Cords and Scaevolas. Cordi.

Munatia, had the Planci. L. (Munatius) Plancus.

Mussid^a, L. Mussidius Longus. L. Mussidius T. F. Longus Triumvir.

Naevia, pleb. had Balbos and Surdinos. C. NAE. BA. L. Surdinus Triumvir. L.
Naevius Surdinus Triumvir.

Nasidia, Q. Nasidius.

Neria, NERI. Q. urb. (Quaestor urbanus.)

Nonia, pleb. Sex. Noni. Suffenas. P. L. U. P. F. (publicos ludos votivos
Praeter fecit.) Sex. Nonius Quintilian. Triumvir.

Norbana, pleb. C. Norbanus.

Numitoria, pleb. L. Numitorius.

Numonia, C. Numonius Vaala.

Ogulnia, pleb. C AR. Oguln. VE R. VE R-Oguln. C AR.

Opeimia, L. Opeimius. M. Opeimius.

Oppia, Q. Oppius P. (Praetor.)

Papia, pleb. L. Papius Celsus Triumvir. L. Papi.

Papiria, part of this Family was Patritian, Min. Gent. part Plebeian M. Carbo.
Carb. (...). This seems to be coined at Nicea in Bythinia, where C. Papirius
Carbo was Governor about Anno U. C. 687.

Pedania had Costas. Costa Leg.

Petilia, pleb. Petilius Capitolinus.

Petronia, pleb. P. Petronius Turpilianus Triumvir.

Pinaria, patric. had Nattas and Scarpos. NATA. Scarpus. Scarpus. Imp.

Plaetoria, pleb. M. Plaetorius Cestianus. M. Plaetorius M. F. Cestianus. L.
Plaetorius Cest. L. Plaetorius. L. F. Q. S. C. (Lucii filius Quaestor Senatus
consultum.)

Plancia, pleb. C. Plancius.

Plautia, pleb. L. Plautius Plancus. P. (Plautius) Hypsaeus (in honorem) C.
Hvpsae Cos. Prtiver. capta. A. Plautius. C. PLUTI.

Plotia, C. Plotius Rufus Triumvir.

Poblicia, or Publicia, pleb. C. (Poblicius) Malleolus. C. MA. L. Poblicius Q.
F. M. Poblicius. C. Malleus. C. F.

Pompeia, pleb. had Rufos. Magnos and Fostlos, or Fostulos. Mag. Pius (Sextus
Cn. F.) Magn. Cn. Magn. MAGN. SEX. MAGN. PIUS. Q. Pomp. Rufus Q. F. Sext. Pomp.
Fostulus.

Pomponia pleb. L. Pomponius Molo L. Pompon. C N. F. Q. Pompon. Rufus.

Q. Pomponius Musa. Many Coins of these, the Reverses commonly some of the
Muses.

Porcia pleb. L. Porcius Licin. C. Cato. M. Porcius P. LAEC.

Postumia patric. A (Postumius) Albinus. A. ALB. S. F. L. Postum. A. F. C.
Postumi. AT. A. Post. A. F. S. N. ALBIN Post. A. F.

Procilia. L. Procilius F.

Quinctia. patrit. Crispinus Sulpitianus Triumvir adopted into the family of
the Quinctii, was called Titus Quinctius Crispinus Sulpic. T. Q.

Renia. C. Renius.

Roscia pleb. L. Roscius Fabat.

Rubria pleb. L. Rubrius Dossin. C. F. L. R. Q. M. (they seem to be the names
of the Triumviri. L. R. perhaps is Lucius Roscius.

Rustia. L. Rustius. Q. Rustius.

Rutilia both patric. and pleb. L. Rutilius Flaccus.

Salvia first pleb. afterward patr. Q. Salvius Imp. M. Salvius Triumvir.

Sanquinia. M. Sanquinius Triumvir. M. Sanquin. Q. F. Triumvir.

Satriena. P. Satrienus.

Saufeia. L. SAVF.

Scrib. pleb. was divided into Curiones and Libones. C. Scr. Libo. on one side
Puteal a Conduit or Well-house, on the other Scribon, because near his house,
or made by him.

Sempronia had Atratinos patric. Gracchos and Pitiones pleb. L. Sempron. Pitio.
L. Sempron. T. Sempron. Gracchus. T. Sempron. Gracchus Triumvir. L. Atratinus.

Sentia. L. Sentius C. F. L. (Sentius) Saturnin. L. SAT.

Sepullia. P. Sepullius Macer.

Sergia. M. Sergius Silus. Patrician.

Servilia patric. (C. Servilius) Ahala. M. Serveil. C. F. C. Servil. M. F. C.
Serveil. P. Servil. M. F. (C. Servilius Ahala killed Sp. Melius designing to
make himself King; which gives occasion to many of their Reverses) M. Servil.
Leg. C. Cassii Imper. (P. Servil.) Casca longus. C. Serveil.

Sestia. patric. L. Sestius.

* Sextia plebeia not extant in Ursinus is in Seguinus, the head of Nasica. C.
Valor. C. Sext. aediles about an Oxe's head.

Sicinia pleb. Q. Sicinius III-vir.

Silia pleb. Silius Annius Lamia III-vir.

* Socia extant only in Seguinus. M. Antonies head. a Trophee. Socius Imp.

Spurilia pleb. A Spuril.

Statia pleb. L. Statius Murcus.

Statilia had Tauros. Taurus Regulus Pulcher Triumvir.

* Suillia apud Seguinum. M. Suillius.

Sulpicia had Galbas patric. Rufos and Galos. P. Calb. P. Galb. L. Servius
(Sulpitius) Rufus. Ser. SULP. Ser. Galba Imper. C. Sulpic. C. F. C. Sulpitius
Platorinus.

Tarquitia patric. C. Tarquitius. P. F.

Terentia pleb. C. TER. LUC. (Lucanus) (M. Terentius) Varro.

Thoria pleb. L. Thorius Balbus. J. S. M. R. (Juno sospita magna Regina.)

Titinia both patric. and pleb. C. Titinius.

Titia pleb. Q. Titi.

Tituria L. Titurius Sabinus.

Trebatia. L. Trebatius.

* Trebonia apud Seguin. C Trebonius.

Tullia patric. M. Tullius.

Valeria had Acisculos. Flaccos Messalas and Catullos, some whereof were
patric. some pleb. L. Valerius Acisculus. C. VAL Flaccus C. VAL C. F. Flaccus.
L. Valeri. Flacci M. Valerius Barbatus Q. P. (Quaestor Provincialis) L.
Valerius Catullus III-vir. Messal. F. Sisenna Messala III-vir.

Vargunteia. M. VARG.

Vergilia pleb. VER. CAR. OGUL (Vergilius, Carisius, and Ogulnius) curatores
Denariorum Flandorum.

Vettia. T. Vettius Sabinus. A. T (Tatius Sabinorum Rex.)

Veturia patric. Ti. VE.

Vibia pleb. had Varos and Pansas. C. Vibius Varus. C. Vibius. C. F. Pansa. C.
Vibius. C. F. C N Pansa. C. Pansa. C. F. C. N. C. Pansa.

Vinicia. L. Vinicius III-vir. L. Vinicius L. F.

Vipsania. M. (Vipsanius) Agrippa Cos designatus. M. Agrippa Platorinus
Triumvir. M. Agrippa L. F. Cos. 3o.

Voconia pleb. Q. Voconius Vitulus.

Volteia. M. Voltei. M. F. LYLO. L. F. Strabo. M. Voltei. M. F. S. C. D. T.

CHAP. VI. Of the Reverses of Medals.
THE greatest Erudition is contained in the Reverses of Medals; for the
understanding whereof, I shall first set down such general Observations as we
find frequently, and upon diverse of them: Afterward when we come to the
Emperors, such as are particular to one or few of them. These general ones
concern their Gods, Sacrifices and Worship; their Solemn Games and Plays, their
Conquests and Triumphs; their Wars; their Magistrates and Offices; their
Colonies, their Buildings, etc.

SECT. I. Of their Gods.
. There were very many Jupiters, but generally they took their Names from their
places, where the most famous Images of them were worshipped, and upon Coins
they are represented accordingly.

Jupiter Ammon, that Great African Jupiter, whose Temple was in the Deserts of
Africa Therefore by some thought to be called Ammon from the Sands; the others
rather think him to have been Cham, the Son of Noah, and People^ of Africa.
figured; a Head with a bushy Beard, curled Hair and a pair of Rams Horns.
Wherefore such Princes as were devoted to him, put the same Horns also upon
their Images and Coins, as diverse Macedonian Kings and M. Antonius the
Triumvir, etc.

Jupiter (...) or T^rminalis an Eagles Head upon his own. Terminus was
expressed by a Body to the Middle upon a Stock; Sometimes a young Head crowned
with Sacrificing Instruments. This God was President (as they supposed) over
the bounds of their Fields and Country. Numa introduced him as the first of the
Gods; and his Solemnity was Feb. 20. He is also deciphered by a piece of a
Pyramide with the Base upwards, whereupon stands a Head with Rays about it, and
Feet coming out underneath. Sometimes (as by the Theraeans) as a man without
Arms, and lessening to his Feet. In Medals it signifies that such an Emperor
enlarged, settled, defended or vindicated the Limits of the Empire. So careful
were they of presrving the Termini even of private men's Inheritanc^s, that
whosoever was convinced to have ploughed them up, both his Oxen and himself were
accursed.

. 2. Capitolinus, for there was another (Latiaris) which has no Thunderbolt;
his Image in the Temples was always besineared with Blood, and before it stood
a golden Table continually furnished, about which were people continually
tasting and sipping.

Serapis is also figured like Jupiter with a Bushel or Measure upon his Head:
He was also Ammon, Dis, the Sun, AEsculapius, Nilus, which was also called
(...), and Jupiter Pharius.

To Jupiter was Sacred the Eagle, either because the chiefest (and as it were)
the King amongst Fowls, as he amongst the Gods; or because he was the first
that tamed them in Crete; or because Jupiter being born in a Cave, an Eagle
brought him every day Nectar which she gathered from the Rocks; as the Dove did
Ambrosia which they gathered from the Sea. For which Favor he placed the Eagle
in Heaven, and the Pigeons he metamorphosed into the Pleiades.

To Jupiter is also joined the Thunderbolt which is three-forked, to show its
triple Force, of breaking, piercing, and burning; tho this be also sometimes
attributed to Juno, Minerva, and other Goddesses: The Oak also was sacred to
him; and where any of those is joined to an Head, they show that to be
Jupiters, (tho commonly he is designed in one manner and likeness) and that
Money was coined in Honor of Jupiter.

Jupiter Axur, a young Head with Tresses and a Garland.

Jupiter Philius, a rugged smiling Head like a Philosophers, perhaps because
Friendship is oftener found amongst them than Gallants.

Vejovis, or Evil-Jupiter, is expressed by an Head and an Hand, as it were
darting Arrows, showing his readiness to hurt.

. 3. Juno born at Samos under an Agnus-Castus-tree, (whose Head is sometimes
joined to Jupiters, as in (...)) to her was consecrated the Peacock, because of
his beautiful Train, and the Fable of Argus; represented ordinarily as a young
Woman with a Laurel and a Veil.

Juno Lanuvia (because in that shape worshipped at Lanuvium) with a Goat-skin
and Horns upon her Head; perhaps she was Juno Sospita, or Sispita, who is also
figured with a Shield and Shoes turning up at the Toes.

Juno Moneta, like Moneta if Moneta was not the same with Juno; A Woman's Head
with her Hair tressed up, and an high Frontal. Anciently a Temple to her upon
the Capitol. Manlius, for affecting to be King, being precipitated from the
Tarpeian Rock, and his House pulled down, upon the place thereof was built a
Temple to Juno Moneta, vowed by Camillus; called Moneta a monendo, because her
Image spoke to them (as they said) advising them in a dangerous Ea^ (...), and
in the War with the Galls, to (...) a Sow great with Pig, which is also
sometimes expressed upon Coins. The Romans also in their War against Pyrrhus
and the Tarentines, b^ing in great want of money, they made Vows to Juno; who
admonished them to make ^e of the Arms of Justice, and they should b^ supplied:
as indeed it happened in that War, wherein the noble ^ricius sent back to Pyrrhus
his Physician, who offered to poison him; and after many Battles at last
obtained a great Victory, and all the Wealth and Riches of Pyrrhus; wherefore
they built a Temple in Honor to her, and therein hung up a Medal with the
Inscription. Moneta.

Moneta, or the Goddess of Money is sometimes expressed with a Cornucopia in
one hand (Money supplying all things) and in the other a Balance; Justice being
necessary in buying and selling. Sometimes are three of these Goddesses to
represent Gold, Silver and Brass, the middlemost representing Gold being the
tallest, [it seems the middle was the best place in their esteem]. In some
Medals of Commodus we find also Apollini Monetae. Moneta seems to signify
sometimes the Forms or coining Instruments; sometimes the Coin it self. It is
not easy many times to distinguish the Heads of the Goddesses Juno, Moneta,
Ceres, Venus, Pietas, Salus, Sybilla, and others being oftentimes all alike
figured.

. 4. AEsculapius, or the great God of Health; an Head with a bushy Beard and a
Serpent commonly twisted about a Club. So a Sacrifice for Health to AEsculapius
was a Serpent upon an Altar as eating or taking out of a Dish or Platter,
probably a little Cake kneaded with Oil and Wine, which they put into the
Serpents mouth to sanctify and envirtue it ^or the recovery of the sick. They
say that AEsculapius being forced to requicken Glaucus, and not knowing how to
do it; as he was musing, a Serpent entered the Room, which he killed with a
stick, presently after came another Serpent, bringing in her mouth a certain
Herb, which she laying upon the head of the dead one, immediately revived her.
AEsculapius taking up the Herb, cured Glaucus with it; hence the Serpent is
Sacred to AEsculapius. And therefore in a great Plague-time the Romans sent to
Epidaurus to fetch away AEsculapius's Image, when they were conveighing it to
the Ship, there swom from the Land a great Snake, which entered the Ship, and
placed it self in the Praetor, Q. Ogulnius's Cabin; and when the Ship arrived
at Rome, she leaped out again upon the Island, where they presently built a
Temple to AEsculapius. Others rather think a Serpent applied to AEsculapius,
because that after Sickness a man recovers, as does a Serpent after the casting
her Skin. It might also proceed from the brazen Serpent made by Moses.

AEsculapius's Wife was Salus, deciphered by a young Maid feeding a Serpent;
perhaps alluding to the custom at Lanuvium, where in a Cave, in a certain thick
Grove lay a great Dragon; whither once a year the Maids went to sacrifice,
carrying each one a Tart or Cake; when they came to the Grove, they were
blinded; notwithstanding which they were, as by a Divine Virtu^, guided
straight to the Den; and if they were pure Virgins, the Dragon came and eat up
their Cake.

They have many times joined with them their little Son Telesphorus, or
Convalescency in a thick Frock. It shows recovery from a sickness, when they
are to be kept warm and treated as Children.

. 5. Mars, the God of War pictured as a Soldier, with Arms and Breast plate; a
Cock because armed and vigilant, a Wolf and Picus Martius, because of Romulus
and Remus his Children nourished by those Beasts: his carrying a Tropaeum upon
his Shoulders, intimates the Opima Spolia gained by Romulus over Acron the King
of the Caeninensians.

But there were anciently among the Romans two Mars's, the one called Pacifer
and Quirinus, is not armed, nor marching, and had a Temple in the City. The
other Bellator, Mavors or Gradivus in a posture commonly of marching, his
Temple without the City in Via Appia.

Neptune, an Horse, because of his Contention with Minerva, for having jointly
built Athens, and contending who should name it, they agreed that he should
have that Honor who would bestow on it the better gift; Neptune thereupon
struck the Earth, and there sprung up an Horse for the War. Minerva raised an
Olive Tree, which being judged the better gift, she gave it her Name. He has
also a Dolphin the swiftest of Fishes; a Trident or Fishing-Iron; and is drawn
by Sea-Horses.

Mercury, the Messenger of the Gods, has his Caduceus and Petasus, his Hat and
winged Staff (a sign of Peace and Agreement) with two Serpents round about,
because Mercury finding two Serpents a fighting, as soon as he put his Rod
betwixt them, they became quiet. The Rod was white, and the Serpents one male
and the other female; and these Caducei were carried by those Ambassadors, who
were anciently called Caduceatores (i. e.) such as went to an Enemy or Enemies
Country to make Peace; with a Purse also either as the Inventor of Commerce, or
because the Monarch that has his Purse well stuffed, is Master of War and
Peace. There is dedicated to him a Dog for Fidelity; a Cock for Vigilance, and
a Tongue for Perswasiveness, the three Conditions of an Ambassador, as he was
of the Gods.

There is also, but rarely found, another Mercury without Wings, yet with a
Caduceus and a Sistrum. This was the Egyptian Mercury or Hermes ancienter than
that other of Arcadia.

To Bacchus is joined the Tiger; either for that a Tiger swom a River to assist
him when driven into Fury by Juno; or for that he was nourished by a Panther or
Tigress. He has about him also Sileni, Fauni, Satyri, etc. (Drunkenness
creating such imaginations.) He is also crowned either with the Vine branches
and Clusters of Grapes, or with Ivy. He has also Thyrsi or Lances wreathed
about with Ivy-branches, or sometimes with woolen Rubans. There are also
Liberae, or She Bacchus's crowned with Ivy; as there is also Luna and Lunus. He
is the Egyptian Osyris, Husband of Isis; and the Ivy in the Egyptian Language
is called Chenosyris, or Osyris's Herb; both are said to be born at Nisa; both
accompanied with a Serpent. His Statues were naked and with Horns, either
because the Son of Hammon; or that he is the Sun; or to show the Power of Wine.

Sometimes Bacchus is described with Horns (as when he is called Hebo the God
of the Campanians, etc.) and he is called also Taurus, for the Ancients
expressed their Kings by a Bull, who has more of Regal qualifications than
either Lion or any other Beast; and Horns were attributed to Bacchus upon that
account; for being supposed to be Noah, he was the great Monarch of the World;
and Bachar in Hebrew (whence the name Bacchus) signifies an Ox. His Feasts or
Ceremonies were the Bacchanalia.

Apollo is deciphered commonly with a Tripos or Stool over a Cave; whereon he
that was to receive Answer to his Demand, sat till he was inspired; with a
Harp also and Plectrum or short Instrument to strike the strings; with a Laurel
also; and sometimes with a Sacrificing- Tripos, whose three feet signified the
three parts of Time; with a Crow and Swan also to represent by their Colors
Day and Night; for Apollo was the Sun, whose Motion is the measure of Time.
There was also an Apollo Palatinus worshipped in Mount Palatine; and is figured
as representing the Senate, being the Genius of that great Council. Apollo
Actius also is represented with a Sun before him, and a Quiver of Arrows, to
intimate his Beams. Many times also he is figured as a Goddess o^ Muse.

. 6. Hercules is known by his Club, Lions Skin, bushy Beard, Bows and Arrows, a
Cup to drink in; the Poplar-tree dedicated to him, because great and strong.
When represented killing the Lion, not tearing his Jaws (as Samson) but
breaking his Neck. There is also a young Hercules called Aventinus, without a
Beard, yet with a Club and Lyons-Skin.

Serapis an Egyptian God with a bushy Beard, V. S. Jupiter.
long Hair, and a Measure upon his Head. The Egyptians to most of their Gods,
but especially to Harpocrates the God of Silence joyne^ the Peach-tree; the
Leaf whereof they fansied like a Tongue, and the Fruit like an Heart, to show
they should go both together.

The Sun a young Head with Rays about it, tho these also are sometimes about
the Heads of the young Princes, who were in their rising Glory; from whence
probably came the custom of Glories of holy or Eminent Persons.

Dii Penates, two Faces, one behind another, with a Lace or narrow Ruban about
their Heads: Sometimes two Figures sitting with a Vulcan's Head, because
worshipped by the Fireside, and a Dog.

Two young Men on Horseback, rarely on Foot, armed, sometimes their Heads
only, but always covered, commonly but not always with two Stars, are Castor
and Pollux, who are said to have appeared in that manner at the Lacus Juturnus
after they had assisted A. Post humius fighting against the Latins at Lacus
Regillus. They feigned that they lived and dyed by course. They representing
the two Hemispheres, the one above, the other beneath us.

Triptolemus, the Son of Osyris, taught the Greeks Agriculture, as Isis did the
Egyptians: and therefore known by having Ears of Corn in his Hand.

. 7. G. P. R. is Genius Populi Romani; and they decipher him with a young Head,
a little Beard, naked, and a Staff with somewhat like a Flower-de-Luce upon it.
But they, in flattery to their Emperors, conceived them to be the Genius of the
Commonwealth, as appears by the Coins of most of the later Heathen Emperors.
But ordinarily the Genius of a City or Country was not so represented; but
naked with a Man's Head, with one Tower for a City, and more for a Country or
People. For they imagined that all Places Countries, Cities, etc. all Persons,
even the Gods themselves, had their Genius's or Angels to accompany them: A
conceit crept also into America, and amongst the Inland inhabitants of Canada;
such are the Algoumekins, and many other neighboring Nations.
and for Cities, the manner of adopting them is set down by Mr. Gregory out of
Joan. Antiochenus, thus. Those who had a mind to build a City, Castle, etc.
caused their Astrologers to find out a fortunate Position of the Heavens; under
which the first stone might be laid. The part of Fortune found out in this
first Figure, was made the Ascendent of another; the first judged of the
Duration, the second of the Prosperity of the City. Under the influence of this
second Configuration they erected a Statue of Brass, into which this Fortune or
Genius of the City was to be invoked by Art, (i. e.) by certain Sacrifices and
Conjurations. A pure Virgin was then sacrificed; and a Statue of her set up,
and called by a new and secret Name; and Sacrifice done to it by the
Chief-Priest of the City. Thus the Name of old Byzantium was (...) when changed
to Constantinople, Anthusa. The Name of Rome was always kept secret, and when
they went to besiege a Town, they evoked this Genius by such Ceremonies as they
were accustomed. This Statue thus inspirited, was placed in a convenient part
of the City; and looked upon as the only Concernment of it. Such was the
Palladium, and diverse others, and these were called (...) and (...). Vid. Cap.
of the Pont. Max. Vid. (...).

. 8. Diana, the Goddess of Hunters, called also Berecynthia, Isis, Idaea, etc.
with an Heart and Dogs, Bow and Arrows as an Huntress. Her Priests Galli were
Eunuchs. She is also described as drawn by Stags, which intimate the diligence
and activeness necessary to that Sport. Besides, her Temples were all full of
their Heads, and her self clothed with their Skins.

Diana Ephesia, or Isis, stands upon a Pied Stall with a Woman's Face and
Head, but the Body (...) multimammum, full of D^gs; representing Nature that
nourishes all things. Isis was G. T. A. (Genius Tutelaris AEgypti, or perhaps
Asiae) a Woman with Horns or Beams, in one hand a Bucket, in the other a
Sistrum or obsolete Musical Egyptian Instrument of the fashion of a Racquet.
Whether Isis be Diana Ephesia, see at large Menetreius in his Discourse de
Diana Ephesia; this is one difference that Isis has no Stags joined with her;
because none of those Beasts were in Egypt anciently, as Aristotle and Pliny
say, lib. 8. c. 33. and they never consecrated Exotic Beasts to their Gods.
Diana Persica was never worshipped beyond Euphrates, and had Oxen dedicated to
her, which went whither they pleased, being marked with a Torch or Lamp, the
Mark of the Goddess: As also in Cicilia at Castabalis, where the Virgins
dedicated to her Service, went upon burning Coals with their naked Feet: also
in Lydia at Hypaepae and Hiero Caesarea, who pretended their Temple to be built
by the Great Cyrus, Tac. An. l. 4.

Vesta, Sister to Juno and Ceres, sometimes sitting, seldom standing, in one
hand a Torch lighted to represent the Everlasting fire, in the other a Discus
or Sacrificing Platter.

Minerva with an Helmet, Spear and Shield called AEgis, ordinarily with
Medusa's Head in it; but sometimes also Octangular without it. It was made of
the Skin of the Capra Amalthea (and therefore called (...)) which suckled
Jupiter; and therefore also Jupiter is said to make use of it sometimes, as in
the Wars against the Giants, as well as Minerva. The Palladium or little
Minerva armed (almost like to, or the same, with Victory) as long as it
continued in Troy, rendered the City impregnable, and was stolen away by Diomedes
and Ulysses, is applied to many Gods and Goddesses: The Temples of Minerva,
Mars and Hercules were Dorick Work, plain and without Ornaments.

Cybele, the Mother of the Gods, called then Rhea, and pictured with her Head
radiant: but as she has the Command of sublunary things called Ops or Divine
help, is figured as a young Goddess set upon a Corn-measure with Ears of Corn
in her hand, and lifting up, or opening her Veil; She is the Earth that opens
her Skirt to afford nourishment to every Creature. She has also a Crown of
Towers upon her Head, and proper to her is a Pine tree, a little Boy called
Atys; and is drawn with Lions, and has in her a Crotalus, sometimes also with
a Sistrum, or Triangular Musical Instrument with loose Rings, which struck with
a stick, made a kind of Harmony: Sometimes also a Drum or such Instrument to
make a great noise (whereby she concealed Jupiter's crying) and which is framed
round according to the figure of the Earth; sometimes also she has a Caduceus
and a Plough. And the Countries that stamped her upon their Coin, would thereby
intimate that they were powerful in Cities and People. The Worship of the
Mother of the Gods came into Rome about the Punick Wars; they say that in
Phrygia in a great Desert there is a mighty Rock called Agdus, the broken
stones whereof Deucalion and Pyrrha took to replenish the World, and out of
which also was formed the Image of Cybele.

Ceres the Goddess of Corn crowned, in her hand Ears of Corn, two flaming
Torches, and drawn by winged Serpents; Harvest being in the hottest Season of
the Year, when Serpents also are most venomous.

Venus drawn with Doves, the most amorous V. part. 2: cap. 1.
and kissing Birds, with an Apple (or Orange) adjudged to her by Paris; the
Myrtle, either because of its Effeminate smell; or because good in Women's
Diseases; or because growing best by the Sea side where Venus rules chiefly.
There were two Venus's; caelestis, which presided over lawful Procreation of
Children; and vulgaris, for Bastardy, etc. She was worshipped at Paphos under
the form as of a Pyramid cut off about the middle, and so represented in some
Medals of the Emperors, of which we shall speak hereafter.

Feronia was the Goddess of Flowers and Garlands, has a Wreath of Flowers upon
her Head, was worshipped by the Sabins under Mount Soracte; he that was
inspired by her, went sasely upon burning Coals and hot Embers; every year at
her Temple a great fair.

Hermathenae were above Images Images with the Heads of Mercury and Min^va.
of Minerva with her Helmet, Shield and Spear; below a Pillar or Terminus
larger above than below.

There were also diverse other Gods and Goddesses mentioned upon Medals, as
H^pona the of Horses and Cattle, Pedina of Feet, Educa o^ Eating, and the like;
subjecting every things to the Dominion, Care and Protection of some particular
God; but of these, few upon Coins, tho many Inscriptions.

The Orgia or Procession sacrificed to Cer^ were in this manner performed.

1. Three Priestesses Virgins carried their (Cist as) Chests open; in the first
were flowers in the second Ears of Corn, in the third Cake^ and Wafers.
Signifying the three States o^ Corn.

2. There were born the Images of four Gods First, Of Jupiter, the Creator of
all things, carried by the Hi^rophantes. Secondly, Of the Sun by the
Torch-bearers. Thirdly, Of the Moon by a Minister of the Altar. Fourthly, Of
Mercury by the Fraeco Sacrorum; and as i^ the Orgia of Bacchus was carried a
Pha^us, s^ in these a Muliebre.

3. They made a great Noise and Howling crying continually Eva, Eva.

4. The Ministers and Women were crown'^ with Serpents, by which also Ceres is
said to b^ drawn.

5. Those (C^ritae as they were called) carrie^ a Stool or other Garment of
Leather.

6. No Mourner was admitted to celebrate Nor any Wine to be used.

9. Figured like to the Gods, and sometimes accounted for Gods, were other
things also; as the Virtues, good Fortunes, Monster^ etc. of which we shall
speak a word or two.

Virtue is not easily distinguished from Roma and Minerva; save that she
carries commonly a Parazonium, or short unpointed Sword. Such as the Tribunes
wore. She is usually armed (for they esteemed Valor in Battle the greatest
Virtue) and sometimes joined with another: unarmed, which is Honor. Who (when
by her self) has a Woman's Face, her Hair wreathed up, and hanging down behind,
they sacrificed also to her bare-headed; Honor being not to be obtained by
Subtilty and secret Means, but by true and open Generosity. When Honor is
coined with Virtue, Virtue is set foremost, according to the Conceit of
Marcellus, who intending to build a Temple to Virtue and Honor, was forbidden
by the Augures; wherefore he built one for each, and so ordered, that none
could pass to that of Honor but through the other of Virtue.

Pietas toward God is commonly expressed by a Woman's Head dressed and veiled,
which was the Habit of the Priests when sacrificing; sometimes also by a Person
praying or sacrificing; sometimes also with a Camillus or little Boy assistant
at the Sacrificing.

Pietas toward Parents is figured by a Stork, which is said to nourish and
bear about her aged and impotent Parents, as is said also of the Glis or
Dormouse; or by AEneas carrying his Father on his shoulders out of the ruin of
Troy; or by the two Cataneans in Sicily, Amphinomus and Anapias, surnamed Pii,
because when their Town was set on fire with the Flames of AEtna, neglecting
all their Goods, they carried the one his aged Father, the other his Mother out
of the burning; after the Citizens returned, and rebuilt their City, they
worshipped them as their Gods, and put them upon their Coins.

Love toward Children is described by small Children.

Eternity is like a Virgin [incorruptible] with her Head covered [her beginning
unknown] with a Globe [the World] under her Feet, the Sun in one Hand, the Moon
in the other; (i. e.) as long as the Sun and Moon shall last: or with the
Vestal Fire, i. e. till that go out. A Scepter or some other Symbol of Rule, a
Cornucopia [Happiness] and a very long Garment. Sometimes also a Phoenix
continually renewing, or living (as Tacitus and other Authors say) 500 years;
or an Elephant the longest liver of Beasts. They used Eternity or some Emblem
thereof many times to represent their Consecrations, i. e. at the time it was
believed they became immortal.

Concordia, a young Woman veiled; and that is used many times for Adoptions;
sometimes expressed by two or more right Hands joined together; or by a
sacrificing Platter; Concord having a Temple and Sacrifices proper to her, and
to her it seems they sacrificed when two or more Augustus's, i. e. with equal
Authority; that they might agree well together; commonly also with one or more
Cornucopias's joined together; for Concordia parvae res crescunt.

Fides is commonly two Hands joined (accipe daque fidem.) Sometimes the
Military Ensigns, intimating the Soldiers swearing Fidelity to the Emperor.
When they sacrificed to Fides, it was their custom to wrap their right Hand in
a white Linen Cloth.

Peace ordinarily in one Hand a Caduceus [Mercury's Staff, wherewith he quiets
even the Ghosts and Inhabitants of Hell] or an Olive Branch; in the other Hand
a Cornucopia, and on her Breast a Jewel called Bulla.

Hope is ordinarily a chearful-aspected young Damsel, in a long transparent
Robe, which she holds up in one Hand, to show her readiness to protect; in the
other an Herb or Flower with three Leaves, which some say is no more but a
young Plant (adhuc tua Messis in herba); others say it is the Flower-de-lys or
Lilly, which was in Heathen Authors the Emblem of Hope. She is also walking on
Tiptoe.

Justice is a grave young Virgin sitting (as they fansied) next to Jupiter's
Throne; in one hand a sacrificing Platter, for to do Justice is the best
Sacrifice; in the other a Staff or Scepter, that being the great Foundation of
Authority.

Clemency, a Woman holding in one hand a Laurel or Platter, in the other a
Staff, like Justice that can hurt but will not.

Equity is frequently with a Balance in one hand, and a Spear in the other.
They conceived that Rome was built under L^a, and that therefore the Romans had
a greater inclination, or desired to be thought to have it, to Equity than
other Nations.

Constancy, either like a Soldier, or a Woman sitting and holding out the right
hand, as affirming somewhat.

Security is a Woman leaning or reposing on one hand, in the other a Scepter or
Staff, probably of Laurel: which they counted a Preservative against many
dangers; so that to say, I carry a Staff of Laurel, was as much as, I fear
nothing.

Providentia, sometimes a Globe, a Building, Ears of Corn, or such Provision as
the Coin signified to be made by the Emperor.

Fe- (and sometimes ee, never ae) licitas like to Peace. The Caduceus was the
Rod whereby Mercury slew the Quick, revived the Dead, and in sum, did what he
pleased; Felicity is the obtaining our desires.

Fortune with the Stern of a Ship, and a Cornucopia. Sometimes standing on a
Globe or Wheel; showing, as they thought, her Dominion over the World, yet that
Dominion inconstant. Sometimes lying on a Bed with a Crown of Towers upon her
Head. Sometimes also sitting. Fortunae Reduci signifies a Sacrifice commonly
made by the Senate with great Solemnity to Fortune for a prosperous Journey
when the Prince went to War, or any other necessary and public Employment.

Sors, a Woman's Head, etc. Vid. Fulv. Ursin. in familia Plaetoria. Seguinus
has another, a young Goddesses Head with C. S. which he interprets Casus and
Sors. On the four Ankle-bones (Cockals) tali with this Inscription: Qui ludit
arram det quod satis sit, which intimates, that their Custom also was to stake
before they played.

Ubertas, a Woman having money or other things out of an Horn, the Purse of the
Ancients, whence Cornucopia.

Laetitia, Gaudium, a Child (the merriest Age) with a Crown. Sometimes a
Goddess with a Crown in one Hand, and Spear in the other; called Vitula from
Vitulari, and Euthymia; it signifies commonly a public Rejoicing for some
notable good Success; and was celebrated with Vows, Prayers, Sacrifices,
Congiaries, Gifts, etc.

Juventus, a very solemn Sacrifice, when they first cut their Beards; and did
excedere ex Ephebis.

Libertas, ordinarily a Woman holding in one hand a Pileum, or such a Cap as
was given to those that were made free, to hide the ugliness of their shaven
Scalps; in the other a Rod called Vindicta; wherewith the Praetor struck them,
to show, that they were now exempt from being beaten by their Masters.

Liberalitas, the Donor sitting, and in one hand a Cornucopia, in the other a
square Figure with a Handle and Marks, to show the quantity of the Donative or
Largess. The Quantities were Quadrantale of Wine, a Measure of 80 l.

Congius, the eighth part of it, or 10 l. which probably being the most usual
Measure given, Donatives in general were called Congiaria.

Sextarius, the sixth part of a Congius, or 1. l. + 7/12. The Coin signifies
such a Largess to be given by the Emperor, and commonly with Marks upon it,
which show how often he has given of those Liberalities.

Annona or Provision of Corn given to the People, is figured commonly with Ears
of Corn, Cornucopia, Ceres, or the like; which intimate also some Office for
providing Corn. When any part of a Ship added, it is to signify that provision
was brought by Sea.

. 10. There were also diverse mystical Representations or Monsters, which
certain Countries or Cities stamped upon their Coins, as they did their Gods
and Goddesses.

Sphinx, a Woman's face, Lions feet (to show, C. 9. Eygpt.
says Bell. that Nilus overflowed when the Sun was in Leo and Virgo) Birds
Wings: and was the ordinary Seal of Augustus, till he made use of his own
Effigies.

Harpiiae, a Woman's Face, the rest a ravenous Bird.

Sirenes, a Woman's Face and Body, ending also in a Bird, tho now they falsely
paint them ending in a Fish. They were three, one sung, another (Parthenope
buried at Naples, thence called Parthenop^) played on a Pipe, the third on a
Harp.

Gryphons made up of Eagle and Lion consecrated to the Sun, because of its
force, swiftness, and governing both the Air and Earth, as does the Eagle and
Lion, and as some Authors say (who believe there are such Beasts) sacrificed by
the Ethiopians to him.

The three Graces are also sometimes seen upon Medals, three Nymphs naked
[Gratitude being to be returned with a free and open heart, without any
disguise] exactly designed, he that abused their Images being held as infamous.
They are three to represent, 1. the doing of a Courtesy, 2. the return of it
from the Receiver, 3. the Obligation the Receiver has to acknowledge it, even
to the Posterity of his Benefactor. They are joined together commonly by their
hands, to show that these three should never be separated. They signify in
Medals Thankfulness for a Courtesy received from such an Emperor.

Semones, (...), Cabiri were the Sons of Vulcan, and Cabaera the Daughter of
Proteus; called also Telchines, Idaei Dactyli from Mount Ida in Phrygia, where
they were the Ministers of Cybele, Curetes in Crete where they nursed up
Jupiter, and Corybantes from (...) Galea, because in the Pyrrichian and
Oenoplian Dances, invented or practiced by them, armed; they also taught the
use of Fire, and working in Copper and Iron; to feed Herds and Flocks, the use
of Honey, manner of Hunting, and ^astly the practice of Civilty and
Conversation. Many Temples were dedicated to them; one ^n Egypt, which none but
Priests might come unto; and they were accounted implacable to any that
offended them.

. 11. We see also upon their Coins their Sacrificings with such things as
belonged to them, which were,

Secespita, an Hatchet, probabilier a Knife, to kill the Beast.

Aspersorium, a Water sprinkle to sanctify the Altar, Vessels and People.

Simpulum, a little Vessel to pour Wine upon the Sacrifice. Simpulum or
Simpullum, and Guttu^ or Gutturnium, one was for Wine, the other for Oil;
called Guttus, because having a narrow Neck, the Ovl dropped out guttatim,
says Varro. Vid. Gell. l. 17. c. 8. whilst the Entrails were a burning, they
moistened them with Oil.

Pingue superque Oleum sundens ardentibus Extis.

Patina or Patera, a Platter to receive the Blood of the Sacrifice.

-- Tepidumque Cruorem
Accipiunt pateris. Virg.
Acerra, a little Coffer wherein they put their Incense; sometimes also a
portatile Altar, whereupon they burnt their Incense.

Capeduncula, a capiendo thure ex acerra.

Mappa, a Towel to wipe the Priests hands.

These signified such a one to be Pontifex Maximus.

To the Priests belong diverse Ornaments o^ holy Vestments, if you so please to
call them. Such were their Pilea, of which they had three sorts.

1. Apex, called so from apere to bind, which was a thin Cap made of a white
Victims Skin offered to Jupiter, with an Olive-tuft stuck on the top with Wool
upon it. Lanigeros Apices. Virg. AEn. 8. with an Half Moon on the Coin of P.
Stolo, and was used by all the Flamines and Priests. It had also two strings
called Offendices (probably also of Woollen) to tie it faster or slacker as
they pleased.

2. Tutulusm belonged to the Pontifices, and was made of Wool, of the figure
almost of a Sugar Loaf, but had not a Half Moon, nor can I tell whether it had
a Virga or Tuft upon the top of it: the fashion of Women gathering their hair
altogether, and tying or tiring it into one knot on the top of their head, is
called Tutulus.

3. Galerus or Albogalerus, was a Cap made of some Beast sacrificed to Jupiter;
was proper to the Flamen Dialis, who never appeared in public without that and
Praetexta.

To the Augures belonged a crooked Staff called Lituus, wherewith they were
wont to mark out the Quarters of the Sky; yet not proper to the Augurs, but
that as also the Commentaculum or straight Staff was used sometimes by the
Flamines, as appears by a Coin of Augustus's, wherein is a Goddess holding a
Shield in her left hand, her right hand over the head of a Priest who holds in
one hand a Lituus, in the other a Commentaculum. L. Lentulus Flamen Martialis.
Sometimes an Augur also is designed by a Cock.

Ara was a small low Altar common to all sorts of Gods. Altar higher and
larger for the Celestial Gods.

Tripos was of two sorts, the one to sit upon, used chiefly in the Temple of
Apollo at Delphos; being set over a certain Cave, whence issued a Breath or
Steam that inspired them. And to these Tripos's are joined Crows consecrated to
Gods Presidents of Divination. The other was a certain three footed Instrument,
whereupon was set a little Pan for Coals to burn Incense to their Gods.

Thensae were certain Chariots which carried Exuvias Deorum, i. e. their Images
and Relics in their Circensian and Solemn Games to the Pulvinar or Bed
prepared for them; and were so called, because adorned Linteis tensis, or
Pavilions for the greater Ornaments and Majesty.

Supplicatio was a solemn time of praying to their Gods for assisting; or
averting some Calamity that threatened; or giving Thanks for some Success of
their Commonwealth. In the Cic. de prove. Cons. ^o, l. 39.
War with Philip there was a Supplication for three days, for Caesar fifteen
days, for the Victory over Antony at Modena fifty days; which had been done to
Cicero before (Phil. 14 and in Calph. Pison.) Sometimes appointed by the Decree
of XV viri; oftener by that of the Pontifices; but commonly by the Senate with
the advice of the Pontifices, as it should seem; and at length they became
ridiculous, as it appears by those decreed for Nero for the Murder of his
Mother, for the Fecundity of Poppaea, Tac. l. 4. 15. Annal. Those Supplications
were most solemn which were ad omnia pulvinaria Deorum. The manner was, that
Youths of about twelve years old went about crowned, and carrying Laurels in
their hands in Procession from Temple to Temple, singing certain Hymns and
Prayers to their Gods.

Lectisternium began about A. V. C. 356. in a solemn Supplication for
deliverance from a great Plague, and sometimes signifies the Bed whereupon the
Guests or Sacrifices lay when they dined; but more commonly the Bed of the
Gods, who, that they might be more at ease, had their Pulvinaria or Pillows;
for at those times they lay the Statue of the God they worshipped upon a Bed
magnificently and curiously accoustred with Pillows, Coverings, etc. in the
Temple with a Table before him, where after sacrificing they feasted as it were
in the Company, and to the Honor of their God, who, by his presence amongst
them, did testify the acceptance of their Offerings, and admitted them to his
Table.

Whilst the Sacrifice was consuming, they first prostrated themselves and
prayed; afterward they sat down as it were in Meditation; as is seen upon
Medals.

An Ox ready for Sacrifice commonly signifies Ludos Seculares, of which
hereafter, wherein was a most solemn and great Sacrifice of Oxen; tho in
Julians Coin and some others, it rather seems to refer to the finding of Apis,
the Egyptian holy Ox mentioned by Marcellinus, which being Sacred to the Moon,
had a spot like her on his side, and his Tail waxed and wained as the Moon.

The Oxen to be sacrificed were bound about their Backs and Bellies with
certain Rubans, and had on their Heads an Infula, which was a kind of woollen
Network (called also Filamenta) which covered their Heads. The Priests also
had the like, and therefore the Sacrificers have always their Heads veiled or
covered. Some imagine, that from thence proceeded the fashion of Christian
Bishops to wear Miters. But this is not probable, for Heathen Priests had not
any Covering like a Miter; that Use rather seems to have been taken up in
imitation of the Jewish High Priest. Condemned persons also had the like, as
the condemned by the Inquisition in Spain at this day have, the Martyrs
therefore being condemned persons, had the same:

Thus much for the Roman Priests and Sacrifices, we find upon the Greek Coins
diverse Officers much differing from the Roman: Such were,

(...), which were not the Chief of Asia, i. e. Governors of the Provinces, but
Chief Priests. (...), i. e. those Sacerdotia a t^tela praebebant immunitatem.
(...), which I do not remember to have found mentioned before Augustus's time,
but afterward very frequently upon Coins, not so frequently in Authors, what
their Office was is obscure: Some say, they were persons devoted or consecrated
to a Deity, but this is too large; they were indeed the AEditui (i. e.) such as
had Charge of their Temples, Sacrifices, and all other holy Ceremonies,
Sacristans. Sometimes whole Cities and Provinces were (...), i. e. had the
Charge of their solemn Games and Devotions, wherein they made solemn Orations
and Panegyricks in Honor of their Gods, and Superiors, they determined all
Controversies about their Religion and Worship; they celebrated and presided in
their solemn Games, etc. and they took it for a great Honor, tho done at their
own Charge, to be often (...).

Of their holy Games they had three principal Officers, (...), and (...) The
Alytarcha was chiefest, J. Gregorout of Job. Antioch.
honored and adored by the Name of Jupiter, during the Solemnity he never came
within doors, nor lay on a Bed, but in the open Air upon stones on the ground,
covered with a Rush Mat and clean Carpets; his Habit a long white Robe gilded,
a Crown of Gold beset with Jewels, an Ivory Scepter and Sandals.

The Grammateus wore a long white Robe, a golden Crown after the Laureat
fashion, and was adored under the Name of Apollo.

Amphithales had a long white Robe, a Wreath of Bays, a golden Pectoral with
the Image of Jupiter upon it, and honored as Mercury.

The Grammateus probably registered the Victors Names, the time and style of
Rewards called (...), the Records of the holy Conquerors.

If any of the Company, whether Maids or young Men, upon the Acclamation of the
holy People were crowned, they were to spend the rest of their days in a
Cloister; for immediately after the Games he was consecrated a Priest, she a
Nun.

Sometimes also the Emperors themselves took upon them the person of the
Alytarchae, as is reported of Dioclesian, who immediately thereupon resigned
the Empire, saying, That after he had born the person of Jupiter, he would not
any more be King. The like was done by Maximianus.

The Celebration of these Games in this or that City of the Community (as of
Asia) was by the people accounted a very holy Solemnity, and an act of
extraordinary Devotion to their Gods and Emperors, and therefore required
peculiar Priests, which moved the Cities very much to affect the Honor and
Dignity of having the Games celebrated there, and of taking care to provide all
things necessary for so many Proxies of the Gods; consequently this gave them a
great opportunity of showing their Devotion unto, and therefore hoping for a
Blessing from, their Gods; of ingratiating themselves into the Favor of the
Emperor by their Panegyricks, and of having many holy Persons amongst them, and
also of drawing a great concourse of people thither; at what time were also
holden Fairs and general Markets, and consequently much Gain and Wealth to the
place. This Favor is expressed upon their Coins how often it was done,
sometimes two, three or four times; and it should seem where any Deity is
mentioned, the (...) were of that only, as (...) where none, it was of the
Mother of the Gods the great Deity of Asia.

How can a City be (...)? Very well, for they might easily manage all the
business by a select Council of the Town, and except what required personal
Service, and for that they chose such persons as they thought meet for the
purpose, which also redounded much to the Honor of that City.

CHAP. VII. Of their Religion, Priests, Days, and Assemblies.
NExt to their Gods we will speak of their Religion, Priests and Sacrifices,
such things especially as conduce to the understanding of their ancient Coins.

. 1. The Religion of the ancient Romans was divided into Sacra, Sacrifices;
over which the Pontifices presided; and Aruspicia or Divinations; and
Predictions over which were their Augurs, who also declared, if Elections and
such like public Actions were not well, i. e. authoritatively made, and
foretold Successes. But in extraordinary cases they consulted the X and
afterward the XV-viri Sacris faciundis, or Interpreters of the Sybils books.
The explanation of Portents, Monsters, etc. was committed to the Aruspices;
these were instituted by Romulus, but afterward lost their reputation, and
were commonly very mean persons (who yet were sometimes consulted even by the
Senate in matters of consequence, but then they sent commonly for persons out
of Tuscany where this trade flourished most) till Claudius the Emperor restored
them to their dignity (Tacit. Annal. l. 2.) and then their College increased so
much, that it became an Order. By the way note that ordo signifies ordinarily a
Dignity, Art, or Profession, as ordo Senatorius, Equestris, Publicanorum,
Mancipiorum, etc. Collegium was a Corporation of three at least, under the same
Laws and Interest. Sodalitas (chiefly Sacerdotum) fellow Officers because they
sat together. Festus verbo sodalis.

So that there were in all four summa Collegia or chief Corporations of holy
Persons, who had supreme Authority in all things pertaining to Religion, tho
the Senate trespassed upon their Office by making Decrees without sometimes,
but commonly with, their advice. 1. Pontificium. 2. Augurum. 3. X and XV
virorum sacris faciundis, and these three were amplissima or most honorable.
4. Aruspicum. By those three were all matters of Religion managed, and chiefly
by the Pontifices and Augures, whose Authority and Dignity was very great;
insomuch that we see such as bore those Offices figured upon their Coin with
their Ensigns, a Patera, Urceolus, Simpulum, or some such instrument of
sacrificing, and a Lituus for the Augurs, tho the Lituus was not proper only to
them: and the III-viri R. P. C. tho they despised and trampled upon all Laws
sacred and civil, yet retained these Honors and their Ensigns, as of great
consequence, to themselves.

. 2. The Pontifices had books containing their Rites and Ceremonies, which they
never discovered; as their Pontificales Annals, Maximos, Commentarios sacros,
Fastos, libros Ceremoniarum. The Augurs had their Augurales, the XV-viri their
Fatales, Fatidicos, or Sybillinos, Commentarios Vaticines: the Aruspices had
Aruspicinos, rituales, reconditos de fulminibus, fulgurales, historias Tuscas,
etc.

The Pontifices were the chiefest, so that in process of time the name Pontifex
was common to all their Priests; so we read Pontifex sacrorum, Caesarum, Solis,
Volcani, AEdium sacrarum, Coloniae, Domus Augustae, fecialis, Quinquennalis,
Saliorum, Vestae, etc. and in case of necessity supplied the Offices of all the
other Priests, as of the Flamen Dialis in case of his sickness, or if he was
not augurated, etc. they also gave Answers out of the Sybills books, concerning
Prodigies, etc. After the death of Ascanius, his son Julus was put by the
Kingdom by Silvius son of Lavinia, and made Priest; but afterward the Kings
were Priests also, till Numa, who first regulated these things, and divided the
whole Sacerdotal Dignity and Employment into three parts, of which the
Pontifices were one: he then elected to be Pontifex, Max. Marcius M. F. a
Senator, and committed to him all the Ceremonies of their Religion writ and
sealed up. He joined to him also three Pontifices Patritians, Quibus solis
Magistratus and Sacerdotia adipisci licebat, quare dicti Pontifices a posse and
facere, says Scaevola; tho Varro derive the word a ponte [sublicio] faciendo,
or re^endo: and they were all Patritii a great while, till the common People by
their Sedition and Unquietness had got Tribunes; and then they never rested,
but first they obtained by Lex Caninia that they might marry with the Nobility;
then by Lex Licinia, that one of the Consuls should be a Plebeian; and that
part of the XV-viri sacrorum should be Plebeians. Ogulnius preferred a Law that
5 Augurs and 4 Pontifices should be created out of the common People, and added
to the former number; which after much contention was obtained. Yet the
Pontificatus Maximus remained amongst the Patritii till T. Coruncanius, Polyb.
l. 3. Flor. Epit. 18. Pet. l. 2.
who was the first Plebeian (Atilio Regulo Cos) that obtained it. Afterward it
was also communicated to Foreigners, the first whereof was Corn. Balbus a
Spaniard of Gades, first jure Quiritum donatus, afterward by Pompey made Cos.
and Pont. Max. After the Lex Ogulnia, Sulla the Dictator again enlarged the
College of the Pontifices and Augurs; and after him Julius Caesar added one to
every College; and the Senate upon occasion often added others supra numerum.
But after that the Emperors assumed to them the Pontificatum Maximum; they
neglecting all former Laws, chose all other Priests; tho sometimes in flattery
the Senate added also their Decree, as they did to Augustus after M. Antonies
death. Dio l. 51. Sulla increased the number of the Pontifices to 15, 8
Patricians and 7 Plebeians; whom Tully calls ex part dimidi^ Sacerdotes, and
then the Patritii were called majores, the Plebeii minores; as there were
majores and minores Flaminii; and amongst the minores the Senior was called
Maximus; and the Junior Minimus-minorum. But tho these at first were accounted
Sacerdotes, and tho of a lower rank and in lower places, yet they sat with the
Pont. Max. the Flamines, Rex Sacrorum, and other Pontifices in Judgment; yet at
last they came to be no better than Ministers, Scribes, etc. to the Majores.
And the greatest of the Majores and the Head of them (not by Seniority but
Choice) was Pontifex Maximus: (As the Flamen Dialis had the greatest Authority
amongst the fifteen Flamines, Praetor Urbanus amongst the Praetors, and Maxima
Vestalis amongst the Virgins.) So called, says one, quod Maximus, quae ad
Sacr^ and Religiones pertinent, Judex sit, Vindexque contumaciae Privatorum,
Magistratuumque. For as the Pontifices were chief of all the Sacred Order, so
was the Pont. Max. the chiefest of them; o^ whose Jurisdictions and Power by
and by. Some say that of all the Sacred Order, the Rex Sacrorum was chief next
the Flamen Dialis, then Martialis next Quirinalis, and then Pont. Max. but it
seems that Pont. Max. was chief, and had Authority over all the Sacred Order;
and that Rex Sacrorum, and the Flamines were designed only to the peculi^
Service of certain Gods, without any other Authority. The Flamines were at
first by Numa instituted three; but afterward the came to be fifteen; but the
first three were of most esteem, and were always Patricii. Live. l. 27. Flaminem
Dialem invitum inaugura^ coegit P. Licinius, Pont. Max. C. Valerim. Florus,
Epit. l. 19. L. Caecilius Metellus Pont. A Posthumium Cos. quoniam idem and
Flamen Martialis erat -- in urbe ten^it, nec pallus est a Sacris rece^ere.


. 3. The Pontifices were after their Institutution chosen by the College, and
by them also was the Pont. Max. chosen out of their own Body, and were created
or inaugurated in Comitiis Curiatis, being they were all Patritii; but
afterward the Plebeii being made partakers of the Priesthood, they were
created in Tributis, [Tributa were Councils or Convocations of the Common
people, wherein the Fathers or Senators had nothing to do] which Comitia,
before Lex Domitia, were holden by one of the Eminentest persons in the
College. By Lex Domitia jus subrogandorum Sacerdotum was transferred from the
College to the people, and then all the Pontifices were created Comitiis
Tributis. And it should seem, that in the Tributis the Pontifices were
renunciati, but were confirmed and established in Curiatis, for in those
Comitia only were Auguries; but Plebeii Sacerdotes, who to their Consecration
had no need of Auguries, were made in Tributis. It should seem also, that in
Comitiis Tributis the people only designed or named the person, but that the
Regular and Authentic Election was in the College; and that they could not
choose any of the same Family with one of themselves; as neither any person that
was a notorious Enemy to any of them. In those Comitia Tributa only seventeen
Tribes chosen by Lot gave their Voices for choosing the Pont. Max. The Curio
Maximus, Augurs and XV-viri were also created in Comitiis Tributis; but the Rex
Sacrorum in Centuriatis; and the Flamines in Curiatis; which were holden by the
Pontifices, whom therefore Cicero calls Auctores Centuriatorum and Pro Domo sua
and in Rullum.
Curiatorum Comitiorum.

. 4. This Custom of Election seems to have lasted, till Julius Caesar, by a
great Largess, was made Pont. Max. but he neglecting the way whereby himself
attained the Pontificate, created Pont. whom he pleased; and the Senate
afterward in flattery voted, That if he should have a Son, he should also be
Pont. Max. M. Antony also neglecting the Comitia and all Order and Law, created
Lepidus Pont. Max. surreptitiously; and to confirm him the more, and colleague
the better, he ordered that from thenceforth the Cooptation or Choice of the
Pontifices should be transferred from the people to the College, as Sulla had
ordered it before for ten years only. After Lepidus's death (which some, tho
falsely, affirm that Augustus hastened for the purpose. Augustus assumed the
Title and Power of Pont. Max. to himself; as did also all the succeeding
Emperors, till they became Christians; not because they were Patritii, but for
the greatness of the Authority and Veneration; and therefore they always placed
^t Spartian.
the first of their Titles: Yet before Hadrian, none executed the Function.
They also sometimes deffe^ed to take upon them the Pontificate, as T^berius was
not Pont. Max. till 6 Id. Mart. tho Augustus died Kal. September. and when
Pontifices Max. they rarely summoned a College, but o^dinarily (...) all things
by themselves, and to settle in them^ves all the Sacred Authority that was
possible; they were also Augurs, as appears by diverse Coins of Julius,
Augustus, Vespasian, Verus, etc. which have the Augures Ensigns upon them. And
Otho; if that reading in Tacitus be true, Hist. l. 1. Otho Pontificatus
Gutherius
Auguratusque honoratus insignibus, cumulum, etc.

They were also sometimes of the XV-viri, that they might engross to themselves
all the three summa and amplissima Sacerdotia. So there is a silver Coin of
Vitellius, with a Tripos, Dolphin, and Bird, all sacred to Apollo; whose
Priests the XV-viri were. If two Augustus's at the same time, the one was Pont.
Max. the other Pontifex only, as appears by the Coins of M. Aurelius and Lucius
Verus, of Caraculla and Geta, of Dioclesian and Maximian.

. 5. And before the Emperors times the Pont. Max. was of so great Honor, that
it was very ambitiously desired even of Persons of greatest Quality, and seldom
any was chosen that had not before sat in Sella Curuli. He took place also and
precedence of all the other Magistrates.

The Inauguration of the Pont. Max. is described by Prudent. Hymn. Sti. Romani,
and was thus; Putting on his Pontificalia, he went down into a Hole made for
that purpose, over which was thrown a wooden Bridge or Cover full of holes;
then was brought an Ox ready for the Sacrifice, and slain upon the Bridge: So
that the blood ran down through the h^s upon the person below and his clothes;
which being done, the Bridge was removed, and he taken up, and acknowledged
Pont. Max.

The Pont. Max. and Flamen Dialis were married per Confarreationem, or a most
solemn Sacrifice; some say they might have but one Wife: Si Dialis uxorem
duxerit illum Flaminio decedere, and matrimonium Flaminis non nisi morte
dirimi; if they were Laws, or if any other such concerning the Pont. Max. it is
manifest by Julius Caesar's Example, they were in his time obsolete and
antiquated.

The Pont. Max. had a public House which Serve. AEn. 8.
was called Regia, because the Habitation of Rex Sacrificulus; and it was
laureata: This was first given by the people to P. Scipio Nasica in via sacra,
who was by the Senate surnamed Optimus, that he might be the easilier consulted
in Matters of Law, which was his Profession; and it should seem that the
succeeding Pontifices lived in that same, even Julius Caesar himself, who
removed out of his own house in the Suburra unto this. But Augustus made his
whole house public, because built with the peoples Money.

. 6. It should seem that the Augurs had this Privilege by Law, that they never
forfeited their Augurships, no not tho condemned to death. The Rex Sacrorum
seems also to have had the same Prerogative, but the Pontifices Maximi not so;
but yet in favor to some persons their Priesthoods were made perpetual; tho
Pontifices perpetui does not always signify such as were to enjoy their
Honors as long as they lived; but such also as were employed continually and
assiduously about Matters of their Religion.

The Maxima Vestalis and the Rex Sacrorum were also legibus soluti,
unquestionable by Law, but the Pontifices not.

It was unlawful for the Pont. Max. to go out of Italy till P. Licin. Crassus
broke that, whether Law or Custom; and he was imitated by diverse of his
Successors, particularly by Julius Caesar; yet against the gre of the Senate,
who voted that Julius Caesar should therefore be given up to the Enemies.

Hereupon some have doubted, whether the Pont. Max. could have any Command in
their Armies, and consequently be Consul, etc. And it is true indeed, that the
Flamen Dialis was seldom chosen Consul, because it was forbidden him to be
General. Exercitum armatum videre Flaminis Dialis religio est, A. Gel. l. 10.
c. 15. Yet both the Flamines and Sal^i might have Civil Power, both Consulates,
tho rarely, and other Magistracies. But the Pont. Max. were capable of any
Power Civil or Military. So we see the Emperors were always Pont. Maximi. So M.
AEmilius was Censor, Live. l. 40. Tacit. Annal. l. 4. P. Licinius was first
AEdile, then Censor, then Cos. Live. l. 27. and afterward Master of the Horse
to Q. Fulvius the Dictator. P. Scaevola also was Tribunus plebis, tho Tully
accounted it dangerous to join those two Offices.

The Charge and Employment of the Pontifices was very great and various. At
first they judged all points of Law, and decided all Controversies: and before
the twelve Tables all the Law was contained in their Books: of which afterward
Cn. Fulvius discovered and published so much as concerned Civil Matters; but
what touched the Rites and Ceremonies of their Religion, was always kept
secret: but they had always supreme Authority in judging all Sacred Causes,
whether between private persons, Magistrates, or persons Sacred. They ma^e
inquisition into the Lives and Carriages of all ^uch Officers and Magistrates
that had oversight over the Sacrifices and Worship of the Gods; as likewise all
Priests, whether of their own or other Order; also any person that belonged to
Religion in any case, and all other persons in religious Cases: and for some
Crimes they could mulctam and poenam ponere; and the Vestal Virgins they could
judge to f^agellation and loss of life. They declared and interpreted the true
Worship of the Gods to the Common people; and took care to prevent all
heterodox Opinions in Religion. They also interpreted the Minds of the Gods
whenever demanded, resolving all Cases of Conscience, as I may call them, and
Cic. de ND 13. de Arusp. resp.
absolving from such faults as were pardonable. They had Charge over Religion
and all other Ceremonies; taking notice also of what concerned the Commonwealth
in Election of Magistrates, undertaking Wars, etc. which were no otherwise rata
and firma, but as by them judged consentaneous to the Ceremonies of their
Religion. They decreed concerning Sacrifices, Vows, Holy Days, and in general
kept the Calendar for all the distinction of their days: which because it is
somewhat intricate, you will pardon me, if by a small digression I try to clear
it.

. 7. Their days then were, 1. either atri, unlucky days, wherein it was not
lawful to fight a Battle, consult the People, nor do any solemn Action, not so
much as to bury their deceased Parents; such were the days immediately
following the Calends, Nones, and Ides; and the fourth day before the Calends,
Nones, and Ides; on the fourth day before the Nones of August was the great
Defeat at Cannae.

2. Other days were not atri, and they were

1^ Festi, Holy Days consecrated to the Gods, in them were Sacrifices to be
offered, Religious Banquets made, and Games celebrated. Some of them also were
Feriae, which were profaned if any labor was performed in them, but what
concerned either the Worship of the Gods, or some urgent commodity of life, as
if an Ox fell into a pit; or a Beam of the house broken; or War brought
suddenly upon them: and those Feriae were,

a Public, and those, 1. Stativae, common to all the people upon certain set
Days and Months, and were marked in their Fasti; on such were celebrated their
Agonalia, Carmentalia, Lupercalia.

2. Conceptivae, which were every Year bidden or denounced by the Priests or
Magistrates, such were Latinae, Paganalia, Sementinae, Compitalia.

3. Imperativae, which the Consuls or Praetors commanded upon occasion.

4. Nundinae, which were Fairs, wherein the Country People came to sell and buy.

b Privatae, and those, 1. of certain Families, as of the Claudia, AEmilia,
Julia, Cornelia, etc.

2. Or of particular persons, such were their Birth-days, fulgurum
susceptiones, Funerals, Expiations, etc.

2^ Profesti, or Working days, wherein a man might dispatch any business
public or private; and these were,

a Fasti, wherein the Praetor might hear Causes, and give Sentence; or, as they
phrase it, fari tria illa verba, Do, Dico, Addico: yet on these Days all
Comitia or treating with the People were forbidden. Nefasti were such Days,
wherein the Courts were not open.

b Comitiales, in which they might both plead in the Courts, and treat with the
People.

g Comperendini, in quibus vadimonium dicere licet.

d Stati, Days appointed for hearing of Strangers.

e Praeliares, wherein they might demand their own by force, and provoke the
Enemy: which it was not lawful to do, in Latinarum Solenni, in diebus
Saturnaliorum, nor cum mundus patet; because that was dedicated to Dis and
Proserpina, and then they counted it unlawful either to raise, march, or
exercise their Men, to charge the Enemy [but if the Enemy charged them, it was
accounted lawful to fight at any time] to weigh Anchor, to go to Sea, or to
marry a Wife.

3^ Intercisi, such Days which were common both to the Gods and Men, half
Holy Days, in some hours the Courts were open, in some not.

. 8. And because frequent mention is made of their Comitia or General
Assemblies, perhaps it will be acceptable to you to know somewhat concerning
them also.

Of the Divisions of the People, and of their Comitia or General Assemblies.
There were two great and solemn Divisions of the People of Rome; the first
according to the place they lived in, and thus they were divided into Tribus
and Curias; the second, according to their Wealth, and thus they were divided
into Classes and Centurias.

After the Sabins were admitted into the City, Romulus divided the City into
three parts, which he therefore called Tribus, and the Governor of them
Tribunos; which Name also he imposed not only upon the Places but Inhabitants;
for diverse of the Albani (to the number of 3000 Foot and 300 Horse) coming with
Romulus to his new Colony, he gave them Houses in a peculiar part of the City,
and made them into one Tribe, which he called Ramnensis, then Titus Tatius the
King of the Sabins coming to live at Rome, brought with him also many of his
own Country, whom he placed upon Mons Capitolinus, and they were made another
Tribe called Tatienses, the rest of the people that inhabited betwixt the
Mountains Palatinus and Capitolinus, made up another Tribe, and were called
Luceres (either because they came ad Lucum, i. e. ad Asylum, and so taken into
the City, or that they were Hetruscans that came with Lu^umo, or Ardeates that
came with Luceres, and fixed in Rome) afterward Servius Tullus having enlarged
the City, divided it into four Regions or Tribes, giving them Names, not as
Romulus from their Countries, but from their places; which were Palatina,
Suburana, Esquilina, and Collina; and he forbad the Inhabitants of any one
place to change their dwelling into another; and this he did probably, because
he saw the Ramnenses and Tatienses to be far exceeded in number by the
continual addition of new Comers, who were all joined to the Luceres; probably
also he divided the Country about Rome, which belonged to the Romans, into 26
parts, which made up so many Tribus Rusticas, as some Authors say; others, as
Varro, Dionysius and Livy seem to think, that he made not so many Tribus
Rusticas, and perhaps no more than fifteen, and their Names were Romilia,
Remonia, Pupinia, Veintina, Galeria, Pollia, Voltinia, AEmilia, Cornelia,
Fabia, Menenia, Papiria, Sergia, Veturia, and that which afterward (A. U. C.
249.) was called Claudia. Afterward, A. U. C. 258. Claudius and Servilius
being Consuls, two more were added, which seem to be Crustumina and Ocriculana.
Anno 369. four more were added, Stellatina, Tormentina, Sabalina, and
Arniensis. Anno 395. two more, Pomptina and Poplilia, or Popillia or Poblilia.
Again, An. 421. two others, Maecia and Sceptia. Anno 435. Ufentina and
Falarina. Anno 454. Aniensis and Terentia: and lastly, Anno 512. Uclina and
Quirina, which made up the number 35, which number never altered. These 16 last
were not in agro Romano, but either in Sabino, or in Umbria, or in Latium, or
in Campania, or in Hetruria; for Ufentina was so called from the River Ufens
near Terracina, and Arniensis from the River Arnus, and seems to have been
about Florence, and they were constituted according as they received more and
more Nations to be Citizens of Rome.

It is to be noted, That tho the Tribes seem at first of all to have received
their Names from the Places, yet diverse of them had other Names from Persons,
as the Horatia, Papia, Camilla, etc. were anciently, and Julia, Flavia, Ulpia,
etc. were modernly Names of some of these Tribes.

Also in the Country he built upon the strongest Hills and Places certain
Castles, which he called Pagos, whither the Country People might resort, and be
in safety, in the time of any Invasion; which Pagi also were dedicated to some
God, to whom once in the Year all that belonged to that Pagus, Men, Women, and
Children, brought a certain piece of Money, which was received by him that had
Charge of the Pagus, whereby he knew the number of all that belonged to that
Pagus, and defrayed the Charges of the Sacrifices and Pagus. These Feasts or
Holy Days were called Paganalia.

Afterward this Manner and Government was quite altered; and Tribus signified
not any place or quantity of Ground with its Inhabitants, but a Company of
Citizens, Freemen, that lived where they listed; so that persons of one Tribe
lived in another: and Tribus was not pars Urbis as formerly, but Civitatis. And
this Change happened (as it should seem) first, because most men desired and
counted it greater reputation to be (as of honourabler Families, so of)
honorabler Tribes. The more honorable were the Rusticae: For Romulus, to
encourage Husbandry, committed all sedentary, mechanic, and sordid Arts to
Slaves, Libertines, and Strangers; but Agriculture to Freemen and Citizens,
whom he designed to be the Nursery of his Militia, theirs being a life more
active and laborious, and which consequently disposed them better to great
Undertakings. Secondly, Because the Adopted passed as well into the Tribe as
the Family of the Adopter; whence it came, that great Families removed
sometimes from one Tribe into another. Thirdly, Because the Censors in process
of time came to have power to add new Tribes, and to remove out of one into
another. So that Citizens began not to be of the Tribes in which they lived,
but of those which it pleased the Censors either to gratify them withal, or to
punish them. Hence it is probable, that all of the same great Family got into
one Tribe, which perhaps gave the Name to certain Tribes, as AEmilia, Claudia,
Julia, etc. And Appius thus gave leave to all Citizens to enter themselves into
what Tribe they pleased; but Q. Fabius, A. U. C. 449. finding the abuse which
had crept in by Appius's permission; whereby the meanest people (being the
greatest part) put themselves into the Rusticae Tribus, and so carried all
things in the Comitia factiously, and to the prejudice of the Commonwealth; he
(I say) finding this, transferred all the meanest of the people into the Tribus
Urbanae; which was another Reason, why after him all Persons of Quality sought
to avoid being in those Tribes. Fourthly, Because that persons for Demerits
were punished by being placed in a lower Tribe, and for Reward advanced to an
higher; where, by the way, it seems that one Rustica was more honorable than
another. Cic. pro Balbo says, that Balbus was rewarded for accusing and
convicting N. N. of Ambitus (unlawfully seeking Preferment) with a removal into
Tribus Crustumina; whether that was the general Recompense for such Actions; or
that the Accuser had the Tribe of the convicted, if nobler than his own, I know
not.

. 9. Servius Tullus divided all the people into six Classes according to their
Wealth, and these again into 193 or 194 (Centurias) the greatest part whereof
were of the richest Persons; whereby it came to pass, that they who had the
greatest Interest in the Public, had also greatest share in the Government.
The Governors of the Centuries were called Centuriones, tho they seem not to
have had any Power but in War. The first Class into 80 Centurias, 40 Seniorum,
and 40 Juniorum under 45 years old, the Census or Wealth whereof was not under
a 100 Minae (10000 Drachmae) alias at 333l -- 10s -- 0d of our Money; they were
best and compleatest armed, and commonly had aciem primam in their Armies. To
these were added 18 Centuries of the noblest and richest Equites.

The second Class was divided into 20 Centuries of Footmen, and their Census
or Wealth was betwixt a 100 and 80 Minae (about 276 l.) they had all the Arms
of the former, except a Breast Plate, and they constituted aciem secundam. To
these were added two unarmed Centuries of Handy-crafts men (Opificum.)

The third Class was divided into 20 Centuries of Foot-Soldiers. Their Wealth
was bewixt 7000 and 5000 Drachmae, or as others, about 167 l. and had all the
Arms of the former, except Greaves. These constituted aciem tertiam.

The fourth was divided into 20 Centuries of Foot-Soldiers, and their Wealth
was betwixt 5000 and 2500 Drachms (about 24 l) their Arms were Spears, Shields,
and Swords; and they constituted the last Battle or Acies. To which were added
two unarmed Centuries, Cornicinum and Tibicinum.

The fifth was divided into 20 Centuries of Foot-Soldiers, whose Wealth was
under 25 Minae, and above 12 and (39l -- 1s -- 3d) These were Velites, and had
Slings and Darts, and the like Missilia.

The sixth was the rest of the People, Proletariorum and Capite Censorum, whose
Wealth was not regarded, and made but one Century, freed from all Tribute and
Militia.

In giving their Suffrages therefore in their Comitia Centuriata or by
Centuries, wherein most of the great Businesses were dispatched; the best and
wealthiest Citizens (who had the most Centuries) had the greatest Power.

. 10. The Comitia Centuriata (called by Cicero Maxima) were, 1. for the
Creation of the greater ordinary Magistrates, as Consuls, Proconsuls, Censors,
Reges Sacrorum, Praetors, Tribuni Militum Consulari potestate, and XVviri
legibus ferendis, where the Candidates had no Voices; and these Assemblies were
held only by the Consuls, Dictators, Interreges, Trib. Milit. Cons. potestate
and X-viri Leg. Scrib. and were called per Cornicinem, and were held in Campo
Martio, where all the people met, and gave their Voices each in their own
Century.

2. For making Laws of greater Consequence, and such as were made by the
greater Magistrates, Senatus-consulta, by the Authority of the Senate; and in
these presided the Consuls and Dictators.

3. For Judgments in Case of Rebellion and Treason, and these were held by the
Consuls, Dictators, or Praetors.

They were only called by the greater Magistrates, and all admitted into
Centuries, had Voices, whether they lived in the City or Italy; and they had
their Diribitores (such as marshalled them, and received their Suffrages)
Rogatores, Custodes, and Praecones; and were in the Campo Martio extra
Pomerium; were proclaimed a competent time before by the Authority of the
Senate (27 days; in which time were kept tria Nundina, or three Fairs, and tha^
space of time was called Trinundinum) and they were always post Capta auspicia,
both by observation of the Heavens, the Auguries of the Birds, and the
Inspection of Sacrifices.

. 11. Tributa Comitia were, wherein the People gave their Suffrages according
to their Tribes, and were

1. First for the Creation of some of their Priests.

2. For Creation of lesser Magistrates, whether Provincial, as Proconsuls,
Propraetors, and Proquaestors. Or Urbani, and these were either ordinary, such
were Tribuni plebis, AEdiles Plebis, Tribuni Militum, AEdiles Curules,
Qu^stores, Triumviri, 1. Nocturni, 2. Capitales, 3. Auro, Argento, AEre flando,
feriundo. Or extraordinary, as Praefecti Annonae, Duumviri Navales, Quaestores
Parricidii, Duumviri AEdium Sacrarum, etc.

3. For making such Laws as were called Plebiscita; concerning making Peace,
solutionem a legibus, Triumphs; Publicas Quaestiones de Civitate.

4. For such Judgments wherein the Faulty persons were only mulcted.

There were to be present, according to the occasion, Candidati, Accusers,
Accused (and they Sordidati) with their Advocates or Patrons. They had
Diribitores, Custodes, Rogatores, and Praecones. They were held without an
Auspication, and in any place within or without the City, but only upon Dies
Comitiales, and they were proclaimed ordinarily 27 days before.

Romulus divided the People into three Tribes or Wards, and every Ward into 10
Curias, like our Parishes, and (as these) each Curia had their proper Temples
and Sacrifices. So that Curia signifies, 1. those 30 parts into which the
people were divided, 2. the Temples proper to every one of these Curiae, 3.
because the Senate ordinarily met in one of these Curiae; it signifies any
place wherein the Senate met.

Comitia Curiata were those wherein the People was asked their Sentence by
Curias, and what the major part of the Curiae agreed upon was firm, and called
jussum Populi, in these Comitia the people met not together in one place, but
all in their several Curia's, and there voted.

1. They made Laws concerning, 1. the Confirmation of certain Magistrates,
which were in other Comitia chosen, 2. the giving Military Charges to the
Magistrates, 3. Revocation from Exile, 4. Adoptions, 5. and Testaments.

2. They created certain Priests.

They were convoked by certain Magistrates, as Kings, Interreges, Consuls,
Praetors, Dictators, and Pontifices; and that by 30 Lictores, and upon certain
days, within the City in Comitio, a place near the Forum. They only had Voices
who were in Curias Scripti, i. e. that lived in the City.

The manner of holding them was this: the President of the Comitia proposed the
business; and then said, Si ita vobis videtur, discedite in Curias, and
suffragium inite: but if the Rogation (or thing proposed) seemed not to be for
the benefit of the People, the Trib. plebis interceded and cried, Veto; and
then the Comitia were Dissolved.

But if it was thought fit to be passed, the Curiae were called forth by Lot to
give their Suffrages, and were called forth so often, till 16 of them agreed.
They voted first by word of Mouth, afterward by Tables. And they observed,
that the Curia first called out, was to be boni Ominis, or else the Comitia
were put often till another day.

Of the Curiae.
. 12. Curia signifies sometimes the Place or Meeting House of the People,
secondly, the People or Company that met in that one place, thirdly, the Jus or
Rights wherewith they were endued. To understand this the better, this is the
History of the Curiae.

Romulus having divided the whole City into three Tribes (or Wards) subdivided
every Tribe into 10 Curiae (or Parishes) constituting in all 30 and their
Governors Curiones; which number was never increased, and to every Curia he
assigned two public places for their Meetings, which places were also called
Curiae; one for their Sacrifices and Assemblings, for the Exercise of their
Religion, the other for Consultations about Secular businesses. Curia locus est
ubi publicas curas gerebant. But because in process of time the City became
greatly augmented; so that these places, built by Romulus, were not sufficient
to contain the multitudes, they built new ones much larger, into which they did
evocare Sacra (transfer their God, their Altars, Ceremonies, etc.) only four
there were left, out of which it was not lawful to transfer their Sacra: which
were Foriensis, Rapta, Veliensis, and Velitia; which were therefore called
Veteres Curiae, the rest Novae: Besides these, we find three ancient Names of
the Curiae, Saucia, Titia, and Tifata; and I know not whether any more.

So that according to Romulus's Institution, four of the ancient numerically
remained, and the number of 30 Curiae was never altered; but they were not (as
he made them) parts of the Tribus's; for when there were made four Tribes,
there were but 30 Curiae; nor were there any Curiae in the Rustical Tribes; but
they had their Pagi, where they performed their Devotions and Paganalia, as the
City-Inhabitants did their Compitalia in the Curiae. For every Curia had his
God, and Sacrifices, etc. peculiar to it self, the Expenses whereof were by
Romulus allowed out of the Treasury, and every Curia had his Curio (or Parish
Priest) that minister'd and officiated in that Curia; both in their Worship,
Sacrifices, holy Feasts, and the like.

Quest. Whether all that were numbered in the Tribus Rustica were referred or
listed in some Curia? It seems that all that did enjoy the full and complete
Liberties and Privileges of Roman Citizens, were referred to some Curia; else
they wanted a great part of the Government in the Commonwealth, many things
being passed in Comitiis Curiatis; but many were Citizens (as Municipes, etc.)
who were of some Tribe, but not of any Curia.

The Curiae were subdivided again into ten parts each, called Decuriae and
their Chief was called Decurio; but these seem not to have been used in the
City: but in the Municipia and C^liniae, we find frequent mention of them.

. 13. But to return from this Digression. The Pontifices also Decreed
concerning Games, Ceremonies of all the Gods, that especially which made pro
Salute Pop. Romani. They appeased the Wrath of the Gods when denounced by
Prodigies or any other way discovered; tho procurare prodigia they commonly
referred to the Aruspices. They did also expiare Piacula, i e. if any thing
done against Religion, to make atonement for it, as if a Vestal Virgin was got
with Child, any great Sacrilege committed, any Games wrong performed; and many
times they ordered Sacrifices, Games, etc. to be done over again. They presided
in all sacred public Solemnities, and were consulted also in such as Cic. pro
Domo sua.
concerned private Persons or Families. And what three of them decreed was
accounted firm and holy. Hence that Saying of Neratius Priscus: Tres faciunt
Collegium. They also with the Vestal Virgins might go into the Penus Vestae
(which they called opening and shutting Penetrale Vestae) which was an inner
secret Room in the Temple of Vesta, wherein were kept the Fortune of the
Commonwealth. They did also Deos indigitare (i. e.) call them by their proper
Names, which it was not lawful sometimes to publish unto the people. These Dii
Indigites were Dii Patrii, (...) men deified, which it was their Office to do.
They also took care of the Intercalation, and equalling of the Civil, with the
Natural, Year; which they kept as a great Mystery and a gainful, being
frequently bribed to lengthen the Year by such as were desirous to continue
their Offices longer, or the Customs they farmed. Till Julius Cic. Epist. 7. l.
5. ad Attic. Epp. 9. 13.
Caesar being Pont. Max. took upon him to reform the Calendar. The Pontifices
Minores had also some Sacrifices and Functions proper to themselves; as that
they sacrificed every Kalends to Juno (called therefore Calendarii) in Curia
Calabra; which was the place of meeting and treating about Matters of Religion,
as Curia Hostilia was for Civil by the Senate. Besides this, they had 30 other
Curia's for the People, wherein to observe their Holy Days and Ceremonies,
which were governed by the Curio Maximus and the Flamines Curiales.

They had also Jurisdiction in the Cognizance of diverse Civil Causes; as such
as concerned Adoptions, which were commonly performed before them in Comitiis
Curiatis. Such were Causes Matrimonial, Causes Testamentary, Sepulchral and
Funeral; for none might without their leave remove a dead Body out of its
Sepulcher, or renew a Monument, etc.

They had anciently Immunitatem a Muneribus, i. e. from Taxes, etc. which
afterward was taken from them, and restrained only to Immunity from
extraordinary Taxes. They had Sellam Curulem, and Togam praetextam (the
Triumphers had Togam pictam) and might not ride in the City but in a Chariot.

. 14. The Rex Sacrorum and Flamines, tho not Pontifices, yet were so joined to
the College of the Pontifices, that they commonly sat in Judgment with them;
and some say in this Order, 1, Rex Sacrorum, 2. Dialis, 3. Martialis, 4.
Quirinalis, 5. Pontifex Maximus; but this Marshalling is very doubtful; for
Livy says expressly, that the Pont. Max. took place of the Rex Sacrorum,
because they would not join pre-eminence to that Name.

As to their Sacrifices and holy Ceremonies, there was not so great difference
betwixt the Pontifices Majores and Pont. Max. as in other things there was; for
besides that he was Head and Chief (and as it were Dean) of the College,
presiding in all their Meetings, and answering for them when ever any thing was
referred to, or demanded of, them: and consequently Head of all that Estate of
Sacred persons; whereby he had Power to convoke the People, propose to them,
and ask their Suffrages, and, as some say, Leges far, especially concerning
Religious Dionys. l. 2. and 10.
matters; insomuch that the Comitia Centuriata and Curiata were in a manner
wholly his, wherein were chosen all the chief Officers of their Religion; whom
he also inaugurated; even the Rex Sacrorum himself, who else was the chief of
them all: yet was his Priesthood under the Pont. Max. Ne additus nomini honos
aliquid officeret libertati, says Livy, l. 2.

Besides all these things, he chose the Vestal Virgins, 20 in number, and in
his custody were fatale Imperii Pignus in Penu Vestae, which were Serve. AEn. 8.
seven in number: Acus Matris Deum, Quadriga fictilis, Veientinorum cineres,
Orestis (i. e.) Priami Fest. verbo Mamurius
Sceptrum, Ilione, Palladium, Ancilia. To the Pont. Max. also belonged the
Tensae, Curricula, Praecentio, ludi, libationes, Epulaeque ludorum pubblicorum.
He began all their sacred Hymns, and Processions, and all other religious
Ceremonies. He also confecit magnos Annals, i. e. writ upon whited Tables what
was done every Year, and exposed it publicly at his House, that all might read
it. And in what State and Splendour he lived the Proverb of Coena Pontificia
shows sufficiently.

The Ministers of the Pontifices were the IIIviri, afterward the VII-viri,
Epulonum: whose Office was to take care of the Solemn Games: and, if any thing
was omitted or wrong done, to advertise the Pontifices of it; and to provide
for the Epulare Sacrificium or holy Feast made of the Sacrifices at those
Games; their Ensign upon a Coin of L. Plancus is Urceolus or an Ewer. Virgins
saliae who assisted at the Sacrifices in the Regia. Camilli were Youths
(ingenui) that served the Priest at Sacrificing, and are commonly deciphered
holding a Box of Incense in their hands. Apparitores or Kalatores, Lictores.
Scribae most of them Libertini (...), a libris Pontificalibus. Decuria
Curiatia. Tibicines who played, and Ludii that danced, at their Sacrifices:
instead of whom in their Colonies was Petreia, an Antic, that led their
Ceremonies in the Habit of an old drunken Woman. Popae, that slew; Victimarii
that dressed, their Sacrifices. Incinerarius that brought the Embers, and
kindled the fire. Jecorus and Aruspex Pontificis that stood by, ordered the
Sacrificed, and viewed the Liver. Fictores, probably such as sold Images of
Flower or Wax to such as were not able, by reason of poverty, to buy living
beasts. Nomenclatores Tensarum Jugares, such as assisted in ordering the Tensae.

CHAP. VIII. Of Countries, Colonies, Places.
. 1. SPain, upon their Coins is sometimes like a Soldier on Horseback with a
Lance, sometimes on Foot with a round Buckler and two Darts, (the Weapons of
that Country) sometimes a Woman with a Rabbet, of which was so great plenty
heretofore in Spain, that whole Towns have been undermined by them; and Galen
thought they were proper to that Country. Deus Hispanus, or their Tutelar God,
is a full Face with short curled Hair, and a Collar of Pearls about his Neck.

Africa, a Woman's Head tired with the Skin of an Elephants Head: sometimes also
beside her a Scorpion, Basket of Herbs, and Ears of Corn. Sometimes also a
Serpent before an Elephant; who is said by his hot Breath to draw them out of
their Holes, and so devour them. Sometimes with G. T. A. Genius Tutelaris
Africae.

Mauritania, and in Hadrian's Money Mauretania, a Woman in a Soldiers Habit
leading an Horse commonly without a Bridle, (Infraenes Numidae Virg. calls
them) and a Switch in the other hand.

Italy, sometimes like a Woman crowned with Towers, sitting on a Globe; to
signify the Command of the World; sometimes with a Cornucopia.

. 2. Roma, owing her Name to a Woman called Rhome; for when the Trojans lay
lurking at the Mouth of Tiber, and made Inroads into the Country, their Wives
troubled at that manner of living, by the Counsel of Rhome, when the men were
gone abroad to forage, burnt the Ships; whereupon perforce they built a City,
and called it Roma; sometimes therefore a Woman armed sitting on seven
Mountains, or on an heap of Arms, with a Wolf suckling Romulus and Remus, and a
Bird or two called Picus Martius consecrated to Mars their Father. Sometimes a
young Head, to show its perpetuity and eternal Vigor, armed also for strength.

Germania, a Woman with a Lance and Shield, like a Rhombus, with the acute
Angles cut off; which it seems was the defensive Arms of most Countries
thereabouts.

Sicilia is figured by three Legs in a Triangle, because of the three
Promontories, Pelorum, Pachorum, Lilybaeum; with Ears of Corn to show its
Fertility.

Judaea and Phoenicia with a Palm Tree.

Armenia with a Persian Quiver of Arrows.

Arabia, a Camel.

Corinth and Syracuse, her Colony, a Pegasus^

Cyrene, the Plant Silphium (a gross Stem with two or three branches at the
top, like a round Ball) because thence the best Laserpitium, either the Gum or
the coagulated Juice of that Plant, which some conceive to be Benzoin.

Egypt, a Woman holding a Sistrum (a Musical Instrument like a Racket of Iron
or'Brass, in the sides of it loose Wyres or Irons with thick ends, that they
might not slip out of the holes, and give also a greater sound; the Sistrum
being held by the handle, and shaken to and again in a certain Measure, made
such Music as served their Turns) Sometimes with an Ibis, a great Devourer of
their Serpents. Sometimes with one of their many monstrous Ass or Dog or Hawk
Cat-headed Gods. Sometimes a Crocodile. Sometimes a Sphinx, which was a kind of
Ape or Monkey, more ingenious than any other sort of these Animals, found
amongst the Troglodites, but brought from Egypt, the Egyptians famous for their
Dexterity and Wittiness, represented themselves by it.

Carthago, on one side a Virgins Head, on the other an Horses; they say, that
at the building of Carthage, an Horses head was found in a Pit in an holy Wood;
whereby was foreshew'd that the new City should be warlike and a great
Conqueress, whence the Punick Name of it KAKKABH signifies (as they say) an
Horses head: the Palm Tree shows them to be a Colony of the Phoenicians.

. 3. Rivers are generally described like an Old man (because from the
beginning; and thence Fluvius, and most of the Names of Rivers are Masculines)
crowned with Reeds or Water-weeds, pouring water out of an Urne, and a
Cornucopia; if navigable, with a Boat. Tyber with two Children sucking a Wolf.
Nilus with a Crocodile, and many Children playing about him, to represent its
Fertility. Tigri^ with a Tiger.

. 4. A Colony is represented commonly by a Plough drawn by two Oxen, or an Ox
and a Cow; which at the building of a City were yoked together; the Cow inward
(the Wife being to be Housekeeper) with the Plough they made a Furrow, which
should be as it were the limits of the City, where the Gates were to be, they
lifted up the Plough out of the Earth; so porta a portando. Sometimes also by a
Banner; for at Rome, when a Colony was to be sent forth, a Banner was set up,
and an inscribed Table under it, to show who was the Conductor, and what
numbers were to go, and whither; that all might have notice who were willing to
give in their Names. The numbers being full, out of every hundred they chused
ten, who were called therefore Decuriones, and made up the Curia or Common
Council of the Colony: these out of their own Body chused their Magistrates
[Duumviri] who, as the Consuls at Rome, had Power to call together the Curia,
to propose, and execute what was decreed by them; Quaestors also and AEdiles,
etc. which were changed every fifth year; and were therefore called
Quinquennales; C. V. Colon. Victrix; C. I. T. Tar. Colonia Julia Togata
Tarracouensis. See a Catalogue of all the Colonies and Municipia in Goltzius.
There were diverse sorts of Colonies; the one Civium Romanorum; the other
Latina, as Col. L. Jul. Cori. Colonia Latina Julia Corintbus; others Italica;
others Latinorum Veterum: the differences whereof were taken from the persons
that went, whether Citizens, Allies, or Associate, and may be seen in Sigonius
and other Authors.

Municipia, were such Towns as kept their own Laws and Customs, and yet had
also the Right of Roman Citizens, and were called Urbes; in Colonies, tho they
lost some of the Privileges of Roman Citizens; yet because commonly old
Soldiers were planted in them, the Governors of the Provinces, for their
Security, chused to reside, and to have their Conventus or Seat of Judicature
there, whereby Colonies grew into more Esteem.

. 5. We find also upon ancient Medals diverse of their Buildings, as Aquaeducts,
Pillars, Arches Triumphal, Forums or Marketplaces, Rostra: near to which were
the Pulpits where they made Orations, Temples, Theaters [half Circles or half
Ovals] for acting Comedies, Amphitheaters, or as if it were two Theaters joined
together, for Huntings, Gladiator-shews, etc. Circus's for Races of Chariots,
Horses, etc.

Puteal Libonis, was the Cover of a certain Pit made with Lightning; which tho
expiated, yet was not permitted to be inhabited or used, therefore was that
Building set over it. Near to, or under which was hid the Whetstone and Rasor
of Actius Naevius; near to it also was the Tribunal of the Praetor, or as some
say, of the AEdile.

CHAP. IX. Of their Magistrates.
Upon their Coins also are frequent Memorials of their Magistrates.
. 1. MAny Persons descending of their Kings, or deriving their Families Kings.
from them, stamped the Effigies of those Kings upon their Coins. Kings upon
Coins are distinguished from other Persons by an Half-Pique they carried in
their hands, which they called (...); and people in the rude Age of the World
worshipped those Spears, and therefore they are put also into the hands of
their Gods. Other Kings are known also by their Diademata; which was a Ruban
about four fingers broad, of Scarlet, or some other illustrious and dear Color
and Workmanship, which was bound about their Head. The Kings of Rome also (at
least some of them) have these Diademata. The Athenians wore certain Cawls
(Reticula) upon their Heads, adorned with golden Grasshoppers (Cicadas) because
themselves, as those Insects, were born out of the Earth, as they said. The
Emperors used them not (because not acknowledging themselves Kings) but of
those Crowns ordinarily bestowed upon the Soldiers for their Services, or a
Laurel one, such as was granted to Jul. Caesar; till Antoninus Caracalla, who
assumed to himself a Diadem, probably after his perfidious Murder of the
Persians, and infamous ravage of their Country: after him Elagabalus, Aurelian,
Carus, Dioclesian, and others, used it, but none continually till Constant.
Mag. who Vide cap^ 10. of Crowns.
seems to have had a Diadem set on each side with Pearl; but about Theodosius's
time they began to wear Crowns, for his Wife AElia Flaccilla seems to be
crowned. The carrying Swords before Kings I do not remember to have read before
Attila; who (as a small History of him, taken out of Priscus, and is put out by
Canisius in Lection. Antiqu.) going against some of his bordering Scythians,
was presented with the Sword of Mars; sometimes a King of those Nations, and
afterward a God, which Attila had afterward always carried before him. In
that Author also is an accurate Description of Attila's Body, very like that
which Conte Thesauro copied after Padre Quaglia's Original.

. 2. The Kings being expelled, and the Consuls.
People brought into great hatred of their Authority, there were established in
their room two Consuls; which were changed every year, who were the chiefest
ordinary Magistrates; convoked the Senate, proposed what was to be consulted,
gathered their Suffrages, executed their Decrees, governed Provinces, etc.
Their Ensigns were 12 Lictors, men carrying each a bundle of Rods or Birchen
Switches, and an Hatchet in the midst, which all waited on each of the Consuls
his Month by Course, a Sella Curulis, a Gown of many colors or Trabea, an
Ivory Staff or Scepter, on the top whereof was ordinarily an Eagle; sometimes
also somewhat like a Flower-de-lys. At first they were both Patritii,
afterward the people by their Obstinacy and Seditions obtained, that one of
them should always be a Plebeian.

. 3. Next to the Consuls were the Praetors; Praetors.
and indeed at first the Consuls were called Praetors; but the multitude of
Employment (especially matters of Judicature) increasing, and the Consuls, by
reason of foreign Wars, many times absent. A U. C. 388. a Praetor was created a
distinct Officer; which was eagerly desired by the Patritii, as proper only to
them, one of the Consuls being taken from them. About A. U. C. 501. were made
two Praetors, the one to judge the Causes of Citizens between themselves,
called Urbanus; the other the Causes betwixt Citizens and Strangers, called
Peregrinus. About Anno 520. were added two more to assist the Consuls in
governing the Provinces, and 575 two more; so that of these six, two always
remained in the City, four went into the Provinces, as they were assigned by
Lot. A. U. C. 605. the number of Causes increasing, all stayed in the City, and
at diverse times their number was increased to 64, but Augustus reduced them to
12. Their Ensigns were six Lictors, Toga praetexta and Sella Curulis. And their
Office was to judge Causes, both Civil and Criminal. They made Shows also and
Plays; and the Sacrifice and Worship of the Bona Dea was at their house.

. 4. The next were the AEdiles, instituted AEdiles.
A. U. C. 271. two to aid the Tribunes in some Causes remitted to them, and
were Plebeians: An. 388. two of the Patritii were added to them, and called
Curules, because they sat upon Ivory Seats, so called. C. Caesar added two more
who might have inspection over the Corn, called therefore Cereales. Their
Office was to look to the City, the Temples, Baths, public Buildings, Streets;
to order petty Funerals and Marriages, and to judge of certain Cases concerning
these things; likewise to look to the Corn, to the Markets, Weights and
Measures, and whatever was sold. Lastly, they provided and took care of the
solemn and public Games and Shows.

. 5. The Tribunes were created A. U. C. Tribunes.
^60. at first two, at last, Anno 297. ten: at ^rst all the Common people;
afterward of the Plebeian Families, but such only as were Sena^s. Their Office
at first was only to inter^ede, interpose, or appeal from the Magistrates (...)
the People, upon Complaint to them of In^y done to a Roman Citizen by any
Magistrate, ^cept the Dictator; and their usual Form was ^to. Afterward their
Power increased; so that ^ey took upon them with the people, without ^e Senate,
to make Laws (Plebiscita) give Sen^nce, convoke and dismiss the Senate, and in
sum, to oppress the Nobility by all means they could. Yet so sacred were their
Persons an^ Office esteemed, that no man durst offer violence to, or resist,
them; till Sulla, being mad^ Dictator perpetuus, curbed their Power, and
limited it much by his Laws, which notwithstanding were afterward repealed by
Gn Pompeius an^ Palikanus; who therefore stamped upon a Co^ the Rostra, and
Image of Liberty.

Now the Emperors, tho they governed (...) absolute Monarchs, yet pretending to
reta^ the ancient Forms, called themselves Consuls etc. and whereas they could
not be Tribu^ plebis, because the Office was annual, and noo^ could be chosen
but Plebeii, whereas Pontific^ Maximi were ordinarily Patritii, they therefore
assumed Tribunitiam potestatem, the which wa^ renewed every year; so that Trib.
Pot. IV. (...) commonly said to be the same as the fou^ year of his Reign. But
this, tho the common Opinion of Medalists, is not true. For Tiber^ v. g. had
the Trib. Pot. long before he was Emperor; so had diverse others. TR. Pot. is
(...) often without any number of years: often tim^ also the years of their TR.
Pot. is lesser tha^ that of their Reign, the Emperors now an^ then committing
that Trust to such, of who^ they were very confident.

. 6. About A. U. C. 269. were the Qu^stors first chosen by the Consuls,
afterward (...) Quaestor.
the People, to take charge of the public Money in the Temple of Saturn, and
were cal^ Urbani (Q. P. is Quaestor publicus) afterwar^ A. U. C. 332. they
created other two, wh^ should accompany the Consuls when they went to War; to
take charge of the Money, sell the Prey, etc. Afterward Anno 439. their number
was doubled, and they were sent by Lot with the Pro-Cos. or Pro-Praetors into
the Provinces; afterward Sulla made them up 20, and Caesar 40. Their Office was
to receive and expend the public Money, to keep the Military Ensigns (which
were commonly of Silver) to sell the Prey, to receive, entertain, lodge
Ambassadors, and such like.

. 7. Servius Tullus, the sixth King, was the first that ordained the censing or
valuing of the Censors.
People, and he did it himself in person; as did also the Consuls; till being
oppressed with business, it was for a while quite omitted; but about A. U. C.
311. the e were two Censors created of the Consular persons; and that from 5
years, to 5 years, tho their Office expired in a year and half (the Censing
being usually performed but once in five years) and if in that time the one
died, the other presently gave over his Office. The Emperors kept this Office
in their own Persons; and the Flavian Family, (i. e.) Vespasian and his Sons,
took a pride to be called Censors, and put it amongst their other Titles upon
their Coin. But after them we hear nothing of it till Constantine's time: who
made his Brother Delmatius Censor; who was the last we read of that enjoyed
that Office. It was a place of very great Honor and Authority, and had all the
Ensigns of Consuls, except Lictors. Their Office was to set down in a Book all,
both the public and private, Wealth of all the Citizens; there-according to
rank them into Centuries and Classes. They let out the Customs in the City and
in the Provinces; and made Laws also concerning them. They took care of public
Buildings, and Highways, and taxed the Prices of the public Sacrifices. They
took care also of the Manners of the Citizens, especially such as were
ignominious, yet not punishable by Law; as Celibacy, Perjury, running in Debt,
infamous Lusts, and the like; and according to their Demerits punished them, as
by casting them out of the Senate, i. e. when the Names of the Senators were
read at the beginning of the Censorship, such Names were omitted. And so for
the Equites, if any so deserved, they took away his public Horse (for the
Equites were allowed about an 100 Crowns to buy a Horse, which they were
obliged always to make good, and about 20 Crowns a year to keep him, and when
they had served 10 Campaigns they restored him) i. e. when the Equites showed
themselves, those who were approved the Censors commanded to pass by, and take
their Horse with them; but if any so deserved, they commanded his Horse to be
sold, and this was called Equi ademptio. For the Plebeians, when they so
deserved, they removed from a more honorable and Country Tribe into one less
honorable and a City Tribe: or else AErarios relinquebant, sive in Caeritum
tabulas referebant, i. e. they took away their Right of giving Suffrages, yet
left them to pay Taxes. All this was done publicly in the Campus Martius; and
when all was finished, the Lustrum, or Muster-roll was laid up: Vows for the
public Wealth were conceived; and the Sacrifices called Suovetaurilia made,
and the Censors ended their Offices.

. 8. The Kingly Power being expelled, the Dictator.
Consular Power in a short time began to be despised, and the people to be very
seditious: Wars also grew upon them dangerously, so that they easily perceived
the Government of many was not convenient; and therefore in all great
Extremities they were forced to have recourse to the power of one, whom they
called Dictator. He was always a Consular person, and named by the Consul alone
in the night season. His Power was absolute and supreme without Appeal from
him. All Magistrates, except the Tribunes, then resigned their Offices. He had
24 Lictors, made Peace and War, determined Causes, punished, rewarded, as he
thought good: his Power was only for half a year. L. Sulla and C. Caesar were
made perpetual Dictators; but after Caesar's death a Law was made, that there
should never be any more Dictator.

. 9. We find many times on Coins Pro Cos. Pro Q. and such like, i. e. Pro
Consule, Pro Quaestore, Pro-Cos.
Pro Praetore, etc. for whereas the Offices of Consuls, Praetors, and Quaestors
were annual, and yet oftentimes it was requisite to continue their Commands in
the Wars (nothing being so detrimental to great Designs as the frequent change
of the Principal Agents) they invented these Offices; that such a one should
command still, for, or instead of, the Consul, Praetor, or Quaestor: and this
began about A. U. C. 427. Afterward also the Praetors and Consuls not being
enough for all Employments, Consular men were sent instead of Consuls,
Praetorians for Praetor; and some Provinces were called Consulares, others
Praetoriae. Some Proconsulares Provinciae also, which were such as were
bestowed by the people, and at first the Consuls commanded them, being
continued as Pro-Consule, but afterward those were put in who never had been
Consuls. The Praetor being dead or absent, his place was supplied sometimes by
the Quaestor, who was then Pro-Praetore; sometimes by his Legatus or
Lieutenant, who had no Command or Power, but what was given him by the Consul
or Praetor, whose Legatus he was.

CHAP. X. Of their Wars, Victories, Rewards, etc.
. 1. OUT of their Coins also we learn much of the Time and Discipline of their
Wars: Their Armies were divided into Legions. A Legion contained sometimes 3,
sometimes 4, sometimes 5, and at last 6000, and received the name from the
order of their raising, as prima, secunda, etc. Legio. Or from the Emperors, as
Augusta, Claudia, Flavia Legio, etc. Or from their Quarters, Gallica,
Cyrenaica, Scythica, Italica, etc. Or from their Gods, Apollinaris, Minervia,
etc. Or some other accident, as Ferrata, Fulminatrix, Victrix, Gemina, Valens,
Ad^utrix, Pia, etc. and was commanded by a Legatus or some Lieutenant, and its
Ensigns was an Eagle.

Ensigns on Medals signify sometimes the restitution of such a Legion, or some
Honor done by that Legion to the Emperor, or by the Emperor to that Legion.

A Legion was divided into ten Cohorts, every Cohort had three Manipuli, one of
the Hastati, another of the Principes, a third of the Triarii (of these there
were never above 600 in a Legion.) Praetoria Cohors or the Generals Lifeguard,
was first chosen by Scipio of the valiantest Soldiers, increasing their Pay 2,
and keeping them continually about his Person. Augustus had ordinarily nine of
these Cohorts, but at first ten, says Dion, of a 1000 men apiece. The Cohortes
urbanae, for defense of the City, were 4 of 1500 men apiece.

A. Manipulus was divided into two Centuries, sixty Centuries in a Legion.
Every Century had its Centurion, a Manipulus two; their Ensigns anciently an
handful of Hay, or some such matter, afterward a Spear with a cross piece of
Wood on the top, under which they hung Shields, upon which were Images of their
Gods, Emperors, and other great Persons (so Suetonius. Tyberius munera Syriacis
legationibus dedit, quod Solae nullam Sejani imaginem inte^ signa coluissent) a
Hand in a Circle alluding to Manipulus, or some such other device. The Cohorts
anciently had no Ensigns, but afterward they had Vexilla or Banners; Vexilla
properly signifies the Ensigns of their Horse, and were little Veils, but are
generally taken for all sorts of Ensigns, which were much like those
Church-Banners carried in Processions. But Vegetius says, in the Emperors
times they were Dragons, Wolves, or the like, carried upon Poles; but I know
not whether these before Trajan's War with the Dacians; and that Banners were
for the Horse, and were called Cantabra. Vexilla (which were like Veils of
Cloth or Silk fastened above to a loose Travers on a Spear, wherein were writ
the Names of their Emperors. Suet. of Vespasian: Assensere cuncti, nomenque
ejus vexillis omnibus sine mora inscripserunt) distinguished by the color, as
Cantabra were by the Device or Motto. Labarum was that Vexillum which was
carried before the Emperor. Onuphrius says, that after Rome was reduced under
the Government of the Emperors, Aquila was the Ensign of the Legion, Signa
those of the Cohorts, Vexilla those of the Manipuli and Horse, and Labarum that
of the whole Army, which was always carried before the Emperors. But I find not
Labarum before Constantine's time, and his is described by Eusebius de Vit.
Constable. l. 1. c. 24. yet that sort of Ensign was in use before. Prudentius also
and the Fathers mention it very frequently; and how he had the Name of Christ
Yet that sort of Ensign was in use before.
wrought upon it. Afterward Julian forbad that, and introduced the Pagan
Vexilla, as Nazianz. (...). (...).

. 2. There were sixty Centurions in a Legion, and every one of them had his
Optio or Lieutenant. So in a Cohort in the Manipulus Hastatorum there were two
Centurions, two in the Manipulus Principum, two also in the Triariorum; and the
first Centurion which was over the Triarii of the first Cohort was called
Primipilus; and had great Authority, as it were of a Major General, carrying
the Orders of the General or Tribune: he governed the Eagle, putting it up, and
delivering it to the Bearer; he was one of the Council of War; his Pay settled
by Augustus was about 300 Crowns per annum, and after the Service was accounted
amongst the Equites. A Centurion was known by his Vitis or Flagellum, wherewith
he chastised the Soldiers. The Tribunes wore Gold Rings, and better Clothes,
and a Sword called Parazonium, wanting a point, which they carried in a Case
like a Quiver.

. 3. There were six Tribunes in a Legion; chosen at first by the Kings,
afterward by the Consuls and People equally, and were called Comitiati; most
of them chosen out of the Equites, yet some also out of the Common people; it
was a step to be a Senator. In the more dangerous Wars, Senators were often
made Tribunes. They heard Causes, sentenced even to loss of life, gave the
Word, looked to the Guards, etc.

The Legatus or Lieutenant General (as we call him, for he corresponds very
much to that Officer in the French Armies) had great Power to advise, command,
and in the Generals absence to be General. The (...) of the Legions were by
Augustus called Legati Praetorii; the Lieutenant-Generals were called Legati
Consulares; and were merely his Lieutenants; not having Right to triumph, since
they acted only by his Commission, and under him.

The General or Imperator had the Command of all, had his Lictores, his
Trumpets, his Paludamentum or Scarlet upper Garment, etc.

. 4. The Arms of the Velites, or such, as first charged, and kept not Rank and
File, nor were reckoned among the Legions, were, a Sword, seven Darts three
foot long, headed with Iron, but weakly, that they might bend, and not be
thrown back again; a round Buckler (Parma) about three foot Diameter of Wood
covered with Leather, an Headpiece of Wool or Skin of some wild Beast.

The Arms of the Hastati, Principes, and Triarii were much what the same; only
the Triarii had instead of the Pilum, a Spear, as being to fight cominus only.
These Arms were,

1. A Shield or Buckler, sometimes round, Oval, imbricatum or equally broad
with corners two foot and half broad, and four foot long, to cover the whole
Body when stooping, made of Boards, the lighter Wood the better, glued
together, and covered with Ox-hide, and edged with Iron. Upon their Coins we
see often the Ancilia, a sort of Shield like to three Ovals clapped the end of
one upon another, the least in the midst. The first of these was said to have
fallen down from Heaven, and it was prophesied, that where that Ancile was
kept, there should be the Seat of the Empire of the World; whereupon they made
eleven more so like to that first, that none could know the true one: and these
were born in their solemn Dances by the Salii.

2. A Sword (and in later times a Dagger) upon their right side, that it might
not hinder their Shield, about two foot and half long in the Blade, and made
more for thrusting than cutting.

3. Pilum, one greater about 4 fingers Diameter, and long about 7 foot, with
its Ironbarbed head, and one lesser like a Hunting Spear.

4. A brazen Helmet, wherein they wore Feathers or other Crests, not unlike
ours, but more upright; the Soldier also sometimes had his Name and the Name of
his Legion engraven upon it.

5. A Breast Plate, or at least a square piece of Iron or Brass which covered
the Breast, called Pectorale; but those of better Quality had Breast-plates,
which were either like Coats of Mail, or plated like ours: the Sarmatae made
them of Horn or Horse hoofs. Some made them of Linen Cloth steeped in sour
Wine and Salt, and quilted, some of Iron, etc.

6. Boots or Greaves for their Legs.

. 5. Adlocutio was when the General had any thing to say to the Army, encourage
them to fight, compose Mutinies, etc. he commonly stood upon a Bank of Turff.

Decursio was an Exercising of the Soldiers, when they were armed to run so
far, to make them expedite and active,

Victory is commonly described a Woman's Head with Wings on the Shoulders;
sometimes a Woman winged, crowned with Laurel, in one Hand a Crown, in the
other a Palm; or sometimes writing upon a Shield, or standing upon a Globe (as
if the Romans had conquered all the World) a Jewel also hanging about her Neck,
which they called Bulla, and was worn by such as triumphed as an honorary
Ornament for their Services; and was also given to Strangers, sometimes for
Service done.

Trophaeum, was a Memorial set up in sign of Victory, which was the Arms of the
Vanquished, hung upon a Tree or Perch.

Triumphus, one drawn in a Chariot with two or four Horses, behind him a small
winged Victory, holding over his Head a Crown.

If a Victory by Sea, it is expressed by a Victory standing on the Prow of a
Ship, or somewhat belonging to Maritime Affairs, as a Neptune, Trident, etc.
After the Victory obtained in the River by the Romans against the Antiates,
they set up the Prows of their Enemies Ships upon a certain place where they
made their Orations to the People; which was therefore called Rostra: Sometimes
also in Honor of a Naval Victory, they set up a Pillar with little Beaks of
Ships carved upon it, called Columna rostrata.

. 6. Upon many Coins are expressed the Rewards of such Soldiers as behaved
themselves extraordinarily. Such were many times Money, Donatives, etc. which
yet was not entirely left to their disposing; but half of it they were obliged
to lay up, which was registered and deposited in Chests in the custody of the
Ensign-bearers: by which means both their Debauches were prevented, and their
Necessities supplied: besides, themselves also were obliged to the Service, and
the Generals knew where, in case of necessity, so much Money was ready for
their use.

Such were also Crowns of diverse sorts. Of Laurel, used commonly by the General
after a Victory. Given also by the Senate to Julius Caesar, which, he being
bald, willingly accepted and used, as did all his Successors, which were
Augusti; or had absolute Power; but those who were only Caesares, did not use
them; till Constantine the Great; who changed it into a Ruband edged with
Pearl, and set with Jewels, as it seems by his Coins, and this is not for
Effeminacy, as Julian (a continual Carper against him and his Actions) reports:
but more probably, because the other had its Original from Idolatry; the Laurel
being even as a Crown sacred to Apollo. However the succeeding Emperors were so
pleased with the Change, that I find not any of them, not Julian himself,
returning to the ancient Custom.

A Crown of Gold seems first to have been used about Theodosius's time, and
that at first as an Helmet, or some Ornament upon it; hence our Saxons call a
Crown Cyne, i. e. Cinings-helmet, the Kings Helmet, but Crowns were of diverse
fashions; our Saxon Kings (as appears by King Edward's Money) used close ones,
not much unlike a Miter; but Francis I. was the first that used a close or
barred one in France.

Obsidionalis, given by those who were delivered from a Siege to those that
relieved them, and was made of Grass cut up in the place where they were
besieged.

Civica, given by the General to such a Soldier as had saved a Citizens life,
and slain an Enemy, made of Oaken leaves, set upon his Head by him that was
rescued.

Muralis, given by the General to him that first scaled the Enemies Walls.

Castrensis, to him that first entered the Enemies Trench or Rampart, and these
were both gilded; the first also had Battlements, the second only Nicks like
Trenches.

Rostrata, of Gold, given ordinarily to the General, who had gained a Naval
Victory with great labor and industry.

Navalis, of Gold given to such a Soldier as first boarded an Enemies Ship.

If any one killed an Enemy in any Velitation or pickering when they fought man
to man, he was rewarded with a Spear without a head, called Hasta pura. The
Gods also are frequently described with such in their hands; in imitation
whereof perhaps might be that custom in our Country of the Principal
Court-Officers, carrying white Rods or Staves, as Ensigns of their places.

If any one had done a more valiant and singular Action; if a Foot-Soldier, he
had a Bracelet given him; if an Horseman, a Chain made with Links or Rings to
wear about his Neck (whence seems to proceed the Honor of wearing Gold Chains)
or Phalerae, which seem not to have been Trappings, as we call them, but rather
Plates hanging down upon the Breast of the Horse.

CHAP. XI. Of their Games.
. 1. GAMES at first were instituted as parts of Devotion and Worship of their
Gods; and therefore always begun and ended with Sacrifices. And these were
celebrated either amongst the Graecians or Romans. Of the Graecians, under
which also are comprehended the Asiatick, I have spoken somewhat before; I
shall only add, that they were either Occasional, as upon the coming of the
Emperor, or some other great Solemnity; or Set, they were called (...), which
was no more than a great Concourse or Meeting of People; and therefore besides
their Acts of Devotion, at these (...) were their great Fairs or Markets; all
sorts of Contentions, as Running, Leaping, Chariot-driving, Wrestling, Disputes
in Philosophy. Quinquennale certamen, more Graeco, triplex, Musicum, Gymnicum,
Equestre. Suet. Nero. c. 12. See more also of their Hieronica or Sacred
Agonists. Suet. Ner. Cc. 24, 25. and hither even banished persons had liberty
to come. The Charges of the Sacrifices and public Entertainments were
sometimes born by one City, which was then (...), sometimes by a whole
Community.

On the Reverses of the Money of the later Emperors, we find frequently VOT. V.
X. XX. etc. The meaning whereof is, That such a City or Province had vowed
public Games, if the Emperor reigned V. X. or XX years, which did not always
signify that they were fulfilled.

Votis V. mult. X. is by some interpreted Votis Quinquennalibus multiplicatis
in Decennalia, i. e. the Games and Rejoycings were to be celebrated both the
fifth and tenth years of the Emperors Reign. But in some it is plainly, as in
Julian the Apostata's Coins, Votis V, multis X, which is meant, that many
Cities vowed Games again at the End of the tenth year of his Reign, if it
should continue so long. This manner of Vowing was in use amongst the Ancients,
when any of their Generals went to War, etc. See the form of it in Live. l. 36.
when they undertook the War against Antiochus. Pompeius was the first, who
being sick was honored with public Vows for his Recovery. Live. l. 21. Dic. l.
45. [Amongst other Vows in greatest Danger was a Ver sacrum, i. e. that
whatever Sheep [Pecus quodcunque] should be yeaned betwixt Kal. March and Kal.
May, should be sacrificed. See the Form in Live. l. 22.] At length all Vows were
converted into Flattery to the Emperors; and these were conceived every new
year on the Kal. Jan. and III. Non. and they were first made in the Camp by the
Soldiers, then in the Capitol by the Priests and Magistrates. Some again were
Vota Natalium, others Decennalia, Vicenalia, etc. Of which vid. Dio. l. 53. and
at last they came to that excess, that the people vowed at all times and upon
all occasions; for the Emperors safe Journey and Return, for his Health,
Family, Fecundity of his Wife, etc. and in all their Epistles to the Emperor
they signified that they did Vota facere for him.

L, and sometimes, tho seldom, L upon their Coins, seems to signify Lustrum,
as L E Lustrum quintum; i. e. there being Ludi quinquennales instituted in the
Honor of such an Emperor, this was coined in the fifth Lustrum. I am not
satisfied in this Interpretation, but know no better. I had it from Sir J.
Marsham.

. 2. But to come to the Roman Games, of which we have more certainty and
knowledge; and of these there were diverse sorts: Not to mention the Munera
which were given for the Solemnization of Funerals and other occasions; and
were Fightings of Gladiators, or men with Beasts, and the like. Ludi or Games,
some were at the Charges of private Persons, some at the public. Private were
for the performing of such a Vow, gaining the good will of the People in suing
for an Office, or performed by inferior Magistrates, of such Money as they were
to bring into the Treasury, and such like. Public were either extraordinary;
such as were vowed by some chief Magistrate, and by Authority of the Senate
(Pr. LVPF Praetor ludos votivos publicos fecit) upon Occasion of some War, for
the settling or continuing of the Properity of the Commonwealth, for the
averting of the Pestilence, Famine, or the like, for the happy Return of the
Emperor, for the aversion of the Omen of such Prodigies, for some favor of the
Gods, and many of the same sort.

Of the ordinary, some were every year, some every fifth year, some every
hundredth year, as the Ludi Saeculares. Some were Circenses (in Circo)
Amphitheatrales (in Amphitheatro, cavea, ^rena) which were Gladiators, fighting
with Beasts, and the like. Theatrales (in Theatro) such were Comedies, and
Tragedies, Pantomimi, Con^entions in Music, Fidicines, Citharoedi (Singers
(...) the Cithara) Citharistae (Players on the Citha^) Lyristae, Tibicines.
These played in Odeo, a ^articular place (the Musick-room) of the ^heatre.

Besides these were Circulatores, who showed ^easts of Activity, Palaestrae in
Gymnasiis* I will speak only of the chiefest, and such only as are explained
by; or set ^on Medals, and first of the Ludi Saeculares, which were the
chiefest.

. 3. When Tullus Hostilius was King of Rome, and Metius Suffetius Dictator of
the Albani, those two Cities began a dangerous War for Superiority; and as they
were ready to join Battle, a certain Spectrum appeared to both Armies, telling
them, that Dis Pater and Proserpina commanded before they fought to sacrifice
to them both, on an Altar under ground, and so vanished. The Romans affrighted
with this Prodigy, sent into the City presently, dug a hole in the ground (...)
Campus Martius near the River, made an Altar sacrificed, and covered the hole
again with the Earth, so that none, except the Romans, knew of it. The place
was called Terentum, because the River there wore away the Earth. And hence it
came, that that War was determined with so little slaughter, by the Fight of
the Togemini, 3 Horatii against 3 Curiatii.

This Altar was discovered a long time after in the Reign of Tarquinius
Priscus, by one Volusus Valesius, an Eminent person of the Sabines and also
well known to the Romans, on this occasion. When, in the time of a great
Contagion, a Grove he had before his House, was struc^ and consumed with
Lightning, and three of h^ Children fallen sick of the Pestilence, he se^ for
the Aruspices to know what he should do^ who told him, that by the manner of
the bur^ing of the Wood, they perceived the Gods we^ angry at him; and that
therefore they must (...) appeased. But when he profited nothing by t^
multitude of his Sacrifices, but that his Children grew worse and worse, going
one time to fetch them warm water, he kneeled down, and prayed to Vesta, and
his Lares to convert the Misery of his Children on his own and his Wives head:
when presently rising, and looking toward the Thunder-burnt Wood, he heard
thence a Voice promising their Recovery, if he would carry them down the Tyber
to Terentum, and there make them drink water of the River, warmed at the Altar
of Dis and Proserpina; which was that water they desired. Volusus hearing this,
and mistaking Tarentum for Terentum (which he knew to be a great way off)
despaired of the Remedy; and the more when he heard of Water to be warmed on
such an Altar. But consulting the Aruspices, he was told he must obey the Gods.
So living at Eretum, 12 miles from Rome by the Rivers side, he presently
carried his Children to the River, and put them in a Boat, thinking to go to
Ostia; but coming to Rome late at night, and weary with rowing, and to refresh
his Children, he brought his Boat to shore at Campus Martius; and whilst he was
making an Hutte, his fire being gone out, he was told there by a Boat-man, that
he had better go a little further to Terentum, and there fasten his Boat, for
that there he espied a Smoke. Volusus hearing of Terentum, was wonderfully
rejoiced; and went thither; where seeing a Smoke come out of the Earth, taking
it as a good Omen, he presently fetched water at the River, and with great
industry made of that Smoke a Flame wherewith he heated the water, and gave it
to his Children, who that night recovered. In the morning they tell their
Father, that they had seen a certain God come to wipe their Bodies with a
Sponge, who had also bid them to sacrifice (Furva) black Sacrifices to Dis and
Proserpina, with the fire on that Altar wherewith their water had been heated;
and that for three nights space they should make Lectisternia, Plays, Games,
etc. Valesius seeing no Altar thereabouts, went into the City to buy one,
whilst he set his Servants to dig a hole in the ground to place it in. They
digging, found the Altar, and one of them ran and told his Master; who
presently gave over buying, and returned to the place, and performed the
Sacrifices, as he was appointed. And this was the Original of Ludi Saeculares.
For

Afterward in a great Pestilence, P. Valerius Poplicola, probably the Son of
this Volusus Valesius. Some say in his first, others say in his fourth
Consulate, following his Fathers Example, renewed the same Sacrifices and Games.

After that, Anno 297. U. C. M. Valerio, M. F. Ma^imo, and Sp. Virginio, A. F.
Caelimontano Tricosto being Consuls, were the first Ludi Saeculares begun, and
afterward performed every 110th year, so that the second were in 407, the
third in 517, the fourth in 627, etc. tho it should seem they were celebrated
extraordinarily at other times upon occasion of Pestilence or other great
Calamity, by the Admonition of the Gods; but ordinarily the Solemnity recurred
only every 110th year; and that tho there was no Plague, Sedition, or other
public Calamity; and then they were esteemed a common and solemn Expiation of
the Offenses of the City. And perhaps they were called Saeculares for that very
Reason, to contradistinguish them from those other occasional Ludi Terentini,
or Ditis Patris and Proserpinae.

The fifth Ludi Saeculares were celebrated by Augustus, himself and M. Agrippa
being Coss. A. U. C. 737. or as others 736, which difference seems to have
risen from the changing of the Year by Julius Caesar. In these Ludi Saeculares
was sung that Ode of Horace which begins, Phoebe, Sylvarumque potens Diana,
etc. And of these is the Memory continued by the Coins.

Augustus used great diligence to find out the exact and precise times of
celebrating these Plays, but the succeeding Princes rather followed their own
Fancy than any Reason or strict Computation; for Claudius Caesar, A. U. C. 800.
himself IIII, and L. Vitellio III. Coss. solemnized them; probably intending to
bring them to the 100th year of the City, as a certain Period, and beginning of
a Saeculum; and none of the Emperors followed his Example but Philippus. But
this being but the sixty third year after the last in Augustus's time, he was
derided, says Suetonius, when the Crier invited the People to see those Games,
quos nec spectasset quisquam nec spectaturus esset: (which was the Form in the
publishing them) since several were alive who had seen them before;
particularly one Stephanio a Stage Player, who had acted in them both.

The seventh Ludi Saeculares were exhibited by Domitian, A. U. C 841. himself
XIIII and and L. Minutius Coss. as his Coins declare. Tacitus being then
XV-vir, omits the reason of the Change of the Year.

The eighth were Severus and Caracalla Sever. TR. Pot. XII. Cos. III. as his
Coins intimate, A. U. C. 957. just 220 years after Augustus's.

The ninth were by Philippus, himself III, and his Son II Cos^. A U. C. 1000.
43 years only after Severus, but with respect to Claudius's Design. The
Magnificence of these Games is described both by diverse Historians, and many of
his Stamps with the Images of the Beasts he exhibited.

In one Coin of Gallienus is mention made of the Ludi Saeculares, what is the
meaning of it is uncertain.

The tenth and last were under Honorius Cos. VI. A. U. C. 1157. following the
account of Augustus; (for one Centenary under Constantine probably they were
omitted) and it should seem permitted by Honorius, on condition there should be
no Sacrifices nor Idolatry, but only Plays and Games. V. Claudian Panegyr. in
VI Consulat. Honorii. After Honorius no more mention of them.

The time when they were celebrated, is uncertain; probably on the Days of the
Nativity of the City, i. e. 9, 10, and 11 Kal. May. under the Consuls. But
under the Emperors on the day when they cameto their Power, as Panvinius most
ingeniously collects out of their Coins.

The manner of their Celebration was thus. A little before the time Criers were
sent through all Italy, to give notice of the Games, Quos nemo adhuc
spectasset, nec amplius spectaturus esset. A fragment of the Decree is extant
at the End of Ant. Augustine. de Legibus. Then a few days before the time
appointed, the Emperor, Coss. or Quindecemviri sacris faciundis, sitting in the
Temples of Jupiter Capitolinus and Apollo Palatinus, distributed to the
Citizens Piamina, sive Februa, i. e. Thedas, Sulfur and Bitumen. So in
Domitian's Coin is Suff. P. D. i. e. Suffimenta populo data: Also in the Temple
of Diana on the Aventine were given Barley, Wheat, and Pulse for them to offer
to the Destinies; which is also upon Domitian's Coin, Frug. ac. a Pop. i. e.
Fruges acceptae a populo. These things being distributed, they went to watch ad
formam Cereris. And on the first day of the Solemnity they went to Terentum,
and continued three days and three nights in their Devotions. At two hours
after Sunset the first night the Coss. or Emperor with the XV-viri upon three
Altars built on the Banks of Tyber, made their Sacrifices; whilst upon
Scaffolds thereby erected, they sung certain Songs and Hymns composed for that
purpose. Afterward they sacrificed in the Vault, and on the Altar consecrated
to Dis and Proserpina. Next morning they went into the Capitol, and there
sacrificed to Jupiter, and afterward beheld Ludos Apollinares, etc. Next day
the Matrons came and paid their Devotions in the Temple of Juno, and after them
the Emperor, Coss. and XV-viri. The third day in the Temple of Apollo thrice
nine Youths Noblemen, and so many Noble Virgins, came and sung Verses and Hymns
in Greek and Latin, recommending the Senate and Commonwealth to the Gods. Mean
while all the three days and nights in all the Circi and Theaters there were
Games and Plays celebrated, and sacrifices offered in all the Temples. It was
also the Custom for the Emperor, Cos. or XV-viri to set up an Altar in
Terentum, with the Relation of what they had then done, and the time.

. 4. Their ordinary solemn Games were either Circenses, such as were performed
in the Circus; or Scenici and Theatrales, such as were in the Theaters or
Amphitheaters.

The Circenses were said to be instituted by Oenomaus King of Elis, but began
in Rome by Romulus to ensnare the Sabine Virgins. Valor. l. 2. c. 1. and
therefore he called them Consualia, because dedicated to Consus the God of good
Counsel; called by the Greeks (...) or Neptunus Equestris: and it should seem
by Servius and Sex. Pomp. that for want of Horses he made use of Mules; and in
a place fitted up for that time, probably in the Campus Martius. Afterward
they were celebrated frequently in Honor of all the Gods and Goddesses, and
upon all occasions of public Joy or Honor as well as upon set and ordinary
times.

Tarquinius Priscus, after the taking of Apiolae, exhibited these Plays more
magnificently and orderly; dividing the Chariots into Bigas, Trigas, and
Quadrigas; and the Horses into singulares and desultorios; after which followed
the Athletae, Pugiles, etc. and those began then to be celebrated every year,
and were called Romani, Solennes, and Magni. He designed also for them the
Circus Maximus; and at first made Seats (Foros) for the people, of Wood
sustained by forked Props, the highest being 12 foot from the ground; but
afterward they were made upon Vaults of Brick, which were at the bottom three,
the next rank two, the uppermost one; the lowest were Shops, those above them
Habitations, and between them were Stairs to go up into the Seats. The Circus
within was one furlong broad, and three and half long; but with the Shops and
Buildings on the outside four furlongs, containing about a mile, and the Seats
were capable of 150000, or as others, of 260000 persons.

The Circus at one end was semicircular, where was a large Gate under a
Menianum or Podium, i. e. a fair Tower with a Loggia; on the Top whereof were
the Statues of Quadrigae, the other end called Oppidum, because with
Battlements and Towers, it was straight, in the ^st whereof was also a large
Gate or Entrance and on the other side six Doors, with Partitions, wherein the
Horses were placed to (...), called Carceres, quia Equos antequam currebant,
coercerent: these were shut up Cancellis, Repagulo; which was only a Rope
holden by two Mercuries, and drawn up, or let down when the Horses were to
start. Tho there were six Carceres, yet till Domitian's time no more than four
were used. In the Compass of the Circus were six Maeniana or Towers, wherein
the Magistrates used to sit, and thence to give a sign of starting, which was
the throwing down of a Napkin.

Julius Caesar brought the Water round about the Circus, when making a show of
(...) Fight with Elephants, he was afraid they ^d do some mischief to the
people, as they (...) done in Pompey's time.

In the middle of the Circus length-ways, tho at a good distance from either
end, was raised up to hinder them from passing from one side to the other
between the Metae, a Building about 12 foot broad, and 4 foot high, called
probably Spinae. Upon which were placed at either end the Metae, which were
three Pyramids at first of Wood, afterward by Claudius made of Marble, on the
top of each an Egg in Honor of Castor and Pollux bred of Eggs, Presidents of
such Sports. The Horses and Chariots setting forth at the Carceres run about
the Metae, i. e. the whole length of the Circus seven times, and he that
arrived first at the seventh time was Victor. To know how often they had run
about, the Officers of the Circus set upon the Metae one of those Eggs every
time they came by. Every Race or Missus contained seven Circuitiones: and on
one day they used to set out 24 or 25 Missi. Upon the Spinae was also commonly
an Obelisk, or, as they now call them, an Aguglia, of which diverse are still
extant in Rome; and on the top of this a Ball called Pyropus (made of Brass 3
p. and Gold p. 1.) because of its luster like to a burning Coal when the Sun
shined upon it; as also a Temple to the Sun, the Image of Cybele, and near the
Metae the Temple of Consus; but whether these in all, or in all Circus's the
same, I know not.

There were in Rome besides the Circus Maximus, Circus Flaminius in Campo
Flaminio given to the City by Flaminius, beautified and repaired by Augustus.
Circus Sallustii in his Gardens, the Remainders whereof are yet to be seen;
Circus Floralis for the Floralia. Circus Castrensis without Porta Maggiore,
perhaps built by Aurelian, there being one upon his Coins. Circus Neronis in
the Meadows near Castle St. Angelo. Circus Vaticanus demolished by Constant,
for the building of St. Peter's Church. Circus Caracallae much of it still
remaining near St. Sebastian's. Circus Agonalis (Piazza Navona) built or
repaired by Severus Alexander, as appears by his Coins.

The Circensian Games or Sports were,

1. Races of Chariots and Horses begun by Romulus. 2. Athletica begun by
Tarquin. Priscus. 3. Pompa. 4. Ludus Trojae. 5. Huntings. 6. Fightings on
Horseback and a Foot. 7. Naumachiae or Sea Fights, and 8. Sometimes
Stage Plays.
. 5. Chariot-Races were Bigarum, Trigarum, Quadrigarum: at first they used
other Beasts, afterward Horses only, which in their Bigae were, 1. white, the
other black: in the Trigae there was another Horse joined, whom they called
Funalis, quia funibus vel loramentis adnexus. The Chariotiers were called
Aurigae and Agitatores; and their Companies were called Factiones: at first but
two colored Livories, white and red, afterward were added Prasina or green
much affected by Caius, Nero, L. Verus: and Veneta, blew or of the color of
the Sea-waves. Domitian added two more, Gold and Purple colors; those of each
Faction were called Greges, as Greges Prasinorum, Venetorum, etc. and were
under the Domini factionum, who maintained and hired them out for gain.

Their Horse-Races were either of single Horses or Desultorii; when one man had
two Horses unsadled, and leaped down from the one upon the other in his Course.
Such the Soldiers also had many times in War to make use of a second, when the
first was weary or wounded. The Singulares also ran sometimes themselves for
the Prize; sometimes they rid before or beside the Chariots, to encourage and
direct them.

2. Next were those Exercises called by the Greeks (...). Such were Running,
Wrestling, Fencing, Leaping, throwing the Discus, etc.

Running was performed after the Chariot and Horse-Races, and much what in the
same manner.

Fencing, Pugilatus, was fighting with Fists, commonly armed with a Caestus,
which was made of Thongs of Leather, studded with Iron or Lead, and fastened
about their Hands and Arms. It is described in AEneid. 5.

Luctatio, Wrestling, this they did naked, and their Bodies anointed.

Leaping and Quoiting, or the Discus, were not much used in the Circus, but are
rather to be reckoned amongst ordinary Sports and Exercises.

3. The next was called Pompa, which was rather a solemn Procession, performed
in this manner. From the Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus through the Forum to the
Circus descended in Ranks and Order: 1. The Magistrate who began the Pompa;
next all the Roman Nobility, and the Sons of Equites on Horseback, the rest on
Foot, marching as to War; next followed the Chariots, Horses, etc. that were to
run; next the Athletae; then three Companies of Dancers, Men, Youths, and Boys,
decently armed and habited, imitating the Saltatio Pyrrichia or Military Dance.
These were followed by those who danced a la Satyresca, some representing
Sileni, others Satyrs, etc. then followed certain Musicians after the ancient
manner. Then the Ministers of the Priests carrying all things necessary for
Sacrifices. Then the Images of their Gods, the chiefest carried upon Thensae;
they were followed with the Armamaxi or Chariots armed after the Scythian
manner, adorned with diverse sorts of Arms, and the Memorials of their Emperors
and Generals. Next all the Colleges of the Priests with the Rex Sacrorum, and
the rest of their holy Officers; and last of all the chiefest Magistrates then
in the City, with the rest of the Magistrates.

In this Order they marched into and round about the Circus, when the chief
Magistrate present commanded the Sacrifices to be made to those Gods, and upon
those Altars, as was requisite; which being rightly performed, the Ludi or
Games began, the Magistrates and Officers all taking their places.

4. Hunting, sometimes Fighting with wild Beasts by those they called Bestiarii
(tho this was more properly a Munus) these Beasts were kept in Vivario.

5. Trojae ludus was a counterfeit Fighting between Troops of Noble Youths, the
President of which was Princeps Juventutis. This Sport is exactly expressed by
Virg. AEneid. 5.

6, 7. The Skirmishes and Fightings on Horseback, on Foot, and Naumachiae were
chiefly exhibited by Julius Caesar and the succeeding Emperors, nothing in them
difficult to be understood.

The Pompae and Naumachiae seem to have ceased in Constantine's time, the one
being prohibited as Heathenish, the other falling of it self after the Emperors
resided in the East. But the others seem to have continued till Justistinian's
time, when the Invasion of the Goths and other Barbarous Nations gave them
somewhat else to think on.

Many of these Games were also celebrated in the Amphiheatres, as Huntings;
where they made sometimes artificial Mountains and Woods to represent the
Hunting more lively. Martial. l. 1. Ep. 21. See in Vopiscus the notable Hunting
exhibited by Probus in the Circus.

PART II. Of COINS and MEDALS.
CHAP. I. Of Julius Caesar, the III Viri R. P. C. Marcus Antonius.
. 1. Caius Julius Caesar, Son of C. Julius Caesar and Aurelia, was born Jul.
12. A. U. C. 654. before Christ Ninety eight Years, he pretended his Pedigree
from Julus the Son of AEneas, the Son of Venus, and therefore amongst his Coins
are;

Veneri Genetrici, the Head of Venus; and reverse, Venus conducted to Anchises
lying under Mount Ida, by a Genius with a Scepter in his Hand, presaging the
Roman Empire.

The Star of Venus, which appearing by day (as they say) to AEneas at his
parting from Troy, conducted him to Laurentum in Italy, where he should settle.

And a Venus naked with a Shield and Helmet, an Ensign and Eagle upon a Pillar;
to show that she gave Caesar Victory and Power over all his Enemies; and
established his Empire, signified by the Eagle upon the Pillar.

And a Venus or Rome with a Cornucopia and a Victory Crowning Mars, or rather
Julius Caesar, standing upon a Base; the Romans dedicated a Statue to him in
the Habit of Mars or Quirinus, with this Inscription, Deo invicto.

. 2. Being of very great Parts and Courage, but not very Rich, his Necessities,
as well as Ambition, thrust him forwards to seek Employment, both to pay his
Debts, and obtain Wealth and Honor; insomuch that he was ready to undertake
any Exploit whatsoever rather than be Idle: At length he was put upon the Wars
of Gaul; which he not only wholly reduced, together with part of Germany and
Britanny, but also became Master of a most powerful Army; which Pompey and his
Party perceiving, and fearing his Ambition, endeavored to make him Disband,
themselves keeping up their Army; and by that means gave him some color of
keeping together. Upon his Disobedience they sought to compel him, and he to
resist; which by little and little bred an utter Defiance and Enmity between
him and Pompey, which broke out into a Civil War, wherein Caesar was Victor,
and by that means obtained the whole Power of the Commonwealth; made Senators
and Magistrates of his own Party, and they again settled him in the absolute
Command of all: They would indeed have made him King, but knowing the great
Hatred the Romans had to that Name, he durst not accept it; but chose rather to
have the Power than the Name; and they, to find some precedent for their
Innovation, confirmed it to him under a Title well known to the People, and
before used by Sylla; which was Dictator Perpetuus, which he enjoyed only three
Years, four Months, six Days, and was then murdered in the Senate, being Fifty
six Years old, by Atilius Cimber, Marcus and Decius Brutus, Cassius and others.
He was also Pontifex Maximus, that he might have the Sovereign Dominion in
Religion (which he knew to have very great Power over Men's Minds and Opinions,
and consequently over their Actions also) as well as in the Civil Government by
his Dictatorship. He was the first Roman whose Image was stamped on the Coin in
his Lifetime; and the greatest part of the Reverses refer to one of these two
Authorities, and have the Names of the III Viri, or sometimes of the IIII Viri
also, who it seems strived which of them should excel in bestowing Honors and
Titles upon him.

. 3. After his Death there appeared a Comet, which, by the Artifice of his
Friends, the People were made believe was his Soul received into Heaven; and
thereupon, and for the Greatness of his Actions, he was honored as a God, had
Temples, Priests, etc. dedicated to him: Of which Virg. Eclog. 9.

Ecce Dionei processit Caesaris Astrum, etc.

The Difficultest Coins of Julius Caesar.

. 4. The Head of Rome Caesar,. Venus in a AEn Vic.
Chariot drawn by two Cupids and an Harp, L. Jul. L. F. Lucius Julius Lucii
Filius; Caesar, probably Caius Caesar's Lieutenant; of whom Caesar makes
mention de Bell. Gall. l. 7. and elsewhere. This Coin was made for the Honor of
the Family.

There were three Venus's, Urania, born of Caelus and Dia, presiding over Chaste
(i. e.) Celestial Love. Pandemus begotten of the Virilia of Caelus and the
Froth of the Sea, presiding over Lust and Copulation. Apostrophia the Daughter
of Jupiter and Dione; a Deity averting Men from unlawful and hurtful Loves; and
this was the Mother of AEneas from whom the Family of Caesar. But the Poets
make but one Venus. Also there were diverse Cupids, the one Celestial and
Virtuous, the other Common and Lustful. One born of Mars and Venus called
Anteros. Another of Mercury and second Venus. A third of Mercury and Diana. Of
Cupid and Anteros see an ingenious Apologue in Porphyry. For Venus having
brought forth Cupid, was much astonished, as were also his Nurses, that they
never perceived him grow, but still he continued of the same Bigness as when he
was born; whereupon consulting the Oracle, they were answered, that he could
not grow alone till he had a Brother; so Venus brought forth Anteros or loving
again, and then they both grew up and diminished together.

The Harp signifies the Harmony or Sympathy in Love.

1. An Head of a Goddess, or Sicily. Caesar Imp. Cos. Iterum.. Sicily setting
one Foot on the Prow of a Ship, and holding three Legs in her Hand.

2. Allienus Pro Cos. coined by Allienus when he had recovered Sicily from S.
Pompeius for Caesar, and sent Caesar two Legions, etc. into the Continent.

. a Trophy, probably for his Victory over Pharnaces, for we find not that he
set up (...) Trophy for any other Victory. The Sagum o^ Soldiers Coat was not
proper to the Romans, but common to all other Nations.

3. The Head of Victory. Caesar Dict. ter.. Rome marching with a Shield, Trophy
and Spoils, with a Serpent. C. Clovius Praef. signifying the Commonwealth (sor
whose Liberty Caesar always pretended to fight) loaded with the Spoils obtained
by his Victories over Asia or Africa, for both places are infested with
Serpents.

4. Caesar's Head. Caesar Dict. Perpet.. the Image Veneris Genetricis, or
Victricis with a little Victory in her Hand. L. Buca. Venus the Author of their
Family, much magnified by Caesar, therefore invoked by him in his Wars, given
as the Watchword in the decisive Battle at Pharsalia, Venus Victrix; as
Pompey's was Hercules invictus; he used as his Seal her Image, and graved it
upon his Arms; Built her Temples. Sometimes a Star (the Morning Star) added.
Caesar to show himself the Progeny of Venus, was observed to have an handsome
Body, to be very neat, and long a dressing himself.

5. The Head of a Woman veiled (probably Pietas) C. Caesar Cos. ter.. a lituus,
urceolus, and Hatchet (Sacrificing Instruments) Aulus Hirtius Praetor. This was
coined probably to remember some Sacrifice made, as a Thanksgiving for his
Victory over Pompey. When they Sacrificed they had a Veil over their Heads.
Virg. AEneid. 3.

Et positis aris jam vota in littora solves,
Purpureo velare comas adopertus amictu.
6. Caesar's Head veiled. Caesar Dict. perpetuo.. Venus Victrix leaning her
left Hand upon a great Shield standing upon a Globe. C. Maridianus. Probably
that Shield Virgil alludes to AEneid. 8. which he says Venus gave to AEneas --
Clypei non enarrabile textum, etc.

The Triumviri.
. 5. They who murdered Julius Caesar, intended to restore the Peoples Liberty
as it was before; but Caesar's Party (by reason that so many of the ancient
Nobility and warlike Personages were slain by Marius, Sylla and Caesar, in
those Bloody Civil Wars) was too strong; and therefore after the Fright and
Astonishment for Caesar's Death was over, they began to bustle; having the
People (who by Caesar's Bounty and Artifices were much of that Party) to side
with them: And first M. Antonius headed them, afterward Augustus; sometimes
agreeing both together, sometimes at Enmity one with another; sometimes taking
in M. Lepidus, because of his Riches, to be the third, and calling themselves
III viri R. P. C. Triumviri Reipublicae Constituendae.

M. Antonius had been of Caesar's Party, and upon that account of Reputation
with the Soldiers; but intended by their Assistance to set up himself, till
opposed first by Brutus, then by Octavius Caesar, he fled into Gallia, and got
an Army, which he joined with Lepidus; and proposed Accommodation with
Octavius, which he accepted; and so they three became Triumviri, (this is
expressed in a Medal where all their three Heads are on one side, and an
Hermathena on the other) and went against Brutus and Cassius, whom they
overthrew, and forced to kill themselves at Philippi in Macedonia. After which
Battle Octavius returned to Rome, and M. Antonius went into the East; where,
after diverse Exploits he came into Egypt, fell in Love with Cleopatra the
Queen, for whose sake he divorced his two Wives successively, called Fulvia,
and Octavia the Sister of Octavius. By Cleopatra he had diverse Children, a Son
and a Daughter at one birth; the Son he destined to be King of Armenia and
Media, which he never obtained. So foolish and vainglorious was this Antonius,
that he called himself the Sun and Cleopatra the Moon; and therefore we see
about his, as also about his Son's Head Rays, with such as Apollo is figured,
and after him diverse others assumed the same honor. Mean while Octavius Caesar
made War against him, and at Actium in a Naval Fight quite overcame him, who
afterward killed himself, as he believed Cleopatra had done before; but she
gave him the Precedence in Execution.

M. Lepidus had an Army given him by the Senate to command in Gallia; to whom
M. Antony being forced out of Rome and Italy by Brutus and Octavius, and
declared Enemy by the Senate, repaired; and because of his Forces joined him in
the Triumvirate; he kept his Army up entire, thinking to suffer M. Ant. Octav.
Caesar, and Sextus Pompeius to ruin or weaken one another so much, that he
might master them all. But Caesar having conquered S. Pompeius, did not go
against Antony, but turned upon him; and practicing with his Officers gained
all his Army from him. Upon his low Submission and Petition, Caesar gave him
his Life, and left him Pont. Maximus, and so sent him to Rome, where he lived
in great Melancholy and Contempt the rest of his days; his Son striving
afterward to practice the Legions against Augustus was put to death.

CHAP. II. Of Augustus.
1. C. Octavius Son of Octavius and Atia, Grandchild of Julia the Sister of
Jul. Caesar, was born upon Mount Palatine ad Capita bubula, though the chief
Habitation of this Family was at Velitrae, A. U. C. 690. before the Birth of
our Lord sixty two Years, Sept. 22. having the Sign Capricorn presiding in his
Nativity; whereby (as the Astrologers said) he was promised the Empire of the
World, and to be a God after his death; for they held that and us were the two
ports of Heaven: by us the Souls of Heroes descended and ascended; by those of
extraordinary Persons, which made Augustus put a Capricorn upon his Coins.

Julius Caesar his great Uncle adopted him into the Julian Family, whereby he
obtained the Command, Wealth, good Fortune and Popularity, as well as the Name,
of Caesar: hereupon we find upon many of his Coins C. Caesar Divi Filius.

Julius Caesar was Murdered when Octavius was about nineteen years old, and in
the Country; whereupon he hasted to Rome, and against the Advice of most of his
Friends and Kindred, resolved to take upon him the Name and Inheritance of
Caesar. Where M. Antony then Consul, though pretending to revenge Caesar's
death, received him very proudly; but Antony presently after designing for
himself against the Commonwealth was forced by him to fly into Gallia to
Lepidus, and quit the Siege of Brutus at Modena. Antony having got Power, sent
to Caesar, that if he would join with him and Lepidus to revenge the Death of
Caesar, they would make themselves III Viri in Imitation of Caesar, Pompey and
Crassus, who had done the same before; if not, they would join with Brutus and
that Party against him; whereupon he assented, and they took upon them the
Triumvirate, and many Coins were stamped, some in honor of each of them, some
in honor of them all together; as that with three Hands conjoined, and the
Ensigns of Supreme Power, Fasces, Caduceus Orb, etc.

Presently thereupon Caesar went against Sex. Pompeius the Son of Pompey the
Great, who by his Fautors (who were many in the Senate) was made Governor of
the Sea Coast, and had a great Navy; which Caesar overcame in Sicily. Of this
Sextus Pompeius are many Coins stamped with some relation to Sea-matters, as
with a Neptune, prow of a Ship, etc. and of Caesar his Victory over him, and
Conquest of Sicily. Many also of the other III Viri either with the names of
the Mint-masters, Quaestor, or some other of their Officers.

Caesar's Coin is often reversed with a Thunderbolt, either to represent his
own terribleness in War, or the assistance from Heaven, (particularly from
Julius his Father) which, as they say, he often experienced in the Wars; and
especially in that fatal and decisive Battle at Actium, whereby he became
Master of the whole Roman Empire, and in Memory of which he repaired the
decayed Temple of Apollo there, and dedicated his own Image in the habit of
Apollo Actius in a long Robe, his Harp, etc. (pretending to be his Son) in the
Library of the Palace.

After the Battle of Actium he returned to Rome, and there put it to the
question amongst his Friends, whether he should restore to the Commonwealth its
ancient Liberty, or take upon himself the absolute Sovereignty, and constitute
a Monarchy. After much debate the latter was resolved; and withal to avoid that
Rock which had split many others, and of late his Father Julius; he determined
to abst^ from all Monarchical and odious names, and to content himself with the
ordinary Titles of the Magistrates of the City.

2. So then whereas anciently the eldest of the Censors or Viri Censorii (such
as had been Censors) was called Princeps Senatus; and afterward such were
chosen by the Censors in their Quinquennial Muster, commonly the most excellent
and eminent Persons, as Scipio the African continued so all his life time;
Octavius chused to be called by that name, as of chiefest honor amongst all the
Senators. [The same Custom was also observed amongst the Equites and Pedites,
and amongst the Youth also; wherefore the young Caesar's, (and some few for
Honors sake before the Emperors called Principes Juventutis,) we find
frequently called Principes Juventutis; but afterward it became a Title of the
young Sons or Heirs of the Emperors] besides this he was always one of the
Consuls, (or else put in whom he might trust) and named the other also: So you
see upon the Coins of the Emperors, Cos. II. III. etc.

Imperator at first was not a Name of Office or Command, but of Honor only.
The Soldiers, after a Victory, wherein a certain number of their Enemies were
slain, and therefore called by Cicero Victoria justa, because in aftertimes
they were not so punctual, calling their General by the Name of Imperator. So
you see many times Imp. X. XVI. etc. i. e. called so so often by the Army:
Appian says, if they had slain 10000 o^ ^ir Enemies: yet afterward it came to
denote him who commanded all the Forces of the Commonwealth in Chief.

The Senate being prone to Flattery, most of them expecting Preferment from
him, heaped upon him all the honorary Titles that had before been bestowed upon
others; amongst the rest, that of Pater Patriae or P P. which at first was
bestowed upon Cicero for discovering and defeating the Conspiracy of Catiline.
They called him also Augustus, a Term applied before time only to the Gods or
Heroes; as if he had somewhat above Humane in him.

And in aftertimes Augustus signified him that was invested in the whole
absolute Power of Emperor; and Caesar, who was designed to be, but not actually
invested in the Majesty of the Emperor. None but he that was Augustus designed
in Medals with a Crown of Laurel; the Title of Semper Augustus, or perpet.
Augustus not found before Diocletian and Maximianus. When an Emperor with Rays
about his Head, it should seem to signify that he was consecrated by some City
or other, and that that Coin was made after such Consecration.

. 3. Being Consul his Sentences might be hindered and interrupted by the
Tribune of the People; to prevent which, he assumed also Tribunitiam potestatem
(for Tribune he could not be and Pontifex Maximus, say some, because the one
must needs be a Plebeian, the other a Patrician, which is false, for P.
Scaevola was Trib. Plebis and Pont. Max. which yet Tully complains of, as
dangerous to have two such Powers conjoined in one Person, l. 12. Ep. ad Attic.
5.) the which was renewed every Year; by which means also his Person was Sacred
and Inviolable; and by which means also, tho not Consul, yet every Sitting of
the Senate he might propose one Cause or Matter to them, tho this Power was
after enlarged to the succeeding Emperors, of referring (or putting to the
Vote) four or also five Causes every Sitting, V. Dio. l. 54. Capitol and
Vopisc. themselves also sometimes voted first of all, and that often with an
Oration spoken commonly by their Quaestors; and such Decrees were said Principe
Authore fieri; sometimes last of all, and so had power of mitigating or
qualifying the Sentences of the Fathers. Some say, that Tr. P. with the Year,
was the time of the Emperor's Reign, but that is false; for, tho very rarely,
it was communicated to another besides the Emperor: As there is mention Tib.
TR. P. XXXVIII. but the certain year of their Government was known by the
comparing of the times of their Titles together.

Because that Religion has great Force upon Men's Minds, he would not suffer
that to be in another's Power; and therefore after Lepidus's Death he made
himself Pont. Max. which all his Successors constantly observed till
Constantine, who refused it: Yet Julian resumed it again, and was initiated
with diverse nasty Ceremonies; but Gratian absolutely refused it, as unlawful
for a Christian (says Zosimus) he means a Lay-Christian, and never after any
received it.

Augustus also made himself Pro-Consul, which, tho it appears not on his
Medals, that I know, yet it is in old Inscriptions; and Elagabalus in Ep. apud
Dionem, calls himself (...). Pro-Cos. which I know not whether it was, that he
might command also the other Provinces, or that the Pro Cos. might know that
they governed under the Power of Caesar, who was the chiefest Pro-Cos. and
therefore whereas all other Pro-Cos. laid down their Power and Ensigns before
they entered the City, the Prince retained his Pro-Consular Power in the City.
So M. Aurelius having married Faustina, had given him Trib. pot. and Imperium
Pro-Cos. extra urbem, says Capitolinus.

And thus he conjoined in his own Person all the Supreme Offices and
Employments in the Commonwealth, without any sensible change of the Laws and
Customs formerly observed. And his Successors trod in the same Steps; some
notwithstanding referring more, some less to the Senate.

. 4. Augustus himself gave the Senate leave to dispose of such Provinces,
(Strabo l. 17. 12. Two Pro-consular, Asia and Africa, Ten Praetorian, two
whereof Tiberius afterward resumed) and Offices as were Peaceable, or not
likely to create any trouble; but reserved to himself all those where there
were any Wars or Commotions, upon pretense of giving them the Pleasure and
Profit, and himself the Trouble. But, indeed, that he might keep all the
Soldiers in his own Power, under such Legates (Lieutenants) as he could trust;
after the Resolution fixed of taking upon him the sole Government, he referred
it to the Senate; by some of whom for Interest, some for Fear, some out of
Judgment, it was voted for him for ten Years; and after those, the Power was
again renewed for other ten Years; and so for every ten Years as long as he
lived; which was observed also by his Successors.

. 5. He had also Statues and Shields vowed and dedicated to his Honor; there is
a Medal on one side Augustus,. on a Shield SPQR. CL. V. (i. e.) Clypeum vovit.
Clypeum, a Shield seems ordinarily to have contained only an Inscription to the
Honor of any Person; but sometimes his Effigy or the Effigy of some noble
Action of his, and was hung up in some eminent Temple. He had furthermore
Honors decreed by most Provinces and Colonies, as appears by the Medals; as
of Alexandria in Egypt; Raemetalces King of Thrace; Gnossians with their
Labyrinth; Cydonians (Citizens of (...) a City in Crete.) Hierapolitanes;
Maronitarum, or Inhabitants of Marony, Coians.

The Coin of Nismes (some say Augustus and Julius, others Agrippa, whose face
it should seem to be) made by that Colony upon the Conquest of Egypt, after the
Victory of Actium. The Palm Tree is Phaenicia, the Crocodile Egypt, chained to
a Palm, the Emblem of Victory.

Augustus's Head,. a Victory flying, holding a Crown over a Buckler, wherein
are CL. V. (Clypeus Votivus) hanging upon a Pillar erected by the People in
Honor of Julius Caesar, Suet. c. 85. Plebs in honorem defuncti (Julii) solidam
columnam prope viginti pedum lapidis Numidici in foro statuit, scripsitque
Parenti Patriae: apud eandem longo tempore, Sacrificare, vota suscipere,
controversias quasdam, interposito per Caesarem Jurejurando, distrahere,
perseveravit. CL. V was a Shield dedicated with certain Solemnities and
Performance of Vows to his Honor. Plin. l. 35. c. 3. says, that Appius
Claudius, A. U. C. 259. was the first broacher of this Custom, Placuit, says
he, in excelso spectari, and titulos honorum legi.

Caesar's Head, Caesar Augustus,. Jupiter with his Thunderbolt standing in the
Door of his Temple. Jov. Ton. Suet. c. 29. says, he dedicated a Temple to
Jupiter after his escape of a Danger in his Expedition to Cantabria (Biscay,
etc.) when as he marched in the night, his Litter was struck with Lightning,
and the Servant carrying a Torch killed. Perhaps Horace alludes to this Temple,
Carm. l. 3. Ode 5.

Coelo tonantem credidimns Jovem Regnare, etc.
Augustus's Head, Caesar Aug. Divi Filius Pater Patriae.. Two young Men in
their Gowns, between them two Shields, two bastae purae a lituus and
Capeduncula, underneath C [aius] L [ucius] Caesares. About it Augusti F. Cos.
Desig. Prin. Juvent. in memory of Caius and Lucius Sons of Agrippa adopted by
him, lately dead, Dio. l. 55. Corpora C and L Caesarum a tribunis militum Romam
apportata sunt, parmaeque and hastae, quas aureas ab Equitibus acceperant, in
Curia suspensae sunt -- Nondum posita puerili praetexta Principes Juventutis
appellari, designare Coss. specie recusantis flagrantissime cupiverat
(Augustus.) A Blazing Star, Divus Julius, of which before,. a Temple with
Julius Caesar sitting in it, holding a Lituus, and a Star over his Head. The
Temple dedicated to him, Virg. Georg. 3.

Et viridi in Campo templum de Marmore ponam,
In medio mihi Caesar erit, templumque tenebit.
Or rather the Temple of Venus, of which Dio. l. 45. Ea re (appearing of the
Star) Augustus animo confirmato Statuam Patris aeream cum stella supra Caput in
Veneris templo posuit.

A Trophy upon the Prow and Rudder of a Ship. Imp. Caesar for his Actiack
Victory. in a Garland Jovi vot. suscep. pro Sal. Caes. Aug. SPQR. Augustus
being Sick after the Battle with Brutus and Cassius, it being reported at Rome
that he was dead, the SPQR. decreed an annual Supplication and Vows should be
made for his Health and Safety.

Two Men's Heads together with the Faces toward other two, without an
Inscription; probably M. Antonius, Octavius and Octavia; for after Fulvia's
(Antonius's first Wife's) death, who instigated him to make War upon Augustus,
and to join with Sextus Pompeius, their mutual Friends began to endeavor a
Reconciliation between them, which at last they effected; and for the greater
Confirmation of it, Antony was to marry Octavia Augustus's Sister, now a Widow
by the late death of her Husband Marcellus. a Ship with the mark of Sicily
under it, and Iter. Praef. which seems to concern Sextus Pompeius, who on his
own Coins is styled Iter. Praef. Classis and orae maritimae ex S. C. for though
one Condition of that Reconciliation was, that they should both of them go
against Sextus Pompeius; yet Pompey retired with his Fleet to Sicily, and there
hindered the Transportation of Corn to the City: which causing a Dearth in the
City forced Caesar and Antony to make a Reconciliation with him also; the
Treaty being at Misenum, whereupon it seems this Coin was made.

A Woman's Head veiled Indulgentiae Augusti moneta impetrata. the Emperor in a
triumphal Chariot, underneath Colonia Augusta, Aroa Patrensis. Patrae was built
by Eumelus, who having learned of Triptolemus the Art of Plowing and Sowing, he
called his City Aroa. (...) says Pausan. Afterward the Achaia^s ejecting
thence the Jonians, Patreus the Son of Preugenes, Grandchild of Agenor,
enlarging the City called it Patrae. And Augustus after his Victory at Actium
recalled the Inhabitants dispersed by the War (the Haven being very commodious)
and also brought thither the Inhabitants of diverse neighboring Cities, and gave
the Patrenses Government over them: amongst other Privileges he gave them,
being his Colony, one was to coin Money.

Augustus's Head. Caesar Divi Fill. a Cupid (Augustus) between two Stars (of
Venus and Julius) upon a Dolphin. S. P. Q. R.

Three vexilla, two of the Manipuli bundles of Hay or Straw the middlemost a
Veil hung crossways Augusto Divi F. Legio IV. Legio VI. Legio X. Fla^vo
Prae^fecto Germanorum. L. JVEN tio Luperco II viris Colonia Cae^sar-Augustana,
a Man plowing with two Oxen. Coined by those three Legions quartered at
Sarragoza.

. 6. To Livia or Julia his last and best beloved Wife were many honors decreed,
as that she should be called Genetrix Patriae, figured in the form sometimes of
Juno, Venus, (Astarte of the Sydonians) worshipping and stiling them as Gods
and Goddesses even whilst alive: the Moon or Diana.

But the greatest honor was after his death, when he was voted to be a God and
to be worshipped; they setting upon the highest part of the Funeral Pile an
Eagle (for an Emperor, and a Peacock (Sacred to Juno) for an Empress) which
might carry the Soul into Heaven to Jupiter; whence it proceeds, that upon
Medals an Eagle set either upon a Globe, or the top of a Rogus, or Bed of
Parade, or some such like, is a Sign of the Consecration of that Emperor. But
Augustus had also Temples built to him both at Rome and in the Provinces, had
Sacrifices and Priests decreed to him, one of whom was Antonia the Wife of Nero
Drusus Germanicus.

CHAP. III. Of Tiberius, C. Caligula, Claudius.
. 1. CAlled before his Adoption into the Family of the Caesar's, Tiberius
Claudius Nero, and Nick named for his Drunkenness Biberius Caldius Mero; in his
old Age was of an^ Ill-favored Complexion, Pale, Hideous, Copper-nosed. His
Master said when he was a^ Child, that he was made of Dirt kneaded with Blood;
which agreed very well to his Disposition, being Cruel, Bloody, Lustful beyond
measure, Drunken, and Filthy in all ways possible. Much of which appears also
upon his Medals.

He came to be Emperor at Fifty six Years old, before which time he had done
many signal Actions, and obtained great Victories over the Parthians,
Illyricans, Dacians, Armenians, Pannonians, etc. but a while after he gave
himself over wholly to Lust and Debauchery; which brought upon him a new kind
of Disease called Colum, and a kind of Leprosy all over his Body.

Yet notwithstanding all these things, he wa^ even in his Lifetime almost
adored, as appears by his Medals; wherein is a Victory sitting upon a Firmament
fashioning a Crown for him; wherein he is called Tiberius, or the Genius of the
River Tiber: Wherein is the Figure of a^ Colossus erected in his Honor, sitting
and holding a Spear in one Hand and a Platter in the other, by the Cities of
Asia repaired by him after an^ Earthquake, with the words Civitatibus Asiae
restitutis; wherein is a Stern fastened to a World as if he governed the whole
World.

The Head of Augustus, another of Tiberius*. Caius and Lucius Caesar's with two
Shields either of them an hasta pura, and for the one a^ lituus, as being chief
Augur, the other a Simpulum as Pontifex; two of the same Family no^ being
permitted to be Pontifices, Dio. l. 39. no^ in the same College of Priests.
Only the Emperors being above all Law, were themselves Pont. Max. and one of
their Sons they made Pont. as here Augustus, and in another Vespasian.

Caius Caesar,
. 2. Called Caligula, because of the Soldierfashion'd-Shoes he wore, was born
in the Army, A. U. C. 764. reigned three Years and ten Months, and lived twenty
eight Years, five Months and seven Days; was of Disposition Wicked, Furious,
Tyrannical, Treacherous, Foolish, Ridiculous, Prodigal, Luxurious, Cruel,
^ncestuous; would needs be a God, and habited and accoutred himself sometimes
like one God, sometimes like another; challenged Jupiter to fight with him;
made Engines to shoot great ^ones against Heaven, and to counterfeit Thunder;
was slain by Chaerea.

Few of his Medals extant, the Senate in hate to him, calling in his Coin, to
obliterate as much as they could, his Memory. Yet some there are, as Pax Aug.
representing the Condition wherein he found the Empire, as one with the Heads
of Caius and Caesonia his last Wife,. (...).

Caesonia was every way as wicked for a Woman as he for a Man; and their
Daughter being but a Child, let her Nails grow to scratch ^ut the Eyes of the
Children her Play-fellows: All slain by Cassius Chaerea.

Claudius,
. 3. Born A. U. C. 743. reigned thirteen Years nine Months, died aged Sixty
three years, was of an hansome out side, but a very il^ mind; a great Glutton
and Drunkard, Luxurious, Incontinent, Cruel, Timorous, Inconstant, Heavy,
Lasche, a great Dicer, ruled by his Wives and Servants; yet built many
Magnificent Works, Aquaeducts, Highways, the Port of Ostia; made good Laws,
preserved the Bounds and Reputation of the Empire. But what he did well, was
for fear lest the chief Men should Conspire against him, not for love of
Virtue; and the same fear wrought in him by Messalia and Agrippina his Wives,
caused him to cut off whomsoever they pleased: So that he put to Death Thirty
Senators, 221 Equites, and other Persons innumerable. So Foolish and Timorous
was he, that when his Wife Messalina was Married openly to Silius, it was a
long time before he knew it; and when he did, durst not a great while take
Vengeance of her. But he was afterward poisoned by his Wife Agrippina in a
Dish of Mushrooms or Tertuffale, which he loved above all other things, and his
Mother had longed for when Great with him.

Claudius had one only Son called Britannicus* whom Nero and Agrippina (his
Step mother) Murdered; of him Medals very rare: Ye^ Seguinus has one, his
Head (...).. a naked Figure (supposed to be the Sun with a Heart to show his
Swiftness) (...) Alabanda was a City in Caria, where the Sun was very much
worshipped.

Many Medals of Claudius; one reverse a Temple, in which Peace or Rome crowns
him; the words Romae and Augusto communitas Asiae. A Britain naked, fighting
with a Poignard against a Roman Soldier armed. A Jupiter amidst seven Stars,
with Thunder in one Hand, and a Trident in the other; or a Jupiter and Neptune
joined, as if both gave their Power to Claudius.

There arose in his days a Rebellion headed by Furvus Camillus Scribonianus
Legatus in Dalmatia; the Army which chused him Emperor, terrified with Omens,
slew him the fifth day. No Medals of him.

Seguinus has set down a very curious Coin of Lead, on the one side a Digamma,
a Letter sound out by Claudius, and not used after his Death, with a Palm
issuing out of it IO. (...) Sat.. a Garland, which he conceives very probably
to be after the Victory Claudius obtained in Britanny. Dio says, that the
Gallican Legions refusing to march into Britanny, he sent Narcissus his
Freed-man to persuade them to it; who coming to the Army, and setting himself
in the General's Seat, and beginning to make a Speech, the Army universally
cried out IO Saturnalia! IO. as if Servants then ruled; and turning to A.
Plautius their General, desired him to lead them into Britanny, which he did;
and afterward hearing of their good Success, Claudius came in Person, and
attributed to himself the Victory and Triumph.

CHAP. IV. Of Nero, Claudius Macer.
1. NERO was born A. U. C. 789. A. D. 38. reigned thirteen Years, seven Months,
Twenty eight Days, died about Thirty two Years old. The most abominable Monster
for Lust, Debauchery, Cruelty and all Wickedness that ever the World saw. He
gave his mind to nothing laudable but Singing and Playing.

The Senate having voted him to be whipped to Death through the Streets, he
chused rather to kill himself, crying out, Qualis Artifex pereo.

Medals many of him (tho the Senate decreed his Coins should not be Current)
because of the length of his Reign. Yea, mistrusting some such thing of the
Senate, it is probable that he caused upon diverse of his Coins, the Pourtraict
of Augustus and Tiberius to be stamped.

2. As himself standing one Foot on a Globe, and a Spear in his Hand; as if his
Valor had given him the Empire of the World. The like a Roma sitting and
setting her Foot upon a Globe.

His Figure standing, Rays about his Head like the Sun, in the one Hand a
Laurel, in the other a Victory; the word Aug. Germanico; perhaps to represent
the Colosse he caused to be made of himself; and in imitation of that of Rhodes.

Four Fishes; perhaps coined in Greece upon the Birth of his Daughter Claudia,
where it was the Custom, that the fifth day after the Birth of a Child, the
Women, who had been assistant at the Labor, first washed their Hands; then
took up the Infant and carried it, running throughout all the House, to the
Hearth especially; and then the Kindred made a Feast of such Fishes as are here
expressed, Lobsters, Pulpes; such viz. as are very Proliferous and Inciters to
Lust; these Feasts were called (...). By the way Athenaeus notes, that the
tenth day after the Child was born, the nearest Kindred met together to name
the Child, which they did after they had Sacrificed and Banqueted together. In
Rome the eighth day was commonly for Females, the ninth for Males, the
Lustricus for purifying and naming the Child.

Ara pacis, and another the Temple of Janus shut up; the reason of opening of
Janus's Temple in time of War, was taken from Romulus, who fighting against the
Sabins, and being worsted, there rose up immediately out of Janus's Temple a
Spring of Hot Water, wherewith the Romans scalded and so vanquished their
Enemies. Going therefore to War, they set open Janus's Temple in hopes of like
Success.

Three Arches of a Bridge with Con. C C II. i. e. perhaps Consensu civitatum
Campaniae duarum: Then it signifies some Bridge made over the great Trench he
endeavored to cut between Avernus and Ostia. (The Port of Ostia, tho upon his
Medals, was chiefly built by Claudius; he only adorned and completed it.)

A Triumphant Chariot drawn with four Horses, and Nero holding a Crown and
Palm, with the word Euthymius, perhaps representing his Victory at the Olympic
Games in a Race of Horses. Euthymius was a Famous Wrestler of Locri, who fought
with the Demon Temsus, and delivered a Beautiful Damsel from him; for which
reason he was made a God and worshipped by the Locri; who probably stamped this
Medal in Honor of him.

An Hydraulick Instrument like our Organs, in which he was much delighted, as
Sueton. notes.

A Serpent as ready to take Fruits from an Altar; which either represented
AEsculapius; or as a (...), his Mother persuading him that sleeping he was
preserved by a Serpent from the Trains of Messalina. Besides, it was a good
Augury to have a Serpent come and eat upon their Altars, as Virgil notes of
AEneas; and that they nourished Serpents as signs of good Luck; and this Nero
did in the Wood of Lavinium amongst the rest.

Nero Caesar in his Youth.. a Senator, (...). an Acknowledgment of some Favor
that City received by his means.

Nero Radiant as the Colossus of Rhodes.. (...), the Rhodians st^g themsel^es
Rhodi^ Ne^nenses Augusti.

Nero like Apollo.. his Wife like Latona, (...).

Europa carried upon a Bull. (...). She being Venus and Astarte.

Nero with a Serpent about his Neck, signifying Felicity.. An Eagle with a Palm.

(...). The River Meles, Famous for inspiring Poetry.

Nero and Agrippina.. Libertas.

Nero. Jupiter, the two Monarchs of Heaven and Earth. So of Serapis also.

Nero.. Poppaea Sabina, as a Juno.

Nero.. Messalina (his last Wife) as a Ceres.

Claudius Macer,
3. Was Propraetor in Africa when Nero died, and commanding the Army there;
partly instigated by his own Ambition, partly by Calvia Crispinilla the
Mistress and Minister of Nero's Lusts, who after Nero's Death, being condemned
and sought for to be slain, fled to Macer; and persuaded him to hinder the City
from Corn, till they declared him Emperor; it seems also he had some Party in
the City amongst the Senators; since there is a Medal of him with his Image and
S. C on one side, on the other a Ratis with Propraet. Afric. But Galba being
Emperor, sent Trebonius Garucianus immediately into Africa, who got his Army
from him and ^lew him.

CHAP. V. Of Servius (Sueton.) Sulp. Galba. Salvus Otho, Aulus Vitellius.
1. GAlba, born A. U. C. 750. reigned seven Months, six Days; died aged Seventy
three Years; employed for a long time in great Charges and Commands, at Nero's
Death he governed Spain; where he was declared Emperor by the Army, and
Encouragement of Julius Vindex. Sriving to reduce the Army to the ancient
Severity and Discipline, and giving them nothing, but being extremely and
sordidly Covetous, he fell into their Hatred. The People also were no less
offended with his Lust and Impotency, whom he governed by his three Friends, T.
Vinius, Corn. Laco, and Icelus his Freed Man; Persons contemptible for their
Arrogance, Cruelty and Baseness; they were after a while all together slain by
Otho, who had beforehand corrupted the Army: He chose Piso also, a Sour young
Man, to be his Successor, who was slain with him.

His Medals are a Soldier with a Victory in one Hand, a Pike with an Eagle in
the other, with Roma renascens, as if ruined by the former Emperors. And the
same. with Roma. XL. or Quadragesima remissa, which was a certain Tax paid at
the Passages of Rivers and Ports, which he remitted. A Triumphant Arch with S.
C. erected either in remembrance of his former Victories, or the Defeat of
Macer.

Honos and Virtus.
Mars presenting Liberty kneeling before Galba, the word Libertas restituta;
because by the Fame of his Arms he forced Nero to kill himself.

His Wife was Lepida, by whom he had two Sons, who both died young.

Q. Calph. Piso frugi Licinianus was, because of their like manner of Life,
chosen by Galba to be his Successor; he was Caesar but four days, was killed
with him, and buried by his Wife Verania who bought his Head.

Galba's Head, Galba Imperator.. the Head, as, of a Goddess. Rest. Number. which
some interpret Restitutor Nummorum. But no History mentions any such thing of
him; besides Nummus is scarce found in that Sense, but Moneta. Others say
Restitutor Numidiae, where he governed two Years Pro-Cos. and established and
settled the Province. Others say Restitutor Numinis, the Head seeming to be of
a Goddess, not of a Country. Sueton. says, that when he took the Toga virilis,
he dreamed that Fortune stood before his door, and told him, that if he would
not let her in, she would go to the first Man she met; whereupon going to his
door, he found a Brazen Image of Fortune of above a Cubit long, which he took
in, carried to his House at Tusculum; and kept an Anniversary Sacrifice to it.

M. Salvius Otho.
2. Born A. U. C. 784. A. C. 33. reigned three Months, five Days, killed
himself at thirty seven years old: was Courteous, Prodigal, Effeminate,
Delicate, Dissolute, Luxurious: he governed Lusitania without blame; courted
Galba, and was the first who persuaded him to take upon him the Empire, coined
all his Plate for his Assistance in hopes to be adopted by him; having
contracted such great Debts that nothing less than the Empire could deliver
him. But as soon as Piso was adopted, he resolved to kill Galba; and by
excessive Largesses, and other means, drew the Soldiers to his part. He was
very intimate with, and imitated Nero in his Life and Manners; and the People
made their Acclamation, Neroni Othoni. He debauched Poppaea from her Husband to
deliver her to Nero* Whereupon he was sent Governor into Portugal.

It is doubted whether any large Medals of Brass of Otho, yet small Coins of
Brass there are, and of Silver not very rare. Such as Otho- on Horseback
brandishing a Spear Pont Max. the Goddess Victory Victoria Othonis (...).
(...). also (...). Isis's Head LA the East generally took part with him,
because acknowledged by and resident in the City; and Sueton. says
particularly that he often sacrificed to Isis.

Aulus Vitellius.
3. Was born A. U. C. 767. A. C. 16. reigned six Months, twenty two Days, died
aged about fifty four years; a Fat, Gross, Heavy, Dull, Sottish, Cruel,
Lustful, Drunken, Glutton, Nasty Beast; having all the Vices of Caligula, Nero
and Otho; and nothing either of their Ingenuity, Parts, Conduct or Gentileness.
He came into Reputation with Tiberius by Flattery and serving him in his Lusts:
by the same Arts he continued in the favor of the rest. Galba, thinking him not
fit to head or manage a Design, sent him General into Lower Germany, where, by
giving the Soldiers License to do what they pleased, he got their Favors so
much, that they saluted him Emperor. Presently he marched into Italy, where
having got the better in one Battle: Otho, through his Effeminateness,
impatient of Labor, never so much as rallying his Men, (who were overcome by
Surprise, and desired much to regain their Honor) or retiring to his Army, slew
himself, and left the Government to Vitellius; who behaved himself in it most
cruelly and covetously, killing all he could have any Pretense against, for
their Wealth; which he consumed wholly upon his Belly, and so laschly that he,
without ordering or providing for himself, was taken by Vespasian's Soldiers
naked in a Sink, and soled through the City, and at last carried to the Scalae
Gemoniae; there a long time tormented, and at last thrown into Tyber.

Of his Medals, -- A Vesta, holding a Sacrificing Platter in one Hand, in the
other a Torch, with Vesta. (populi Romani) Quiritun. signifying that he was
Pont. Max, or that Vesta was the chief Defendress of Rome, or that his
Government was to be Eternal.

-- AEquity the Goddess. AEquitas Aug.
Victory (with a Platter and Palm) sitting, S. C. for he pretended to take Arms
to Revenge Galba's and Piso's death.

A Tripode, with a Dolphin and a Crow XV VIR. SACR-FAC (Quindecimvir Sacris
faciundis) Vitellius was one of them, whose Office was to keep the Sybils
Books, and make certain Sacrifices: the Dolphin a Fish of good Presage. Apollo
was called Delphinius because he guided Castalius the Cretan, conducting a
Colony under that shape. Theseus also sacrificed to him under that Name; and
Plutarch testifies that many Altars of the Greeks had a Dolphin upon them: the
Crow Sacred to Minerva, and much esteemed in Augury and Divination.

A Shield curiously wrought (...)

Sextilia was his Mother, a brave and virtuous Woman, whom he saluted Augusta;
which Title she refused, saying, She had born Vitellius, and not Germanicus:
And afterward not approving his Actions, it was reported she was poisoned by
him. Yet some think that to be her Image which is on a Reverse of Vitellius,
with Matter Augusti, Matter Senatus, Matter Patriae.

His Wives were, first Petronia; whom, after he had a Son by her, he repudiated
and slew Dolabella, because he married her. Second, Gelaria Fundana, by whom he
had a Son almost Dumb and Stupid, slain by Matianus, and a Daughter whom
Vespasian married very honorably.

CHAP. VI. Of Flavius Vespasianus, Titus Vespasianus, Domitianus.
. 1. FLavius Vespasianus was born A. V. C. 761. A. C. 10. reigned nine Years,
11 Months, and twenty two Days, died aged sixty nine Years; of mean Parentage,
obtained the Empire by his Merits: for having done great Services in Britanny,
where he fought thirty Battles, and Germany; he was at last sent into Judaea,
(being not feared because of his mean Extraction) where the Legions hearing of
Galba, Otho and Vitellius, their Election by their Armies, conceived themselves
as able to raise an Emperor as the others; and therefore by common consent made
choice of him, who was presently received by all the Eastern Legions. He was a
very Prudent, Sober, Vigilant, Valiant, Clement, Moderate, Frugal and Liberal
Person: Frugal in his own House, and toward the Courtiers, who blamed him much
for Covetousness; but so Magnificent in building Temples, Cities, Bridges,
Highwaies, etc. that it is much admired how he found Wealth enough to do it,
after those expensive Beasts; especially since he oppressed none, but wept
extraordinarily even at the just Punishment of Malefactors. The Greeks, to whom
Nero had foolishly given liberty, tax him for reducing them again to pay
Tributes, and be subject to the Romans; for which they had no reason, using
their Liberty to quarrels amongst themselves, and to the prejudice of the
Commonwealth.

Very many Medals of Vespasian, the chief are; His Victory over Judaea, a Woman
leaning to a Palm Tree with her Hands bound, signifies the Captivity of the
People: A Woman sitting in an unusual Posture, alludes to that of Isa. 3. 26.
She, being desolate, shall sit upon the ground.

Two Capricorns with a Globe between. He was born under Capricorn as was also
Augustus, and of later Times Charles V. and Cosmus Medices, surnamed the Great.

Vespasian's Head. a Jupiter with a Patera in his Right Hand, in his Left a
Scepter with an Eagle on the Top. (...). Anno novi Templi octavo: Before his
coming to the City, his Son Domitian and Sabinus seized upon the Capitol, where
Vitellius besieged and fought them; Sabinus was slain there, Domitian escaped;
but the Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus was burnt, by whether Party uncertain.
Vespasian therefore coming to Reign in his first Year rebuilt that Temple, from
which Building he counts this Epoch.

A Victoria Pacifera, with a Bulla, Caduceus, and a Serpent before, betokening
the Direction of the Gods, as the Caduceus of Prudence, the word Paci Augustae.

The Front of the Temple of Peace built by him adorned with many Statues, SPQR.
Vespasian Consecrated, crowned with Laurel not Radiant, as being a great and
invincible Hero, a Pot between two Laurels: The Pot represents the Pot of Oil
set by the Dead before they were interred. Before their Doors also was set a
Pot of Water, for them that entered to Expiate themselves. The Laurels were in
honor of his Victories.

A Woman's Head without Inscription; probably Coenis his Concubine after his
Wives death, whom he loved dearly, a prudent Woman.

Jupiter sitting holding a Victory. (...) as much as Jupiter the Castle-or
Town-Keeper. Bolanus, he that governed Asia.

His Wife was Fl. Domitilla, by whom he had Titus, Domitian, and a Daughter
called Fl. Domitilla; both the Mother and Daughter died before he came to be
Emperor; but notwithstanding they were Consecrated, and Medals made for them.

Titus Vespasianus,
. 2. Born A. U. C. 793. A. C. 42. reigned above two Years, and died, as most
say, poisoned by Domitian, aged forty Years. Was the most Courageous, Liberal,
Prudent, Chaste, Mild, Knowing, Temperate, Innocent Prince that till that time
the Romans had. He chaced out of the Court all Women, etc. of evil Lives;
sending away Q. Berenyce, who hoped he would have married her; as also all
Accusers, Calumniators and Flatterers; some of whom he put even to Death; he
said he lost that day in which he did not good to some or other. Being advised
to put to Death some that conspired against him, he said he had rather dye
himself; his Father, himself and Brother, were persuaded that all things were
by Fate; and that they could not prevent the Death appointed and destined to
them by the Gods.

Pax. Aug. a Peace, and a Thigh of a Sacrifice upon a Stool; for to Peace they
Sacrificed only the Thigh and Leg-bones. Nor was it lawful to shed Blood in her
Temple: So they killed and dressed the Sacrifice without, and then brought in
and burnt the Bones.

Antiochia, Vesp. and Titus much honored that City, not only building much of
it, but placing there the Brazen Cherubims brought from Jerusalem, and building
a Theater in the place where the Synagogue of the Jews stood.

An Altar Providentia, intimating that it was his Providence and Wisdom that
destroyed the Jews (under whom the Christians also were comprehended) and
established the worship of the Gods.

Victoria Navalis over the Jews upon the Lake of Genesareth.

An Elephant, a Symbol of Perpetuity and Magnificence; but Titus had also a
mavelous Elephant; which perceiving one day that the Wife of his Master
committed Adultery with another Person, killed them both; and laying them both
together in the Bed as they were before, covered them; and when his Master came
home, he carried him to the Bed, uncovered them, and showed what was done, and
afterward showed his Teeth, which were Bloody.

Titus sitting on a Rock, leaning on his Perizonium, and a Horse (the Emblem of
Empire) brought to him by a Woman, supposed to be Fortune naked, without Wings,
Wheel or Orb, they fancying that when Fortune had traveled all the World over,
at last she came to Tyber, and went into the Palace, where immediately she laid
aside her Wings, Wheel, Globe, etc. and there rested.

A Woman upon the Prow of a Ship, (because of the Situation upon the Sea) with
a Scepter in one Hand, a Vine-branch in the other (because of its Fruitfulness
in excellent Wines) a Dove, (which there were nourished in great quantity; the
Syrians not eating but nourishing them as Sacred, Birds of Venus, and into
which Semyramis the great Queen was converted.) The word (...).

(...) like a Jupiter with Towers on his Head, and a Flower in his Hand (which
seems to be Lotus, esteemed by them, because of it they made Bread.) Nilus was
worshipped by the Egyptians as Jupiter.

His Wives were Arricidia who died without Children.

Marcia Furnilla (whom some call Fulvia) by whom he had Julia Sabina; he was
divorced from her, being yet a private Person.

Julia Sabina his Daughter, refused by Domitian, married Flavius Sabinus, whom
Domitian, for love of her, caused to be Murdered; and having got her with
Child, persuaded her to destroy the Foetus, whereby she also killed her self.
Her Medals a Julia Augusta,. a Peacock Divi Titi F.

Venus Augusta, Venus resting upon a Pillar, in one Hand the Helmet of Mars, in
the other a Spear; her Cestus or Scarf (which was a sort of thin Vestment,
through which the whole Body was seen; therefore in the Cestus was said to be
placed the Charm of Love) tied about her Thighs: Signifying that she was Venus,
and had Command and Power over Domitian.

Domitian,
. 3. Was born A. D. 52. U. C. 803. reigned about fifteen Years, was slain at
the Age of Forty four Years by his Domestics, who were afraid he should have
Murdered them, as he had done many others.

He was Beautiful enough, and at first by his good Laws for reforming their
Religion, and against Gelding Boys, and his frequent hearing of Causes, gave
hopes of good Government; but he changed after a while, and showed his own
Inclinations to be Barbarously Cruel, Traitorous, Insolent, Cowardly, Ignorant,
Lustful, and every way Vicious. He (because (as some imagine) he heard the
Sybils prophesied of a Virgins Conception) gave out, and imprisoned some for
not saying, that he was the Son of Pallas; which is the reason why somewhat of
Pallas is upon most of his Medals. He would needs be a God, sometimes Jupiter,
Hercules, etc. would have his Bed be called Pulvinar; suffered himself to be
adored; gave his Hand to be kissed, etc. He banished also all Learning,
especially Philosophy, out of Rome.

A Goat within a Crown. Princeps Juventutis, perhaps in Flattery to resemble
him to Jupiter, educated by a Goat of Amalthaea, of whose Skin he made his
AEgis.

A Ram. Princeps Juventutis; the Ram the chief of the Flock, and first of the
Signs.

Domitian having upon his Breast the AEgis --. on Horseback, his Horses Foot
upon the head of a River; representing a Statue described by Papinius Statius,
made in Honor of Domitian after his giving Peace to Germany, or rather his
buying it.

A Triumphal Arch.

In the Habit of Mars, with a Trophy on his Shoulder for his German Victory.

Pallas standing upon a Ship with two Prows, her Invention; probably
representing the Vessel in which Domitian passed the Rhine and Danow; being so
fearful that he could not endure so much as the trouble of Rowing; he had a
Boat on purpose drawn by the Galleys, in which he sat alone like an Image.
Plin. Paneg.

An Altar dedicated to him by the Nicaeenses (probably for giving them the
Primacy of Bithynia against the Nicomedians) under the name of (...), or
Forensis (President of Tribunals) esteeming him a God. As also in that of an
Eagle holding Thunder; they called him Jupiter Domitor Orbis.

Isis stretching or displaying a Sail; called Pelagia Goddess of Navigation,
and Inventress of Sails.

. 4. His Wife was Domitia Longina, Daughter of that brave Corbulo, whom Nero
caused to kill himself; he took her from her Husband AElius Lamia, whom he
afterward also slew. She was a very wicked Woman, and governed by Paris a
Comaedian; whereupon Domitian turned her away, but overcome with her Beauty
afterward received her; and for fear he should again use her worse, she helped
to Murder him. Others commend her much for her Virtue; and Procopius says,
that after Domitian's Death, she was so much reverenced by the Senate, that she
was sent for thither, and desired to request what she pleased of her Husbands;
she only desired the liberty to set up his Image where she pleased, which was
granted. She sent therefore and gathered together his torn Limbs, and had them
put together, and sowed, and fastened, so as the Body being given to the
Statuaries, they made a Statue upon it; which she placed upon the ascent to the
Capitol; which he says remained there till his time, representing the marks of
the sowed Limbs.

A Peacock, Concordia August. made after her Repeal.

By her he had a Son, which dying young was consecrated -- A Child sitting upon
a Globe amongst Stars.

Domitian and Domitia.. a Temple with a Goddess, (...). Domitian began his
Patents, Dominus ac Deus noster sic jubet; she might well be a Goddess then.

Lucius Antonius injured by Domitian (who called him Scortum) Governor of
Germany, raised a Rebellion, but was overcome and slain by another General.

CHAP. VII. Of Cocceius Nerva, Ulpius Trajanus.
. 1. NErva was born A. D. 33. reigned some say sixteen Months, others 27. he
entered into the twenty eighth Month, for he was Cos. IV. and in the second
year he was made Emperor, for at that time we find his Medals; died aged above
Seventy two Years; was a most Just, Mild, Wise, Tranquil, Passionless,
Irreproachable, Bountiful, Learned Prince; recalled those Domitian had
banished; and in their rooms sent the Informers, Accusers, Sycophants of the
Court; was persecuted and banished by Domitian jealous of his Virtues. Being
advanced to the Empire by the Murderers of Domitian, he could not protect them
from the Rage of the Soldiers, who cut them to pieces; the first Action of
Insolence of the Army, but not the last. A little before his Death he most
wisely provided for the Commonwealth, by adopting Trajan; who having gained a
great Victory in Pannonia, and sending a Crown to Nerva, was by Nerva adopted
in the Temple of Jupiter Capit. and immediately made Caesar and Trib. Pot.
given him; tho it seems he abstained till after Nerva' Death, from the Title of
Augustus; yet was he partaker of the Sovereignty.

Ulpius Trajanus,
. 2. Was born A. C. 54. reigned nineteen Years, six Months, sixteen Days: we
find no more than TRI. Pot. XVII. died at the Age of sixty four Years at
Selinapte, from his death called Trajanopolis; was exceedingly Valiant,
Magnificent, Just, Liberal, Benign, Eloquent, (but either for Laziness, State,
or his squeaking (and not very intelligible) Voice, had another to speak for
him in the Senate,) a very great Soldier. Patient and Painful; was taxed for
Drunkenness, Lust, and Ambition of Honor, which made him be called Wall-Flower,
because so many Inscriptions of his Name upon Buildings. His Medals very many.

His Head with an ordinary Inscription, Osyris, or the Sun with a Peach upon
his Head, and a Stag (to intimate his Swiftness) in his Hand. (...). LI I.
Koptika was a Prefecture in Egypt.

His Head an ordinary Inscription, his Pillar with an Owl on the Top, an Emblem
of Vigilance, Providence and Wisdom.

A Ship with Soldiers in a Storm, and Trajan standing in the Sea calming it,
etc. showing the miserable Condition of the Commonwealth when Trajan undertook
it.

Trajan under the shape of Hercules the Erymanthean Boar, the Club, as if
Trajan were a new or second Hercules. So he is also represented as Euthymius
the famous Locrian Wrestler, and deified for it, drawn in a Chariot by four
Horses, as the Cities were wont to bring home (breaking down a part of their
Walls for them) their Citizens when Victorious in their Games.

Divi Nerva and Trajanus Pat [res] For Trajan did extremely honor his Father
Trajanus, who had obtained a great Victory against the Parthians, calling him
Divus, erecting Statues, a triumphal Arch unto him, and coining many Medals
with his Name.

Arabia with a Camel; in one Hand a Branch (it should seem) of a
Frankincense-Tree, or perhaps Schoenanthe the best Food of the Camel; in the
other a Calamus Odoratus: Never wholly conquered but by Trajan, who made it a
Province, and endeavored to bring it under the Roman Laws.

Italia, presenting two Children to Trajan, and underneath Alim. Ital. many
People abstaining from marriage because of the difficulty of Educating their
Children; the Emperor took upon him that Charge, and maintained at least five
thousand of them in Italy. At Alexandria a Woman having five Children at one
Birth he took Charge of them all; and the next year he returning thither, she
had three more, all which he maintained also.

Parthia Capta, a Trophy between two Captives, in Memory of Trajan's great
Victories there, where he took Susa it self the chief City, and in honor of
which Conquest Hadrian instituted Games every year called Trajanalia; which
continued a long time, probably till after Constantine the Great.

An Athlete between two Goddesses. Filinus, who was an excellent Athlete of
Cos, and won twenty four Prizes at the Olympique and other Games. This was
coined by the Coans in honor of Trajan, to signify that he had won as many
Victories over his Enemies, as their brave Athlete had: So the Locrians called
him Euthymius.

Diana winged, Shooting, drawn in a Chariot by two Centaurs, and
Trajan-Hercules marching before Diana drawn in a Chariot by a Lion and a Boar;
both stamped in his honor of giving liberty to Hunt in the Circensian Games and
other where, which by the former Emperors were forbidden. The Centaurs taught
Diana to Hunt; and they who are born under that Sign are supposed to have great
power over Beasts: or, that Trajan-Hercules (as Hercules was said to do)
brought Diana from the banks of Ister (Danubius) where she used to Hunt; and
where he was favored by her in his Dacick Wars, to Rome, to inspire the Skill
and Dexterity of Hunting into the Romans.

Imp. Nervae Traj., etc. Diana sitting naked betwixt two Soldiers standing with
a Child in one Arm. (...) On the same Medal Latin and Greek, which is very
rare. Dictynna was a Nymph, companion of Diana; afterward taken for Diana her
self, and so worshipped. The two armed Figures intimate perhaps the Pyrrhichian
manner of Dancing invented in Creet either by one Pyrrhus, as Pliny says, or
by the Curetes or Coribantes.

A Croissant with a Star between her Horns. B(...)ZANTIN(...)N (...)T ((...))
The Byzantines (Constantinopolitans) being besieged by Philip of Macedon, he
endeavored to take the City by a Mine in a dark, cloudy, rainy Night: but upon
a sudden the Moon broke forth, dispelled the Clouds and discovered his Men,
(some add also that the Dogs about the Town by their barking advertised the
Citizens) and after the Moons setting, the Morning Star shined so bright that
Philip could not do any thing that Night, and afterward raised his Siege and
went away: Whereupon the Byzantines grew very Devout toward the Moon, which
they called Hecate; to which Dogs also are Sacred, and took the Moon for their
Devise.

The Front of an ancient Temple with a Semicircle before it, and four Pyramids;
betwixt the two middlemost a kind of Pyramidal Figure, which was of Venus
Paphia, for there she was worshipped under that form.

Clem. Alexand. Strom. 1. says that the Ancients, before they had the Art of
Statue-making, worshipped Pillars as their Gods, citing a Passage out of the
Author of Phoronis to this purpose,

Callithoe, excelsi clavem quae gest at Olympi
Junonis, quae velleribus festaque Corona
Reginae ornavit Sublimem prima Columnam.
and out of the Author of Europaea, that the Statue of Apollo Delphicus was a
Pillar. Tacitus, Maximus Tyrius, and others, say that the Statue of Venus
Paphia was a Pillar ending ina Pyramid. The same is said to be done by the
Phaenicians to their Gods, Eusebius. de praepar. Evang. l. 1.

Jupiter sitting, etc. (...) (that throws down Thunder) (...) of Cyrrtum in
Syria, A Vase or Water-pot with a Woman's Head coifed, etc. The Picture of
Canopus the Egyptian God, who was supposed to govern the Water; and was much
worshipped in Egypt: and when the Persians came with their Fire, the Egyptians
made a Canopus full of holes which they stopped with Wax, and filled the Vessel
with Water; the Wax being melted with the Fire, the Water running out quenched
the Fire, and so Canopus got the Victory over the Persian God.

A Temple and within it a Mountain, under it (...) for the People thought that
the Mons Casius was indeed Jupiter. (...). Seleucensis Pieriae Syriae. Seleucis
was that part of Syria called Tetrapolis.

Many of his Medals also are reversed with his Pillar set up by S. P. Q. R. in
honor of him for his Dacick Victories; it is still extant at Rome in the same
Place where erected then. It was designed by Julio Romano at the Expense and
Command of Francis I. King of France, who had an Intention to have such another
cast in Brass for himself in France. Fr. Villamena Engraved it, and Mutianus
first, and afterward Ciaconius. Interpreted it.

His only Wife was Plotina, a very Grave, Prudent, Just, Moderate, Courageous
Woman and Virtuous. Pliny calls her Sanctissimam. The first time she entered the
Palace, she said openly, Talis huc ingredior, qualem me egredi opto: As Trajan
long time refused to be called Pater Patriae, so she with her Sister Marciana
to be called Augustae. Hadrian did extremely honor her, whereupon she disposed
Trajan to adopt him his (Cousin) rather than her own Cousin; he built Temples,
made Hymns, and mourned extremely for her.

Pudicitia. The Empress holding her Scarf or Veil by the ends, whereas
ordinarily Pudicitia is described a Woman veiled.

His Sister Marciana, like him in Countenance and Manners, lived in the Palace
in wonderful Concord with him and Plotina: He built in honor of her
Marcianopolis in Mysia, upon occasion that her Maid going to take up Water out
of the River there, let fall her Pitcher of Gold, which a good while after she
took up Swimming upon the Top. For Trajan apprehending there the Presence of
some God, built that City, and called it by the name of his Sister. She had a
Daughter called Matidia, who was also Augusta, and had two Daughters, Sabina
married to Hadrian, and Matidia the younger called the Aunt of Antoninus Pius.
She seems to be the Mother of Ulpia Gordiana, the Mother of the eldest
Gordianus. Matidia was also deified.

Pietas Aug. Matidia with her two young Daughters. Where Piety signifies the
love of Parents toward their Children; though ordinarily of Children toward
Parents.

CHAP. VIII. Of Hadrianus.
1. HAdrianus was born A. C. 77. reigned 20 Years, eleven Months X died aged
Sixty three Years X was in all Arts and Sciences the most knowing Man of his
time; but withal so Ambitious, Envious and Jealous of the Reputation of his
Knowledge, that he could not brook any one should pretend to equal him; and for
this cause some he put to Death. Historians report him, yet he seems not to
have been, of a Cruel Disposition; for tho he put many to Death, yet there were
also many Conspiracies against him, especially the first and last Years of his
Reign. And to Nigrinus (one of those he executed) he designed the Succession in
the Empire, and de facto adopted his Son in Law AElius. He was, or at least
seemed to be, extremely Devout toward the Gods; forbidding all Human
Sacrifices; building many Temples, and in many of them placing no Statues
(which Temples were called Hadriania,) some to our Lord Jesus Christ, as
admiring his great Miracles. He forgave the People a great Sum of Money due to
the Exchequer, of which a Medal -- Reliqua vetera Sestertium novies millies
abolita: And giving great Congiaria, was called by the Senate, Optimus
Maximusque Princeps. By a great Bleeding at the Nose he fell into a Dropsy,
which he first assayed to cure by Magic, which not succeeding, he afterward
betook himself to the Physicians; being in very great Pain he grew Mad, and
commanded many Senators to be slain, who were saved by Antoninus called
therefore Pius. For the recovery of his Frenzy, he went to Oreste, which he
therefore called Hadrianopolis. He visited almost all the Provinces of the
Empire, on foot, with great Labor and Pains, going always bare-headed: To many
of them he was a Benefactor, as appears by his Medals, especially to Africa,
where, it seems, his Father was Pro-praetor; whose Figure, with his Mothers
Domitia Paulina's, seems to be that with two Heads, Divis Parentibus.

A Crescent with one Star; the Star signified the Soul of his dear Antinous,
which he supposed, and said he often saw in the Moon; with the Seven Stars,
perhaps an Emblem of his happy Marriage to Sabina.

Adrian, on his right Hand an Eagle reaching him a Scepter, as from the Gods,
Providentia Deorum. Also another with a Thunder, alluding to a Dream, which he
had at Antioch two nights before his Adoption, that he saw Fire descend from
Heaven upon his Body, which compassed, but harmed or frighted him not.

An Head Radiant Oriens, signifying that the East conspired and united at his
Adoption. Also the East was the place whence their Gods came, and there were
born; and therefore the Temples opened toward the East, that the Gods might
come in; and at Noon none entered their Temples, because then they were full of
Gods, and they prayed toward the West. The Christians quite contrary prayed
toward the AEquinoctial East, as Sidonius says. They thought also that the Sun
arose out of the East, and run his course only to gratify their Emperors;
thence those Inscriptions, Soli invicto Comiti. Sol Dominus populi Romani. Sol
invictus pacator Orbis, etc.

A Woman with two naked Children Sacrificing on an Altar before. Hadrian.
Adventus Aug. Judaeae; signifying that by his coming he forced the Jews to
Sacrifice to his Gods, and not Circumcise their Children; for he made a most
Cruel (the only one he made all his time) War against them, and destroyed them
exceedingly, rebuilding Jerusalem, and calling it AElia.

A Woman sitting, etc. Britannia and exercitus Britannicus; and -- Restitutori
Britanniae; signifying his settling of Britanny in Peace, and his building the
Wall of Eighty Miles from New Castle to Carlisle, to defend them from the Scots
and Picts.

Hadrian traveling through diverse Provinces, settled and ordered their Affairs
quietly and peaceably; therefore we see upon many of them, Restitutori, etc. a
Woman kneeling, and him in Robes of Peace taking her by the Hand; with some
mark to know the Province by, as for Achaia the Herb Oreoselinum in a Vase;
being that wherewith Hercules was much refreshed after his killing the Nemean
Lion, and wherewith they crowned the Victors in the Nemean Games. So Adventus
Augusti.

Terra Stabilita, an Husbandman with a Plow and Anchor, to show not only the
Firmness of the Peace, but that by his Piety he had obtained that there should
not be so many Earthquakes; which in the beginning of his Reign were very
frequent.

Sabina holding a Palm-branch, and two Children at her Feet, Hilaritas P. R.
the People wishing Fecundity to Sabina; tho we read not that she had any
Children. The Palm Tree was accounted Happy, to cause Fecundity, and to help
Women to an easy Delivery. Hilaritas was chiefly for the Birth of Children,
and Hilaria the Feasts public for Great Men's, Hilariae private for the Birth
of Common Men's, Children.

Hadrian Hercules with a Club, and three Apples, and a Navigable River,
intimating that Hadrian like Hercules (worshipped at Gades near to which
Adrian's Family was) went up and down settling Peace and Concord, and taking
all Thieves and Robbers out of the World; the River is Baetis.

A great Serpent or Dragon (which is Osiris, and signified the River Nile) with
a Caduceus, as being the cause of the Felicity of Egypt, and a Sistrum.

The God Lunus, etc. Nisae(...)n, a City in Armenia near to Mesopotamia, where
this God was worshipped, as making his worshippers Masters of their Wives,
whereas they thought those that worshipped Dea Luna were under the Power of
their Wives.

A Crown like Flames issuing out in certain places in the midst. A, conceived
to be Corona Antinoa, in Honor of Antinous, made of the Buds of Lotus and
Palm-leaves.

Isis Suckling Orus with a Water-pot behind her. Isis and Osiris being taken
for the Genius's of Nature, and its Fecundity, which consists in Moisture, they
always carried in their Procession a Pot of Water; as the Romans had a Vessel
they called Praefericulum.

The armed Head of Pallas probably stamped at Athens, which City being ruined
by the Wars, he restored, repairing their Walls, their Temples, building an
Academy and other Temples; for which the People rendered him all the Honor
they possibly could; amongst the rest erected a great Colossus of him, and
called a Colony of theirs in Delos, Novae Athenae Hadrianiae.

2. Hadrian's Wife was Julia Sabina, with whom he did not well agree, accusing
her of Morosity, Frowardness, and ill Humor; tho she seems indeed to have been
a Virtuous and Grave Woman, but much offended with his wicked and horrible Love
to Antinous his Boy. She had no Children, endeavoring not to have any, left
(as she said) she should of that Man breed a Plague to Mankind.

(...). A Temple with a Semicircular (...), in the midst the Umbilical Image of
Venus Paphien, on the top a Crescent with the Morning Star, as to the Moon; on
either side a Dog watching as to Hecate or Diana; intimating that Sabina was
Diana for Chastity, the Moon for Brightness and Beauty, and Venus for Fecundity.

(...), Two Fishes which seem to be the Pelamides, or young Tunny-fish before a
Year old, which is there caught the best and in great abundance.

Of his Sisters none named but Paulina married before Trajans Adoption to C.
Jul Servilius Ursus Servianus. She died before Adrian; not any Medals mentioned
of hers, nor that she was called Augusta.

3. He had a Favorite and Ganimede called Antinous, born in Bithynium or
Claudiopolis the Capital City of Bithynia (for whose sake he favored much that
Country) who (as some say) to avert some Dangers fore-signified by certain
Dreams and Prodigies, from the Emperor; or (as others) that the Emperor might,
by his Intrails, be resolved in some difficult matter, was content to be
Sacrificed; for such Affection of his, Hadrian heaped upon him all the Honors
he possibly could; calling Flowers, Stars, Cities, Games, Sacrifices by his
Name, and building Temples to him.

(...).. (...). A young Man (seeming to be Antinous) with winged Feet, and a
Pedum or feeding Staff, and sometimes a Caduceus (representing Mercury) and
with his right Hand pointing to a Cow; intimating, probably, the Descent and
Original of that wretched Boy, whom some call Philasius, and feign him to be of
the Progeny of Hercules.

Antinous's Head. (...).. an Upupa or Houpe in a Crown of Laurel. (...). That
was ordinarily a sign of Piety toward the Gods and Parents.

4. Hadrian being Sick, adopted L. Aurelius Ceionius Commodus Verus, who
afterward took the name of L. AElius Verus, it should seem for his Beauty; he
was Learned and of excellent Discourse, governed Pannonia with Reputation, but
his manner of living was Effeminate and Luxurious; being very Sickly he died
before Hadrian, leaving a Daughter (Fadia) and a Son L. Ceionius AElius
Commodus Verus, who afterward reigned with M. Aurelius.

AElius Caesar. Pannonia, presenting an Ensign or Cornet to him, lying along in
form of the River Danubius, intimating that that River was not advantageous to
them, but by his Aid.

Angeloni says, his Wives Name was Lucilla, and that it is she we see upon
Medals with six Children about her, with Faecunditas Aug. but this is not
likely that she should be Augusta and not her Husband; besides that no History
mentions it to be so.

CHAP. IX. Of T. AElius Hadrianus, Antoninus Pius, Aurelius Fulvius, Boionus
Antoninus, called before.
1. ARrius Son of Aurelius Fulvius and Arria Fadilla was born A. C. 87. reigned
twenty two Years, six Months; died aged Seventy four Years, six Months, A. C.
162. When Hadrian felt himself declining, and not knowing whom to choose, as he
was coming one day to the Senate, he saw this Antoninus sustaining his Aged and
Impotent Father, and conducting him into the Senate; with which Action Hadrian
was so much pleased, that he immediately adopted him, having no Relation before
to him or his Family.

He was the best of all the Emperors, of an excellent Understanding, Knowing,
Eloquent, Taciturn, but Cheerful; Skilful in governing, Courteous, Bountiful,
Moderate and Chaste. Tho he spent most of his time in the Country, yet he
governed the Empire very well, with great Vigilance, Justice, Activity,
Clemency and Prudence: Being blamed by his Wife for giving too little of his
own Inheritance to a Servant; he answered, Stulta, postquam ad imperium
transivimus, and illud, quod habuimus ante, perdidimus. He punished but one for
Treason, and forbad also to enquire of his Accomplices, and was very kind to his
Son. Either because of his Piety toward the Gods, or his observance of
Hadrian, or the saving of many Senators Lives whom Hadrian commanded to be
killed, the Senate gave him the Surname of Pius; which with the addition of
Felix (P. F.) the succeeding Emperors continually used. Magnifick Games called
Pialia were made in his Honor. He sacrificed in his own Person ordinarily every
day, blamed the Heathens for imputing the causes of public Calamities to the
Christians.

Genio Pop Romans It was not lawful to publish the name of the Genius of Rome as
long as it was a Commonwealth; but afterward the Emperors were esteemed the
Genius of it; and that they were animated by the Spirit of the Gods
immediately, for we see Genius Caesaris, by which they frequently swore. --
Genio Senatus it should seem, was coined in Honor of him, when he gave liberty
to the Senators to dispose of all their Goods by Will, whereas Caesar before
had restrained them to half, to the other half the Emperor succeeding.

Alexandria (the chief City of Egypt, and second of the Empire) holding in one
Hand either a Book (as the chief place for Learning) or some square Packet (for
Merchandise,) in the other Ibis (a black Stork that devoured their Serpents,
and was Sacred to Mercury.)

Laetitia Cos. IIII. (which was the Year when M. Aurelius espoused Faustina,
and gave great Donatives even to the Soldiers, made great shows, etc. as
appears by many of his Medals. Annona Cos. IIII. etc.) two Goddesses, the one
taller (which was Faustina the Mother, (for their Heroes they figured about a
third part taller than the ordinary Stature, and the Gods double to ordinary
Persons) holding in her Hand Ears of Corn; for whereas before her Death, there
was a great Famine, and presently after great Plenty, they attributed it to her
then deified, that she had obtained it for them of the Gods, hereupon the
Emperor gave the People a Congiary,) the other lesser, as being yet Mortal,
which was Faustina married to M. Aurelius, with a Ball in her Hand, because the
World was her Dowry, or Venus her Apple. This young Faustina was also after her
Death worshipped as a younger Ceres, her Mother being the Elder; and Ceres or
Corn is the great cause of public Joy.

Pietati Senatus, giving them thanks for their Decree of the Surnames of Pius
and Pater Patriae. His Head.. SPQR. A. N. F. F. Optimo Princip. that Annum
novum Faustum foelicem.

A Jupiter veiled over a Goddess (Juno) as flying and holding a Globe; over
either a Star signifying Antoninus and Faustina.

(...) a Jupiter; at Trallae he received the first Omen of his Empire, the
Priestess of Jupiter, instead of saluting him ave Proconsul, saying ave
Imperator.

(...), etc. a Mount, two Temples, etc. as described by Josephus called Hermon,
afterward Panium, because of a Famous Temple of Pan; under it the City Paneas
anciently called Dan, because of one of the Fountains of Jordan, afterward
rebuilt and called Caesarea Paneadis, and Caesarea Philippi, the two Temples
one to Augustus, the other to Antoninus.

(...). AEsculapius and Venus. (...) being quite ruined by an Earthquake, as
also a great part of Ionia sore shaken, Antoninus repaired them, and planted
Coos with a Colony of Milesians; therefore Antoninus and Faustina were meant by
the two Deities.

Cybele sitting upon a Rock, under her a Man with his Head and Arms above
Water, (...) (Flavia) (...) (Samosate) (...) (Sacrum asylum) (...) (legibus
suis vivens) (...) (Metropolis Comagenes.) The Man seems to be Euphrates the
Son of Arandax, who finding his Son Axurta sleeping one day near his Mother by
mistake slew him, and afterward drowning himself, gave name to the River
Euphrates.

(...). A Jupiter's Head with Serapis's Bushel, Ammon's Horns, and Osiris or
the Suns Beams, AEsculapius's Serpent twisted about a Pisis, or Neptune's
Trident like a Mercuries Caduceus, and a Cornucopia for Nilus. The NT. probably
Antoninus, as if he were acknowledged by the Egyptians to have been their
Serapis, or comprehending all the Gods of the Heathen.

(...). A Man on Horseback under him (...) perhaps for (...), one of the
Cabiri, Corybantes, or Idaei Dactili.

Antoninus's Head -- Antoninus Aug. Pius P P. TR. P. Cos. IV.. a young Child
swathed, newly born, not Faustina, for she was married when he was Cos. IV.
whose Mother seems there to represent Rhea or Matter Magna, with the Corybantes
or People with Instruments of Music, and Satyrs.

Antoninus's Head. (...), etc. Jupiter (or Pius in his shape) sitting upon
Rocks and raining out of an Horn upon a Statue lying along underneath, probably
some River, a Rock also, a little House or Temple, and a Cypress-Tree (...),
where note that it should seem I anciently in Latin was not pronounced like ee.
since the Greeks express it by (...), and Seneca Ep. 58. renders (...) by I.

Antoninus's Head, etc. a Woman naked sitting upon a Rock, with a Water-flower
in her Hand, and a Water-plant behind the Rock. (...). Marcus Sabinus Governor
of Philippopolis a City in Thrace under Mount Rhodope coined this: it should
seem by this that Rhodope was so called, not from a Queen of Thrace, but from a
Nymph Daughter of Strymon got with Child by Neptune.

2. His Wife was Annia Galeria Faustina, Sister to AElius Caesar, a foolish
lightheaded Woman, who denied her self nothing she desired; she died at thirty
six Years three Months old, she had two Daughters, one died in his Proconsulat
married to Silianus Lamia, the second was Faustina; and two Sons, one (of whom
a Medal with his Mother deified) Galerius Anton. the others name not known, as
neither the time of their Death, as neither whether the two Cornucopia's a of
Antoninus be meant of them or the two Sons of M. Aurelius.

Faustina, that has her Hair wreathed on the top of her Head is the Mother,
she that has it tied up behind the Daughter.

CHAP. X. Of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, and Lucius Aurelius Verus.
1. M Aurelius Antoninus Son of M Annius Verus, (Brother of AElius Caesar) and
Domitia Lucilla was born A. C. 122. reigned nineteen Years ten Days, died at
fifty nine Years old -- At Syrmium by the help of his Physicians (as some say)
in favor of Commodus. Was sickly, but exceeding Courageous, Laborious, Prudent,
Just, Mild, Learned, (in Philosophy especially) and Chaste. He put none to
death, but only banished them, for Treason: forbad Gladiators to kill one
another, and therefore blunted their Weapons. Whilst he was Caesar he wore not
Garments different from ordinary Persons, nor would suffer Fire to be carried
before him; his word was (...), All things flow from Above; and that he that
would live or govern happily must imitate the Gods. Very liberal toward all
Poor Persons, even the Christians, as appears by Capitolinus who calls them
homines novos: where see also who was Lucius Commodus Verus: He gave to
Hierapolis (which was almost wholly Christian) at one time three thousand
quarters of Coin. Yet held the Soul to be Mortal, and the Gods to have Bodies.
Notwithstanding his great Wars he never forsook his study of Philosophy, which
yet made him not at all morose.

Aurelius Caesar armed, riding upon a Sphinx, (the Emblem of Subtilty, Cunning
and Prudence, as also of Egypt) either as if by his Prudence he conquered
Barbarians, and all other his Enemies; or particularly some Exploit in Egypt.

A Woman (perhaps Faustina praying for the Health of M. Aurelius, or perhaps of
the whole Empire, which was in his time much afflicted with the Plague and such
Diseases) before the Altar of Salus, (another of AEsculapius) presenting a
little Cake (which they called Sanitatem; and being put into the hands of the
Idol, and taken out again, was accounted Sovereign for many Diseases) and a
small Vase it may be the (...) or poculum Sanitatis.

The Temple of Mercury upon four Hermes's: Over-head a Dog, a Cock, a Tongue,
Relig. Aug. for as the Inventor of Religion and Sacrifice was accounted the
Genius of Piety and Religion; with a Purse, to show the plentiful Provision for
the Entertainment of his Temple, by the Bounty of the Emperors; A Dog,
(Fidelity) a Cock, (Vigilance) and a Tongue, (Perswasiveness) necessary to a
Pontifex. This God much worshipped by M. Aurelius.

(...). A King with a Diadem and Head-^e, not unlike an Imperial one: the name
of the Kings of the Osdroenians, Eddessenians, etc. which are parts of Arabia,
who seemed to be Christians, and are diverse of them called by the Fathers Viri
Sancti.

(...). The Emperor presenting an Eagle to Cybele. Attalus the Son of Polemon
the great Sophister, (probably) sent to the Emperor in behalf of his Country
ruined by Earthquakes, obtained great Succor; for he repaired them and many
other of those Asian Cities, which worshipped the Goddess Cybele.

(...), Two Athletes with Cestus's: probably some Eminent Persons the
Lacedaemonians (a People above all other addicted to Martial Exercises) sent to
the Emperor; who also practiced those Athletick Exercises very much, to
strengthen his Health, as he did also Hunting and Hawking, as his Father loved
Fishing. If it be inquired what kind of Hawking was then in use among the
Romans, whether like our Modern? and of what Continuance that has been? I
answer, that it is out of my design to enter into such Discourses; but that I
am informed that a Person of Quality of this Nation has an ancient Greek
Author of this Subject ready for the Press.

2. His Wife was Faustina, a very beautiful and sprightly, but a vile
abominable Woman for Lasciviousness, and all other Wickedness; which yet either
her Husband was ignorant of, or would not be informed, or dissembled; for in
his Book he commends her much, and when she died bewailed her in a most
extraordinary manner, as if he had never understood Philosophy; and afterward
deified her, for which Actions he is justly censured. He had by her six
Children as appears by a Medal of Faustina with two in her Arms, and four about
her: No Son attained to Age save Commodus, Sextus Annius Verus younger than
Commodus died at the Age of seven Years, by the unskilful cutting of an
Imposthume behind his Ear, his Father punished not, but comforted the
Physicians, and mourned for him only five days. There are Medals of him.

Antonius Geminus, Twin with Commodus, died at four Years old.

Annia Cornificia, Sister to M Aurel. married Numidius Quadratus, by whom she
had a Son of the same name, to whom M. Aurelius left his Mothers Inheritance;
he was put to death by Commodus.

Lucilla married L. Verus. Fadilla put to death by Caracalla, of the rest
little known.

Veneri Victrici. Faustina (as Venus) half naked holding M. Aurel. (as Mars)
lest he should ^o to the Wars; or else getting him to her self from Fadia the
Daughter of AElius Caesar.

Fortunae muliebri, to which she was much devoted, her Temple four Miles out of
Rome, whither went only such as were Univirae, and offered a Crown.

Soeculi felicitas: Two Children upon a Bed. When Male Children of a good House
were born they carried them into the Temple of Juno Lucina, and laid them upon
a Bed of the bigness of that Hercules lay in when he slew the Dragons; for an
Omen of their future Prowess.

AEternitas. Faustina carried upon the Wing of a Victory, or Minerva, or
perhaps Diana Lucifera, into Heaven after her Consecration.

AEternitas. Faustina of a grand and divine Stature set between two Heroines,
or lesser Goddesses; probably her own and Husband's Sister both installed
amongst the Demi-Goddesses, as coming to accompany her to Heaven.

(...), a City of Thrace gratifying the Emperor for settling their Peace, by his
Victories over their Neighbors.

Isis and Anubis, Dog-headed, whom the Egyptians conceived the chiefest God and
Goddess, intimating Faustina and Aurelius.

(...), Certain Quinquennalian Games celebrabrated at Actium, perhaps renewed
by Aurelius.

3. Lucius Aurelius Verus, (called also Commodus before his Adoption) Son of
AElius Caesar was born A. C. 129. reigned about eleven years, and died of an
Apoplexy about forty two years old: He was a Foil to M. Aurel. being Rash,
Heady, Light headed, Prodigal, Voluptuous, a Mocker, so much given to Whoredom,
that at the request of a common Strumpet he cut off his Beard which he had so
carefully nourished, easily drawn and ordered by his Servants. At first he was
not so bad as after the Parthian War, which he finished chiefly by his
Lieutenants. M. Aurelius notwithstanding with great Prudence covered his
Faults, and commended in him what was good, i. e. to love his Servants, not to
dissemble, not to be bloody.

Rex Armenis datus, They say his Name was Soeinus ejected first by Valogesus,
who flying to the Romans was made a Senator, and afterward re-established;
which perhaps is showed by his Roman habit.

Col. Patr [ensis rather than Patricia] an Athlete, sacrificing and laying his
left Hand upon a Term, (or Pillar with a Head upon it) as sacrificing to the
God of Games, for Patrae was a City of Achaia, the Theater of Games, to which
Verus was much addicted.

The Statue of Jupiter in the shape of Verus upon the top of a Mount flaming on
one side and Trees on the other, perhaps Vesuvius: it may be the Inhabitants
thereabouts worshipped him to deliver them from the danger of those Eruptions;
or else as Jupiter (...) or President of the Mountains, upon the top of which
the Heathens used to worship their Gods.

Venus (...), or on Horseback. (...). i. e. Anatho a holy Town of the Isle
Prosopites, (an Island made by Nilus) and an Asylum.

His Wife was Lucilla the Daughter of M. Aurelius, whom he married in his
Parthick Expedition; her Father promised to accompany her into Syria, though he
went no farther than Brundusium; but her Husband, lest M. Aurelius should be
witness of his Debauches, met her at Ephesus, where they were married. But
before that she was possessed with the Devil, which could not be ejected by any
but Abertius Bishop of Hierapolis; to which City after the Ejection, the
Emprors gave that great Largess of Corn. After Verus's death she was married to
Claudius Pompeianus, a very virtuous and worthy, though mean, Person; but she
maintained her quality of Emperess, till Commodus being displeased with her, at
first banished, and afterward killed, her. She was a Daughter worthy such a
Mother, such an Husband, such a Brother.

Her Head (...).. Ceres sitting (...). Dio speaks in Trajan's time of Manus a
King of the Arabians beyond Euphrates between the Osroeni and Armenia Major,
possibly this Mannus might be his Son or Grandchild. For Verus sending Avidius
Cassius against Vologaesus a near Neighbor to this Mannus, Mannus being
afrighted, cajoled the Empress then being at Antioch with her Husband,
pretending friendship to the Romans for fear.

4. Under M. Aurelius and Verus arose up a Rebel, Avidius Cassius, a Man of
many, especially Military, Virtues; who endeavored to engage in his quarrel the
Legions of Asia, Syria and Egypt; pretending first to restore the ancient
popular Government, but afterward taking upon him the Title of Emperor, he was
slain after three Months by common Consent of the Armies and People,
wonderfully affectionate to the Virtues of M. Aurelius.

CHAP. XI. Of Commodus,
1. COmmodus was born A. C. 162. reigned 12 Years nine Months, and was
strangled at the Age of thirty one Years. In his Impurity, Brutishness,
Cruelty, Injustice, Gluttony, Drunkenness, Impiety equalled Caligula, Nero,
Vitellius and Domitian. He murdered his Wife, his Sister, his Cousin German,
his Aunt, all his Friends and twenty four of the eminentest Persons of the
Empire. He violated his Sisters, the Vestal Virgins; had three hundred
Concubines, and as many

This his Incontinency was augmented by the Ointments and Medicines he took to
preserve him from the Plague; which reigned violently in his time. He defiled
the Temples and Altars with Murder and Lust, gave his mind to be a Gladiator,
Charioteer, Pimp, etc. Yet in hate to the Senate Severus afterward made him a
God.

Jupiter laying his Hand on the Shoulder of Commodus. I. O. M. Spon [sori] Sec
[uritatis] Aug [usti].

Col [oniae] Aug [ustae] f[elio] Cermeno, in another Germeno, a Wolf suckling
two Children. Rome being much desolated by a great Plague, Commodus repeopled,
and would have it called Colonia Commodiana. Now Rome was composed anciently of
four Villages* Romula, Velia, Germalum and Forum; this Germalum called also
Germanum, was (as Plutarch notes afterward called Cermanum, Cermenum; which it
seems Commodus stored with People.

Commodus with a Lion's Skin L. AE L. Aurel. Commod. P. F. Herculi Romano Aug.
for amongst other Madnesses of this Sot, this was one, that he would be called
and clothed as one of the Gods, so

Anubis Nobilitas Aug. P. M. he said Anubis was his Ancestor at whose
Ceremonies he presided, and was masked like Anubis with his Dog's Head, with
the Snout whereof he used to beat the bare Scalps of such as went nigh him.

Crispina in the habit of Fortuna Victrix, before her a Basket of Fruits,
behind three Children, one swathed, as if Crispina were the cause of all his
good Fortune; that she had any Children is known only by her Medals: It seems
they lived not long.

Africa and Egypt giving a handful of Corn to Commodus habited as Hercules
Romanus, setting his foot upon a Prow. For by his Negligence there being a
great Famine, and the People mutining, he built a Fleet to fetch Corn out of
Afrrick and Egypt.

The Goddess Salus (Daughter of AEsculapius) raising up a Man. Salus generis
humani, seems to initiate the recovery of Commodus (and in him of the whole
World) from some great Disease.

Apollini Monetae, perhaps referring to this, that Commodus inspired by him,
had put to death Cleander, the Cause of the Dearth and Poverty.

(...). Telesphorus, (a God of Health, and Son or Grandchild of AEsculapius)
upon an Altar in a Capuch, and his Hands (as if cold) under a long wide
Vestment, as he is usually represented.

(...). Juno the Goddess of the Samians, Juno Pronuba, or as she presided at
Marriages, therefore is she habited like a new married Woman. This seems coined
in Honor of the Marriage of Commodus.

Bacchus drawn by four Elephants, (...), calling Commodus, as it were, their
new Founder.

An Eagle and a Serpent. (...). Nicomedia being horribly ruined with an
Earthquake, the People had a design to build it in another place over against
the ancient Situation. As they were therefore Sacrificing, an Eagle came and
took the Head of the Sacrifice off the Altar, and carried it on the top of a
Rock on the other side of an Arm of the Sea, a vast Serpent appeared at the
same time, which Swom to the same place; which the Inhabitants following there
built their City.

2. His Wife was Crispina the Daughter of Brutius Praesens, whom having taken
in Adultery, he slew.

A naked Woman stooping down with a Laurel branch in her Hand, and setting her
Foot upon I know not what Colo. Aug [usta] Troas: Troas was called Alexandria
from Paris the Son of Priam; and Antigonia, Antigonus re-peopling it; and was
situated between Mount Ida and the Sea. The Figure seems to be of Herophile the
Sybil in her posture of Prophesying, standing upon a Stone, and Laurel in her
Hand; which Herophile lived a great part of her time at and was buried near,
this Alexandria. From whence she was called Phrygia, Trojana, Hellespontica,
Gergithea, Marpessa, Erythrea, (from Marpesses called Erythrea, because of the
red Soil) Ancyrana, and Delphica; from the several places of her Abode and
Prophesying.

CHAP. XII. Of Helvius Pertinax, Didius Julianus, Pescennius Niger, and Clodius
Albinus.
1. P. Helvius Pertinax, Son of Helvius Successus, Son of a Freed Man, was born
A. C. 127. reigned about four Months, died aged 67 Years four Months, more or
less, slain by the Praetorian Soldiers, his Guards. He was very Prudent,
Learned, Eloquent, Valiant, Constant, of a present Spirit, Moderate, Just, so
Frugal that he seemed Avaritious. A very skillful and experienced Soldier; was
very averse from receiving the Empire, put upon him by the Murderers of
Commodus; In the Senate preferring others before himself, hindering his Wife as
much as he could from being called Augusta, and his Son from being Caesar;
saying, That it was sufficient that himself reigned against his will. Whether
discouraged by his obscure Birth, his old Age, or the Licentious Times, is
unknown. He endeavored with great Labor, Vigilance, Courage and Dexterity, to
settle the Commonwealth in good order; repressing the Insolences of the
Soldiers, banishing and punishing all the Ministers of Tyranny, bestowing the
wast and untilled Grounds upon such as would husband them; saying, That those
Possessions were the Commonwealths, not the Emperors; taking away illegal
Taxes; selling all Commodus's Superfluous and Luxurious Statues, Eunuchs and
Household Stuff to pay a Largess to the Soldiers and Citizens; recovering vast
Sums of Money which Commodus had sent to the Barbarians to buy Peace of them;
retrenching the Expenses of his House. And it is almost incredible what
Reformations he made in those few Months of his Reign.

His Head. Imp. C. P. Helvius Pertinax Aug.. A Woman with a Cornucopia and a
Tessera, such a one as they used in their Largesses. Civibus Liberatis. Either
from the Tyranny of Commodus; the People as they met any Senator crying out
Age, Age, Salvus evasisti, vicisti; or because People being very much
necessitated for want of Corn, himself went by Sea to hasten home the Corn that
was sent for.

2. His Wife was Fl. Titiana, of a loose and wicked Behavior, which is the
Reason he would never permit her to be called Augusta, therefore also few
Medals of her; besides he was enamoured of Cornificia his Concubine, but not to
the Prejudice of any one. He had by his Wife diverse Children, amongst the rest
a Son called Pub. Helvius Pertinax, whom he educated as a private Person, at
his Father's House, at School, etc. nor suffered him to use the Title of Caesar
the Senate gave him; after his Father's Death and Consecration he was made his
Priest, and afterward Consul, and was at last murdered by Caracalla, for
having called him Geticus after the Murder of his Brother Geta.

DIS Custodibus. A Fortune setting her Stern upon a Globe; either intimating
the Golden Fortune, which was solemnly carried into the Palace of the new
Emperors; or else some Statue of Fortune, erected by him in Honor of the Gods
that so protected him.

Col. Hell. Colonia Helvia, of which two are mentioned, one on the Promontory of
Lilybeum in Sicily; the other in Piceno. Two Hercules's with their Clubs; the
one supposed the Divine Hercules, the other Pertinax. It was taken as an Omen
of the Empire, that Commodus that day he was slain gave to Pertinax his Club to
hold wherewith he acted Hercules.

3. M. Didius Severus Commodus Julianus was born A. C. 134. reigned two Months,
six Days, and was beheaded by the command of Severus at the Age of sixty Years,
four Months, four Days. The Praetorian Soldiers having murdered Pertinax,
retired into their Camp, and proclaimed, that he, who would give most, should
by them be made Emperor; which Julianus hearing, made them such offers as
contented them; whereupon they presently saluted him Emperor, and conducted him
to the Palace, where seeing the Frugal Provision made for Pertinax, he scorned
it very much, and commanded great Preparations to be made; intending to live
more like Commodus, to be thereby more grateful to the Soldiers; to content
whom also he took his Name. But hereby he incurred the hate of the People,
(whom at first he despised, but afterward slew many of them by his Soldiers)
and the Senate; where entering, he made an insolent and foolish Oration in
Commendation of himself. And as he invaded the Empire unworthily, so he carried
himself laschly, and negligently, especially when the People first cried up
Pescennius Niger, and afterward Sept. Severus, to whom he offered at last to
be Partaker of the Empire; which Severus refused, who sent his Soldiers
disguised into Rome, who slew Julianus after he was condemned by the Senate.

His Wife was Manlia Scantilla, who together with his Daughter Didia Clara,
(married to Cornelius Repentinus her Cousin German) both of them styled by the
Senate Augustae, incited the old Man to take upon him the Empire. Little notice
is taken of them by Historians; and but few Medals of them.

3. C. Pescennius Niger Justus Son of Annius Fuscus and Lampridia, was born,
when and where not known; reigned about eight Months, and after many Battles
was slain by Severus about fifty eight Years old: was called Niger, because of
the Sun-burntness of his Neck and Face; the rest of his Body being very white.
Was very Sober, and so Chaste that he never accompanied his Wife but that he
might have Children by her. Rather plain, open and generous than cunning, yet
Wife and Prudent; he by Letters persuaded M. Aurelius to continue the Governors
of the Provinces five Years at least; that the Assistants of the Governors
should succeed them; that the Governors and their Counselors should have their
Salary duly paid them; saying, Judicem nec dare debere nec accipere. Was in
great Employments, which he discharged with great Honor. Was because of his
Valor, Virtue and Generosity, in the East called the Second Alexander.
Imitating the ancient Captains in the Discipline of War. His Wife, Children,
and whole Family were put to death by Severus.

Minerva Victrix. Minerva reaching Niger a Crown, and he offering her a Globe,
hereby acknowledging her for his singular Patroness. Probably he dedicated some
Statue to her in this Posture.

(...). (a City in Syria Euphratesiana) Niger, as AEsculapius, acknowledging
him thereby their Savior.

5. Decimus Clodius Albinus (called also Septimius by Severus when he made him
Caesar) Son of Ceionius Postumius Albinus, and Aurelia Messalina, reigned about
three Years, eight Months, killed himself being vanquished by Severus. Was
Hasty, Proud, Choleric, Active, Valiant; So bold a Gladiator that he was
called the Cataline of his Age. Very Lascivious, a horrible Eater, but little
Drinker. Grave, exceeding severe toward the Soldiers, Learned, and Eloquent.
Commodus would have made him Caesar, which he refused; but accepted afterward
from Severus, who honored him only to amuse him; sending at the same time five
Persons to kill him, whom Albinus compelled to confess by force of Torments.
Whereupon he went to fight Severus; and first defeated his Lieutenant Lupus:
and afterward encountered Severus himself near to Lions, where Severus's Party
being almost overcome, was restored by Laetus, who brought a fresh Army;
whereupon Albinus through Despair killed himself, and his Body was most
barbarously used by Severus.

Saeculo Frugifero Cos. II. (and another Saeculi foelicitas, much what the same
thing their chief Felicity consisting in Plenty). A Deity-raies about his Head
like Apollo, a Caduceus like and a Trident like Neptune. Probably the of the
Galls, which was the great Genius of the world, and therefore Author of
Fecundity; the Head is the Sun presiding over the Seasons of the Year, the
Caduceus's Wings represent the Fecundity of the Air, as the Serpents do the
Harmony of the Elements; and the Trident the Fruitfulness of the Water.

Another like the former, but the Head like Cybele, and an How instead of a
Trident.

(...) (Sidetens^um the Second City of Pamphylia, where it seems Albinus had
been Governor, and which Severus chose to himself) two Warriors joining hands,
Severus in Arms as Superior, the other without as Inferior.

(...) (Gaditanorum) a Temple and Hercules standing; being much worshipped
there. Albinus was an African, and had governed Spain. Gades two Islands, one
belonging to Africa, the other to Europe.

His Wife was Pescennia Plautiana, Daughter of Plautius Quintillus, whom
Severus slew. By her he had a Son Pescennius Primaeus, or Prinaeus slain with
his Mother (though before pardoned) by Severus; after the Victory over Albinus.

CHAP. XIII. Of L. Septimius Severus, Bassianus Caracalla, Septimius Geta, and
M. Opilius Macrinus.
1. L. Septimius Severus, Son of L. Sept. Geta, and Fulvia Pia, was born at
Laeptis, A. D. 147. reigned seventeen Years, eight Months, three Days; and died
at Sixty five Years, nine Months, twenty three Days old; was very Active,
Vigilant, Courageous, Indefatigable, Provident, (especially for Provision) of
good Understanding, and a Lover of Learning, tho himself not Learned; but
withal most horribly Ambitious, Traitorous, Cruel, Covetous and Vindicative,
more than any of his Predecessors, having put to Death Forty of the eminentest
Persons of the Empire at once, without hearing their Cause, upon Suspicion of
their Conspiring with Albinus; for which, being exceedingly hated, he
endeavored to engage the Soldiers to himself, by giving them many Gifts, and
Licenses to wear Gold Rings, to have Wives with them, etc. the cause of much
Misery and Ruin of the Empire, and even of himself; for as soon as Caracalla
came into his Youth, they began to cast their Eyes upon him, and neglect
Severus; made Caracalla Augustus in despite of him; which so heightened him,
that he continually sought to kill his Father, sometimes by Poison, sometimes
by the Sword; which so enraged the Gouty Old Man, that his Disease increased
exceedingly, and became so insupportable, that he would have killed himself,
but was hindered; and at last eat so enormously on purpose that he died upon
it, after he had in vain endeavored to punish his Son, whom he mortally hated.
Dying he said, Omnia fui, and nihil expedit.

Diis Auspicibus, etc. Col. II. Hercules and Bacchus with a Dog. Severus going
to fight in the East against Niger, purposing also to invade the Parthians and
Indians, Sacrificed to these two Gods, under whose Auspicia [Standards] of the
one, as a Victor over Tyrants, of the other, as over the Indians. Auspicia also
they called the Sacrifices they made the day of their entering their Office or
Employment. The Heroes anciently were said to have Dogs with them; both because
of their Fidelity, etc. and of their Divination; they attributing much to their
Barking, Howling or Fawning. Hercules's Dog, crushing a Purple Fish, discovered
to Hercules that excellent Die.

Saeculi felicitas, a Crescent with Seven Stars, showing the numerous Issue he
had; besides his Sons, two Daughters, and Grandchildren of Caracalla -- So
Julia between Caracalla and Geta.

So a Ship under Sail, showing the Commonwealth, after the Storms of Civil
Wars, sailed quietly.

Severus, Julia and his two Sons, before his going to Britanny reconciling
them. Geta with an Helmet, as being to have part of the Army under his Command.

Pacator Orbis, a young Head radiant; it was one of the Titles bestowed upon
him after the Parthick Victory; the Head is of Caracalla, and Sun mingled
together; Caracalla went with him in this Expedition.

Marti Statori; it should seem some Vow made to him, when in the Battle against
Albinus, the Soldiers running, and his Horse Slain, and himself on the Ground,
yet he rallied and conquered.

Libero Patri, a Bacchus; to whom he dedicated a great Temple.

(...) (certain Games first instituted in the Honor of Apollo, renewed in
Honor of Severus) (...). Two Earthen-pots upon a Table with two Palms; on the
Ground a Sacrificing Pot and five Apples, which seem to be the Prize contended
for. Many Medals made by the Perinthians in Honor of Severus, who after the
taking of Byzantium after three years Siege, bestowed the Privileges thereof
upon the Perinthians, to whom also, he subjected it with all its Territory;
insomuch that they styled their City Metropolis Europae. Tho afterward he
restored all to Byzantium.

(...) -- Abgarus King of the Edessenians confederate with Severus, and
assisted him exceedingly with his Archers against the Parthian.

(Civitas) (...). Honorat hac Statua (Minervae) Severum Aug.

(...). The Ilienses or Trojans accounted Severus their great Heroes.

(...). (The Praetor of the Smyrneans) about, an Oaken Garland; within which
(...). which were the first solemn Plays made in the Honor and presence of
Severus and his two Sons returning from the Parthick War; called (...) because
made at the common Charge of the Towns of that Province.

(...) of Egypt, where was a Famous Temple of Serapis, and the Sepulcher of
Osiris; Severus with a Bushel as Serapis. Caracalla with Rays as Osiris.

Concord holding in either Hand a Temple, one to Severus, another to his Sons,
built probably on either side of her Temple (...), certain Games of which we
know nothing.

A Temple of an Antic Fashion, I. O. M. H. Jovi optimo Maximo Helvio, i. e.
Pertinaci Jovi facto. Col [onia] Hell [via] in Piceno; eundem honorem etiam
Severo post mortem decernentes.

2. Severus's first Wife was Martia, by whom he had two Daughters married to
Probus and AElius two eminent Persons; it seems he loved her well, and
afterward erected a Statue to her.

His second Wife was Julia Domna, and so the Syrian and Asian Medals style her,
Surnamed Pia after she came to Rome in Honor of Fulvia Pia the Mother of
Severus. She was born at Emesa in Syrophaenicia, Daughter of the Priest of the
Sun named Bassianus. Severus, then Governor of the Lionnois in the sixth year
of the Reign of Commodus, understanding by his Astrologues (to whom he was much
given) that her Horoscope was, that she should be married to an Emperor, was
never quiet till he obtained her. She was very Beautiful, Learned and of great
Capacity; wherefore he consulted with her in all Affairs of Consequence, and
put her Name in all his Letters and Missives to the Senate: She also saluted
all as Severus and Caracalla did. He did not love her, being she was exceeding
Proud, Arrogant, Malicious, Cunning, Quarrelsome, and given to her Lusts and
Pleasures. Yet did he not control her, tho she conspired to take away his Life.
After the Death of Severus, she endeavored all she could to reconcile the two
Brothers; till at last Geta was killed by his Brother in her Lap, which also
she durst not resent, nor Lament, for fear he should kill her also; as he would
have done, had he not feared an universal Revolt. When Caracalla was slain by
Martialis the Friend of Macrinus, she fell into bitter passionate words against
Macrinus; and would have killed her self, but the Blow was not Mortal: But
after that Macrinus had treated her well, she took heart, till her words and
endeavors to get the Army from him were told him; then he sent her word to
retire her self whither she pleased; but she chused rather to starve her self
to Death. She had two Sons, Caracalla in the first year of her Marriage; to
whom she was never married, as some Historians report, and Geta.

Julia's Grandmother seems to be Varia Soaemias; her Father M. Jul Bassianus,
her Sister Julia Maesa called before Varia; who had two Daughters Julia
Soaemias and Julia Mamaea, by Julius Avitus Lupus. Soaemias married Varius
Marcellus, by whom she had Varius Avitus Lupus, called Elagabalus. Mamaea
married Genesius Marcianus Father of Alex. Severus. Marcellus and Marcianus
seem to be B others, Sons of Varius Marcellus Alexianus; and Severus
Alexander's Name was Alexianus Marcellus.

Foecunditas, the Goddess Tellus lying half along to show her Stability; and
not subject to Earthquakes as under Antoninus; four Children (the four Seasons)
about a Globe with Stars upon it, intimating Julia and her four Children, two
Sons and two Daughters.

Luna Lucifera, the Moon in a Chariot drawn by Horses, two by Oxen.

1. Matter Castrorum. 2. Matter Augg. 3. Matter Deum. 1. As Sacrificing to the
Ensigns. 2. As Cybele sitting on a Cube, which signifies Stability, drawn by
four Lions. 3. As Cybele sitting leaning on a Globe with two Lions beside her.

Matter Augg. Matter Sen[at^s] Matter Pat[riae.] an Inscription common also to
other Empresses.

Her Head (...). (...). Bacchus (who in Egypt is (...) Osyris the Husband of,)
and, Isis ^awn in a Chariot by a Male and Female Centaure, those Creatu^s being
accounted great D^inkers; on Isis's le^t Hand Cupid with a Torch; and Cissus,
Bacchus's boy Dancing; for when Cissus was Dancing with a Satyr, the Satyr
struck him down and wounded him mortally; whereupon Bacchus turned him into an
Ivy tree called therefore (...), and therefore also Sacred to Bacchus.

3. Bassianus called at first, and by a Nickname, Caracalla, but afterward M.
Aurelius Antoninus; was born A. C. 188. reigned six Years, two Months, five
days, and was killed by a Captain as he was at stool, in the Twenty ninth year
of his Age; was very unhansome, and therefore strived to make himself Terrible;
he was Proud, Violent, Impatient, Brutish, Furious, Bloody, Lightheaded,
Traitorous, Presumptuous, Covetous, Prodigal, Cowardly, Lustful; so that he had
in a short time, by his Lusts, wasted and decayed his Body, and made himself
incapable of Generation. He slew Twenty thousand Persons at one time, as also
almost all the Eminent Persons of the Empire; almost all the Inhabitants of
Alexandria (for having mocked him) and that most Treacherously: So did he also
to the Germans; under pretext of Marriage with his Daughter, he invited
Artabanus King of the Parthians, with his Nobility, into a great Plain, and
the^e slew most of them, but the King escaped. He designed to Murder his
Father, threatened his Mother, killed his Brother, his Father-in-Law Plautianus,
his Aunt Lucilla, his Governor and Kinsinan Papinianus; forced his Preceptor
to kill himself; for which he was so haunted, that many times he became
Furious, crying out upon his Father and Brother for Persecuting him, so much*
that none durst ^ame Geta to him. Tho his Baseness was such, that he durst not
put on Armor. (...) ^is Fear ^rced him to make his Clothes so like Armor,
that he was believed alwa^ ^o (...) A^med. As he passed through Macedoma he
imitated Alexander the Great, would be called Magnus, and set both their Heads
upon the B^sts of ^is Statues. At Ilium he would needs be Achilles.

Providentia, the Head of the Sun (to whom Providence is many times attributed
as well as Power) showing the Providence of Severus in ^aking Antoninus Caesar.

A Lion Radiant with Thunder in his Mouth, ^ems to signify the Lion, which, as
he was going against the Parthians, came down from (...) Mountain, and fought
against his Enemies (...) the head of his Troops. He also nourished (...) Tame
Lion, which he sed at his Board, ^d carried always with him, and which, when he
went forth that time he was slain, ^ould have stayed him in his Tent, so that
^e tore his Garment. A Lion also in this Figure, was worshipped at Heliopolis
(the Country of Julia) and thereabouts, as the God Genaeus or the Sun; a
certain (...), ^amed Eusebius, testifying that ^e saw a Globe (...) Fire
descending from Heaven, and that it ^as the God Genaeus.

Col. Caesarea A^ph. in the (...) o^ (...) a Goddess (...) like a Nun, (...)
^eems to be Diana Alp^a (...) (...).

Indulgentiae foecundae. Julia sitting as a Goddess, obtaining some Favor or
Indulgence for Carthage or some other City. v. g. some Privilege, Liberty,
Prerogative, etc. So the Romans expressing by this Medal, the great Benefit to
all the World by her Fecundity.

Caracalla Radiant (imitating the Sun) in a little Oval Chariot drawn by four
Horses; which was the manner in the Ludi Circenses in Honor of the Sun, whom
they fansied to be carried about the World in such a Vessel. With these and
suchlike Games was Caracalla mightily delighted.

AEsculapius with the little God Telesphorus, and a Ball; it seems coined for
the recovery of Caracalla from some great Sickness; and that he submitted his
Empire unto them.

(...), (i. e. Decreto Senatus.) An Eagle crowning Caracalla, etc. Severus, to
the great affright of the Senate, declared himself Son of M. Aurel. and
Caracalla took upon him the name of Commodus.

Two Gods, the one in^olded in the Scarf of the other, drawn by two Horses:
Probably Caracalla and Julia, represented by the Perinthians, in their Games,
as the Sun and Moon.

(...), (Zeugma was a strong City and Castle upon a Passage over Euphrates on
the other side, on the edge of a vast Solitude) a Temple on the Top of an high
Rock, to which there are two Asc^nts; probably erected by Vespasian, and
repaired by Caracalla at his return out of Parthia, or by the People in Honor
of him; with a Capricorn alluding to the Situation of the place; on one side
being a place fit for Goats only; the other for Fishes, i. e. Euphrates where
Venus turned her self into a Fish.

(...). A freed Man of the Emperor's made Governor of Magnesia a City of Ionia
at the Mouth of Maeander. A young Man (Caracalla) crowned with Olive, and a
Girdle (of Scarlet) sitting before an Altar, whereon is a Pineapple (Sacred to
Cybele) and about him three Coribantes beating their Sheilds: probably
intimating the Initiation of the Emperor in these Mysteries, for the Expiation
of his Fratricide (for which these Ceremonies were accounted very Efficacious,
two of the Coribantes having killed their Brethren) and Preservation from
Danger. This Emperor being very Timorous, and also much troubled in mind for
that Fratricide, of which yet (probably by being thus initiated) he was not
recovered.

(...). A Serpent with a Man's Head; the Serpent the Genius of Wisdom, etc. was
frequently worshipped, and particularly by the Nicomedians; the Egyptians
brought in the manner of joining Beasts with Men's Heads or Bodies.

Bacchus leaning upon, and caressing, Pan; in the other Hand a Capricorn (into
which Sign Pan was converted ^or transforming himself first into it, and
thereby showing the Gods the means to escape Typhon, who had almost surprised
them.) Pan is joined to Bacchus, both because he was brought up in the Cave
with him ( his Father leaving him there to keep him company) and that he was
the Best and Drunkennest Companion he had. Bacchus was worshipped chiefly at
Nysa in Egypt.

(...). An Instrument betwixt an Ox and Sheep, it may be to draw Water out of
the bottom of the Sea; as they say they did, their Island (s^uate in the
Phaenician Sea) being a Rock, and having no Spring being once besieged.

Geta in a Croissant, they imagined that the Souls of their (...) inhabited the
Air from the Earth to the Moon; but the Gods above the Moon and Sun; and that
the Goddesses, or (...), (...) passed through the Moon, and some pure and
innocent Men also as Geta. (But this ra^ly* for ordinarily they took their way
through the Sun.)

His Wi^ was (...) Plautilla Daughter of (...), the greatest Favorite the
(...) Empire ever saw, a Vile, Brutal, Traitor; that (...) one time caused a
hundred Citizens So^ (...) quality to be g^lded for Musicians ^o (...)
Daughter; he was slain for Treason in (...) his presence; and his Daughter,
with the two Children, thereupon banished, and afterward slain; a fit end for
so shameless and impudent a Woman.

Venus felix; Plautilla like Venus, giving an Apple to her Son young Antoninus.

4. P. Septimius Geta was born A. C. 190. reigned with his Brother ten Months,
fifteen Days, was slain by him in his Mothers Bosom, at the Age of Twenty three
Years; was like his Father Severe, but not Cruel, having (as some Authors say)
dissuaded him from putting to Death so many of the Friends of Niger and
Albinus, lest there should be more in Rome sorry than glad for their Victory.
Delighted much in Neatness, Gardens, learned and virtuous Men's Conversation;
acquitted himself well in the Wars; wherefore his Brother, jealous of the
Affection generally born to him* never rested till he had slain him, and to
satisfy the People he afterward Consecrated him.

Principi Juventutis. Geta on Horseback, looking back upon two others that
ride after him. The Ludus Trojanus invented by Ascanius and described AEneid. 5.

Castor standing by his Horse Cyllanus, intimating the Excellency of Geta in
that Exercise. Castor being the better Horseman, and Pollux the better Pugil.

Hercules and Juno. Dii Patrii, both the Gods of their Family and their Country
Tripolis.

(...) A Vase full of Apples (gathered out of the Gardens Sacred to Apollo) the
Rewards of the Victors at the Pythian Games at last, as an Oaken at first, and
afterward a (...) Garland. Palms were generally given to all Conquerors.

M. Opilius Severus Macrinus,
5. Of an Equestrian Family, was born A. C. 166. reigned fourteen Months, three
Days; at Fifty four Years old was overcome and slain by the Army of Elagabalus;
he was before he came to be Emperor, of good Government and Reputation; but
afterward very Luxurious, given to Pleasures and Vanities, to Plays, Foolish
Pastimes, and also Haughty (tho Rustical in his Behavior) giving difficult
Access, and seldom answering to the Satisfaction of Petitioners; withal
Unfortunate, being vanquished by Artabanus; of whom he bought a Peace with a
vast Sum of Money; yet he endeavored to reduce the Soldiers to their ordinary
Pay, and disaccustom them to those P^ofuse Largesses of Severus and Caracalla;
(...) which causes he was hated by them; and the hat^ed helped by the Practices
of Jul. Maesa, and her Money made them receive her Grandchild Elagabalus, and
destroy both him and his Son.

(...) -- An high Mountain of Rocks, underneath which a Temple and two gr^t
Stones. It should seem Caesarea of (...), o^ some place thereabouts, in the
(...) Maurimena, where he was born, and to (...) Temple seems dedicated.

(...) Macrinus in the form of Jupiter Urbanus.

His Wife was Nonia Celsa Daughter of one Diadumenus: little known of her but
her Unchastity; being supposed to have by another Man

6. M. Opelius Antoninus Diadumenianus slain with his Father at the Age of
twelve Years; perhaps so called, because he was born, instead of a Caul, with a
Diadem about his Head, so strong, that it could not easily be broken. Was
exceedingly Beautiful, Graceful and Ad^oit. Little else known of him.

(...). A Cow, probably the black Cow they Sacrificed yearly to Proserpina,
which being at Pasture when Mithridates besieged the Town, came in of her own
accord at the time of the Sacrifice; the Inhabitants intending to Sacrifice, in
her stead, a Cow of Paste. A Town Famous for Beautiful Women: Proserpina they
called Servatrix, because in the War with the Giants, she, with Hercules,
fought with them in that place, and saved their Town, which the Giants would
have destroyed.

CHAP. XIV. Of Varius Avitus Lupus, Elagabalus, Severus Alexander.
1. VArius Avitus Lupus, called to gain the Favor of the Soldiers, Bassianus;
they proclaimed him Emperor, and called him Antoninus. Afterward he called
himself The diverse writing of this name Elagabalus, Sec Seldom de Diis Syris
Synt. 2. c. 1.
Elagabalus, assuming the name of the God whose Priest he was Hered^tarily; was
born A. C. 205. reigned about five Years (as appears by his Medals) tho others
say but about three Years, eight Months, and was killed, dragged through the
Street^ into a Jakes, afterward cast into Tyber, aged 20 Years more or less.
He was a Devil in the shape of an Hermaphrodite, a Prodigy of Impiety, Villainy,
Lust, Debauchery, Gluttony and Cruelty. He brought his God to Rome, built him a
stately Temple, into which he transferred all the Mysteries and Holy things of
all the other Gods, as the Palladium, Fire of Vesta, Ancilia, etc. His Lust was
unexpressible, clothed himself like a Woman, was married to a vile Man, and
used as his Wife; would have made Hierocles, the vilest of his Rakehels,
Caesar, and his Successor; bathed himself in Sweet Waters; exhibited a Naval
Fight in a Lake of Wine, trod upon Plates of Gold; his Chamber-pots were of
Onyx, and his Close-stools of Massy Gold: Called the Senators his Slaves,
brought his Mother to sit and Sign amongst them; designed to set fourteen of
his Infamous Rout over the Fourteen Regions of the City, and other Pimps and
Coach-men, etc. over the Provinces, etc. sent to gather all the Cob-webs of
Rome, which amounted to ten thousand Pound weight. His (...), etc. was beyond
Apicius, betwixt five and six hundred Heads of (...) at a Meal, to pick out the
Brains; he (...) his Slaves with Peasant. He slew Euthymianus (...), his (...)
^ther, who took care of him, made him (...) etc. because he was a Prudent Man,
and the Soldiers refusing to kill him, he struck him first himself; took
hundreds of the best Men's Sons in Rome and Italy, to Sacrifice them by the
Advice of his Magicians; and as he said, that the Grief might be more general,
he took none but such whose Parents were alive. He would have slain his Cousin
Alexianus, whom he had adopted; but durst not for the Soldiers who guarded him,
and slew Elagabalus; who had provided Scarlet Silken Cords, Golden Daggers,
etc. to kill himself withal.

It is difficult to distinguish the Medals of Caracalla from those of
Elagabalus; Caracalla is made commonly Frowning, the other not so. Elagabalus
puts commonly Imp. on his Medals, the other not; says Leon-August.

A Temple with a Victory crowning Security, Col. Berytus.

(...). A Thunder bolt upon an Altar. Seleucia in Syria upon the Mediterranean
Seacoast; which Seleucus there built, having, as an Omen of its future
Felicity, a Thunderbolt there falling; and the Seleucians worshipped it as the
chiefest God.

(...) (a City in Jonia) Hercules in a Temple: there arrived a Bark with an
Image of Hercules between Chius and Erythrae, which either City strived to have
to themselves; a certain Man dreamed that the Erythraean Women should cut off
their Hair, make a Cable of it, and draw the Bark to their Town; which the
better sort refused, but the poor Thracian Women there did so, and drew the
Bark and Image which was there very much worshipped.

(...). The Sun or Orient figured as Elagabalus.. (...) The Goddess Salus, with
little Telesphorus behind her. (...) or Ad^d the Sun, Benos or Belus a King.
The Goddess Salus seems to be Margatis or Dea Syria.

His Wives were six, First Annia Faustina Great Grandchild to M. Aurel. Ant.
whose Husband Pomponius Bassus he ^ew to have her, and forbad her to mourn for
him.

The Marriage of Elagabalus with Faustina; the Sun (his God) between them.

2. Julia Cornelia Paula, he married her to have Children, and gave a great
Donative to the Senators, Equites, their Wives, the Soldiers and the People;
besides many Games, etc. after a while he repudiated her, because (as he said)
she had a Stain in a secret part of her Body.

Concordia, a Woman beyond them embracing them both, having their Hands joined
over an Altar.

(...), etc. Anazarbeorum Metropolitarum Amanicae Ciliciae anno secundo, a
Capricorn over a Globe.

Anazarbus, a famous City of Cilicia called Dio Caesarea, Caesar Augusta, and
afterward Justinopolis, being repa^ed by Justine as before by Augustus; in
Memory of which they coined his Capricorn.

3. Julia Aquilia Severa, a Vestal Virgin, but very beautiful, and for that
cause taken by him out of the Sanctuary; saying, That being a Priest and
marrying a Vestal their Children must needs be holy; yet after a while he cast
her off and married three others successively (whose names are lost) and took
her again at last.

2. The Mother of Elagabale was Jul. Sooemias, who educated him to that
Lasciviousness and Wickedness he afterward practiced, being her self so
inclined; after her Husband's death she took to her Assistance in all her
Affairs in Bed and elsewhere Eutychianus a Freed Man, who had been a Comaedian;
but a prudent Man whom Elagab. slew. She was very Proud, taking place in the
Senate, and Voting and Signing all Acts as did Maesa also; endeavoring by all
means to destroy Alex. Severus her Sisters Son, she drew Ruin upon her Self and
Son by the universal Hatred all Mankind bore to them. She erected a little
Council of Women, where they voted ridiculously concerning their Habits,
Ornaments, etc.

Venus Caelestis. Sooemias in habit of Venus, with a little Boy (Elagab.) and
the Sun upon a Globe, she publishing him to be the Son of Caracalla.

(...), a Goddess with a Wheel and a Rhombus, representing Fortune, Venus,
Nemesis or Hecate favorable to Sooemias and her Family. (...) Rhombus
accompanies Hecate, and was a certain Instrument whereby Magicians pretended
to work many Feats; whose help these People it seems used to get the Empire.

Julia Maesa, was called Maesa because Priestess of the Sun by them named Mese;
a Subtle, Prudent, and Sprightful Woman, was exceedingly enriched by living in
the Court of Severus and Caracalla, all which Macrinus to show that he was no
Enemy to the House of Severus, suffered her to enjoy, and inherit also her
Sisters Wealth; by which she afterward corrupted the Soldiers against
Macrinus. Under Elagabalus she showed her self a discreet Woman, managing
whatever she had committed to her very prudently, and she was the only Support
he had, but perceiving his Courses, she foresaw he could not escape sudden
Death, and therefore persuaded him to adopt Alexander Severus; for fear also
lest he should adopt Hierocles whom he married: To this purpose for a while she
accompanied him in his wicked detestable Actions, but after he had adopted him,
she took very great care for his Preservation, and afterward advised him very
prudently in Governing and Reforming, and at last died very Aged, and was
consecrated. When the Soldiers were worsted by Macrinus's, she descended from a
Tower where she beheld the Fight, run amongst them with Elagabalus on Horse
back, and by Persuasions and Reproaches rallied them again and won the Fight.

3. Alexianus Marcellus, called afterward Bassianus, in favor of Caracalla,
whom he was not unwilling should be thought to be his Father rather than Varius
Genec^s (...) a Sy^an. But being Emperor he was called M (...) Severus (in
honor of those two (...),) Alexander, changing Alexianus into Alexander, in
Honor of Alexander the Great, in whose Temple, on whose Birthday he was born
at Ar^na, whom he desired to imitate, and i^ he could, to equal. He was born A.
C. 207. reigned thirteen Years, seven Months, seventeen Days, and was slain by
Maximinus at the Age of twenty nine Years. He was of a vivacious Spirit, which
appeared by his bright and sparkling Eyes, which they who looked upon him were
not able steadfastly to behold; and by the Subtilty and Piercingness of his
Spirit many were persuaded that there was somewhat more than Human in him. He
was excellently ^arned in most kinds of good Literature, be^g of an excellent
Wit and Memory. He was Wise, Moderate, Prudent, Just, Merciful, be^ved and
reverenced of all good Men, though (...) seve^ a Justicer that the Color came
in his face, and his Choler was stirred, even to vomit^g, at the sight of a
corrupt Judge; yet was not Cruel, nor ever put to death any who was not
condemned by the Senate. So Pious that ^e adjugded a Tavern in Controversy
betwixt ^he Christians for a Church, and the Host to (...) Christians, saying,
That it was much better ^od should be served there, in any manner, than it
^ould be a place of Debauchery: He also worshipped Christ and Abraham amongst
his Lares or private Gods, and made use of Sentences of Scripture which he had
learned up and down. Though accused by the Soldiers and such People as under
the last Emperors were only enriched, of Avarice; yet was it necessary, after
the Commonwealth was so exhausted by those Prodigies, that good Husbandry
should recover it; and he began the Reformation in himself, retrenching all
Superfluity at his Table, Utensils, Cloths, of which all he used were very
ordinary and of common sort; he sold all his Jewels, applied the Taxes and
Paiments of the Cities toward the Reparation of their public Places; set up
Manufactures, lent Money to Poor People, he repaired the Ruins of all the
ancient Buildings, and put not his Name upon any of them; and erected many new.
He gave four Congiaries to the People, and a quantity of Oil promised by
Severus. When a Governer returned from his Charge, if he had done well, he
thanked him in the name of the Commonwealth, used him with all possible Honor,
and rewarded him Nobly. He reduced the Taxes to a third part, repaired many
Cities and Temples ruined with Earthquakes; settled Salaries for the
Professors of Sciences, and the Nourishment of such Poor Children as were
willing and fit for Study. Would often Chide virtuous Persons who had served
the Commonwealth for not asking somewhat of him; founded and endued many
Hospitals for such Children as had their Patrimonies ruined in the Wars. For
these an^ suchlike Actions the Comedians, Calumniators, and other wicked
Courtiers, and especially the Soldiers accustomed to the Profuseness of
Caracalla and Elagab. hated him extremely; as likewise because he endeavored to
reform their Discipline exceedingly corrupted, that he with great Courage and
Dexterity, cashiered a Legio^ sometimes all at once which was incorrigible. And
Maximinus, (offended with him for a just Reproof given him by the Emperor for
some indiscreet Actions in the Parthian War, (wherein Severus, though with
great Loss, so suppressed and abated the Fury of the Parthian, that he stirred
not in many Years afterward) taking occasion upon it,) persuaded the Soldiers
to Murder him, which they most vilely and wickedly did near Ments in Germany:
Thus died the Repairer of the almost ruined Commonwealth, the Stay of Justice,
the Reformer of the Soldiers, the Refuge of the Poor; and who for good
Government had no equal amongst all the Emperors; he did nothing without the
Advice of twenty of the Prudentest, most experienced Persons in the
Commonwealth. When the Legions mutined in the East, and threatened to kill him,
with wonderful Courage he commanded them to lay down their Arms and Disband.
When Camillus would have made himself Emperor, he accorded to him that Honor at
his Table, and every other Place, carrying him along to the Wars with him, and
inviting him to take pains, etc. according to his Example; which so wearied
Camillus that he desired leave to retire, and so did. He changed all Elagab's
Officers, which he had set in all the Empire. He forbad all vicious Persons to
salute and come to him; but good Men he visited even in their own Houses,
especially when Sick. To Courtiers and Smoak-sellers he was an implacable
Enemy; stifling one of them with Smoke because he Sold Smoke. He would not have
any Panegyric made in his Praise.

Severus and Maesa. (...), etc. Bona for tuna sive Tucca Terebentinorum
Carthaginensium: Fortune with a Globe, Scepter and Wheel. (...) was the Name of
a Town which worshipped Fortune, which they here apply to Maesa, by whose
Conduct Severus came to the Empire.

A Lectisternium to Fortune, as giving her thanks for the Empire.

Severus Alex. without a Garland.. Alex. the Great's Effigy, a sign of the
great Honor and Devotion he bore to him.

A Garland of Gold within (...), etc. Chrysanthina Sardianorum ter Neocororum.
The Sardians, as Neocori made Games and Wrestlings in Honor of Sev. Alex.
called Chrysanthina, and sent him this Crown of Gold made in fashion of Leaves
(probably of the Plant and Flower Chrysanthis,) these Games probably instituted
by Chrysanthas, a great Commander of Cyrus the Great, famous for his great
Services to him, whom he set over Lydia and Ionia, after the Example of Cyrus
himself.

(...) (Tenos was an Isle one of the Cyclades) a Trident charged with a
Serpent. In that Isle Neptune was worshipped under the Epithete of (...).
Neptune also brought Storks amongst them (...) devour their trouble-some
Serpents.

(...). The Zacinthyans, (Zante now the Isle is called) a Colony of the
Ionians, were very idle and effeminate Persons, given much to Plays and Dances,
one of which is here represented, i. e. Diana, as surprising the Satyrs; and
old drunken Maron Dancing about one of her Nymphs lying asleep.

(...) His Wife was (Sulpitia) Memmia, Daughter (...) o^ (...)
probably of Sulpitius Marcianus, a Person of great Reputation, Power, and a
(...) in also to the Emperor. Mamaea being offended that she took the Name of
Augusta, caused her to be banished; wherefore her Father being Angry,
endeavored to raise a Mutiny amongst the Soldiers against the Emperor, for
which he was put to death. Monsieur Seguin (as Morellus says) discovered S.
Barbiam Orbianam to have been the Wife of Alex. Severus.

He had a Sister called Theoclia, whom he would have married to Maximus Son of
Maximinus, had it not been for the barbarousness of the Father, which
exasperated his Father against him. Afterward she was married so Messala Son
of Silius Messala, put to death by Elagabale.

Julia Mamaea (Mother to Sev. Alex.) was at first instructed by Origin and the
Christians, but afterward fell into diverse Heresies that taught her to
conceal, next to counterfeit, and and lastly to quit all Religion; and give her
self up to hoarding of Money. She became also Proud and Haughty, by which
Courses she brought that excellent Emperor into Dis^putation; he strived to
reform and restrain her, but could not; she having got so great Power.

A Medaillon, wherein she is represented as having somewhat of Isis (having a
Peach between two Leaves on her Head) the Moon, (by the Crescent) Nature, (by
her Breasts discovered) Concord, (a Cornucopia) Minerva, (by her Nose-gay of
Olive and Laurel) and Victory, (by her Wings.). Felicity, or Maesa Crowning
Mamaea, holding a Sacrificing Platter and a Scepter. Two other Figures perhaps
of Theoclia and Memmia

Col. F. Bostra Alexandrea. Bostra, one of the chiefest Cities of Arabia, first
made a Colony by Trajan, afterward repaired by this Emperor. A Head with
Towers to show its Strength, Cornucopia for its Plenty, and a Star for the East.

5. Sulpitius Martianus, Father-in-Law to Alex. made Caesar by him. V. S.
Antoninns, was by the Guards, who had slain Ulpianus, set up; but he refused to
be Emperor, and going away lived unknown. After his refusal they set up
Uranius. In the East one Taurinus set up himself, but for fear drowned himself
in Euphrates. Ovinius Camillus also rebelled against him, whom Alex. sent for,
carried him into the Senate, declared him his Companion, communicated Counsels
with him; took him with him to the War, where he presently grew weary, and
disposed to kill himself; which the Emperor prevented, sending him to his own
House with a Guard of Soldiers; but afterward finding that he practiced the
Soldiers against him, and that the Soldiers were inclined to him, as one likely
to let them do what they list, he was put to death.

CHAP. XV. Of Julius Verus Maximinus and Maximus.
1. C. Julius Verus Maximinus Son of Micca and Abaqua, the one a Goth the other
an Alain, born in a Village of Thrace about A. D. 173. reigned five Years more
or less, was slain with his Son Maximus about the Age of sixty five Years, was
a Giant in Stature, Bulk, Strength, Force, Boldness, Eating, etc. a great Enemy
to Idleness, Filthiness, etc. which made him retire under Elagabale; but
otherwise Impious, Sacrilegious, Ungrateful in the highest degree to his
Emperor, who had brought him from his Retreat, made him General of his Armies,
and had thoughts of Marrying his Sister to his Son; Murdring him, and all those
who had assisted him in his necessitous and low Condition; Cruel and
Avaritious, putting to death all Alexander's Friends and Counselors, all the
chiefest Christians, all the Eminentest Persons of the Commonwealth to get
their Wealth; suborning Accusers, Informers and Calumniators against them: an
incredible number of whom was put to death by Pupienus, etc. Inconsiderat,
Rash, Imprudent, even in War, losing by his ill Conduct an Army that he carried
against the Persians, and at last his Life also by his indiscreet besieging of
Aquileia, which not being able to take, he accused his Officers, and put most
of them to death, which made the whole Army rise against him, and kill him and
his Son in his Tent.

Maximinus and his Son,. Castor and Pollux, naked on foot with their Bucklers
and Javelins.

Maximinus and Maximus,. Neptune sitting, and two Tritons who were the Sons of
Neptune, and Salacia BPOYZHN(...)N. which is no other than (...), (the like
Letters being often changed one into another) a City of Bithynia upon the Sea
of Propontis.

His Wife probably was Paulina, a good Woman, aged when he came to the Empire;
who endeavored to persuade him from that Cruelty he used, and was sorry when he
committed it; which the Tyrant not enduring made her away also. She was
Consecrated, of which some Medals.

His Son was C. Jul. Verus Maximus, the beautifullest Person of his time, and
withal Chaste, Liberal, and not Cruel; yet Prouder, Statelier, than his Father:
was born A. D. 218. and was slain with his Father about twenty one Years Old.

Col [onia] Fl [avia] Pac [ifica] Diylt [um] a City in Thrace so called. An
Apollo. He was betrothed, but not married, to Junia Fadilla of the Family of
Antoninus Pius, as it should seem. After his death she married Toxotius.

There rebelled against Maximinus, Magnus a Commander in his Army, whom he
slew, and with him four thousand Soldiers unheard. Titus Quartinus, General of
the Strangers, in favor of Alexander Severus, whom a private Soldier slew, and
cut off his Head. His Wife was Calphurnia, both of them very Wise and Virtuous
Persons.

Also Pompeianus, possibly M. Aur. Cl. Pompeianus, Grandchild of M. Aurel.
Anto. chosen by the Senate after Gordian's death, he died suddenly two Months
after his Election.

CHAP. XVI. Of M. Anton. Gordianus, Father and Son.
. 1. M. Anton. Gordianus, Son of Mettias Marullus, and Ulpia Gordiana, was born
A. D. 158. reigned eighteen Months and hanged himself, because his Son was
defeated and slain, through Despair, being above eighty Years Old. He was
exceedingly Noble, Rich and Learned; was also of very good Reputation for
Prudence, Moderation, Sobriety, Neatness, Liberality and Magnanimity. He was
proclaimed Emperor being absent at Thysdrum in Africa his Government, utterly
against his will; nor did he accept of it, till constrained by force. He
associated his Son to him, and sent him with a new raised Army against
Capellianus, who headed the Army of Maximin, by whom he was slain; which the
old Man hearing, rather than come into the Hands of his Enemy, hanged himself:
Both their Bodies were (as they were a Transporting to Rome to their
Sepulchers) drowned in the Sea.

His Wife was Fadia Orestilla, Daughter of Annius Severus, of the Family of
Antoninus.

. 2. M. Antoninus Gordianus their Son was born A. D. 192. and slain about forty
six Years Old, was a Man of very good Understanding, Honesty, Integrity,
Civility, but not used to Wars; and besides much given to Pleasure, for he
married not but kept many Concubines; he was Bald, and of a long Visage, by
which only his Medals are distinguished from his Fathers. His Sister was Mettia
Faustina, married to Julius Balbus.

CHAP. XVII. Of D. Caelius Balbinus. M. Clodius Pupienus. Ant. Gordianus.
1. D. Caelius Balbinus was born A. D. 179. reigned about a Year, and with
Pupienus was slain by the Soldiers about the Age of sixty Years, was of a noble
Family, very Rich, Prudent, Cheerful, Bountiful, Sincere, peaceful Disposition.
He was esteemed a great Politian, having governed many Provinces with great
Reputation; but not experienced in War; therefore there was joined to him
Pupienus, a severe warlike Person; these two falling to despise one another,
and both of them the young Gordian, together with some discontents which the
Soldiers received about their Election, made the Soldiers kill them both.

Foelicitas temporum. Three Obelisques dedicated to him, Pupienus and Gordianus.

Two Hands joined, (Balbinus and Pupienus) Patres Senatus.

2. M. Clod. Pupienus Maximus, Son of Maximus and Prima, was born A. D. 175.
reigned about one Year and was slain, aged seventy four Years; was of a severe
Countenance, Sober, Just, Chaste, Clement, Pardoning as soon as any demanded it;
not Choleric, Prudent in Affairs; very Valiant, Experienced, and Fortunate in
Wars: Loved by the Senate, and feared for his Severity by the People; who
therefore Mutining, would not be appeased till Gordianus also was joined with
them. He presently went against Maximin, and by Prudent managing his Affairs,
destroyed him.

Jovi Ultori. Jupiter naked marching with a Whip in his Hand, either against
the Giant Maximin, or the Persians, whither Pupienus designed to go; as if the
God of the Romans, Jupiter, had taken the Whip out of the Hand of the Sun, the
Persian God.

A. K. M. K. (...).. (...), etc. Tarsi Metropolis Amano idicae Ciliciae Secundo
Anno. A Sea Monster, or Deity playing on a Shell, with a Stern and Dolphin
above perhaps Amphitrite, the Wife of Neptune, persuaded to marry him by the
Dolphin. The Stern signifying some Supreme Power, her Trumpet or Shell to call
and give orders to the Sea to Ebb and Flow, Calm, etc.

3. M. Anton. (called both Antonius and Antoninus) Gordianus Son of Gordianus
the African, or (as some say) of his Sister, was born A. D. 226. reigned six
Years, was Murdered by the Treason of Philippus at the Age of twenty two Years,
was nobly descended, very well inclined, Knowing, Eloquent, defective in
nothing but Age, and exceedingly beloved of all Men; till giving himself to his
Pleasures, his Eunuchs and Courtiers took License to do many Injustices. But
after he married Tranquillina the Daughter of Misitheus, an upright, wise, and
experienced Man, he was guided wholly by his Counsels, and first chased away
those Vermin of Courtiers, and set good Men in Command: and prospered mightily,
reducing Sabinianus a Rebel, and Conquering the Persians, till Misitheus dying,
the Traitor Philip turning, by many Artifices, the Army against Gordianus, at
last Murdered him: He was afterward Consecrated.

Col. Tyr. Metrop. Ambrocie Petre. Two Rocks, a Cup with Fire and a Purple
Fish. U. S. Two Stones near Tyrus, of which many Stories.

Serapis with his Basket and a Garland.

(...). Carrae, a City in Mesopotamia, after his Persian Victory, set up (it
should seem) a Statue in Honor of Gordian as to Mars Romanus; before which they
Sacrificed upon an Altar. A Cybele and Crescent the Gods worshipped in all
those Countries, being the Dea Syria.

(...). Apollo in habit of a Goddess with his Tripos, Snake, Crow, etc. being
much worshipped there, though rendering Oracles only in Winter, and in Summer at
Delos. About Patera he was born, where, when he was young a little Girl brought
him in a Box diverse sorts of Sweetmeats; which the Wind taking from her,
carried into the Sea, which cast them up not far thence, where they built
Patera, after the name of the Box; which is marked by the Crow sitting upon a
Box in the Medal. Or it may be the Box signifies Ointment and Medicines, in
which Lycia abounded. and of which Apollo the God of Health makes use.

(...). B. N. bis Neocorus Ao 1o Gordiani here designed very young with a
Mountain upon his Head, as the Sovereign Genius of that famous Mountain Argaeus.

(...). The Emperor and Empress as taking Palms to bestow on the Victors at
their Games, in the Front of a Temple under a Hill, representing the Situation
of Nicomedia.

Gordian and Asgarus: Asgarus probably acknowledging the Resettlement of him in
his Kingdom, or some part of it to Gordian.

The Ox, Mnevis, with a Peach upon his Head, and a Garland about his Neck,
(...); perhaps some great Body of the Ephesians dwelling at Alexandria.

(...) Seleucia in Cilicia.

(...), etc. Bacchius Panegyricus Apameorum [Phrygiae] situated upon two
Rivers, Marsyas or Lycus and Maeander, grown bigger with Orga or Orba, newly
received into its Channel; Marsyas holding a Flute in his Hand, because there
grows in him a certain Reed called (...) (the word signifying a (...)) which
being shaken with the Wind makes excellent Melody, or perhaps of which Flutes
were made. Marsyas also was the first that invented that Instrument, on which
he played so cunningly, that he challenged Apollo with his Harp, who overcoming
him fleaed him alive; for whom the Nymphs and Satyrs were so grieved, that they
increased his small Stream with their Tears into a River. Diana of the
Ephesians worshipped also at Apamea, and all the Country thereabout: The two
Nymphs also represent the Situation of the City between two Mountains and these
two Rivers; one of them having in her Hand a Rock with a Cave, whence issues
the River Marsyas. What the Letters signify is not known.

(...). Hypaepenorum Praetore Ant. Tauro Anno primo. Hypaepis a Town of Lydia.

Gordianus.. a Woman crowned with Towers sitting upon Rocks, at her Feet the
River Tygris.

(...). Singara a Town in Mesopotamia, whither it should seem Severus
transported a Colony, calling it Aurelia, because of his great Affection and
Observance to M. Aurelius. Gordianus undertook such another Expedition into
these places, as Severus had done before.

His Wife was Furia Sabina Tranquillina, of whom little written or known.

(...). Chalcedon. A Swan carrying Apollo up to Heaven, which was the Form
under which the Chalcedonians worshipped him.

Against this Emperor the Carthaginians chose one Sabinianus, whom afterward
being besieged by the Emperor's Army, they delivered up into his hands.

The Senate also chused Severus Hostilianus to oppose the Violence of Philip
who had murdered the Emperor, but Philip advancing before Hostilianus was in
order to receive him, he either slew himself, or by ill binding his Wound,
after letting Blood, he bled to Death.

CHAP. XVIII. Of M. Julius Philippus, Father and Son, Carvil. Marinus, G.
Messius Quintus Trajanus Decius, Q. Hetruscus Messius Decius, Caius Valens
Hostilianus, Messius Quintus, C. Julius Valens Hostilianus, C. Vibius
Trebonianus Gallus, C. Vibius Volusianus, C. Julius AEmylianus.
1. M. Julius Philippus, born at Bostra, his Father was a Famous Captain of
Robbers, his name Saturnius, reigned about five Years and a half, and with his
Son was slain by Decius A. D. 253. an Ambitious, Bloody, Traitorous Person; and
a Fighting, but not very resolute or provident Soldier: He celebrated with
great Pomp the Ludi Saeculares, and was slain by Decius his own General, whom
he had sent against the Rebels.

Virtus Augg. the two Emperors on Horseback: Philip desired to bring that
Militia into request above foot.

P[rovinciae] M[ysiae] S[uperioris] Col[onia] Uim[inacium] An. VII. perhaps
Annona VII. a Goddess (the City) between a Cow for a Colony, and a Lion showing
the Valor of the People.

The Heads of Jupiter and Bacchus, representing the two Philips. Bacchus being
born in Arabia, or rather unsowed from the Thigh of his Mother Semele.

Philip's Head.. (...) the three Furies; one with a Serpent and Key; (with a
Key perhaps they open and shut Hell-gates at their pleasure,) another with two
Firebrarnds or Torches; a third with a Sword and Whip and two Dogs.

-- Visaeque canes ululare per umbras
Adventante Dea -- AEn. 6.
They were worshipped in diverse places that they might not hurt.

His Wife was Marcia Otacilla Severa, a Virtuous, Prudent and Chaste Woman; of
whom little known, save that some say she was a Christian.

Provincia Dacia; probably her Country Transylvania; a Woman between an Eagle
and Lion, signifying their Faithfulness to the Romans, and their Valor.

His Son was Caius Saturnius afterward called M. J. Philippus, was slain in
the Arms of his Mother at twelve Years old; naturally (...). He had a Sister
married to Sabinianus.

Carvilius Marinus Governor of the Legions of Pannonia, etc. rebelled against
Philip; who sent Decius against him, but the Soldiers had slain him before; and
persuaded Decius to take the Empire, who joining those Rebels to his own Army,
came into Italy, conquered and killed Philip.

Seguin has a Coin, an Head with an Eagle. (...), it seems Marinus was
consecrated, either by the Soldiers repenting of their Murder, or in hatred to
Philip, whose Vengeance they feared; or by Decius, thinking by this means to
gain his Soldiers; or by Philip to divert from himself the opinion of his
Murder.. Rome sitting with a Victory on her Hand, (...). S. C.

Jotapianus also in Syria was slain by his Soldiers.

Lucius Priscus, Brother to Philip, Governor of Syria, after his Brothers
Death, set up for himself, but was slain by the Soldiers.

2. G. Messius Quintus Trajanus Decius born at Bubalia (Buda) A. D. 211.
reigned about two Years, and died swallowed in a Marish as he was flying from
Cneva King of the Goths; he was a prudent Person able to govern a great Empire,
by reason of his Experience, Vigilant, Courageous, not Ambitious,
Fair-conditioned; but a cruel Persecutor of the Christians, insomuch that he
slew a Kings Son, an Hostage in his Court, only because he saw him frequent the
Christians Church. The Arabians were so implacably offended with him, that to
keep them in order (since he could not send an Army against them) he caused
many Lions, as also Serpents of both Sexes to be brought out of Lybia and sent
amongst them.

Dacia, A Woman with an Ass's Head upon a Spear. Dacia contains Transylvania,
Moldavia, and Walachia; the People were called Getae by the Greeks; they
carried an Ass's Head as their chief Ensign before the Battle, intimating their
Constancy and Fearlesness of Death, their Sufferance also, etc. also a Sign of
good Luck.

CE II. (...). Septimia Colonia Rhesaenesiorum. Anno 1. A City in Mesopotamia
near the River Aborus, made a Colony by Sept. Severus.

His Wife was Herennia Sallustia Barbia Orbiana, of whom little is written; and
very few Medals found; tho others say that she was the Wife of Alex. Severus,
and that Decius's Wife was Herennia Etruscilla.

His Son was L. Herennius Hetruscus Messius Decius, made by his Father Caesar
at the beginning of his Empire, and Augustus when he took him with him in his
Expedition against the Goths; where he was slain with an Arrow valiantly
fighting in the Vanguard; which being related to his Father, he said, the loss
of one Soldier was no great matter.

Pietas Augg. without wings, as being continually to reside with the Emperors,
and not to return to Heaven; with a Purse, as if all their Piety was for
Interest.

(...) etc. Sub Praetore Glycone Theologo ^ergamenorum primorum Neocororum.
AEsculapius under the Countenance of young Decius, and Juno Pronuba or
Nuptialis, in Honor of the Marriage of this young Prince, carrying two Torches,
as Mother of the Sun and Moon; as also the Mother, or at least the next
Kindred, carried Torches before the Bride; and a Veil wrought only by the Hands
of Chaste and Fruitful Matrons.

His Wife, the Martyrologies say, was Tryphonia, a Christian Woman who suffered
Martyrdom (as is supposed) under Valerian.

3. Caius Valens Hostilianus Messius Quintus seems to be the Son of Severus
Hostilianus Caesar, before Philippus; he received the names of Messius Quintus
by the Adoption of Decius, who married to him his Daughter Gneia Seia Sallustia
Barbia Orbiana; and left him to govern Rome and Italy whilst he went against
the Goths: Decius thus providing to settle the Empire in his Family; but was
deceived, the Pestilence taking away Hostilianus about the same time the Decii
were slain by the Goths. His Wife was Gneia Seia, etc. not Herennia as her
Mother was called.

Caius Julius Valens Licinianus seems to be the Brother of Hostilianus; him the
People, seeing the Decii were dead, persuaded to be Emperor; who going into
Illyricum to fight against Gallus, was abandoned and slain by his Soldiers.

The Senate also chused Hostil. Perpenna Licinianus, of the same Family, who
was also after a while taken away by the Plague.

4. C. Vibius Trebonianus Gallus, was born Anno Christi 207. was with his Son
Volusianus made Emperor in the Isle Meninge or Girba, reigned about two Years
six Months, was slain by AEmilianus at the Age of Forty seven Years; seems to
have married Hostilia Severa Daughter of Severus Hostilianus, and his Son
Volusianus to have married Herennia Hetruscilla Daughter of Decius; so that
Decius could not trust any Man better to go against the Goths, who had seized
upon Philippopolis in Thrace; nor is it probable what many Authors say, that
Gallus betrayed Decius into the Hands of the Goths, showing them what was to be
done to ruin Decius; but rather that Decius was Ruined by his own Rashness,
constraining the Goths to fight with him upon Disadvantages, for hastily and
disorderly pursuing them through a Marsh, they turned Head and destroyed him;
but Gallus gathering the Relics of the Army, and what more Men he could get
together, put himself speedily in a condition to fight them; but because of the
Persians then Invading, and the Plague within ruining, the Empire, he chose
rather to make them a Bridge of Gold, and send them away with a (...) of Money;
which though Dishonorable, yet was then a necessary Composition. Returning to
Rome, he began to make Preparation against the Persians, who had taken and
pillaged as far as Antioch; mean while AEmylianus, left by him Governor in
Pannonia, practiced the Soldiers against him, who ^lew him and his Son at
Interamna (Tarni) as he was marching against the Persians.

Junoni Martiali, the Mother of Mars, and also (...), Fortitude presiding over
Arms; whence by the Falisci called Curitis* from Curis, signifying a Spear.
Juno sitting with a pair of Sizers, or some such thing in her Hand; if Sizers,
it denotes the Custom that Men had to cut off, and cleanse themselves from,
their Hair before her Images; or because Sizers are the chiefest and most
ordinary Tools of Women's labor.

Apollini Salutari, because the Emperors took great care to free the Empire
from the Contagion that reigned, they were called Apollines Salutares.

His Wife was Hostilia Severa, of whom we find nothing.

In Sir J. Cotton's Library is a small broken Coin, with OCTIA (...), probably
this Woman.

5. C. Vibius Volusianus, little noted, except for a great Persecutor of the
Christians, and his care for Interring such as died of the Plague. Was ^ain
with his Father.

His Wife seems to be Herennia Hetruscilla, of whom little is spoken; yet there
are some Me^als both of her Husband and her self, but easy ^o be understood.

6. C. Julius AEmylianus, called by Victor AEmilius AEmilianus, was a Moor, and
born about A. D. 214. reigned about four Months, and was slain in his Palace at
Spoleto about forty six Years old, got the Emp^ by Treachery and Ingratitude,
kept it without any Reputation, and lost it shamefully, being by the Senate
declared public Enemy, and sending to Valerianus then with the Gaulish Legions
offering to make him Emperor if he would destroy AEmilianus; which he
understanding offered to lay down the Empire, so that he might command the Army
against the Persians; but Valerian would not Capitulate with, but slew, him.

Votis decennalibus S. C. the Senate made solemn Prayers that it would please
the Gods to grant him a Reign of Ten Years, when they would renew them again.

CHAP. XIX. Of P. Licinius Valerianus, M. Cyriades, Ingenuus, Q. Nonius
Regilianus, M. Fulvius Macrianus, (Father and Son) Quietus, Balista, Odenatus,
Moeonius, Herodes, Valens, Piso, AEmylianus, Saturninus, Trebellianus, Celsus,
Victorinus.
. 1. P. Licinius Valerianus, Surnamed Colobius, Son of Valerius Licin.
Gallienus was born A. C. 184. reigned about seven Years, was taken Prisoner at
Cesarea by Sapor King of Persia, and afterward cruelly flayed to death at
seventy six Years old. Notwithstanding what some Authors say, he seems to have
been a Man of great Valor, Prudence and Conduct, of great Experience and an
Exemplary Life; being by Decius made Censor, an Office usually annexed to the
Emperor's Person, and partaker of the greatest Charges of the Empire; and was
in such Reputation that he was generally desired by all Men to be Emperor. At
first he ceased the Persecution raised against the Christians, and employed
them very much; afterward by the persuasion of a certain Magician, he began a
most violent and inhuman Persecution against them; using also most devilish
Sacrifices and Practices, for which causes God Almighty (it seems) gave him up
into the Hands of the Persians. For many of his Lieutenants being by them
beaten, and the East Country much ruined by the Plague and the Wars; he was
forced to go in Person, where Fighting, his Army was ruined, and himself taken
Prisoner, and laden with Chains in his Robes, was forced to be a Footstool to
the Persian when he got on Horseback, for many Years together, and at last
flayed alive.

Col [lonia] Julia Augusta Felix Helvia (Lilybeum in Sicily) certamina Sacra
Capitolina OEcumenica Iselastica Helvia. Three Vessels with Palms in them,
Prizes for the Victors. OEcumenica probably because free for all Nations to
come, and all sorts of Exercises. Iselastica, because the Victors were drawn in
a Chariot of four Horses into their own Town, and received a certain Stipend
from the Emperors called therefore Iselasticum.

Coloniae Tyro Metropoli: Tire made Metropolitan of Phoenicia by Hadrian, and a
Colony by Sept. Severus. A Man upon a Gate with a Goddess, the Sun, etc. hard
to be understood except it refer to the Story of the Slaves, who having all but
one (Straton) slain their Masters, ordered that he should be King who saw first
the Sun arising; Straton, by the Advice of his Master, looked Westwards upon
the Housetops, etc.

(...) of Julis a City in the Isle Ceum; Three Nymphs naked, perhaps the Graces
or some other Nymphs there worshipped.

(...) Diana (or rather Mariniana) like Fortune.

(...) Valerian's Head. (...). The God Lunus with Horns upon his Shoulders, an
Hunting Spear in his left hand, a Discus or some such thing in his right; an
Oxe's Head at his Foot. Seguin. Some Historians say that he had two Wives, by
the first whose name is not known, he had Gallienus; by the other called
Mariniana, probably the (...) of Carvilius Marinus, Licinius Valerianus, who
was first Caesar and afterward Augustus; after her death she was Consecrated,
of which there are Medals.

2. There rebelled against Valerian Marcus Cyriades the Son of a rich Syrian,
who being (...).
Chid by his Father for his Debauches, robbed his Cossers, fled into Persia,
and there persuaded first Odenatus, and afterward Sapor to invade the Romans;
Sapor's Army he Commanded, took Antiochia, Caesarea, and many other Places,
slew his own Father, called himself Augustus; and was at length slain by the
Treachery of his own Soldiers.

Gallienus, after the departure of his Father, Ingenuus.
having the charge of the West, and being busied in repelling the Germans who
invaded Gallia; Ingenuus General in Pannonia rebelled, and declared himself
Augustus, against whom Gallienus fought near Murcia, and conquering him, he
slew himself.

Q. Nonius Regilianus gathered up in Maesia the Regilianus
scattered Troops of Ingenuus, where he commanded some Legions for defense of
the Country against the Sarmatae; he was declared Emperor as it were in Jest;
one declining Rex, Regis, Regi, Regilius, Regilianus, as if thereby destined to
reign: Though a very Valiant, and against the Sarmatae, a very Fortunate
Captain, yet Gallienus came upon him, and overcame him: His Soldiers, to make
their Peace the better, slew him. He was consecrated as his Medals intimate.

3. M Fulvius Macrianus, by his Prudence, Macrianus
Valor, Constancy and Integrity, came to be of such Authority, that Valerian,
at his departure into the East, committed the Charge of the Armies unto him:
Valerian being taken, and the Soldiers wanting a Commander, they chused him
(Balista refusing it because of his Age) Emperor, with his two Sons Macrianus
and Quietus. Having therefore settled the East as well as he could, he left
Balista and Odenatus to fight against the Persians: Himself, with his Son
Macrianus, and an Army of Forty thousand chosen Men, came for Italy; but in
Illyricum were fought, and by Aureolus (who there made himself Emperor,
pretending it was by the consent of Gallienus) and his Lieutenant General
Domitius Domitianus. they were vanquished and slain.

M. Fulvius Macrianus the Son, was for his extraordinary Macrianus
Strength and Valor, though young, made a Tribune by Valerianus. Some Medals
both of the Father and Son.

C. Fulvius Quietus, being left in the East with (...).
Balista, recovered a great part of the Country to the Romans; but after the
loss of his Father and Brother, Aureolus sent Odenatus to sight against them,
who slew, at Emesa, Balista; and the Emesians slew Quietus after their Defeat.

Servius Anicius Balista, Praefectus Praetorii to Valerian, an exceeding
prudent, valiant Person; Balista.
after Macrianus's Defeat, suffered himself to be made Emperor; he won very
great Victories over the Persian, forcing him to fly to the utmost Deserts of
his Kingdom, taking also his Treasures and Wives, but was afterward slain by
Odenatus. Some, but few, Medals of Quietus and him.

4. Odenatus was first General of the Palmyrenians, Odenatus.
and took part with the Persians against the Romans; but was afterward, by
Valerianus, won over to the Romans; and when he went against the Persians, his
Countrymen made him King; afterward Gallienus made him Emperor, because of
his vindicating the East from the Persians. He was exceedingly Prudent,
Valiant, etc. but above belief Indefatigable, having been the greatest Hunter
of all the East. He drove Sapor beyond Ctesiphon, which he took with all his
Wives, Satraps and Treasure; which so enraged Sapor, that he fleaed Valerian,
and filled up a Valley with the Bodies of the Captive Romans, which he there
slew, and marched over them. Odenatus, after that, fought with him, and
overcame; but was at last, together with his Son Herodes or Herodianus, slain
by his Nephew Maeonius; for Odenatus and he being together on Maeonius.
Hunting, and a wild Beast coming upon them two, Odenatus forbad the young Man
to strike, saying himself would slay it; notwithstanding Maeonius slew it, and
this he did several times after he was chid; which made the Emperor take his
Horse from him, and make him go on foot, which, in that Country, was a great
Disgrace. Maeonius therefore threatened Revenge, his Uncle put him in Irons,
whence after a few days, by the Intercession of Herodes, he was delivered; in
requital whereof, he slew both of them at a Banquet: Himself, for his
detestable Life, being by his own Friends shortly after slain.

Odenatus had Herodes by a former Wife, by Zenobia (who was thought consenting
to the Murder, that her Sons might come to the Crown) Herennianus and Timolaus.

Herodes or Herodianus was, though Valiant, altogether unlike his Father, being
given to the Luxury and Delicateness of the Asiaticks, which his Father bore
withal very much, giving him all Sapor's Concubines and Jewels. Some Medals of
them both, (that is, Odenatus and Herodes.) He seems to have had a Son called
Hermias Vaballathus.

5. P. Valerius Valens, a wise valiant and experienced Valens.
Man, set over Achaia by Gallienus, when Macrianus was declared Emperor in the
East, (there being great Jealousies and ancient Emulations betwixt them.)
Macrianus sent Piso to destroy him; he, to avoid the Designs of Macrianus, made
himself be called Augustus by his Soldiers, and so when Piso came, he slew him;
but was himself also, after a while, slain by his own Soldiers.

Lucius Calpurnius Piso Frugi of the Ancient Piso.
Nobility, of great Worth also and Integrity; and in so great Veneration, that
Valens himself was sorry for his Death; and the Senate consecrated him, as
being the ablest and worthiest Person in the whole Empire: Being sent by
Macrianus against Valens, he came into Thessaly, where finding Valens Emperor,
to save himself from him, he also called himself Augustus, and received the
Surname of Thessalius; but was slain there.

Tiberius Cestius Alexander AEmylianus was Governor of Egypt, whither Equites
only were sent, AEmylianus.
because of the Levity of that People in choosing Princes; was chosen Emperor in
a Sedition at Alexandria. He purged the Country of Thieves, and prepared for an
Expedition toward the East, but was set upon by Theodotus, whom Gallienus sent
with an Army against him, being constrained to retire into Alexandria, ^e there
endured a great Siege; but at last Theodotus got the City by Treachery, and
took AEmylianus alive, and sent him to Gallienus, where he was Strangled in
Prison.

6. Sextus Julius Saturninus was a Person of Saturninus
very great Worth, the best Soldier of his times, and was constrained to be
made Emperor, at that time he telling the Soldiers, that they had lost a good
General for a bad Emperor; he got many Victories over the Barbarians, and was
at last slain by his own Soldiers unwilling to be reformed.

C. Annius Trebellianus was first chosen Prince Trebellianus.
of the Isaurians, because of his Dexterity in Thieving, and afterward made
himself Emperor; and so maintained himself a long time in that Mountainous
Country, till Causisoleus the Brother of Theodotus found means to draw him into
the Plains, where he fought and slew him. He was probably by some Rebellious
City, as other Rebels were, consecrated: as appears by his Medals.

C. Titus Cornelius Celsus, having a long time, with great Reputation, served
in Africa, the Celsus.
Africans were advised to make themselves an Emperor like other Countries,
which they did, and chose this Man, forcing him to accept it; the seventh day
after he was slain by the Citizens of Sicca, by the persuasion of Galliena the
Cousin of Gallienus, his Body was eaten by Dogs, and his Effigy hanged upon a
Gibbet.

7. M. Piauvonius Victorinus, Son of Victorina Victorinus.
possibly the Sister of Postumus, a Man comparable to any, or perhaps all the
Ancients, had it not been that his Lust spoiled all his Virtue; he was chosen
by Postumus to assist against the Generals of Gallienus; which he did so
valiantly, that they got no Advantage over them. He was slain by the Practices
of Attilianus, for having violated his Wife. After his Death Postumus
consecrated him, and chose Tetricus in his stead.

Invictus, the Sun running, either to show Victorinus's Celerity in his Warlike
Enterprises, or his design to go into the East; whither his Mother, envious of
the Glory of Zenobia, urged him to go.

Saeculi felicitas, Fortune carrying the Infant Platus, as represented at
Thebes, as Pausanias reports in his ninth Book. Showing, that by Fortune's
favoring the Enterprises of Victorinus, Riches were much increased.

L. A. (perhaps Aurelius) Piauvonius Victorinus, Son of the other, was made
Caesar when his Father was made Augustus, and afterward Augustus also,
probably slain with his Father.

A Galley I. AASVI. what the meaning is, is not known.

CHAP. XX. Of Licinius Gallienus, Cornelius Saloninus Valerianus, Q. Julius
Saloninus Gallienus, P. Licinius Valerianus.
. 1. P. Licinius ^gnatius Gallienus, born A. C. 219. reigned with his Father
near seven Years, and eight Years alone, was slain about the Age of Fifty
Years; was very Courteous and Liberal, Quick, Ingenious, Easy, Learned,
Eloquent, Vigilant, also Circumspect and Valiant; but very Vindicative, putting
to Death Four thousand of Ingenuus's Soldiers in cold Blood; very Debauched,
Wanton, and given to his Pleasures; which he unwillingly left when he was to go
upon any Exploit: He ruined Three hundred thousand Goths with Ten thousand Men;
he conquered also Ingenuus, Regilianus and diverse other Tyrants; but Postumus
he could not overcome; nor did he pursue his Victories against the Barbarians,
nor endeavor to redeem his Father; nothing but imminent Danger forcing him to
quit his Voluptuousness and Debauchery: And as he neglected to provide against
the Goths, who invaded the Empire, the Officers of the Army slew him, and chose
Claudius in his stead; wherewith the Soldiers were much displeased, but the
same Officers appeased their Mutiny, by Money distributed amongst them.

Gallienus, as the Genius of the City of Rome,. Intrans S. C. Urbem, probably
when made Augustus by his Father, and sent with an Army to protect the West;
where the Barbarians made great Spoil even in Italy it self: to the great
Affright of the Romans, who thought themselves secure by his, their good
Genius's, entering the City.

Gallienum Aug. (possibly to be supplied SPQR Statua donavit). ob
conservationem salutis; he endeavoring to remedy the great Mortality which
continued in his time.

Restit. Galliarum; probably after a Battle which he gained against Postumus,
he took this Title; Galliarum were the three Gallia's, Cisalpina, Narbonensis,
Comata.

Apollini Cons. Aug. a Centaure shooting: Apollo being Famous for it, and for
his Horses, they are both joined together to preserve the Emperor from the
Archers of the Persians on Horseback.

Leg II. Parthica VII. (Septimum) Pia. VII. Felix. He gave these Titles to his
Legions as often as they did him Service eminently; which they carried also in
their Ensigns; and was a gentile Invention to engage them to him. So Leg
Mi[nervia P[ia F[elix Vic[trix.

Jovi Cons. Aug. the Amalthean Goat which nourished him, of whose Horn he made
the Horn of abundance, of her Skin his AEgis; and made her self a Star.

Soli Cons. Aug. an Ox consecrated to Apollo, who by his force brings forth
Pasturage for them. Mnevis was an Ox sacred to Jupiter, as Apis to the Moon.

(...). without naming him Emperor or Aug.. (...). A Man's Head altogether
unknown, probably some Kinsman of the Emperor's.

. 2. His Wife was Cnea Cornelia Salonina Daughter of Attalus, and before called
Chrysogone, a learned Woman, and Favorer of Plotinus, and other knowing
Persons: He had a Concubine dearly beloved of him, called Pipara or Pipa,
Daughter of a King of Germany, to whom he gave part of Pannonia for his
Daughter.

Juno Aug. Salonina, in the Habit of Juno with a Flower (Lilly) in one Hand the
Flower over which Juno passing conceived Mars, and which signifies the Chaste
Love of Man and Wife; and a Torch in the other.

AEquitas publica: Three Goddesses with Balances and Cornucopia's, expressing
the Justice of the Emperor in governing the three parts of the Empire,
signified Africa by Serapis, Asia by the Sun, and Europe by Salonina.

Augusta in pace. Salonina sitting in the habit of Peace.

Junoni Cons. Aug. Stags with Horns; Dian Hunting spied five mighty Stags with
Golden Horns, four whereof she took, the fifth by the help of Juno escaped, and
was slain by Hercules after.

Deae Segetiae, or she that takes care of the Corn after it appears out of the
Earth.

3. Publius Licinius Cornelius Saloninus Valerianus Son of Gallienus and
Salonina: all the Medals inscribed P. C. Lic. Valerianus Nob. Caes. are of this
Person. So those with Pub. Lic. Saloninus Valerianus Caes. So with D. Valeriano
Caesari or Divo Caesari Valeriano, was of a good Wit, but given to his
Pleasures as much as his Father; being young he was sent to Gallia with
Albinus, yet under the Command of Postumus to dispose the Legions there to
oppose the Goths. When he arrived, Postumus had defeated the Goths, and
recovered from them a very great Booty; which Albinus said he ought to have
presented to Saloninus as representing his Father. Postumus, provoked by the
Reproaches of that Man, made the Soldiers (to whom he had distributed a great
part of it) to Mutiny, and bringing them before Colen, the Citizens delivered
up Saloninus and Albinus into his hands, who presently put them to death, and
proclaimed himself Augustus. Gallienus Consecrated his Son.

Dii Nutritores. Jupiter giving a Victory to his Father, both of them are
called his Nourishers.

Jovi Crescenti Valerian; an Infant upon a Goat, it being their Custom first to
set them upon Sheep and Goats, and afterward upon Horses.

Q. Jul. Saloninus Gallienus was the second Son of Gallienus; little known of
him, the Historians confounding him with his Brother, only their Medals show
them several Persons; Some Inscriptions also mention a Sister they had called
Julia Galla, who being possessed with the Devil, was dispossessed by S. Zeno
Bishop of Verona. She was married to Serg. Terentianus Prefect of the City.

4 P. Licinius Valerianus was Brother to Gallienus by the Father, but not the
Mother: He was made Caesar by his Father, and Augustus by his Brother, with
whom he was also slain A. C. 269. for as Gallienus and he were Marching against
Aureolus, the Army seeing no hopes from them to chase away the Goths and
Barbarians, or recover Gallia, Brittanny, and part of Spain, possessed by
Tyrants; they slew them. Though Valerian was of good Understanding, Valiant,
and not at all debauched; insomuch that Gallus lamented much his death, and
erected him a Sepulcher.

Deo Volkano, he erected a Temple to him as his Brother did to Mars, he being
as necessary to war as any other God.

(...). Seems to be the City it self, sitting and holding an Image of Juno
Pronuba upon her Head, perhaps intimating the Marriage of this Prince with

His Wife Cornelia Supera, as is very probable, though Historians mention her
not, yet some Medals do.

CHAP. XXI. Of M. Cassius Latienus Postumus, his Son, Lollianus, M. Aurelius
Marius, Lucius AElianus, Cecrops, Appius Claudius Censorinus, M. Acilius
Aureolus, M. Aurelius Claudius, Claudius Quintillus, Victorina, Zenobia,
Herennianus, Timolaus, Vaballathus, Septimius, Domitianus, Firmius, C.
Tetricus, and his Sons.
1. M. Cassius Latienus Postumus, born in France of mean, perhaps Equestrain,
Parents, was of all the Tyrants the most Illustrious, Generous, Constant,
Magnanimous, Wise, and beneficial to the Commonwealth; a Valiant and
experienced Captain, an excellent Statesman, and true Justicer: Wherefore he
was marvelously beloved, not of the Gauls only, but many of the Roman Senators
went over through discontent unto him. Being made Emperor, and having slain the
Son of Gallienus; Gallienus came against him with a great Army and was
vanquished; in another Battle he got the better, and besieged Postumus in a
strong City, but his Army was so harassed with the Siege, and himself wounded,
that he quitted the Siege, and retired into Italy; where he made Peace with
Aureolus on purpose to reinvade Postumus more fiercely, but he succeeded not.
Postumus therefore went about to settle Gallia, and to reduce all things to
very good order for the space of Ten Years, till Lollianus another General
raised a Party of the Barbars against him, but Postumus overcame and besieged
him in Mentz, which he also took, but denying the Pillage of it to his
Soldiers, they mutined, slew him, and chused Lollianus in his stead.

Postumus's whole Face to show his Clemency, etc.. his half Face armed to show
his Valor.

Postumus and his Son. Mars and Julia Donata resembling Victory, Wife of
Postumus (as is conceived).

Herculi Deusoniensi. Deuson a Town in Germany, probably Duyts near Colen,
called also Deutsch; near to which probably Postumus was born.

Postumus Father and Son,. Victory and Peace. Felicitas Aug. perhaps (many of
his Medals signed with Victoria) is meant Victoria or Victorina, Mother of
Victorinus, probably his Sister.

A Galley Laetitia Aug. probably for some Conquest by Sea, or over Britanny.

Minervae Fautrici. It should seem he was equally Learned as Warlike, and for
that Reason Valerian committed the Education of his Son Gallienus unto him, as
Gallienus did his.

Salus Provinciarum, the Rhine, upon whose Banks all along Posthumus built
Forts to hinder the Irruptions of the Germans into the Roman Provinces.

His Wife, as appears by an ancient Medal, was Julia Donata, of whom nothing
writ.

2. Caius Junius Cassius Latinius (or Latienus) Postumus was his Son, to whom
Valarian committed the Government of Gallia Narbonensis. But Postumus being
declared by the Army Emperor, made him Caesar, and afterward Augustus. He was
so Eloquent, that diverse of his Controversies are taken for Quintilian's. He
much resembled his Father in Manners, as also in his Countenance, only he was
not so curled, nor so flat nosed.

It is supposed he died naturally before his Father, no mention being made of
his death.

AEternitas Aug. Three Heads Radiant, one in Face; the other half faced,
representing perhaps the Wise and Children of Postumus not mentioned by
Historians, but the like Medal of Severus is so interpreted.

Postumus on Horseback speaking to his Soldiers Exercitus Iscamicus, perhaps
the Legion that lay at Caerleon in Britanny.

3. Spurius Servilius Lollianus Commanded part of Germany, and was General of
the Horse under Postumus; whose old Age despising he rebelled and chose Mentz
for the Seat of the Wars; he reigned one Year before Postumus's death:
Afterward making the Soldiers work at the repairing of the Fortresses on the
Rhine, with too much Severity, they slew him.

M. Aurelius Marius, at first a Smith, afterward a Soldier, got by his Valor
and Industry to be chosen Emperor after Postumus's death. He was a Man of vast
Strength, Pride and Insolency; though Historians say he reigned but three days,
yet it is manifest by his many Medals, that he reigned some while both in
Gallia and Britanny.

Victoria seems to signify his Victory in Britanny, of which V. Camdenum.

Lucius AElianus was made Emperor after Lollianus by the Army about Mentz, he
reigned but awhile, being slain either by Tetricus or Claudius.

Victoria Aug. the only Medal found of him.

4. Cecrops or Cecropius a Dalmatian, was he that much assisted Claudius to
obtain the Empire, not only aiding Heraclianus and Martianus to entrap
Gallienus, but himself giving the false alarm that Aureolus was a coming, and
giving him the first and mortal stroke. It should seem that he rebelled against
Aurelian, not Gallien.

Zosimus also names one Antoninus, of whom nothing is known.

Appius Claudius Censorinus, a Person of great Reputation, having honorably
discharged all the great Offices of the Empire, and in his old Age retired, was
forced by the Soldiers to take the Empire against Claudius; those very Men slew
him who forced him to be chosen. He was buried near Bologna with this
Inscription. Felix ad omnia, infelicissimus Imperator. He reigned three Years,
as appears by a Medal of his.

M. Acilius Aureolus a Dacian, and at first a Shepherd, but being Active,
Vigilant, Valiant, etc. Gallien made him General of the Horse, and he served
him with great Success a long time; he was afterward made Governor of
Illyricum, where, by the Soldiers he was made Emperor, having defeated
Macrianus, and entertained the rest of his Army, he took upon him to be
Emperor; Gallien could not suppress him, but made him partaker of the Empire on
condition he would go against Postumus and ruin him, which he could not do.
Afterward Gallien mistrusting him, fought against him, forcing him to retire
into Milan; where Gallien besieging him was slain. Claudius being made Emperor,
Aureolus submitted to him; but afterward they falling out, fought, and
Aureolus was by the Soldiers slain, contrary to the mind of Claudius, who would
have given him his Life. After his death he built a Bridge in the Place called
by his Name; and erected him a Tomb.

LI (Legio prima) MINERvia Restituta. Minerva and Aureolus holding a Palm
between them.

5. M. Aurelius Claudius, as some say, natural Son of Gordian III. and a Woman
of Dalmatia was born about the Year 239, reigned somewhat above two Years, and
died of the Plague, as some say, as others, slain in a Mutiny of his Army about
thirty two Years of Age. He was of a prodigious Strength of Body, but a more
Heroical Courage, Prudence, Integrity, Constancy, Justice and Capacity.
Valerian made very great account of him; sodid Gallienus, who sought by great
Presents to pacify him, when he knew that he was offended at his Debauchery,
and at last when he saw himself dying, he sent him the Imperial Ornaments in
Gratitude to whom, and to wipe off the Suspicion of his Murder, he writ to the
Senate not to suffer any more of Gallienus's Friends to be put to death (the
Nobility being very violent against them) and to give himself the honor of
Consecration, which were both done. There were two Wars upon his hands,
Tetricus in France and the Goths; he chused first to go against the Goths;
saying that Tetricus was his Enemy, but the Goths the Commonwealths Enemies;
and though there were a vast number at least 320000, and 2000 Ships of War; yet
he absolutely ruined them, slaying a very great number of them; as he had done
before also when General under Gallienus. He died at Syrmium, and the Senate
dedicated to his honor his Statue of Massy Gold in a Discus of Gold in the
Senate; and his Statue of Gold also in the Capitol before the Temple of Jupiter
of ten Foot high; as also a Columna rostrata, with his Statue on the top of it
of fifteen hundred Pound of Brass. He was a great Persecutor of the Christians.

Virtus Claudii Aug. Claudius holding an Horse, intimating his Governing the
Commonwealth, represented often by an Horse.

Divus Claudius Caesar Consecratio. We read not of his Consecration by the
Senate; this then must be according to the common Voice and Desire of the
People.

Divo Claudio Consecratio. Claudius young, as about seventeen Years old;
showing him after his Consecration to have renewed his Vigor, and to continue
always youthful.

6. M. Aurelius Claudius Quintillus, Brother of Claudius, was chosen Emperor by
the Army left in Italy; and after his Brother's death confirmed by the Senate;
he reigned seventeen days, and hearing that Aurelianus was chosen Emperor by
the Soldiers, he cut his Veins and bled to death, or some say he was slain in a
Mutiny by the Soldiers, and, as appears by his Medals, Consecrated after his
death.

7. Victoria, or Victorina, seems to have been the Sister of Postumus, a Woman
of great Understanding, Generosity and Artifice, as appears by her insinuating
so much into the Soldiers Affections, that she made them choose her Son and
Grandchild, and afterward her Kinsman Tetricus Emperors: Called Mother of the
Armies, and being another Zenobia.

Septimia (as appears by a Brass Coin set out by Seguinus) Zenobia seems to
have been a Syrian, and probably a Jewess at least by Profession; or else a
Samosatenian Christian; tho some say Samosatenus fell into his Heresy by
endeavoring to convert her from Judaism. She never lay with her Husband after
she had once conceived; was a Woman of great Understanding, Prudence, Courage,
Constancy, Gravity, Eloquence, Justice and Laboriousness; marching a foot many
times in the Head of her Infantry, and haranguing the Soldiers with her Helmet;
sometimes also she would drink with the Officers, whereby she kept those
unconstant Nations always firm to her. Her extraordinary Abilities, and the
Services done against the Persians, by her Husband Odenatus and her self,
merited Pardon from Aurelianus. At first she reigned under the Title of her
Sons, but afterward she styled her self Queen of the East; designing to
subject the whole East; and afterward march into the West, and joining with
Victorina, make themselves Mistresses of that also For which cause Aurelian
came upon her, and in a great Battle overcame her; but offered her Peace, and a
quiet Retreat; which she refused, trusting to the Aids of the Persians,
Sarazens, etc. which Aurelian turned from her: So that in fine, he besieged her
in Palmyrene her chief City, whence she escaped upon a Diomedary, but was
overtaken at Euphrates, brought back, and carried in Triumph in Chains of Gold
and rich Jewels; afterward she had Houses and Lands to a great Value near
Tivoli Tiburtium, where she and her Family lived a long time in great Honor,
and left Posterity after them in Rome.

Herennianus and Timolaus Sons of Odenatus and Zenobia, one or both, after the
Death of their Father, were called Augusti by Gallienus, notwithstanding the
whole Power was in Zenobia. What became of them is uncertain; most probable
that Herennianus died before, and that Timolaus lived with her at Tiburtium,
and left his Posterity at Rome.

Hermias Vaballathus was the Son of Herodes, Son of Odenatus by another Wife,
to his prejudice, it should seem, Zenobia and her two Sons reigned; or else
that she governed under his Title, who it seems after the Murder of his
Father, was brought up in some place of Armenia, or there abouts, under the
Protection of the Romans; and that Aurelian made use of his Soldiers and
Subjects to quell Zenobia. Most of his Medals are Reverses to Aurelianus.

Imp. C. Aurelianus Aug. the East mingled with some Lines of Aurelian,.
Vabalathus UCrim PR. the Image of Vabalathus crowned with Laurel.

(...) (his Father being called Athenes Herodianus or Herodes, the Syrians
commonly (as this Prince) had two Names, one Greek, the other Syrian. (...).
being the fourth Year of his Reign, which was the first of Aurelianus; and in
another Medal the fifth of his, which was the second of Aurelian.

8. Septimus was made Emperor by the Soldiers in Dalmatia, and presently by
them slain

Zosimus also names one Epitymius; and another Achilleus a Kinsman of Zenobia
reigning in Egypt, and defeated by Diocletian; these two may probably be the
same, the Coins being inscribed. (...).

Zosimus also names Urbanus, but if not he that was Governor of Palestine, and
put to death by Maximianus; we know nothing of him.

Domitianus also is named, probably that Claudius Domitius Domitianus the
General of Aureolus, an eager and valiant Man, who defeated the Macriani; and
in hatred to Aurelian (who slew Aureolus -with his own hand, when Claudius
would have saved him) being Governor of Egypt, was chosen by the Alexandrians;
there being a Medal of such a one, with Ale. under the Reverse.

Antiochus was made Emperor by the Palmyrenians against Aurelian, who came upon
them, ruined their City, but spared Antiochus as unworthy his Anger.

M. Firmius an inseparable Companion of Zenobia, the Relics of whose Army he
gathered up, and when Aurelian was passed over into Thrace, with them, and the
Aid of some Neighboring Nations he made himself Emperor in Egypt; but Aurelian
returning upon him, shut him up in Alexandria, where he took and slew him.

9. C. Pivesuvius Tetricus of a Senatorian Family, being Governor of Gallia
Aquitanica, was by Victorina persuaded to suffer himself to be chosen Emperor;
he governed all Gallia and part of Spain, defending them with great Valor,
Justice and Prudence for ten Years together, till Faustinus endeavoring to
debauch the Army from him, he sent to surrender himself to Aurelian; when the
Armies met, Tetricus and his Friends were in the Van, and went over to
Aurelian, abandoning his Seditious Soldiers to the Mercy of Aurelian, who slew
many of them. Yet Aurelian carried both Tetricus and his Son in their Imperial
Robes in Triumph; but afterward honored him very much, employing him in
^erning the most important Provinces in Italy, (...) which Employment he lived
a long time in great Content; and after his Death, in the time of Tacitus, was
consecrated.

Imp: Pesuvius Tetricus Aug.. Pivesuvius Aug. which Pivesuvius seems to be the
Name of some Family into which he was adopted; his Son also bore the same Name.

Tetricus and his Son,. AEternitas [Imperii] Aug. a Goddess holding a Globe, on
which stands an Eagle; the Eagle a Symptom of long Life and Eternity; which was
wished to Tetricus to be continued in his Family by his Son.

C. Pac. Tetricus seems to have been the eldest Son of Tetricus, being on his
Medals called Augustus, which the other was not, Histories mention him not; it
seems he died presently, his Medals being very rare.

P. Pivesuvius Tetricus, another Son of C. Pisuv. Tetricus, was made Caesar
when very Young; he was led in Triumph with his Father by Aurelianus; but was
well treated by Aurelian, being left in the Senate, enjoyed all his Patrimony,
and was much honored by all Men.

CHAP. XXII. Of Lucius Domitius Aurelianus, Claudius Tacitus, Annius Florianus,
Sempronius Saturninus, Bonossus, AElius Proculus.
1. Lucius Domitius Aurelianus, probably called L. Valerius Aurelianus, and
assumed that of Domitius after his Adoption by Ulpius Crimitus, who it seems,
was of the Familia Domitia, was born in Dacia or Mysia, of his Father named
Aurelius, Farmer to a Senator, and his Mother Priestess of the Sun: He reigned
six Years, and was Traitorously slain by Mucapor. He was a great Justicier,
enemy to all wicked Persons, Chaste, and so Severe, that he was accounted
Cruel; and for that reason Valerian preferred Postumus before him to educate
his Son; and he was ordinarily called Manus ad ferrum; of excellent Conduct and
Discipline in War; so that since Caesar, none performed such great things in
Person as he; defeating the Goths, and taking Cannabus, their General,
Prisoner; as also the Marcomans, Su^ves, etc. breaking into Italy, without
giving them Battle, only by Advantageous Ski mishes: Thence he went to settle
the City, where he was cried out upon as Cruel, for putting some Senators to
death: Thence against Zenobia, in the way destroying the Barbarians that had
invaded Bithynia, he met her accompanied with Zabas her General, who had
reduced Egypt under her Command; their Army consisted of Seventy thousand Men
at Emesa, where, after a sore and bloody Battle, he forced them to fly:
Afterward he took her and Palmyra, where treating them severely, as soon as he
was gone from them into Europe fighting against the Carpi, they rebelled, so
that he returned and ruined the City entirely: Thence he went into Egypt
against Firmius, whom he took and slew: Thence against Tetricus: Thence he went
to Rome and triumphed, leading with him twenty Nations Captives; where after
having settled the Commonwealth, and made many good Laws; he marched against
the Persians relieving Ausburg by the way; but being near Byzantium, he was
slain by Mucapor suborned by his ungrateful Secretary Mnestheus, whom he had
threatened to punish for some Fault; fearing therefore his Displeasure, he
showed the Mutinousest Heads of the Army a Counterfeit List of such Names as
Aurelian intended to put to death, by that means inciting them against him. The
Army (which loved him exceedingly because of his Valor and Bounty) executed his
Murderers, and built him a Magnificent Tomb in the place wherein he was slain,
and sent to the Senate to choose a new Emperor, which they did after six Months.
He built the Walls of Rome, yet finished them not, walled with B^icks the
Channel of the Tyber, from the City a great way down toward Ostia, repressed
the Mint-masters who falsified the Coin, and fearing Punishment, raised an Army
against him, which he defeated and slew many of them.

Pietas Aug. Aurelian and Severina Sacrificing with a Star before them, which
was the Sun, to whom Aurelian bore a particular Devotion, calling him Dominum
suum; probably the first Sacrifice they made in the Temple of the Sun which
they built.

His Wife was Severina, as appears by the Medals, for Historians neither name
nor speak much of her; only they say, that one time she desired leave of her
Husband to wear a Skarlet Silk Gown, which he would not permit: Saying, that it
was a Shame to buy Threads as dear as Gold, for at that time one Pound of that
Silk was equal in value to one Pound of Gold. He had also a Daughter, but not
so much as her name is known.

2. M. Claudius Tacitus being Prince of the Senate, was chosen Emperor Anno
276. reigned six Months and twenty Days, and was killed at Tyana at the Age of
Sixty five Years. The Soldiers and Senate complimented one another for six
Months about the Choice of an Emperor; at last the Senate chose this, a very
Prudent, Wise, Valiant, Moderate, Clement Person, and though Aged, yet
Vigorous; for which Action they were exceedingly joyed, as if their Ancient
Power had been returned them. He took well that the Senate at his request
denied to make his Brother Consul. He gave all the Money he had, which was a
very great Sum, immediately to the Soldiers: He undertook an Expedition
against the Goths, who (having been sent for by Aurelian to help him against
the Persians, and finding him dead) had seized upon the Provinces near to
Pontus; where he conquered them in two Battles. He severely punished all who
had hands in the Murder of Aurelian; returning back toward Europe, finding so
many laid wait for his Life, he died out of Melancholy, as is supposed.

Conservator Militum Suorum; for had not he accepted the Empire, the Soldiers
had either been disbanded or grown Licentious.

3. M. Annius Florianus Brother to Tacitus's Mother, was chosen Emperor after
Tacitus's death; he reigned two Months, and either killed himself, or was slain
by the Soldiers unanimously favoring the Election of Probus. He was not so
sufficient, as desirous, to govern; and therefore immediately after his
Nephew's death seized upon it: But hearing that the Syrian Legions had chosen
Probus, he left the Goths half conquered (permitting them to return into their
Country) to go fight Probus; and to that purpose marched to Tarsus, Probus
being weaker, delayed to fight till the Advantages were equal; when the Armies
came in sight, they separated without fighting, as endeavoring an
Accommodation. But Probus mean while debauched Florianus's Legions from him;
insomuch that Probus's Soldiers came to Florianus and took away his Robes; but
he taking heart put them on again; and sent to Probus to know if he would
partake of the Empire. Probus having got all the Soldiers, sent him word, that
he must either be a private Man or dye. So he chused to have his Veins cut, and
died,

A. P. Sempronius Saturninus a Gaul, a Man of great Abilities, and who had done
very eminent Services for the Empire, was by Valerian set over the Eastern
Limits of the Empire; but forbid to come into Egypt: Yet in Aurelian's time he
came to Alexandria, where he was presently saluted by that giddy People
Augustus; which he refused, and immediately retreated into Palestine, where
considering with the Soldiers, that what had been done was sufficient to give
Umbrage to Aurelian, who never pardoned; and that therefore they were in
eminent Danger; the Soldiers forced him to accept the Title, which he
maintained till Probus's reign; who offered him pardon if he would lay down his
Arms; which the Soldiers fearing Revenge, would not suffer him to do. So Probus
came against him, and with very great difficulty forced him into a Castle,
there besieging him, and there he was slain against the will of Probus, who
would gladly have preserved him.

5. Q. Bonosus a Britain, but spending most of his time in Spain, was made
Governor of the Frontiers of Rhetia (the Grisons,) he was a very great
Drinker, yet never Drunk; and Aurelian made use of him to make the Ambassadors
of the Barbarous Nations Drunk, and get out their Secrets. The Germans burning
one time all the Roman Ve^els that were upon the Rhine and in his Custody,
fearing Punishment he made himself be declared Emperor, and maintained himself
in Gallia a great while, till after a long and sore Battle, being conquered and
taken by Probus he was hanged.

His Wife was Hunila Daughter of a King of the Goths, a Beautiful, Virtuous and
Discreet Woman, whom being Captive, Aurelian gave to Bonosus, to the end that
being next to the Barbarians, by her means he might have better Intelligence
concerning them. By her he had two Sons; they were all honorably maintained by
Probus after Bonosus's death.

Titus AElius Proculus, a very Valiant and Experienced Captain, but much given
to Lust, was persuaded by his Wife to make himself Emperor; which, with the
help of the Lionois, and some Slaves added to his Army, he did: but was first
chased by Probus, then taken, together with his Son Herennianus (whom he
intended to make his Companion in the Empire) and slain.

His Wives name was Viturgia, called also Samso, an Ambitious Woman.

CHAP. XXIII. Of M. Aurel. Val. Probus, M. Aurelius Carus, M. Aurel.
Numerianus, J. Sabinus, Aurelius Carinus, Eugenius.
1. M. Aurel. Val. Probus Son of Maximus, a Man Famous amongst the Soldiers, It
is said that his Brother Domitian, and his Nephews Probus and Metrophanes, Sons
of Domitianus, were Bishops of Constantinople, v Jus. Cp. R. p. 297.
was born A. D. 231. reigned seven Years, more or less, and was slain by his
Soldiers at Syrmium the place of his Birth. He was very Mild, Just, Liberal,
but severe toward the Soldiers, never suffering them to be Idle; insomuch that
at their leisure times he made them Plant Vines in several Countries (as
Hannibal (to whom he was compared) filled Africa with Olive Trees) yet very
liberal to them, never retaining to himself any thing of the Spoil but the
Arms. He was so Moderate, that he withstood, as much as he could, being chosen
Emperor, though in all Men's Judgments the fittest for it. He was mightily
esteemed by all the preceding Emperors; Valerian making him Tribune of the
third Legion before he had a Beard; Aurelian designed him for his Successor.
Tacitus would have had him chosen Emperor, and made him Lieutenant General
through all the East. At twenty Years old he sought against the Sarmatae, where
he was honored with four Hastae purae, two Vallares Coronae, one Civique, four
Ensigns Military, two Bracelets, one Chain, and a Plate of Gold weighing five
Pound. After the Death of Tacitus, the chief Officers speaking to the Soldiers
to choose an Emperor Fortem, Sanctum, Verecundum, Clementem, Probum, they all
cried out with one accord, Probe Dii te salvent. His first care was to search
out and punish all those that had alarmed Tacitus, or had any hand in the
Murder of Aurelian; but all that assisted Florianus he pardoned. The Senate
was infinitely rejoiced with his Election, for indeed never any Man had
performed such and so many noble and heroical Exploits before being Emperor, as
he had done; nor any Man, in so short a space of time, so many after; for in
Gallia he slew, at diverse Battles, Four hundred thousand Barbarians, took from
them Seventy Towns, with all the Booty and Wealth they had got; nine Kings he
had Prisoners at one time: Afterward he marched into their (the Germans)
Country, destroyed their Army, took Semnon their King and his Son Prisoners. He
defeated the Franks, Vandals, Bargundians, and took their General Ingillus, and
sent the Prisoners to People Britanny. Thence he went against the Sarmatae,
whom he forced to restore all that ever they had taken from the Romans. Thence
into Thrace, where he so frighted the Goths, Scythians and Getae, that they
absolutely submitted to him. Thence he passed into Asia, destroyed in Isauria
the dangerous Thief Palfurius, and settled all the Provinces. Thence he went
into the East, where he subdued the Blemmyes, took the strong Cities Copten and
Ptolomais. He so frighted the Persians, that they sent to beg Peace, which he
refused: Mean while he sent vast Numbers of Barbarians to People the wast
Regions of the Empire; some of whom rebelled and spoiled others of the
Provinces. Having triumphed over an infinite number of Nations, he departed to
go against the Persians; when employing his Soldiers to drain some Marshes
about Syrmium, and withal, saying, That he hoped after a while there would be
no more need of Soldiers, (which was an Aim more glorious than ever any had
before him) his Army mutined against him and slew him. Nor indeed was there any
of the ancient Heroes, to whom he was Inferior. He was Consecrated.

Siscia Probi Aug. probably his Birth Place, a City in Pannonia situated
between the Savus (Saw) and Colapis (Calpa) which makes an Island called
Segestica wherein Siscia is situated, now called Sisceck, the chief Town of
Croatia.

His Wife was said to be Julia Procla, no Hi^y names her; Seguinus has set
out a Coin (...), her Head with an unusual dress: (...) whether it were this or
no, or who it was, he knows not.

2. M. Aurelius Carus was born A. D. -- was chosen after Probus; reigned about
one Year, was slain by Thunder; not much unlike or inferior to Probus, only
more Ambitious and less Religious than he, suffering himself to be si^ed upon
his Medals, Deo ac Domino nostro Caro. Going against the Persians, they sent an
Ambassade to him; who found him lying on the Grass at Dinner upon salt Pork and
Pease; after they had told their Message, he bid them tell their Master, that
if he did him not Reason in a short space he would make his Kingdom as bare as
his Head, showing them withal hid bald Head, and envited the Ambassadors to
Dinner, who returning with their answer, the King came in Person, and yielded
to all Carus demanded. Finding the Soldiers mutining against Probus, (whose
Praefectus Praetorii he was) and that they practiced to make himself Emperor,
he informed Probus desiring liberty to retire, but Probus would not suffer him.
Probus being Murdered, he revenged his death severely. Afterward defeated the
Sarmatae; and afterward the Persians in Mesopotamia; thence he entered Assyria,
took Ctesiphon and Seleucia; after which he became Sick, and after a great
Thunder-storm, was found dead in his Tent. He was Consecrated.

3. M. Aur. Numerianus, younger Son of Carus, was by him made Caesar at his
first being Emperor, and Augustus after the Victory over the Sarmatae. He
accompanied his Father into Persia, servived some Months, and was Murdered by
Arrius Aper his Father-in-Law. He was the best Orator and Poet of his time,
besides of wonderful Magnanimity, Sufficiency and Virtue. He so much lamented
the death of his Father, that it brought a Rheum into his Eyes, so that he was
forced continually to March in his Litter closed; which occasion Aper took to
Murder him at his return from Conquering the Persians, and taking Babylon;
which was not known till betrayed by the Smell. He was Consecrated.

Virtus Augustorum: Numerianus and Carinus fighting against their Enemies, many
of whom lie dead under them.

The Name of his Wife is not known, he had a Son called Basiliscus a great
Persecutor of the Christians, as both himself and Father were.

Julianus Sabinus, after the death of Carus made himself Emperor near the
Veneti, he was Corrector Venetorum, which was the same with Governor, he was
overthrown and slain by Carinus going to fight Diocletian.

4. A. Aurel. Carinus was born at Narbone about A. D. 250. was made Caesar and
Augustus at the same time with his Brother Numerianus, he reigned about two
Years six Months, and was slain about the Age of thirty six Years, not unlike
in Disposition to Gallienus; save that he was more Cruel and Lustful, and
Gallien more Ingenious and Handsome; he had nine Wives, all which he cast off
successively, slew an incredible number of Persons without cause. His Father
hearing of his ill Carriage, said he was not his Son, and intended to send
Constantius Chlorus to succeed him. Hearing that Diocletian reigned instead of
his Brother, he went to fight him in Pannonia, where, after having overcome
him, he was slain by his own Officers for his evil Carriage, especially toward
their Wives.

Eugenius, a Tribune, having fifteen hundred Men to cleanse the Port of
Seleucia, was by them forced to take upon him to be Emperor; the same Night
they seized upon Antioch, where the People slew them and Eugenius among them.
But Diocletian most cruelly punished these two Cities for this Rebellion; as
afterward Egypt for creating Achilleus, of whom before.

M. Aurel. Julianus is named by some Authors, little known of him.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Diocletianus, Valerius Maximianus, C. Carausius, Allectus,
Constantius Chlorus, Galerius Maximianus, Valerius Severus, Alexander,
Maximinus Daza, Valerius Maxentius, Bassianus, C. Julius Valens, Licinianus
Licinius, Valerius Licinianus Licinius, Calocerus, Fl. Delmatius, Jul.
Delmatius, Claudius, Hanniballianus.
. 1. C. Valor. Diocletianus (called before Diocles) was born of his Father a
Freedman of Anulinus a Senator, and his Mother called Dioclea, in Dioclea a
City of Dalmatia about A. D. 245. reigned twenty Years, quitted the Empire and
lived retired in his own Country nine Years. Afterward killed himself for fear
of Constantine and Licinius at the Age of sixty eight Years; was extraordinary
Cunning and Subtle, distrustful of his Friends, horribly Cruel and Insolent,
making himself be called God and Jupiter; also Dominus a Name hateful to the
Romans, and clothed with the greatest Splendour possible. To encourage the
Worship of himself he endeavored to extirpate Christianity. From a private
Soldier he came to be Master of the Palace to Carus and Numerian, and finding
Numerian Murdered by Aper, he presently slew him, upon which the Soldiers
proclaimed him Emperor. His horrid Cruelties (which notwithstanding he sought
to father upon Maximian) obscured his good Actions; the Persecution against the
Christians he began upon occasion of an Oracle of Apollo, who said he could not
speak truth because of the Just; he asking who were those Just, it was answered
the Christians: thereupon he began to persecute them, and spared not his own
Wife Serena, or any of his Friends who refused to worship Idols. But seeing the
great number of Christians, he ordained to put out one of their Eyes. Seeing it
impossible for one Man to defend the Empire, he chused Val. Maximianus his old
Acquaintance, and asterward Galerius Maximianus and Constantius: Maximian he
sent into Gallia against Amandas and AElianus, Rebels, whom he Conquered; but
was forced to compound with Carausius who reigned in Britanny. Mean while
Diocletian Conquered Achilleus in Egypt, and afterward sent Maximianus against
some Rebels in Africa whom he reduced; and Galerius Maximianus against the
Persians who beat him; but returning with more Strength upon them he Conquered
them. Diocletian went against the Saracens. The great Cause of their good
Fortune was their Concord (which outwardly was inviolable, though there was
inward Grudgings amongst them all) by the Authority and Cunning of Diocletian;
who at last seeing the great Success of Galerius, and the Valor and good
Fortune of Young Constantine, began to suspect his own Condition; and fearing
in his old Age to come to misery by one or other of those young Men, he quitted
the Empire at Nicomedia; Herculius Maximianus doing the same the same day at
Milan, both using the same words, Recipe Jupiter quod commodasti. He died, some
say, in continual Apprehensions of being destroyed by Lightning, which his
Palace once was; others say that Constantine Marrying his Sister to Licinius,
invited him to the Marriage; which he refusing, they sent some threatening
words; in as much as he favored Maximian and Maxentius; fearing therefore they
should put him to some shameful Death, he poisoned himself.

Jovi invicto Aug. communicating to Jupiter his Attribute of Augustus, and
assuming to himself the Name and Epethite of Jupiter; in all his Patents he
called himself Jovius, and adopted Maximianus, whom he called also Herculius:
probably pretending to make the Christians, when they worshipped the Statues of
the Emperors, to adore the Gods also.

His Wife was named Serena, as appears by the Martyrologies, especially that of
St. Susanna his Niece; whom she persuaded to Constancy in her Religion, and
with whom she was Beheaded on the Fifteenth of August, as some say, others say
she survived her a while, and died of a natural Death: as also was Gaius (Pope)
and Gabinius, (the Father of St. Susanna) Sons of his Brother Maximinus; and
many others of his Kindred.

L. Pomponius AElianus, and Saloninus Amandus, headed a great number which were
discontented with the Government of Carinus, who called themselves Bagaudae,
who seized upon a great part of Gallia, and were at last defeated by Maximianus.

2. M. Aurel. Valor. Maximianus (surnamed Herculius) was born at Syrmium in
Pannonia of obscure Parents, about A. D. 249. reigned twenty Years, and was
strangled by the command of Constantine, being about sixty Years old. He was
Clownish, Brutish, Cruel, Fierce, Lustful, Treacherous and Proud, yet a good
Soldier. Diocletian made use of him to act all his barbarous and inhumane
Cruelties; keeping still an ascendent above him, both because of his better
Understanding and Parts, and also the Authority of Adopting him; so that
against his Inclination he persuaded, or rather overruled him to lay down the
Empire with him: but this forced Retirement lasted not long, before he sought
an occasion to be in Action again, which offered it self by Maxentius (supposed
and taken by himself to be his Son) who living near to Rome, was solicited by
the Praetorian Guards and the Populace, to declare himself Emperor, seeing
Constantine succeed Constantius; which he did, and committed many Wickednesses
and Insolences; which Maximian perceiving, returned from his Retirement to
retake the Government, which he could not endure should be usurped by his Son.
But at first he pretended only to reform and establish the Commonwealth, to
restrain his Son, etc. Mean while Galerius Maximianus had made one Severus
Caesar, and sent him into Italy with a puissant Army against Maxentius, who
bribing his Soldiers, defeated him, and afterward slew him at Ravenna; which
to Revenge Galerius came in Person, but returned without doing any thing.
Maximian hereupon thinking the Crimes of his Son rendered him Odious, came into
the Army, harangued them, and endeavored to pluck the Purple from his Son; but
the Army took against him, baffled, and would have killed him, had he not
excused himself by saying, That what he did was to try their Constancy and
Affection to his Son. Thence he went to Illyricum, where he was also rejected,
and at last to Constantine to whom he married his Daughter Maximiana Fausta,
yet perfidiously sought to Murder him; which he could not bring about by reason
of the great Affection both Soldiers and People bore to Constantine, to whom it
was at last revealed by his Wife; which Maximian knowing, fled first to Arles,
thence to Marseilles, where endeavoring to escape, he was caught and strangled
by the command of Constantine.

Virtuti Aug. Htrcules carrying the Boar, alluding to Diocletian's killing
Aper, wherein possibly Maximianus assisted him.

His Wife was Val. Eutropia, a Widow, having a Daughter Theodora, who was
married to Constantius. She seems to have been a Christian at least after the
death of Maximianus, by whom she had Maximiana Fausta, married to Constantine.

3. C. Carausius an Irish Man, at first a Pyrate, afterward commanded a Fleet
upon the Coast of France to defend the Continent from the Allemans, Saxons,
etc. against whom he obtained many Victories. After a while he connived at
their Landing and Robberies, and at their return homewards, fought them, and
took their Prey, whereby he became very rich; not restoring any thing to the
poor People, nor paying any thing to the Emperor, and seized upon Britain;
where he maintained himself so well, that Maximian was glad to make Peace with
him, leaving him the Command of the Island, upon Condition he should defend it
against the Barbarians. He was after seven Years reign slain by Allectus the
Captain of his Guards.

Allectus being an able and experienced Soldier, was chosen by Carausius to
Command his Fleets; when for some Misdemeanors committed, fearing Carausius
would put him to death, he slew him by Treachery, and enjoyed the Government
three Years, till Constantius by the help of Asclepiodotus undertook the War
against him, and first took from him Bologne; and afterward Landed in diverse
parts of Britain, fought with and ruined Allectus; who seeing his Army
defeated, with the desperatest of his Men he fell in upon the Enemies, and was
there cut in pieces.

4. Flavius Valor. Constantius, surnamed Chlorus Son of Flavius Eutropius, a
great Person amongst the Dardaniens, and Claudia Daughter of Crispus, the
Brother of Claudius the Emperor, was made Caesar by Dioclet. and Maximian, in
which Quality he reigned twelve Years one Month, and after the Retirement of
those two he was Augustus two Years three Months, he died of a natural death at
York. He was Chaste, Civil, Prudent, Sober, Liberal, Good natured, Charitable, a
very good Soldier and Politician, but wanted Learning: He neglected so much
getting of Wealth, that being one time to make a Feast greater than ordinary,
he was glad to tax the Houses of the City to furnish him; he was most
exceedingly beloved and reverenced by the Gauls. Diocletian sent some Persons
of Quality to admonish him of the neglect of laying up Money; whom having
patiently heard, he deferred to answer till the morrow, mean while sending to
all the Monied Men of the City, that he had need of Money, and desired them to
show in that time of Exegence how much they respected him; they immediately
sent in such quantities of Money, that the Messengers were astonished at it. He
fought first against a King of the Germans, whom he defeated and took Prisoner:
^erwards against Allectus: next against the Batavi and Frisons, many of whom he
transported into Gallia; then against the Germans, who came upon him so
suddenly at Langres, that he was forced to be drawn up into the City by a Cord,
but presently after his Legions arriving, he fought them, and slew almost sixty
thousand; and lastly against the Picts. He married Helena when he was young, a
Christian, secretly, as himself also was, by whom he had Canstantine, who was
brought up by Galerius lest he should be a Christian: from whom he escaped, and
came to his Father lying sick upon his Deathbed, who presently adopted him,
not only to the Empire, but the Affections of the Army and People.

Divo Constantio Pio Principi. We find not that he was Consecrated, but it may
be these modest Titles might be rendered his Worth and Goodness after death.

Constantius veiled. memoriae aeternae: a Lion, Hercules loosing one of his
Fingers in the Battle against the Lion, it was honorably buried, and upon the
Tomb was set the Statue of the Lion; which afterward turned into a Custom to
set a Lion upon the Tomb of an Hero.

His first Wife was Julia Flavia Helena, never sufficiently to be praised:
Constantius was forced to quit her and marry Theodora; but it seems his
Affection was still toward her, and Theodora being dead, he received her
again, and made her Augusta two Years before his death, which her Son continued
to her. Her Country some make Britain, some Bithynia, where, in the time of
Carus, Constantius was Governor.

Helena veiled DHMR. i. e. Diva Helena Matter AuGG. Constantine the younger
being then dead. This, as also the Consecration of Constantine, (drawn in a
Chariot, and reaching out his Hand toward another coming out of Heaven) being
expressed thus by his Sons, Constantius and Constans.

His other Wife was Flavia Maximiana Theodora, Daughter of Eutropia the Wife of
Maximian, who when he chused Constantius, Caesar, made him put away Helena, and
marry this his Daughter-in-Law. She died before Constantius, and left six
Children, Delmatius, Constantius, Aniballianus, Constantia married to Licinius,
Eutropia Mother of Nepotianus, who rebelled against Constantius, and Anastasia
Wife to Bassianus Caesar.

Pietas Romana. Theodora giving Suck to a Child, which it seems was the Fashion
in those days.

5. Galerius Valerius Maximianus surnamed Armentarius, was born near Sardica in
Thrace of poor Country Parents. Diocletian gi^ing him his Daughter Valeria to
Wife made him Caesar, and so he continued thirteen Years; and Augustus
afterward seven Years six Months. He died miserably A. D. (...). was without
Capacity or Judgment or Experience in Civil Affairs, though Just, a good
Soldier, but extremely Arrogant, affirming with great Oaths, that he was begot
by a Dragon, as was said of Alexander; Cruel as Diocletian, Brutish as
Maximian, and Lustful as any: Being, when made Caesar, sent by Diocletian
against the Persians, and returning with loss, Diocletian made him run in his
Robes by his Litter a great way together, the Shame whereof so nettled him,
that receiving a greater Army, he fought and overcame his Enemies so much, that
Diocletian, jealous of his Honor, recalled him. Yet they triumphed, and
presently after Diocletian and Maximian retired, making Constantius and
Galerius Augustus's, and Maximinus and Severus Caesar's. But Galerius being now
in perfect Liberty and Authority, denied himself nothing that his Arrogance or
Lust suggested; particularly he outragiously persecuted the Christians; to
whom, at Nicomedia, he made a great Oration of the Glory of his Actions, and
the Prosperity of the Seasons; but immediately the Weather changed, ruined all
the Corn and Fruits with Thunder and Lightning; and Maxentius made himself
Emperor in Italy; where he first defeated Severus and put him to death at
Ravenna; afterward Galerius himself coming with an Army, endeavored to draw
Maxentius to Parley; which not being able to do, and besides finding the
Country by Maxentius's Practices, ready to rise against him, he returned into
Illyricum; where he made Licinius, one of his Generals, Caesar; and thence to
Sardica in Thrace, where he fell into a Disease, that all his Body was devoured
by Worms, and so he died. Others say, that the Stench of his Body was so
intolerable, that the Physicians could not endure it, the greatest part of whom
he therefore put to Death; but one boldly telling him, that his Disease was the
Judgment of God fallen upon him for persecuting the Christians; he by a new one
recalled his former Edicts against them; yet notwithstanding, his Disease
increased so much, that for mere Anguish he killed himself.

P. D. Jovii (for Galerius being Augustus took that name upon him, as after his
death also Maximinus did) and Licinii invictorum Augusti and Caesaris. Galerius
and Licinius holding a Globe (as partaking in the Government) with a Victory
upon it.. Jovi Tutatori, etc. Moneta Karnuntensis; for at Carnuntum in Pannonia
he created Licinius Caesar, of which this Medal is the Monument; from which
Adoption, and Maximinus's taking upon him the Authority of Augustus of his own
head, proceeded afterward many Wars and Miseries.

His Wife was Galeria Valeria the Daughter of Diocletian; in Honor of whom he
called that part of Pannonia which he had drained Valeriam.

Gal. Valeria Aug. her Head curiously dressed, on the top, for a Symbol of
Felicity, a little Serpent probably of Gold, or some such like matter, called,
as it should seem, (...), or a Sling; Women having that part of their Head
hollower than Men, they filled it up, and covered with a certain Ornament;
which because tied on with Ribbons, they called it a Sling.

6. Flavius Valerius Severus, chosen Caesar by Constantius and Galerius after
the Retirement of the two old Emperors, Anno 306. he was defeated, taken and
slain by Maxentius at Tres Tabernae, having reigned about two Years, a weak
Man, a Drunkard, and was chosen by Galerius, who hoped to have him obedient. He
was set over Italy and Africa (Constantius having Britain, Gallia and Spain)
but Maxentius, Son of Maximianus, and Son-in-law to Galerius, took it ill that
Severus, the Nephew of Galerius's Father-in law, should be preferred before
him; and therefore he solicited the Praetorian Soldiers and the Populace, who
chose him Emperor. Against him Severus came with a great Army as far as Milan,
but Maxentius debauched by Money and Promises a great part of his Army, and
even Anullinus his Prefect of the Praetorium; so that Severus was forced to
save himself in Ravenna with the rest of his Troops, where Maxentius in vain
besieged him. But Maximianus Herculius, pretending to compose the Difference
between them, persuaded Severus to come forth to a Personal Conference with
Maxentius; which doing, he was entrapped by an Ambush laid for him, and slain
by the Counsel of the said Maximianus Herculius.

7. Alexander, A Phrygian of mean Birth, Timorous and Lazy and Aged, being
Sub-praefect of the Praetorium, was chosen Emperor in Asrick; for Maxentius
sending his Statues to be adored in Asrick, the People, who were affected to
Galerius refused, and made an Insurrection. Maxentius therefore endeavoring to
go thither with an Army, was hindered by his Diviners, who foretold him ill
Luck if he went; wherefore he sought other ways, and sent to make this
Alexander of his Party; and to that end desired him to send his Son (a
beautiful young Man) for an Hostage; which he absolutely refusing, and fearing
the Revenge of Maxentius, was forced to declare himself Emperor, by the consent
of them that were in Insurrection; which Maxentius understanding, sent against
them his Praefectus Praetorii Volusianus, and Zenas an old General, who
defeated Alexander, and took him Prisoner at Cirta and strangled him.

We find also some few Medals of one Nigrinianus a Youth, and consecrated; but
no History or Inscription informs us who he was; for that Consul mentioned by
Occa he is not; perhaps the Son of Alexander.

8. C. Valerius Galerius Maximinus (surnamed Daza) Son to Galerius's Sister,
was made Caesar, A. D. 306. and so continued four Years, and Augustus three
Years; died miserably at Tarsus; was rude and unlearned, yet loved learned Men;
not cruel, but being Drunk (to which he was much addicted) he did many cruel
Actions. So that he made an Order, to execute none whom he had condemned in his
Drink, till he had examined the Cause again when Sober. He was (if possible) a
greater Enemy to the Christians than any of his Predecessors; was also very
Silly, Unexperienced and Insolent; for as soon as Galerius was dead, he thought
all the Empire belonged to him, and therefore began to make War upon the rest
(Licinius, Maxentius and Constantine,) but with Licinius first, because
nearest. Yet he staid a while till he saw what would become of Maxentius, whom
Constantine overcame; and yet longer, being afraid of the Alliance made between
Constantine and Licinius; and therefore he (as well as they) revoked his Edict
against the Christians; but as soon as Constantine and Licinius were at
distance, he gathered a very vast Army, using all Enchantments, etc. against
Licinius, who totally ruined his Army, and made him, casting away his Robes, to
hide himself; which he did for a time in a Farm-house; but Licinius departing,
he began to look abroad, and gather an Army; but first of all he put to death
all his Magicians, etc. as conspiring with Licinius; afterward Licinius coming
upon him, he fell into a most painful Disease, beginning with an Appus Caninus,
consuming his Flesh like an hidden Fire, forced with Pain the Eyes out of his
Head; and so he died, acknowledging the Judgment of God for his Cruelty toward
the Christians. Licinius slew all his Children and Friends.

9. M. Aurel. Valor. Maxentius Son of Maximian and Eutropia, made himself be
saluted Emperor at Rome. about A D. 306. was overcome by Constantine, and
drowned in the Tyber, having reigned six Years, and lived about thirty Years,
(...), Lustful, Cruel, Cowardly, Covetous, Heady, given to Magic, etc. At the
beginning of his Reign he feigned to be a Christian, to flatter the People, was
also very Mild, but after a while he showed his own Nature, (being from a
Child, because of his evil Disposition and Stupidity, hated by his own Father
and Father-in law) ravished their Wives, slew whom he pleased, many Senators
also, ripped up Women with Child and Infants. After the Victory obtained against
Alexander in Africa, he used very great Cruelty against the Africans, sparing
none that was accused to have sided with his Enemy; and though he ceased the
Persecution against the Christians for a while, yet began it again; he was so
hated, and yet so negligent and unable to govern, that the Cries of all that
part of the Empire obliged Constantine to come against him, who first sent him
an Embassy, offering him Conditions; with which Maxentius was so enraged, that
he threw down his Statues, and drew his Pictures through the Dirt, etc.
Constantine thus affronted, made haste over the (...), and first defeated
Ruricius Maxentius's best General, and afterward himself, accompanied with
almost two hundred thousand Men. Maxentius being mightily hated, many of his
deserted him after the first Charge; but the old Soldiers fought a long time,
till being overcome, they fled with Maxentius himself over Ponte Mola (Pons
Milvius,) which being made of Boats, and oppressed with their weight broke, and
Maxentius, with many of the rest, fell into the River and were drowned. His
Body being found the Head was cut off, and carried into Rome in Triumph.

AEternitas Aug. Nostri Moneta Ost iae percussa. Maxentius and his Son Romulus
in likeness of Castor and Pollux with their Horses.

His Wife probably was Magnia Urbica; he married the Daughter of Galerius by
his first Wife, whom he quitted when made Caesar. Two days before the great
Battle Maxentius was so tormented in his Palace, that with his Wife and Son he
quitted it, and went to lodge in a private House.

M. Aurel. Valor. Romulus eldest Son of Maxentius, when made Caesar, or died,
uncertain; only he died Young and was consecrated.

Divo Romulo Nostrae Urbis Conservatori.

Imp. Maxentius Divo Romulo NV (nostrae urbis) filio.

10. Bassianus Caesar. Constantinus having married his Sister to Licinius, sent
to him Constantius (Son of Constantius, Chlorus and Theodora) his half Brother,
to persuade him that Bassianus (the Husband of Anastasia another of their
Sisters might be made Caesar, and govern Italy, which he did; and Licinius
afterward practiced him by (...) (Bassian's Brother) to take part against
Constantine; but Constantine coming upon him before he was provided, took and
slew him; demanding Senecio of Licinius, and being refused, and for other
reasons, as sor throwing down his Images, etc. he made War upon Licinius.

Anastasia probably was afterward married to I. Ranius Ac^itus Optatus, whom
Constantine made Patricius an Honor above the Praefecti Praetorii, and next to
the Emperor himself; he was slain after by Constantius.

C. Julius Valens was created Caesar by Licinius (when conquered by
Constantine) whose Confident he was; to raise Men in Thrace and thereabouts,
with greater Authority, which he did, and they fought again, where Licinius
also was beaten, and made Peace with Constantine, upon condition that Valens
should be deposed and put to death.

Licinius, upon the same ground, made also M. Martinianus, another of his
Confidents, Caesar and Augustus; but both of them were defeated and taken in
another Battle near Chalcedon; and Martinianus put to death, but Licinius
consined to Thessalonica, where endeavoring to raise new Seditions, he was
slain.

11. C. Valor. Licinianus Licinius born in Dacia (Transylvania) of mean
Parents, Anno 275. He was first made Caesar, and sent into Illyricum, then
Augustus, and succeeded Galerius and Maximinus (whom he overcame) in the East,
and reigned about fifteen Years in all; being vanquished many times by
Constantine, he was at last put to death in Thessalonica, about Sixty Years
old. He was Cruel, Traitorous, Uncivil, Lustful, Covetous above all the rest,
and so great an Enemy to Learning, that he persecuted all the Professors of it,
especially Orators, Advocates, and People belonging to Law-Courts, as also the
Philosophers. So was he also an Enemy of Flatterers and such like Courtiers; A
good Soldier and given much to Husbandry: Galerius made him Emperor against
Maxentius; but before he went against him Galerius died, and presently after
Maximinus declared War against him, for making himself Caesar without his
leave, and taking also from him part of his Government. But Maximinus was
defeated, and afterward died. So Licinius became Monarch of the East as
Constantine was of the West, who agreed very well together, and met at Milan,
where Constantine married to him his half Sister Constantia. Amongst other
Articles of their Agreement, one was to favor the Christians (setting out
Edicts in both their names to that purpose) which Licinius observed about three
Years for fear of Constantine, and his own Wife who was a Christian, and also
exceeding affectionate to Constantine. But his Hypocrisy discovered it self
after a while, for being at Nicomedia, he first turned all Christians out of
his Court, pe^secuted the rest, openly showed himself a Zealous Professor of
Paganism; and withal he (...) ravishing Senators Wives and Daughters; of all
which Constantia advertising her brother secretly, he resolved to make War upon
him, for that and the business of Bassianus; and after a long Fight near Cibala
in Pannonia, forced him to fly to Syrmium, and thence into Dacia; where making
Valens Caesar he raised a new Army and fought again in Campo Margiensi; where
the night coming on, hindered that Licinius was not totally defeated: So he
marched away to Beraea in Macedonia, and there sent an Ambassador to
Constantine to beg Peace; whom, after a long time of Deliberation, whether he
should receive him, at length he heard, and granted Peace upon certain
Conditions. After which they made Crispus, Constantine and Licinius, Caesar's.
But Constantine being gone against the Goths and Sarmatae, Licinius began a new
horrible Persecution against the Christians, and complained of Constantine with
Threatenings, for taking away Thrace from him, making it the Seat of the Wars
against the Goths; with whom it seems Licinius held Intelligence, and made use
of against Constantine. After many Treaties of Accommodation, etc. Constantine
assembled a great Army and Fleet and fell upon him. Jul. Crispus (Son of
Constantine by Minervina his former Wife) commanded the Fleet, and was sent
against him in Asia, whilst Constantine fought with him about Hadrianople, who
disordered and vanquished Licinius, killing Thirty four thousand and forcing
his Camp. Licinius fled to Byzance, where rallying his Men, and making
Martinianus Emperor, he got up a new Army. But Constantine besieged him in
Byzance, Crispus also with his Fleet defeated Licinius's Fleet coming to his
Aid; which Licinius hearing, retired, with his Wife, Son, Treasures and Army,
to Chalcedon; and whilst Constantine besieged Byzance, he got Aid from the
Goths; which Constantine hearing, lest Crispus before Byzance, and went himself
into Bithynia to fight Licinius; they met near Chalcedon, where Licinius lost
his Army, and escaped with some Horse to Nicomedia, where he was besieged by
Constantine; there Licinius begged his Life by his Wife Constantia; which was
granted, and he was sent to Thessalonica, where practicing new Insurrections,
he was put to death.

His Wife was Fl. Valeria Constantia, Sister to Constantine, a Christian,
Prudent and Virtuous, endeavoring all she could to hinder the Persecution, and
Solace the Christians; after Licinius's death, her Brother treated her so Nobly
and Honorably, that she was in the same esteem with him as Helena his Mother
had been. Yet afterward she turned Arrian, and persuaded Constantine to recall
Arrius who was banished: Afterward she seemed to return Catholic. She had by
Licinius one Son called Licinianus Licinius.

Fl. Valor. Licinianus Licinius, Son of Licinius and Constantia, was born A. D.
312. was made Caesar at twenty Months old, at fourteen Years old was put to
death by Constantine, by the Practices of Fausta, to whom perhaps jealous for
her own Sons, his hopefulness gave some Umbrage, if not to Constantine himself.
Who foresaw that his Fathers old Officers applying themselves to him, might
probably make some Disturbance. He seems also to have been very Opiniastre in
his Paganism, which made him suspected by his Mother and her Court, fearing
some danger from the Pagans, whose Head this young Man seemed to be, as the
Family of Constantine of the Christians. Constantine, after his Fathers death,
made him Consul with himself, and always used him as his own Son.

12. Calocerus Master of the Camels rebelled in Cyprus, and made himself King,
but Constantine sent an Army, took him and executed him as a Thief.

Fl. Delmatius Hanniballianus, Son of Constantius and Theodora, half Brother of
Constantine, was made Censor by Constantine, and probably Caesar also; as were
also his Sons, and the rest of Constantine's Brethren, though inferior to his
own Sons, or perhaps only Nobilissimi, which were inferior to Caesar's, but
above Patricii. He died before Constantine, or before his Sons were advanced,
who were Delmatius and Hanniballianus.

Fl. Jul. Delmatius was his eldest Son, and very hopeful, in many things
resembling Constantine, who made him Caesar and Cos. A. D. 333. He overcame and
took Prisoner Calocerus. He resided ordinarily with the Army in Mesopotamia;
and after Constantine's death he was designed Governor of Thrace, Macedonia and
Achaia. But Constantius (as many say) jealous of his Greatness and Favor,
underhand practiced the Soldiers to Mutiny against, and Murder, him, after he
had reigned three Years.

Fl. Claudius Hanniballianus was the younger Brother, and by Constantine made
Rex Regum and Gentium Ponticarum (i. e. Cappadocia and Armenia Minor) and had
his Daughter Constantina to Wife; he gave him that Title probably to shelter
him from the Jealousy of his own Sons; which yet he could not do; for it is
very probable that he also was put to death by the Practices of Constantius.

Securitas publica; A River, it should seem Euphrates, underneath Con. Ob. i.
e. Constantinopoli Obsignata. Showing that he was set there in those Countries
upon Euphrates, to guard that part of the Empire against the Persians.

Flavia Jul. Constantina was his Wife, after whose Death she was married to
Constantius Gallus Son of Constantius, Brother of Constantine; and caused much
evil to the Empire, being Mortalis Megaera, and ruined her Husband most
miserably; but he being called to give account of his Actions to Constantius,
this Constantina went before, in hopes to pacify her Brother, but died in the
way of a Fever. She seems not to have been that Constantina that built the
Church of St. Agnes at Rome, and wherein her self, with her Aunt Constantia,
were Baptized.

CHAP. XXV. Of Fl. Valor. Constantinus Magnus, Fl. Jul. Crispus, Fl. Jul.
Constantius, Fl. Claud. Constantinus, Fl. Jul. Constans, Flavius Popilius
Nepotianus Constantinus, Vetranio, Magnentius, Magnus Decentius, Fl. Jul.
Gallus, Silvanus.
1. FL. Valor. Constantinus, the only Son of Constantius and Helena, was born
at Naissus in Dardania, as others in Dacia, as others in Thrace, A. D. 272.
reigned One and thirty Years ten Months, and died of a natural death, Anno AEt.
65. and some Months. He was Magnus and Maximus, because of his very great
Dignity and Power; nothing laid to his Charge, but that he was too severe,
especially toward those of his own Family, having put to death his Son
Crispus, (though for a Pretext he served himself of the Accusation of his Wife
Maxim. Fausta) probably for fear least he should have proved too Great for him;
having obtained many great Victories, and being much honored by all Men. So
that Constantine seems to have been too Ambitious and Covetous of Honor,
jealous of his State and Dignity; and Bloody sometimes in his Humor,
especially in his declining Age. He was also too Negligent in his Expenses, and
not sufficiently capable to prefer Persons of best Worth to public Charges;
though Cruel to his own Relations and Family, putting Licinius to death,
Poisoning Crispus, stifling Fausta his Wife in a Bath; yet was he not at all
Cruel in his own Nature; abolishing that cruel manner of death, Crucifying; not
taking Revenge of the Egyptians for defaceing his Statues.

Herculi Conservatori Caes. Hercules strangling the Lion. Hercules represented
young, intimating Constantine himself, who whilst Hostage in the Court of
Galerius, was by him put to Combat a Lion, which he overcame and slew.

Jovi Conservatori Augg. He seems to mean Diocletian, and by Augg. Constantine
and Licinius.

Marti Conservatori. Mars resembled like Constantine; Mars also being born in
Thrace. Constantine also in his Youth was called Thracala (Thracula)
praestantissimus; the most excellent Thracian.

Soli invicto Comiti; the Sun (as Constantine) radious. Constantine being
esteemed to have the Genius of the Sun, his Swiftness, Beauty, Vigor,
unconquerable Force, Influence upon his Inferiors.

Fundator Pacis Constantine; as Mars drawing a Captive by the Hair of the Head;
probably alluding to what he did in the Wars against the Sarmatae, whither he
was sent by Galerius with a few Men, on purpose to have been destroyed; but he
overcame, and in Person drew a fierce young Sarmate by the Hair of the Head
before Galerius.

Constantine having on his Headpiece ^, which Mark is also found on some
ancient Medals even of the Ptolomees, and some Romans also; which whether any
of their Hieroglyphics, or the Letters of the Coiners name, or what else, is
uncertain. Victoriae laetae (over Maxentius and Licinius represented by two
Captives below) Principis perpetui vota ^ upon an Altar; ^ denoting Christ as
Julian notes, or signifies the Victory in his tenth Year, or vota Decennalia.

DV (Divus) Constantinus PT (Pater) Augg. Constantine veiled.. Constantine
drawn in a Chariot with four Horses, holding up his Hand toward another Hand
coming out of Heaven. It does not appear that Constantine was consecrated
either by Pagans or Christians, till a long time after by the Greeks; yet was
generally by both esteemed to be Happy and Blessed (a Man performing such great
Actions, being (as they thought) very dear to the Gods,) and though not
consecrated, yet taken up by Jupiter, reaching him his Hand to draw him up into
Heaven. Drawn in a Chariot, the Soul being called, by the Philosophers, the
Charioteer of the Body, and his Head veiled, to intimate his dazzling Splendour.
So that this Medal represents the common opinion had of him both by Christians
and Pagans.

Constantine's first Wife was Minervina, whom he married, being a Young Man,
and the Son only of Constantius Caesar; with whom he lived in great Continence;
and had by her Crispus.

2. Fl. Jul. Crispus, eldest Son of Constantine by Minervina, born at Arles,
was a Beautiful, Valiant, Courageous, Mild, Chaste, Constant, Virtuous young
Man; having all the Virtues, without any of the Vices, of his Father; was also
a Christian educated by Lactantius; in his Youth he conquered the Franks and
Allemans in the depth of Winter; also he vanquished by Sea the Admiral of
Licinius, who escaped with no more than four Vessels: He fought also with great
Reputation against the Generals of Licinius, and Licinius himself also. At
length being frequently solicited to Wickedness by Fausta his Mother-in-law,
and he refusing her, she turned her Love into Hatred; she accused him falsely to
Constantine, to have endeavored to force her, who either really, or for some
other private Consideration, feigning to believe her, condemned him to dye
without hearing him speak in his Justification; and accordingly he was put to
death by Poison. But Helena, Grandmother to Crispus, being exceedingly
grieved, and blaming her Son very much for that unjust Action; he enquired
secretly concerning the Accusation, and having discovered the Truth, he
commanded his Wife Fausta to be stifled in a Bath overheated.

It should seem he was married to one Helena, and that they had a Child, but
nothing mentioned in History: It Is said by some, that Constantine erected a
Statue of Silver with a Head of Gold to Crispus, with this Title (...), to his
Son unjustly condemned.

Constantine's second Wife was Flavia Aurelia Maximiana Fausta, the Daughter of
Maximianus and Eutropia; she had three Sons, Constantinus, Constantius and
Constans, and three Daughters. After she was dead they say, that Constantine
would not vouchsafe her Burial, but caused her Carcass to be carried to the top
of an high Mountain to be eaten by Fowls and Beasts; and that her Sons
afterward buried her Bones with their Father. She was a Pagan, and had that
Reputation with her Husband after his Victory over Maxentius, that she
persuaded him again to Idolatry; wherein notwithstanding he staid not long.

3. Fl. Jul. Constantius, the Brother of Constantine, seems to have been second
Son of Constantius and Theodora, though Factious, Seditious, and Envious of the
Glory of Constantine, (if he had failed, the Empire would have come to his
House) yet was many times employed by him, as in Embassy to Licinius, who had
married their eldest Sister Constantia, to persuade him to create Caesar
Bassianus, who had married another Sister Anastasia. He was also made
Patricius, and Cos. and Praefectus Orientis, though it seems this was after the
death of Helena who was no Friend to him. It is reported by some Authors, that
Constantius and his Brother caused Constantine to be poisoned in a Bath; but
Constantine coming to the Knowledge of it, writ to his Son Constantius to
dispatch him out of the way; which he did shortly after, making him be slain by
the Soldiers a little while after he had taken Possession of the Empire.

His first Wives name was Galla (Flav. Anicia Galla) by whom he had two Sons,
the eldest slain with his Father, the other (Gallus) put to death by
Constantius for his evil Government.

His second Wives name was (Flav. Anicia) Basilina the Daughter of Anicius
Julianus, she was a Pagan, died young, and had no Child but Julianus.

The third Brother of Constantine (1. Delmatius, 2. Constantius) was
Constantine; probably he helped Constantius in poisoning Constantine, and was
put to death also as well as he by Constantius.

4. Fl. Claud. Constantinus, eldest Son of Constantine and Fausta, was born at
Arles, A. D. 312. was made Caesar by his Father, who died when he was Twenty
two Years old, and was slain at Twenty five Years, reigning only three Years,
seems to have been of a peaceable Disposition, very Bold, if not Rash, yet
Ambitious of Honor, and loving Wine. In the division of the Empire between
Constantine's three Sons and two Nephews, Delmatius and Hanniballianus, (of
which two the rest quickly eased themselves) Constantine had for his share
Spain, Gallia, Germany and Britain; Constantius Thrace, Asia and the East;
Constans Illyricum, Italy and Africa; Delmatius, Macedonia, Achaia and
Peloponesus; and Hanniballianus, Armenia, Cappadocia and Pontus. The first
Quarrel was, that Constantine pretended to Italy and Africa, and resolved to
force them from Constans; and came with an Army into Italy, where he was met
with an Army which Constans pretended to send to his Brother against the
Persians, was defeated fighting undiscreetly (as having drank too much) and
slain; and cast into the River Alsa near Aquileia. In his Fathers time he had
conquered the Goths and Allemans, and as soon as he came to be Augustus, he
restored Athanasius to the Bisnoprick, who was banished at Triers. Constantius
his Brother lamented mightily his death: Nothing mentioned of his Marriages.

Victoria Beatissimorum Caes. (Crispi and Constantini) Vot. V. which was always
made at their entrance into their Caesarship.

5. Fl. Jul. Constans, youngest Son of Constantine and Fausta, was born A. D.
320 was made Caesar Anno 334. and three Years after came to the Empire, which
he governed about thirteen Years, was Assassinated about the Age of thirty
Years, by the Accomplices of the Rebellion of Magnentius. He was Active,
Vigilant, Warlike, by the sole Terror of his name keeping the Barbarians, his
Neighbors, in Peace all the time of his Reign. Also very Pious, restoring all
the Orthodox Bishops, and adorning the Churches very much; very Bountiful,
sending great Alms to the Poor every where; extremely Vigilant, Industrious and
Laborious; he overcame the Franks and other Barbarians; he made a Voyage in the
midst of Winter into Britain; he marched always on Foot in the head of his
Army; his very great Labors brought him into Gouts and Pains in his Sinews,
which much tormented him: He chased away from the Court all Players, Buffoons,
etc. [Some Writers give him a contrary Character, but Libanius a Pagan, and all
the Christians, speak very much in his Honor.] By his Severity he alienated the
Minds of the Soldiers from him; which encouraged Magnentius, a wicked debauched
Person, but much acquainted with the Barbarians, himself being a Gaul, one whom
Constans had rescued with his own Robe from the Fury of the Soldiers, to rebel
against him, and declare himself Emperor at Authun; whose General Gaiso
pursuing Constans, forsaken of most of his Men, overtook him as he was passing
the Pyronean Mountains to go into Spain, at a Town called Helene (Helne or
Elne) and there slew him. He was afterward very much lamented, and all his
Murderers and Opposites grievously punished; especially Marcellinus, who
cruelly persecuted all Constans's Kindred, slaying Nepotianus, Eutropia, and
many others.

Gaudium Pop. Romani; A Crown within Sic V. Sic ^. i. e. Sicut quinquennalia
sic Decennalia; intimating the Public Joy expressed in Pastimes, etc. at the
beginning of the sixth Year of Constans; and that the People desired to do so
much again after the tenth Year. T E S Thessalonicae (coined.)

Felix temporum reparatio; A Phoenix burning her self on the top of a Rock;
signifying the renewing of the Empire (decayed by reason of the Wickedness of
former Emperors) under Constantine and his Sons, as the Phoenix renews her self.
Some write that there was a Phoenix seen at the building of Constantinople by
Constantine.

Gloria Reip. Constantius and Constans (being Consuls the tenth Year of their
Reign, and it should seem entering their Charge at Siscia, after they had been
at Thessalonica celebrating their Decennalia, and now consulting about the War
in Britain) with two Women (Constantinople and Rome, the one being Cos. for the
East, the other for the West) presenting them Branches of Laurel: Circles as
Glories about their Heads, such as the Pagan Gods had about theirs,
representing a bright Cloud, which they called Nimbus; such as Virgil describes
about Pallas, AEn. 2. and the Moon, AEnei. 3. and in some Medals is seen about
Nero.

Felix temp orum Reparatio. Constans drawing after him a Youth (for reforming
the Times must begin with Youth, old Men accustomed to their old Habits being
irreformable) near two Trees, the one withered (representing the former times
of Paganism) the other fresh, (the new ones under Constantius) for we find this
called Novum Saeculum.

He was espoused (but it appears not that he was married) to Olympias the
Daughter of Ablatius Prefect of the Praetorium to Constantine, and put to
death by Constantius; after Constans's death, she was married to Arsaces King
of Armenia.

6. Flavius Popilius Nepotianus Constantinus, (taking his name probably when he
came to be Emperor) was Son of Popilius Nepotianus and Eutropia the Sister of
Constantine; seems to have been employed in the Wars, and made a Tribune in his
Youth by Constantine; he and his whole Family are commended by Athanasius
(entertained by them) for good Christians.

When Constans was slain, and Magnentius prospering, he conceived himself and
his whole Family Ruined and Massacred, if that Tyrant prevailed; being
therefore of Constantine's Family, he gathered together the Gladiators, Slaves,
and such Men as he could get, armed them, and calling himself Emperor,
vanquished Probinus Governor of the City for Magnentius. P^t his Men not being
disciplined, (...) great Murders upon all who were (...) to favor Magnentius.
Magnentius (...), Insurrection, sent Marcellinus, (...) ^ent, with part of the
Army against Nepotianus, who not having had time to gather Strength, (not
having reigned Forty days) was defeated and slain, and all his Family and
Friends also; so that Rome was, by reason of the Murders, almost desolated.

7. Vetranio born in Maesia, Sober and Innocent; of a plain and sweet
Conversation; yet an excellent and experienced Soldier, Fortunate and Beloved,
a Devout and Charitable Christian also, was declared Emperor against his will
by the Legions of Pannonia, in Envy to those of Gaul, etc. which had chosen
Magnentius; to whom he would not in any wise (though solicited) join himself;
but sent to Constantius to assist him against Magnentius. But Constantius being
at a great distance, and Magnentius near approaching to him, he was forced to
accommodate his business with Magnentius; and so they both sent Messengers to
Constantius to make Peace, they continuing in the Government of their Provinces
as Emperors, yet he as Supreme. But Constantius kept the Messengers in the
Court, and hasted with all Diligence and Secrecy, so that he surprised
Vetranio, who was forced to join his Army with Constantius. Constantius mean
while used him with all Magnificence, and they agreed the next day to Harangue
both Armies; which Constantius knew so well how to do (having also gained some
of his chiefest Officers by Money) that both the Armies declared him sole
Emperor, and plucked Vetranio off the Scaffold, pulled off his Purple, and
declared him a private Man. Constantius then sent him to Constantinople, and in
Bithynia assigned him a House and sufficient Revenues; where he lived
contentedly six Years afterward, and very Holily: He reigned about ten Months.

8. Magnentius Son of one Magnus, was of great Strength, Eloquent, Confident in
Prosperity, Timorous in Adversity, dissembling his Cruelty, Treachery and
Ingratitude. He pretended to be a Christian, yet permitted the Idolaters their
Night-Sacrifices; used Magic and Enchantments. He was Colonel of the two
principal Legions (Jovian and Herculian) of Constans's Army, and gracious
amongst the rest, having been Fortunate against the Barbarians in several
Rencounters. Constans being Gouty, and unable to endure the Fatigues of War, he
resolved to make use of his Reputation amongst the Soldiers against his Master,
(who in a Sedition and Mutiny of the Soldiers, had protected him from their
Violence by his own Robes) assisted especially by Marcellinus Captain of
Constans's Guard, and Chrestus Intendant of the Kitchen. At Autun then
Magnentius celebrating the Birthday of his Son, feasted all the Chief Officers
of the Army and City; and when they had well drank till late in the night,
Magnentius went forth, and returned clothed with Purple, and his Guards, as
Emperor, showing himself to the Company, who after a short but efficacious
Speech, declared him Emperor, and adored him according to the Custom; so did
the Citizens by little and little, and the rest of the Army also corrupted by
his Largess: Then keeping the Gates shut, that none could go forth, he chose
those of his Men, in whom he most confided, commanded by Gaiso, to surprise
Constans who mistrusted nothing; and as he was returned from Hunting, wearied
and asleep at Elne in the County of Rousillon, they slew him, awaked with the
noise, and endeavoring to save himself in Spain: To the Officers also whom he
knew Faithful to Constans, he sent Letters in Constans's name, to come to him
with all speed; these he slew, by Ambuscades and other Treacheries, to a very
great number; and so seized upon Gallia and Britain, Spain, Africa, Sicily and
Italy; till the Legions of Pannonia chused Vetranio; whom Magnentius endeavored
to join to himself. But Constantius having joined to his own the Army of
Vetranio, marched to meet the Tyrant, creating Gallus (Son of Constantius his
Uncle) Caesar, naming him Constantius, and leaving him to govern the East: To
balance which, Magnentius also made his Brethren, Decentius and Desiderius,
Caesar's, and sent them to raise Men, etc. The Armies on either side marched to
fight, and Constantius's Vantguard was ill handled by an Ambuscade of
Magnentius's; which encouraged the Tyrant so, that laying a Bridge over the
Savus (heightened also by the Revolt of Silvanus from Constantius, and by
Constantius's sending Philippus to Magnentius to treat of Peace) he marched his
Army, which was there encountered by Constantius's Soldiers, and almost ruined:
So that he was forced to pretend that he came to make Peace, and take
Conditions of Constantius; which Philippus there proposing, he assented unto;
whereupon Constantius gave him leave to march his Army into Pannonia, where he
ruined Siscia and many other Cities; and grew so proud, that he sent to
Constantius to surrender the Empire and beg his Life. Constantius answered, God
would Revenge his Treason. Mean while the Tyrant besieged and assaulted
Syrmium, where he was beaten off with great loss; thence he went to Mursia,
where Constancius having defeated an Ambuscade, at Cibalis fought a very sore
Battle with him, getting a great Victory, loosing Thirty thousand, and killing
Thirty six thousand and eighty. This being in Autumn, and Constantius's Army
being much weakened, he sent part of his Horse to pursue them. The Tyrant
rendezvouzed at Pavia, which he fortified, and quartered his Men so
Advantagiously, that he feared little of Constantius, and so gave himself to
all Voluptuousness; but in the end of Winter, Constantius sending part of his
Army to compass them about, he came with the rest, and forced him to fly into
Gallia; where using all sorts of Cruelty, he retired to a Castle, and sent to
Constantius to beg Pardon, who denied it. Mean while the People seeing him in
this condition, refused to send him Succor; yea, his own Army, to beg their
Peace, beset him at Lions, intending to deliver him up alive to Constantius:
For which cause, entering into a Rage, he slew all his Kindred and Friends that
were present; and last of all himself also, Forty two Months after his Election.

Victoria Aug. (over Nepotianus) Libertas Romanorum (to worship Idols.)

9. Magnus Decentius, Brother to Magnentius, was a warlike Man, and left by his
Brother in Gaul, to govern and assure it to their Party; where he was defeated
by Chnodomarius set on by Constantius; but as he was leading an Army to his
Brothers Assistance, having heard that he had slain himself, he also strangled
himself at Sens.

Desiderius his other Brother, some say, Magnentius slew, with his Mother and
Kindred, when he killed himself also; others say he was only wounded, and that
his Wounds being healed, he presented himself to Constantius, who pardoned him.

10. Fl. Jul. Gallus (called Constantius when created Caesar by Constantius)
was born at Massa in Tuscany, A. D. 325. he was made Caesar and sent to govern
the East, where he reigned betwixt three and four Years; was put to death by
the Command of Constantius, about the Twenty ninth Year of his Age; he was
Rude, Simple, Lightheaded and Bloody; though this not so much of his own
Inclination, as through the Suggestions of the Fury his Wife: He was brought up
in Cappadocia, and escaped when his Father, Brother, Uncle and Cousins were
murdered, by reason of Sickness, as Julian did because of his Infancy; they
were both intended by Constantius for Churchmen, and were brought up
accordingly. He carried himself very valiantly against the Persians and Jews;
and was always an Orthodox Christian. Constantius married his Sister
Constantina to him, and made him Caesar, being Twenty five Years old: After a
while he began to practice against the Emperor, and put to death his best
Friends and Officers; of which, and other his Violences and Tyrannies,
Constantius being informed, drew him to him with fair words and shows, though
he doubted a long time, and if he could have found his Men Faithful, he would
have declared himself Augustus; but by his Cruelty, Insolence and Inconstancy,
he had got the Hatred of all Men. So sending before his Wife to make his Peace,
as well as she could, (who died of a Fever contracted by Indignation to see
her self in that condition) he departed from Antioch toward Constantinople; by
the way Constantius discharged him of part of his Train, and afterward set a
Guard upon him; who took away his Robes, put him into a Hackney-Coach, and
carried him to Pola, where being examined he was put to death, having been a
long time tormented with the Apparitions of those he had murdered.

11. Silvianus the Son of Bonitus a Tribune, was a valiant and prudent Man, who
was Faithful to Constans, but was forced to follow in the Army of Magnentius,
till he found an Opportunity to go over to Constantius; which he did with all
his Men, who made him General of the Infantry. He was a Man of great Capacity,
a Christian, Generous, etc. But Constantius grew Jealous of him, which made
him, for the Safety of his Life, to declare himself Emperor at Colen, whither
Constantius had sent him to fight against the Germans, who had done much hurt
in Gaul; for the Flatterers and Sycophants of Constantius's Court (which were
many, the Prince hearkening to them) persuaded him that Silvanus intended to
Rebel, and counterfeited Letters, as sent from Silvanus, to some Friends, for
that purpose. So that, to preserve his Life, he was forced to make himself
Emperor: Whereupon Constantius, then at Milan, sent Ursicinus, an Ancient
Soldier, (but laid by by the Flatterers means) with some other valiant Men,
with Letters to him from the Emperor, who dissembled that he knew any thing of
his Rebellion; but with Instructions to kill him; which they did, having
insinuated themselves into his Favor, by pretending Discontents; by which
Suggestion Ursicinus got so much into Favor with him, as none so much.

CHAP. XXVI. Fl. Jul. Constantius, Fl. Claudius Julianus, Fl. Jovianus.
1. FL. Jul. Constantius, second Son of Constantine, was born A. D. 317. was
Caesar thirteen Years and a half, being created that day his Father laid the
first Stone of Constantinople: He reigned about Twenty five Years and six
Months, and died Aged about Forty four Years. He was Sober, Chaste, Learned,
Peaceable, Bountiful, and too credulous toward his Friends, affectedly Grave;
his greatest Vice was hearkening to Eunuchs and Courtiers, and by their
Instigation doing things sometimes Cruelly and Unreasonably, these Julian
afterward put to death; had it not been for that and his own Distrustfulness,
Jealousy, and Suspicions of his Kindred, Friends and Officers, he had been
comparable to the best Princes. By his extreme Zeal also to Arrianism, he vexed
mightily many of the Godly Bishops and Doctors of the Church. He fought against
the Persians and vanquished them, though with very great loss; afterward with
Magnentius, etc. but returning to the East, the Barbarians invaded Gaul, and
the Persians the East; so that he was forced to seek out for some one to make
Caesar, which was Julian Son of Constantius (his Uncle) and Basilina; which he
did, and gave him Helena his Sister in Marriage, sending him into Gallia; where
Julian having done very great matters, was by the Legions saluted Augustus;
which so alarmed Constantius, that he left the Persians and the East, to
chastise Julian; but as he was in Cilicia a violent Fever surprised him, and
he died with great Grief and Sorrow, that he left his Enemy his Heir, and one
that was so great an Idolater; that he had been such a Favorer of Arrianism,
and put to death so many of his Kindred. He was brought to Constantinople, and
buried with very great Pomp.

Constantius Aug. Three Palms (representing probably the three Sons of
Constantine) over the middlemost (Constantius) a Star (perhaps the beatified
Soul of Constantine) for that was in his time, and afterward, the ordinary
Representation of that shedding his Influence upon Constantius.

He was married in his Father's Lifetime to the Daughter of his Uncle
Constantius, the Sister of Gallus, whose Name and Story is unknown. But after
the death of Constans, and Victory over Magnentius, he married Fl. Aurelia
Eusebia, the beautifulest Woman of that Age, and very Virtuous also, learned,
and of a sweet and mild Disposition; but proud and intermeddling so with all
Affairs, that nothing could be done without her; an Arrian and great Supporter
and Favorer of them. She was Barren, but very desirous to have Children;
whereupon taking some Drugs into her Womb, she became Sick and Hectic, and so
died.

His last Wife was Maxima Faustina, whom at his death he left with Child of a
Daughter called Constantia, which at the Age of fourteen Years was married to
Gratianus the Son of Valentinian.

2. Fl. Claudius Julianus, Son of Constantius and Basilina, was born A. D. 360.
was made Caesar by Constantius, and so governed five Years; when he had made
himself Augustus, he reigned about one Year and eight Months, and was slain in
Persia about the Age of Thirty three Years; he was Lightheaded, Vain,
Fantastical, but desiring to seem a great Philosopher, imitating them in all
external Behavior, Loquacious in Extremity, and so Superstitious and Anxious
for the future, that he consumed innumerable Sacrifices; a Flatterer of
Constantius when alive, and contrary in all things to him when dead. He was by
Constantius destined to the Clergy, and accordingly he studied Theology, and
all other Sciences fit for that Profession, yet Hypocritically having Paganism
in his Heart; this proceeded from his Masters, some whereof were Pagans, as
Mardonius, Libanius: and his Acquaintance with Maximus a great Magician and
Necromancer, put to death afterward for these things by Valentinian. Julian's
Ambition still inciting him to search and enquire after the future. This
Maximus, as also his Master AEdesius and Jamblichus, were the great Procurers
of his Apostasy, which notwithstanding he dissembled all the time of
Constantius. He was in danger of death with his Brother Gallus, but by the
Favor of Eusebia he escaped, and obtained leave to go to Athens, whither he
drew also diverse of his Philosophers and Magicians; and by the Priest of
Eleusis (the knowingest Magician of his time) he enquired of his future
Condition. From Athens he was sent for to Court then at Milan, where he was
made Caesar, married to Helena the Emperor's Sister, and sent into Gaul with a
small Army, to deliver it from the Oppression of the Barbarians; at that time
he professed Arrianism, but coming into Gaul, and finding the People (so many
as knew of it) averse from it, he pretended to be Orthodox, animating the
Bishops and Clergy against it, because against Constantius: Being arrived at
his Command, he regained many places from the Franks, escaped many Dangers,
(especially at Sens his Winter Quarters.) Next year Constantius gave him a
larger and absoluter Commission, to raise Men, etc. and then he defeated and
took Prisoner Chnodomarius, and sent him to Constantius; complaining afterward
very much, that not himself but Constantius had triumphed: He chased away the
Franks, restored Gallia, and transferred the War into Germany, where he
delivered many Prisoners, took much Spoil, Towns and Captives, and sent many
Soldiers to Constantius then going to the East; and whether puffed up with
these Successes, he made himself, or was by the Force of the Soldiers
compelled, so it was, that he was saluted, Augustus; of which he gave notice to
Constantius presently, with many Excuses and Protestations. Constantius
endeavored to reduce him to reason by Letters, but in vain, for he resolved to
maintain his Election; and to that purpose, after a while (his Wife dying in
the mean time) he resolved to fight Constantius: In his way Vadomarius with an
Army (who had defeated one of his Tribunes with his Army) interposed himself,
(as he says, by the setting on of Constantius) whom under show of Friendship,
inviting him to a Feast, he took Prisoner. Marching forward then into Illyricum
and Thrace, Constantius returned from the Persian War to fight him, but died in
the way in Cilicia, so that Julian remained sole Emperor. The principal
Officers and Commanders went to Julian, assuring him that Constantius had named
him his Successor, thinking thereby to calm his Spirit toward the Servants and
Familiars of Constantius; which yet they did not, he slaying and banishing many
of them, without any Injury done to himself by them; and displaced all the
Officers of the Household: He, to show his Mildness, and to set greater Enmity
amongst the Christians, recalled all the banished Bishops of the Christians,
commanding and licensing all to serve God as they pleased. He restored the
Pagan Altars and Temples, spent much Money in perverting Persons from
Christianity, promoted Heathenism with all his Power; the first Expedition he
undertook, was against the Persians; whither marching, at Antioch he was hugely
affronted and scorned with Jeers and Libels; entering into Persia, he suffering
himself to be Fooled by certain Run-aways, burnt his Fleet, and marched into
desert and inconvenient places, where being continually alarmed and harassed by
the Persians, he was at last slain by one of their Troopers.

Apolonius Tyaneus.. An Athlete drawn by four Horses; intimating the Games
addressed by Julian to the Honor of Apollonius, worshipped as a God by the
Inhabitants of Tyana. Many of Julian's Medals have upon them Serapis, Anubis,
Isis, or some other of their Deities mingled with some Traits of Julian;
Libanius affirming that many Countries and Towns erected Statues unto him,
mixed with the Effigies of their Gods; and that they prayed publicly unto him,
and that none who prayed unto him, went away without performance of his request.

His Wife was Flavia Maximiana Helena, called also by her Brother Constantia,
seemed to be a virtuous Christian; she died not long after his assuming the
Title of Augustus.

Isis Faria; which was the true name of Isis the Daughter of Pharaoh, and
married to Joseph who was afterward worshipped as Serapis; so says Tertullian.

3. Fl. Jovianus was born at Singidunum in Pannonia the Son of Varronianus, a
Man of great Esteem in the Court; he reigned seven Months one and twenty days,
and died about thirty three years old: He was very Strong, Valiant, Courageous,
Resolute, Affable, Chaste, Continent and Clement, and an Orthodox Christian,
protesting he would not accept the Empire, except all the Army would declare
themselves Christians, which they presently did. He refused to serve under
Julian, except he had liberty of his Religion, which Julian granted. After
Julian's death he was chosen Emperor by the universal Consent of the whole
Army, which was brought into a desperate condition by the Rashness of Julian;
insomuch that Jovianus was forced (to save the remainder of it) to make a Peace
with the Persian; to yield to them the Provinces conquered upon them by
Galerius, and two strong Towns, Nisibus and Singara. He associated to himself
in the Empire (his Father being newly dead) his Son Varronianus an Infant; he
forbad and severely punished all Idolatry, extirpating out all Magicians and
their Superstitions. As he was going to Constantinople at Dardastane, he was
found dead in his Bed, probably of an Apoplexy, being given to eat and drink
somewhat too Liberally.

His Wives name was Charito Daughter of Lucilianus, a very worthy Person, who
(probably for the Profession of Christianity) had forsaken the Court for a
private Life; but was, by Jovianus, made Governor of Illyricum, and was slain
afterward in a Mutiny at Rheims. Charito was a Zealous Christian.

Varronianus an Infant, after his Father's death, had one of his Eyes put out,
to make him incapable of the Empire.

Books Printed for and Sold by William Miller at the Acorn in St. Paul's
Churchyard, where Gentlemen, and others, may be furnished with most sorts of
Acts of Parliament, Kings, Lord Chancellors, Lord Keepers, and Speakers
Speeches, and other sorts of Speeches, and State-matters; As also Books of
Divinity, Church Government, Humanity, Sermons on most Occasions, etc.
Books in Folio.
Assemblies Annotations in two Volumes.

Ainsivorth's Annotations.

Book of Martyrs in Three Volumes.

Jones's Reports.

Bishop Wilkins's Essay toward a real Character.

Cradock's Harmony of the Four Evangelists.

Curia Politiae.

Elton on the Collossians.

Love and Revenge, a Romance.

Extravagant Shepherd, the Anti-Romance.

Heywood's Hierarchy of Angels.

Hart's Diet for the Diseased.

Jones on the Hebrews.

Johnson's Three Plays.

Kellet on the Sacrament.

Lloyd's Memoirs.

Leggon's History of the Barbados.

Matchiaver's Works.

Monk's Military and Politic Observations.

Orlando furioso.

Philip de Comine's History.

Ramsey's Astrology.

Rouse's Works.

Royal Chemistry.

Spanish Bawd.

Bishop Smith's Sermon.

In Quarto.
Barclay's Argines, in English with Cuts.

Ball against Can of Separation.

Holy History.

Jackson's Concordance to the Bible.

Sir Henry Vane's retired Man's Meditations.

Weeme's Works in three Volumes.

Adventures in Love.

Arreignment of the whole Creature.

Allain's Chain of Scripture Chronology.

Behmon's Pieces.

Bolton's Works in two Volumes.

Baxter's Works.

Cooper's Heaven Opened.

-- His Life and Death.

Clark's Life of William the Conqueror.

Cradock's Knowledge and practice.

Carpenter's pragmatical Jesuit, a Comedy.

Dod on the Commandments.

-- On the Lord's prayer.

Digges's Tectonicon.

Extravagant Shepherd, a Comedy.

Ghost, or the Woman wears the Breeches.

Heywood's Life of Edward VI.

-- Life of Henry IV.

Hooker's Soul's preparation for Christ.

-- Soul's Humiliation.

-- His Exaltation.

History of King Authur.

History of precious Stones.

Killigrew's Conspiracy, a Tragedy.

Leigh's Saints Rest.

Norwood of Fortification.

Squier on the Thessalonians.

Struther's King David's Choice.

Voyage of the wandering Knight.

Medice cura teipsum, or the Apothecaries plea against Dr Christopher Merret.

Bagshaw's Doctrine of Free Grace.

-- His Discourse about Christ and Anti Christ.

-- His great Question concerning Things indifferent in Religious Worship.

-- Of God's Decrees against Pierce.

A Letter of Advice concerning Marriage. By A. B.

In Octavo.
Lately published some Instructions in the Art of Grammar, writ to Assist a
young Gentleman in the speedy Understanding of the Latin Tongue.

Vinnes's Twenty Sermons on the Sacrament.

Arcanum of Astrology.

Botelar's Art of War.

Bagshaw's Rights of the Crown.

Bunworth of the French Disease.

Continuation of Sir Philip Sidney's Arcadia.

Dent on the Revelation.

Downame's Abstract.

Enchirion of Fortification.

Epicurus's Morals.

Wall's Baptism Anatomized, being propounded in Five Queries? 1. What Water
Baptism is? 2. What is the end for which it was Instituted? 3. What gives
right to it? 4. Who are the true Administraters of it? 5. Whether is be Lawful
for a Man to Baptize himself, wherein the right that the Infants of Believers
have to Water Baptism is vindicated; The duty of Believing Parents in that
matter asserted, and that by the contrary Tenet and Practice they ought
themselves to be excluded from the Lords Supper, is plainly and fully proved.

The Christians daily Walk, in holy Security and Peace. Being an Answer to
these Questions; 1. How a Man may do each present days work with Christian
Cheerfulness? 2. How to bear each present days Cross with Christian Patience?
Containing familiar Directions: 1. How to walk with God in the Course of a
(...) Life: 2. How to be Upright in the said walking: 3. How to Live without
taking Care or Thought in any thing: 4. How to get and keep true peace with
God; wherein manifold Helps to prevent and remove damnable Presumption; also to
quiet and ease distressed Consciences. By Hen. Scudder.

Hume's steadfast Christian.

Juan de Luar, Spanish and English Grammar.

Gouge's Word to Saints, and Word to Sinners.

Knolly's Rudiments of the Hebrew Grammar.

Latine's Apprentice made Free man.

Love's Dominion.

Lucius Florus in English.

Natural and artificial Conclusions.

Sharp's Midwifry.

Ward, of Wit, Wisdom, and Folly, describing the Nature, Use, and Abuse of the
Tongue and Speech.

Skelton's Tachugraphia, in Latin.

Emblems Divine, Moral, Natural and Historical, expressed in Sculptures, and
applied to the several Ages, Occasions, and Conditions of Men. By a Person of
Quality.

In Twelves.
Boulton's Devout Prayers.

St. Barnara's Meditations.

Bradshaw and Hildersham on the Sacrament.

Cotton's none but Christ.

Capell of Temptation.

Coral and Steel their Virtue.

David's Repentance.

Duty of every one that intends to be saved.

Complete English and French Cook.

Fettiplace's Christ Monitor.

-- His holy Exercises of heavenly Graces.

-- Sinners Tears.

Grandda of Prayer and Meditation.

Books Printed for and sold by Christopher Wilkinson at the Black Boy against
St. Dunstan' s Church in Fleet Street.
CHaracters and Discourses on several Subjects, written by the Right Honorable
Francis Lord Viscount Shannon. A Collection of English Words, not generally
used, with their Significations and Original, in two Alphabetical Catalogues,
the one of such as are proper to the Northern, the other to the Southern
Counties: With an account of the Preparing and Refining such Metals and
Minerals as are gotten in England. With Observations and Letters, etc. By John
Ray, Fellow of the Royal Society.

Dictionariolum Trilinguae, secundum Locos Communes, nominibus Visitationibus,
Anglicis, Latinis, Graecis; Opera Joannis Raii, M. A. and Societatis Regiae
Sodalis.

A Catalogue of the Nobility of England, according to their Respective
Precedencies and Titles of Honor they now enjoy, with the Blazon of their
Paternal Coats of Arms, and a Catalogue of the Bishops; in a large Sheet.

Sixty Curious Cuts Engraven on Copper, for the New Testament and Common
Prayer, in Folio and Quarto, by Mr. Faithorn deceased.

FINIS.

