THE ANTIQUITY OF THE QUAKERS Proved out of the Scriptures of Truth.

Published in Love to the Papists, Protestants, Presbyterians, Independents and
Anabaptists.

With a SALUTATION of pure Love to all the Tenderhearted WELSH-MEN.

But more especially to Flint-shire, Denbigh-shire, Carenarvon-shire and
Anglesea.

By their Countryman and Friend, Thomas Win.

Mat. 7.14. Narrow is the Way which leads to Life, and few there be that find
it.

Psalm 1.1. Blessed is the Man that walks not in the Counsel of the Ungodly,
nor stands in the Way of Sinners, nor sits in the Seat of the Scornful.

1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Prove all things, but hold fast that which is good.

Printed in the Year 1677.
THE ANTIQUITY OF THE QUAKERS Proved out of the Scriptures of Truth.
2 Pet. 3.3. Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days
Scoffers, walking after their own Lusts.


COme Papists, Protestants, Presbyterians, Independents and Anabaptists, are
not the very people amongst you the Apostle Peter said would come in the last
days?

That many of you are guilty of being Scoffers, is too evident; and for you to
deny it, would be notorious, since if a Catalogue of your Scoffs, Jeers,
Reproaches, Flouts and Derisions could possibly be collected, it would, without
doubt, be one of the greatest Volumns now extant in the World.

First, To prove you to be such as generally practice Scoffing at Quaking and
Trembling, I may call for witness the greatest part of that called Christendom;
and it has been a thing much observed by me in all Companies for these 20
years last past, even amongst the solidest of you all, that it has been as the
Burden of all your Drolleries, to let fall some Scoff, Taunt or Jeer at Quaking
and Trembling.

And it has been very ordinary with many, especially the Priests, to ask me,
Of how long standing Quakerism (as they scoffingly called it) had beer, as if
suggested by them, that it is some New T^ing, not heard of before; George Fox
preached, that which convinces men of Sin in their own Bosoms, to be the Light
of Christ.

And to Answer their Objections much has been said to the same purpose, as
shall appear in these following Lines, notwithstanding they persist in scoffing
at such a Practice, as a Delusion of the Devil.

Come Scoffers of all sorts, read the following Scriptures, and see if there
were not Quakers before you reproachfully gave us that Name; and if both Old
and New Testament, Prophets, Christ and his Apostles approved of such a
Practice as Quaking and Trembling, and that they were ^uch themselves; then let
the Light in your Consciences judge, what you are that scoff at it.

Genesis 27. Mark how good old Isaac was surprised, that he had blessed Jacob
instead of Esau, insomuch that the Text says, And Isaac Trembled very
exceedingly.

Come you Scoffers, you may see that Quaking and Trembling is of greater
Antiquity then either your Name of Papist, Protestant, Presbyterian,
Independent or Anabaptist; and which of you dare say but Isaac was an Honest
Man, although a Quaker?

Exodus 19.16. And it came to pass on the third day in the morning, that there
was Thunder and Lightnings, and a thick cloud on the Mount, and the Voice of
the Trumpet exceeding loud, so that all the people that were in the Camp
Trembled.

Come all of you beforementioned, who call your selves Christians, that scoff
at quaking and trembling, saying, It is a New Thing, and of Late Date; I pray,
cast up how many Hundred Years is since these Quakers were in being; and were
not here a great number of Quakers, above Six Hundred Thousand? and were not
these Quakers the Israel of God?

And truly, we may say, It was with us in England as it was then with Israel of
old, that when the Morning Light of Christ appeared (after a long and dark
Night of Apostasy) we saw a thick Cloud over us, and over you all; and the Lord
uttered his Voice like a Trumpet, and thundered and lightened exceedingly, so
that great Terror and great Fear and Trembling sell upon us; but it seems you
have not seen nor heard any thing that could make such sturdy Oaks as you to
tremble, but scoffed us that did and do Tremble before our Maker.

1 Samuel 4.13. where you may read, that good old Eli watched by the Way side an!
trembled for the Ark of God; and when he had heard that the Philistines had
taken the Ark, he fell down backward, and broak his Neck, and dyed. And has it
not been ordinary with your Priests of all sorts, to call their Opposers the
Philistines, and make Applications on this Text, what Danger the Ark of God was
in, although we very well know what the Ark of your God was and is, viz. your
Fat Benefices, Tithes and Augmentations; and this was the Reason some of the
Priests did so Bemone the Death of Old Oliver, and in their Addresses to his
Son Richard, Read the Priests Addresses to Richard Cromwell, after Oliver's
Death.
telling him, That their MOSES was Dead, but he was their JOSHUA, that must
carry them to the Proms^d Land. But what that Land and their Ark is, may be
easily known; and so at every Overturning and Change, this has been the manner
of the Priests of all sorts; but they scoff at quaking and trembling.

1 Samuel 14.15. And there was trembling in the Host, in the Field and among all
the People, the Garrison and the Spoilers, they also trembled, and the Earth
quaked; so it was a very great Trembling: Read that Chapter, and see the Cause
of their Trembling, and see if you can find any Encouragement for you to Scoff
at Trembling.

Ezra 9.4. Then there were assembled unto me every one that trembled at the
Words of the Lord God of Israel, because of the Transgression of those that had
been carried away; and I sat down until the Evening Sacrifice.

Come you Scoffers of all sorts, was not here a Meeting of Quakers, that
trembled at the Words of God? But you say, Quakers and their Meetings are a New
Thing, and of late Date.

Ezra 10.3. Now therefore let us make a Covenant with our God, to put away all
the Wives, and such as are born of them, according to the Counsel of my Lord,
and of those that tremble at the Commandment of our God.

Mark, you Scoffers, there were Quakers in Ezra's days, and the People that
had done amiss were resolved to take Counsel of them that Trembled at the
Commandment of God.

Job 4.14. Fear came upon me, and Trembling, which made all my Bones to shake.

Observe, Was not this good Man a Quaker.

Job 21.6. Even when I remember, I am afraid, and Trembling takes hold of my
Flesh.

Psalm 2.11. Serve the Lord with Fear, and rejoice with Trembling. But your
Rejoicing is to Jeer, Taunt and Scoff at Trembling.

Psalm 55.5. Fearfulness and Trembling are come upon me, and Horror has
overwhelmed me.

Psalm 99.1. The Lord reigns, let the people Tremble. Would not the People be
Quakers then?

Psalm 119.120. My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy
Judgments.

Mark this, you Scoffers, this Prophet and King was not ashamed to own himself
to be a Quaker.

Isa. 32.11. Tremble ye Women that are at ease, be troubled ye Careless Ones,
strip and make ye bare, and gird Sackcloth upon your Loins.

And truly, I judge that many of the Women of our time had as much need to take
this Counsel as them, to whom he wrote; but rather then repent in Sackcloth,
and turn Quakers, they had rather gird themselves in every Frenchified new
Fashion, and scoff at the Quakers.

Isa. 64.2. As when the Melting-fire burns, the Fire causes the Waters to
boil; to make known thy Name to thine Adversaries, that the Nations may tremble
at thy Presence.

Here you may see that the Prophet Isaiah had a Desire that the Nations should
be Quakers.

Isa. 66.5. Hear the Word of the Lord, ye that tremble at his Word, your
Brethren, that hated you, that cast you out for my Names sake, said, Let the
Lord be glorified; but he shall appear to your Joy, and they shall be ashamed.

You may see here how the Quakers were served, as you serve them now; however,
I have Faith to believe, that the Lord will appear to our Joy, and to the Shame
of them that cast us out.

Jer. 5.22. Fear ye not me, says the Lord? will ye not tremble at my Presence?

Observe here, the Lord requires Trembling at his Presence; but you Scoff at
Trembling.

Jer. 33. and the latter-end of the 9th verse, And they shall fear and tremble,
for all the Goodness and all the Prosperity that I procure unto it.

But instead of Fearing and Trembling, when you receive Goodness and
Prosperity, you scoff at such as Fear and Tremble.

Ezekiel. 12.18. Son of Man, eat thy Bread with Quaking, and drink thy Drink with
Trembling.

Mark how God does enjoin his holy Prophets to be Quakers, and yet you can
scoff at quaking and trembling.

Ezekiel. 26.16. Then all the Princes of the Sea shall come down from their
Thrones, and lay away their Robes, and put off their Broidered Garments; they
shall clothe themselves with trembling; they shall sit on the Ground, and shall
tremble at every moment, and be astonished at thee.

And have not thou, O England, had many Threatenings, as well as Tirus had? but
instead of trembling, thou scoffest at such as do tremble.

Dan. 5.6. Then the King's Countenance was changed, and his Thoughts troubled
him, so that the Joints of his Loins were loosed, and his Knees smote one
against another. But had it been in our time, no doubt but it would have served
to droll on.

Dan. 6.26. I make a Decree, that in every Dominion of my Kingdom, Men fear and
tremble before the God of Daniel.

See how Zealous King Darius was at the time of his Convincement, to have all
in his Dominions to be Quakers; but you say, It Is a New Thing, and scoff at it.

Dan. 10.7. And I Daniel saw the Vision; for the Men that were with me saw not
the Vision, but a great Quaking fell upon them, so that they fled to hide
themselves.

It seems; you read the Scripture but little, that scoff at quaking, and say,
It Is of Late Date; but you may see, if you be not stark blind, that the Quakere
were before you.

Dan. 10.1^. And he said is to me, O Daniel, a Man greatly beloved, understand
the Words that I speak unto thee, and stand upright; for unto thee am I now
sent: and when he had spoken this Word unto me, I stood trembling.

See, was not Daniel a Quaker in your Eyes, that Scoff at trembling?

Joel 2.1. Blow ye the Trumpet in Sion, sound an Alarm in my holy Mountain, let
all the Inhabitants of the Land tremble; for the Day of the Lord comes, and it
is nigh at hand.

And has not the Trumpet been blown in thee, O England and Wales, my Native
Country, and the great Day of the Lord, that is near at hand, proclaimed, that
the Inhabitants might with Fear and Trembling prepare for it; but instead of so
doing, thou have fed thy self without Fear, and scoffed at such as fear and
tremble before him.

Hab. 3.16. he said, That his Belly trembled, and his Lips quivered, and
Rottenness entered into his Bones, and he trembled in himself, that he might
rest in the Day of Trouble.

And would not you have scoffed him, and called him Quaker, if he had been in
our time?

Luke 8.47.
Mark 5.33. But the Woman fearing and trembling, knowing what was done in her,
came and fell down before him, and told him all the Truth.

Mark how this Woman trembled at the Work of God; but you scoff at it.

Mark 16.8. And they went out quickly, and fled from the Sepulcher; for they
trembled, and were amazed

Come, you Scoffers, were not these Quakers good Christians, who trembled at
the Resurection of Jesus? and if ever you come in your selves truly to witness
the Power of his Resurrection, it will make you also to quake and tremble,
although now you scoff and deride such as do witness it, and tremble at it.

Acts 7.42. you may read, When Moses heard the Voice of the Lord in the mount,
he trembled. Yet the Scoffers in our Age, that call themselves Christians, say,
That there were no Quakers, but of late.

Acts 9.5, 6. And he said, Who art thou, Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus
whom thou persecutest; it is hard for thee to kick against the Pricks: And he
trembling and astonished said, Lord, what will thou have me to do? Here you may
see a Persecuter turned Quaker of a sudden.

But suppose any of you should send any of your Company with a Packet of
Persecuting Letters, as was with him, and that by the Light and Power of God he
should be convinced, and fall a Trembling, as Paul did, would not you soon fall
a Scoffing, and calling him Fool, Puppy, Loggerhead, Phanatick, with many more
Derisions, if not to Blows and Imprisonment? So you may, if you please, see
what kind of Christians you are.

Acts 16.29, 30. Then he called for a Light, and sprange in, and came tremling,
and fell down before Paul and Silas, and brought them out, and said, Sirs, what
shall I do to be saved?

Come you Scoffers, did not this poor Jailer turn Quaker?

1 Cor. 2.3. And I was with you in weakness, and Fear, and in much Trembling.

Would not our Scoffing Professors have said, that this was Canting, and have
called Paul Quaker?

Phil. 2.12. Work out your Salvation with Fear and Trembling.

Here you may see, that the Prophets and Apostles were Quakers, by which you
may judge, what you are that scoff at them who tremble because of God's Power
in our Age.

Oh my dear Countrymen! I beseech you, be calm a little while, and reflect
upon your selves, and consider, whether you do not scoff and taunt all the
Prophets and Apostles, who were Quakers, as well as we, who you now
reproachfully call Quakers?

And now, since I have proved the Antiquity of the Quakers but of their own
Writings, viz. out of both the Old and New Testament, and that they were such,
is very evident, and that the Jews and Heathens acknowledged them to be the
only People to be hearkened unto, is undeniable; and that God not only owned
such, but that he required them to be such, is very plain; and how you will
answer scoffing and taunting of them, without coming under the Apostles
Reflection, I leave you to make your Defense.

Come Papists, Protestants, Presbyterians, Independents and Anabaptists, answer
me a Query; How came you to give credit to these ancient Quakers Writin s, viz.
Old and New Testament, and now Mock, Scorn, Scoff, Jeer, Taunt, Flout and
Reproach the present Quakers, whose Principles and Practice run parallel with
the ancient Quakers? Are you not like your Forefathers of old, who said to
Christ, the Head of both the Ancient and Present Quakers, that Abraham was
their Father, and God was their Father, yet they went about to kill him? but he
said unto them, You are of your father the Devil, else you would not go about
to kill me, John 8.39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44. So you may see how your Ancestors
owned the ancient Quakers, before their time; but mocked, taunted, jeered,
scoffed and persecuted the present Ones, and put them to Death; as witness
Matthew, Mark, Luke and John's Narration of Christ, and other Histories of the
Cruel Persecutions of the Apostles, by the great Professors in that Generation.
And so you, like them, profess to own the former Quakers, and make their
Writings the Rule of your Faith; but like your Forefathers, that owned the
ancient Quakers, and persecuted the present Ones.

You pretend to own the ancient Quakers, both Prophets and Apostles, but deny,
scoff and persecute the present Quakers, whose Faith is one with the ancient
Ones, both Prophets and Apostles, as having Dependence on the one Foundation,
which it is in vain for any to lay any other then that which is laid, even Jesus
Christ. So the Work of the present Day, all who were out of the Truth hated,
and sought to shelter themselves by adhereing to, or owning the Work of former
days, as you may see at large how the Scribes and Pharisees adhered to Moses
and the Prophets, but killed Christ Jesus, whom they prophesied of; and so do
you in words, like them, adhere and seem in words to own the Prophets, and
Christ, and his Apostles, but now deny his present appearance in our day and
time, viz. the Light and Principle of God in you, which checks and reproves you
for Sin.

Come Papists, Protestants, Presbyterians, Independents and Anabaptists, how
comes it to pass that you make such a stir with the former ancient Quakers
Writings, and carry them about with you, and keep them in your Houses, and call
them the Bible, and the Word of God, and your Rule; but cannot abide the
present Quakers, and their Writings, but are afraid to read their Writings;
although there be nothing in our Writings but what is largely testified of, and
pointed unto, in the Writings of our traduced Brethren, the Quakers of old. And
seeing you thus calumniate, scoff, mock and taunt the present Quakers and their
Writings, how can you for shame (I mean you Priests of all sorts) make such a
Trade and Gain of the former Quakers Writings? And may not I say, without doing
any of you Wrong, that that is one great Reason why you so highly own the
ancient Quakers Writings, because the Trade you drive with them brings in most
Gain of all Trades? And is not that the Reason, why you so abuse the present
Quakers and their Writings, because they tell you, that it is Symony so to do,
and that you ought to preach freely, according to Christ Jesus his appointment,
as his Apostles, the then persecuted Quakers did and the present Ones now do?

And oh you Priests! both papists, protestants, presbyterians, independents and
anabaptists; when I think of you, I cannot but take up a Lamentation for you
(for God knows, that as you are a part of Mankind, I love you, and unfainedly
desire your Welfare) when I consider at what a Loss you are all, about the
Meaning of the ancient Quakers Writings, one saying, Lo, this is the Meaning of
it; and another says, Lo, that is the Meaning; and a third, fourth and fifth,
The other is the Meaning: and what is the Reason, but that you all deny to make
use of the Key of David, an ancient Quaker, that unlocks the Mysteries of all
his Brethren's Writings (which the Quakers have at this day.)

But you not having the Quakers key to unfold the Mystery, you, like Pharaoh of
old, that called his Wise Men, Magicians, Southsayers and Astrologers, to make
known the matter, so I say do you: you having lost the key of David, a Quaker,
you run to your Magicians, to your Schools, Tongues and Languages, and with
them you perplex your selves, as Pharaoh did, and as Nebuchadnezzar, did; and
in that nature would, as of old, build a Tower reaching heaven.

But behold, you builders are confounded, you magicians and scholars cannot
tell the mystery, nor unfold the meaning of the ancient Quakers Writings; but
Pharaoh's Proviso, and Nebuchadnezzar's Proviso was more discreet by far then
their's are who trust in you; for each of you with your Tongues pretend to
unfold the thing; and you Bargain, and make the poor blind people give you
great Gifts and Sums by the year, although the Mystery be not unfolded until
this day.

And are you not they that Christ (the ancient Quakers head) said, would come,
Luke 17. who would say, Lo, here, and lo there; but believe them not; for
(says he) the Kingdom of God is within you?

Now, if you would hut honestly consider, what did and does induce you to
believe the verity of the ancient Quakers writings, viz. the Scriptures, the
same Light would induce you to believe the present Ones; for it is the same
thing in you that does assert unto you the Truth of the Scriptures, as does
assert that sin is sin; but although each of you beforementioned do believe
the ancient Quakers Writings, yet you differ in your Faith, as touching the
ancient and present Quakers Principles, held forth in the ancient Quakers
writings; and so you being wrong in the principle of your foundation or
building, how then is you Edifice but like to fall?

First, It was the ancient Quakers faith, (John 1.9.) That it was the true
Light, that lightened every man that comes into the World, But you deny it to be
that true Light, but say, It Is the light of Nature, or of a natural Conscience.

The ancient Quakers said, ( Romans 19.) that Whatever may be known of God, is
manifest in men; for God has showed it unto them. But each of you in
Contradiction to the ancient Quakers, that writ so, and in Contradiction to the
present Ones, that now write so; you say, That which may be known of God is not
manifest within men, but without them.

In the ancient Quakers Writings one of them said, (1 John 2.27.) We have an
Anointing in us; and we need not any man teach us, but as the same Anointing
teaches us.

But in contradiction to him, you will not trust that Anointing in you, to
teach you, but hire Men without you, who do not teach from that Anointing
within, but what they have scraped from Books and Histories without them.

In the ancient Quakers Writings you may find a Proclaimation made to all
People, Isa. 55.1. (thus) Ho, every one that thirsts, come, buy Wine and
milk, without money and without Price. And in another place in the ancient
Quakers Writings thus, The Spirit says Come, and the Bride says Come, and let
him that is athirst Come, and take of the Water of Life freely, Rev. 22.17. and
21.6.

And if you will read the present Quakers Writings, you may see that they are
of the same Mind; but each of you in contradiction to both ancient and present
Quakers, will not allow of your pretended Milk, Honey nor Wine, without Money
or Price; and have got Laws made, that if any will not give you your Price for
your Ware, you will sue them at Law, and recover treble Damage, and put their
Bodies in Prison until Death, and drive away their Cows, Oxen, Horses, Swine,
Pigs, Geese, Beds and Blankets, and their Wearing Apparel, not leaving a
Skellet to boil poor Children Meat, nor a Bed to lie on.

Oh! how diametrically opposite are you all to the ancient and present
Christian-Quakers, who Gave all, and now do freely Give, without Money or
Price? but you have Money and Price, not only of them that willingly give you
Money for that which is not Bread, but of them also who have Bread of Life
freely given them, and have no Want.

And now you might say, the present Quakers were Phanaticks and madmen; indeed
if they should forsake the Fountain of Living Waters, and the Bread of Life
that is given them freely, and come to you, and give you Money for that which is
no bread.

Oh you Priests of all sorts! I beseech you for Christ's sake, do not run thus
headlong to Destruction, and draw the poor blind People after you; it would be
far better for you to accept of the Bread and Water of Life freely, without
Money or without Price.

For, what Profit will it be to you, as Christ (the Head of the Quakers) said,
to pull down your old Barns and build new, and fill them with ill-gotten
Treasures, when you know not but this Night God may require your Souls of you?

The ancient Quakers Writings, viz. the Scriptures of Truth, Mich. 3.11.
are very full of Testimonies to this purpose, Isa. 56.11.
sharply reproving all such as in their day did preach for Hire, Jer. 5.30, 31.
and divine for Money, Ezekiel. 13. and 34.2, 3.
and were for the Fleece and Wool, and made a Prey on the People, and
Merchandise of their Souls.

And in the latter-end of the ancient Quakers Writings, one of them named John,
in his Revelations, speaks of a time coming, that no man would buy their
Merchandise any more.

The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Head of both the
ancient and present Quakers, Prophets, Apostles and Children of the Most High
at this day, hasten that day, that all people may come, and take of the Water
of Life freely; for the Spirit and the Bride, the Lamb's Wife, at this day
invites all to come freely, without Money and without Price, Revel. 22.17.

And it is said unto all that do come, even as it was said to the Church in the
Canticles, (Cant. 5.1.) I am come down into my Garden, my Sister, my Spouse; I
have gathered my Myrh with my Spices, I have eaten my Honey with my Honeycomb;
I have drunk my Wine with my Milk: Eat, oh Friends! drink, yea, drink
abundantly, O Beloved.

Oh! blessed State, Oh! happy Estate is this to witness and experience Christ
Jesus his great Love unto us, who is now come down unto us, and has made us of
so near Relation to him as Sister and Spouse, and does give freely the Bread of
Life, even the hidden Manna, and the Water of Life, and says unto us, and unto
all that will come, Take of it freely, yea, eat oh Friends, yea, drink
abundantly O beloved, Rev. 2.17.

And now the Visitation and Invitation is to you, both Papists, Protestants,
Presbyterians, Independents and Anabaptists, both Priest and People, to come
and take of the Waters of Life freely, and lay out your Money no more for that
which is no Bread, nor make a Trade no longer of the ancient Quakers Writings,
but believe and obey the ancient and present Quakers Principle, the Glorious
Light, which shines in the Darkness, but the Darkness comprehends it not;
and that will bring you to be of one Heart, and one Mind, and one Soul, and to
serve God with one consent; and then you will know your Teacher in you, which
Christ promised and said, could not be removed into a Corner; which is the
Anointing in you, which the Apostle said, there was no need of any other
Teacher; for all other Teachers may be removed into a Corner; and therefore, as
you prize the welfare of your Immortal Souls, Cease from Man and Man's
Teaching, although he may transform himself so like Truth that he might d^ceive
the Elect, if it were possible, and own and believe the Light, the Anointing in
you; for you need not any Man teach you, but as the Anointing in you teaches
you, which is Truth, and no Lie; for it is a measure of the Light of Christ,
God's Anointed.

Objection, But do not you teach your selves, and allow some Teachers among
you?

Answer, It Is true, we do allow the Children of the Light to declare to people
what God has done for their Souls, as the same blessed Anointing in them
teaches and directs them; so we may say, as the Apostles said, What our Ears
have heard, and what our Eyes have seen, and our Hands handled of the Word of
Life, that we declare, according to the blessed Experience God has given us,
(which Teaching only can edify the Hearers.)

And that is the Reason that sometimes we sit silent in Meetings, without any
Word, waiting diligently in quietness, with reverent Attention, hearkening with
the inward Ear of our Mind for the Voice of our Beloved, Christ Jesus, the
Anointing in us, to teach us; and if any do teach from this Anointing, Christ
Jesus, we own it, and have Unity with it; although we own the Teaching enjoyed
by waiting in silence to be before and beyond any man's teaching, although he
teach immediately from the Anointing in him; for that is but at second hand to
the Hearers, but what we are taught by the Anointing, every one in his own
particular, is at first hand; he that has an Ear to hear, let him hear: and we
may say, as the Church in Canticles said, Cant. 5.2. It Is the Voice of my
Beloved that knocks, saying, Open to me, my Sister, my Love, my Dove, my
Undefiled; for my Head. is filled with Dew, and my Locks with the Drops of the
Night.

And I may say unto you, my dear Countrymen in England, and my Native Country
North Wales, That a long Night of Apostasy has been since the Apostles (the
ancient Quakers) days the true Church fled into the Wilderness for a time, and
times, and half a time (Rev. 12.) but now she is coming out of the Wilderness,
leaning upon her Beloved, whose Head is wet with the Dew, and his Locks with
the Drops of this long Night; and this is he whom John speaks' of, who said,
Behold I stand at the Door and knock, if any man open, I will come in, and sup
with him, and he with me: Lo how universal is his Voice, and his Knocking, and
how willing to be entertained by all men.

And I appeal to all your Experiences, you my Friends and beloved Welsh men,
Have not you heard the Voice of our Beloved, Christ Jesus, the Anointing in
you, calling you one day after another from all the Evil of your Ways? and
does he not stand at the Door of your Hearts, knocking, that he may come in,
and sup with you, and you with him?

And which of you in England or Wales, for which I mourn, can tell me of any
one Sin that you have practiced, and although no Eye has seen you, but you
have heard the Voice of our Beloved, Christ Jesus, in you, calling you away
from it: Oh! what wonderful Love is this, that he should thus continue to speak
to, and woe the Children of Men?

And is it not great Ingratitude for you thus to disregard this blessed Voice
in you? Oh! I beseech you consider; Would it not be counted great Ingratitude
in you, if some Prince or great Man of the Earth, who had been your great
Friend, should stand at your Door without, and knock, and you refuse to open
unto him? Nay, I am persuaded, that if but a Lord, or Earl, or Knight of your
acquaintance, should but knock at your Door, oh what a Passionate Haste would
you be in to open to him! and what Apologies would you be ready to make, that
you could not accommodate him with Entertainment fit for him! and how great
Care would you have of sleighting him! but if you should be so unkind, as not
to open to him, nor entertain him, how soon would he take Offense at you, and
it may be never be reconcilied to you more, although you never did it but once?
and how ready would most of your Neighbor be to fall out with you on his
account, telling you of your ill Behavior to so worthy a Person.

But behold, how often have you slighted our Beloved, who stands knocking, and
whose Voice calls you to open to him? and notwithstanding that, you have
slighted him a thousand times, and let him stand and call, and knock, some
twenty, some thirty, some forty, some sixty years, yet is he willing to be
reconciled to you. Therefore I beseech you be persuaded to open unto him, and
let him (the anointing in you) be your Teacher; for you need not any man to
teach you, but as this Anointing in you does teach you, freely, without Money
and without Price.

Now I beseech you, my Friends and Countrymen, both Papists, Protestants,
Presbyterians, Independents and Anabaptists, Priest and People of all sorts,
That you no longer slight the Voice of our Beloved, that calls thus in you,
and that so long has waited to be gracious to you, as your own Experience will
tell you; yea, I earnestly beg and entreat of you, that you proceed no further,
as many of each of your Priests have done in their Books to abuse our Beloved,
the Anointing in you; some saying, Its a Natural Light, or Natural Conscience;
some calling it Witchcraft; and some, Ignis Fatuus; and some, the Quakers Idol,
with many more ill Names too tedious to name; and like the Jews great Scholars
and Priests of old, that Crucified him; so have they done now afresh, and put
him to open Shame; and it was the God of this World that blinded those great
Scholars Eyes then, that blinds these now. And as the Mysteries of his Kingdom
were hid from all those men then, so it is at this day; and it is my Testimony
for God, that there is no way to come to the Knowledge of the Heavenly Mystery,
but by giving heed to the Light, the Voice, the Knocking of the Anointing in
you.

Therefore strive no longer with your Invented Various Meanings, your Various
Commentaries on the ancient Quakers Writings, your Tongues and Languages,
strive no more with your Logic, Rhetoric, Studied Sermons, Philosophy and
great Books; for there is none, neither Learned nor Unlearned, found worthy to
open the Mystery of the Book, but the Lamb, whose voice in you only can make it
known unto you: For as the Apostle Paul said, If I give all my Goods to the
Poor, and my Body to be Burnt, and have not Charity, I am but as a Sounding
Brass or Tinkling Cymbal; so I say unto you, study, pray, preach, read Books,
hear Sermons, yea, do all the uttermost your Arts and Sciences can teach you,
and it will signify nothing unto you without Charity; and where is your
Charity or Pity either, to let the Beloved of our Souls, Christ Jesus, stand at
the Door of your Hearts, and call unto you for Entrance, and take no Pity of
him, but many of you call him ill Names, as before.

Well, my Friends, my Soul's Love desires you to open unto him; for he will not
always strive with you, and if you persist in slighting of him, although his
Voice be but low, and his Appearance but like a Grain of Mustard Seed sown in
your Hearts, you will find that this Light, the Anointing in you, will be more
against you then a thousand Witnesses; and then you shall know, that this is
the Truth, written in Love to your Souls, by me, who am.

Your Real Friend. Thomas Win.

Y Llythyr i annerch fie anwyl wladwyry Cymru.
FIE anwyl Frodyr a Chwuorydd o wlad fyngenedigaeth, I mae in amser i chwi
ddeffro, oblegid dydd mawr yr Arglwydd a wawriodd, a chododd Haul y cyfiawnder,
ac i mae in discleirio oddifewn yngalonau meibion dynion, in twymno ac in
cyssuro y rhai a'i carant of: Ac fell y bu Duw in drugarog trwy roi Howl
oddiallan, i gyssuro ac i gynal holl ddynol ryw in eu gorchwylion oddiallan; ac
hebddo ni fyddei and nos in fuan o farfolaeth i holl ddynol ryw: Felly i mae of
gwedi rhoi haul y cyfiawnder Christ Jesu mewn mesur (i ddiscleirio oddifewn) i
holl blant dynion, i ddangos iddynt hwy y ffordd i fywyd tragwyddol. A'r
goleuni yr haul yma sydd in datcuddio i blant dynion eu holl hanwireddau: a
phan fachludo yr haul yma mewn enaid, mae in rhywyr ir enaid weithio. Am hynny
(fie anwyl Frodyr y Cymbru tirion) ystyriwch mewn pride, a rhoddwch ufydd-dod i'r
gwir goleuni in eich Cydwybodau chwi. Oh! grandewch ar lais yr hwn sydd in curo
wrth ddrysiau eich calonau chwi, ac in galw arnoch chwi beunydd, i ymadel a
phob drwg, a wyddoch i fod in dda, A dyma 'r gwir Figael sydd in casclu ei
ddefaid ir un gorlan. A dyma 'r gwir Fugael a ddywedodd, Joan 10.10. Fie nefaid
i a wrandawant ar fie llais i, ac ar lais un dierth ni wrandawant ddim. A dyma
'r Bugael da a roddodd ei fywyd i lawr dros y defaid: And (eb of) y cyflogwr a
ffu, oblegid ei fod in gyflogwr, ac nid iw in gofalu am y defaid, Am hynny (Oh
Cymbru tirion) ymadewch a'r holl gyflogwyr, oblegid ffo a wnant hwy, os
coeliwch Christ Jesu oblegid i bod hwy in gyflogwyr, and ydynt in gofalu am
danoch chwi, and am eich eiddo chwi: A diange a wnant hwy, pan i gwelant chwi
mewn cyfyngder; Pan welant hwy y blaidd, gelyn eich eneidian, diangc a wnant
hwy. And y gwir Fugail, yr hwn a roddodd ei fywyd i lawr drossoch, yr hwn sydd
in lleisio ynoch, efe a'ch gwared chwi oddiwrth y blaidd, gelyn eich enidiau
chwi. Am hynny ymadewch a dynion, a throwch at gwir goleuni Duw a Christ ynoch
chwi; Canys os y doll a dwysa 'r dall, y ddau a syrth i 'r clawdd, medd Christ:
Ac fe ddywaid yr Apostl Joan, y mae genym Eneiniad ynom: Ac nid rhaid i chwi
neb eich dyscu, and fell y dysco yr Eneiniad ynoch chwi. A dyma fie 'nhystiolaeth
i oddiwrth wir deimlad oddiwrth Dduw, ac o wir gariad at eich eneidiau, Oni y
madewch chwi a gwrando ar gyflogwyr, ac oni ymadewch chwi a Dynion a dyfod i
gymerid eich dyscu began yr Eneiniad oddifewn i chwi, gwell a fuasai i chwi fod
heb eich heni. And os chwi a ymadewch a dysceidiaeth dynion, a chymeryd eich
dyscu began Grist yr Eneiniae ynoch, ac in ei weinidogion of, happys a fyddwch
byth in dragwyddol. A gwybyddwch (y Cymbru anwyl) mae mewn gwir gariad at eich
eneidiau chwi, i rwi 'n scryfennu attoch chwi, yr hwn a adwaenoch chwi wrth yr
henw.

Carwys, y 4 mis yr ail dydd, 1677. Thomas Win.

Postscript.
OH! my dear Friends beforementioned, I beseech you once more to lay to Heart
the Estate and Condition you are in, and call to mind it will be Wisdom for you
to remember your Latter End; and think not that your Joaking or Scoffing will
serve turn before the great Tribunal, nor your empty professing of God and
Christ in words; for, it is not every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter
the Kingdom, but he that does the will of the Father which is in Heaven.

But in may be some of you will be ready to say, that I make no Distinction
between the Best and the Worst.

To which I Answer, That I have written in general, and though there be among
you distinct Names, as before, I find you all to agree (in Nature) to Scoff,
Taunt and Persecute God's poor despised People; and seeing you have so
unanimously agreed so to do, as may appear if need be, I judge it but equal to
let you be together until some of you disjoyn your selves by a more holy Frame
of Spirit.

Yet I know, there are some particular Persons of each of you, who are come so
far to be led and guided by the holy Principle in them, that they dare not
scoff nor jeer any, but are troubled to hear or see any others do so, who have
showed their Moderation so much as they themselves have not escaped being
Sharers in the Reproach of the Quakers; ct these I distinguish from the rest,
and from what I charge the afore-mentioned with; and I heartily desire, that
they may witness a Growth in the Heavenly Principle, which will further them in
holy Living, and make them able to discern who they are that fear God, and who
fear him not.

T. W.

THE END.

