AN ANSWER TO A LETTER FROM Dr. BRAY, Directed to such as have contributed
toward the Propagating Christian Knowledge IN THE PLANTATIONS. By JOSEPH WYETH.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-street,
1700.

AN ANSWER TO A LETTER From Dr. BRAY.
BEing one of those who are heartily Desirous that Christian Knowledge be
propageted in the Plantations, and have in my small proportion, contributed
thereto; I suppose my self to come within the compass of the Doctor's
Direction, and as such, have some kind of Right to Read and Consider his
Letter, and also to Reply to it, upon finding him either Mistaken or Partial;
and I cannot avoid thinking he is both. Partial, in attemptiug to break the
common Liberty of the people of Maryland, for the private Advantage of a few
Clergymen: Mistaken, not only in calling his Attempt by the glorious Title of
Promoting Christian Knowledge, but also, in the Way and Means to effect it; and
therefore have given my self the trouble of the following Papers, to contribute
yet farther, if it may be, to undeceive any who may be misled by the Doctor's
Letter, which I shall consider chiefly under two General Heads.

First, With respect to the Design. Secondly, The Method by him proposed to
carry on and effect the Design.
First, The Design it self; The Doctor, p. 1. and in his first Paragraph, says,
is for the Destruction of the Powers of Darkness, and the Enlargement of
Christ's Kingdom in his Majesty's Plantations.

This Design, when real, and not pretended only, is a Design so Noble, Just and
Honorable, that it is worthy the hearty Encouragement of all Faithful
Christians; and all such cannot but think themselves engaged to Contribute,
according to their several Capacities, for the effecting of it; because, that
in the Progress of this Work, it makes Governors and Government Secure and
Easy; it makes Families Sober and Industrious; it makes Societies Pleasant and
Profitable; in fine, it makes all Happy; by taking from the several Orders of
Men, that irregular Passion, which is the ground both of Sin and Strife. But as
best things, when corrupted, prove the worse, by adding Malignity to their
Degeneracy; so the noblest of Designs may be pretended to cover very contrary
Intentions: Thus the Doctor, under the specious Pretense of the Destruction of
the Powers of Darkness, has plainly endeavored the Destruction of the Power
of Christian Liberty; and under the pretense of Enlarging Christ's Kingdom,
has shown his zealous endeavor for the Enlarging Anti-scriptural Hierarchy,
and Secular Power, in the Person of the Priest; not barely to the prejudice of
Christian Knowledge, but positively against the end and design of the Gospel of
Peace, which Jesus Christ is the Author of, and which the Apostles preached:
And therefore it cannot be unacceptable to every Contributer, to the
Advancement of Christian Knowledge, to see the Fallacy of the Pretense
detected; by showing, that instead of that Excellent Design, the bottom is, as
the Apostle has it, to seek their own, and not the things which are Jesus
Christ's. Phil. 2. 21.


As to the first of these, viz. the Destruction of the Power of Christian
Liberty, the Doctor has plainly shown his Endeavor and Aim, in these words,
Now that the Quakers are openly, and the Papists more covertly, making their
utmost Efforts Letter, p. 1. Art. 3.
against the Establishment of our Church, by false Representations at home, of
the Numbers and Riches of their Party; and by insinuating, that to Impose upon
them an established Maintenance for the Clergy, would be prejudicial to the
Interest of the Province, by obliging so many weathly Traders to remove from
thence: the Falsity of which, they (the Clergy) thought me best able to make
appear.

The Apostles, when they established Churches in the Faith, they tell us, They
delivered them the Decrees for to keep, that Acts 16. 4.
were ordained of the Apostles and Elders which were at Jerusalem.

These Decrees were few and short; and among them there is no mention of
imposing a Maintenance: I will recite them. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost,
and to us, to lay upon you Acts 16. 28, 19.
no greater Burden than these necessary things: That ye abstain from Meats
offered to Idols, and from Blood, and from things Strangled, and from
Fornication: From which if you keep your selves, ye shall do well. Fare ye well

And if the Doctor had sought the Establishment of his Church, by the
delivering of these Decrees, and pressing with the greatest Earnestness, the
necessity of a Holy Life he might rest himself most firmly assured, that the
Quakers never did, nor will ever oppose such an Apostolic Establishment: But
if the Establishment of his Church, must be upon the Ruin of the Temporal
Estates of those, who agree not with him in Worship, in removing that Security,
which the Privileges of their first Settlements, and the Sanction of a Law,
has given them: He ought not to take it ill, that we openly oppose that.

As for any Covert Opposition, or any Opposition at all made, by Papists, to
the Doctor's Establishment, I known of none, nor cannot at present find a
reason why they should disagree; unless it were upon the Question, Who shall be
the Receivers of the Maintenance? But with this I care not now farther to
trouble my self; but shall proceed to show, that this Christian Liberty, which
the Doctor would now destroy, was very earlily provided for, by a Law made in
that Province, and confirmed by the Government here, and bears date the 6th of
August, 1650. which Law is entitled, A Law of Maryland for Religion: In which,
among other things, it is said, And whereas the enforcing the Conscience, in
matters of Religion, has frequently fallen out to be of dangerous Consequence,
in those Commonwealths where it has been practiced; and for the more quiet and
peaceable Government of this Province, and the better to preserve mutual Love
and Unity amongst the Inhabitants here: Be it therefore also, by the Lord
Proprietary, with the Advice and Assent of this Assembly, Ordained and Enacted,
except as in this present Act is before declared and for forth, that no Person
or Persons, within this Province, or the Islands, Ports, Harbors, Creeks, or
Havens, thereunto belonging, professing to believe in Jesus Christ, shall not,
from henceforth, be any ways troubled, molested, or discountenanced, for, or in
respect, of his or her Religion, nor in the free Exercise thereof, within this
Province, or the Islands thereunto belonging; nor any way compelled to the
Belief or Exercise of any other Religion, against his or her Consent. And after
a Clause, for the Security of the Civil Government, it goes on, And that all,
and every Person and Person, that shall presume, contrary to this Act, and the
true Intent and Meaning thereof, directly or indirectly, either in Person or
Estate, wilfully to Wrong, Disturb, Trouble or Molest, any Person or Persons
whatsoever, within this Province, professing to belive in Jesus Christ, for or
in respect of his or her Religion, or the free Exercise thereof, within this
Province, otherwise than is provided for in this Act, that such Person or
Persons, so offending, shall be compelled to pay treble Damages to the Party so
Wronged or Molested; etc.

Whosoever, that is not strangely bigoted to Persecution and Imposing, must,
upon reading of this Law, agree with the Doctor in his Character of the People
of Maryland: They are, says he, generally observed to be a People of quick
Letter p. 2.
Parts, and good Intellectuals. I am sure, to me, this is an Argument that they
are so. For in this Law, they secured a Scirpture Belief, and preserved a
Liberty, which the Apostle hints at, when he says, Who art thou that judge
another Man's Servant? To his own Master be stands or falls: Yea, he shall
be Rom 14. 4.
holden up: For God is able to make him stand.

In this they did very prudently: For hereby all Professors of Christianity
stood upon the same foot of Advantage; none, as Christian, had Power of
Imposing a Maintenance from others, each were free to establish Churches, and
maintain Ministers (if they would) for themselves. And if those, who Labor in
the Word and Doctrine, Labor in a Gospel Spirit, and Live according, they need
never fear but the People they Labor amongst will cheerfully supply their
Necessities; for which they have the Promise of Jesus Christ, if they have
Faith enough to depend upon it. But to proceed. This Legal Security, and some
other Previous Advantages, was both Encouragement and Protection for some early
Planters, to settle in that Province; among which, with the Doctor's leave,
some, not of the Latest, nor most Inconsiderable, were Quakers; whose Christian
Sobriety, and Rational Diligence, has been of no small Advantage to the public
Advantage of that Province, as well as the increasing Revenue of this Crown:
The first, their Ingenuous Neighbors will acknowledge; and of the last, there
are some Witnesses here, who also are much better Judges than the Doctor, what
Prejudice, both to the Revenue of this Crown, and the Good of that Province,
their removal would be.

But that I may, if posible, open the Doctor's Eyes in this Question, I will
set before them a short Scheme and Estimate of that Violation, which has
repeatedly been offered to the Privileges of the Law beforementioned, and
which has been as often refused to be Confirmed by the Government here. In
order to which, I must first acquaint my Reader, That the Law of Maryland, for
Religion, beforementioned, did continue to be the Peoples common Landmark of
Liberty, from the date of its Confirmation, till Anno 1692. at which time some,
either not liking their common Freedom of Religion, with the rest of the
Inhabitants; or else not willing to Maintain singly their own Chargeable
Clergy, did, with the hepl of the then Governor Coply, get an Act, to Impose
upon all others to Maintain them; and was entitled, An Act for the Service of
Almighty God, and Establishment of the Protestant Religion, etc. This was sent
over hither for to be confirmed, but when tendered to the King and Council for
that end, (which was five Years after it was brought over, but was kept
Dormant, because that till it was disallowed, it had the Force of a Law, and
accordingly they made Distraints by Virtue of it) it was disallowed, as
contrary to the Law of Religion above cited, and the Repeal sent over, This did
not discourage that Party, but that they procured another Act, of the same
Title, and to the same purpose, and sent it over to be Confirmed This also the
King in Council disallowed, Anno. 1699.

At the time when this Repeal and Disallowance was sent over, Doctor Bray also
went, and did so effectually bestir himself, that with the Assistance of the
Clergy, etc. they, in Contradiction to the repeated Disallowance of the King
and Council, to their Law, have again renewed the said Act in Substance, and
have made the Title yet narrower than the two former: They were for the
Establishment of the Protestant Religion; but this is for the Establishment of
Religion in this Province, according to the Church of England. The first, it is
true, was the most Charitable Title, but yet it served to the same purpose, and
was expounded as the last.

In this Law, among other things (after their former Patterns) it is enacted,
That for the Encouragement of faithful and able Ministers, laboring in the
Work of the Gospel, to come and reside in this Province, instead of such Tithes
usually in England, as aforesaid, a Tax or Assessment of 40 l. of Tobacco per
Poll, be Yearly, and every Year successively, levied upon every Taxable Person,
within each respective Parish, within this Province.

By Taxable Persons, is understood, all Males of sixteen Years, and upwards, to
sixty; of white Persons, and all, both Men and Women, Blacks of the like Ages.

Now for the drawing of the Scheme and Estimate, which I promised, I shall
suppose (for with respect to Number, I can do no more, unless I had the
Assistance of the Doctor's Tabula Prima, etc. of which more anon) that the
Heads of Families, who differ in Worship from Episcopacy, their Children and
Servants, both White and Black, which are Taxable, may be in Number 6000. (and
I think I am not much mistaken in this Supputation, because the Doctor, in his
Circular Letter to the Clergy of Maryland, at the end of his piece entitled,
Apostolic Charity, printed this Year 1700. has these words, Especially the
Papists and Quakers, which I understand are numerous amongst you; which
intimate, there are others who differ from them, though these named may be most
numerous) the Yearly Assessment of these, at 40 l. of Tobacco per Poll, valuing
the Tobacco, communibus annis, at a Penny a Pound, (though some Years since 1692.
it has been double that Price) it amouts to One Thousand Pound Sterling a Year:
Which is no inconsiderable Sum, to be taken and distrained Annually, for eight
Years, as this has been, on pretense for the Service of Almighty God, by color
of Laws disallowed by Authority.

But as the Assessments abovementioned, of 40 l. of Tobacco per Poll, has
been gathered by Laws disallowed, so it is some degree of Injustice, to
constrain, even those who owned their Ministry, to give them such a certain
Portion; which Assessments being added to the former, will make up, according
to the Information I have, a Sum three times the former; the whole Number of
Taxable Persons being supposed to be about 24000. by which Computation, 4000
Pounds Sterling a Year, has been taken or distrained, for 8 Years, for the
Clergy of that Province. The Total of which Sum is, 32000 Pounds; and the
Doctor tells us, there is but 16 Ministers, and the Churches but lately built,
and that to the great Charge of the Governor Nicholson, and the Country.

l. That it has been to their great Charge, is likely very true, for if each of
these 16 Ministers had for the past 8 Years, 100 l. per Annum, that will make
the Sum of -- 12800 Then for Building Churches, and petty Expenses, if at least
it has been so expended -- 19200 Total 32000

Reader, Is not this a notable Burden to Intail upon a Country, and a ready
way to Cramp the Industry of its Inhabitants; and thereby prejudice the Revenue
of the Crown?

Now Doctor, as our King is the common Father of his People, and has carefully
excuted his distributive Justice, How is it consistent with that, and with the
established Privilege of that Province, to seek to draw his Authority to
color the Violence of a few, who in their desire, show themselves more bent on
the Spoil of their Neighbors, and the enslaving of the People, than either the
Glory and Service of Almighty God, or the common Good of that Province?

Having shown briefly, that the Doctor's Design of Imposing, is quite contrary
to the Settlement of that Province, to the Will of this Government, as appears
in the Disallowances beforementioned, and to the common Good of the People
there.

I must bestow a few Lines, to show the Inconsistency of that Design, of
Imposing, with the Design of Christianity; and which I cannot better begin,
than with the Account of our Savior, who it is said, In the last Day, that
great Day of the Feast, stood, and cried, saying, If any Man thirst, let him
come John 7. 37.
unto me and drink: But he did not Impose it upon any; and as Himself did not
Impose upon any, so the Precepts which he gave his Apostles were agreeable; for
in great Simplicity and Poverty he sent them forth Matthew. 10. 1. Mar. 6. 7.
to Preach the Gospel; and does particularly observe to them, that he Matthew.
10. 16.
sent them forth as Sheep in the midst of Wolves. But when Men, who pretend to
be their Successors, shall by Force Impose upon the People to Maintain them, it
is proper to read; They are sent forth as Wolves in the midst of Sheep; and
then, who sent them is no difficult thing to know. But, as our Savior Jesus
Christ did not Impose himself upon any, neither his Disciples, so they left no
Precept that any of their Followers should; and their Examples was of so much
force in Primitive Times, that at a Synod held in Ireland, about the Years 450,
or 456. it was ordained, Concilia, etc. Hen. Spelman, tom. 1. p. 52. Can. 11,
12.
That neither the Alms of Christians Excommunicated, nor which the Gentiles
gave, should be received into the Church. And in times acknowledged to be yet
Grosser, and more Dark, viz. about the Year 600, they had yet retained so much
of true Christianity in practice, if at least we may credit our Historian, Beda
lib. 1. c. 25.
That Austine, and those that came with him, began (it had been well if they,
and all their Successors, had continued) to imitate the Apostolic Life of the
Primitive Church. And he particularly mentions their great Constancy and
Self-denial, showing forth in their Lives, the excellency of their Doctrine,
that they received necessary Food, only from those whom they Taught.

These few Instances are sufficient to show the Inconsistency of the Doctor's
Pretense to Apostolic Charity, with Imposing a Maintenance; and that his
Design of so doing, is contrary to the Gospel of Christ: It was in free Love,
and without the expectation or possibility of Reward, that our Savior has put
us into a Capacity of Salvation, and it is freely and without expectation of
Reward from Man: that his Ministers are the Messengers of that Glad tidings:
And all those whose Commissions are of the same Tenure with the * Apostles, on
Acts 26. 18. 1 Cor. 9. 16.
such a necessity is laid, yea, Woe is unto them if they Preach not the Gospel;
they skill not, in selling the Gifts of the Holy Ghost, no more than Peter did.

Thus far, with respect to the Doctor's Design; and next, to the other General
Head, which I proposed, viz. The Method by him proposed to carry on and effect
that Design; which will fall under a twofold consideration; 1 st, As it
respects the People of the Province: 2dly, As it respects his Clergy there.

And first, for the Doctor's Method to Propagate Christian Knowledge, as it
respects the People, which I will give in his Letter p. 1. par. 3.
own words, By the returns given in (says he) upon my Tabula prima Parochialium
inquirendorum, by which, when they shall be all sent in, I shall be enabled to
give an account of the Names of all Heads of Families, and of the Religion and
Morals of every individual Man, Woman and Child, Freeman and Slave, White and
Black, throughout Maryland.

This is, it seems, the Doctor's Method and Undertaking, and a very remarkable
one it is; but I cannot forbear asking him, Whence the Pattern of this his
Tabula prima? All the Acts of the Apostles has nothing like it; they, Holy Men,
were not so solicitous of the Names and Numbers of the People in a Province, as
they were, that those who had given up their Names for to be Followers of
Christ, might in all things Adorn the Gospel. They planted the Faith in godly
Sincerity, and not in the cunning Craftiness of Men. It Is true, the Doctor may
have an occasion for such a Scrutiny, which the Apostles had not; for if he
should leave any of their Names out of his Number, it may be the loss of 40 l.
of Tobacco per Poll; and therefore it is not unlikely, but he will endeavor
that his Tabula be complete, as to both their Names and Numbers; but with
respect to their Morals, it is much if his Tables are not often false.

But further, this Tabula prima Parochialium Inquirendorum, of the Doctor's, or
(to make it once speak English) First Table of Parish Inquiries, seems to have
some affinity with the Inquisitionem of the Romanists, and to be a Branch of
their Antichristian Politics, drawn from the Writ by Meursius, and printed
1635.
Decreta Societatis Jesu, by which to draw the People under his Girdle; and
that this is not bare Guess and Surmise only, the Doctor's following words do
show. Because I find (says he) there comes under my Cognizance, several very
important Cases to be tried speedily, with Relation to the Clergy and Laity. To
determine several of which being of so high a Nature, as Eorgcry of Holy
Orders, Polygamy and Incest, I want Instructions as to the Manner and Forms of
Proceedings; and as it appears to me, have no Power, by my Commission, to give
such Sentences as the Nature of the Crimes will require,

Upon which, I cannot but tell the Doctor, that whatsoever Person, holding
Christian Society, does by wicked and unclean Actions (of which, these are some
of the chief) give occasion of Scandal and Offense, to the Society he pretends
to hold Church Membership with; that Society has no farther Power warranted in
the New Testament, than to give Admonition, Reproof or Rebuke, upon the
Offender; which, if not followed, by the Amendment of the Offender, then to
cast out and refuse such an one their Communion. This is all the Process which
the Church can make, it being all that our Savior directed, and what the
Apostles did practice.

Now I make no doubt, but the Doctor's Commission was full as extensive as
that; but if, through the mistake of the Clerk who drew it, it had been more
narrowly worded, yet Holy Writ, without a Bishop's Commission, is both
sufficient Warrant and Precedent, for all that relates to Church Membership,
and a Separation from it: So that had the Doctor designed to govern himself in
his pretended Spiritual Function, and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, by that
Rule, he could not want any necessary Instruction, relating to the manner of
Proceedings against Sinners of his Communion. But it seems it is something more
that he wants, viz. To give such Sentences as the Nature of Polygamy and Incest
do require. The Doctor does well to tread softly here, and see that his Power
be full before he exercise the office of the Civil Magistrate, and venture to
give such Sentences as the Nature of these Crimes require, lest he incur a
Praemunire; for who knows not that these Crimes are in their Nature justly
deemed Capital, and the Sentences, which our Laws have provided for them, are
according. Here the Doctor's Commission was short, he might Excommunicate, but
not Hang the wicked, and it is like it will be no short while before the
Government put into his hands such a branch of the Civil Power.

What I have yet said, has not been with respect to Forgery of Holy Orders,
which the Doctor says, does also come under his Cognizance; therefore now a
word or two of that, and then I have done with these great Crimes of some of
the Doctor's Communicants. It is nothing strange, that the Doctor should want
Instruction in this matter, because it is a thing not named in all the New
Testament; and therefore he can have no light, as to the manner of Proceeding,
or Sentence from thence against it: The nearest Parallel which the Doctor can
urge from thence, is, where the Apostle tells of some that were false Apostles;
and the mark by which he judged 2 Cor. 11. 13.
them to be so, was, they were Deceitful workers: Now if the Doctor will make
this the Line and Rule of his Judgment, it is too likely he will find no small
part of his few Clergy there to be guilty.

But now, the deceitful Works, by which false Apostles were known, could not be
the forging of any Writing or Warrant under the Hand and Seal of a Bishop, to
Use and Practice as a Minister in the Church of Christ: Because we read not,
that any of the Ministers of Christ had any such thing; so much the contrary,
that one of the most Eminent says, I neither received it of Man, neither was I
taught it, but by the Revelation Gal. 1. 12.
of Jesus Christ. This was Holy Orders, properly and truly speaking. And I deny
the Doctor to prove by any Warrant or Authority from Christ or his Apostles,
that That manner of Ordination and Mission is now ceased; and that it is now
merely Humane and Political, according to the general Practice of Christendom.
This brings me to the 2d Consideration of the Doctor's Method, as it respects
his Clergy there: In the Choice of which, that are now to be sent over, the
Doctor seems to be very careful, when he says, He would have them to be of a
true public disinterested, Letter. p. 2. Par. 6.
in one word, of a missionary Spirit. These will indeed be excellent
Qualifications; because the Man who is truly of a Missionary Spirit, will find
like pressing necessity to Preach the Gospel, as the Apostle says he had. And
if the Doctor will take only such, instead of Thirty, which he says he shall 1
Cor. 9. 16.
at least want, I would be glad, with my whole Heart, if the number were much
increased; nor would the People be in any danger from them, because such would
in Truth and Sincerity say, We seek not yours, but you: And therein give full
proof, that they were both public Spirited, and Disinterested to wordly Things.

But alas, the Provision which the Doctor has so carefully began to make, of
Glebes and Parsonage-Houses, and Yearly Assessments for Tithes, are plain
Indications to the contrary of his pretense of Disinterestedness, and speak
this no less loudly, than the Bleating of the Sheep, and the Lowing 1 Samuel 15.
14.
of the Oxen, did Readiness Disobedience.

That this may appear yet a little plainer, if possible, I shall observe, that
the Doctor, in his General view of the English Colonies (which is at the
beginning of his Piece, Apostolic Charity, etc. printed this Year 1700.) says,
There are 16 Ministers in Maryland; and in his Letter, as above-quoted, he
says, He shall want at least Thirty, so that these will make Forty Six in
Number, which will be a pretty chargeable Company to the Province, by that time
they are furnished to the Doctor's Mind; for he says, Fifty Pounds worth of
Books being the least that can be supposed requisite Apost. Cha. P. 7.
to enable a Minister to discharge the Duties of his Function. Here the Doctor
has taken a Method to spend Two Thousand Three Hundred Pounds, of the Peoples
Money, only to help qualify the Priests: Is not that very hard upon the
People? Who must be obliged to lay out their Money to Teach the Priest gratis?
Yet, when he has learned, he will not Teach the People gratis, but make them
pay for what he takes out of Books which they gave him. If the Doctor can
reconcile this to the practice of the Primitive Preachers, recorded in the New
Testament, then we may say, He has turned over them leaves to some purpose. But
not to insist long on this, I will show how the Doctor does further explain
himself in his Proposals for the Encouragement and Promoting of Religion, etc.
printed in his Apostolic Charity, before-quoted; The Clergy (says he) that are
already in the Plantations, as well as those who are to be sent thither, cannot
(Humanely Speaking) be so capable of Informing themselves, and of Instructing
others, in the Design of Christianity, in the Nature of the Covenant of Grace,
in the Meanings and Importance of the Articles of our most Holy Faith, and in
the Nature and Extent of all Christian Duties, without the assistance of some
good Commentators upon the Holy Scripture.

I must not omit here, to observe to the Doctor, that if the Clergy which are
already in the Plantations, and those who are to be sent thither, are truly of
a Missionary Spirit, having a Zeal for God's Glory, and the Salvation of Men's
Souls, it is impossible they should be Ignorant of any Essential Part of the
Christian Religion: And therefore, if they recur to Humane Means, to make
themselves Gospel Ministers, they will yet want a Gospel Spirit; and then
wonder not, if they succeed not in bringing Souls to God: For the turning
People from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan to the Power of God,
is only to be done by such, who have first known something of the Power of God,
to turn them from Satan's Power, by which these are both Ministers and
Witnesses of those things, in which the Power of Christ has appeared; and
these will more effectually know the Design of Christianity, in the Nature of
the Covenant of Grace, as it has wrought in them, than any Commentator
whatsoever can teach them. But since the Doctor does place so eminent a part of
his Clergy's Qualifications, in their Acquaintance with good Commentators, it
may not be amiss a little to examine the Pretense, and which might have been
done with more certainty, had the Doctor named those good Commentators he
intends; but it will, however, be no very difficult matter to judge, which may
be some that are ranked in that Number: For when Persons are distinguished by
the Epithers of Fathers and Holy, there can be no doubt, but these, if they
have writ Commentaries, they obtain the first place; and of such there are very
many: Yet that I may not tire my Reader, with too great Variety of them, I will
choose to Instance, particularly, Hierom, of whom it is said, He was Daile's
use of the Fathers, lib. 1. p. 112.
the greatest Critic of them all; and who, by often exercising the Strength of
his admirable Wit, both by himself, and with others, has observed more,
touching the Style, Method, natural Disposition and Opinions of the Fathers,
than any other.

This Man, in an Apology which he writ, says, This is the usual manner of
Commentaries, and the Rule that Apol. advers. Ruff. Daile lib. 1. p. 101.
Commentators go by; to set down in their Expositions, the several Opinions
they have met withal; and to deliver both what their own, and what the Judgment
of others is upon the place. And this is the Practice, not only of Interpreters
of the Scriptures, but of the Expositors also, of all kind of Secular Learning,
as well in the Greek, as in the Latin Tongue.

Now Doctor, with what certainty, Humanely Speaking, can any of thy Clergy
learn, from such an undistinguished Mixture of Opinions, the Design of
Christianity in the Nature of the Covenant of Grace? But to carry the
difficulty, or rather impossibility, to its proper length, let us hear the same
Hierom, in an Epistle which he writ, where, after having named the Writings of
Origin, Didymus, Apollinaris, Theodorus, Heraolas, Eusebius Emissenus,
Alexander the Heretic, with others, he says, That I may therefore plainly tell
the Truth, I confess, Hierom ep. ad August. qu. e est 89. Daile lib. 1. p. 104,
105.
that I have read all these Authors, and collecting together as much as I could
in my Memory, I presently called for a Scribe, to whom I dictated either my own
Conceptions, or those of other Men, without remembering either the Order, or the
Words sometimes, or the Sense.

See here what great Uncertainty the Man is brought into, who seeks to them for
Information in the Design of Christianity; while he is reading, as he thinks,
Hierom, or others of the Fathers (as they are called) it may not be the Opinion
of the Man, under whose it is found; and how should the Reader know this,
unless he takes the Advice which Hierom gives to Augustine? Saying, If
therefore thou lightedest upon any thing in my Exposition, which was worthy of
Reprehension, it would have stood better with thy Learning to have consulted
the Greek Authors themselves, and to have seen whether what I have written be
to be found in them, or not; and if not, then to have condemned it as my own
private Opinion. See Doctor, where Commentaries lead; for, according to this
Advice, each of the Clergy Men ought to have all the Greek Authors; and
possibly, according to another Man's Advice, they ought to have all the
Latine's; by which time the Libraries for thy 46 Clergymen will cost near half
so many Thousand Pounds: And after all the Expense, are not such Comments
excellent means to Teach the Clergy, that are to Teach the People? And yet such
is the Assistance that is to be expected from them; for if some others have
Daile's use of the Fathers, lib. 1. P. 104.
not spoke out so much, they have done no less; witness Hilary, Ambrose, and
others, who Robbing poor Origin without any Mercy, do not yet do him the
Honor, so much as to name him scarcely.

What I have said, does only respect their Manner of writing Commentaries; for
as to the Matter of them, it falls under a distinct Consideration, wherein, in
very great variety of Instances it might be shown, that their Opinions are as
odd and extravagant, as the manner of Collecting them was precarious, which I
desire not now to trouble my Reader with.

What I have said, as to the manner of Writing Commentaries, may serve to show,
that, Humanely Speaking, they are not proper Assistances to Teach a Man, the
Design of Christianity, in the Nature of the Covenant of Grace. But indeed, why
should any Man go to look for that in Commentaries, which he may much more
plainly, and with infinite more certainty, find in Holy Writ, if he bring with
him but a fitting Disposition to receive Information, I mean, Sincerity and
Humility. Christian Religion, is a plain Religion, its Design is the Salvation
of Men; and there being very many, whose Capacities and Understandings are not
fitted to apprehend nice Subtilties, whose Souls are still in the same Capacity
of Salvation with the Wisest: God, in his Justice, has not withheld, even from
these, a possibility of knowing certainly their Duty, and sufficient
Assistance, whereby they may be enabled to do it; For the Grace of God has
appeared unto all Men, to teach them both their negative and positive Duty,
what to leave undone, and what to do; and why any should refuse this, and
depend on them who pore upon Commentaries, and neglect this certain Teacher, I
see not a Reason.

I have now done with the Doctor's Method of propagating Christian Knowledge,
for the present, and come to an Assertion of his; At Philadelphia in
Pensibvania, the Congregation of Church people, which amounted but to Twenty
Letter p. 3. Par. Last.
or Thirty, at most, not two Years ago, through the Blessing of God, upon the
endeavors of a late Missionary, is now increased, chiefty from
Quaker-Converts, to upwards of Seven Hundred.

The Doctor was either foully imposed upon, or did willingly mistake the State
of the Communicants of his Church in Pensilvania, when he ventured to assert as
above; and I do tell him, that if his Tables of Parish Inquiries are made with
no greater exactness, they will not be fit to be depended upon: For he is very
much out both in the Relation he has given of what the Number of them was, and
is; but to me that is not material; for if they were many-fold what he says
they are, I should by no means be offended, while they were good Christians,
walking answerable to that Holy profession: But when he Insults and says, That
they are now upwards of Seven Hundred, chiefly from Quaker-Converts: I must put
him to rights so far, as to tell him, That there is not Twenty Quaker-Converts
among them; and even of them, I suppose, he will neither care to give the World
a true Account of their Names nor Morals.

I shall now come to the Conclusion, and take leave of the Doctor for this
time, when I have taken a little notice of his Liberality, in bestowing upon G.
K. the Epithet, Excellent, and the occasion of it, when he says, The Field is
there, and the neighboring Parts, so happily Sown by the Excellent Mr. Keith.

And first, for the occasion of it, viz. The Field's being Sown by him: Prithee
Doctor, What is the Seed, Tares or Wheat? I am informed it is not, nay, I am
sure it cannot be the last, if at least he has Sown the same, he is Sowing up
and down this Kingdom, since his being denied by us, such as Uncharitablencss,
Strife, Contention, Division, and the like; from the Sowing whereof, there can
Spring no good Crop: Nor will he prove more than a weak and short Support to
them that depend upon him.

But since the Doctor seems to be a Stranger to all this, and therein
unacquainted with the true Character of his Excellent Mr. Keith, I will present
him with his short Description, in the following Abstract.

G. K. is a Man of an unstable Mind, neither consistent long with himself,
agreeing with others; by which natural Disposition, and the help of his
Eleemosynary Learning, he accustoms his Pen to Scribbling; in which he Perverts
Men's Words, Misrepresents their Principles, and then draws false and odious
Consequences from them; and charges them on those, whose Principles, fairly
stated, do not admit of such undue Conclusions. He has traduced both the
Living and the Dead, and by what he writes, he has shown, that to gratify his
Revenge, he regards not what he says, nor what he writes, if he can but expose
them to Contempt and Reproach, with whom he is Angry. He is one of the greatest
Instances of Inconstancy, Contradiction and Censoriousness, which this Age has
produced. In a word, He is the Compound of Abuse and Slander; He is at present
an Itinerant Preacher, but gaping after something better than that Fatigue;
which advance, if he miss of, Caveat Hierarchia.

Doctor, This is thy Excellent Mr. Keith, in whom, it seems, thou art not less
mistaken, than in the foregoing parts of thy Letter; all which may thou
amend in thy next, by endeavoring to propagate Christian Knowledge, in a
Christian Spirit, and by Christian Means,

Is the Desire of thy Faithful Friend, Joseph Wyeth.

FINIS.

