OF EDUCATION. Especially of Young Gentlemen. IN TWO PARTS. The Second
impression with additions.



OXON. At the THEATER Ann. 1673.

THE PREFACE.
IT is not the design of this Discourse to entrench upon any knowledge already
disposed, and appropriated into Arts and Sciences, as they are at this time
delivered; but only to propose such things to consideration and use, as, lying
scattered and in common, are less cultivated and regarded. For this reason it is
in vain to expect accurateness of method or style; but the first part is almost
wholly writ in manner of Essaies, the second of Aphorisms: the styles most
free, loose, and unscientifical.

The most useful knowledge is that, of a man's self: and this depends upon that
more universal consideration of, Quid homo potest; naturally, and artificially:
i. e. what abilities are in us originally, by the gift of God; and what
attainable by our own industry. And both these in order to Knowledge or Action.
To advance this discovery, it is hoped that these papers may contribute some
hints and steps; whereby others may proceed to perfect the whole building.
Which who shall effect, or but considerably promote, shall perform a service as
acceptable, as beneficial, to Mankind.

The perfecting of a young Man in Sciences and speculative Learning is the
business of so many Books and Persons; that it seems superfluous to engage in
that part of Instruction. It was therefore thought more useful to furnish some
rules and principles of Active life; as being that, whereto Gentlemen seem more
disposed both by their births, and general inclinations; and whereto also
little assistance could be expected from our ordinary speculations. I have
therefore rather chused to gather up disorderly, and bind together, such
scattered counsels and notions, as have occurred either in observation, or in
some Italian Writers, not ordinary amongst us. If any person shall hereby be
any whit forwarded toward the attaining the great end of his Creation; it is all
that is here aimed at. Almighty God give success according to the riches of his
goodness.

Amen.
A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS. IN THE FIRST PART.
CHAP. I. Necessary to Learning. 1. Capacity. 2. Instruction. 3. Practice. The
two last of which are comprehended in Education. Page 1. CHAP. II. Of the Duty
of Parents in educating their Children. p. 13. CHAP. III. Of the Educator. p.
25. CHAP. IV. Of the Educated. p. 29. CHAP. V. General directions to the
Educator. p. 35. CHAP. VI. Of ordering the dispositions and manners of the
Educated. p. 47. CHAP. VII. Of frugality, or ordering his money, and expenses.
p. 61. CHAP. VIII. Of the preservation of his health. p. 66. CHAP. IX. Of the
diverse passions, inclinations, and dispositions of Man, and the ways to
rectify and order them. p. 71. CHAP. X. Of parts or capacities in general, and
of their diversity, and how to be ordered and rectified. p. 98. CHAP. XI. Of
Invention, Memory, and Judgment; and how to help, better, and direct them. p.
124. CHAP. XII. Brief Directions for Elocution. p. 163. CHAP. XIII. Of
bettering the Judgment. p. 174. CHAP. XIV. Of traveling into foreign
Countries. p. 193. CHAP. XV. Of prudent choosing a calling, or state of life.
200.
PART. II.
CHAP. I. Of Civility. Page 210. CHAP. II. Of Prudence. p. 232. CHAP. III. Of
Prudence in conversation, and discourse. p. 244. CHAP. IV. Concerning Business.
p. 259. CHAP. V. Of Servants. p. 273. CHAP. VI. Of giving, receiving, and
promising. p. 277. CHAP. VII. Of Prudence in acquiring emploiment, and
preferment. p. 281.
OF EDUCATION.
CHAP. I. Necessary to Learning. 1. Capacity. 2. Instruction. 3. Practice. The
two last of which are comprehended in Education.
1. THAT a man may attain perfection in any Art, Science, or Virtue, three
things are requisite.

1. A natural ability, power, or capacity. 2. Art, or instruction. 3. Exercise
and practice. Capacity consists 1. in Fancy or Invention. 2. Memory. And 3.
Judgment, of which we shall speak at large hereafter. And these in several
persons are very different. For granting, what some Philosophers say, that they
are originally equal in all men, as being the soul it self; yet in reality,
because every soul comes into a body endued with various dispositions; and the
Organs, which the soul employeth, and are as necessary to the producing its
operations as the soul it self, are not in all equally well-disposed, there
arises great variety of capacities, and abilities: God Almighty distributing
these his Gifts of Nature to every one in what measure himself thinks fittest.

2. I know there are, who accuse the divine Providence, as more niggardly or
sparing toward men, then other Animals; which without teaching, know not only
what is sufficient for their subsistence, but some things also, which men learn
by long imitation: As, to go, to swim, to express their passions and thoughts.
Yea and some manual arts, which are in us the effects of Education, are in
beasts the actions of sense, or instinct. But truly this complaint is without
reason. For if we think Impotency to be an advantage, and those creatures to be
in the best condition who have least to do; it is true that beasts are happier
than men, and vegetables than Animals. But if every thing be made for action,
and the more able it is to work, the more noble; if plus posse follows and
argues nobilius and perfectius esse; then is our condition infinitely the
better; as not only having more, but more various, more sublime, and more
difficult Operations. It is necessary for beasts to be born with hair,
feathers, scales, or shells, because they had not the ingeny to make themselves
garments; which, to their very great convenience, they might alter according to
the seasons: nor had they the knowledge of creating fire, building houses, and
the like. Nature furnished them with beaks, claws, and horns, because they
could never arrive to find out a stone, to be melted and framed into all sorts
of instruments and utensils. Their knowledge arises no higher then of what is
pleasant or painful; they apprehend not convenient, or inconvenient; just, or
unjust; happy, or miserable. God, as a Master of a family, gives the servants
their set salary, and employs them; but his Children he educates and instructs
to command and dispose, not their own only, but even the faculties of all the
other: therefore were beasts to live by Nature, but man by Art. Beasts were to
be perfect at first that they might be presently employed, man by habits of his
own acquiring. For beasts, besides their sustentation in this present life,
were to expect no other recompense; but man by his labor was to merit, and by
wel-employing his abilities to inherit a reward, and that eternal. He made
indeed no creature, which he endowed not with sufficient abilities for the uses
of their Creation: and most also with a power to better and advance them by
assiduous practice; but the end of all inferior Creatures was comprehended in
their actions of life, for the conserving, and propagating that: But man he
created capable of a supernatural employment; of a life to be continued
infinitely beyond and above this small moment; and of operations sublimer then
providing for the belly. And therefore he adorned him with faculties
accordingly; an ability to discern betwixt good and bad, virtue and vice;
reflection upon his own actions; an understanding capable to know and
comprehend the whole World; and more then that also, to be present to all past,
and future, as well as present things; to multiply a small inconsiderable
proposition to infinity; and to know him who exceeds all knowledge.

3. NOR are these faculties even in infants (tho imperfect) altogether obscure.
For as soon as they have strength (with which beasts are born) they do more
then beasts; they exert greater testimonies of Natures bounty, framing in
themselves human actions, whereas beasts work only according to their own kind.
For even the nobler faculties show themselves betimes; Fancy in imitation of
others; Memory in retaining what is imitated; and Judgment in selecting certain
actions, and parts of actions for their imitation, which are the principles and
manner of all learning. I deny not, but sometimes there is such an impotency,
or defect in the Organs (which also I doubt not most frequently, if not
always, to be a disease, and often curable by a discreet Physician) as renders
the subjects, according to the degrees of the indisposition, unfit or incapable
of any Instruction; and that all labor bestowed upon them is lost: or at least
so unapt are they, as it is not tanti to employ so much industry as is
requisite to render them, indifferently, like other men. Neither is this exact
difference of capacities always (in childhood especially) so easily discerned,
as it may be with conversation and trial. Let the Educator therefore think
himself to be but as a Midwife, who cannot bring forth a child, where there is
none; but where there is, can assist the birth, though the mother be sickly,
and the child infirm. And as it is loss of labor to sow where there is no
soil; and as where the parts are meaner, the greater measure of cultivating by
Instruction and practice is requisite; by which even mean parts may be
bettered: So where there is a greater measure of parts, less institution and
exercise will advance in them a greater harvest, and great industry will raise
them to admiration. Of these several degrees, it is diligently to be
considered, that some have a bare capacity, sufficient to be instructed, moving
only as they are drawn; who, like Bottles, render no more then is just put into
them. Others have a great inclination to knowledge, running, when once set in
the way, either to any, or some one science in particular; and having the
grounds and principles given, they are able to raise Conclusions, gather
Corollaries; and having the foundation laid, build up the rest themselves.
Others (though few) are as automata, (...), their own Masters; and have a
genius, or somewhat extraordinary, to assist them. Which who so have, and
withal a probity of affection, and willingness to take pains, they seem set out
by God himself richly fraught for his glory, and the good of Mankind. It is
also to be observed, that, where there is a great indisposition to one study,
(as many times there is, some being by nature more inventive, others more
retentive; some very active, others slow, etc.) it is seldom worth the labor
to strive to introduce the contrary to such inclination. Amended and bettered
such persons may be, but totally cured they rarely are; and in their own way
they may prosper excellently with less pains. I speak not here of inclination
to virtue or vice; for there is no man so disposed, but he may be virtuous if
he please, as shall be showed hereafter. This of Capacities.

4. BUT the best Capacity, without Instruction by precepts and examples, to
which are subservient exhortations, admonitions, threatenings, corrections, etc.
is ready to spend it self upon low, mean, and many times vicious employments:
as the best ground, except tilled and sowed with profitable seed, produces
only ranker weeds. Satis norunt prudentes (says Pasch. in vita Pybrach)
virtutis and vitiorum semina cum nascendi origin copulata, vi educationis, in
alteram partem necessario emicare: adeo ut bonum esse, non a natura datum, sed
art sit quaesitum; ac proinde been institui sit efficacius, quam feliciter
nasci. His meaning is; That parts are indifferent of themselves to produce good
or evil; and great parts (as Themistocles was told by his Master, fili, tu
nihil mediocre eris, sed vel magnum patriae lumen, vel magna pestis) are fitted
for great, whether good or bad, undertakings; great errors and wickednesses
proceeding only from great Wits. Education and Discipline form our manners; and
that only every one knows which he is taught. The faculties of the soul can
work of themselves; but as not except upon an external object; so neither to
the utmost of their power, without imitation; nor in the best, i. e. the right
and true manner, but by instruction. We are born with hands, feet, and tongue;
and have by nature power to write, dance, and speak; yet none of these can we
do, except assisted, sustained, and formed by either those, whom we see so to
employ the same members; or by those by whom we are, as soon as strength
permits, taught and molded into such habits. So all men are born with reason,
but have not the use of it at first. And when we begin to serve our selves of
it, it is so weakly, that we are easily overcome by sense, which till then has
guided us. And, if at this dangerous conjuncture we be not assisted, it is much
to be feared our reason will be but of small use to us: especially since we
find great store of tracks and encouragements in the broad way of pleasure; and
therefore shall be unwilling to leave it for the narrow, rough, and unbeaten
routtes of Industry and labor. It is true, that persons of very great parts
can, out of their own observation, (for so all Sciences at first began) or when
they arrive at years of discretion by the help of books, (that is, other men's
experience) advance without a Teacher to a considerable perfection. As Lucullus
is said to have come into Asia an excellent General, who departed from Rome an
unexperienced Soldier. The same is also storied of the Lord Deputy Montjoy.
Though, to confess the truth, these instances are not very rare: for (which
seems strangely absurd) there is no Art, to obtain which less diligence is
used, then this of Soldiership, though of the greatest consequence. But we had
lately a person, who without any experience in Navigation, by reading and
study, at the very first essay of his Art, happily and discreetly commanded a
Ship to the East Indies. Some commend only practice: Others think reading
sufficient; both to blame: joined together they do best. Reading advances
more, and sooner then practice alone. A Reader is more universal, better for
many things; more accurate and observant in his practice: A Practisers
knowledge is in a shorter compass, in ordinary cases, and is longer before it
come to perfection. Reading is other men's experience, which by meditation and
practice becomes our own; but it makes us somewhat too exact, and to expect all
things should fall out according to our Imaginations; whereas the World in
fancy is much different from that in reality; not clothed with those
particularities, and circumstances, which are either parts of, or inseparable
from it. Though reading however be good, yet it is best with those who have
already had an Instructor; who can apply his precepts and advices to all
accidents, supply defects, answer all doubts, retrench excesses, inculcate what
is neglected, call to mind what is forgotten, and set his charge in the
straightest and nearest way.

5. YET both Capacity and Instruction are effectles without practice and
exercise; which consists (according to the nature of the thing to be learned)
in Meditation, thinking, or contriving; observing others practices; and
actually trying and working. Precepts serve very well for a guide; but advance
not the guided, except himself follow them; they facilitate the beginning and
progress, but the person himself must set to his own endeavor, if ever he
intends to attain perfection. Never have I seen parts, how great soever,
without industry and study to produce any good; much evil indeed I have known
proceed from thence. Such persons may prove sometimes plausible discoursers,
and of an agreeable conversation in ordinary companies for a time, till their
Stock be spent: but it is industry and exercise, that renders a man knowing and
solid; that makes him not fear to be asked a question in what he professes.
And if industry be necessary to great, much more to mean parts; which it
bettereth and advances to perfection and honor. And since to have great
natural parts is not in our power, but we must be contented with those which
God has given us; we must set our rest upon our labor and industry, for
correcting our bad, bettering our indifferent, and perfecting our good
inclinations. And of this (the use and profit we make of our talents) must we
give a severe account. Nothing changes Nature, but another Nature, Custom;
not force, not reward, not passion. Our thoughts are according to our
inclinations, our discourse and speeches according to what we have learned, but
our Actions according to what we have bin accustomed. How often do we see men
promise, vow, engage, yea and resolve to change v. g. an ill habit, and yet
continue to do as they did before? How many see we daily who began well, and,
as long as they took pains, profited exceedingly; but when trusting to the
goodness of their parts, and that small stock of knowledge laid in before, not
improving it further, but giving themselves liberty of mirth and pleasure, have
not only not profited, but bankerupted also, and lost their principal? Besides,
industry and exercise of themselves render us thinking, vigilant, attentive,
provident for all cases, and accidents; lay up a treasury against all events;
prevent surprises; and make us familiar, and ready to all that may happen. But
by idleness, and pleasures, the spirit is relaxed, the understanding unbended,
the fancy overgrown with rust and rubbish, and the memory perished.

6. THESE two last (Instruction, and Practice) are comprehended in Education.
There is but one way and manner of learning, be the subject what ever it will.
In manual Arts the Master first shows his Apprentice what he is to do; next
works it himself in his presence, and gives him rules, and then sets him to
work. The same is the way of breeding a Gentleman, or a Scholar. The Educator
prescribes his end; gives him rules and precepts; presents him examples and
patterns; and then sets him to act according to what was before taught him. And
if the Educated apply himself seriously to meditate, contrive, observe his
copy, and be content to be admonished and corrected when faulty, he will, no
doubt, arrive to the intended perfection; which is to perform his duty with
ease, readiness, and delight; i. e. to advance his Art into another Nature. For
in this Art equals Nature, that is, as she, works without deliberation, and is
indisposed to the contrary; as a good Musicians hand consulteth not what string
to touch, but runs to it as readily, as Nature does to the proper muscle, when
she would move a finger. Only in this they differ, that Nature God has given
us, Art is of our own acquisition; Nature is perfect at the first moment, Art
is not obtained without study and industry. And the earlier we begin, the
better it is. For should we suffer young men, as they say of Hercules, to choose
virtue or vice, labor or pleasure, when they come to years of Discretion; and
in the interim let them spend their youth in the vanities, and follies, that
age suggests to them; is not this that wherein the Devil tempted our first
Parents, presenting them the excellency of the knowledge of good and evil?
whereas it had bin much better to have known good only, and left evil to have
been understood by the examples of such, as would not consider. But into what
hazzards are these uninstructed persons cast, should it please God to cut them
of in their youth? Is it not, as if they said; let them habituate themselves in
vanity, idleness and folly, that they may afterward judge better of virtue, i.
e. of that whereof they have no experience? How can they choose good, since they
know not what it is? and every one must follow and embrace what he knows. Shall
we let them first vent their malice? but by practice it increases: let them
defer their choice till they may make it with Discretion? but without teaching
they will never come to Discretion. For every habit, especially when according
to a natural inclination (as these are by reason of the remainder of that evil,
left in us for our exercise) hurries them violently, and at length irresistably
also. At best; suppose a child should escape accidentally, i. e. by the care of
parents, or his own naturally good disposition, this rock; yet those, who start
late, are so far behind, that when they should be ready for employment, they
are learning the principles of it, and are surpised and at a gaze where to
begin. The great inclination of Youth is to pleasures; and that, either to
idleness and sleep; whence proceed inconsideration, carelesnes, hatred of labor
and thinking; or else to eating, drinking, or the other lusts of the flesh. And
all these, indulged and accustomed, grow stronger, and at last inextirpable.
For they end in habitual sin, darkness of understanding, and extinguishing the
light both of Gods spirit, and reason. Virtutem (says Pasc. vit. Pibr.) nisi
in primaeva germina, dum tenera sint and mollia, instilletur, frustra in
adultis requiras. The reason why we see so many old men fools, is because we
see so many young men unlearned. Those, who are employed in Missions for
converting Nations to Christianity, find little fruit in treating with ancient
men. It is also necessary to get an habitude of virtue and knowledge in Youth,
that in that Age, when our understanding fails us, we may do nothing
unbeseeming us. But the force of Education is seen in nothing more, then that
whole Nations, from age to age, continue in the very same customs and manners:
and to change these, especially to the better, is a difficulty even beyond
imagination. Those, who are brought up in Wars, are active, restles, violent,
ungovernable but by force; brought up in peace, lazy, unexperienced; in trade,
subtle, interessed, covetous; amongst poor men, mean-spirited; amongst idle
persons, good for nothing. Again, were there a City consisting of Subjects
without Education, what a confusion would it be? without obedience, without
breaking their own humors and passions, every one following his own lusts,
without regarding any other, without discretion, civility, even without
humanity it self. It Is good Education of Youth, that makes virtuous men and
obedient Subjects; that fills the Court with wise Councellers, and the
Commonwealth with good Patriots. Even Trees, if not cultivated when young,
change their nature into wildnes; and Beasts grow fierce and resty if not tamed
and broken in youth. Nature is bettered, and made useful by Education; and what
our industry produces in us contrary to Nature, is stronger, and converts
Nature into it self. To neglect instructions is to want other men's experience,
and to begin again at the very foundation of every Art, or Science; which being
by little and little advanced, and not yet perfected; he much hinders himself,
that takes not advantage of the height they are already arrived to. And not to
exercise parts is to loose them; and not to use them to the best, is to debase
and vilify them. For they, whose spirit suffers them not to be idle, and yet
are not instructed to the best advantage, fall upon trifles, turning,
watchmaking, hunting, or worse. One I have read of brought to Alexander, who by
many years practice, had obtained the dexterity of throwing a small seed
through a needles eye. The King for a just reward gave him a sack full of those
Seeds. But Math. Huniades the Warlike King of Hungary, was more severe with
him, that brought him a wooden Coat of male, wherein was not one ring wanting,
a work of fifteen years; for he commanded him to prison for fifteen years
more, to expiate for so much time and parts spent in so fruitles an employment.

CHAP. II. Of the Duty of Parents in educating their Children.
1 I desire Parents would seriously consider, that Education of their Children
is not left to their pleasure, but a duty imposed on them. God, the great
Father of us all, deposited the Children in the Fathers charge; and provided by
his Laws, and threatenings, they should be reverenced and obeyed by them. They
are part of your selves, and what you do for them is indeed for your selves.
You expect honor by them at all times, and may sometime also stand in need of
their help. It Is what you either have enjoyed from your Parents, or lament your
loss by their neglect. You have brought forth Children into this World of
misery and trouble, and will you so leave them? Will you not assist them in
passing through it as well as they can? It is but reasonable they should by a
speedy death be taken away from the future evil, if you refuse to fortify them
against it. You provide them estates; to what purpose, if you also procure them
not parts to use them? By that you appear to be their provident Parents, but by
this you are paralleled to their good Angels, in taking care and watching over
them.

BUT I will speak no more of this: for though there be some inhuman and
irrational Parents, that desire their Children should be like themselves; that
think their own honor and respect eclipsed if their Sons be wiser, or worthier
then they; and are contented their Children be wicked, least their own actions
be shamed: some also who for covetuousnes, neglect, or ignorance, will not
bestow good Education upon them; yet there are so few of this sort, and their
error so manifest, that it needs no further discovery.

ANOTHER and not inferior error of Parents there is, that out of I know not
what tenderness, they are unwilling their Children should undergo such hardships
and severities as a good Education does require. Which is, as if the mother
should not suffer her newborn Infant to be molested with the pain of swathing,
and binding, till it grows better able to endure that torment. Many Parents are
afraid, their Childrens spirits, i. e. their obstinacy and pride, should be
broken with due correction, and harsher chiding.

BUT the greatest, and most general error of Parents is; that they desire their
Children to be more plausible, then knowing; and to have a good mine, rather
then a good understanding; or at least, to have both together: to employ the
same time to acquire serious studies, and a-lamodeness; to study gravity and
levity; gallantry and Philosophy together. But (besides what I said before, if
these come in competition, pleasure will certainly carry the cause; both more
time bestowed and greater proficiency shall be made in that, then the other) it
seems to me little less then impossible, that two things so unlike, if not
contrary, should be together attended (one hour of pleasure obliterating more,
then three of study will imprint;) that two so differently commanding Masters
should be obeyed. If the Soul can apply it self to such dissonant studies, why
may not the eye also, at once, aim at two opposite marks? The Gallants
chiefest study is to spend his time; the other's to save it: the one is for
living in pleasure and mirth; the other, in labor and seriousnes. The one for
adorning and trimming himself, to visit, game, play, etc. the other for
watchfulnes, industry, devotion. In sum, the one places his design to be
conformable and acceptable to those, who understand least; to some such silly
Women and Ladies, from whom if you take vanity, nothing remains: the other
strives to approve himself to God, his holy Angels, the example of all worthy
and wise men of the past and present age. Why are rich clothes but to be shown;
shown to them, who best understand them? They best understand them who mind
nothing else, who can judge of every punctilio of the mode, and can read a
lecture upon a knot of ruban. Besides gallantry is ridiculous, except
accompanied with formality of conversation, punctuality in dancing, visiting,
courting; which inevitably engage them in loss of time, folly, and averting the
understanding from serious and useful thoughts. And this is as consentaneous to
reason, as experience; for the Soul is fortified by introversion upon it self,
continual meditation, and reflecting upon its operations, faculties, and the
objects therein reserved: whereas all sensual pleasures call forth the forces
of the Soul to the outward parts and members of the body: whence proceeds that
continual combat, so much spoken of both by Philosophers and Divines, between
sense and reason, the body and the soul, wisdom and pleasure.

METHINKS therefore Children should be educated to all severity of labor, and
virtue; and to this outward politure, by the bye only; to make those their
study and employment, and to regard these so much as not to be offensive to
those they converse withal. Pleasure and recreation indeed is so far necessary,
as to keep up the strength and alacrity of the bodily forces, without which the
Soul cannot work; But I speak not of these at this time, but of that which is
esteemed a part of business, and employment. Cyrus and Darius, great Captains
and wise men, ruined their families and Monarchy, because they educated their
Children after the Median fashion, i. e. amongst their Wives and Women; who
never suffering them to want any thing, nor to be contradicted, their delicacy
made them slothful and languid; the slavery and flattery of those about them
rendered them haughty and imperious: so that they could neither labor wirh
cheerfulnes, nor command without arrogance: that made them contemptible, as
effeminate; this odious, as insolent. I wish the Persians were the only faulty
in this matter. Whoever would educate a child to folly and ruin, must give him
his own will; not suffer his humor to be contradicted; be careful that he never
come in danger or hardship; that he be above labor and industry; and every
days experience shows us, that Fortuna, quem fovet, fatuum facit.

BUT it is very considerable, contrary to the Persians, that many great Princes
have brought up their Children to industry and hardship. Egin^artus says of
Charles the Great, Liberos suos it a censuit instituendos, ut tam filii, quem
nepotes, primo liberalibus studiis (quibus and ipse operam dabat) erudirentur.
Tum filios, quamprimum aetas patiebatur, more Francorum equitare, armis ac
venationibus exerceri fecit. Filias lanificio assuescere, coloque ac fuso, ne
per otium torperent, operam impendere, atque ad omnem honestatem erudiri fecit.
Augustus wore the clothes spun and made by his Wife, Daughter, and
Grandchildren, as Suet. informs us. Monsieur de Rhodez thus describes the
Education of Henry the Great of France. His Grandfather would not permit him
to be brought up with that delicatnes, ordinarily used to persons of his
quality; well knowing, that seldom lodges other then a mean and feeble spirit
in an effeminate and tender body. Neither would he allow him rich habilements,
and Childrens usual trifles: nor to be flattered or treated like a Prince.
Because all these things are causers only of vanity, and rather raise pride in
the hearts of Infants, then any sentiments of true generosity. But he
commanded, he should be habited, and educated like the other Children of that
country; that he should be accustomed to run, to leap, to climb the rocks and
mountains; that by such means he might be inured to labor, etc. His ordinary
food also was course Bread, Beef, Cheese, and Garlic; and he often went
barefoot, and bareheaded. The same care was taken by whole Nations, especially
such as were of a military constitution. The Lacedemonian and other ancient
Nations Customs are to every one known. Olaus Magnus describes the manner of
the Education of the Nobility of the Warlike Nation of the Goths, l. 8. c. 4.
They were accustomed to endure beating and wounds, to change of heat into
sudden cold, to suffering of fire and frost, to lying upon boards, course and
uneasy clothing, strong, but ordinary food, violent and wearisome exercises
according to every age; such as riding, darting, shooting, wearing heavy arms,
especially helmets, sheilds, spears, boots and spurs, swimming on horseback,
and in armor. I shall not instance in any more for fear of seeming to much to
upbraid the present delicacy.

2. THE Duty of the Parents therefore is first to begin betimes; for very
frequently the blandishments of Nurses, and the foolish, vain, or evil
conversation of those about them, leave such impressions even upon their
Infancy, as are difficultly defaced, even when the child arrives to discretion,
and maturity. Besides, the Nurses form the speech, the garb, and much of the
sentiments of the child. The ancient Romans (says Quintilian) when a child was
born, put him not out to an hired Nurse, but brought him up in his Mothers
chamber, under the eye of some grave and virtuous Matron, chosen out of the
Neighborhood, who was to have him continually in her presence; Coram qua neque
dicere fas erat quod turpe dictu, neque facere quod inhonestum factu videretur:
Ac non studia modo, sed remissiones etiam, lususque puerorum sancta quadam
gravitate ac verecundia temperabat, etc. And so considerable was the Education
of Children thought to be, that, as he says, Cornelia the mother of the
Gracchi, Aurelia, the mother of Augustus Caesar, were Governesses to great men's
Children.

3. SECONDLY, though a discreet and careful Nurse be provided, yet let not the
Father remit his diligence to wean him betimes; nor permit tenderness to
overcome his judgment, or his present false, the durable and perfect love; but
hinder, as much as is possible, the sowing of evil seeds, and prevent the very
first beginnings, and sprowtings of bad actions. There is indeed no man that
sees not the vast difference in Childrens inclinations to virtue or vice; how
easy some are advised, how difficultly others restrained, even by correction.
There remaining in every one somewhat of that pravity derived to us from our
first Parents, inclining us as much, if not more, to evil, then to good; yet
some more violently then others: which inclinations, though they render us not
guilty (the sin being washed away by Baptism) yet our consenting to them is
sin, as our resisting them is virtue, and our fighting against and overcoming
them, is the great employment of our life. And truly were it not for evil
examples and counsels, or at least for want of good ones, the victory would
not be so difficult, as we commonly suppose, and find it; nor the difference of
inclinations so manifest. For thus much must be acknowledged to the glory of
our Maker; first that as every constitution has a disposition to evil, so that
very disposition is contrary to another evil, to which the indifferent would be
more obnoxious; and Secondly, inclines also to the neighboring good; every
defect, by the wise ordering of providence, being balanced with another
advantage; as proneness to anger prompts also to activenes, and hardiness to
attempt difficulties; the slow, and phlegmatic, are also perseverant and
constant in their resolutions; that which disposes to lust, suggests also
persuasivenes, plausibility, and cheerfulnes: desire produces Industry, fear
breeds quiet and cautiousnes. And by the way, let this be remembered, that it is
much easier to bend a natural mis-inclination to its neighbor virtue, then to
its opposite: as an angry person is easilier persuaded to activenes, then
meeknes; the tenacious, to frugality, rather then bounty; obstinacy to
constancy, fawningnes to complaisance, and ignorance to obedience. So that any
one becomes evil rather then good, is not so much the fault of his
constitution, as the perverseness of his will; following the suggestions of sense
rather then the Dictates of reason. It Is pleasure in Children, that recommends
the evil, and warps them from the good: it is inconsideration and folly more
then the difficulty or unnaturalnes of virtue. And if there be any such man, as
without delight or interest, pursues bad rather then good, he wants either
the reason, or desires common to all Mankind. Nor did wise Lawmakers institute
reward and punishment to constrain men to do against nature; but to
equiponderate the prejudices of pleasure and interest, i. e. to countenance
reason against sensuality. I cannot forbear setting down a notable saying of
Quintilian cap. ult. Natura nos ad optimam mentem genuit, adeoque discere
meliora volentibus promtum est; ut vere intuenti mirum sit illud magis, malos
esse tam multos. And Seneca, Nihil est tam arduum and difficile, quod non
humana men's vincat, and in familiaritatem producat assidua meditatio: nullique
sunt tam feri and sui juris affectus, ut non disciplina domentur. Quodcunque
sibi imperavit animus, obtinuit. Sanabilibus aegrotamus malis, ipsaque nos in
rectum genitos natura, si emendari voluerimus, juvat. Thus they out of the
strength of their reason and experience: perhaps also they had learned so much
from Socrates, who by his own example, showed that even the worst disposition
was conquerable by reason. And this is to the shame of so many pretended
Christians. But how would they have glorified God, had they known the advantage
given us by grace and his Holy Spirit, always ready to assist our good
endeavors? Though Seneca seems to have discerned some glimpse of that also.
Ep. 41. Sacer intra nos spiritus sedet, malorum bonorumque nostrorum observator
and custos. Bonus vir sine Deo nemo est. An potest aliquis supra fortunam, nisi
ab ipso, surgere? ille dat consilia erecta and magnifica. O pie Domine, O
Salvator bone, says Salvian l. 7. quantum per te efficient studia Disciplinae,
per quae mutari possunt vitia Naturae! And speaking there of the Africans, he
says, Adeo exclusa naturae originalis sinceritas, ut aliam quodammodo in his
naturam vitia fecerunt. The sum is, Though all Dispositions be not equally
good, yet the worst may, by the industry of the Educators, and Gods grace,
never wanting till refused, be so reformed and bettered, as to be able to do
God, his Prince, and family, honor and service. And the greatest frowardnes
and worst inclinations, we find in Children, are conquerable; and when actually
overcome, those very persons may better succeed, then the more facile and
complying. Only as I said let them be taken betimes: and the rather, because it
cannot be known but by experience, how any child's disposition may prove and
show it self. But if instead of rectifying his evil inclination, any one
indulge it; and instead of bridling encourage it; he makes it his Master.
Whence come those irregular and extravagant desires, and actions, which we see
in many persons, of stealing, drinking, inconstancy, and the like.

4 MY third advice is, that Parents would have their Children (as much as they
can) under their own eye and inspection. By this they shall be preserved from
evil companions, imitatation of bad Superiors, their council, discourse, and
such like; but more then all, from indiscreet, impertinent, unmanaged Servants.
For Youth not having the judgment to measure it self from its own actions,
knows it only by reflection, from others relations; and thinks it self such
really as a fawning servant represents him: and servants who are usually
brought up in that low condition, and have their thoughts and speeches
suitable, cannot be fit companions to a Gentleman. But above all, the example
of the Father is of greatest force to educate a Son. O te beatum Adolescentem
(Plin. lib. 8. ep. 13.) qui-eum potissimum imitandum habes, cui natura te
simillimum esse voluit. The Father's actions authorize the same in the Child;
nor can the Father chastise him for what himself is guilty. Great care must the
Father take therefore least he give any bad example either of intemperate anger
with servants, or of using any evil, obscene, or undecent words; and to be such
as he desires his Son should represent him. It concerns him also to overlook
even his Governor and Educator, when he is of age to stand in need of one, both
to keep him to his diligence, and create authority to his instruction. Cato,
though he kept a Master expressly for his Son in his own house, yet did himself
always frequently teach him. So did Augustus his Grandchildren Caius and
Lucius. The great Theodosius used frequently to fit by Arsenius, whilst he
taught his Sons Arcadius and Honorius; to whom also he commanded such respect
to be given by them, that surprising them once sitting, and Arsenius standing,
he took from them their robes; and not till after a long time and much entreaty
restored them. And if the Father and Family be of good example, it seems to me
best to educate him at home, and leave him in his first bed, till he have taken
some root before he be transplanted. If the child be of a soft, or of an
haughty disposition, or the family of evil examples, it is better to send him
abroad betimes. But generally, the best place of Education seems to be amongst
companions (as near as may be, his equals) at some distance from home; but
whether he may repair every night, or very frequently. If this cannot be, then
with companions in his Fathers house; for to teach one alone, besides other
inconveniences, is extremely tedious both to Master and Scholar. For want of
these opportunities the next is at a public School; but then great care is to
be had that the Family, where he sojourneth, be of good example. And much
better would it be for him there to have a Pedagogue (which in those Countries,
that abound with Clergy, is seldom omitted) i. e. one somewhat versed in
learning; who may continually attend the Child, see to his repetitions, and the
performing his tasks and exercises, model his manners, and preserve him from
danger, and the like.

5. PARENTS also, fourthly, ought to guide them, as much as is possible, with
kindness and affection; endeavoring to convince and persuade them of the
excellency of labor, seriousnes, learning, virtue, sufferings, and the like;
and even denying what they think not fit to grant them with sweetness and love;
and even chastising them with sorrow, and for vices only, in things indifferent
giving them liberty. In bodily sicknesses the patient is the first who desires
the cure; but the distempers of the mind are to be discovered and persuaded to
the Patient by reason and good admonition. Neither must the Father destine his
Child to such an employment as himself thinks fittest to serve his other
occasions. Though most men's parts are capable of many employments, yet are many
less disposed to one then another; and so much, as it is not worth the time and
labor many times (as is said before) to endeavor the change of such
inclinations. Consider therefore both his disposition, and the nature of the
calling, i. e. what faculties it chiefly employs: and whether those faculties
be most eminent in the subject; and so fit them together; and you shall not
need to fear their corresponding to your care. However, if after all your
endeavors they prove not to your desire; as many times it happens: murmur not
against God, who permits them to miscarry; either that men may take notice,
that all well-doing is from his grace, not our wisdom; or that your faith and
patience may be tried, and your self purged from all human and secular
affections and interests; or that some faults in your self may be punished in
them.

CHAP. III. Of the Educator.
1. THE Fathers greatest diligence is seen in choosing a good Governor, or
Director of his Son. A good Educator therefore, whether one be to be chosen, or
any one desires to render himself such, being instead of a Father to his
charge, ought to be; First, religious, virtuous, and grave, both himself and
family; that he may give good example, and not need to fear that his Scholar
resemble him. He must therefore be sure to live with greater severity then he
exacts of his charge. Then also may he hope by his prayers to obtain a blessing
upon his endeavors; and (performing his duty as in the sight of God) to give
up his accounts cheerfully, and receive his reward from him.

2. PRUDENT, and discreet, as in all other things, so especially in observing
the Child's disposition, and to know what it will produce. For many times the
medicine is to be applied to the disease, not to the symptom. Not too severe,
nor too indulgent; not too austere, least he affright; nor too familiar least
he become contemptible to his charge. For young men understand not much the
reason of his demeanor. He must praise without flattery, chide without
contumely, and correct without passion; be cheerful without levity, affable
without fawning, grave without morosity, and merry without folly.

3. PATIENT, humble, and meek, to pass-by, dissemble, and bear with, many
impertinencies, dulnesses, forgetfulnesses: to endure many affronts, contempts,
passions, and sometimes very evil words. Not to despond, though success answer
not his Industry; for Almighty God gives grace when he pleases, nor does all
seed immediately sprout: however he shall be rewarded not according to the
others proficiency, but his own industry and sincerity.

4. MASTER of his tongue, for that is his great and universal instrument.
Besides, the speech of the Master authoriseth the Child's imitation. He must
therefore religiously avoid, not only all wicked, profane, and obscene; but
also all undecent, all passionate, all hyperbolical, superfluous, customary,
vain, speeches; knowing that the greatest reverence is due to Children.

5. DILIGENT, making it his business to assist and better his charge, to observe
all his motions and speeches; for tho all cannot be amended at once, yet no
default is to pass unregarded; least that connivance authorize the committing
it, and the frequent committing produce an habit. Yet let him not so trust to
his own Industry, as not by continual prayer, to recommend his employment to
the giver of success.

6. NOT covetous. Especially let him not fancy to himself the making advantage
by insinuating into the interest of his charge, for that breeds jealousies at
least: nor into his affections, for their gratitude is writ in sand, and their
passions change with new objects. Besides, after a while he will be looked upon
as impertinent, and exercising ridiculously an obsolete power. If, besides
these qualifications, he have experience of foreign parts; if he understand
learning and sciences; if wel-born, of a good presence, and address, and wear
his clothes hansomely, it will admit him into the respect of his charge, and
facilitate the performance of his Duty.

7. IN all times, great care was taken for providing good Educators; for they
said, it was better to prevent vices, then punish them. And in most States the
Magistrates appointed them; nor was it lawful amongst many Nations for Parents
to employ any others, or educate their Children, but in public. The Canons of
most Churches, since Christianity, have charged that election upon the Bishops:
and that with so much reason and prudence, that the contrary practice has
once, and is even now ready, to endanger the ruin of this Government. The
Ancient Persians (despairing to find all requisite accomplishments in one) had
usually four distinct persons to educate their Princes: one supreme, who had
the general inspection over both Masters and Scholar; another eminent for
sanctity and virtue, to teach him Religion, Honor and Justice: a third for
learning, to principle him in knowledge and wisdom: and a fourth to perfect him
in his carriage, valor, exercise of Arms and Chivalry. And, tho this be above
the capacity and reach of most subjects; yet by this every one may see what is
perfectest, toward which he may advance as his estate will bear. And let them
be sure of this, that if they will have the best Educators, they must liberally
encourage them; for worthy persons will not labor without considerable
rewards, both of means and respect. Besides, the gratitude of Princes, and
great Persons to their Educators, invites others to fit themselves, and to
undergo that laborious and hazardous employment. Alexander the Great built up
Stagyra for Aristotle's sake, and spared Lampsacus for Anaximenes's. Augustus
bestowed great honors upon the person and Country of Apollodorus; and forgave
the Alexandrians, to gratify Areus his Master in Philosophy. Trajan dignified
his Master Plutark with the Consulship. Memorable is the piety of M. Aurelius,
who made Proculus Proconsul; and took Junius Rusticus with him in all his
expeditions, advised with him of all his both public and private businesses,
saluted him before the Praefecti-Praetorio, designed him to be second time
Consul, and after his death obtained from the Senate publicly to erect a statue
to his memory. Tantum autem honoris Magistris suis detulit, ut imagines eorum
aureas in larario haberet, ac sepulchra eorum aditu, hostiis, floribus semper
honoraret, says Capitolinus. See the gratitude of Gratianus to his Educator
Ausonius in his Epistle to him. Carolus Magnus exceedingly honored Alcuinus;
as did also Theodorick Cassiodorus, making him his Counceller and Confident. So
did Otho III. Gerbertus; for whose sake, and ut habeat Magister quid Principi
nostro Petro a part sui Discipuli offerat, Otho gave to the Church, to be
disposed of by his Governor, eight Comitatus, or Counties, Pesaurum, Fanum,
etc. Will. Rufus made Lanfranc Archbishop of Canterbury. Laur. Medices greatly
enriched Joh. Argyropilus, and Marsilius Ficinus his Educators. And truly it
seems to me, that one of the greatest advantages of wealth is, that thereby may
be procured better Education, then those can have, who are not able to requite
a worthy person.

CHAP. IV. Of the Educated.
THE Educator cannot perform his Duty, unless he know the aim and scope of his
employment, i. e. unless he consider diligently, what a one the Educated ought
to be framed by him.

1. FIRST then we suppose, that no man comes into this World either to be
idle, or follow and enjoy only his own pleasure and humor; but to be
serviceable to his Maker: who (acting as a rational agent) makes nothing for
our, but him, self; and out of his infinite favor to us, is pleased to honor
us so much, as both that some way we may do him service, and thereby also in
the highest manner advantage our selves, by advancing his Kingdom and
interest, i. e. by doing good (for God is the universal good) both to our
selves and others. There is no exception even of the greatest Prince from that
general burden laid upon us by God himself: In sudore vultus tui vesceris pane
tuo. i. e. Every man is to have some laborious employment, either of body or
mind, which is to be his calling, and of which he is to render a strict and
severe account. Solomon's Princess eats not the bread of Idleness. S. Paul
labored. Our Lords whole life was divided in labores and dolores. The greatest
Prince is obliged to the greatest observance; and some have accounted
themselves but as the General Ministers or Stewards of their Subjects. The High
Priest among the Jews had, and the Grand Seignior at this time has a trade, at
which (as I am informed) he is to labor every day; which is for no other
intent but to mind him of this general obligation. And good reason this is; for
there cannot be imagined such a difference amongst men, all of the same kind,
made all of one mass, having the same entrance into, and exit out of this life;
that some should be born for pleasure only, others for labor; some for
themselves only, others for the sustentation of them in their Idleness.

2. THE greater means and opportunities any one has of glorifying God, the
greater Duty and obligation lies upon him. The reason is plain; it is God that
bestows all good things; who being no respecter of persons, gives to every man
to profit others. And the more he (as the Husbandman) sows, the more he
expects to reap; more from him that had five Talents, then from him that had
but two.

3. WHATEVER a man enjoys, enabling him to glorify God, and to do good to
himself, or others, is a Talent. As strength, health, parts, etc. Also whatever
gives him greater Authority, as riches, and honors, or reputation; the two
foundations of Nobility; which rendering them eminent and conspicuous above
other men, sets them also, at least, as lights and examples to be followed by
their Inferiors.

4. PERSONS of quality, therefore, besides the obligation of private persons,
have others also particular and peculiar to their condition. First, as rich
men, they are to make all the advantage they can for bettering themselves and
others by their riches. They are Gods Stewards (after they have taken what is
necessary or convenient to themselves, and families, the better to perform such
duties) not for luxury, delicious fare, or fatting themselves, as beast are for
the day of slaughter; nor for accumulating wealth, the rust whereof will
corrode their consciences as fire would their flesh: nor for furnishing their
vain pleasures, or extravagant desires. But for providing for the poor, (the
immediate and particular care and charge of Almighty God) many of whom he has
left in worse condition then the Beasts and Fowls; were they not preferred to
these Treasurers; but for public and magnificent works, which exceed the
ability of meaner persons. Besides, that Charity and Generosity are ingenious
to invent many ways of assisting others.

SECONDLY, As Masters of numerous Families, they are to provide for their
several relations, Wife, Children, Servants, Neighbors. And not only temporal,
but also, spiritual supplies. Every Family being a little Church, and every
Master of a Family a Magistrate within his own walls to govern, advise, direct,
reward and punish those under his charge.

THIRDLY, As Members of a noble Stock, they are to advise, assist and benefit
also their brethren and kindred, to whom they have a more particular relation
then to the rest of Mankind. They are also to correspond unto, and in
themselves (as in a burning-glass) concenter the characters of their worthy
Predecessors; and communicate them as well as their wealth down also with
advantage to their Descendants. And let them remember that it is not less
praiseworthy to deserve to be a Prince, then to be one.

4. As the most considerable members of a Commonwealth, they are engaged in
more peculiar Duties toward the Prince, and his subordinate Magistrate; to know
and obey the Laws, and assist toward the observation of them by others. Beside
this, to fit themselves for such employments as they may probably be called
unto. Whether to be Courtiers, and domestic Servants to the Prince.
Magistrates in Peace, Commanders in War. Councellers of, or Officers under the
Prince. Employed in foreign Parts, as Agents, Ambassadors, etc. Or in the
Church, as Clergymen, Secular or Religious, active or contemplative. Nec sic
quisque debet esse otiosus, ut in eodem otio utilitatem non cogitet proximi;
nec sic actuosus, ut contemplationem non requirat Dei. Aug. de C. D.


5. THESE, and such like, are the Callings and employments of Gentlemen; who,
as you see, ought not to overvalue or think themselves better, because of their
wealth or honor; but to have greater obligations. And as they may justly
expect greater rewards, because of greater temptations, so are they to fear
greater punishments, because of greater opportunities of doing good, and
because every fault is more conspicuous and dangerous in them then in
inferiors. But besides they must not forget themselves also to be private
Persons: But let their public business be what it will; they will, and must have
some time to themselves also to bestow on their particular Inclinations.
Whereof, first, that is best spent, which is employed upon Almighty God. And by
the way, let them take notice, 1. That they ought not to undertake any
employment, which will not allow them every day a competent time for their
Devotions. 2. Next, that is best employed which is set upon ingenious studies;
especially such as are beneficial and advantageous to the Public; or such as
poorer persons are not able to support. Such are the History of his own or
other Countries, search of Antiquity, Natural History, and experiments;
Medicine; foreign Laws; Mathematics, Astronomical observations; Mechanics,
and the like; It being a noble study to observe, how God governs natural, as
well as free Agents. Thus is Solomon praised for his knowledge in Plants; Moses
for being versed in all the learning of the Egyptians; Daniel was chief of the
Magicians; Abraham a great Astronomer; David and Job eminent Philosophers,
Avicen, Averroes, and Almansor were all Princes. Radulfus the Emperor gave his
mind to Jewelling; Gratianus to making of Arms. But heed must be taken least
those be made the principal, which should only be accessories and
divertisements.

6. Now to all these the Educators care cannot extend, nor is it expected it
should. But this he ought to do: First, to lay in his charge the foundation of
Religion and virtue. 2. To improve his natural parts as much as he shall be
able. 3. To ground him so far in such general knowledges, as may be serviceable
or useful unto him, till he be able in some measure to proceed in them by his
own Industry, and by them be also fitted for the other. 4. And lastly to assist
him in such particular Arts or Faculties as he seems most fit for, inclined
unto, or likely to follow. But these not all at once, but as his judgment and
parts are prepared to receive them: that being not superficially or slightly
painted or tincted, but thoroughly furnished to all good employments, he may have
both ability and delight to pursue by himself the same routte; and in his
private studies build up that knowledge and wisdom, whose foundation was laid
by his Teachers. Which is the end of the Educators pains, and will perhaps take
up more of the Young-mans age, then is usually allowed by Parents to that
purpose. And perhaps it will not be amiss here to advertise, that Governors be
not too soon cast off. Augustus Caesar kept Posidonius his Instructor with him
till his old age; and when he then desired of the Emperor to be dismissed into
his own Country, where he might dye in quiet out of the tracas and noise of
the World; Caesar desired before his departure, to receive some good rules from
him for better governing himself; the Philosopher answered, that when he
perceived himself angry, he should, before he undertook any business, repeat
over the Alphabet; Augustus considering his prescription, replied, that he
perceived he had still need of him, and perhaps as much as when he was first
under his care; so refused to dismiss him, but gave him an appartment in the
Palace, better, and nearer to himself, increased his revenues, and kept him
with him as long as he lived.

CHAP. V. General Directions to the Educator.
1. THE Educator having thus his end proposed, and his matter (the Educated)
delivered into his hands, let him consider how to work this matter to that end.
And first he should endeavor thoroughly to understand what parts and capacity,
as also what dispositions and inclinations, his charge has; i. e. how apt to,
or averse from this end. Next, how to frame and order these dispositions; which
to correct, which restrain, which encourage. For many times an unskilful
Gardener spends much vain labor to gather out the roots of Summer-weeds, which
would perish in the digging.

2. MUCH does it concern the Educator to carry himself discreetly. For young
Men observe diligently, and censure severely (when amongst their Camerades) and
their Governors in the first place. His first case must be to steer evenly
between mildness and severity. Yet making use of more or less of each,
according to the disposition of his charge, and the present occasion. It
requires great judgment to join sweetness and efficaciousnes in his commands:
not to advance into harshnes and morosity on the one side; nor degenerate into
softnes and laschenes on the other. Harshnes is discovered in these and the
like particulars. In enjoining things in themselves too difficult, unfesible,
unsuportable, or too hard for that person: or commanding obscurely, or
equivocally, as if he were seeking an occasion to chide; or enjoining them too
imperiously, and not showing the reason of his commands: in not directing him
how to do them: in unseasonable urging, and exacting them either in regard of
the time, or the ability, or disposition of his charge: In pressing all things
great and small with the same vigor and importancy, or because it is his
command: in rejecting all reasons to the contrary, as excuses; and not hearing
his charge speak for himself: In showing himself jealous and suspicious, or to
have an ill opinion of his charge, or giving occasion to suspect him morose,
unsatisfiable; or that all his actions and speeches, tho dubious, are
interpreted in the worst sense: In exaggerating all mistakes and errors into
sins and crimes: In denying all, or most of his desires, tho the things be
reasonable, or unprejudiciable: In unseasonble, nimious, opprobrious chiding,
and such like.

3. REMISSNES on the contrary shows it self in these things. If he take notice
only of great and scandalous, not smaller or secreter faults. If what is well
enjoined, either because of the Educated's unwillingnes, or others
intercessions, be not as it ought, exacted; but either omitted, or changed into
an easier. If he judge faults, because ordinarily committed, or his charge is
inclined to them, lesser then indeed they are. If he think them incorrigible,
and so go not about to rectify them. If indeed he resent them as faults, but
chideth or corrects not so much, as is sufficient to amendment. If, when he
has showed him his faults, and that he is displeased with them, he leave the
amendment to the young Man. If, to please others, as the Parents, kindred,
companions of his charge, he yield to a greater indulgence then he ought, Or if
out of timidity and fear of offending his charge, he neglect his duty.

4. Now to avoid both these rocks, either of which is fatal; let the Governor
be resolute to obtain his end, but sweet and mild in prescribing and exacting
the means. To be sure not to let any vice pass unreprehended, and according to
the nature or danger of it, to be more or less eager; but for things
indifferent, indecencies, fancies, little humors (which are neither vicious,
nor scandalous) to bear with them till their turn come to be weeded out.
Endeavor to beget in your charge a persuasion, that you reprehend or correct,
not out of your own interest, pleasure, or passion; but out of a true,
internal, sincere affection; which, if you really bear such toward him, will
not be difficult. And if you can thus far advance, you may go a step farther;
i. e. breed in him an affection toward you (for love begets love) and then the
great difficulty of your work is past: in this also the Parents must assist.
This must be increased by showing your self at all times concerned in his
interests; openly taking part in, and justifying his quarrels, tho privately
you reprehend him severely, (for thus he sees you are careful of his
reputation;) by your diligent care and attendance on him when sick; and many
other occasions will be suggested of honestly insinuating into his affections.
But take heed you flatter him not, nor praise him too much, yea tho he deserve
very well; for many times immoderate praise makes him proud and insolent; many
times also lasch and negligent, thinking he has got applause enough, and needs
no more endeavor; but, as if he has already hit the mark, unbends and throws
away his bow. Indeed the moderate suffering of praise, is as great a trial of
wisdom and prudence, as the cupel is of silver.

5. STRIVE also to enamour him of what you would teach him. For to him that
does willingly what he must of necessity, the proficiency is certain. To be a
good and virtuous man, consists almost solely in the will: Quid tibi opus est
ut sis bonus? velle. Sen. ep. 80. He that desires to be so, wants little of
being so. And this is done by recommending your commands and instructions with
the reason of them; for when the judgment is convinced, the Will surrenders of
her self. I cannot deny but this is contrary to the practice of too many of our
great Schools, where Children learn only, because it is minus malum; tho
painful and troublesome, yet not so much altogether as perpetual chastisement.
Many have doubted whether Children of Person of quality should at all be
beaten, pretending it is slavish, and if in another age, injurious; that he,
who will not reform with chiding, will be also obstinate against beating. Tho
there is no justifying those Masters, who think every thing lawful against that
unresisting age, who being overburdened with numbers, make cruelty pass for
diligence, and supply their want of care with plenty of the rod: as if they,
who are committed to their charge, are abandoned to their passion; or as if
reason were not to be used to those who are not yet Masters of it: Yet corporal
chastisement is necessary, even for great Men's Children also, especially for
such stubborn dispositions, as care not for shame, but are afraid of pain. But
not this till last of all. For the Educator is to try all means before he comes
to that: Exhorting, examples, employments, praise and shame, promising,
threatening, rewards always before punishments. Diverse laudable crafts also,
and deceits are to be practiced; as to commend him sometimes more then he
deserves, or for what he has not done, but you feign to believe he has done
it. To let him know that you pass-by many failings in compassion to his age; to
seem not to believe the evil related of him, but to nourish a better opinion:
to put his faults upon another, and exaggerate them in his presence; to declare
the punishment deserved or inflicted; to watch over him so as to hinder the
acting of his evil intention, without taking notice of it. It was also the
custom to punish the young Prince's Favorite for the Prince. If these suffice
not, try smart chiding; wherein take heed of unbeseeming words, which a noble
nature many times resents long after, but all are apt to imitate toward
others. Beware also of too importunate, or unseasonable reprehensions; as
either when the offender is in passion, or in public, or your self in passion;
tho it be not amiss sometimes to seem so. Neither be always chiding, for that
breeds insensibility and carelesnes, and authorizeth his fault by your own.
Nescio quomodo hoc ipsum, quod concupiscitur, jucundius fit cum vetatur, and
contumax est animus (maxim puerorum) and in contrarium atque arduum nitens.
Indiscreet reprehension is many times recommendation of the vice. Let corporal
punishments be the last refuge, and when the rest, tried, are found
insufficient; for what is done willingly is best done, Horses and Beasts are
subdued by the rod, but man has a free will, which (if possible) is to be
gained by reason. What we do for fear of punishment we really detest; and, were
we left to our selves, we would not do it. Yet by accustoming to do it, though
for fear, the bugbear that caused our hatred is driven away, and by little and
little we acquire an habit of, and by degrees a love to, it.

6. TAKE all faults, vices especially, at the beginning, by preventing as much
as you can all occasions and opportunities of ill-doing; as let him not
frequent suspected places, not be abroad, tho with a friend, nor be late from
his lodging, and the like. For tho he do at such time nothing blameworthy, yet
that irregularity indulged will breed inconveniences first, and faultines
afterward. Plato having chid a young man for a slight fault, and he replying
'twas no great matter, answered, But the custom of it is. Tho he cannot amend
all at once, yet he must not settle in any one. Many times also we see a word
cast in by chance, or in merriment, to have greater force then a formal
admonition. Quintilian, if any of his young Scholars committed a fault,
especially too bold and venturous, would tell him, that for the present he
disliked it not, but for the future he would not endure it: so he both indulged
their wit, and corrected theit errors aegre enim reprehendas quae sinis
consuescere.

ESPECIALLY beware of all obscene discourse, and those equivocal phrases, which
the wicked invent to express their lust (ingeniously as they think) most
plausibly, i. e. dangerously. As likewise of all filthy Songs, and of Libels,
wherein either the Magistrate, or other person is taxed. Forbear also (chiefly
if the Child be naturally timorous) all discourse of witches, Spirits, Fayries,
and the like; which intimidate the spirit, and fill the head with vain and
frightful imaginations. Also all fond Romances, whether of Giants or Love.
Those seem to have taken their original about the time of the Holy-War, when
all Europe was upon the gog of fighting, to which they thought those fond
Stories were very conducing; but these from later times, when Courtship and
lust were in greater account then Arms and Valor. But whatever they be, being
but Castles in the Air, it matters not whether they are built for Palaces or
Prisons; they have both a bad effect: For they impress upon Children, and
(which is almost the same) upon Women, and weak silly men also, false notions.
They are to the mind what a Fever is to the body, filling the Soul with
preternatural, irregular conceits, and hindering the true understanding and
real notion of things as they are in the World, which true Histories set
forth. They represent actions by a false glass, as in the idle imaginations of
silly and loose people. If wandering and insignificant fancies in the brain,
(Romances in the thought) be so troublesome to all well-minded people; to have
such in writing, is certainly much worse. What a madness is it to increase
these by suggesting more nonsense? by printing our follies, and publishing our
resveries? They show us lust instead of love, false honor and valor instead
of true; the World in imagination for that in reality, agreeable dotages,
pleasant means to render men fools. The most dangerous of all Romances, are
those, which are dressed up with all the artifice of good words, habits,
action, etc. on purpose to withdraw the Soul from seriousnes and virtue, to
vanity and filthiness: Comedies, I mean, which who with delight frequenteth,
returns with the passions and humors there represented, shall I say? or
recommended. The design of them is sensual delight and pleasure (to say no
worse) which a good serious man looks upon as his greatest enemy: Nemo ad
voluptatem venit sine affectu; nemo affectum sine casibus suis patitur. Vbi
voluptas ibi studium, per quod sc. voluptas sapit. Tert. de Spect. Upon the
same reason I would dissuade all conversation with Fools, Jesters, Buffoons,
and all such as accustom to, and study to procure, laughter. A dangerous and
pestilent sort of pleasure, that renders the mind's indulging it, like to his
that causes it, light, foolish, vain, and contrary to that seriousnes and
thinkingnes requisite to prudence and gallantry of spirit. When this passion is
over, reflect upon what caused it, and the manner of it, and you shall scarce
find any action whereof you will be more really ashamed; as of that which Nature
has not suffered to be acted without uncomely motions of the mouth and
countenance. E impossible (says Danti p. 53.) che sia pace o verit a nella
republica, se colui che governa e amico de buffonerie, and bugie. And as it is
in a commonwealth, so in a family, and in all conversation.

7. LET him do every thing for a good end, and the best way. First, direct his
intentions aright, and by that means his actions become virtues; and (which is
more) there will be insensibly implanted the very essence of Religion. To carry
himself decently, tell him, not that the people will think better of him, that
he shall be more accepted in conversation; but tell him that he ought to carry
himself as the noblest and worthiest of Gods creatures. To study and be
diligent; not that thereby he may arrive to honors here, and be acceptable to
great persons, but to do God his Creator the more service, and the like. To do
his actions the best way, will breed a laudable ambition in him to excel in
that which is good. And since in every age the same faculties are employed,
only the objects changed, and the actions of those faculties not many; it must
need be, that our whole life is but reacting the same thing frequently over
upon diverse subjects and occasions. As the Fool personates the same humor, tho
in diverse Comedies; and tho sometimes Lance, Jodelet, or Scaramuccio, yet it is
all but the same Buffoon. In infancy little quarrels with their brethren,
peevishnes, wilfulnes, etc. are afterward angers, hatreds, envies, prides,
jealousies; and a sensiblenes in Youth for a gig or a suggar-plum, is the same
afterward for honor or interest. And he is not the only wise man who
discourses of, or acts, great and high matters, but he who speaks or does,
whatever it be, great or small, pertinently, and according to the nature of the
subject. Therefore let your charge, even in his youth, frequently reflect upon
his own and others actions, and censure them freely, that himself may be
engaged to know to do better when the like occasion recurs. It Is generosity not
to admire every thing he hears or sees (which some miscall civility) but to use
his judgment; to discommend as well as praise; nor to acquiesce in every
answer, but to seek for solid reason, and, according to his capacity,
satisfaction. Let him also in in his sports be prompt, diligent, active,
subtle, free, not dishonest; and where there is any engagement for victory,
earnest, contriving, watching advantages, yet not quarrelsome; endeavoring to
overcome, yet patient if vanquished: and these qualities will be also afterward
put on in more serious matters; for if hunting be a praeludium to War,
Childrens sports are so to all other actions of their life.

8. IT is also necessary that the Educator have the disposing of the servants;
or at least that the Child have none but virtuous and discreet persons to serve
and wait upon him, especially in his Chamber: whose discourse at his rising and
going to bed have great influence upon him many times, either to confirm or
deface such notions, as have bin infused into him the day before. Great care
also must be had of recommending him to good Companions, and rather those that
are somewhat above him in years, of a good reputation, and such as you will be
content he may imitate. If you come into a strange place, you may discover
evil company; if they be extraordinarily officious without any reason; if they
applaud whatever the young man says, or does; if they offer their service and
assistance to all purposes; if they advise against the Governor, or to liberty,
libertinisme, or idleness; if they railly, droll, and speak evil of others,
especially of virtuous men, or such as the young man is recommended to; if they
endeavor to draw him to unknown, obscure, or suspected places, or bring him
into much company. Beware of such men, and get your charge out of their hands
as soon as you can.

9. I have often thought it a great shame to see Beasts, as Horses and Dogs,
taught with so much care and industry, their natural vices corrected, and their
disposition reformed, by almost certain rules fitted, out of observation, to
every humor and imperfection: Yet many men to return not only not bettered,
but much deteriorated from their Governors; till I considered, that besides the
ignorance, negligence, and insufficiency of the Educators, or their undertaking
to bring up too many, and all by the same way, there was also required on the
part of the Educated, the generous concurrence of his own free desire and
endeavor to do well. That some also have such natural imperfections and
perverse dispositions, as if not taken at the first moment, as it were, the
primo-prime acts, and preserved with infinite care and industry from
temptation, are difficultly reformed and straightned. Nero was not rectified by
Seneca and Burrhus, tho it is probable, had he been a private person, and so
long under their care till he had got an habit, and imbibed those instructions
they gave, he might have proved a virtuous person. But the Tree returned to its
native crookednes before it had time to grow straight. Cicero's Son to the
stupidity of his nature, added Drunkenness and good fellowship; and no wonder if
from Athens and Cratippus, he returned as he went to them. M. Aurelius provided
14. of the most approved Masters of the whole Empire (the learned Julius Pollux
being one) to educate his Son Commodus; and within a while cashiered five of
them, because he had observed some levities in their carriage. Yet could not
the other nine rectify the froward and barbarous humor, perhaps sucked from,
and encouraged afterward, by his Mother, at the time of his conception in love
with a Gladiator. Caracalla was nursed by a Christian (Tert. ad Scapulam) whose
education had such force upon him, that for a long time he behaved himself so,
as he gained the love of all men, hujus puoritia blanda, ingeniosa, etc. says
Spartianus. But afterward the natural humors which were not sufficiently by
that short time of good education purged out, sermented again, and corrupted
the whole mass. In such cases therefore, I advise the Educator to be contented
to do his endeavor, and not easily despond; but if no betterment, to have
patience; and without all passion, and with due respect to the person (careful
not to fix any scandal or permanent infamy upon the family) send him away. He
may be fit for somewhat else; as the Spanish Proverb says, that which will not
make a pot, may make a cover: or others may be more fitting for him, or more
fortunate then your self. And so, as Physicians remove their incurable Patients
far off into the country, free your self from him, that you may not be shamed
by him, nor your self see his shame.

CHAP. VI. Of the ordering the disposition and Manners of the Educated.
THIS I begin withal, because it is the chiefest and foundation of all the
rest. For if you can plant in him a virtuous disposition, the rest is easy, and
follows as natural corollaries from thence. And this is sustained upon two
general bases, Conscience, and Honor. Therefore,

1. LET the Educator in the very first place endeavor to plant in his charge a
true sense of Religion. I mean not that, which consists in Disputing for a
party, or in discourse only; but that in the heart and affections. That he may
seriously remember and acknowledge his Creator betimes; and accustom himself to
bear that yoke, which in time will grow easy, and at length pleasant: and that
he may not be ashamed to own God Almighty for his Master in this adulterous and
atheistical generation. Our Lord said, that the good Seed, being sown in the
ground of an honest and tractable disposition, cannot but bring forth in youth
the blade, then the ear, and at last arrive at maturity. Regard not any wicked
Proverb, or censures of early piety. But if Religion once take root in the
spirit of a Child; 1. The principal is saved, should it please God to call him
betimes out of the World. 2. Neither can he in his whole life miscarry. For
this is founding him upon the rock, which withstands all floods and tempests;
i. e. it is a principle, universal, perfect, unfailable; upon which whoever
builds, shall live uniformly, contentedly, and happily, both here and
hereafter: A principle which will bear him up in all estates, accidents, and
actions; a principle, he never need change, or forget. His sufferings by it
will be pleasant, his life blameles, his actions prudent, his words discreet,
his thoughts virtuous and regular, and in all things shall he live according to
the perfection human nature is capable of. Religion prescribes a certain end,
the Glory of God, or doing as much good as he can to himself and others; which
is an high and noble aim, and direction; and hinders all lownes of spirit,
disorder and confusion in actions, and inconstancy in resolutions. For if any
object be proposed, he considers not so much what is lawful or expedient, as
what is best to be done. From want of such a scope or mark it comes, that most
men shoot under, employ their minds in little by-businesses, unworthy their
dignity, and not honorable if effected. Indeed our understandings are foolish,
and desires irregular; and to rectify them we have Fathers and Governors, whose
wisdom we make our guide; yet is not theirs comparable to that of our Lord
set forth in the Holy Scriptures. Frequently therefore inculcate the greatness
of God, the Creator and Governor of all, and every particular, in this World;
the shortness of our life, and certainty of judgment; the great reward for the
good, and severe punishment for the bad. Explain to him the mysteries of the
Lords Prayer, the Creed, Commandments, his obligation in Baptism, and the
doctrine of the Sacraments in due time. Accustom him often to meditate, and set
before him the manner of the life, which our great Lord, the only Son of God,
lived here on Earth; and the great sufferings and mortifications he voluntarily
chose and underwent; that so he may not prefer in his thoughts any way before
it. Frame also for him Prayers conformable to his age and condition, which may
contain a summary of his duty. And take care that he say them every morning and
evening upon his knees, not in bed; and as he advances, change them, lest they
become a mere form. Let him also every night, at his going to bed, recollect
historically what he has done, and said that day; and for what he has done
amiss to be sorry, and for what well done give thanks. Let him also frequently
(suppose twice a day) read some part of the Scripture, and the Historical and
Sapiential Books rather then the other, which are more difficultly understood.
In the morning let him, as much as he can, order his actions and emploiments
for the whole day; foreseeing what temtations that day are likely to come upon
him, and how he may best prepare against them.

2. LET him also be made to know his own dignity, the sublime ends to which he
was created, and the noble actions which are in his power. Ad magna, imo ad
maxima, nati sumus, not as Beasts grovelling on the Earth, obedient to their
appetit, and laboring only for their belly. Major sum, and ad majora genitus,
quam ut mancipium sim mei corporis. Sen. Man has a design higher then Nature,
to be like to Almighty God and his Holy Angels; to overcome himself, master his
passions, and rule over others, not by fear and violence, but by reason,
justice, and choice. The Arts and Sciences he invents, the Laws and Government
he establishes, the Cities and Fleets he builds, argue him to be of a most
noble extraction; and that a good man is worthy to be reverenced of his own
self; in as much as he will do nothing misbeseeming so noble and eminent a
nature. And especially let him be fortified, and well prepared to entertain
sufferings; which is the great trial and cupel of gallant spirits, and without
which he can never become perfect, i. e. his faculties can never be advanced to
the height of their power. For in some sort suffering is the one half of our
life, as doing is the other. Sufferings in body, sicknesses, pains, want of
conveniences in diet, lodging, liberty, wearines, etc. In good name,
obloquies, defamations, revilings, affronts, too much reputation, expectation,
and the like. In his mind, ignorances of what he desires, or is fitting for him
to know, discontents for loss, or miscarriage of Relations, and Friends,
breaches of friendship, treacheries, ingratitudes, failings of his designs,
insulting of enemies, etc. In external things, losses, poverty, with infinite
more. I shall not name spiritual afflictions, because seldom incident to this
age. Now for these and the like, let him be instructed how to render himself as
little, as is possible, obnoxious to them, by not setting his mind upon what is
not in his power; by good considerations proper to every sort, such as are
furnished in many Books, particularly in Petrarch. But especially let him be
practiced and inured to suffer and bear so many as his age well permits, with
courage and patience. However, he may arrive to the discretion not to be
disturbed for trifles, for the loss of a Horse, a Dog, or a Picture, or
somewhat of smaller value. And if he can bear a small burden in youth, doubt
not but he will be able to carry greater still as he grows in age.

3. ENDEAVOR to sow in him the seeds of true honor, to be afraid of shame for
misbehaviours, and to value the good opinion of virtuous and worthy persons.
The desire of honor is of so great force in all our actions, that the false and
conterfeit of it is the great incentive and encouragment to all wickedness; that
those men, who neglect and despise Religion, yet pretend altogether for honor;
that the horridest and most dangerous designs never want persons to act them,
if they can be persuaded to be honorable; that the pretended diminution of it
is thought not sufficiently revenged with the loss of life; that for it so many
Battles are fought, so many friendships broken, so many Laws, even of Religion
despised, and Conscience and Justice trampled on. But these are from a
misapprehension and mistaking that to be honorable, which indeed is not so. But
I would my Educated should esteem reputation only from wise and virtuous
persons, which is the attestation of them, that know best, to his actions, and
a public recommendation to emploiment. By this means he shall list himself
under that ensign, and be ranged with that party, whereof our Lord himself is
the Captain; and he will take pleasure in virtue and piety, when he sees his
actions and ways conformed to the sentiment of the World of all gallant
persons, both past and present. Nor shall he need to hunt after applause and
fame; that will follow him fast enough, with those that are either
indifferently, or well inclined. But he must expect obloquy from the contrary
party; and many evil words, and much raillery will be spent upon him; in vain,
if he have the courage to despise them. Being a Gentleman, then let him
consider that he is above the tongues of evil men: That he is engaged to nobler
and sublimer designs and actions then other persons; he must steer by higher
Stars, and aim at somewhat more Heroical. Other men labor for a fortune, and
are a long time before they can arrive at that height to which he is born, and
wherein the virtues of his fore fathers have placed him: he is already, because
of his wealth, secured from necessity and want of what may be convenient or
useful for his studies; from necessity, too often the mother of low and abject
thoughts, with which a poor man first combats before he can conquer any
advantage of emploiment. Besides, by his Family he is already placed upon the
Theater, where all his actions shall be observed and praised, even more then
they deserve; all men's eyes are upon him expecting somewhat extraordinary from
him; and so he needs not some eminent action to introduce him into the good
opinion of the World. Let him therefore aim at somewhat above, not only
ordinary persons, but his own condition also; least he fall equal to those
below him; for he cannot in practice reach the height his imagination designs.
Let him say continually with himself, for what came I into the World? Why has
God gived me such riches, such parents, such respect amongst men, but to do
more good? Surely I have received five talents, a greater increase and return
is expected from me. Magnam fortunam magnus animus decet.

4. THIS greatness of spirit consists principally in these virtues, (omitting
most of those, which Erasmus in his Enchiridion Militis Christiani, recommends
very effectually, but are common to all Christians as well as to a Cavalier) I
will only recite such as are more noble, heroical, and honorable; and leave the
pressing of them to the industry of the Educator.

HIS Title of Gentleman suggests to him the virtue of humility, courtesy, and
affability; easy of access, and passing by neglects and offenses, especially
from inferiors. Pardoning also injuries, as being superior to them; and not
provocable to injure another. Generosum apud animum cito moritur iracundia. He
despises no man for his fortune or misery; and is not afraid to own those who
are unjustly oppressed; for such, ordinarily, are men of parts, and if of
virtue and integrity, they commonly rise again. He is not proud, no not when
commended, nor does any thing render him insolent or haughty above other
persons. Nor does he strive to make himself known to be a Gentleman by huffing,
swelling, strutting, or domineering over inferiors; nor by disobedience, and
restines toward Superiors; much less by hectoring and quarelling. So neither
by his clothes and peruque: nor stands he upon his family, name, wealth, honor
of his kindred or Ancestors; but strives to equal himself with those that began
their reputation, in civility, industry, gentleness and discretion. By obedience
to Laws, submission to Governors; not content to do barely what is enjoined, or
to make Law the adequate rule of his actions, he forbears more then the law
forbids, and does more then it commands: he storns to take advantage of his
quality to exemt him from such duties, exercises, and rules, as meaner persons
are obliged unto.

HE does nothing for fear of punishment; nor leaves he a good action because of
the danger, obloquy, or the like. Courage is the proper virtue of great
spirits. Wherefore he defieth all little crafts and subtilties in negotiations,
and thinks to master his designs by reason, and magnanimity, rather then
finesse and devices. He is also, as much as is possible, equal and alike; in
his conversation, calm, peaceable; and the same in private as in public. He
bears also adversity cheerfully: when deservedly chid or corrected, is patient;
is open, and free, not dissembling or hiding himself behind little nets, or
fig leaves. Invalidum omne natura querulum est. He scorns to tell a lie. Tasso
said, that other vices were like clipped or light, but lying like counterfeit
and false money, which an honest man ought not to pay, tho himself received it.
Nor is he afraid to confess his faults, because he commits them unwillingly;
nor ashamed to discover his ignorance, for he has a desire to learn.

HE is also laborious, abstinent, and willingly undertakes difficult and
painful emploiments: he had rather be in a Camp then in a Bedchamber, and is
afraid of nothing more the the dead Sea of sloth and pleasure. Difficulties, he
knows, bake and concoct the mind, lazines effeminates and loosneth it.

HE is ready to do good to all; give rather then receive; is bountiful, values
not great favors done by himself, so much as small ones received. Is not
ungrateful to others; but himself desires no recompense, and is content, tho
unworthily used. Bona facere and mala pati regium est. He thinks it much below
him to hate any one.

IN sum, he is bold without rashness; affable without flattery; prudent without
cunning; secret without dissimulation; devout without hypocrisy. He is
constant, not opiniatre; liberal, not prodigal; gentle, not soft; open, not
foolish; frugal, not covetous. He fears nothing, he despises nothing, he
admires nothing.

5. TO beget in him these and all other virtues, set before him good examples;
if of his own family, ancestors, and kindred it is the better: as also are those
of his own Country, condition, time, age, acquaintance, and present, rather
then ancient and absent. No Prince (except of a very base alloy, as Nero and
Commodus) if he hear of a good Musician or Comedian, desire to be like him; but
if he knows of the noble Acts of his equal, he wishes his own were such.
Acquaint him also with the stories of good and virtuous, rather then
great-fam'd men, for this many times fills his head with vain and fruitles
imaginations. And here I cannot but recommend to all persons the reading of
lives, of modern rather then ancient persons: which are not the worse (if drawn
truly) because somewhat hansomer then the Original. As Monsieur Peiresk, and
Monsieur de Renty, Alessandro Luzzaga, etc Coglione, Giacome Medices, Marquis
of Pescara, Pibrac, Giac. Foscarini, etc. Sir Tho. More, proposed to himself
Jo. Picus Mirandula, whose life and some of his Works he translated into
English. Carolus Calvus caused a Manual to be made for his instruction in his
daily duty, out of the lives of famous persons; and that excellent book of M.
Aurelius, seems to be no other, then such Memorials as he collected for the
governing himself and Empire. Examples also of evil men, if discreetly
represented, are as useful (if not more) then others; for wise men learn more
by fools, then fools by wise men. The thorns also which are dug out of his own
ground by admonition or correction, must serve to make a fence for the future:
and he must be manured with the weeds plucked up in his own Garden. All the
faults, both of himself, and other men, being useful to preserve him from the
like.

6. LET him also know the great advantage of Innocence above Repentance. He
that keeps himself from great sins, is as one that has a prosperous voyage; he
that repents as he that saves himself upon a plank. Consider what the good
Father said to the frugal Son; All that I have is thine. And what S. John of
those who continue Virgins, i. e. Innocent; that they have a new and peculiar
song, that they, as immediate attendants, follow the Lamb whither soever he
goes. And that they are the first fruits most holy unto God and our Lord. How
happy is he that never goes out of his way! With a reasonable constant pace he
must needs advance much further then other persons. Especially fortify him
against the three great ruins of youth, Luxury, debauchery, and Gaming; and all
other faults, which tho in themselves lesser, yet his peculiar inclination may
render them as dangerous as the other. But if his garment cannot be kept
always clean; yet have a care it may be with all possible speed washed; and
let all endeavor be used to preserve him from habitual and customary sins; for
rather then permit these, you ought to render him up to his Parents, who
perhaps may find a cure you know not. Dionysius ('it is better to use a foreign
example for that, which is too common amongst us) having in his youth indulged
himself the liberty of debauchery, and finding too late the inconvenience, and
endeavoring to oblige himself to the strict rules of temperance; was answered,
tho perhaps untruly, that he could not safely do it; if he relinquished his
drinking he would fall into a consumtion; so in his own defense he was forced
to continue in his sottishnes. So true is that of our Lord, He that commits
sin is the servant of sin; and especially in this sin of Drunkenness, whilst
that extraneous supernatural fire quenching the true, native, genuine heat of
the body, requires still to be nourished by its equal or stronger.

7. THE great spring and origin of lust is Idleness; and if drinking increase
the fire, lust takes away the fuel, both shorten the life. Ply him therefore
with continual labor and study, that the Temter may find no bait to cover his
poison. This is the remedy against that fire, which consumes so many noble
Persons, Families and Nations; an enemy not to be contended withal, but
avoided. After you have detained from him all Romances, lascivious Books,
Pictures and discourses, and yet prevail not; bodily labor interchanged with
study must be prescribed: and if this remedy not, change places, and suggest
new objects continually. A worthy Prince of late times, being, by a servant of
his, temted to this sin, showing him all things prepared for the purpose; the
Prince opened the door of the room, and commanded the officious Ruffian to give
him place and secrecy; which he had no sooner done, but the Prince shut the
door upon him, and forbad him ever to come again into his presence. And truly
this Temtation is the exact, and almost adequate, trial of a brave and heroical
spirit. He that is not carried away with every beauty, nor too much with any
one; that is deaf to pleasure and those enticements which so few can avoid,
has a noble Soul and well grounded virtue. But if neither sense of honor,
which this sin wounds more then any other, (shame always accompanying those
unlawful, as blushing does the lawful actions) nor sense of the grievousnes of
the sin, nor the expensivenes, nor spoiling his parts, nor danger to his
person, nor the fear of diseases, and shortness of life, nor conscience of his
duty and virtue, nor emploiment, nor any other remedy will serve; it is best to
marry him. This sort of Love, said Tasso, is a vice, wherein the same coin is
not current between buyer and seller: the one pays honor, conscience, virtue as
well as money, the other but love at the very best. But betwixt man and wife
there is money for money, love for love, and all other things equal. But I look
not upon Marriage as a remedy only for fornication, except in such young men,
who before the time, are impetuously carried on to those desires; it is much
more honorable, but seldom falls under the Educators cognizance; and if it do,
he is rather to advise who is unfit, then who is fit for a wife.

8. THE inconveniences of gaming, are, 1. acquaintance with low, base,
unworthy company. 2. Learning also from them sordid and unmanly Arts, as
sharking, cheating, lying, equivocating, which is by such counted overwitting
their camerade. 3. Loss of time and money. 4. Great engagement of the passions,
which is the most effectual and speedy means to obliterate any good thought,
and introduce the superiority of the bestial part. 5. Learning, or at lest
patiently enduring those abominable swearings, cursings, blasphemings, etc. 6.
Danger from other men's Passions. How many have bin murdered, more duelled,
upon play-quarrels? Monsieur Faret observes, that only three sorts of persons
follow the trade of gaming. 1. Covetuous, who for love of money care not what
means they employ to obtain it, and find none easier and cheaper then this
which requires no stock, no tools, no learning, and is readily taken up by any
one that has but little wit, and less conscience. 2. Lazy and effeminate, who
not knowing how to spend their time better, can devise no divertisement so
proper as this lasch exercise. 3. Desperate, who being by fortune, or their own
wickedness, reduced to that extremity, that they live to day, as if they were to
die to morrow, think they may obtain that subsistence by cheating or hazard,
which they cannot hope reasonably for by their industry; and not having any
virtue, ability, or lawful emploiment to supply their debauchery, they betake
themselves to prey upon the weaknesses and ignorance of better men then
themselves. Here then it is to be supposed, that no Gentleman desires to
advance his fortune by the detriment of an other, and that to avoid
coveteousnes (the author of those horrid mischiefs in gaming) he ought to
forbear gaming, as the trade and emploiment of necessitous, idle, dissolute
persons: the cheats whereof are so infinite, that it is impossible a virtuous
or ingenious person should learn or avoid them; and that it is a science which
will neither credit its Professor, nor quit the charge of the learning. Yet if
not as a trade, but with due caution practiced, plays may be learned; such
especially as are menaged by skill, and not fortune only, to acquaint him with
numbering, and to quicken his fancy and memory. Besides, Music, discourse, and
such other divertisements will not hold out long conversation with the same
persons. But then let him not play for more money then the loss of it will be
insensible to him; and if his play can bear its own charge, seek not to gain by
it. And let him (as much as is possible) practice to be unconcerned in the
winning or loosing; to play calmly without passion. To which if he can arrive,
he has been serious in his play to very good purpose. Let him also be
veracious, and abominate a lie, or cheat, even in his play. And lastly, if a
by-stander, let him beware of discovering the faults, either unskilfulnes, or
deceit of the gamesters; else both parties will hate him.

CHAP. VII. Of Frugality, or ordering his Money and expenses.
1. WEALTH i. e. Money being the great Instrument, whereby all things are
performed in civil Societies; and therefore being equal to all other external
commodities of our life; whereby also well laid out friends are gained in the
Court of Heaven; it is necessary the Educated be taught the use and value of it
betimes. It is reported of Sr Thomas More's Father, that to the intent his Son
might prove a good husband, and employ his time and intention wholly upon
learning, he would never permit him to have any money, but when he wanted any
thing to ask for it. Quod adeo stricte observavit, ut nec ad reficiendos
attritos calceos, nisi a patre peteret, pecuniam haberet. And this severity Sir
Thomas More afterward mightily commended; For by that means (says he) I could
not furnish any vice or pleasure, I could not loose my time in gaming, nor knew
I what unthristines or luxury were, nor could I employ my self in any thing but
my studies. Sir Thomas More was indeed one of a rare and extraordinary spirit,
so observant of his Father, that the History says he never offended him, nor
was ever offended with any thing his Father said or did to him: And when
himself was Lord Chancellor of England, before he ascended his own Tribunal in
Westminster Hall, he went to the Kings-Bench-Court (where his Father was Judge)
to ask him blessing upon his knees: And I believe had his Father indulged him
the command of all his Estate, he would have done no otherwise then as without
it. So that whether is better to keep all money from a Youth, or let him have
some small proportion (for any great part he must by no means be possessed of)
is a question not to be decided by this example. I knew two Persons of quality,
great friends, who brought up their Sons together, and were of diverse opinions
and practices in this point. If we may judge by the event, he, who had the
power of money, proved the better husband. But neither do I think this to be
any more then one single example; more, I am confident, have miscarried on the
other side. Methinks the best general rule (because several dispositions are to
be handled several ways, which must be left to the discretion of an
ex-experienced Educator) is; That he be allowed so much a Month to be spent
according to his own fancy, yet over-looked, not scrictly watched (except where
there is reason to suspect some ill menagement) by the Governor. Who is also to
restrain him from debauchery, gaming, and all notorious acts of Prodigality:
and on the contrary to provoke him to compassionate the necessitous, be liberal
to such as have any way served him (nothing being so unbecoming a Gentleman as
ingratitude) and such like. But by no means let him have all his allowance in
his own power, for that is to put the bridle out of his mouth, the means
whereby the Governor must coerce him.

2. LET him, (at first with the direction of his Governor) do as much of his
own business (I mean buying, trucking, giving, receiving, paying, choosing,
clothes, books, etc.) as he is capable: for hereby his mind is inured to a
great piece of wisdom, [Soli sapienti notum est, quanti res quaeque taxanda
sit. Sen. ep. 82.] to esteem, compare one thing with another; to judge and
value, not only things necessary for the present, but all others also. For the
grounds and principles of judgment and discretion are the same, tho the
subjects, whereupon they are exercised, are diverse. Nor let him fear the silly
opinion of such Persons, as think cheapning or choosing a derogation to their
honor, or buying for the just value a cheating of the seller. I have seen the
greatest King in Christendom refuse to buy what he conceived too dear, and to
change the Shop where he thought himself not well used. Persons also of very
good quality in Italy are not ashamed to go to a Shop, choose, and bargain, v.
g. for their clothes, and make the Tailor also cut them out of the whole piece
before them. Whereas an ordinary Gentleman amongst us thinks himself abused, if
not cousened. As if it were noblenes to expose and suffer themselves to be
overreached, derided, and fooled by an impudent Pedlar, or flattering Host.
Who, tho in our Nation they arrive, by the impudent folly of those, who know no
nobler way of generosity then to be fooled by the meanest and unworthiest of
all people, to buy the estates of such Prodigals, as degrade themselves first
into a familiarity, then into an equality, at last into an inferiority, with
them: yet in other Countries, where men have and make use of the parts God has
given them, they are kept in that degree and rank which befits their Profession.

3. LET him always buy with ready money; which will both keep him in
mediocrity of expenses, within his bounds, teach him the value of money, and
acquire him very great reputation both with Tradesmen and others. He buyeth
cheaper and better commodities, and is not imposed upon with false bills and
accounts. By this means also he may learn to live under his revenue; which
whosoever does not, can never keep himself out of debt. It is therefore
dangerous to have to do with them that keep books, which are authentic
records, tho governed many times by careless or dishonest Boys; except himself
also keep another, and as diligently look to his accounts; and that frequently
to, (old reckonings never turning to the profit of the debtor): and if after
the manner of Merchants, under the notion of Creditor and Debtor, it is the
easier and better. But if he keep his accounts severely, not only they with
whom he deals, but his Servants also, will be more careful what reckonings they
bring him.

4. YOUNG Men out of emulation have a great vanity of desiring whatever they
see their equals enjoy, and this proves many times a dangerous and expensive
folly: being accompanied most-what with a speedy loathing, or neglect of what
they unreasonably longed for. Omnis flultitia laborat fastidio sui. A young man
need not be altogether cured of this distemper: if it can be regulated,
excellent use may be made of it for his instruction in many knowledges, and
gaining him much experience. But to moderate the exorbitancy, the best way is
to make him an example to others; by putting him upon some particular curiosity
by himself, which may with reputation be opposed to those many vanities of his
Camerades. And such a one also as need not perish with the using, as Globes,
Maps, Pictures, Medals, Curiosities of Art and Nature, etc.

4. NEITHER let the Educator be too morose or solicitous to keep him from all
vanity in clothes or expenses, lest he be discouraged. For few being willing to
learn out of the School of Experience, and she being a good Mistress, if not
the sole one, it is very fitting to make her a partner in our instruction. Only
the Educator (that is, reason) must be the chief Master, and let his charge
take out only such lessons under her, as his Guide shall think fit: that is,
such as may convince the Younker of the vanity of those and the like desires.
Scriptum est enim (says Rog. Bacon very wisely) qui non errat non invenit, qui
non corrumpit non emendat, qui non tristatur non laetatur.

CHAP. VIII. Of the preservation of his Health.
BECAUSE it is very tedious, chargeable, and sometimes dangerous to repair for
every small distemper to a Physician, it is very fitting the Governor should
know to preserve his charge in health. For without that he is incapable to
undergo any emploiment; neither can he study, nor follow his exercises, when
sick; but is troublesome to others, and unprofitable to himself.

1. IN Youth excess in eating and drinking is very frequent, necessary
therefore it is to moderate his appetite. For if the stomach be stretched
beyond its true extent, it will require to be filled, but never well digest
what it receives. Besides it is much better to prevent diseases by temperance,
sobriety, chastity, and exercise ((...)) then cure them by Physic. Qui enim se
Medicis dederit, seipsum sibi eripit. Summa medicinarum ad sanitatem corporis
and animae abstinentia est. He that lives abstemiously or but temperately,
needs not study the wholesomnes of this meat, nor the pleasantnes of that
sauce, the moments and punctilios of air, heat, cold, exercise, lodging, diet;
nor is critical in cookery and vintnership; but takes thankfully what God gives
him. Especially let all young men forbear wines and strong drinks, as well as
spiced and hot meats; for they introduce a preternatural heat into the body,
and at least hinder and obstruct, if not at length extinguish the natural.

2. BUT if overtaken by excess (as it is difficult always to stand upon guard)
the best remedy is vomiting, or fasting it out; neither go to bed upon a full
stomach, except by reason of drinking, it be necessary to remove him from
company; that the World may not be witness of his brutality; and that himself
may be hindered from all extravagancies, and be ashamed of it the next day. Let
Physic be always the last remedy, that Nature may not trust to it.

3. IF through melancholy, timorousnes, or womanish education (for I see very
few Women well educate Men; nor Men Women) your charge have imaginations that
he is always sick; (if he only pretend so that he may avoid study and labor,
it is another case) do not at first seem to discourage him, but rather bring him
off his humor by painful and harsh Physic; which is the cure also of those
melancholic persons, whose sickness, tho they are frequently indisposed, yet is
not dangerous either for life or labor.

4. MUCH of health consists in exercises and recreations, which must be
regulated according to the Country, Season, etc. but generally rather violent
then lasch; such, I mean, as may cause the body to transpire plentifully; and
exhale those black and fuliginous vapors, which are wont to oppress young men;
that nature be not hindered in her circulation. Neither be afraid, tho he be
weary and tired: for wearines is no disease, nor does simple heat without
putrefaction cause a Fever. Besides brisk exercise will render him strong,
active, mettlesome; whereas idleness contracts a stagnation of humors, numnes of
the joints, and dulnes in the brain. Yet violent exercises, as running,
leaping, wrestling, are not so fit for thin, choleric, and weak bodies:
rendering such old and gowty before their time, as they did Constans the Emperor.

5. DANCING is a moderate exercise; so much whereof is to be learned as may
give a good and graceful motion of the body. No Nation civil or barbarous,
ancient or modern (except our late contradictive spirits) that express not
their joy and mirth by it, which makes it seem a sprout of the Law of Nature.
But the use, which is now frequently made of it, especially since it is become
a difficult study, and many years, besides infinite practice, required to a
reasonable perfection in it, I cannot but utterly condemn: subscribing to the
severe, but true, censure of that most excellent modern Historian Monsieur de
Rhodez. There is nothing (says he) which does more dissipate the powers of the
spirit, nor more enervate the forces of the Soul, then the ravishing harmony,
the continual agitation of the body, and the charms of Ladies conversation. The
great triumph of sensuality is such meetings, where the ear is fed with
Music, the eyes with Beauties, the smell with Perfums, the taste with Banquets;
whither none are invited or come, but to please or be pleased. Could their
thoughts be then seen, in what a hurry and tumult should we perceive them? what
desires, what fears, what impatience, what lust, what jealousy, what envying,
what despisings! etc. Card. Borromeus in his Book against Balls and Dances
says: that he, when a young man at the University, and his companions, with
great importunity prevailed with one of their Professors, a grave and prudent
person, to go along with them to a Ball: who having observed the actions and
circumstances thereof, told them with great astonishment, that it was an
invention of the Devil to destroy Souls, by corrupting the very being and
essence of Christian virtues. When a servant lights a torch, we give him
strict charge not to carry it amongst flax, straw, or the like. Why do not
Parents forbid their Children to frequent those places, where is more danger of
kindling another manner of flame? to have the imagination swelled with the
presence of Beauties in their trim, and under a full sail, when the blood is
chased, and the mind set upon pleasure; is not drinking cold water, but strong
poison to one overheated.

6. IT will not be amiss here to add, that diverse bodily diseases, infirmities,
and undecencies may by the Educators care be regulated, and either wholly, or
in good part, amended. For few there be, who have all the members of their body
equally sound and well-disposed; the worst is corrected by bringing spirits to
that part with labor and exercise: as

Shooting in a long bow, for the breast and arms.

Bowling for the reins, stone, gravel, etc.

Walking for the stomach. Riding for the head: and the great Drusus having weak
and small thighs and legs strengthened them by riding, especially after dinner:
as did also his late Majesty.

Squinting and a dull sight, are amended by shooting.

Crookednes by swinging and hanging upon that arm.

Stammering by deliberate and slow speaking, and observing what words run most
currently. So both Mr Mede and Mr Oughtred helped themselves.

Diverse misaffections in the eyes, by Spectacles.

Bashfulnes and blushing, by frequent speaking in company, etc.

CHAP. IX. Of the diverse passions, inclinations, and dispositions of Man, and
the ways to rectify and order them.
1. BUT that the Educator may clearly see his work, and have it, as it were,
wholly in his view; I will dig a little deeper; anatomize and lay open the Soul
with its operations. Perhaps not so accurately and punctually, yet as plainly,
and for practice as usefully, as I can; regarding not the curiosity or
Philosophy, but the necessity and utility of the knowledge. For he that knows
quid homo potest, will quickly perceive what his charges abilities are, and
what his defects; and consequently what the remedies.

2. IN the Soul then are two sorts of powers, Cognoscitive for knowledge.
Motive for action.

Knowledge (omitting apprehension as not falling under our consideration)
consists in invention, memory, and judgment, of which in their places.

Action is in the Will (of which we shall not speak) or Affections. And these
are either Concupiscible or Irascible, and both these are Passions or
Inclinations.

Passions are the natural motions of the Soul toward objects agreeable or
disagreeable. Or the motions, or effects, which objects pleasing or displeasing
immediately cause in the Soul. i. e. what the Soul suffers from its objects
immediately without deliberation. Tho some call Passions only the more
irregular and ungoverned actions of the Soul.

Inclinations are the frequenter, and customary working according to those
passions. And, if merely according to natural suggestions, they are properly
called Inclinations: but if they proceed to excess, and be not bridled and
regulated, they become vices. But if regulated by reason or Gods spirit, they
are properly Virtues. If by the probity of Nature, without much deliberation,
our inclinations work laudably, i. e. as they do when habitually regulated by
reason, then are those natural Inclinations called natural virtues, or good
nature.

3. BY the way take this caution, That you trust not to these natural virtues,
as if they were, or could be, sufficient to make a man habitually and thoroughly
virtuous: or, as if he, that acts according to them, were really and
sufficiently virtuous. What Seneca says of Valor, is true of all the rest.
Paucissimos fortes natura procreavit, bona institutione plures reddidit
industria. And this our holy Religion expresses more plainly, when it
distinguishes between Grace and Nature; for if natural dispositions be not
sufficiently virtuous morally, neither are moral virtues sufficient for
obtaining heavenly and spiritual graces. Dispositions indeed they are to
virtue, but must themselves also be ordered and directed by Prudence: else they
will run into many mistakes; love, where there is more reareason to hate, and
cajole, where they should chastise: they will also neglect many actions of
virtue, and run into many of vice. Nor is it a sufficient excuse for any
evil-dispositioned, v. g. an angry person, to say, that he is so naturally, for
we are to live by reason and grace, not by Nature; nor is it well said of a
thief, I am so naturally, for to what purpose have you reason?

4. PASSIONS. INCLINATIONS proper to, or arising from, them.

1. Love. Sweetness, kindness; contrary to insensibleness of good. 2. Hatred.
Maliciousness, evil-naturedness. 3. Desire. Heat or eagerness; contrary to
coldness or Indifferency. 4. Aversation. Frowardness, peevishness. 5. Hope.
Courage, boldness; contrary to faintheartedness, cowardliness. 6. Fear.
Timidity, softness, (contrary to hardiness,) indifferency, lazines, quietness,
love of ease, dulnes. 7. Confidence. Credulity; contrary to distrust. 8.
Despair. Impatience; contrary to patience, longanimity. 9. Joy. Cheerfulnes;
contrary to sadness. 10. Sorrow. Melancholy, saturninenes; contrary to mirth,
jovialness. 11. Acknowledgment. Gratitude, generosity; contrary to ingratitude.
12. Wrath or choler. Roughness, harshness, morosity, contrary to meekness.
Anger. Promptness, briskness, rashness, revenge. Pride. Haughtiness, swelling.
13. Shame, Modesty, bashfulness. 14. Impudence. Hastiness, impertinency. 15.
Repentance. Flexibility; contrary to obstinateness. 16. Pity. Tenderness,
mercifulness; contrary to hardheartedness, cruelty. 17. Envy. Malice. 18.
Emulation. Activeness. 19. Indignation. Vehemence. 20. Reverence. Humility. 21.
Contempt. Surliness, disdain, scorn, insolence. 22. Love of Women. Amorousness,
uxoriousness. 23. Jealousy. Suspiciousness, doubtfulness, suspense,
misinterpretation.


IT is to be noted, that many times a man works contrary to his natural
Inclinations; because the Inclinations follow the cognoscence of the Soul: and
it happens frequently, that a violent and strong apprehension may be formed on
a sudden, contrary to what is usual. As the sound of Drums, Trumpets, Shouts,
Examples, etc. may put such apprehensions into a Coward, as may make him
valiant; and on the contrary weariness, darkness, rumors, sombre and dismal
accidents, etc. may intimidate a valiant man. Wherefore it is great rashness to
judge of any man's inclination by any particular action: or to think that every
man must work, as he is inclined. Again; Passions having their force, because
reason and the commanding part of the Soul does not restrain and bridle them;
it seems that Inclinations are best discerned when they are most at liberty: as
Childrens at their play, when they think not of dissembling, or restraining
them. And 2. that they, who command not one passion, are also obedient to
others; and that he who is one way passionate, is likely to be so in all, or
any. And 3. that the Educator, seeing the inclination of his charge, may
moderate, change, and govern it as it shall be convenient; and that by changing
objects, and apprehensions; but chiefly by showing him the good or bad of that,
or the contrary, that is, by rationally persuading him to submit it to reason.

5. THESE Inclinations are but as the Elements and principles of our
dispositions and humors: which are made up of many of these (Man as all other
Creatures being de-de-compositum) and these in several degrees and
predominancies; and these also mingled and tempered with the differences of
knowledge or apprehension. And by the way, upon these grounds, I persuade my
self, it would not be difficult to enumerate all, or the greatest part of our
actions, and the causes and order of them; which is a piece of knowledge the
most conducing to the well menaging of our selves that can be; for the variety
of passions, inclinations, and dispositions is the cause of all human business
and affairs in the whole World. From the mingling of Inclinations, and
apprehensions, arise those infinite sorts and varieties of (as the French and
Spaniards call them) Wits; we term them Dispositions. The chiefest I have
observed, I will here set down, for an essay and sampler, to direct those who
have more leisure to add to them according to their experience. And it would be
a good work to characterize them so vively, that men (at least such as are
extravagant) may see themselves as in a glass; and discovering their
imperfections, amend and alter them. In general some dispositions are bad,
others good. Bad are such as these.

1. Such as want wit, dead, stupid, senseless, heavy, dull, forgetful, sottish,
not able to apply themselves to any thing, yet are crafty, and deceitful; these
are miserable.

2. Idle, sensual, slothful, gluttons, without memory or care, cat-witted,
dissolute, foolish, impertinent, obstinate, untractable.

3. Weak, base, low, fearful, irresolute, soft, troubled, mazed, confused,
emty, open, bashful, sheepish, sneaking, low-spirited, yet many times crafty
and malicious; these easily become a prey to low and mean companions.

4. Vain, giddy, harebrain'd, bird-witted, inconstant, such as employ their
thoughts in things of no value (as Domitian in catching flies) skipping from
place to place, neglectful, haters of thinking, inconsiderate, heeding nothing
after it is out of their hands. Fantastical, restless, lightheaded,
crack-brain'd, carried away with every new object, never considering what is
best, unconstant, impatient, changeable; that work without affection or
delight, doing what they must to make an end, rather then to do it well.

5. Curious, scornful, mockers, jeerers, taunters, abusive, reproachful,
tatlers, charlatans, who upon all occasions are ready to publish all they know
to the prejudice of another; delightful in making debates and mischief, enemies
of God and charity, breeders of all petit factions, news-brokers.

6. Buffoons, ridiculous, flatterers, apes, rimers, players, wits, airy, light,
foolish.

7. Proud, pretenders, pedantick, vainglorious, formal.

8. Contentious, litigious, quarrelsom, blustering, cowardly, hectors, froward,
perverse, disloyal, treacherous, envious.

9. Ambitious, arrogant, fierce, rash, impudent, violent.

10. Crafty, sly, double, malicious, cheats, versuti, and who can change their
shape, mine, and discourse, according to their advantage.

11. Covetuous, sordid.

12. Of angry persons some are sour, harsh, ill to please, sturdy, sullen,
intractable, unadvisable (a disposition mixed up of pride and melancholy)
peevish, fixing upon the worst, morose (a delicate sort of wasps) who are
offended if every thing be not done the best way, i. e. as they would have it.
Some men's anger vapoureth away in words, clamor, scolding, reviling, railing,
threatening. Others say little, but lay up revenge against an opportunity; this
is incident to superiors, who conceive it below them to quarrel, and who think
themselves despised, if every thing is not conformed to their will. Others
neither chide nor revenge, but turn their wrath upon themselves, as melancholic
men do. I pity these, for they have already the reward of their peaceable
wrath: who have a pleasure in their torment, and a kind of satisfaction in
their most agreeable discontent. But it were better for them to chide even
without reason, then store up this sooty humor, which corrodes body and soul.

Some are quickly angry, and quickly pacified, hasty.

Some are quickly angry, and difficultly pacified.

Some difficultly angry, and difficultly pacified.

Some difficultly angry, and easily pacified. The disposition of God himself.

13. Pragmatical, prating, impertinent, giving judgment in every business
without a fee, without asking, in every man's company unwelcome.

14. Mad, wild, furious, brutish, untamed, terrible, pertinacious, cruel,
impious, divelish, cross, precipitious, despiteful, revengeful, tyrannical.

15. Ill-natured, solipsi, valuing themselves only, their own judgment and
interest, deceitful.

16. Melancholic, jealous, suspicious, discontented, interpreting every thing
in the worst sense; and every displeasure to be contemt, affront; and all men
to be against, and enemies to, him.

17. Extravagant, Heteroclites, Alchymistical or blessed-stone-men,
Astrologues, Diviners, passionate lovers, Romantic.

Good dispositions also are of several sorts.

1. Subtle, sharp, piercing, ready, vigilant, attentive to business, sagacious.

2. Argute, acute, quick in giving answers and reparties, resolving doubts and
speculative questions, inventive.

3. Facetious, merry, cheerful, gay, jovial, (...).

4. Wise, prudent, judicious, that examine things to the bottom, able to
discern and judge of things alike, sage, grave, practical, experienced, that
know opportunity.

5. Free, noble, generous, bountiful, meek, peaceable, quiet, moderate,
magnificent.

6. Bold, resolute, free in reprehending others, and speaking their own minds,
backed with reason, hardy in difficult enterprises, brave, warlike, valiant,
sensible of honor.

7. Stable, magnanimous, constant, patient in adversities, and businesses.

8. Industrious, thinking, ingenious, universal.

9. Religious and devout.

There is also great mixture and composition of these, sometimes contraries
seeming equally eminent in the same person. Procopius says of Justinian, Juxta
malignus erat and deceptu facilis, cujus ingenium pravum and fatuum dixeris.
Dissimulabat ipse fraudibus omnium expositus. Temperamentum insolitum, cum ex
contrariis constet. Inconstans amicis, inimicis inexorabilis; avarus,
contentiosus, novarum rerum cupidus; ad scelera facile, ad optima nullis
suasionibus moveri poterat. Yet is not this temper so unusual as Procopius
supposes. For most men mistake a vice for a seemingly like, but
really-contrary, virtue. As pride for greatness of spirit; hectorisme for
valor; cunning for wisdom; which are really contraries. And indeed
concerning young Men, and all others (as Women, persons ill-educated, etc.) who
follow their present apprehensions and impetus, without much considering their
actions, or rectifying their inclinations by reason, it is oftentimes hard to
discern whether they be virtuous, or vicious; which is not so concerning those
who are habituated: for then all virtues go together, as well as all vices. And
those constellations are easily discovered by their own light. But natural
virtues are often accompanied with such natural vices as are habitually
contrary. As meekness is often joined with faithfulness, and then it proceeds
from want of spirit and apprehension. Whereas habitual or acquisite meekness
has perhaps an inclination to sloth, but has mortified and bridled it. And
every virtue appears and shows it self, when necessity or fitting occasion
requires it. So gravity in a child, and those who being old are yet children in
understanding, is accompanied with dullness, formality, pride, and
censoriousness: because it proceeds from want of mettle, not from choice; and
seeks to justify and shrowed that defect by finding fault with others. Whereas
true and laudable gravity is opposed only to levity and folly. So natural
civility and courtesy is joined with effeminacy; severity with implacability,
and the like.

6. CLIMATS also, and diverse other accidents, produce various inclinations; not
that any Country produces only one inclination, but only more of one then
another. So all of one age are not alike inclined, tho most of them are; and
more in youth then age, because the manners are then least artificial. I will
set down therefore, and because most to our purpose, inclinations of youth:
that the Educator may in some measure be able to judge, which are imperfections
of the Age, and therefore likely to fall off when his charge arrives to
maturity. Only this caution ought to be observed; that he humor or encourage
not his charge in any of them, for that is to persuade him to be a child
always. And 2ly that, if he be in any of them exorbitant, the fault then seems
to be of the person, not of the age; which happens very frequently: and
therefore requires more care, and a more early and efficacious remedy in the
edication.

Young men then, being guided by sense, nature and passion, not reason,
experience or discretion, are inconstant and unsettled. For the sense being
easily tired with the enjoiment of its object, and the Soul (being made for
something better) not finding satisfaction in things sensible, they conceive a
fastidiousness of the present, and a desire to change: and this is necessary
for their condition, that they may not obstinately and fixedly resist (as old
men commonly do) the introducing of such habits as are necessary to the
perfecting their faculties, and making them happy. For tho their passions be
eager, and sensuality predominant, yet their resistance is strongest at the
beginning, afterward they with patience are brought off; their natural
inconstancy suggesting advantages to the Director. For their present thoughts
being vented, they are at long-running, as a fish when wearied, brought tamely
to your hand: therefore also you may hope well of most of them, but be
confident of none. Hence also it comes that with less reluctance they embrace
such knowledges as do not thwart their pleasures, and senses, but of morality
and prudence they are less capable; and that in sickness when sensuality fails,
they are easiliest wrought upon. Therefore also are they open, and free, easily
discovering their thoughts and inclinations. Eager, also, hasty, unadvised,
sudainly resolving and as violently pursuing what they resolve for a little
time. Quicquid volunt valde volunt. Stomacful also, as not tamed by adversity
or necessity. They are also taken with shows, gallantry in clothing, etc.
desirous of what they see, and weary of what they possess: ambitious to do what
they cannot, or should not, but neglectful of what they ought and can.
Therefore gladly would they be learned, but not study; be excellent, but not
take pains: consequently expensive, easily seduced, negligent, careless,
fearless, forgetful, improvident and credulous: Desirous of honor, and making a
show of excelling in beauty, clothes, etc. of getting the victory at play and
gaming, yet valuing honor more then gain; wanting experience they are angry,
fierce, enemies of thinking and consideration, and therefore rather affecting
bodily exercises, at which they labor and sweat without measure. Full of hope
also, catching at appearances, gay, merry, laughers, modest, bashful (because
ignorant) pitiful, loving their companions and and follies more then riches;
the want whereof they value not, because they know not their value; therefore
not looking beyond the present, nor avoiding ill consequences. Imitative also;
for the Soul, being a blank paper, and naturally desiring to be furnished,
greedily imbibes what it sees before it; and this is that faculty, with which
God endued them on purpose that they may learn, and advance in knowledge and
wisdom. Children speak nothing but what they hear, and do nothing but what
they see: hence they are generally addicted to designing, acting, etc.

SUCH then being the conditions of young persons; those who have the contrary
are to be feared and well looked after; especially the sly, reserved, close,
who are also commonly cunning and malicious, for this reservedness proceeds
either from pride, conceit of their own abilities, and unwillingness to be
taught; or from evil designs; for who strives to conceal what he cares not who
knows? or from jealousy, that other persons counsel them not for the best.
These do usually guide themselves by words that seem to them accidentally
spoken, whereby they are easily ensnared and ruined. For no man being able to
bear the burden of his own thoughts, and these having no friend or confident,
they have no other course to steer. They will with all patience hear your
advice and reprehension, when they are resolved nothing shall work upon or
alter their purposes. Sometimes they will take notice of so much as serves to
their own designs, and misinterpret and detort what you say, even contrary to
your intention. These persons are commonly seized by flatterers, mistresses, or
at best fall into low and mean courses. It is difficult to cure this malady,
yet ere they know their strength, threats and punishment do them good: or
accidental recommendation of such to their conversation, who may humor them by
counterfeiting the same inclinations, and complying with them, till by little
and little they can show them the great advantage of freedom and openness.

It has bin also the observation of learned men, that the sad, melancholic
and querulous hardly advance to any great proficiency. Praecipue vitentur
tristes, and omnia deplorantes, quibus nulla non causa in querelas placet Sen.
Neque illum tristem semperque demissum sperare possum crectae circa studia
mentis fore. Quint. Querulousnes often proceeds from some inward debility of
body, as sharp humors, mal-conformation of some part, or the like.

IMPUDENCE is commonly a forerunner of debauchery, violence, contemt of Laws;
also of heedlesness, forgetfulness, slowness to learning and wisdom.
Confidence is the medium betwixt it and bashfulness. It Is observed in the life
of Emanuel Philibert Duke of Savoy, that when a child, he had the confidence to
speak to any person, as he did to Charles V. that great Emperor; but if what he
said was not approved, he pressed it not, nor was offended when denied; which
seems indeed to be the true notion of Modesty and Confidence, to express his
mind freely, yet entirely submitting himself to the judgment of his Superiors.

BASHFULNES on the contrary is an evil weed, but sign of a fruitful and good
indoles. Care must be had, that in weeding it we extirpate not modesty. A
bashful man is not his own master, nor uses his own judgment, but is overawed
by others boldness: and the more impudent have more power over him. It Is also
an evil guardian of youth, betraying it, contrary to its own desire and
inclination, to the worst men, who hurry it to evil actions and places. How
many have lost their estates, honors and lives, because they were ashamed to
distrust? A man invites you to drink, to game, to rob, to be bound for him:
cast of that foolish modesty, deny him. An impudent flatterer comes to eat upon
you, he begs an horse, a ring, a garment, give to the deserver, not the beggar.
Some are so bashful, as not to send for a good Physician, or choose a good
Lawyer or Governor, because they are acquainted with a worse. Begin betimes to
break this fault in small matters, exert your liberty and judgment in denying
to drink, to accept a recommendation, to lend money, to admire every one you
hear praised. And be constant, not overcome with importunity, another sort of
impudence.

7. THERE are two Dispositions most incident to young Persons of Quality,
because they most resemble greatness of spirit, tho in truth as much opposite
to it as a Dropsy to health: of which I shall speak somewhat more copiously,
These are Anger and Pride.

1. AN angry Inclination in children discovers it self, either by pettishness,
peevishness, hastiness, etc. or by surliness and sullenness. Tho all in youth
of mettle are promt and seem to be angry naturally, yet does that show it self
in briskness and cheerfulness, this in frowardness and incorrigibility. If this
evil weed grow up with them in age, and they be not broken of it betimes; it
makes them follow their own impetus, despise counsel of friends, and authority
of Superiors; Eripi sibi suum judicium, etsi pravum, non sinunt; they defend
and hug their error, and had rather continue in it, then change, or repent by
others advice. Also because they are inconsiderate and furious, they pursue
their purposes good or bad with great force and concernment; and therefore take
not the aptest and most rational means to obtain them. (For reason judges what
is fit and just, anger uses that as fit which it judges to be such; which
makes many good Hunters, for we are not angry with Beasts, few good Soldiers.)
Hence it comes that angry men are unwary, easily deceived; not open and plain,
but exposed to them, who are willing to take advantage. Apt also to judge evil,
and hate other men upon slight occasions; therefore are they not fit for
friendship: also uneven, and unequal in their conversation; many times also
inexorable, unsociable, and tyrannical: and their discourses runs much upon
oaths and curses. Many are the causes of angriness; sometimes a choleric humor,
from their nativity, or adventitious, so we see families very subject to it;
but most commonly it proceeds from weakness of judgment. And generally the more
impotent, the subjecter to it: as children, women, aged, sickly, in adversity,
or such as are other-waies also passionate. So we are more testy and angry when
weary, when watched, or any other trouble upon us, as a thorn in a finger
breeds a fever in the whole body. Some are angry out of choice, thinking it a
piece of grandezza, and that it makes them feared and respected. Others by an
evil custom, being by their Parents or Educators indulged their own wills; who
at first not suffering others to contradict them, at length neither dare they
themselves.

BECAUSE this passion admits no counsel as other passions do, but is, as when a
man sets his own house on fire, all full of tumult and confusion, that no
orders can be heard or obeyed; it is difficultly cured. In age it is remedied
either by afflictions and crosses, which Providence bestows upon such persons
as he loves, or by prudent considerations; such as these. Because it springs
commonly from small matters, a word, a jest, a taunt, a neglect; endeavor to
pass by, pardon, and get quit of the occasions; examine no faults too
curiously; chaw not nor reflect upon them; argue not, nor consider what other
men will think or say, for that blows and kindles the flame. Neither desire
great, much, difficult, or rare things; nor desire vehemently; be as
indifferent to all things as is possible; and make use of common things, rather
then appropriate them to your self; that I and MINE are great sticklers for
anger. When you are in a fit, reflect upon your self and your inner
constitution, see how the whole frame is disordered (it is a passion even in
the external as deformed as dangerous) and either conquer it (which after you
have done sometimes, the victory to a vigilant person is much easier) or at
least defer what your passion promts you to do; for whatever is done in anger,
may also be done with judgment. For discretion says not, do not punish a
faulty servant, but do it prudently. Some endeavor to suppress and quench it by
violence, but then it is apt to ferment either into melancholy, or malice, and
envy.

THE Education also of choleric persons is not less difficult, except they be
menaged when very young; for then their humor may be broken by force and
punishment; but when they begin to understand their strength, fair means must
be used, for fear of breaking also their spirit; and while we cure the angry
man, we make him soft and lazy. For this passion, and spirit, are many times so
twisted together, that it is difficult to distinguish the actions of one from
those of the other; and consequently to pluck up one without destroying the
other. It is in vain to admonish or reprehend when the passion is violent, for
at best it is but as burning feathers under the nose of one in a fit of the
falling sickness, which may perhaps raise him up, but cannot cure him. But when
he is sober, furnish him with good remedies and considerations against a time
of necessity; as men do when they fear a Siege, and expect no relief from
abroad. Or check it with another passion, as with shame, or fear, or joy.
Indeed cheerfulness and moderate pleasure clear up the spirits: and tho sadness
and anger differ, yet are they much alike in their causes, and the same
medicines are good for both.

2. PRIDE is many times grafted upon anger: and is so like to it, that it is
not easy to discern which operations proceed from which cause. It is grounded
in an error of the understanding, i. e. a vain and false opinion of his own
excellency above others, and above the truth. In youth it discovers it self by
contemt of others, ingratitude, injuriousness; accepting all honor, respect,
and officiousness as due and deserved, but paying none: therefore conversing
more willingly with inferiors, and domineering over them also; neither is a
proud man familiar or friendly to any but flatterers, to whom he easily becomes
a prey. His care is not to do well, but to seem so; and therefore he is ashamed
to confess a fault, error, ignorance, or inferiority; to learn or be taught; to
be chid or corrected. Instead of amendment he is sullen and dogged. He is
seldom free from envy, and therefore impatiently hears the praises of another,
especially his equal; but he swells, looks big, struts, vapors, and boasts to
show what he thinks himself to be: he is displeased, hates, and revengeth if
not treated according to his merit. Comparing himself with others it is to his
own advantage; looking only upon their errors, and aggrandizing them into
faults and vices: but upon his own virtues, which are all heroical. Especially
prying into the actions of Superiors, whom he imagines to usurp upon him, who
deserves and can menage all things, better then they. Therefore if in power, he
becomes imperious, tyrannical, opiniastre, impatient, if every thing correspond
not to his desires: But if he fall into misery, as commonly such do (being more
exposed to it by reason of their high valuing of themselves) he is low, vile,
cowardly, and dejected. His great badge is singularity, and his discourse runs
much upon I, we, mine, etc. This being a fault of the mind, and not radicated
in the temper of the body, is reduced to equanimity by mortification of his own
conceits and fancies: either by punishments, by reason and good counsel, or
conversing much with strangers; or by the method taken by God Almighty to
humble him by others resisting,, despising, and crossing him.

8 I HAVE not observed that any Physiognomical signs are infallible: not, tho
many of them concur in the same indication; and tho many famous Authors and
Proverbs in all Languages seem to authenticate them. For indeed the temperature
of the body seems no otherwise to be the cause of the actions of the soul or
person, then as the temper of the Axe is the cause of cutting; to which many
other things as figure, weight, motion, etc. are required as well as it; and
yet all together are but the instrument of the man, who by greater strength,
dexterity, etc. can work better with another sort of a worse tool, and can make
one advantage remedy another disadvantage. We see also that study and
experience give more force to the soul, then any disposition whatsoever of the
body; even as temperance, labor, etc. make the body more obedient: all which
are great testimonies of the Souls spirituality. It Is commonly set down by
Authors, that tall and strong men are of small understanding and courage: that
it is a sign of wit, to have a curiouc taste, and delicate stomach (which indeed
proceeds sometimes from the weakness of that faculty by too much intentive
study) and many such like: which it is in vain to repeat; since it is not
difficult to show that some of contrary dispositions have the same signs: and
of contrary signs, v. g. to ingenuity, are yet ingenious. Seneca says of
Claranus ep. 66. Inique se gessit natura, and talem animum male collocavit: aut
fortasse voluit ho^ ipsum ostendere, posse ingenium fortissimum ac beatissinium
suh qualibet cute latere. Et videtur in exemplum editus, non deformitate
corporis foedari animam. The like is verified of the President Pedro Gasca,
that recovered to the King of Spain, Peru almost wholly revolted: and of many
more in our memory. Yet thus much I willingly grant, that the passions discover
themselves almost inevitably by the countenance; because they, being sudain and
violent mutations in the Soul, cause the like also in the spirits; which show
themselves through the skin: or in the motions also of the exterior members.
But it is not so with the inclinations and dispositions, which are by our own
industry and habituations turned now into natural: and impress no such violent
or extraordinary motions in any part, either of spirits, or body.

9. MORE trust is to be had to such other signs, as seem to be the flowers,
which preceed and pretend some smell of the fruit it self. These then promise
virtue; modesty, obedience, advisableness, compassionateness, loving virtue in
others, and consorting with such, cheerfulness, aptness to friendship,
impatience till reconciled to any he offended, mildness, humility. Those who
are apt to shed tears, are of a softer and lovinger disposition, as those who
cry and shed no tears, prove commonly stubborn. Signs of nobleness and
generosity are, to confess a fault rather then tell a ly, or frame a cobweb
excuse; to be ashamed to be overcome in any laudable study or exercise; not to
be angry when justly reproved, or corrected, (moneri posse, ac velle, summa
virtus est;) to do more for honor then reward; not to be easily discouraged or
despond, but to be more sprightly; to desire difficult emploiments; to pass by
small offenses; not to deride others defects; to be more ready to excuse then
aggravate faults of his Companions; lastly, to be grateful, especially to his
Masters, Teachers, and Servants. Signs of a capacity for sciences, are,
attention to what he goes about; demanding the reasons of things. [By the way,
asking questions very much discovers the ingeny of a child: for to ask many is
a sign of curiosity and wit; to ask vain and impertinent ones, or the same over
again, or not to stay for an answer, of folly and inconsiderateness; material
and pertinent ones, of judgment and discretion.] WHY is the great question of
knowledge; not to be satisfied with a slight answer; sagacity, and much
thinking; not talkative, but reflecting wardly, meditating with, and
entertaining himself. Primum argumentum compositae mentis, posse consistere,
and secum morari. Good imitation of what he sees. If he have so much confidence
of his parts, as to hope with industry to conquer every thing, but without
labor to do nothing well; if he have a strong faithful memory for things, tho
not for words; if a rational, methodical, and regular understanding. As
Democritus seeing Protagoras, when a youth, to bind up a faggot orderly, and to
the best advantage, conceived him fit to be a Scholar.

AND Cimabue rationally conceived great hopes of Giotto Bondone, when being a
poor boy and keeping his Fathers sheep he saw him designing one of them upon a
brick. Afterward he became the restorer of that whole art, and the famousest
man of his age. A child that delights in tormenting, and vexing either Beasts
or Men (as the daughter of Caligula, that let her nails grow to scratch her
companions and play-fellows) is of an evil, perfidious, and bestial nature.

DELIGHTING in gallantry commonly portends lowness and weakness of spirit, as
have those Women, who have nothing but their outside to entitle them to
humanity. But slovenliness, if it proceed from negligence, i. e. if he be
careless in other things, especially of concernment, is a very ill sign: ad
morem discincti vivere Nattae. But if from particular neglect of delicateness,
as too low and mean, it is a good sign, cave tibi a male cincto puero. A sign of
timorousness and effeminacy is to indulge diverse fancies, and to pretend to see
imaginations and spectra (things which valiant men are seldom troubled withal)
as also to pretend antipathy to diverse sorts of meats; etc. and timorousness is
the prologue to craft and dissimulation. Unseasonable gravity many times
indicates slowness to sciences, negligence, and weak memory. Quickness of wit
is in danger to usher in pride, contemt, abuse of others, and neglect of study.
Acuteness and sagacity is often accompanied with anger and precipitiousness.
Such also, if Students, are apt to fall into needless curiosities, factions and
heresies. For they search not to the bottom; but having principles think to
work out the rest by the dexterity of their wit. Vain-gloriousness is always
subject to flatterers. Distinguish between softness and meekness: the more soft
the less understanding, the more meek, the greater generosity and nobleness of
spirit: a soft man has no anger or gall, a meek man bridles and masters it.
Huffing and swaggering (like bottled drink) commonly shows want of spirit, for
it is but froth that makes that noise, and presently such become vapid, and
distastful.

10. WE must take heed of thinking any of these imperfections or faults
incurable, because according to a natural inclination: or if a child be not
exactly such a one as we would have him, that he must be treated as the
Brachmans did their children, whose indoles they disliked, abandon them in the
Woods to the wild Beasts; or as the Inhabitants of Madagascar, who expose all
their children born upon a Friday. Turpiter desperatur quicquid fieri potest,
says Quintilian. Illud desperandum est posse nos casu bonam mentem influere:
laborandum est: and ut verum dicam, ne labor quidem magnus est; si modo animum
formare incipimus, antequam durescat pravitas ejus. Sed nec indurata despero.
Nihil est, quod non expugnet pertinax opera, and intenta ac diligens cura. Sen.
ep. 50. Let the industrious and skilful Educator make many trials and diverse
experiments, as Physicians do, before they give a determinate prognostic.

Now, of cures some are general. As 1. to make them know their infirmity, and
that it is an infirmity; and 2. that they be willing to be cured. For it is not
as in corporeal diseases, when the body is necessitated, by connection of
causes, to undergo and suffer the malady incumbent. But here the Soul is in its
own power, subject to it self only and its own will, and that directed by the
understanding. Wherefore the first step to a cure, is to convince by reason
that they do ill, i. e. to acknowledge their disease: the desire to have it
cured follows naturally. So that it is in the power of reason to rule
absolutely over the affections and dispositions of the Soul. But because reason
sometimes is misled, or obstinately mistaken, Almighty God has given us his
holy Religion, and his spirit, to govern reason also, and render every thought
obedient to Faith. So that in Religion lies the universal and never failing
remedy of all the evils of the Soul. But many times particular and topical ones
are also to be applied. A child, when he begins to go, refuses immediately to
be assisted; So when the will begins to follow its own choice, it then also
begins to scorn a guide; the appetite of liberty being stronger then that of
security. Great industry therefore and discretion is requisite to turn it the
best way; endeavoring, as Physicians, to introduce the contrary of what is
amiss, and supply what is defective; to coerce and discountenance the bold and
impertinent; to encourage the soft and modest: severe to the merry, cheerful to
the melancholic. Waken the taciturn with questions, and silence the loquacious
with baffling fallacies. Bridle the too forward and eager, and spur up the lazy
and slothful.

11. SOME there are, who are lazy and unindustrious to study, yet very active
and sprightly in bodily exercises; these many times are fitter for other
emploiments then learning. Others are to all purposes slow and sawntring, and
these are to be cured with bodily labor. First make them play, run, leap, etc.
afterward bring them to study. For there seems to be a moisture clogging their
spirit, which must be first shaken of; for if they be indulged they will become
more sleepy, even till changed into dormice. Then never let them want work, yet
not much at a time, but be careful that what you command them be sedulously
performed. There are also who are pettish, peevish, hard to please, and are
always lean, maigre, and consumtive: which proceeds from a sharp, thin humor,
easily exasperated, and to such a degree as may be very prejudicial. It is best
therefore to deal with those gently and smoothly (the default being more in the
body then the mind) and not put them upon crabbed, intricate, vexatious, or
intentive studies; nor be too rigorous in exacting an account of them. It would
be worth labor to try whether such medicines, as dulcify the blood, would not
profit them. Like to these are they, who seem rough, harsh, regardless of
civility, and not easily mingling conversation. These, (if not such in
extremity) when mellowed by experience, prove better then the complaisant and
amicable. Keep this sour disposition to study, virtue, and knowledge; and tho
he grumble and repine, be content so as he does his work; and he is in less
danger of temtation, becomes more solidly virtuous, and lasts much the longer.
As the wine, which pleases in the Cuve, must be drunk in the must. They are
also fitter for friendship then the compliant; for these are equal to all, and
the greatest interest can be gained in them is but civility; the other choose
their company, and fix upon the best. This sourness proceeds ordinarily from a
brisker, and fiercer spirit, not willing to go in the ordinary routte, nor
follow the track of those he undervalues; but loves the generous taste of
liberty. Whereas the soft wax, that melts with every ones fingers, keeps no
impression. But if this harshness be extreme, and increase with age; consider
whether it grow from pride, and then the root is to be dug up; or from
natural inclination; and then let him frequent facetious and merry company, let
him converse with Strangers, with whom he must stand upon his guard. Women's
acquaintance also, if discreet persons, is not ill for this disease. With the
froward and perverse begin to use severity betimes, and master him before he
know his own strength. Let him not be humored or gain by his sturdiness; but
let him know by experience, that his tricks are not only undecent, but vain
also and uneffectual. Imitate God Almighty, who to the meek shows himself
gentle, but to the perverse, froward: that he may humble the high looks and
thoughts of the proud. For indeed this sullen humor, which against all reason
will be guided only by its own opinions, and will brook no contradiction, is
the effect of the greatest pride; and is too frequently found in Persons of
quality, when cockered by Parents, or flattered by Servants. When they are
children rough usage is good for them, but afterward it irritates them the
more. Then if sober reasoning open not their eyes, they must be (as wild Trees)
often transplanted and removed into strange company. For where unacquainted
they dare not show their humor; especially before such as will not brook their
impertinencies, but answer them with laughter, scorn, or somewhat more severe.
Indeed generally all bad dispositions are reclaimed by conversation, and the
example of other persons, especially such as are eminent in the virtue you
would produce. Afflictions also have a wonderful force, which are discreetly to
be menaged by the Educator, for then the humors are ripe for purgation.

CHAP. X. Of parts or capacities in general; and of their diversity; and how to
be ordered and rectified.
HITHERTO we have spoken of Dispositions in order to the regulation of life and
manners. In the next place we must treat of what concerns Knowledge and
Science. And in order to this we must resume; that there are three faculties
(of which we shall speak by and by more copiously) naturally implanted in us,
Wit, Judgment, and Memory. Concerning which that you may the better understand
my intention, I will set down the most common and usual differences of
capacities. And first take notice, that the goodness of Wit is seen in, first
quick apprehending what is proposed: and 2ly ready, pertinent, and copious
invention. A Memory then is counted excellent, when it quickly embraces, and
long retains, what is committed to it. And that Judgment is commended, which
subtly compares, and accurately discerns between things that are like. Next,
that Wits some are ordinary, others extraordinary. Extraordinary, such are:

1. IMAGINATIVE persons, who 1. either have their fancy so volatile and skipping
from one thing to another, that they cannot fix long upon any one subject.
Sometimes this proceeds from levity and impatience of the labor of thinking
(non est enim minor lassitudo animi quam corporis, sed occultior;) sometimes
from Melancholy. And such a degree there is of this, as is incurable but only
by Medicine, that is frenzy and madness. Or 2ly who have great and ready
variety of fancies or suggestions, but little of Judgment. Even as Cisterns,
whereinto the water continually flows, are never clear. These catch at, and sit
down with, their fullest apprehensions, without weighing or considering the
contrary; and are called Fantastical. The best way to cure both these, is to
fix them, by setting them to Mathematics, Geometry especially, where they are
not suffered to taste a second dish, till they have perfectly digested the
former; and by employing their memory. Disputations also in public are very
profitable.

2. PRECOCIOUS persons, whom the Proverb has branded to be of small duration.
Perhaps because these sine Tempers are usually less strong and durable, their
spirits either exhaling and spending, or fixing and thickning. So that like
corn upon stony ground, they spring up upon a sudden, show all they can do,
are in admiration for their forwardnes; but wanting root, they bring forth
yellow, and emty ears before the Harvest, and so vanish. Thus Hermogenes the
Orator was heard with admiration at 12. years old, at 24. with laughter. Yet by
the good leave of the Proverb, I have not seen many of precocious parts, except
by their own or Educators fault, miscarry. For many times it happens that those
persons, seeing their advantage in the race above their companions, slacken
their speed, betaking themselves to pleasure and idleness; or as they say of
Rablais, who not finding his good parts and serious studies encouraged
according to his expectation, abandoned himself to buffoonery. These pregnant
wits, being much courted for their plausible conversation, endanger their ruin
from those, who pretend to woe their friendship. It would be better for them to
consider, that they are not matched only with those who started at the same
time with them, but with those also who had advantage; and that he is to be
crowned, not who does as well as others, but as well as he can. But because of
the prejudice most men have against precociousnes, it will not be amiss to show
some late examples of those who begun betimes, have proved admirable, and
lasted a long while. The great Card. Bellarmine, whilst at School, interpreted
publicly Cicero's Oration pro Milone; at 16. began to preach, and openly read
the grounds of Divinity, Card. du Perron read over the Almagest of Ptolemy in
13. days before he was 18. years old. Torquato Tasso spoke plain at 6. months
old; at 3. years went to School; at seven he understood Latin and Greek, and
made Verses; before 12. he finished his Course of Rhetoric, Poetry, Logic, and
Ethics; at 17. he received his degrees in Philosophy, Laws, and Divinity; and
then printed his Rinaldo. And tho of prodigious natural parts, yet the writer
of his life observes, that he writ (his Poems especially) by the force of
indefatigable study, rather then vivacity of wit, or fruitfulnes of invention;
which rendered them admirable, for he began there where others would have
ended. Augustus Caesar at 19. years old, contrary to the advice of his Friends,
put himself upon the menagement of affairs, claimed, and entered upon, the
inheritance and succession to his great Uncle Julius. So did Cosmo (the great
Cosmo) Medici, at 17. years old, contrary also to the counsel of his kindred,
take upon him the government of the Republic of Florence, after the murder of
his cousin Duke Alexander. By the bye also it is observed, that to both of these
the first day of Augustus was fortunate, to the one for the Battle at Actium,
to the other for the two victories over the two Strozzi, Father and Son.
Vesalius began when a child to cut up Mice and Rats; Mich. Angelo to draw
Figures: Galen to compose Medicines. Jo. Picus Earl of Mirandula out-went his
Teachers, nor could they propose any thing to him, which he did not immediately
apprehend; and the 900. conclusions, which he proposed to defend against all
opposers about 21. years of age, show what he was, and he never retired till
his death. Jos. Scaliger says of himself, that all the time he lived with his
Father in his youth, he every day declamed, and before 17. years old made his
Tragedy Oedipus. Besides many other particulars which he recites in the life
of his Father. To Vid. Fab. Pibrac then not 20. years old, the great Alciati in
his public Lectures acknowledged the solution of many great difficulties in the
civil Law. Grotius at 8. years old made Verses, and performed his public
exercises in Philosophy; before 15. he put forth his Comment upon Martianus
Capella. At 16. he pleaded causes. At 17. he put forth his Comment upon Aratus.
Lipsius writ his Books Variarum Lectionum at 18. years old. Ingenium habuit
docile, and omnium capax praeter Musices: memoria non sine praeceptorum
miraculo etiam in puero, quae in senectute non defecit. Cent. 4. ep. 87. Sr
Phi. Sidney (says Sr Fou. Grevill) tho I knew from a child, yet I never knew
other then a man; with such staiednes of mind, lovely and familiar gravity, as
carried grace and reverence above greater years. And what his parts were,
appears by that strange affection born him by Lanquet, and William Prince of
Orange, who kept correspondence with him when but a youth. Calvin printed his
Institutions before 25. years old. Alph. Tostatus learned all the liberal
Sciences without being taught; and writ in the 40. years he lived as much as
most men can in that time well read: yet was he also Counselor to the King,
Referendary Major of Spain, and Professor of Philosophy, Divinity, and Law in
the University of Salamanca. I could bring also very many more of our own
Nation, and my own knowledge (besides Mr Oughtred and Mr Cowley) to testify
against that Proverb: but I think very few examples (Vopiscus says none) can
be given of such, as being dull and heavy in their youth, arrived to any great
perfection in their age. Neminem (says he in Probo) unquam pervenisse ad
virtutum summam jam maturum, nisi qui puer seminario virtutum generosiore
concretus aliquid inclitum designasset. May non si raccoglie buon frutto nell'
autumno, sel' albero non ispunta buone foglie nella prima vera. Danti.
Indubitatum est, eos, qui in ulla re unquam excelluerunt, mature puerilibus
annis ad eam rem accessisse. P. Com. p. 59. totum in hoc consistit, primum in
beneficio Dei, proxime in educatione. Ibid. Let no man therefore slacken his
endeavor toward these early fruits, nor let the young man himself despond, but
rather (which is a great truth) say, that God Almighty has thus furnished him
to be an ornament to his Creation, and an assistance to Mankind. Let the
Educator also be more careful of him, and not leave him to himself, for there
will come cold frosts and hails, loathings and tediousnes of Labor, which, if
not well defended, will hazard his dropping off. The subtle and delicate edge,
if encountering too great difficulties, is in danger to turn; in such cases
therefore let them not be tired out, but assisted to expedite themselves with
ease and delight. Propose to them high and noble studies, but give them your
hand; keep them continually running, but not at their full speed, lest they
grow weary, and loath, and abandon them. And indeed it is a much greater
difficulty and masterpiece, to direct and conduct great parts, then mean ones.
Parts are indifferent to good or bad, and great parts to great good or great
evil; and all great evil as well as great good proceeds from them. And which
way soever they go, they are not easily diverted, their abilities supplying
them still with sufficient defense for themselves. Maxima ingenia, says
Seneca, miror and timeo, mediocria probo; as he is in less danger who walks on
a plain, then he who dances on a rop^. Minutius, in the Preface to his
Paradoxes, tells us of one Creighton, a Scottishman, who at 21. years old (when
he was killed by order of the Duke of Mantua) understood twelve Languages, had
read over all the Poets, and Fathers, disputed de omni scibili, and answered ex
tempore in verse: Ingenium, says Scaliger, prodigiosum, and admiratione magis
quam amore, dignum, ei judicium defuit. Principes solent illa ingenia amare
magis, quam been doctos. Such persons, if not well regulated (which as I said
is difficult) become many times proud and conceited, angry and precipitious,
scornful and presumtuous, many times also light and freakish. And truly mean
and indifferent, or even low wits, have more pleasure and satisfaction then
these high-flyers. For trusting to their parts they neglect study and exercise,
and so are easily surprised and discovered, when either not fully apprehending
the question and the consequences of an opinion, or themselves not well
disposed for discourse.

3. THERE is another sort who have not so great parts, but have a volubility of
language, are able upon a sudden to speak de omni ente and non ente, and of
them too, pro and con. This passes amongst Women and ordinary people for
Eloquence and great parts, but amongst discreet and serious persons, for
impertinence. And the rather, because these Men choose to talk commonly of
things they understand not, or are most improper and unknown to the company;
and of them also, without order, or method; and have, when at a non plus,
certain common places to retire to; lest they should fall into that terrible
disgrace of having no more to say.

4. SOME persons (tho very few) have a strong indoles or inclination to, and
abilities for, some particular science; strong, I say; for a slight fancy to
one more then another is not straightways (as they call it) a Genius to such a
thing: for most men are not altogether indifferent to all sorts of learning,
(tho Card. du Perron could never observe that he was more affected to, or more
apt for, one Science then another) and yet may arrive to a great perfection in
that, whereto they are least disposed. But if his Genius lead him so strongly
to any one Science, that he be unapt to others, it is by all means to be
humored. Ne tents (says Quintil.) quod effici non potest; nec ab eo, quod
quis optime facit, in aliud, cui minus est idoneus, eum transferas. It is
reported of Chapter Clavius, that being found by the Jesuits, under whose education
he was, very unapt for learning, and ready to be sent back to his Parents, to
be some other way employed, before they would quite abandon him, one of them
resolved to try him in Mathematics; wherein in a short time he profited to
admiration, and grew very famous and eminent in those studies. Or if his Genius
be accompanied with a noble and generous wit, let great endeavor be used to
teach him other Sciences; and if that, he is inclined to, be not the noblest,
to take him off from it also. Omnino iniquum est nobiliora ingenia dehonestari
studiis minoribus. Yet many times it is difficult to bring such off their
inclination; as in Monsieur Pascal; out of the Preface to whose last book I
will transcribe some passages very memorable both concerning the precociousnes
of his wit, and strong inclination to Mathematics.

Monsieur Pascal was observed in his childhood to have had an admirable
understanding to pierce into the profundity and depth of things; and to discern
solid reason from superficial words. In so much that when they offered him
words only, his understanding was restles and unsettled, until he had discovered
reason. At 11. years old, at table, having struck an earthen dish, and observed
it to make a sound, which ceased as soon as touched with his hand, he was very
earnest to know the cause thereof; and from that began to demand many other
questions concerning sounds, in so much that he made then a small, but very
ingenious, treatise concerning sounds. This his strange inclination to
ratiocination, made his Father fear, that if he should give him any insight
into Geometry and Mathematics, he would be so much taken with them, that he
would neglect all other studies, especially Languages. He therefore resolved to
hinder him, to lock up all Books of those Sciences, and not so much as to speak
of them in his presence. But all this cautiousnes served only to excite his
curiosity; so that he often entreated his Father to teach him Mathematics, or
at least to tell him what they were. His Father to satisfy him somewhat, in
general said, they were Sciences which taught how to make figures equal or
proportional one to another, and withal forbad him to speak to him, or think
any more, of them. A command impossible for such a wit. For upon this hint he
began to revolve them continually in his mind, especially at his times of
recreation. Once especially being in a large Hall (where he used to divertise
himself) he began to make figures with a coal on the pavement, as a circle, a
triangle of equal sides, or of equal angles, and the like, and this he did
easily. Afterward he began to search out and make propositions. But all Books
and instruction being by his Fathers diligence concealed from him, he was
forced to give names and definitions after his own invention. A circle he
called a round, a line a bar, etc. After this he framed also to himself
Axioms, and upon them Demonstrations after his own manner, till he arrived to
the 32. Prop. E. l. 1. His Father surprising him in this posture, was mightily
astonished when he heard him discourse, and as it were analize his
propositions. And hereupon, by the advice of friends, he put into his hands
Euclides Elements, which he read and comprehended at 12. years old, with as
great pleasure and facility, as other Children do Romances: he read and
understood it all by himself without any Master; and advanced so much in that
knowledge, that a while after at Paris he entered into the Conferences of learned
Men, held once a week concerning Mathematical questions. Thither he brought his
own inventions, examined others propositions, etc. and yet was all this
knowledge only the product of his leisure hours. At 16. years old he composed a
treatise of Conics, which Monsieur Descartes would not believe but to have bin
the work of his Father, endeavoring to procure reputation to his Son. At 19.
years old he invented that Instrument of Arithmetic, which is in print; and at
23. having seen the experiments of Torricelli, he also added to them a great
number of his own. This example of Monsieur Pascal is very extraordinary, as
was that of Pet. Damianus to piety; who being a Boy and almost starved and
naked, by the churlish and unnatural usage of his Brother, yet having found a
piece of money, not regarding his own necessities, he bestowed it upon a Priest
to pray for his Fathers Soul. Most men are fit for many Sciences, and that
inclination, which they have to one more then another, is ordinarily from their
ability to perform one more then another: as memory is for some; wit for
others; courage and bodily strength for others, etc. or from their own
imitation, or others recommendation, by word or example, to one thing more then
another; or from some external and accidental effect they have seen or known of
any one, or some such like. But tho all men have not, or scarce any have, all
faculties excellent in an equal degree; it will be the Teachers care and
Educateds endeavor to better that, wherein they are most defective; but so all
ways, that you conduct them by that way they will go. Too much strained-wits,
as forced grounds, badly correspond to our hopes. Unusquisque suum noscat,
says Tully, ad quas res aptissimi erimus, in iis potissimum elaborabimus.
Seneca says, that Virgil was as unfortunate in Prose, as Cicero in Verse. But
I am rather persuaded that both the one and the other proceeded from want of
practice. For Tasso was eminent in both: and Ovid was an acute and eloquent
Declamator as well as a fluent Poet. And Sen. l. 2. Cont. 3. stories of him,
that being importuned by his Friends for liberty to expunge three verses out of
his Writings, he yielded upon condition he might except three, and named those
they would have blotted out.

5. BESIDES what I have already mentioned, there are in teaching Sciences, two
great rules to be observed. 1. Begin not to teach a new science till your
Scholar understand all that is necessary to it; as not Rhetoric till he know
Grammar, and the Latin Tongue, for so he will learn both more, and cheerfuller.
Whereas the mind cannot to purpose intend many things at once. Tho such studies
as have correspondence and affinity may well be conjoined; for the comparing
illustrates both, and variety takes off the tediousnes. See Quint. l. 2. c. 12.
Be not too hasty with your Scholar; advance him not too fast; lay the
foundation sure and stable. For he that eats faster then he digests, breeds
crudities, and work for the Physician to purge away. Besides he that
understands, goes on cheerfully and securely. Which I take to be the reason,
why Men of age make greater progress in learning, then Children. Jul. Scaliger
began not to learn Greek till 40. years old, and then mastered it in a very few
months, as he did French and Gascon in three. Pet. Damianus learned not to read
till man's estate, yet proved one of the eminentest Scholars of his time. Balaus
entered so late upon the Law, that they told him he intended to be an Advocate
in the other World. 2. Teach not too much at once, but take your Lesson in
pieces, let him spell before he read; invent in English before in Latin,
confusedly before in order; then choose the best, put it in order, turn it into
Latin, and then file and polish it. It is reported of Virgil, that he first
composed his matter in Prose, then turned it into Verse, afterward reformed
those Verses to fewer; and last of all revised and amended them. To these rules
I must add, that he be taught things necessary or useful. Such are,

1. LANGUAGES. The Bulla Aurea, tit. 26. commands all the Sons of Electors to
be brought up from 7. years old, in the Italian and Slavonian Languages, and to
perfect that study before 14. That is prescribed to the German nobility; but
for ours it seems requisite, that they learn the Latin Tongue, so much as to
understand an Author readily, to write and speak it competently; and if they go
abroad, the more readily they speak it, the better. Other of the learned
Languages are ornaments, but not so necessary as the Modern: and of these,
theirs, with whom we have most converse, are the most useful.

2. IT is requisite that he learn to speak perspicuously, decently, and
persuasively, which is Rhetoric. To understand the difference of styles
Epistolary, Historical, and for Orations in all the three kinds. Also to
compose and pronounce them hansomly, at least in his own Language. It is better
also, if he understand and practice (tho not much, except he have a
considerable dexterity in it) Poetry; without which no man can be perfect
Orator, but his fancy as well as expressions will be low and mean. Poetry warms
the imagination, makes it active, and promt to soar to the top of Parnassus; it
emboldens to the use of a lofty Metaphor, or confident Catachresis. Besides
accustoming the style to measure gives insight, judgment, and readiness also in
Oratorical number. It teaches also to choose good words, to consider, weigh,
and pierce better into what we read, to take notice of the most delicate
artifice, and discern sparks of diamonds. So that it is observed, that when
Poetry is despised, other Sciences also are in the wane. One great piece of
Poetry, and perhaps the most familiar and proper, is the Dramatic, in which
could they be of good subjects, well garbled, and discreetly handled, it would
not misbecome our young Gentleman to have his part.

3. MUSIC I think not worth a Gentleman's labor, requiring much industry and
time to learn, and little to loose, it. It is used chiefly to please others,
who may receive the same gusto from a mercenary (to the perfection of many of
whom few Gentlemen arrive) at a very easy rate. I should rather advise Singing,
especially if you fear him subject to a consumtion; which, besides that it
strengthens the lungs, modulates the voice, gives a great grace to elocution,
and needs no instrument to remove or tune.

4. To discourse pertinently and rationally is also necessary. This is Logic;
which tho taught in every College, and every one learneth, yet do very few
attain perfection in it. Error is so well disguised, Verity is also sometimes
so deep, and our cord so shallow, that it requires very much experience, to be
able readily to discover the truth, and dissolve a sophism. These knowledges
already mentioned are but foundations, upon which all Sciences are built, but
themselves appear not in the edifice. For they are nothing but regulating and
perfecting the actions of our natural faculties; not informing them with any
new or extrinsecal accedent; they are disposing and preparing the table, that
good resemblances may be drawn upon it. They are necessary that a man may make
the best advantage of his natural parts in apprehending of other Arts and
Knowledges. Some indeed have bin of opinion, that a Gentleman needs no more,
but what nature has given him. Licinius, and a great General in our own times,
were so illiterate, that they could scarce write their own names. Lewis XI.
desired his Son might understand no more Latin then, Qui nescit dissimulare,
nescit regnare. And what harm had it bin, if he had permitted his Son (Charles
VIII.) to have learned somewhat of Latin? He could at the worst but have done
as he did, that is commit his business to others, and not be able to discern
good counsel from evil, and interessed. But it seems that Prince had but one
trick in King-craft, and that a very mean one; more Latin might have taught him
others, and not to have needed that, so base and unworthy of a Prince. As it
did those great Monarcks, who were practiced in them, Julius, Augustus, and the
rest of that family; (whereof Nero, to his dishonor, was the first that stood
in need of borrowed eloquence, Seneca making his speeches for him;) Trajan,
Hadrian, M. Aurelius, and that miracle of Princes, Severus Alexander. Hannibal
writ the lives of two famous Generals: and Alexander slept with Homer under his
pillow. I will not muster up any more examples; they are infinite. Learning, i.
e. Sciences are not necessary to every man; nor all to any man; yet are they
useful to all, tho not to all equally. But that is best, which is most
beneficial and proper for every ones condition of life. Learning and study
makes a young man thinking, attentive, industrious, confident, and wary; an old
man cheerful, and resolved. It Is an ornament in prosperity, a refuge in
adversity; an entertainment at home, a companion abroad: it cheers in solitude
and prison; it moderates in the height of fortune, and upon the throne. In
these parts of the World we seem to run after Sciences, and think them to be
all things; whereas the great and universal business of our life, especially
active, is wisdom, prudence, noblenes, and liberty of spirit. Sciences are
necessary to man's life, and Professors of them are requisite to instruct such,
whom it concerns to know and exercise them; in other persons wisdom is the
chiefest, and what can be spared from acquiring that, let it be bestowed upon
Science. By the way, take notice, that these are not both the same, that to be
learned is not to be wise; nor are Sciences to be placed in the upper room,
notwithstanding the honor and wealth to be acquired by them. They are
particular means for the obtaining particular ends; and dispose a man very much
for wisdom also: but the great universal Art is, Tu regere imperio populos,
etc. to excel others in virtue, prudence, and those abilities which render him
more useful in the general concernments of Mankind. Besides Sciences are easily
learned being taught by routte and course; but wisdom requires greater
advertency, and more accurate observation; which all are not able to learn, and
very few to teach. But, if a young man be industrious and of good parts, there
is time enough for both Sciences and wisdom. Those are more properly the
emploiments of youth, this of maturer age. He may obtain those before he be
well capable of this, I mean a sufficient perfection in them; not so much as is
required for a Professor, but so much, as is necessary or requisite for a
Gentleman. Nor will the acquisition of them hinder his progress in this, but
much further, and advance, it. Both because of the well-disposing of the
faculty, and of the affinity between both knowledges. Amongst Sciences
therefore I recommend to him,

5. THE practice of discoursing, or the seeking after truth by Evidence, which
is Mathematics, Geometry especially. I mean not a superficial taking upon trust
the Propositions, or the practical part only, or Instruments; these spoil, make
not, Mathematicians, but the high road of Demonstration. This is the first part
of the building that appears above ground; it is practicing them in the
greatest Instances of invention that we know; it fixes the fancy, it
accustometh to thinking, and enquiring after truth in all discourses. Analytica
is the gage of a man's parts, and Algebra the pinnacle of argumentation. Only
let it be remembered, that I advise it here as a piece of Education, not a
profession. I would not have a Gentleman give up himself to it; for it makes
him less fit for active life, and common conversation; except he well consider
that he cannot find his Demonstration in all matters; except he can be content
with such evidence as the subject affords; and not despise a proof, because he
can say somewhat against it: and except he can apply his mind and intention to
things as they are in the World; and not rack them to the accurate model of his
exactly regulated Imagination.

6. NATURAL Philosophy, but especially Ethics, and Politics, should also not be
neglected. Which will dispose him, when he comes to greater maturity, to
comprehend the Laws, especially of his own, and neighboring Nations, and their
Government. Of which I shall speak hereafter.

7. YET one thing we lack. Albertus Magnus desired of God 5. years before his
death, that he might forget all that he had learned in those studies, that he
might entirely give himself up to devotion. The example also of Monsieur Pascal
is very eminent. Tho he was able, as any man could be, to pierce into the
secrets of nature, and actually did see very far into them; yet more then ten
years before his death, he so well understood the vanity and nothingnes of all
those kinds of knowledge, and conceived such a distaste against them; that he
could hardly endure men of parts should seriously discourse of, or busy
themselves, in them: from that time he always professed, that nothing besides
Religion was an object worthy an ingenious man's study; that it was a proof of
the lownes, whereto we were thrown by the fall, that a man should seriously
fasten upon the search of such things, as contribute little or nothing to his
happiness. Wherefore his usual saying was, that all those Sciences produced no
consolation in the times of affliction; but that the knowledge of Christianity
was a comfort both in adversity, and defect of all other knowledge. He believed
therefore, tho there were some advantage or customary obligation to study
things of nature, and to be able to conceive and discourse rationally
concerning them; yet it was absolutely necessary not to prize them above their
just value. And that if it were better to know and undervalue, then be ignorant
of, them; yet it were better to be ignorant of, then know and overvalue, them.
The gentle spirit of Petrarch also long before his death quitted his Helicon
and Muses for mount Olivet and Divinity. Card. du Perron kept not so much as
any book of humanity (tho formerly a great Poet and Orator) either Poetry,
Oratory, or History in his Library. Jo. Picus Mirandula extremely repented his
love verses; so did Bembus, Ronsard, Marc-Ant. Muretus, Laur. Gacubaro, and
Cavalier Marini. And Naugerius tho formerly a famous Poet, yet afterward so
much detested all licentious compositions, particularly Martial; that every
year he bought up a considerable number of such books, and upon his birthday
solemnly burnt them. Nonnus in penance for his Dionysiaca paraphrased the
Gospel of St. John. Pet. Veliardus not being able to abolish the custom of
reading the Poets, etc. Omnes Poetas, scriptoresque profanos Evangelicos
faciebat. Omnia ad exaedificandam in timore domini juventutem accommodabat, ut
unde non pauci perniciem periculumque suis discipulis ferunt, inde illi in
salutem and morum disciplinam compararet. Orlan. in vita P. Fabri. These, you
will say, did well to begin to disengage themselves of their riding posture,
when they came in sight of their home: but that it will be difficult to
persuade young men coming into the World to follow these examples. This I
grant, yet some time should be given to him that gives us all, even in youth;
and the more the better; and as before I advised to the practice of Religion in
the very beginning, so, as they grow toward maturity, I would persuade them to
the study of Divinity, even that decried study of School Divinity. Which the
great Earl of Strafford, and many other very wise Persons and Statesmen have
themselves studied, and to others recommended. Theologia Scholastica principi
viro necessaria; nam, dum quaestiones suas discutiunt, omnes subtilitates,
effugia, suspiciones, omnes denique ingenii machinas and vires produnt, etc.
The Writers of this do more exactly canvas, and search out, their subject then
any others whatsoever. Which partly might be the reason why Monsieur Pascal
fell into such an utter dislike and loathing of his Physical and Mathematical
studies in comparison of Divinity. For tho he afterward made that discourse of
the Roulet or Cycloid, yet all therein was found out by chance, and almost
without study; and besides he intended it for another purpose far differing
from Mathematics. But if ever this study was necessary, it is now much more
certainly, when some are ready by the study of Nature to immerse God in the
matter; and with those impieties of Democritus and Epicurus to confound him
with Nature: and others for want of this ballast in these unsettled times, are
driven upon rocks and sands by the ignorance of some, and craft of others, that
lie in wait to deceive the betterminded, but less-learned then themselves.

6. AND the best place and manner of learning these, and all other Arts and
Sciences, or what belongs to them, I take to be in the Universities. And so
has bin the general opinion from the very beginning of learning. These were
the Schools of the Prophets in Gods Church; and such were Athens, Alexandria,
and many other places, among them that followed their own reason. For these
were the great Markets for Learning; here resided the best learned, and
greatest frequency of them; here was emulation and mutual information in
studies; here were opportunities of discoursing, studying, and continual
advance; here were Books, privacy, and all other necessaries for that purpose.
And still to this day in all Christendom is this observed; every Nation,
whether Kingdom, or Commonwealth, makes the establishing and well regulating
their Universities, one of the principal parts of their care. For from hence
they draw able subjects for all Professions and emploiments; here they
institute, both in learning and manners, the whole Youth of the Nation, and the
hopes and honor of the growing age. And therefore do the Supreme Magistrates,
by such great rewards, and immunities, encourage and procure the best
Professors and Teachers in every Art and Faculty. And such rewards are needful
to entice persons of great parts (as such must be), to such indefatigable and
uncessant labor and study, and to quit all the means of advancing themselves in
the Commonwealth to serve the Public. In these places you may find skilful men
in all Knowledges you desire: some give their mind and time to Languages,
others to Sciences; either to have a right and large knowledge, or comprehension
of things, whether the effects of Nature or manner of her operations, or of the
sublimer and abstruser general propositions concerning the higher and noble
entities, and such as are not obliged to the Laws of Nature: others to be able
to express their knowledge and notions, whether popularly by orations and
speeches, wherein they are frequently exercised, or convincingly to learned
Men, by their continual Disputations, to which they are educated. I mean not
that arguing and discoursing, which a Student uses with his own self to find
out truth, but that which comprehends both, and the assistance also of
others, public and open Argumentation pro and con. This is it which brings a
question to a point, and discovers the very center and knot of the difficulty.
This warms and activates the spirit in the search of truth, excites notions,
and by replying and frequent beating upon it, cleanses it from the ashes, and
makes it shine and flame out the clearer. Besides it puts them upon a continual
stretch of their wits to defend their cause, it makes them quick in replies,
intentive upon their subject: where the Opponent uses all means to drive his
Adversary from his hold; and the Answerer defends himself sometimes with the
force of truth; sometimes with the subtility of his wit; and sometimes also he
escapes in a mist of words, and the doubles of a distinction; whilst he seeks
all holes and recesses to shelter his persecuted opinion and reputation. This
properly belongs to the Disputations, which are exercises of young Students,
who are by these velitations and in this palaestra, brought up to a more
serious search of truth. And in them I think it not a fault to dispute for
victory, and to endeavor to save their Reputation; not that their questions and
subjects are concerning things of small moment, and little reality: yea I have
known some Governors that have absolutely forbidden such questions, where the
truth was of concernment; on purpose that the youth might have the liberty of
exerting their parts to the uttermost, and that their might be no stint to
their emulation. But indeed in natural Philosophy (wherein the greatest liberty
is given) what is there that is not disputable? and even they, who most pretend
to experiments, will find it difficult to produce one new, or confute an old,
universal proposition; and when they shall discover one, they will find it
disputed both with contrary reasons and experiments. So true is that of
Solomon, Eccles. 3. Tradidit mundum disputationi eorum, ut non inveniat homo
opus quod operatus est Deus ab initio usque ad finem. And of Siracides, Ecclus.
18. Non est minuere neque ad^icere, nec invenire magnalia Dei. Cum
consummaverit homo tunc incipiet, and cum quieverit aporiabitur. There may be
further discoveries, as perhaps was the circulation of the blood, and some
others; and with all thankfulness we acknowledge, and embrace their labors that
endeavor such advancement, but to lay new principles, especially since the
received are incorporated into all common speech, and our Languages are formed
according to them; and consequently all men's notions set according to them,
which will not be altered and extirpated by small fancies, is a business of an
higher difficulty. Besides that Aristotle himself, whom all Universities,
Christian, have followed about 400. years (longer then any other of his
maligners have continued theirs) but the Grecians and Arabians much longer
time, was not a Novice in Natural History; witness those most learned works in
that subject. Yet did he write his Philosophy conformable, not contradictory,
to his knowledge in particulars; and therefore it must needs be very difficult
to overthrow that which is so well grounded, which was the product of so much
experience; and by none but those who are better versed in that learning then
himself. Neither is his Philosophy more notional then all Sciences, which are
delivered in a Synthetical, i. e. a doctrinal method, and begin with universal
propositions. I acknowledge indeed one point of Education, wherein I wish our
Universities more defective then they are, i. e. that which the Ladies call
breeding and accomplishment; a fault incident to all these Schools of Learning,
even to Athens it self; for Plutarch tells us, that long before his time some
persons wondered, why those, that went fine Gentlemen to Athens, and very
knowing, after a year or two's stay there began to know nothing; and the longer
they stayed the greater clowns they proved. A negligence incident to those, who
have their minds more employed then their bodies; and who converse not with the
gallantry of the age.

7. THAT you may judge the better of Universities, I will set down the manner
of Instructing in foreign Universities, or also our own in former times;
without reflecting upon, or judging our present practice. Anciently in Oxford
and Paris, (the two only general Studies for a long time on this side the Alps)
I suppose in the others too, their reading was dictating, and their learning
writing those dictates of their Master. Card. d' Estouteville about 1476.
reformed this tedious and unprofitable way of teaching, and brought in (as it
should seem) the manner now generally used; which is, first an account of the
former Lectures; then to read and write about half an hour; then to explicate
that about an equal time. Experience since has added an hour more for the
Scholars conferring one with another in circles, in presence of their Reader,
and disputing upon questions given them the reading before. The hour that
remains, the Master begins another Lecture, explains it to them, and gives them
questions for their next disputations. Yet the Jesuits in Portugal, to ease
their Scholars also of much of the labor of writing dictates, have printed a
Course of Philosophy, which they explain, confer, and dispute upon. And this
seems the best way: but whether introducible amongst us; or if it be, whether
better then Tutors reading privately in their Chambers, especially if Tutors be
diligent, it is not fitting for me to determine.

8. THE true method of studying to render any one a learned man, I conceive not
to be, to trust to his memory; Aliud enim est meminisse aliud scire: meminisse
est rem commissam memoriae custodire; at scire est and sua quaeque facere, nec
ab alio exemplari pendere. And these differ as much as digesting our meat, and
reserving it in a cupboard. Wherefore neither is it to be able to quote many
Authors, nor tell their opinions, nor to repeat their pretty sentences or
profound subtilties: as neither to read many Books, nor to say them by heart,
is to be a Scholar: but to digest what is read, and to be able to know where a
difficulty lies, and how to solve it, i. e. to make it your own, and to be able
to satisfy your self and others in that which you conceive to be truth. First
of all then, propose to your self a subject; never read at adventure the book
newly come out, or in fashion, whatever subject it handles, for that is
commonly lost labor: but read always with design: then shall you know where
you are, how far you have gone, what is behind both of that Science, or of the
whole Encyclopaedia. Having fixed upon your subject, take an Author, a modern
one, and the learneder the better: and consider first the latitude and method
of your Science; and then begin with his first question; upon which first use
your own thoughts; or at least yours together with his, i. e. let your
imagination loose, both before and when you read; discourse, doubt, argue upon
and against; and draw consequences from your Author; who is many times but a
ladder to your own inquisitivenes. When you have found a difficulty, which
neither your own thoughts, nor his writing, do resolve, make use of other
Authors of the same subject; for what one wants another supplies; your
difficulty perhaps your Author foresaw not, another did. And by the citations
of modern Authors you will easily be directed where to look for satisfaction.
When that question and the difficulties and solutions are fixed in your mind by
sufficient meditation, go to another, and so forward.

CHAP. XI. Of Invention, Memory, and Judgment; and how to help, better, and
direct them.
IT is not my purpose to intermeddle with any particular Art or Science in this
discourse; but only with such things, as do not properly fall under, or belong
to, any of them, yet are generally required to them all. And first I must
reassume, what before I only mentioned, that there are three faculties to be
cultivated, Wit, Memory, and Judgment.

1. WIT, the actions whereof are fancy, or invention, is in ordinary acception,
nothing else but a quicker apprehension of such notions, as do not usually
enter into other men's imaginations. It consists (says Thesauro) in 1.
perspicacity, which is the consideration of all, even the minutest,
circumstances: and 2. versability, or speedy comparing them together; it
conjoins, divides, deduceth, augmenteth, diminishes, and in sum puts one thing
instead of another, with like dexterity, as a jugler does his balls. It differs
very much from judgment; that is more perspicacious, this more profound; that
more quick, this more stable; that chiefly considers appearances, this reality;
that produces admiration and popular applause, this profit and real advantage.
Ingenious men are commonly impatient of thinking, and therefore take
appearances for reality; and their fancy still suggesting new conceits, suffers
them not to weigh or compare reasons: wherefore they are commonly unfit for
business; their ability consisting in sudain apprehensions, and quick
expressions; whereas it is only study, and thinking, that hatcheth and produces
all noble designs and actions. And if ingenious men do come to consider
seriously, or to deliberate, they are able to say so much for either side, that
they have no resolution; they dispute well, but conclude nothing. Consequently
they are irresolute, inconstant, and unfortunate: and their wit failing before
they arrive at old age, and not being furnished in their memory and judgment,
they become flat and contemtible. But if wit be joined with power, it is very
dangerous to the public. Sapientia sine eloquentia parum prodest civitatibus;
eloquentia sine sapientia nimium plerunque obest, prodest nunquam. says Cie.
l. 1. de Invent. I think I may truly add, that all mischiefs in Commonwealths
proceed from these Wits; for wise men will not disturb government, and fools
cannot. Whereas the Judicious man is fitted for any emploiment, considers what
dangers and evils may happen, and avoids them; consequently is prosperous,
brings about his designs, advances himself and family. And the longer he
lives, the more does his Talent increase. In sum, the one is best in a Tavern
or Coffy-house, the other at a Councel-table: the one is a facetious companion,
the other a faithful friend; the one a good droll, the other a good Patriot;
the one makes us merry, the other wise. Wit, say some, proceeds from active
spirits, or a greater degree of heat in the brain; the excess whereof produces
madness; and so difficult it is to determine what degree serves for one, and
what for the other, that the Proverb assigns them the same confines. And indeed
the conceits of Madmen are nothing else but high and extravagant Metaphors: as
that of one who fancied himself a firebrand, and desired every one he met to
blow him. Another thought himself a mustard seed. Another took himself for a
glass-alembick with a long nose, the droppings whereof he called Rose Water.
Others were Cocks, Urinals, etc. A lesser degree of madness was that they called
Enthusiasm (many times from some vapor or water out of the Earth) which was
imagined to come from the Gods, and which created the most ingenious Poets. Who
all, pretending to that afflatus, continually called upon the Muses, Nymphs,
and Presidents of those inspiriting places, in the beginning of their Poems.
And they, who are denied by Nature this faculty, and will not take the pains by
study and exercise to prepare and fit themselves, are wont to increase their
heat or frenzy by Wine (which causes a temporary madness;) or by some high
Passion, which has the same effect as drunkenness. Magna pars eloquentiae est
dolor, said Seneca, when he heard a dull Orator declame most eloquently that
day his Son died. So Polus the Actor, that he might more vively represent the
grief of a Father upon the body of his deceased Son, brought in an Urn the
ashes of his own Son newly dead. This for one Passion. So for anger, Si natura
negat, facit indignatio, versum. Archilochus and Hipponax two very bad Poets,
yet for spite and rabbia, to be revenged of two persons that injured them,
invented those doggrel sorts of Verses, Iambics and Scazons, whose force they
so well applied, that their Adversaries made away themselves. And for Love, let
the Smith of Antwerp be witness; who, being refused by his sweetheart because
of his dirty Profession, changed his hammers and anvil for pencils and tables,
and arrrived to be the famousest Painter of his time. But to let these pass;
Wit is the mother of facetiousnes, conceits, jests, raillery, satyricalnes,
(which is almost synonymum to wit,) drollery, quick reparties, quaint
Metaphors, and the like, in conversation. Of projects, new Inventions,
Mechanical Instruments, etc. And in learning is the great Nurse of Poetry,
Oratory, Music, Painting, Acting, and the like.

2. JUDGMENT is the deliberate weighing and comparing of one subject, one
appearance, one reason, with another; thereby to discern and choose true from
false, good from bad, and more true and good from lesser. Which who so does, is
a wise man, beloved of God, and reverenced of all good men. Its parts consist
1. in circumspection, or consideration, of all circumstances, advantages,
accidents, etc. 2. In sagacity, or collecting much from little hints; which
requires both a great vivacity, serenity, and subtilty of spirit; all these
together make up Solertia. 3. In caution or weighing all things for, and
against, the subject. And 4. Providence, or provision of futures, what may, and
what may not, most probably fall out; which is the height of human wisdom. A
judicious man is stable, solid, serious, looks after truth, real advantage, and
happiness; is fit to govern and obey: is not rash or inconstant; believes not
easily; nor easily disbelieves, but as his reason guides him. His discourse is
not so plausible as solid; uses reasons more then Metaphors; speaks to
purpose, and knows when to hold his peace. He is what every one strives, but
few arrive, to be. This faculty is proper for all Sciences that depend upon
rational discourse, and much thinking, as Divinity and the profound mysteries
thereof; Natural Philosophy, and Moral; Practical Medicine, Law, Judicature,
and Government in Peace and War.

3. MEMORY is the calling to mind or recollecting of what has bin before known
and apprehended. They that excel in it are accounted many times greater Clerks
then wise men; are able to cite many Books, and Authors, and their Editions;
can tell their opinions; and enterlace their discourse with ends of gold and
silver. Yet, if not menaged by judgment, their opinion or learning is of little
force or esteem amongst knowing men; who yet can gather many useful things out
of their confusion. This faculty is necessary for Lawyers, whose learning lies
in quotations, and records; and who number, rather then weigh, their
Authorities. It Is also proper for learning Languages, Criticismes, Philology,
Antiquities; for putting out, commenting upon, and making Indexes to, Authors.
It is a natural faculty, and conspicuous even in Children, who by it learn till
they arrive to some considerable degree of Understanding.

4. IT is commonly imagined, that a great memory seldom accompanies a great
wit, or a good judgment; and that these three are incompatible one with
another; that they have diverse habitations in, and a diverse temperature of, the
brain. Whereas I think the contrary is generally, but not always, true. And
thence is gathered an effectual argument, that they are all menaged by one
great Agent, the Soul or spirit; which is above temperature, place, and matter.
That one man proves not excellent in all or many Sciences, proceeds not from
the inhability of one or other faculty of the Soul; but either from the long
time required to one study; from want of industry, every one being most ready
to make use of, and cultivate, that, wherein they have some natural advantage,
and to neglect the other; or from the two great attachment Men have to what
they first master, so that all following studies are cast into the mold of the
first; or lastly from a mistake, for that memory is not so conspicuous, except
where wit and judgment are wanting. Yet in these later times what persons have
we seen eminent in all three faculties? Erasmus, when a youth, had all Terence
and Horace by heart; Jos. Scaliger in 21. days got by heart all Homer (the
Ilias containing 31670 verses, and the Odysses about the same number) and in 4.
months all the other Greek Poets. Monsieur Peiresk, when a youth at School,
could repeat all Ovids Metamorphosis, and Justins History without book. Card.
Bellarmin, says Gallutius, had such a memory, ut quicquid legeret scriberetve
statim ac subito reciperet, quicquid recepisset, fidelissime constantissimeque
retineret. P. Paolo Sarpi's great memory, as well as wit and judgment, even
from a child, read in his life. What a man Monsieur Pascal was in diverse
Sciences, his other works; what in Divinity, the Provincials Letters,
demonstrate. I will omit Julius Scaliger, Joh. Picus, Paulus Scalichius, Adr.
Turnebus, Casaubon. Card. Perron in four days got by heart all Ecclesiastes in
Hebrew, and besides his other vast abilities, was also an excellent Poet. Mr
Oughtred in his old age had Ovid and Virgil fresh in his memory. Fr. Suarez had
S. Austins works so by heart, that he could repeat, not only the sense, but for
the most part his very words; and if he was asked of any thing in his own works
(22. Volums in fol.) he could tell the place and very page where he treated of
it. But this himself called not memory, but reminiscence; for it was indeed as
much judgment as memory: for he was so well versed in that learning, and so
perfectly master of it (having read the whole Course of School Divinity, as I
remember, 17. times over) that if he were asked of any point, or conclusion, he
would discourse of it just in the same manner, and order, as he had writ it in
his Books. I could produce many more instances. But in reason, the goodness of
the judgment must depend upon invention and memory; that being the faculty
which gives sentence according to the reports of the other two. Yet few there
are in whom these faculties are, as I may say, mingled ana. It is best
therefore that all be cultivated and advanced as high as they are capable to
be: and what is most defective is most to be helped. And Children having memory
by nature, invention not till youth, nor judgment till maturity, their memory
is first to be menaged: only with this caution, that they be made to understand
what they learn, and the reason of it, as soon as they shall be capable.

5. OF the bettering of Judgment we shall speak in another place; but for
Memory, because we remember better those things, 1. which we learn from our
childhood; 2. which we are more attentive to; 3. which we exercise our selves
most in; 4. which we orderly apprehend; 5. which we can call to mind from the
beginning; 6. which we conceive to be somewhat like; 7. and which is pleasing
to us; and because childhood and youth have their memory (tho not so excellent
as men, yet) more useful then their understanding; therefore what ever they
learn, let it be got by heart; that they may repose and store up in their
memory what their understanding afterward may make use of: let them also
frequently render it, and after several interstitiums; which will be a great
help to their memory, to the perfecting of which nothing conduces so much as
practice. Yet there is also an Artificial help to memory, which is variously
and obscurely delivered by many Authors; the shortest and easiest is this. Make
use of a sufficient number of places best known to you; as of Towns in the way
to London, the Streets of London, or the Signs in one Street, such in fine as
are well known to you. Keep their order perfectly in mind, which first, which
second, etc. and when any word is given you to remember, place it in the first
Town, Street, or Sign; joining them together with some fancy, tho never so
extravagant, the calling to mind your known place will draw along with it the
fancy, and that the word joined to it. And these you may repeat afterward
either in the same order as they were delivered, or backwards, or as you
please. This serves very well for words, and indifferently for verses after
much practice; but it requires a long time by this art to remember Sentences. A
succedaneum to memory is writing; and Students are wont to serve themselves of
Common-place-Books, excellent helps to ordinary memories. The best way that I
know of ordering them, is; To write down confusedly what in reading you think
observable. [Young Students commonly take notice of remarkable Histories,
Fables, Apologues, (such as are not in Esop) Adagies, if not in Erasmus, or
Manutius. Hieroglyphics, Emblems, Symbols; (which are all but simile's dressed
after diverse fashions) Histories of heathen Gods, Laws and customs of Nations.
Wise and useful Sentences. Elegant Figures, Reasons and Causes, Descriptions
and the like.] Leaving in your Book a considerable margin; marking every
observation upon the page as well as the pages themselves with 1, 2, 3. etc.
Afterward at your leisure set down in the margin the page of your Index, where
the head is, to which such Sentence relates: and so enter into the Index under
such a head the page of your Note-book, wherein such sentence is stored. These
Note-books, if many, are to be distinguished by A, B, C, etc. your Index must
be well furnished with heads; yet not too much multiplied, least they cause
confusion. Your own experience will continually be supplying what is defective.

6. INVENTION is bettered by practice, by reading, by imitation, and by
common-places.

1 FOR practice, let him have a Teacher, who himself has some considerable
dexterity and practice in it, who may guide his charge by fit and easy rules
and exercises, and not thrust him upon fishing in Books at first; and may take
his subject after him, and show him what more might have bin said, and what he
has said, bettered. Neither let the young man torture his mind at all; but set
down what is suggested by his memory or fancy concerning his subject, be it
considerable or no. The Soul will by little and little heat, and wind it self,
unto higher conceptions; and in transcribing, he may reject what is too
obvious. Let him be taught first to fill up a Sentence with epithetes, oblique
cases of the Instrument, manner, cause, and all circumstances and relations:
which is easily known by the rection of the parts of his Sentence. Practice him
in most easy oppositions of Not and But; in most easy descriptions of things
most familiar to him, to enure him to the observation and taking notice of what
he sees: in enumeration of parts and species, as The old is better. In
Histories or Fables; giving him somewhat to make out the rest, as Ultima omnium
spes evolavit e dolio; in most easy and familiar similes, as of a Shepherd and
Magistrate, pismire and industrious person; sufficient variety of these is
collected by Erasmus. Under simile's are comprehended also Metaphors,
Allegories, Fables, Parables, Symbols and the like. And it were a good exercise
amongst a circle of Scholars, to propose a Symbol (the easiest first) and every
one to answer in his turn; v. g. let every one give his Symbol of fortitude,
and a motto or word for it such as, a Pillar, which sustaineth the greatest
weight laid upright upon it, the motto Rectum stabile; a Palm tree that grows
up against a pressure, Tu ne cede malis, sed contra audentior ito; to a Die,
homo quadratus; An oaken-bough struck with lightning, impavidum ferient: A
Rock, an Anvil, an helmet, etc. Fables are taken (as Symbols from things
natural) from things animate, as an Eagle, Cock, etc. clothing them with speech
and action; such betwixt Men, are Parables. So there are mixtures of all these,
as, Easter said to the Griggs, tarde venerunt. There are also compound
subjects, which they call Emblems, of which Alciat, Sambucus, and many others
have made Volums. Such are also Impresa's of great Men, a vast number whereof
are collected by Typotius and others. Another way of practice is, to apply all
such things as he sees, or as occur in his ordinary business or conversation,
to somewhat of morality, policy, etc. As seeing an Ivy thrust down the wall
upon which it grew, one said, that was the perfect emblem of a flatterer; an
onion having its germe covered with so many scales, represents a man that
conceals his intention under many pretenses, and the like.

2 FOR reading; verse him well in inventive Authors: such are generally all
Paradoxists, Satyrists, such as write one against another, Declamators,
Controvertists, and generally Orators and Poets, as Cicero, Quintilian, Seneca;
I name him last, because, tho his matter be very good, yet he husbands it well,
and spreads it thin. Among the Latin Poets, Lucan, Juvenal, Claudian,
Epigrammatists, etc. Let him also use his own invention before he reads upon
his subject; and in reading set down what his own fancy suggests upon, or
besides, the Author; and let him always read. Cassiodorus reports of Tully,
that he refused to plead when it was expected, because he had not read upon his
subject.

3 FOR imitation; let him imitate those he reads (as is taught in Rhetoric)
by translating, paraphrasing, epitomizing, and composing upon his own subject
somewhat like the other. Give him the same subject with an Author unknown to
him; and then compare his conceits, fancies, reasons, metaphors, etc. with the
Authors. Let him also vary discourses, as an History into a Dialogue, or
Epistle; which take their Arguments from all occasions; as Antenor to Priamus,
to send back Helena. Agan emnon to Menelaus to quit her. So to vary Comedies
and Dialogues into Epistles and Discourses, as Mitio to Demeas to spare his
Son, and the like.

7. 4 FOR Common-places and helping the Invention by them, many have written
very copiously; others think it altogether unuseful. For that experience
testifies; That those, who have passed the course of their studies, and never
understood or practiced this Art, have yet had very good Inventions; that those
who use their fancies, do not at all serve themselves of these common-places,
nor beg at every door for Arguments and Metaphors; that the matter suggested by
these places is only general, or an heap of universal notions, which is rather
a disadvantage then an help. Thus l' Art de penser. But on the contrary, it
must be acknowledged, that all the Ancients, Aristotle, Cicero, etc. made great
account of this; that tho some have great parts, that they can without Art
perform the effects of art, yet all Fields have not a River or a Spring in
them, but some require the diligence of a bucket; that those (whom they called
Sophistae) who governed in their days, made Profession, out of these places,
to teach to discourse upon any subject pro and con, and to say all that could
be spoken concerning it: that many of late days have attained to plausibility
in discourse merely by Lullies art, which is but a few of those common-places;
and those too the most general and indistinct: that all conceptions are drawn
out of these places; and if reason naturally as it were, and of her self runs
to them, it cannot but be very useful (for Art is a more certain guide then
Nature) to make her see her own power, to discover to her self her great
treasure, and to direct her, whither to go for what she wants. For if the Soul
be a great Palace furnished with all necessaries; is it not a considerable
assistance to the general Dispenser, to show him where every thing is disposed
and deposited in its proper place? The sole reason, why these are not more
taught in the Schools, is, because they are included in, and learned together
with, Logic and Philosophy; and tho the use of the Topics in Logic be quite
different from this here intended (which seems to be the mistake of that
Author) yet being the things are the same, it is left to the diligence and
versability of the Understanding, to apply them according to all their uses.
The uses of Topics in Logic and Rhetoric, are to discover the value and force
of a proposition in order to find out the truth, and to produce assent in our
selves or others, either by conviction or persuasion; but here they serve to
procure a right notion and apprehension of things, by considering all that
belongs to them: as also to communicate the same right notions to others; and
by questions to draw forth as many notions as the subject will afford. It is
true also, that these places are general; for being the common springs of wit
and invention, they cannot be otherwise; Invention being the well applying of
general predicates to particular subjects. Thus much also I confess, that these
Topics are not so profitable to them, who already understand Sciences, as to
those who are ignorant, and concerning the usefulnes of them to such, Matteo
Pellegrini (of whose Fon^ del' ingegno I have made much use in this chapter)
tells us; that the Gentleman, for whom he composed that Book, by the use of
it, arrived to such a perfection, as to be able in a short time to write,
without defacing one word, many pages concerning any the meanest subject
proposed to him; to the great admiration of as many as knew him.

It is also to be noted, that some subjects are barren, which notwithstanding
will serve very well for beginners; such are universal, plain, ordinary themes
and propositions, which are to be fertilized by diverse Artifices; chiefly by
clothing them with some rare or unaccustomed circumstances; such as have a show
of novelty or unexpectednes, for nothing else is grateful. As to congratulate
for a degree, marriage, etc. are barren, except there be somewhat particular of
age, severer examination, extraordinary merit, etc. It is also to be noted,
that, tho some persons have such happy Inventions, that they can presently
compare notions, and as it were descant ex tempore upon a subject; yet will
they sometimes be at a loss; and then these Topics will be useful unto them,
tho perhaps not so much as to ordinary wits; who must read, and observe much,
that they may store up a Magazin of conceptions; and practice much also, that
they may readily and easily by their questions pump out what is to serve their
occasions. For every proposition is the answer to some question, and we think
we understand perfectly, when we are able to answer any question concerning our
subject. All subjects also are either of single words, or propositions.

Invention concerning single words consists chiefly in substituting other
single words for it, whether for expressions only, or to raise more matter for
propositions.

In short, the height of the Invention, a single word is capable of, is an high
Metaphor, Catachresis, or Hyperbole. I will give you an example of a single
theme, and how the fancy descants upon, and menageth it through all the
Predicaments, out of Imman. Thesauro, to save my self the labor. His subject is
a Be, dead, in Amber, which he makes a compound subject, and takes first the
several parts, Be, and Amber.

Substantia.

APIS. Animans, fera, avicula, corpusculum vivax, insectum.

ELECTRUM. Gemma inanimis, Heliadum sororum lacrima, arborum sudor, humor
concretus, viscus, gelu.

Quantitas.

AP. Pusilla, brevis, levis, monstrosa.

EL. Gutta, stilla, rara merx, inform corpus, formas se in omnes vertens.

Qualitas.

AP. Flava, auricolor (for first she was iron-colored, till Jove changed that
for golden, because she was his Nurse) sonora, ingeniosa, prudens, sedula,
casta, vilis, metuenda, sonitu minax.

EL. Flavum, mellicolor, illustre, perspicuum, clarum, pretiosum, nobile, a
fluido aridum, tenax, gelidum, fragile, sterile.

Relatio.

AP. Fimo-genita, mellis genitrix, nobilissima insectorum, Jovis nutricula,
fera socialis, Reip. amans, fucorum hostis, Regi fida, Colonis chara; Harpyiae,
Amazoni, Pegaso similis; Aristaei inventum.

EL. Ex populo genitum; matronis carum; speculo, auro, vitro, simile.

Actio and Passio.

AP. Hortos populatur; dulces e floribus succos delibat; furunculos insectatur;
nocuis nocet; telum jaculatur; venena fundit; nectareos molitur favos; facibus
ceras ministrat; aliis mellificat; domos architectatur; Remp. gerit; Regibus
paret; pro Rege militat; fumo necatur.

EL. Magnetica virtute paleas rapit; animalcula illaqueat; labra mordet; oculos
allicit; Phaetontem extinctum deflet; artificum torno expolitur, elaboratur.

Locus and Situs.

AP. Hyblaea, Cecropia, odoris innata floribus, hortorum cultrix, ceratae urbis
inquilina; domi nidificat; dulces nidos fovet.

EL. In Eridani ripa, ad Phaethontis sepulcrum stillat; monilibus and armillis
inseritur; thesauris atque scriniolis servatur.

Motus.

AP. Per fiorea rura volitat, vagatur; semper fugax, quasi aliger equus, and
eques; dum volitat, pugnat,

EL. Trunco haeret and profluit; lentum, segne.

Quando.

AP. Brevis aevi; in castris hyemat; vere novo se prodit; in aurora roscidum
nectar legit.

EL. Aeternum, immortale; vere liquatur; densatur bruma.

Habere.

AP. Pennigera, alata, loricata, armata; tubam and hastam gerit; ipsa telum and
pharetra.

EL. Aurium appendix; virginum gestamen; monilium decus and luxus; inter opes
numeratur.

So joining several of these together, you may call a Be Ingeniosum insectum;
hyblaea hospes; Ales Cecropia; nobilissima simi filia; aurea Jovis altrix;
florum praedo, hirudo; Florae satelles; cerearum aedium architecta; nectaris
propinatrix; mellis opifex; pusilla hortorum Harpyia; volans venefica; loricata
avicula; alata Amazon; volatilis tuba; viva telorum pharetra; surunculorum
terriculum, etc.

And Amber, Pretiosum gelu; luctuosa Eridani gemma; jucunda Heliadum lacrima
and monile; Phaethontis funus; lapideum mel; aridus liquor; concretus fluor;
aurum fragile; gemmeus arborum sudor; gelidus ignis; viscosa lux; avicularum
illex and pedica; flavus palearum magnes; gemma rapax, mordax; fulva Eridani
supellex; lubricae opes, tenaces divitiae; populea spolia; lapis non lapis;
armillarum pupilla; lacrimosum Matronarum delicium, nobile aurium pondus.

Then he joins both together, not considering that the Be is dead.

Substantia.

Nova Metamorphosis! olim flebilis Niobe in saxum, nunc apis flebilem in gemmam
migrat: Mirae deliciae! Apis inter gemmas numeratur: lapis animatur, animal
lapidescit: Medusam vidit apicula; imo eadem Medusa est and lapis: novas natura
docet insitiones, in arbore gemmas, in gemmis apes: prodigiosa fecunditas,
lapis aviculam parturit, etc.

Quantitas.

Myrmecidis anaglyptis adnumerandum opus; apis in gutta. Unica haec apis
rempub. perosa sibi vivit; sola suum implet aviarium, and pusilla se in aula
jactat, etc.

Qualitas.

Fulva apis fulva lucet in gemma; electrum dixeris in electro. Cerne ut gemmeo
radiet fulgore ignobile insectum; dices etiam Apicula est sidus. Alget Apis in
flamma; ardet in glacie: quid enim electrum nisi flammeum gelu? vilissima rerum
Apis electro pretium astruit; nescias utrum utri plus conferat, Electrum Api,
an Apis Electro. Haec pretiosior est captiva quam libera, eo carior quo
clarior. Hem voluptuarius puellarum terror Apis in gemma; de alieno superbit
Apis, luce fulgens non sua.

Relatio.

Jovis altrix praemium alterum tulit, olim aurea, nunc gemmea; imaginem cernis
quam nemo expressit, sine caelo caelatam; nimis ipsa sui amatrix apicula
perpetuo se miratur in speculo.

Actio.

Arbor apim, apis oculos rapit; ex ista gemma pateram confice, Nectar apicula
propinabit. Cerne ut arcto complexu hyblaeam volucrem gemma soveat; dices
electrum esse Adamantem. Ad Phaethontis sepulerum dolens apicula lacrimis
obruitur. Aucupio delectantur Heliades, viscus est lacrima. Incauta apis in
lacrimis invenit insidias. In furto deprehensa gemmeis compedibus tenetur
apicula. Non impune arbores pupugit ut flores. Florum praedo fit arborum
praeda. Avarae volucri viscus est gemma. Electrum vidit Apis, mel opinata in
illecebris laqueum reperit. Dolosas experta gemmas, viscata munera, etc.

Locus and Situs.

Gemmea in theca latet venenum. In gemma latitat fera: and opes timentur. Apum
Regina regiam invenit qualem nec Semiramis. Auream domum sibi condidit Nero,
Apis gemmeam.

Sumtuosa haec Apis in gemma nidificat. In speculo excubias ducit. Gemmam
custodit apis qua custoditur. Apim coluere Aegyptii, apem avari. Infidae infida
latebra latentem prodit. Ubi asylum sperabat carcerem invenit, etc.

Tempus.

Strenua bellatrix apis in gemma hyemat, aestivat in glacie. Brevis aevi
avicula lacrimis aeternatur. Nuper avis, nunc lapis.

Motus.

Vernis fessa laboribus apis vacationem obtinuit in gemma. Castrorum desertrix
in ostro cubat. A lento velox tenetur. In liquido haeret, in sicco not at.
Nimis alte volitans Icario lapsu naufragium fecit. Effugere si potest, nollet,
illustrem sortita carcerem. Rara avis volucri gemma, etc.

Habitus.

Novum indumenti genus, vestita est apis and nuda pellucet. Jam matronales
inter luxus feram numeres, etc.

If you add to these another circumstance, the Be dead in Amber, you discover
a new field of matter.

Substantia.

Venesica hic jacet cui gemma venenum suit. Titulo non eget hic tumulus,
latentem cernis. Lethalis hic succus, quam necuit, servat; dubites, apisne
mortua sit an electrum vivat; exanimatum corpus suum animavit sepulorum. Hoc
cadaver, uti Hectoreum, pretio redimitur, etc.

Quantitas.

Pusillum hoc sepulorum Mausoleo insultat. Ingens miraculum apis mortua. Unica
jam non est Phoenix, alteram ostendit Eridanus.

Qualitas.

Obscura olim avicula, dum extinguitur, lucet. Hoc cadavere nihil pulerius,
nihil hac umbra clarius; Flysium habet in gemma. Luxus est sic perire.
Pretiosum hoc funus invidiam morti detraxit.

Relatio.

Gemmeum apiculae typum cernis in protypo. Sese ipsa finxit and fixit. Narcissi
fatum experta est apis in speculo mersa. Hanc puellae vivam oderunt, mortuam
colunt.

Actio and Passio.

Exigua haec artifex majori ingenio cadaveri cavit quam corpori; ceream sibi
domum molita, sepulcrum gemmeum. Nec lacrimis eget nec face; in lacrimis
conditur, in tumulo lucet. Crudelis Nympharum pietas! innocuam apim dum lugent,
necant: hanc amore an odio peremerint, nescias, complexu praefocarunt. Mortuae
Heliades hostem occiderunt. Mirum, auceps in gemma latuit.

Locus and Situs.

Huic cadaveri sepulorum non debes sed serinium. nobili leto laeta volucris
fimo-genita in gemma moritur. Sarcophagi pulcritudine capta mortem solicitavit.
Hunc tumulum violabit nemo; pretium vetat. Rapax volucris rapaci conditur
gemma; florum harpyia sic condi debuit.

Motus.

Fugacem licet aviculam lenta mors tenuit. Casses abdiderat inter gemmas. Diu
pennis velificata carybdim reperit in gemma. Novum inalum! in lapide mergi.

Tempus.

Quod immortalis sit apis nil superis debet, sed morti. Aeternitatem Phario
Regi astruit Myrrha, api Electrum, utrique lacrima. Lethali hoc succino mors
apem perdidit, Apis mortem.

Habere.

Gemmeum cadaver cerne; tales Proserpina gemmas gestitat. Inops victavit apes,
dives moritur.

Thus much for single words; it follows concerning Propositions or Sentences:
these consist of subject, copula, and predicate. The subject in Invention is
either kept, and other copula's and predicates applied to it; or changed to
raise more matter; and then is substituted in its place either,

1. SYNONYMUM: as for little, take epitome, compendium, pigmeus, homuncio,
punctum, atomus, etc. or some other of those expressions, found out in the
places for single words.

2. GENUS; as for treachery, take deceit.

3. SPECIES; as for treachery, take Treason against the Prince, or Country, as
Tarpeias; against enemies, as Sinon; or against friends, as Bocchus's betraying
Jugurth to Sylla.

4. THE Cognata; as for treachery take feigned friendship.

5. Or its simile's; as of a Fisher baiting his hook; a Coy-duck intising those
of its own kind into the danger. For beginning; Root, fountain, spring, (as of
a watch) seed.

6. OPPOSITES; as fidelity.

The Copula, for so we will at present call those Verbs auxiliary, by some of
which all questions are made, and by which the predicatos, whether Verb or
Noun, are joined to the subject. These are, am, was, with their diverse cases
and persons, have, had; do, did: make, made: suffer: shall, should: will,
would: may, might: can, could: owe, ought: uses or is wont. These again vary
questions by the Tenses or times; present, past, or future: and both these a
long or short while: such are these questions, Is it? was it? has it bin
always? lately, or a long time ago? will it be? would it be? may it be? might
it be? etc. ought it or behooves it to be? uses it, or is it wont to be? Again
all these are either affirmative or negative. Is it not? was it not? has it
not bin? They are also varied with If, as, if it be, if it were or were not
what would follow? If Alexander, had fought with the Romans? If the Sun go out
of the Zodiac?

For Predicates, ordinarily Authors do prescribe no other Common-places for
Invention then the Predicaments; which indeed do supply answers to very many
questions, but not to all. I have therefore rather chosen to follow Matteo
Pellegrini, who reduces all Predicates that can be applied to a subject (as
near as his observation could reach) to twelve heads, or (as he calls them)
Fountains and Springs of Invention; which are these. 1. The relation or
commerce between the object and human faculties. 2. Constituents or parts. 3.
The causes, principles, or efficients. 4. The End. 5. The Action. 6. Passion.
7. Quality. 8. Quantity. 9. Time. 10. Place. 11. The Subjects. 12. The
Correspondents. Of which I shall speak in order, showing what sub-heads every
place contains, and how matter may be drawn out of them by questions. Yet I
shall not set down all that is to be said, for that were both impossible and
unnecessary; but sufficient to make the use of them, and of all not set down,
understood and practicable. The manner to use them is this; set down the common
place with its particular heads upon a several table or page; till by frequent
perusing and practicing they become ready and familiar to you. Then, by the
auxiliary Verbs put in form of a question, find out such notions contained in
each place as are agreeable and fitting to your subject: change also the
subject (as often as you have need) by some of the former ways, and apply the
questions after the same manner to them also.

1. COMMONPLACE. The Relation of the object to the faculties of man, is as
diverse as the faculties are; 1. Sense external, internal. 2. Understanding. 3.
Expression. 4. Affection. Concerning sense (your subject being the object of
some of them) are these and infinite other questions, v. g. a Battle. Have I
ever seen it? at least painted? or described? might I have seen it? where? how
long ago? how often? had I seen it, what would it have wrought in me? I would
I had seen it, for, How can I imagine it? what notion have I of it? has my
friend, or stranger, or acquaintance seen it? had he seen it, or not seen it,
what would have followed? has he dreamed of it? If a Battle be so terrible
when heard, much more when seen; yet more when present in it. Could virtue be
seen how would it allure all the World! it is pity a lie cannot be seen, that
all men might beware of it. Again, the passion of the sense affords such
questions as these. The Comet, did it deceive, weaken, blind, astonish,
confound, please, comfort, cheer, the sense?

Semper ego Auditor tantum? nunquamne reponam,
Vexatus toties rauci Theseide Codri? etc.
2. CONCERNING Understanding, or the internal faculty of knowing. The actions
whereof are thinking, imagination, apprehension, comprehension, perfected when
we have a complete notion, or Idea of our object; this by many men (an original
of many errors) is confounded with assent. Assent or belief that the object is
so, or not so; hereto belong also doubting, opinion, beleiving or crediting
another, science or perfect knowledge, deceit, error, prevision or foresight,
remembrance, there being nothing that falls not out to be the object of the
understanding, etc. Concerning these, we frame commonly these with infinite
other questions. v. g. Columbus's finding out the new World. How came it into
his thought? did any think of it before? what imagination or conception was
formed of it? why were not such, as before him had that imagination, excited to
undertake it? did the Ancients think it impossible? did they doubt, whether it
were not all Sea? did they believe their Predecessors that denied the
Antipodes? how did Columbus first assent to it? what Arguments, what
Authorities moved him? if he had not thought upon it, would any other? A thing
so probable did it find many abetters? etc. How did it move, work upon
Columbus, when he first gave his full consent? what Resolutions did he take
upon it? etc.

3. EXPRESSION, or that faculty which discovers our minds to others,
comprehends Words, languages, spoken or written; our own or foreign; ancient
or modern; copious or barren; elegant or rude; pleasant or harsh; perspicuous
or obscure; ambiguous, equivocal, synonymous, proper, natural, figurative.
Again, verse or prose; narration, interpretation, question: instructing,
disputing, determining, affirming, denying, proposing, answering, confuting,
amplifying, exhorting, praying, commanding, advising, congratulating,
condoling, etc. All these again are true or false; likely or unlikely; doubtful
or certain.

To this head are referred also all expressions not by words; as by painting,
graving, symbols, emblems, characters, ciphers, hieroglyfics, impresas; as also
signs with the hand, eye, or other motion of the body; either natural, or by
consent of general custom, or particular correspondence. As also all natural
expressions of passions, as sighing, laughing, etc.

V. g. Being to speak of America and its Inhabitants; I ask what is the name of
the Country? what language it is? who imposed it? whence derived or took he it?
what is its true signification? what the reason of imposing it? what synonymas
to it? is it equivocal? who has writ of it? in what language? how much? etc.

Again, is there any Map of it? what does it resemble? is it painted any where?
etc.

4. AFFECTION has these sub-heads, whence questions may be suggested. Delight
and trouble; pain and pleasure; love and hatred; desire or aversion; hope or
fear; gratitude or ingratitude; anger, admiration, veneration, contemt,
indignation, compassion, complacency, and in short all other motions, or
passions of the Soul. In reference whereto I demand, if v. g. a visit of a
friend has ever, and when, and how often, delighted me? whether it be a thing
desirable, joyful, etc. to me? or if to any other, and to whom? etc. If he
should come, how would my passions be affected? what content? etc.

II. SECOND common place of Constituents contains three heads. 1. of
essential degrees of Genus's, Species, etc. 2. of Particulars of its Species;
and 3. of parts constitutive.

The first has subheads all Essential predicates. Beginning first with ens,
enquiring if your subject (v. g. an Unicorn) be, or if there be such a thing.
So descending, if it be a substance, or accident. If a substance, whether
corporeal, or incorporeal. If an accident, whether quantity, quality, motion
(action and passion) relation, time, or place; running through the species of
your genus till you come to your subject it self. These subdivisions of every
genus are to be found in the predicaments. For example, an Eagle. Is there such
a thing? a substance or accident? is it a substance created? corporeal?
compounded? living? mortal? animal? irrational? volative? wild? that flies
single, not in flocks? with a hooked-beak? living by prey? etc. So concerning
the first predicate, many questions offer themselves. As, War is a thing, no
great matter if it were not in the World. Were it not that we see it acted
every day, we should esteem it a fabulous chimera; such as Cerberus, and the
Furies. Were it not, from how many calamities should we be free? Oh that there
were never known the names of quarrels, dissentions, hatreds, fightings! but
that love, charity, and peace reigned every where. What sort of entity is War?
pursuing it through all its differences; it is an Action, not peaceable or
profitable, but troublesome and offensive: offensive upon deliberation, not by
Nature, as cold is contrary to heat: for interest of state, to distinguish it
from robbery or private quarrels. Menaged with open violence, not secret plots,
with armed multitudes, against an enemy that defends himself with a competent
Army, etc.

The second suggesteth to us considerations, if the subject be one or many,
simple or various; and of how many sorts, v. g. how many sorts of Eagles? of
War? by Sea, by Land, offensive, defensive; just, unjust; horse, or footfights;
fair or barbarous. So for particulars, the War of the Turks against the
Venetians, English against Hollanders, French against Spaniards.

The third of Constituent parts, whether essential, integral; and these
homogeneal or heterogeneal. Adjuncts, as hairs are parts of Beasts, leaves of
Trees, and these either excrementitious, or else perfective and for ornament;
as pillars are parts of noble Buildings, Theaters, Fountains, Piazza's, etc. of
great Cities. Or parts of order, as beginning, middle, end: superior, inferior;
internal, external, etc. The Soul, has it parts? may it have? why has it or
has it not? if it had or had not, what sort of parts? how many, etc.

III. THE third Commonplace is of Causes, efficients or principles, to which
are reduced, occasions, instruments, means, or any concurrents, assistants, or
accessories to produce the effect. These again are remote, near, or immediate;
universal, particular: primary principal, or secundary and less principal:
total, partial, separate, conjoined: internal, external: necessary, contingent,
fortuitous, intended: weak, strong: which may, or may not, be hindered: easy,
hard: possible, impossible: prepared, unprepared: dispositions, etc. Again, all
these are either of the thing it self, or the thing being such as it is,
clothed with accidents and circumstances.

In human actions also are other heads, as the Person, our selves, or some
other, friend, neighbor, stranger, enemy; which work either by chance, by
reason, by passion, and these love, hatred, etc. by force, necessity, or
violence; by custom, by error or mistake, by opportunity, etc. as War: by whom
or between whom made? who the occasion? what moved to it? what was the true
cause? what the pretense? whence began it? with what Arms and Forces was it
menaged? what instruments or furniture? what conveniences? how many artillery?
how many horse? how many foot? how many shot? what stock of money? what
strength? what experience? what counsel? who the General? what a one for skill,
courage, fortune? what Underofficers of all sorts? how qualified? was he
constrained to fight? did he undertake the charge voluntarily? out of duty?
ambition? does he menage it by intelligence? treachery? or force?

IV. THE fourth Commonplace is of the End and Means, or of Good; for the end
of every Agent and every action is Good either real or seeming; near or far
off; private or public.

Of Ends there are several degrees or subordinations. The ultimate or supreme
end. The chiefest is the glory of God the Creator: next, the perfection of the
universe. And these are universal of all things. Next follow more particular or
mediate ends, the conservation of the Species; the conservation of the
Individuum: its delight or pleasure; excellency; and convenience; honestum, or
duty; profit to the Agent, his friends, neighbors, the public, his Country, etc.

All natural Agents, though they work for an end, yet intend it not, but are
directed to it. Only man, being a rational creature, knows and aims at an end.
And the end of the man is one; of his Art, another: as the statuary makes a
statue to get money, etc. but of his Art is to resemble the Archetype. Of men's
intentions or aims, some are principal, others accessory; some ordinary, others
accidental. Pompey married Caesar's daughter; not for the love of progeny, nor
for her beauty, or dowry; but for his own ambition, an accidental end to
marriage. Some direct, others perverse; as a Father recounts to his Son the
worthy actions of his Ancestors, to provoke him to the like; which he perverts
to pride, libertinism, dis-subjection to Laws and Magistrates, and insolence
toward his inferiors. And this happens sometimes out of error and mistake; as
when an Orator diverts his Art to get applause; sometimes also out of malice
and wickedness, as when a General desires Victory to satisfy his private
revenge. When a man goes to Church to look upon an hansom woman, etc.

Again of ends, some are ultimate and principal, others secundary,
instrumental, or means to obtain the other. As a Prince gives out money, to form
an Army, to fight an enemy, to overcome him, to take away his dominion, to
seize it for himself. This is the ultimate end, the other are means. Of these
also some are proper and convenient for the end; as if he, that designs to be a
Soldier, learns to menage an Horse, to understand and use arms, to endure
hunger, cold, wearines, wounds, watching, etc. Others are improper, as to
quarrel, to swagger, to be drunk, fight, kill and slay, every one he meets. To
be an Orator, the proper means are to study reasoning and argumentation; to
imitate Cicero, Demosthenes, etc. to observe the best way of disposing his
matter, clothing it with good words, phrases, figures, etc. the contrary and
improper way, or rather impediment, is to scrape together a parcel of
well-sounding words, a few snaps of wit, etc.

Again, some ends are obtained, others hindered; as a man desires health and
strength, sed grandes patinae, tucetaque crassa annuere his superos vetuere. A
Father desires his Son to be virtuous and prudent, and provides him Masters,
Books, etc. but the young man abandons himself to ill company, etc. hindered by
our own folly, opposition of friends, enemies. etc. or fortuitous accidents.

Questions concerning the End are such as these. Wherefore? why so? to what
end, purpose, intention? for whose sake? for what good does, works, makes,
he this? what shall he reap by it? has he obtained his end? hops he, shall
he obtain it; what means takes he to obtain it? are they rational, prudent,
proper? who can, has, will, hinder him? or it?

V. THE 5. Commonplace is of Actions. Whereof some are immanent, when the
Agent is also the patient, commonly expressed by Verbs neuters in Latin. Such
are, to grow, to fail, to move, to rest, to want, to have, to declame, to
study, etc. to think, understand, etc. Others are transient, when the Agent and
Patient are diverse, aad are expressed by Verbs transitives, as striking,
heating, etc.

Again, some actions concern being; as v. g. Pride, what does, can, shall,
will, etc. it produce? [Note that all the auxiliary Verbs have their greatest
use and force in this Classe] generate, perfect, preserve, consume, destroy?
Conversation begets similitude in manners, mutual confidence, uniting
interests, conserves friendship, and is apt to procure advancement, etc.
Debauchery consumes the estate, destroies health, etc.

Others concern qualities, and indeed all actions proceeds from the virtues or
faculties of their Agents; whether natural or acquisite; and Actions are as
various, and copious, as Qualities are. As a wise man gives good counsel, and
does his actions wisely. A young man does, can, may, is wont to do foolishly.
Strong Wine, does, is apt to inebriate. In action, the place, time, and
quantity often afford matter considerable. He can speak more boldly in an
Alehouse, then at Court. The Sun warmeth and enlightneth (because bigger) more
then Venus; more also when nearer. How does it move, act? by it self, by
another? by Nature, force, chance; as the Efficient, end, pretense, etc.
circularly? directly? how in youth? how in age? how at first? how afterward?
slowly or hastily? constantly or by intermissions? equally or unequally?
mediately or immediately?

To action are reduced also Consequents or Effects, which answer to the
Question, what does it, or he, work? and of these some are made, some are done;
some endure no longer then the action it self; as, the room is no longer light
then it is enlightened. If the Auditors mind him not, all is done, as soon as
the Preacher has spoke his Sermon.

Others remain after the action is ended; as health remains, tho the Medicine
have ended; Science remains, when the study is finished. Science gets honor,
honor emploiment, emploiment riches. A Prince what does he? what ought he, etc.
to do? to administer Justice. What will that do, or is it apt to produce? to
maintain plenty, security, peace. What are the effects of these, naturally,
usually, always, continually? the peoples love, and readiness to spend their
lives and estates for him. Hence no danger of insurrections, rebellions, etc.
he will live in great honor, and reverence with his Neighbors, etc. The golden
apple, thrown by discord amongst the Gods at a feast, what consequents had it,
might it have? etc. delight of the guests: Emulation and desire of the three
Goddesses: Choosing of Paris to be Judge: Mercuries descent to carry him the
message: His undertaking it: his beholding the three Goddesses, etc. So the
immediate effect of the Sun is heat, thence the warming of the Earth, raising
vapors, thence clouds, rain. Again, from heat, Seasons of the year, generation
of all plants, metals, etc.

VI. THE sixth Commonplace is of Passion, or receiving an Action. But
especially suffering, which is chiefly of evil. To this belongs being made,
being done; was the World, could it be, could it be made, from eternity? the
rebuilding of the City, is it, may it, could it be done, finished, perfected,
destroyed, consumed and changed into better, worse?

Why do some men grow as fat as Ehud, none as big as Goliath? Qualities. The
Moon, because receiving her light from the Sun, is subject to Eclipses,
changes, full, etc. Priamus, because old, lived to be spoiled of his Kingdom,
to see his Sons slain, his City destroyed, etc. The Ethiopian is burnt with
heat, the Laplander frozen with cold.

In sum, what ever heads belong to action, may be also easily applied to
Passion.

What does the object work upon us? our senses? etc. what do all Simples and
Medicines; Air, and all things (called by Physicians) preternatural? all things
edible? etc. work upon us in order to health and sickness? what do all Arts
work? what all virtues, vices, estates, ages, sexes, etc. work? well? ill? or
indifferently?

VII. THE 7th Commonplace is of Qualities, which has these heads. 1. Good and
evil in themselves, good is perfect, worthy, noble, excellent, happy, etc. Evil
the contrary. In respect of others, necessary, helpful, superfluous,
profitable, agreeable, hurtful, etc. as Lucifer was created a most noble and
excellent spirit; but afterward became unfortunate, wicked, dangerous,
malicious, in endeavoring to diminish the glory of God, and devising mischief
to man. Full of hatred against Heaven, and deceit against Earth, etc. by which
means he is become the vilest, and most detestable of all Creatures.

2. QUALITIES occult, which are known only by their actions. What is the power,
faculty, etc. of the Loadstone? to draw Iron, to make it move toward the
North, etc. who could believe the power of Circe, to change Men into Hogs?

3. QUALITIES sensible, such are beauty, uglines; figures of all sorts; light,
darkness; colors of all sorts, natural, artificial; white, black, etc. for
hearing, sounds of all sorts, shrill, loud, skreeking, whistling, din, noise,
etc. So for smells of all sorts, and tastes: also tangible qualities, as heat,
cold; dry, moist: heavy, light; hard, soft; liquid, solid, thin, thick, subtle,
gross, clear, etc. and all these natural, or adventitious. As Lucretia was
beautiful naturally, etc.

4. QUALITIES of the mind, faculties, or powers natural, or accidents, as in
the understanding, perspicacity, sagacity; memory, tenacious, treacherous:
invention, ready, slow: the affections also and passions: virtues and vice
belong to this head.

5. ADJUNCTS; as naked, clothed, armed, adorned, trimmed; not men only, but
Houses, Cities, Sepulchers, Fountains, and the like.

6. SITUATION; as Cloth is tenter'd, folded, etc. a Pillar upright, leaning,
fallen, hanged up, etc. a living creature stands, sits, lies, kneeleth,
etc.

7. RELATIONS; as Lord, Subject, Judge, Advocate, accused, Magistrate, Master,
Servant, Scholar, teacher: married, unmaried; rich, poor, etc. noble, ignoble;
glorious, in disgrace, etc.

VIII. THE 8th Commonplace is Quantity; this is easily and vulgarly known with
its species. To it therefore belong number, one, many, few, etc. v. g. How many
Suns are there? is it never seen double, or triple? why can there be no more?
if there were more, what would follow? is it divisible or indivisible?
extended? how far? how many parts has it? how great is it? how large, long,
high, thick? greater then the Earth? how often? how is it to be measured? how
long has it lasted? is it diminished or increased? has it any weight?

IX. THE 9th Commonplace of Time, has these heads, always, sometimes, v. g.
what is the duration of the Creator? he has always bin. Is it possible he
should be not eternal? if he were not eternal, what would follow? why is he
eternal? can any thing be eternal besides him? Duration is varied into past,
present, and future. Prudence considers things past, that it may govern the
present; and makes conjectures from both, that it may well menage the future.
The past is considered by memory; the present is in acting; in the future are
concerned our hopes, fears, providence, cautiousnes, etc.

2. DIVERSE measures, of time; as ages, years, months, days, hours, moments,
and parts of time as Morning, Evening; Spring, Summer; Infancy, Childhood, etc.
the beginning, middle, ending of the Duration of any thing.

3. OCCASION, as favorable, opportune, accustomed, purposed, etc. with their
contraries.

X. THE 10th Commonplace is where, or place. To which belong. 1. The several
parts of the Universe; as Air, Earth, Fire, Water, Heavens, Firmament, etc.
North, South, etc. Zones, Climates, etc. Land, Sea, Islands, etc. Countries,
Asia, Africa, etc. India mittit ebur, molles sua thura Sabaei. Where shall we
find deceit? in Shops and Markets, in narrow Souls. Where subtilty? in the
Genoueses. Where Industry? in Holland.

2. PLACE is either Proper, common; due belonging to another. A Scholar in a
Market is a fish on dry land. Place also is natural, violent, accidental; where
it ought, is wont; it may safely, well, be. Our Country, dwelling, etc.

3. DIFFERENCES of place; before, behind; on the right, left etc. hand; above,
under; over against, toward, etc. near to, far off; in, by, at, etc. Where
stood Carthage? Italiam contra, Tyberinaque ostia. Where is water to be had? in
the Fountain, River, Sea, Well, etc.

4. QUALITIES of place, cold, hot; fruitful, barren; clean, dirty; champaigne,
mountainous; tilled, untilled, sandy, chalky, etc. desert, inhabited.

5. CIVIL places, as an House, Town, Village, Villa, Shop, Marketplace,
Street, Theater, Church, Hall. Public or private. Sacred or profane, solitary,
inhabited, our own, another. Where may a man plant, build, etc. upon his own.
Where do flatterers frequent? the Court.

6. THE power or property of place. Vervecum in patria, crassoque sub aere
natus.

XI. THE 11th Commonplace is the subject to which any thing belongs, or
wherein any thing is. There is nothing that may not be the subject of another.
The cause may be of its propriety. Virtuous actions to whom are they proper? in
whom to be found? in prudent persons. What things are hot? those exposed to the
Sun, are near to the fire, are in motion. Who are cunning? they who have much
experience. The effects and signs. Who are noble? they who do nothing basely,
or craftily. Who are true Princes? they who govern for the good of their
People. Who are subject to anger? they who have a sharp nose, curled hair, red
face, etc.

Substances are most properly the subject of other things. As God is the
fountain of goodness, the Angels receive it immediately from him. Men and other
Creatures are good each in his kind.

So for all other things. What things are, may be, use to be, ought to be,
accounted long? [Actions and Passions] a Journey from England to China. The
works of Tostatus Abulensis. Delay of what is earnestly desired. [Time] the
lives of Men before the Flood. [Piace] the way from Paris to Constantinople.
What things are weak and feeble. [Quantity] things small and little. [Quality]
sick persons, Women, pale persons, fearful, tired, etc. [Action] Children, old
Men. [Place] the Asiatics, etc.

XII. THE last Commonplace is Correspondents, which has many under it, as

1. Before and after; first, second, third, etc. last: beginning, middle,
ending. More or less. Whether is before, Saturn or the Sun? in dignity and
perfection the Sun is before: in place descending Saturn is before. In time
they are equal.

2. The same and diverse or different. Virgil was the Author of the Georgies,
who of the Aeneids? the same. How does his Poems differ from Homers,
Theocritus, Hesiod, Tasso? etc.

3. Equal and unequal: double, triple, etc. half, and generally all Proportions.

4. Like, unlike; contrary, opposite; and these varied with more and less.
Alexander and Jul. Caesar were like in boldness, unlike in stature; of contrary
dispositions. Whether was more prudent? less fortunate? Was Plato a better
Philosopher, or Dionysius a worse Tyrant? the Astrologues prediction of Caesar's
death, brings to mind the like of the Earl of Pembrok.

5. Union or conjunction in the same action; as when two act one upon another.
Mutually, as two enemies, or emulators seeking to undermine one another. Or
when both act upon a third, as two Rivals toward the same Mistress. Or both
suffer from a third, as two servants under the same Master. Or one act and the
other receive or suffer, as the Master and Scholar, Judge and accused.

6. Together, near, far of: antecedent, concomitant, subsequent, either in
place, dignity or time. Christmas brings to mind good cheer, mirth, jollity. A
feast suggests Meats, Cooks, Fish, Foul, Flesh, Sawces, Dishes, Chargers,
Wines, Cups, Plates, etc. The Spring brings in Summer, Autumn, Winter. Caesar
makes me think of Brutus, Cassius, Pompey, etc.

CHAP. XII. Brief Directions for Elocution.
I Beg the Readers pardon, if, contrary to my own design, I here subjoin to the
discourse of invention, a few lines in order to regulate our speaking and
writing, what we have invented. And the rather, because amongst the very many
Books of Rhetoric, I have not seen any, that declares the differences and
reasons of Styles and Figures so exactly as Eman. Thesauro. Out of him
therefore, for the greatest part, I have drawn this short scheme and prospect;
whereby any, even meanly practiced, capacities, may be able to discern and judge
of what is well, and Orator-like written or spoken; and consequently himself
also to imitate the Eloquentest Authors,

There are then diverse manners of speaking and writing.

1. CONCISELY, in few short abrupt Sentences, as men ordinarily speak in common
conversation, without any art, or order. As

Dic mihi Damaeta, cujum pecus? An Melibaei?
Non, verum Aegonis. Nuper mihi tradidit Aegon.
Such is very frequent in the Comedians.

Vos isthaec intro anferte: abite. Sosia
Adesdum. Paucis te volo.
Dixi, audivistis, tenetis, judicate.
2. SOMEWHAT artificially but imperfectly; 1. without any observation of
numbers, correspondence, measure, etc. when a period has no certain bounds,
but goes on till the matter be ended, keeping the mind of the Auditor still in
suspense, till all is said which is to say; which when it will be, the Auditor
cannot divine, because he cannot foresee where the speakers design will
determine. Such are the beginnings of most of S. Paul's Epistles. Such is that
beginning of Cicero's Oration pro Caelio. Si quis Judices forte adsit, ignarus
legum, etc. till you come to quibus otiosis, ne in communi quidem otio, liceat
esse. So in that pro Milone beginning at Occidi, occidi non Sp. Maelium etc.
unto non modo vestibulo privaret, sed omni aditu and lumine. So in Catone
Majore. Plus apud me Antiquorum authoritas valet, etc. unto per visum ex
Africano audisse dicebat.

Such is that Dithirambique scene in Senecas Oedipus which begins,

Effusam redimite comam nutante Corimbo
Mollia Nisaeis armati brachia thyrsis. etc.
Such that of Virgil in his Silenus.

Namque canebat uti magnum per inane coacta, etc. And Aeneid. 6. Principio
caelum ac terras, camposque liquentes, etc. Such is most of the Historians
manner of writing.

This fashion of speech the Greeks called Oration pendens, Ar. Rhet. l. 3. c. 9.
such when an Athenian Ambassador used at Sparta, the Senate replied, the first
part of your Oration is gone out of our minds, and the second never entered in.

4. AFTERWARD Thrasimacus, or whoever he was, that first observed the
pleasingnes in Lyrics to proceed from their pauses and measures, began to
practse the same in Prose; and to mince those great and unlick'd masses into
shorter and rounder periods. Of these, that, which consists of one entire sense
only, and is not divided into members, (such as are most of Senecas) is called
by Aristotle Periodus supina: and by reason of the omission of the transitions,
and the frequent repetition of the same matter in several words, is by most
Orators rejected. Wherefore others, out of more diligent observation of what
was pleasing, changed those round and incoherent periods into many more concise
members: carving them, as it were, into diverse clauses and parcels; which were
also made correspondent and commensurate one to another. So that they became
neither entire, nor yet maimed; not metrical, yet not without meeter; not in
feet, yet not altogether loose; without Verse, not without rythme; verse
compared with other prose, prose compared to verses. This came not in fashion
amongst the Romans till the latter end of Tullies time; which made his first
Orations not to be so eloquent as his latter; and himself to complain that he
was going out of the World when he began to understand Rhetoric. And of some
Orators in his time he says; In iis erat admirabilis cursus orationis, ornata
sententiarum concinnitas non erat. i. e. they had a wonderful fluency in their
style, choice words, and round full periods, but they wanted the neat
distribution of them into parts and members. The first is like an head of
excellent hair, but hanging down, and flagging; this other like the same hair
disposed and made up into rings and curles. Examples of these are infinite in
Plinies Panegyric.

4. THIS Harmony or correspondence of the clauses of a Period consists in three
things,

1. Equality of the members. 2. Contraposition of the words. 3. Similitude of
terminations.
1. Equality is, when the diverse clauses of a period consist of equal number of
words, or of syllables, or times, (two short syllables being equal to one long)
which is altogether as graceful. As Speremus quae volumus; quod acciderit
feramus. Cic. Alterum optare crudelitatis est, alterum servare clementiae.
Superbia in front; ira in oculis; pallor in corpore; in ore impudentia. Plin.
Si quid obtigerit, aequo animo paratoque moriar; neque enim potest accidere
turpis mors forti viro; neque immatura Consulari; neque misera sapienti. Cic.

2. Contraposition, antithesis, is a conversion or retorsion of the same words
in diverse clauses of the same period. For the same words are severally (and
often contrarily) joined, to make as it were a seeming contradiction, or
paradox at least. As

Saepius accidit ut imprudentes felixiter, prudentes infeliciter agant.
Inselix Dido nulli been nupta marito;
Hoc pereunte fugis, hoc fugiente peris.
Stultus prudentibus, prudens stultis, visus.
Sometimes also words of a contrary signification are joined together elegantly
in one periodus supina. As, Inclinata resurgo. Carpit and carpitur una. Qui
spectavit vulnera vulnus habet. Sparta ibi muros habet ubi non habet.

Sometimes words signifying contrary things are placed in diverse clauses of the
same period. As, Aut vivos amplifica, aut mortuos derelinque.

Alba ligustra cadunt, vaccinia nigra leguntur.

Sometimes they are placed in manner of a Dilemma. Morere, si casta es, viro;
si incesta, amori.

Jupiter aut falsus pater est, aut crimine verus.

3. Similitude of terminations, whether. 1. by iteration of the same words in
several clauses. 2. Of the same cases and persons of nouns and verbs, though
not the same words, yet of the same or like sound. Of the Spartans at
Thermopylae.

Trecenti sumus, sed viri, sed armati, sed Lacones, sed ad Thermopylas; nunquam
vidi plures trecentos. Of the same, Nos sine deliciis educamur, sine muris
vivimus, sine vita vincimus. This correspondence is sometimes in one word,
sometimes in 2, 3, 4; and 5 sometimes, but rarely.

Indignus cui vel improbi been vel probi male dicant.

Dum laurum acquisivit regiam, palmam amisit popularem.

Vel in negotio sine periculo, vel in otio cum dignitate esse possint. Aeque
nocent and qui nolentibus vitam officiose impertiunt, and qui volentibus mortem
malitiose negant.

An tu me per hos in patriam revocare potuisti, ego te per eosdem in patria
retinere non potero?

5. BESIDES these, there are two other sorts of figures, or ornaments of
speech. The first are such as move the affections, and persuade as well as
delight, and therefore may well be called Pathetical. The second are such as
consist in ingenious expressions in the words themselves.

Pathetical are those figures, which serve to express some passion, or other
operation of the mind; as the imagination, understanding, etc. whether they
concern apprehension, appetite, anger, or any other affection whatsoever. Such
are,

1. Cognitio, to this belong these and the like expressions. Agnosco, audio,
intelligo, scio, experior, video, etc. Agnosco, agnosco; victum est Chaos. Sen.
Nunc scio quid sit amor. Virg. Nescio quo pacto fieri dicam. Cic.

2. Demonstration, to which belong en, ecce, adspice, audite, etc. En quo
discordia cives perduxit miseros! En queis, etc. Virg. Intuemini huic erutos
oculos, illi confractos pedes; quid exhorrescitis? sic iste miseretur.

3. Narratio, to which belong, dicam, enarro, etc. Favete linguis; carmina non
prius audita Musarum sacerdos Virginibus puerisque canto. Hor. -- Nunc qua
ratione quod instat confieri possit, paucis adverte, docebo. Hospes, disce
novum mortis genus.

4. Affirmatio, est labor, non nego; pericula magna, fateor; multae insidiae
sunt bonis, verissime dictum. Cic. Affirmo tibi, Caie Mari, non sic
restitisset. Qum.

Negatio. Nego esse quicquam a testibus dictum, quod etc.

Jole meis captiva germanos dabit? non.

5. Ironia. Ni fallor, feminas ferrum decet.

6. Aposiopesis. Novimus and qui te.

7. Praeteritio. Non dico te a sociis pecunias accepisse; non sum in eo
occupatus, quod civitates, regna, domos omnium depeculatus es; surta, rapinas
omnes tuas omitto.

8. Juramentum. Per has lacrymas dextramque tuam te. Virg.

Testatio. Vos, Dii Patrii, penates, testor, integro me animo ac libero P.
Sullae causam defendere.

9. Animadversio, epitasis. A reflecting upon what was said before, or
animadverting upon some circumstance of what preceded. Obrepsisti ad honores
commendatione fumosarum imaginum; upon which he animadverts, Quarum nihil
habebas simile praeter colorem. Cic. in Pis.

Tu intrare illum Senatum poteris, O Tulli, in quo Pompeium non sis visurus? tu
illam togam induere, quae armis cessit? Sen. in Suas.

Regina quondam ancilla nunc quidem tua.

10. Parenthesis.

11. Correctio. Antronium in campo vidimus, and quid dico? vidisse nos? Ego
vidi.

12. Repetitio. Commotus non es, cum tibi matter pedes amplexaretur; non es
commotus.

13. Admiratio. Novum monstrum! integer alitur, debiles alunt. Sen.

14. Exclamatio.

15. Extenuatio. Levia memoravi nimis; haec virgo feci. Leve est quod actum est.

16. Commemoratio. O Mysis, Mysis, etiam nunc scripta illa dicta mihi sunt in
animo.

17. Praesagitio. Nescio quid animus grande praesagit malum.

18. Dubitatio. Dubito an moriendo vicerit, an vincendo sit mortuus.

19. Inquisitio and interrogatio. Nunc quaero abs te, quare patrem suum Roscius
occiderit: quaero quando occiderit. Cic.

20. Responsio. Quaeris, quo jaceas post obitum loco? quo non nata jacent.

21. Interpretatio. Si intelligis, Cicero, non dicit roga ut vivas; sed roga ut
servias. When Anthony offered him his life if he would ask it.

22. Occupatio, or preventing an objection.

23. Fictio. Fingite vobis, antiquam illam urbem videre, lucem orbis terrarum,
etc.

24. Imaginatio. Jam mihi cernuntur trepidis delubra moveri sedibus. Virg.

25. Expressio, ectyposis. Putares cadaver ambulare.

Quacunque iter faceret, ejusmodi fuit, ut non legatus Populi Romani, sed ut
quaedam calamitas pervadere videretur. Cic. Verr.

26. Prosopopoeia. Tecum patria sic agit. Cic. Cat.

27. Apostrophe, when we speak to one that hears not. O Fons Blandusiae
splendidior vitro, dulci digne mero. Hor.

28. Ratiocinatio, when one discourses with himself.

Cur Pallas non nupta? virum non invenit ullum.

29. Conclusiuncula, when the foregoing matter is reflected upon and concluded
with somewhat unexpected. As Cicero, having declared how the Herbetesi were by
Verres condemned to pay a great sum of money to two of his Mistresses,
concludes. Itaque civitas una sociorum atque amicorum; duabus deterrimis
mulierculis vectigalis fuit.

Epiphomena. Sic dii spreti exardescunt. Sic humana consilia castigantur, ubi
se coelestibus praeferunt. Val. Max.

Compendium. Illis parentis nullus aut aequi est amor, avidis cruoris, imperii,
armorum, doli: diris scelestis, breviter ut dicam, meis. Oedip.

30. Perplexitas. Quid agimus? animum distrahit geminus timor; hinc gnatus,
illinc conjugis cari cinis. Pars utra vincit?

31. Approbatio. Sic, sic agendum est. Been est. Abunde est. Hic placet poenae
modus.

32. Imperium. Egredere ex urbe Catilina, -- Egredere, purga regna; lethales
tecum aufer herbas: libera cives metu. Medea.

Admonitio. Vos pro mea summa diligentia moneo; pro authoritate consulari
hortor; pro magnitudine periculi obtestor. Cic.

Obsequium. Tuus, O Regina, quid optes

Explorare labor, mihi jussa capessere fas est.

So for the Passions.

Blanditiae. Animula dulcis, suavis animula.

Salutatio and Apprecatio. Been valeas, quisquis es. Sit tibi terra levis. Dii
te ament qui haec legis.

Veneratio. Delubra and aras coelitum, and patrios lares supplex adoro.

Abominatio. Heu stirpem invisam! and fatis contraria nostris.

Irrisio. Ah, ah, Ah, lepidus amator silicernius.

Execratio. Dii te perdant, fugitive. Cic.

Optatio. Fecisset utinam Deus immortalis. Maxim vellem, Judices.

Invocatio. Hymen, o Hymenaee veni.

Votum. Voveo tibi victimam, fortuna redux.

Obsecratio. Per has aniles ecce te supplex comas, atque ubera ista pene
materna, obsecro.

Commendatio. Si te in germani fratris dilexi loco: sive haec te solum fecit
maximi, seu tibi morigera fuit in rebus omnibus: Te isti virum do, amicum,
tutorem, patrem. Bona nostra haec tibi committo, ac tuae mando fidei.

Concessio. Do quod vis; and me victusque volensque remitto.

Gratiarum actio. Non erimus regno indecores, nec vestra seretur fama levis,
tantive abolescet gratia facti. Virg.

Recusatio. Non me delectant ignoti domino servorum greges: nec sonantia laxi
ruris ergastula: nolo dives esse: Patrem gratis amo.

Exultatio. Jo. triumph! tu moraris aureos currus, and intactas boves. Jo
triumph! nec Jugurthino parem. Horat.

Jactantia. Et nos aliquod nomenque decusque gessimus.

Gratulatio. Laetare, gaude gnata; quam vellet tuos Cassandra thalamos.

Plausus. At mihi plaudo ipse domi, simulac nummos contemplor in arca. Horat.

Ejulatio. Hei mihi! neque^o quin fleam.

Expostulatio. Improperium. Ingrate cessas orbis? excidimus tibi?

Poenitentia. Potens jam cecidit ira: poenitet; facti pudet. Sen.

Spes. Spero equidem mediis, si quid pia numina possunt, Haesurum scopulis.

Desperatio. Actum est, conclamatum est. Occidimus. Aures pepulit hymenaeus
meas.

Timor, horror. Sudor per artus frigidus totos cadit: omen tremisco misera
feralis Dei. Sen. Pavet unimus, horret: magna pernicies adest.

Verecundia. Heu me! per urbem (nam pudet tanti mali) fabula quanta fui.

Audacia. Impudentia. Resistam: inermes offeram armatis manus. Dabit ira vires.
Ingentem confidentiam! number cogitat quid dicat? number facti piget?

Excandescentia, Minae. Accingere ira; teque in exilium feras furore toto. Vae
tibi causidice. Diris agam vos; dira detestatio nulla expiatur victima.

Nemesis. Indignatio. Isthic nunc metuenda jace: non te optima matter condet
humo, patrioque oner abit membra sepulcro: Alitibus liquere feris; aut gurgite
mersum undaseret. Virg.

Miseratio. Compescere quidem verba, and audacem manu poteram domare; sed meus
captis quoque scit parcere ensis.

Confessio. Me amare hanc fateor; si id peccare est, fateor id quoque. Tibi,
Pater, me dedo; quid vis oneris impone, impera.

Deprecatio. Miseremini familiae, Judices; miseremini fortissimi Patris;
miseremini filii. Cic.

3. OTHER figures there are, which consist in the words; as Metaphors of diverse
sorts, whether the Genus for the Species, Species for the Genus, part for the
whole, or the like. As Hypotyposis, or applying of words of life and sense to
things inanimate. As Hyperboles, Laconisms, Oppositions, such as Campi
liquentes, liquidi Chrystalli; Or Deceptio, when a sentence ends unexpectedly.
Spero tibi eventuram hoc anno maximam messem mali. Her mouth, oh heavenly!
wide. Tua nitet in front sulgor aureus; argentum in cirris; smaragdus in
oculis; sapphirus in labiis; chrysolithus in genis; collum in resti.

Metaphors are of diverse sorts, i. e. are taken from diverse common places.
1. From likeness Homo quadratus. 2. From the attribute Regnat gladius. 3.
Equivocation Jus Verrinum. 4. Hypotyposis Pontem indignatus Araxes. 5.
Hyperbole Instar montis equum. 6. Laconismus Carpathii leporem. 7. Opposition
Men's amens: 8. Deception Vale apud Orcum.


More particulars may be found in Authors; thus much is sufficient for this
place, where this discourse intruded it self, besides my intention.

CHAP. XIII. Of bettering the Judgment.
1. THE Judgment is that faculty whereby we discern, i. e. Judge of, true and
false; good and bad; better and less good. Naturally some (i. e. sedate
considering persons) are better disposed to it then others; but none at ain any
considerable perfection in it any other way, then by experience. Experience (I
say) of others communicated by Books or instruction, and of themselves by their
own observation. The habit, which perfects this faculty, (as that which
regulates the will and affections is virtue) is Wisdom or Prudence. That great
power, whereby we live in happiness and content; whereby we excel all other
creatures, and most men also; being by it out of the reach of their deceit and
craft, and not imposed upon, or derided, by them; whereby our reason and better
part is regulated; and whereby we ought to govern both our selves and others.
This if it be applied to particular subjects has several names; as if to
govern Cities or Commonwealths, it is political prudence; if Armies and War,
military; if a family, oeconomical, etc. with none of which I intermeddle, but
only with that, which concerns every particular person in the conduct of his
life: and here only in general; reserving to the second Part such particular
rules, as either my own or others experience, that I have read, have suggested.
In this place therefore I shall only advise (as wall as I can) how the faculty
is to be cultivated for the implanting that great perfection.

2. AND first take notice; that the exercising this faculty is the employing of
all the rest. For it is in vain to give judgment without examining the reasons
(devised by Invention) for both parties; and the like cases in former times
suggested by memory. For the chief employment of the judgment being concerning
the future, either the choice of an End, or of apt means to an end; no man can
promise to himself any success in his election without engaging all the powers
he has. As there must be. 1. [Supposing the end to be already resolved upon
and always before his eyes] a proposal or finding out several v. g. mediums
to an end. Which is called Counsel. 2. A comparing these together, that he may
be able to choose the best and properest, and honestest for his purpose, (for if
he use dishonest means, tho proper, it is craft and subtilty, as to choose
improper is folly and want of wisdom.) This is the immediate action of
Judgment; and which consists of many parts. As 1. circumspection of all
circumstances of time, place, and all other opportunities; 2. Caution for
prevention of hindrances, considering all dangers, and difficulties, he is
likely to encounter; and either providing to decline and avoid, or arming
himself to resist, or suffer them. 3. Solertia or good and rational
conjecturing of what is likely to succeed. 4ly A firm resolution, and competent
secrecy. And lastly a constant and due execution of what is well resolved. Now
because this knowledge is very difficult, and at the best but a conjecture, it
is necessary to consider what has succeeded heretofore upon such premises, for
that is most likely to happen again: but this cannot be done without the
assistance either of Books or experienced persons, who have seen and known the
like cases and successes: and this cannot be without much observation and
taking notice of things in the time of their actual flourishing; and storing up
such rules and histories in the memory for future application. By the way it
will not be amiss to take notice, that as there is no new thing under the Sun,
so neither any new action; but the same are represented over again under
varying circumstances; so that he, who intends to be a wise man, must endeavor
to distinguish the Action (as Physicians do in judging diseases) from the
circumstances; that he may be able to give a good judgment and prognostic; and
afterward to frame a general rule, which may stand him in stead at other times
and occasions.

3. OPPOSITE to wisdom is folly, that base, abject, low, poor, sordid,
condition; which renders a man wearisome to himself, and contemtible to others;
exposed to every ones deceit and craft; a slave to his own passions and others
flatteries; and a stock whereupon to graft any vice, shame, or misery. This is
made up of two Ingredients, Ignorance and Error. To avoid which, as also to
rectify the understanding, and abtain a true notion of things as they exist in
the World, and relate to us, it is necessary that we.

1. Endeavor to be set at liberty from the dominion.

1. Of Vices. 2. Of Passions.
2. To use much attention, consideration, and weighing things themselves.

4. That a man may be virtuous it is not sufficient that he now and then do
virtuous actions; nor that he do them frequently out of good nature, interest,
mode, passion, or the like: but that he work discreetly, constantly,
habitually, and for a good end, and by deliberation and choice; which two last
conditions necessarily presuppose Prudence. So that as no Virtue without
Prudence, neither is it without them. For it has bin the observation of all
knowing and discreet persons, and they have delivered it for a certain rule, as
has also the Holy Spirit, and Wisdom of God himself; that virtuous courses
only, together with Gods grace obtained by much prayer and intercession, are
capable to make a man wise, i. e. to direct his actions in such manner as he
shall not need to repent of them. And that therefore such actions are called
good: and others evil, because of the evil consequents; that they bring such
as perform them to sorrow, repentance and misery. Hereupon are grounded those
rules in the holy Scripture, that the fear of the Lord is the beginning of
Wisdom, that the beginning of Wisdom is to avoid folly, and wickedness. That it
is sport to a fool to do wickedly, and the like: Religion being the chiefest
and supremest of all virtues. An evil man seeks occasions to gratify his humor;
and at best thinks to stop at the confines betwixt passion and vice; but a wise
man avoids the occasions of vice, which he looks upon as a disease of the Soul,
contrary to the natural and due constitution of it, and subverting its true
tone and disposition. And that every vice in particular is contrary to
Prudence, appears; because Covetousnes instead of wisdom introduces craft,
subtilty, deceitfulnes, which are called the wisdom of the World. Pride breeds
confidence of a man's self, and despising others advise and counsel; and lust
(the third fountain of all vices) is the mother of negligence, precipitious
inconsiderateness, inconstancy, and at length of that blindness of
understanding, which renders them incapable of discerning, such things
especially as concern their Souls, but even such also as are advantageous to
their temporal welfare; and of choosing better from worse; fit and convenient
from improper and aliene.

5. PASSIONS, tho not so immediately concurring to the ruin of the Judgment as
vice, yet indirectly and by consequent destroy it also. For being (as I said
before) undeliberate motions toward objects pleasing or displeasing, and
therefore in the sensitive Soul; the objects passing through that to the
understanding, carry with them that tincture or form they there receive by
those Actions; not now as pleasing or painful, but as good or bad (for so the
passions represent them.) And if the Intellect do not speedily reflect upon the
deceit; and separate and cleanse the natural from the passionate, wherewith it
is stained, it becomes partaker of, and engaged in, the error. And so not only
loses the true notion and knowledge of the object, but apprehends it also
under a wrong and false Idea; mistaking v. g. the pleasure or good for the
object. And whatever it receives or considers, whilst in that disposition, is
conceived under the same mistake. So that all passions more or less, according
to the degree of their strength, render the understanding partial and
unindifferent, and consequently erroneous, and unfit to judge in any thing of
moment. Hence it is, that a man in passion, tho the alteration be only in
himself, yet imagines the World without him to be changed. What was before
esteemed; when now looked upon through this false light, appears contemtible;
and the contemned becomes admirable. The beloved or desired is without faults,
is excellent and easy; the hated is all faulty, unworthy, and impossible. Yet
is this no great matter compared to the Passions, when they are in their height
and vigor. Do we not see how for the satisfying of a lust, and enjoying a
revenge, a man breaks through all Laws, all obligations natural and civil? how
he regards not what injury or affront he offers even to Magistrates and
Parents? how he despises all inconveniences and evil consequences, his own or
other men's reasons may forewarn him? But I will not meddle with these
extravagants, utterly unfit to be carved into Mercuries, and will consider
those which work more mildely; and seduce, not trample upon, the Judgment.
Such are,

1. SELF-LOUE, or self-estimation, an overvaluing of a man's own parts,
opinions, or actions. An error in some sort necessary to the well-being of man;
for should every one know exactly the measure of his own ability, the greatest
part of the World would be miserable. Every man, therefore, makes himself the
standard for all others, esteeming every ones abilities and actions, as they
are equal or conformable to his own: And this seems to be a natural suggestion;
but if it be too much indulged, so that either for pride of his own parts,
knowledge, etc. or for interest and covetousness; or for honor and reputation;
or for custom and education; or any other by-respect, a man warp his Judgment,
he lies under a lasting and universal prejudice. For this is the beginning of
Opiniatrety; and when despising the advice and judgment of others, he follows
only his own counsel, is it not just that he should be permitted to fall into
the consequences of his own opinion? he that bends, and plies his reason to his
passion, why should he not enjoy the product of his indiscretion? why should he
that sows folly, reap the fruit of counsel and advisement? But to instance in
the foresaid particulars.

1. HE that is conceited of his own worth, eo ipso despises others, and
therefore will not read or take pains to inform himself what other Men say or
know, but when he fixes in himself this proposition, that other Men are more
ignorant then he; then whatever comes in his fancy, seems to be an addition to
knowledge; and must either be reserved as a mystery, or vented as the Depth of
Science, and Oracle of wit; though many times it is but either a great error,
or at best, a vulgar truth, And the most extravagant and grotesque conceits, as
being most of all his own, he esteems and values the most. Such a man frames to
himself notions and opinions, which all the World is to submit to, and these
alone are to be taught and propagated; and all opposers are opiniastres, and
ignorant, if not malicious, contradicters of the truth, and envious of the
glory of him that discovers it. Hence comes the spirit of contradiction, that
let the adverse opiner say what he will, his reasons will not be heard; for
indeed our learned man stands upon his guard against truth; and so at last,
instead of fair arguing, turns to chicanery and Pedantery.

2. How much interest and secular respects wrest the judgment, is manifest to
any one that observes; that the thriving opinions, and such as are countenanced
by them that can reward, never fail of abettors. But I can easilier pardon
these then those who for love of gain oppose the Magistrate and Government; who
knowing the humor of the ordinary people to be against obedience, and
subjection, make use of it to disturb the peace, that they may fish the better.
They gain Proselites that they may grow rich; they gather Churches that they
may collect wealth; and heap up Disciples, that they may multiply collections.
Thus they deceive unlearned and unstable Souls, of their temporal, as well as
their spiritual, goods: and care not what craft and deceitfulnes they use that
they may fill their puries; their Arts are infinite, and seen of every one but
those who are deceived by them.

3. VAINGLORY, or desire of seeming more knowing then other persons, is as
strong a passion, ever since our first Parents were carried away by it, as any
that molests our Souls. This goes masked many times under a vizor of seeking
Reformation, advancing knowledge, and the like; when it is in reality seeking
applause, insinuating into a party, and vaunting our own selves. The beginnings
of this delusion are many times very subtle, and difficultly discerned, except
by those who are very jealous of themselves. Hence comes an itch to invent or
publish new opinions and fancies; to quarrel for a new interpretation, and even
go to Law for the primogeniture of a notion. From hence also, if sharpened a
little by coveteousnes, comes all seditions, disobedience to Magistrates,
heresies, schisms, and rebellions. Is it not strange to see an ignorant
person, without comprehending, or so much as tasting, the principles of Arts
and Knowledge, to judge for himself, and scorn to be guided; especially in things
of consequence, where most caution is to be used? he that will not refuse to be
taught to be a Shoemaker, scorns to be instructed in Divinity; and he will
submit to a Master of a Trade, that will not bow to a Doctor. If a man well
furnished with this spiritual Pride, happens to be informed in some particular
knowledge above the rest of his condition; he immediately thinks himself
inferior only to Angels; instruction he despises; all ignorance, yea and
sometimes Science too, he defieth; and pretends to nothing but inspiration,
and, the consequent of that, infallibility; then has the Devil perfected his
work in him, he is advanced as far in error as is possible, and becomes a
seducer and an impostor.

4. OF all Opiniatrety, that which proceeds from Custom, and Education, is the
least absurd; yet a fault it is also, and more difficultly conquerable then the
rest. For the errors become in a manner connatural; and tho a disease, yet have
so tincted the Understanding, that it apprehends nothing but through them. And
therefore the more any one knows in his error, the more difficultly is it
eradicated; yet time, and labor will do much; one custom not being to be
expelled but by another. From this force of Education it comes, that heresies
and dissessions are for so many generations continued; that whole Orders, and
sometimes Nations espouse one opinion; and that contrary to another as wise and
learned as it self.

2. TIMOROUSNES, baseness, or slothfulnes, is another origin of Errors, quite
contrary to those produced by self-love; when a man seems to have no opinion of
his own, but to assume the color and tincture of those with whom he
converseth. The Opiniatre takes for false what any other person affirms, the
Complaisant for true. This is indeed the most peaceable way, and the best to
make a fortune, but corrupts the judgment more then the other. For such a man
either despises Truth as a thing of no value, not worth laboring for; or his
own Soul, as if God had not given him reason, but had brought him into the
World, and not endued him with sufficient ability to guide himself in it. Such
men usually admire other men's persons, and take things upon the credit either
of a greater number against a less (which in difficult matters is very
dangerous) or sometimes of a less against a greater. Or of persons not versed
in what is desired to be known, as of a learned man in things of piety or
secular prudence; of a pious man in matters of learning and the like: yet this
is better then to take a man's judgment, because of some external and accidental
advantages; as to think a man learned, or in the truth, because a friend or
acquaintance. Or, I am of his opinion, because I gain, or hope to get, by him.
Or, he is rich, for which Men hold him wise. He has so many legions, therefore
he has reason. Or, he is in great Office, he is above us, therefore wiser then
us; he is of our Order, therefore we must sustain him. From this admiration of
persons it comes, that he is thought a good Preacher that sweats and labors in
the Pulpit; or he a good Advocate that bawls at the Bar; or he a wise man that
talks gravely. We also think him a wicked person or our enemy that is
acquainted with such, as if all that converse together joined in the same
interest; him proud and insolent, that neglects a due civility; him ignorant,
that is slow and silent; and him to have taken good counsel, that has success.
Hence also it proceeds that most Men admire what is in fashion and vogue even
in Religion it self, and learning, as well as in clothes and phrases. That Men
are taken with shows and splendour, and vain appearances; and are unwilling to
go out of the track; but relinquish reason, and many times virtue it self,
because they want company.

But that which most imposes upon persons of learning and prudence, is; if
they see a man say much truth, and well, they are apt to take the rest of his
discourse upon that credit. The strong carries off the weak; and the
Understanding once conquered, is not willing to try her strength a second time
against the victor.

3. I WILL mention no more of the Passions; but in short reduce all the causes
of errors to 2. heads of misjudging. The first is too hasty assenting, the
second too slow. For the first,

1. There being no proposition, for which somewhat may not be said; many Men
(whether out of passion, interest, want of ability or leisure, lazines, or
whatever other cause) rest with the first appearance, and by little and little
take root, and fix in error. Alas how few can judge of probabilities! of them
that can, how few will take pains to weigh and consider? how many are concerned
that Error should be Truth? and who are so easily deceived, as they that think
themselves wisest? Hence it comes, that so many Men abandon themselves to
sensuality, covetousnes, and other vices, without remorse, or discovering the
fallacy, for they assume to themselves certain reasons built upon slight
foundations, which they are concerned should be true, and therefore they will
not examine them: but because they have some (tho but very small) show of
reason, they serve them, first for discourse with others, and then to fool
themselves. As generally for all vice they urge.

The example of other Men, the most, many also in prosperity, and many esteemed
good, that yet are vicious some way.

That it is not so bad, or dangerous, as is pretended.

That many sin, yet but few punished. And the like.

For pleasure, such as these,

That natural desires are vainly implanted in us, if not lawful.

That it is for poor and impotent persons not to bestow upon themselves what
they desire; to bridle appetites and lusts is an argument of lownes of spirit,
or want of power; and that by this, great persons are distinguished from mean
ones and inferiors.

That if pleasures had not been fitting, Nature had not joined them to those
actions, which are mostly hers; and that therefore Beasts are always regulated
by them.

That no men, whatever they pretend, but use them.

That studying, or emploiment, is only that pleasures, and rest, may be enjoied
in old age with more gusto.

That thinking is a dull formality; and desiring a laborious life, by him who
can live at ease, is a busy folly.

So for Covetuousnes.

That a good Patriot endeavors to increase the stock and wealth of the Nation,
which prodigals wast and consume.

That it is a great fault to spend and abuse those things, which may be put to
good use.

That nothing breeds respect but wealth; that alone is equal to all things; the
ransom of a man's life; the last appeal, and resort of all calamitous persons.

That it is but storing up what is necessary, etc.

The like pretenses, and fig leaves may be found for all other irregular and
vicious desires. To which if a man by education, interest, passion, or any
other way, be biased and prepossessed; and his indifferency removed; he will
easily take up these plausibilities; and by them make his reason and truth
truckle under his lusts and desires. Qui vult decipi, decipiatur.

But this fallacy of hasty judging reaches further, even the learned and
Philosophers are guilty of drawing universal conclusions out of insufficient
inductions. The Instances are infinite, but not fit for this place. But see in
common Conversation what argumentations are frequent amongst us. Some
professing Religion, live not accordingly, therefore all Religion is hypocrisy.
Some grave men are only formal, therefore all gravity is formality. Some things
are uncertain, therefore there is no truth at all, etc.

2. The last Error in Judgment I shall note, is contrary to the former, i. e.
too long deferring Assent. When a man has considered a Question, and finds on
either side Arguments; many times he will not put himself to the trouble, or
for want of judgment he is not able, to consider; which is more probable, which
easilier answered, etc. but sits down with suspense of assent; thinks, that of
two so equal in probability, either part, or neither, may be safely taken; and
is contented with Skepticism. In justification of this folly some have made a
profession, and instituted a sect; defending that there is no proposition so
probable, but its contradictory is as probable: and that no man can be certain
of any thing, against which any reason may be objected. So that we are not to
believe our selves awake, because we, sometimes, dream that we walk, think,
eat, etc. A Doctrine more then brutish; for the Beasts feed, and sleep, guided
by their senses, notwithstanding the manifold errors, and deceits of them,
without any scruple of doubting. Against human nature also, and injurious to
our good Creator; blaming him for giving us no more certainty then is needful
or useful; and not such a one as by curious persons may be imagined. It Is also
Against their own practice; for what Skeptic ever refused to eat or sleep,
pretending that the necessity of those actions was not grounded upon a
principle of absolute certainty, or the like; which notwithstanding, they
willingly suggest to others? Upon the testimony of senses and reasoning upon
the objects supplied from the senses, all the moments of our lives and fortunes
depend; Peace and War, Government and obedience, and the rest. He would be very
ridiculous, that being convinced of robbery before a Magistrate, should plead
that the senses of the witnesses might err; that they might be at that time
asleep; and dream they were robbed; that it is dangerous to take away a man's
life without absolute certainty. In short, not to assent to sufficient
evidence, i. e. to so much as all men are wont to assent unto, and upon which
they set their lives and fortunes, seems to be a disclaiming of humane nature,
and a silly affectation to be what man never was, is, nor can be.

6. I Will instance in no more Errors, but proceed to the Remedies; of which
some concern the Educator, others the Educated. For the first.

1. I Would not have the Instructor to be offended, if his charge take not
every thing upon his authority; Obest plerumque iis, qui discere velint,
authoritas docentis. But encourage him to ask questions, and move doubts;
accustom him to give his opinion and reasons in doubtful cases; especially such
as fall out at that time, and upon the place. For want of such, let him censure
the Ancients; let him accuse the murderers of Caesar; jeer Cato for killing
himself, etc. Quicken also and waken his spirit, by giving him liberty to
Contradict you, when he finds reason for it; and when he does not, do you show
him what arguments are against your self. Encourage in him all thinking and
exercise of the mind; and let him judge and censure freely what he reads or
hears; sparing persons always for charity sake; and discourage him not for
every error he commits. Take not all the talk to your self; nor make to him
long harangues, expecting a youth should go along with you, and understand and
believe all you say. But discourse with him much after Socrates's manner; which
teaches him to know things even before he learn them, i. e. by considering and
comparing them with things obvious and familiar, to wind up to the knowledge of
things unknown and obscure. This will enlarge and exalt his spirit to an
universal contemplation of the natures of things as they really are; and make
him to admire nothing; to be surpised with nothing; and not condemn every
thing that is not cast in his own mold, or framed after his own mode and taste.
Thus he will not be offended with small matters; nor be amazed to see contrary
humors, opinions, or fashions, nor be like a man brought up in a bottle, see
all things through one hole. It is also observable, that the more any one
knows, the less is he engaged in opiniatrety; but this I only mention.

2. HE that seeks truth, and to perfect his judgment, must endeavor to render
himself indifferent, free, and disengaged, that he may be ready to pass his
Sentence secundum allegata and probata: which is chiefly by delivering himself
from the power and dominion of all passions whatsoever. Which is done by
regulating the Imagination (for there is their beginning) i. e. by subjecting
it to reason and the Understanding; that it may not without consultation follow
the suggestions of sense, and unruly motions of the Appetite. And this is not
difficult if the particular occasion can be foreseen; but because that happens
not frequently, it is requisite to set a continual guard over our weakest
place, where we are most obnoxious to the enemy; and to have a continual
magazine of such sober and, moderate considerations, as advice, reading, and
experience will furnish. But if notwithstanding you cannot prevent these
apprehensions, which indeed is difficult; I mean for a man to stand so
continually upon centry, his arms ready and fixed, and in his hands; then at
the time of the assault, retire; let the motion spend it self in vain, and
suffer it not to fix upon the object. But at the worst, play an aftergame. If
anger v. g. have prevailed against you, force your self to beg pardon; and let
shame and (especially voluntary) punishment, and penance, bring wrath to
reason. So against Insolence contradict your own, tho lawful, desires another
time, and do contrary to what you most affect. In sum, observe your own
inclinations (for accidental Passions are not so dangerous) and watch over them
diligently; which is also better and easilier performed, if you can procure a
faithful monitor to assist and advise you. Next set not your affections to much
upon any thing whatsoever, even not upon the public, or works of Charity which
are not necessary; pursue nothing with eagerness and engagement. And think not,
when you have conquered three or four times, that the war is ended. Passions
are much the weaker by being overcome; but take heed they rally not. Qui sani
esse volunt, ita vivere debent, ut perpetuo curentur. Good counsel. is not to
be taken as Physic, but as nourishment, continually received, ruminated, and
digested. And lastly, when you are foiled, put some penance upon your self, and
resolve upon greater diligence for the future. And using these means, doubt
not, by Gods blessing, but to arrive in time to a sedate tranquillity of mind
and a clear understanding of the truth, a condition not more advantageous to
the possessor, then grateful to, and admired by, them with whom you converse.

3. THE last means I propose of acquiring a good Judgment, is consideration,
weighing, or thinking much upon the probabilities of both sides; and that not
only at the present, when the mind is engaged and concerned in, and for the
business; but at leisure, suppose at night, when you recollect what you have
done all the day; for then the mind is free to review, and revise her own
actions. He that uses this, will find in himself other thoughts and
conceptions then he can possibly imagine, and he will see the same difference
as is betwixt looking into muddy, and clear, water. Hence it will follow that
much business is a great impediment to him that desires to perfect his judgment;
nemo occupatus bonam mentem invenit. Sen. An experienced person is capable of
engaging himself in many emploiments, but a beginner must not; nor in any one
business that takes up his whole time: for by that means indeed he may be well
skilled in that one thing; but he cannot arrive at the largenes and
comprehensivenes required to true Wisdom. Again, whatsoever conduces to
heighten, and, as I may say, to spiritualize, the Soul, is also advantageous to
wisdom. And this nothing does so much (of the several parts of learning and
sciences I have spoken before) as Devotion or Contemplation; which is a
borrowing of light immediately from the Sun; and a lifting and raising up the
Soul to God; who of his infinite goodness has made the reward of his service in
some sort the effect of it also.

Now the first consideration a wise man fixes upon, is the great End of his
Creation; what it is, and wherein it consists: the next is of the most proper
means to that end: afterward he weighs the difficulties and hindrances, he is
likely to rencounter in his obtaining that end. After which he weighs all
particular occurrences, how they conduce to, or at least agree, with that end,
and those means so chosen. But for these, I refer you to such Authors as have
spoken expressly concerning them.

CHAP. XIV. Of traveling into Foreign Countries.
1. THE Advantages of Travel are, 1. to learn the Languages, Laws, Customs,
and understand the Government, and interest, of other Nations. 2. To produce
confident and comely behavior, to perfect conversation and discourse. 3. To
satisfy their minds with the actual beholding such rarities, wonders, and
curiosities, as are heard or read of. It brings us out of the company of our
Relations, acquaintances, and familiars; making us stand upon our guard, which
renders the mind more diligent, vigorous, brisk, and spiritful. It shows us, by
consideration of so many various humors, and manners, to look into and form our
own; and by tasting perpetually the varieties of Nature, to be able to judge of
what is good and better. And it is most useful for those, who by living at
home, and domineering amongst servants, etc. have got an habit of surlines,
pride, insolence, or other resty and slovenly custom. As also for those, who
are entangled with unfitting companions, friends, loves, servants. For those,
who are seized upon with the vices of their own Country, such with us are
Drinking, rusticity, sowrnes in conversation, lazines, etc. and then, every one
must be sent into the place most proper to reform him; as Drunkenness is not
much used in France; less in Italy and Spain. Debauchery with Women not so
frequent in Germany, Flanders, etc. Gaming is common every where, but less in
Italy. Quarrelling dangerous in Italy, and Spain. Prodigality is often helped
by setting a certain allowance, in a place where he cannot be trusted, where he
is necessitated to live within his compass; or in prison; or shamefully run
away without paying his host. It is also profitable for all persons learned,
inquisitive, and curious: who, by the conversation of learned Men, and use of
Books unusual with us, and Libraries, may very much augment their knowledge, as
well as their experience.

2. I WOULD not advise any young man to go abroad without an Assistant or
Governor, a Scholar: one able to instruct him in such ingenious Arts, as are
fitting for him to know; to choose his companions (else a young man left to
himself, not having to employ his time, must of necessity fall to debauchery,
and evil company, who are always ready to seize upon young straies;) to assist
him in sickness, or any other necessity; to advertise him of his failures; to
exact the performance of his studies, exercises, and emploiments; to husband
his allowance; to keep him company, and furnish him good discourse, and good
example.

3. WHOEVER would have his Son molded upon the form of such a Nation, must send
him thither young; that his tongue may be plied to their Language, and his
whole carriage imbibe, by imitation, their manner and fshion, before tincted
with any other. But if that design be not regarded (as I conceive it not very
convenient for any one to quit his own Country customs, [customs, I say, not
vices]) then it is better to travel when they arrive at some judgment, to
discern better from worse; when able to furnish discourse, and by that means
enter gratefully into conversation. Whereas being sent young, and having no
knowledge or experience, they cannot advantage themselves abroad, but are there
in a kind of amazednes; variety of objects, which they neither understand, nor
value, confounding, rather then edifying, them. And truly I conceive the chief
reason, why Travelers have so little (especially good) conversation of the
natives, to be, because of the jealousy they have of young Travelers; that
nothing is to be advanced by their conversation worthy the trouble of their bad
Language, impertinent discourse, silly questions (for such those demands seem
to be, which concern things to them familiar and obvious) and frequent visits.
Methinks therefore, it were better every one to be educated at home, to the
subjection and obedience of his own Country Laws, and Customs; (except the Laws
and Government be subverted, as they lately were; and except there be some such
Nation in the World, as admire all Laws and Customs but their own.) Etcocles
would not give hostages to Antipater of the youth, but of grown Men. And the
Persians, when wanting a King, they sent for some of the Royal Family, then
hostages at Rome, were afterward displeased at, and cut them off, as not
agreeing with the manners and customs of their Country. Besides it is better
they should stay, till by instruction and study they have arrived to a capacity
of employing their time profitably and delightfully by themselves; without
being (as too many are) forced to seek divertisement with others: then leave
their Country at that age, when they should be habituated and molded into the
Laws of it. And this is the reason, why not knowing their native duty, and
living as strangers, licentiously, and not according to the best examples
abroad; they bring home instead of solid virtue, formalities, fashions,
grimaces, and at best a volubility of talking nonsense, etc. Yet some,
perhaps, think them then well educated; and that foreign vanity is preferable
to home-discretion. This is also the reason why they are forced, for passing
their time, to apply themselves to such conversation as they can find; and good
company being very rare and shy, but bad always ready, and offering
themselves, it is no wonder if they run into extravagant expenses, as well as
evilnes of manners. Or if they escape these, then the Fencing, Dancing, and
Language-Master catch them, from whom picking up some scraps and shreds of
discourse, at home they vent them for laces and rubans. Or at best of all, they
sow but gape-seed, which, if well husbanded, yields them a goodly crop of
wonders in their own Country.

4. EXERCISES commonly learned in Travel are Dancing, Fencing, Riding, to which
some add Vaulting, and anciently Swimming, (for which reason Suetonius takes
notice of it as a strange thing, that C. Caligula, so good at other exercises,
could not swim: He observes that Augustus instructed himself his grandchildren
to write and swim; Swimming also was publicly taught at Athens) Music, and
Designing. And these, I conceive, might as well, if not better, be learned in
our own Country; were it not either for the sloth or opiniatrety of our Nation.
The use of dancing and fencing is sufficiently, if not too much, known; riding
renders him master of the noblest and usefullest of all Beasts; Vaulting makes
the body active, but else is not of so great use as wrestling were, if in
fashion; or swimming; which is both more healthful, and many times proves to be
of great consequence and necessity. Music I advise not; since to acquire any
considerable perfection in it, takes up too much time; and to understand little
of it, is neither graceful, satisfactory, nor durable. To thrum a Guitar to 2
or 3 Italian Ballad tunes, may be agreeable for once, but often practiced is
ridiculous. besides I do not remember to have seen any Gentleman, tho very
diligent and curious abroad, to qualify himself with that skill, but when he
came to any maturity, he wholly rejected it. Designing I advise to, but only as
a parergon, not an emploiment. And the small Mathematics Strangers learn in
France serve to little, besides getting money to the Teacher.

Rules in Traveling. 1. Be very careful with what company you associate upon
the way in pension, lodgings, etc. But make no such familiarity (except you
have of a long time tried the person) as not to leave your self liberty to come
off when you please. Neither be ready to make or accept assignations of
meetings, at Taverns, etc. Especially be not the first motioner. Much time is
lost, ill acquaintance got, money spent, and many mishaps come by it. Besides
they beget and draw in one another, the most idle always contriving to twist
in another meeting.

2. Suspect all extraordinary and groundless civility of foreigners, as a
design upon your purse; and what money you lend upon the way to Strangers, count
it given, not lent. Nor ever declare what money or Jewels you have (of which
notwithstanding you ought to have a reserve, not to be touched but upon
extraordinary occasions:) but always make your self poorer then you are.

3. Make even with your host for pension, and all other demands, at the end of
every month, and take his hand to an acquittance; for by that means you hinder
all after-reckonings; and they are wont, at your leaving them, to pick some
quarrel, or seek some pretense upon you to get more of your money. And so upon a
journey, when you are not at an Ordinary, reckon with your Host after supper.
And where you never mean to return, extend your liberality at your first
coming, or occasionally as you have need of them, and defer it not till your
departure.

4. Injuries from Strangers, especially in their own Country, are easily,
safely, and discreetly, put up; but never safely revenged, where they have more
friends, and power, then your self. Especially beware of intrigues with Women:
infinite quarrels and Tragedies have begun there.

5. For health, without which you can do nothing. When you begin (especially a
long Journey) for three or four of the first days, or meals at least, abate a
third of your ordinary eating, the like do also at your arrival to rest, tilll
your body be somewhat accustomed to the alteration. In traveling, especially
in hot weather, drink as little as you can; especially by the way, for that
increases your thirst, heateth, and disposes you to a fever. Mix water with
wine, but water alone to one subject to thirst, makes him more thirsty.

6. If you find your self indisposed, of feverish, throw in a glister, miss a
meal or two, cover your self well in bed, that your body may transpire or
sweat, or else let blood. But if it seems by your wearines, unquietnes,
disturbed sleep, high pulse, pain, etc. that it tends to a real sickness, call
the Physician betimes.

7. Have with you a little Venice-treacle, or some such Antidote; that if you
eat any bad meat or drink, go to bed presently after supper, or find any thing
heavy on your stomach, or be tired with a long, wet, or tedious Journey, by
taking a little of it, you may restore your self. Lucatellos balsom also (if
well made) serves against ulcers, wounds, aches, galls, bruises by falls, and
like accidents.

8. If your occasions require you to voyage in hot weather, be very careful to
preserve your head from the heat of the Sun; be very abstemious in your diet,
and take the best care you can, your body be open. Accidental heat also is best
expelled by transpiration.

9. Drink not before you eat, for that quenches appetite; nor at any time
without eating, especially no mornings drinks, and beware of raw fruit, the
most pleasant and newly gathered commonly is worst; corrected much by eating
bread with it.

10. Temperance, chastity, and moderate exercise are the great advancers of
health and long life. De resto in every Country observe the rules of health,
practiced by the discreetest Inhabitants.

CHAP. XV. Of prudent choosing a calling, or state of life.
UPON the discreet choice of our calling, or state of life, depends our whole
content and felicity: for if we choose that which is agreeable to our
inclinations and abilities, both of body and mind, we work cheerfully, our life
is pleasant, and we are constant to our purposes. But if, capable of better, we
choose a worse and lower, we espouse a continual vexation: if we aim at what is
above our capacity, we despond and despair. Players fit their parts to their
persons; and let us exercise our selves in what we are most fit for. And if
necessity force us against our inclinations, let us use diligence to comply
with it as hansomely as is possible: and at least avoid vice, rather then
pursue things which are not given us.

2. IN all our actions, the principal guide we have is the End; as in
traveling the place whither we are to go directs the way. And since we have,
by the law and condition of our Creation, one principle (reason) in us, which
does, or may and ought uniformely to produce all our operations, we may also
have them all directed to the same scope and intention. We are indeed composed
of body and soul; and the body is guided by sense; but the soul (the better
part) does, or ought to govern the body, and it self be governed by reason
illustrated in Christians by Gods holy Spirit.

3. THEY who aim at nothing but satisfying their sense, are such as either, 1.
never look before them, but live in diem, without care or prudence, passing
their time in mirth and jollity, without design or consideration, except to
contrive that to morrow may be as this day; or to escape some present pressure
and difficulty which interrupts their delights. Or 2. do indeed advise and
propose an end, but such a one as is either not obtainable; or if obtained, not
satisfactory, universal, or durable. Such are pleasures, riches, and honors.
Any, or all, of which to be made the principal and ultimate end of our actions,
is great folly and madness. For neither will they avail us in sickness and the
calamitous parts of our life; whereto also they often engage us; and, in the
prosperous, they are not in our power to command them when we please; nor keep
them when we have them; nor do they satisfy us, if we keep them. They grow
tedious and burdensome, subject us to cares, sorrows, envy, and dangers: and
there is somewhat better, which is not liable to these exceptions.

4. BEASTS do not deliberate, but work out of instinct of Nature; all of one
kind the same way; (wherein they may be somewhat perfected, but not changed)
without any general end or intention of their living or acting; tho they have
some little particular ends of some of their actions. But deliberation is a
considerate weighing of all reasons pro and con, such an end, and the means to
obtain it. i. e. how a man shall employ those powers and faculties, which God
has given him, either by nature or his own acquisition, to that purpose, for
which God has given them. For there is one certain end, which all men may, and
ought to propose as most agreeable and proper for their nature and condition.

5. THIS intention, which will sustain a man in all estates and conditions,
which will have an influence upon his whole life and actions, which is a rock,
whereon he may safely build in all conditions and accidents, is: To do as much
good as he can, both to himself, and others. Which the holy Scripture calls
glorifying God (a phrase demonstrating the reason why this is the universal
end of our Nature) because that God created us all; and gave us our being and
all that we have; and this not for our own sakes, for no rational and
intelligent workman does so, but for his own sake: who is glorified when his
works answer his intention. He being also the universal good of all creatures,
what ever good we do, is a corresponding to, and as it were an assisting, him;
a propagation of his interest, and consequently a fulfilling of that end for
which he made us.

6. THIS is performed several ways, as 1. by serving him in his own house,
being members of his family, i. e. Officers in his Church, or Ecclesiastical
persons, whether active or contemplative. 2. By serving him in the
Commonwealth, in actions of charity: and that, either as Magistrates, or
private persons. In both which good is to be done by example, advice, counsel,
commanding, governing, rewarding, punishing, liberality, assistance of the weak
and poor against oppression, etc. In all which the Magistrate has greater
opportunity and obligation to do good, then private persons. Many of these good
actions also cannot be performed without wealth and reputation; and riches, if
with due moderation and justice, to this purpose desired and employed, are very
good. For, these being the measure of all things in the commerce and
conversation of mankind, it is impossible for him that deals amongst men, to be
without them, and for him who is in an active life, and to do good, to be
without a considerable proportion of them. And his reputation (I do not say
popularity, but the good opinion of wise and virtuous persons) every one is
bound to preserve, and to provide thimgs honest in the sight of men also. So
much pleasure also is to be allowed as is necessary to keep up the body in
health and cheerful vigor; which the wise Creator also has appointed, in that
he has joined pleasure to natural actions.

7. IN choosing a calling therefore (the fitnes whereof is only in order to our
glorifying God, i. e. our own Salvation) consider

1. The advantages or disadvantages to our end, or its contrary.

2. The temtations we are likely to undergo and meet with.

3. What strength, assistance, or hopes we have to overcome them.

But because it is not possible to judge of these but by experience, which the
Deliberant is supposed not to have, but in some lesser measure; it is therefore
necessary for him, to ask advice first of God, then of wise, upright, and
experienced persons. And

1. Those who have an excellent faculty, or genius, to one thing above others,
seem to be by God called to that.

2. Those, who are by their Parents, or own choice, educated in one thing
particularly, and find it agreeable to them, may safely acquiesce, and be
persuaded, that calling is from God; as may also those, who have as it were an
hereditary calling, being born to riches, and honors, may safely acquiesce in
it, I say, provided they can overcome those temtations of offending God, which
do usually accompany it. As all callings have some, and some very many more,
and greater than others.

3. Those, who upon any rational grounds embrace such a calling, wherein they
are persuaded they can serve God, and live charitably, and do good to their
neighbors, may safely conclude that they are called by the ordinary providence
of God; who is also the giver of reason to assist and govern us in those
things, which fall under its cognizance.

4. Some, also, God Almighty calls extraordinarily by his Prophets,
Ministers, or internal inspirations, exciting to somewhat extraordinary, either
in spiritual, or secular emploiments. Concerning whom we can give no rules.

5. Many men are not capable to choose for themselves, being of weak judgments,
unexperienced, biassed with some vice or irregularity: these are to submit to
the counsel of their friends; and the most disinteressed, and nearest a kin,
are the likeliest to give best counsel.

6. It is in vain for him to ask advice that is not indifferent to all, or most
of them; at least so much as to be without prejudice, or to refuse any
proposed, and not to love or hate any so much, but to be ready to change his
passions upon the information of better judgments. Unindifferent are those who
are preingaged. As for married persons, it is in vain to consult about single
life. For then, they can only deliberate how to glorify God in a married
estate. And if an estate be ill chosen, but irremediably, accuse not God
Almighty for the ill choice, but seek to amend it by more virtuous and pious
living.

8. GOING to choose, therefore, place your self as much as is possible in
equilibrio; and resolve to choose the best as near as your own discretion (the
assistance of Gods spirit implored) and the advice of friends, shall suggest
unto you, The best, I say not simply, but the best for you; considering your
parts, inclinations, bodily health, and strength, exterior advantages, and the
like.

And 1. consider that, tho no man is obliged under guilt of sin to undertake
the absolutely best calling or estate; and that God Almighty has not so made
man for eternals, that he has no care for temporals; yet in Prudence, and if
he have a design of attaining Christian perfection, he ought to make choice of
that which he conceives the better.

2. That as every man is to give an account of the calling wherein he is, and
not of another: so a man is rewarded that lives and does better in a less
perfect state, then he that does less well in a more perfect; yet a more
perfect state is to be preferred, which affords more advantages of doing well,
or better.

3. That tho there is no lawful estate, wherein heroical virtues may not be
exercised; yet these are much more easily and frequently practiced in some then
others.

4. That since contraries are so mingled in all our affairs; that nothing is so
good, that it has not some inconveniences joined with it; nor any so probable
as that somewhat may not be said to the contrary; you are not to defer your
resolution, till all difficulties be cleared, and you be able to answer all
things to the contrary; but it suffices to embrace that which is most probable.

5. That, if your election be thus made, i. e. with indifferency,
unpassionatenes, and sincerity, seek not to change, but settle your self
quietly in it: and make account that whatever you choose, you will sometime or
other repent of it, i. e. when you find the unexpected inconveniences and
hardships of your own, and the seeming ease and conveniences of another. The
sincerity of your choice needs not be doubted of, if you choose purely for the
love of God; if you would have advised your friend to the same course of life;
and if you would be content, when God shall call you, to be found so doing.

9. AN old man in Vitis P. P. being demanded of one, what he should do,
answered; our Works are not all of the same sort. Abraham was hospitable, God
was with him. David was humble, God was with him, etc. Therefore, what you find
your Soul inclined unto, so as it be according to Godliness, that do. It is true
that one calling has more opportunities of glorifying God, and of glorifying
him more, i. e. with nobler and sublimer actions. All men are not alike capable
of those heights; and by him, who after due consideration, probably conjectures
that he shall do very well in an active, and but meanly in a contemplative,
life, here the active doubtless is to be preferred.

10. IF you have made choice of an estate less advantageous, which you may
change, be sure to advise well before you do so; for many times wearines and
inconstancy advise a quitting of that, wherein it is really better for you to
continue.

11. THO there be no state, but may be more or less dangerous, or convenient
for one then another; as where God gives greater strength and plentifuller
grace there is less danger from temtations; yet those states seem to be in
themselves best, which are not subject to so many temtations; which have the
fewer avocaments from Religion; which have more incentives to, and occasions
for, piety; more good examples, more leisure for devotion, more severity
toward our selves, more, and more heroical acts of virtues, which approach
nearest to the life of our Lord, and which show most gratitude toward Almighty
God.

12. THO God supplieth grace sufficient to every one for his estate, and he
that fails of his duty does it by his own default; yet he, who casts himself
into temtations, cannot promise himself to be assisted by God. S. Paul advises
younger Women i. e. such as will put themselves in frequent dangers or
temtations of not living continently, rather to marry. Temtations are from
company, health, bodily strength, wealth, bad inclinations, as to ambition,
covetousnes, opiniatrety, desire of liberty; opportunity of time, place, etc.

13. FROM the consideration of which, and such like, these rules may be taken
notice of,

A good natured facil man is not fit for such an emploiment, wherein he must
necessarily converse frequently with evil persons.

A melancholic person is not fit to undertake a profession of much study or
solitarines.

A timorous spirit is not fit for Magistracy.

A covetous person is not to be a Merchant, or Banquier.

A man of bodily strength and choler will not be a good Officer in War.

The sleepy and drowsy are best employed in a calling, wherein is much bodily
activeness.

A rash man not to be entrusted with a great affair, especially in War.

14. LET no man easily persuade himself; that, what ever his calling be, his
thoughts will be different from the rest of mankind, that is in that calling;
for all men are alike; have the same principles of thinking and acting, and the
same way of deducing from, and acting by, them. Particularly let no man think;
that Magistracy will change him, to the better especially: look at his actions
and conversation in his private life; such will he be also in his Authority.
And therefore let him not upon such confidences hastily take upon him a
calling, in which he sees in general great inconveniences or dangers, to the
preserving of his virtue, or innocence.

15. IF you be consulted concerning a person, either very inconstant,
passionate, or vitions, give not your advice; it is in vain: for such will do
only what shall please themselves.

Never advise any one to a calling, which is much against his will, or
inclination.

OF EDUCATION. PART II.
CHAP. I. Of Civility.
IN this second Part, are thrown together a miscellany of observations
concerning several, the most usual occurrences in Active life. Such as enter
not into any Art or Science, but are the result of experience in the
conversation and affairs of this World. I begin with Civility, as being the
first to be learned and practiced; and tho many rules of it seem plain and
obvious, such as are fit to be insinuated into the Practice of Children; yet
are they not to be neglected, but to be neal'd into youth, that they may not
through defect of them, miscarry in their age, as many great persons have done,
who trusting to their Justice and severe virtue, have bin ruined for neglect of
compliance and civility. For tho Serpents are greater poisons and presenter
death, yet more men are destroyed by their irregularity in eating and drinking.
And small wounds, if many, are mortal. To be courageous, bountiful, and just
are indeed much greater and nobler then to be of an agreeable conversation: yet
is this as useful, for it is in continual practice, the other rarely and upon
occasion: besides other virtues have need of somewhat to maintain and exercise
them. Justice will have power, liberality, wealth, etc. but this is set up with
no other stock then a few pleasant looks, good words, and not-evil actions. All
men are in some sort disparata; and even these, who are under the relations of
superiority and inferioty, yet, those obligations being satisfied, as to all
other matters, account themselves as equals. And tho laws punish not the resty
and froward, yet are they chastised by the loss of that good will and
freindlines which good-behaviour gains; most men having greater aversenes to
the incompliant then the vicious. Wherefore it is necessary for every one, that
would bring his purposes to effect, (which cannot be done without making use of
other men's abilities; and the greater the design, the more Instruments are
needful; and those Instruments also not inanimate or necessitable, but
spontaneous and free) to master the wills and powers of those he makes use of;
to make them, I say, to work cheerfully and readily for him; which is by
Civility to let or insinuate himself into their good liking, and voluntary
assistance. For he who cares not to live void of offense toward others,
renders himself offensive and odious unto others; consequently they comply not
with him; they act for him, if at all, by force either of reward or punishment,
and therefore no more, nor otherwise, then they are constrained. Thus, for want
of civil address, many men of parts and virtue become useless in their
generation; but others by their surly and uncompliant humor, grow distastful in
conversation, fall into contemt, whence follow affronts and quarrels. Some also
are forced upon low and mean company, and thereby bring a dishonor, not upon
their persons only, but their Family and Parents (who are looked upon, as not
willing or able to give them decent Education) and their Country also, if they
happen amongst Strangers, who are ready to censure hardly of that Nation, whose
Gentry are so little civilized.

2. AGAIN, where there is much company, as in Cities, etc. there is also great
variety of humors and dispositions; and a greater care of wary conversation; as
also where are persons of greater and more piercing spirits, or curiouser
observers, as in Courts, or amongst Foreigners, who take particular notice of
many things which continual practice makes us pass over. He who thinks to live
contentedly or peaceably in these places without mortifying his own humor, and
deposing his natural inclinations, is of a shallow capacity, or an evil nature.
i. e. He is either of a savage, fierce, insolent disposition; or of a stupid
slothfulnes. Both of them fitter company for Beasts then Men, and for Deserts
then Cities.

3. WHEREFORE, as Justice bridleth our coveteousnes, and constancy our natural
timorousnes, so does civility our haughtines and presumtion: and as a good
Christian, for the glory of God, mortifies all his own passions and humors, and
puts on those, which are for his purpose, and according to his intention: Such
I mean, as Religion and reason suggest: And as a good Courtier, for his
interest complies with every one; always gay, cheerful and complaisant,
without any humor of his own, only borrowing that of the company. So in like
manner, every civil person does the same, so far at least as to avoid all
offending those with whom he converseth.

4. FOR Civility consists in these things, 1. In not expressing by actions, or
speeches any injury, disesteem, offense, or undervaluing of any other. 2. In
being ready to do all good offices and ordinary kindness for another. And 3ly
in receiving no injuries or offenses from others. i. e. in not resenting every
word or action, which may (perhaps rationally) be interpreted to be disesteem
or undervaluing. Indeed our reputation, which is only pretended in this case,
(were it really in danger) yet is not of such consequence many times, as peace
and quietness; but we are ordinarily unjust and partial Judges of our own
concerns, never looking upon our selves but with love and value. But however
our patience is certainly a rewardable virtue (but whether the correction of a
misdoer will reuscire well, is a difficult question) and is that so much
recommended by our Lord, of forgiving trespasers against us.

5. CIVILITY is not, therefore, punctuality of behavior: I mean that which
consists in certain modish and particular ceremonies and fashions, in clothes,
gesture, mine, speech, or the like; is not using such discourses, words,
phrases, studies, opinions, games, etc. as are in fashion in the Court; with
Gallants, Ladies, etc. This is a constrained formality, not civility; a
complying with the times, not with persons; and varieth with the age or season,
frequently according to the fancy of mechanic persons, in their several
professions: whereas the rules of Civility, founded upon Prudence and Charity,
are to perpetuity unchangeable. I speak not here of such ceremonies as are by
duty required toward our superiors, either in gesture, speech, or other
address. Those are not in our disposing to omit or alter; custom our Great
Master has imposed them, and that rationally, for the ease of the Magistrate,
and to make his commands current, and we ought to obey without dispute or
pleading. Nor of such as are used generally in conversation, whereof also I
advise every one to be rather liberal and give some of his own, then retrench
any of what is due. But of such as by particular persons (who either would seem
modish and perfectly civil, or would hide their poverty of understanding and
discretion under the vail and varnish of mode) studied and affected. Whereby
themselves think to insinuate into the favor of those with whom they converse;
but those imagine themselves esteemed as weak and easy, that are to be moved
with such trifles; and (as some women) are thought to be taken with rubans and
fancies more then real decency.

6. COMPLIMENTS also are another thing, serve to a contrary end, and proceed
from a different cause. Civility from sincerity and virtue; these from
duplicity, and deceit. That makes friends, these unmake and hinder them; that
distinguishes one man from another, these involve all in an equal adulation.
They consist in praising immoderately, and pretending greater love and
friendship then either is deserved by, or intended to, him, to whom they are
offered. He that uses them, beleiveth not himself, nor would have his Auditor
believe his expressions; but I know not what greatness of affection: he is
always offering and promising, never performing; asking pardon where there is
no offense or necessity, but when it is commanded by God and reason, he will
dye rather then demand it. These are imaginary services; notional, impertinent,
humiliations; a solemn nonsense; an abusing of language, and putting together
many good words to signify nothing. The use of this traitorous discourse (if
any be) is to hide a mans-self (as Juglers and Mountebanks) in a cloud of good
words, that the Auditor may not discover more of him then himself pleases. Or
as Tradesmen keep you still in talk, lest you should too narrowly examine the
wares they would put upon you. Officious lies they are, licensed by custom, and
like the unproportionable garments, are faults of the age. Neither is flattery;
encouragement to, or accompanying, in vice, or error; consenting to any thing
prejudicial to a third person; a permitting to offend, or actually sinning, or
the like; any part of Civility. For this consists not but with severe Justice,
real Charity, and solid Discretion.

7. AND therefore it, as all other virtues, requires an early initiation, and
continual practice to arrive at a perfect habit of it. It concerns also Parents
and Educators to see that the educated converse as much as may be, with his
equals or superiors; not with servants or mean persons, lest he put on their
manners, and playing Rex amongst them, he become apt to undervalue all others,
and so become insolent. It behooves them also to give him no evil example by
themselves, or others; but propose such Precedents, as they desire the young
Man should copy. In France, Fathers are wont to carry their Children, when
youths, with them to visit persons of Quality, to show them how such demean
themselves, and to procure them a convenient boldness. Mothers also in Italy
teach their little Children pieces of Dialogues or Plays by heart; which they
render and recite in their presence, and are taught by them graceful address in
saluting, speaking, etc. they also send their Children frequently in errands,
and visits to their kindred or neighbors; teaching them what to say, what
titles to give, what answers to make to the demands most likely to be asked,
somewhat also to furnish discourse, etc.

8. THE young Man himself also, ought, as he grows in age, to observe the
actions of others, especially of his equals, and of such as are most reputed
for civility; and to note what becomes or misbecomes them. Also, what is
practiced by most, by persons of higher quality and by persons of maturity and
judgment. He must also watch over himself severely, and once a day, at least,
call himself to acount of his speeches and actions. And also procure some
friend to observe, advise, and admonish him of what is well, what ill, what
might be better, done, or omitted. Lastly observe such rules as these that
follow, some of which are framed for youth, others for such as are growing up,
or arrived to some discretion.

1. Do nothing which may justly scandalize virtuous persons; chiefly by any
neglect of Religion, as by undecent behavior in Gods house, as seeking your
ease, abandoning your self to laziness and lolling, gazing about you, frequent
changing postures, covering your face or head. Regulate therefore your self by
the example of the best and most devout in the place you live. Use not commonly
or unnecessarily the name of God, or of the Devil; not passages of holy
Scripture; not mocking or profaning holy persons, things or actions: not only
because these things are sinful, but undecent also; and practiced only by
persons of ill behavior, or mean condition.

2. Do nothing that may offend another sense or imagination. To strike or
pinch a man, is a clowns salutation. No carrion, or excrement, is to be showed
to your companion, for you know not how squeamish he is. Approach not your
mouth so near in discoursing, as to offend or bedew any one with your breath,
for all men's breaths are offensive. Be not nasty in your clothes, or about your
body, in much sweating (except in time of War or action) belching, biting, or
cutting your nails, rubbing your teeth, picking your nose, or ears, handling
any parts of your body which are not usually uncovered, nor those more then
needs. Sing not to your self, nor drum with your feet or fingers in company, as
melancholic men do. Grind not, nor gnash your teeth, nor scrape or make any
sound to offend or interrupt others, not so much as loud speaking, except where
necessity. Spit, sneez, cough, etc. from the company, and not loud, for
decencies sake.

3. LET your look be pleasant, composed, modest, confident. Frowning is
apprehended to be a sign of a cruel disposition, as is noted of Caracalla. When
you discourse with any person, gaze not upon him, as if you were taking his
picture. Nor fix your eyes constantly on any one object; for that betokens
impudency, or at best, amazedness, or contemplation, as staring does folly.
Wandering and inconstant looks express madness, or unsettled thoughts; winking
(if not a natural infirmity) is the action of lightheaded persons, as winking
with one eye (like Shooters) is of maliciousness and evil nature. A sharp and
fierce look, is as one that is angry. To bite your lip is used in threatening;
to thrust out the tongue, is scurrilous. To sink the head into the shoulders,
is laziness; the head erect and backward, is interpreted pride and arrogance,
as letting it fall on either side, hypocrisy. To go with folded arms, is sloth
or melancholy; and in this, it is a natural suggestion to keep the breast warm,
and defend it from hypochondriac pain; to set them a kembow is arrogance, and
to hang them down, folly and lazines: to keep your hands in your pockets, or
covered with your cloak, is a neglect of the company.

A slow pace is proper to delicate and effeminate persons, an hasty one to mad
men; strutting is affectation, wadling is for the slothful and lazy, and in
measure to dancers.

Speak not through the nose, nor with any affected or unhansom gesture, wrying
the mouth, swelling the cheeks, lisping, etc. If you have not a pleasing
pronunciation, recompense it with good matter; and when speaking, cough not,
nor use any interruption, for so do liars when they invent what to say. A
little laughter is permitted, moderate smiling commended.

4. THERE is a certain mine and motion of the body, and its parts, both in
acting and speaking, which is very graceful and pleasing. Greg. Nazianz.
foretold what a one Julian (afterward called the Apostate) would prove, when
he saw his hasty, discomposed, and unseemly gestures. S. Ambrose discarded a
Clerk, because of an undecent motion of his head, which he said went like a
flail. On the contrary Cn. Pompeius, says Tully, ad omnia summa natus habebat
in voce splendorem, and in motu summam dignitatem. This consists; 1. in the
proportion and harmony betwixt every man's person and condition; as for a young
man to be active and sprightly, not mimical and restless: a grave man slow and
deliberate, not dull and sluggish. 2. In confidence, opposed to sheepish
bashfulnes; when one knows not how to look, speak, or move, sor fear of doing
amiss; but always blusheth, and is not able to support an harsh word, a
chiding, an angry look, without being altered. 3. In avoiding all affectation
and singularity; for whatever is according to Nature is best, and what contrary
to it, always distastful, and betraies vanity and indiscretion, that knows not
to imitate the best. Nothing is graceful but what is our own. And therefore
every one strives to work easily and freely, and with a seeming negligence, for
such seems to proceed either from Nature, or an habit. But constrainedness
undervalueth an action; as does also seeming to do all with design and study.
Yet, affected negligence is worst of all.

5. IN eating, at meals, the company is offended, if you eat with hands dirty,
or unwashed after you have made water, or done any offensive action. If you
hover over the plate or table, as an Hawk over her prey; if you handle others
meat, be delicate, or take the best, or most, or foremost, to your self. As the
Indian, that seeing at the other end a dish that pleased him, leaped upon the
table to fetch it. If you feed with both hands for fear of loosing time, or
keep your knife always in your hand, or with the point upward: if you dip your
fingers, or any thing you have tasted, in the sauce, or make a noise in eating;
cut or put into your mouth great morsels, or lick your fingers, or not wipe
your mouth or spoon after eating.

It is against health to swallow your meat unchewed, or greedily, or much, or
much variety, or delicacies: and against civility to eat after others, to throw
your bones or offal upon the floor, to gnaw your bones, to handle dogs, etc. at
the table, to observe what and how others eat, to dispraise or praise
immoderately the meat, or smell to it; for if you suspect it let it alone, lest
you offend others.

Present not to others what your self have tasted. Drink not, nor talk with
your mouth full, or unwiped, or glass full; nor put the cup too far into your
mouth as Children do; nor drink greedily, or so long that you are forced (as
Horses) to breath in your draught; nor blow into any ones cup, or upon his
victuals, tosts, etc.

Talk not at table any ungrateful or impertinent discourse, nor be angry with
your servants, nor do any thing which may interrupt the cheerfulnes of the
company. It is questioned whether it be civil to talk much at meals, because
that hinders the intention of the table, and it is not easy to avoid all
offensivenes, especially in discouse about Divinity; the frequentest table-talk
in England.

In England, Strangers tax us for drinking before we eat, against health;
drinking many in the same cup; and many times the snuffs left by the former;
for eating much, much flesh, sitting long at meals; not using forks but
fingers, and the like.

6. IN Visitings is much more ceremony and civility observed in some places
then others. The Italians, and of them the Romans, and Neapolitans are most
punctual. The greatest cause hereof is the avoiding of misinterpretations, and
quarrelling. This has begotten an Art of ceremoniousnes, so full of subtilties
and punctilios, that it is an emploiment to learn them. And therefore, tho in
this Country of great freedom and little jealousy, where persons of quality are
neither so apt to give, or take, offense, they are unnecessary, or also
unfitting; yet it may be fitting to know how to entertain a Stranger; or how we
are entertained by him, or by any other that expects or practices this
accuratenes of ceremony. I have therefore set down the chiefest of their rules,
for the most part out of the Book called Il Maestro di Camera, which is on
purpose to instruct in those observances.

Women are not usually visited in the morning; nor Ambassadors, or persons of
business, on the hour or day of their dispatch or emploiment. Nor persons in
the beginning of deep mourning; and if visited, it is not expected they should
use the accustomed ceremonies. Nor sick persons till they can sit up in their
beds, and put on their upper garments. Women also have always the upper hand,
even in their own houses; and are entreated not to stir out of the Chamber of
entertainment.

It is better to give too much honor to any person then too little; therefore
better to carry himself as inferior to his equals, and equal to such as are not
much inferiors. Inferiors also, if of parts, are to be better treated, for
parts are equal to honors or wealth. The more familiarly, the more honorably
are inferiors, or equals treated, (but superiors the less) as to your table, to
your bedchamber, or closet, to your self in bed, dressing, or retired.

Nearest the wall in England and France (I suppose because the cleanest) is the
honorabler place; in Italy the right hand, if two; the middle place, if three,
walk together; because easiliest heard of both.

To make signs to one to be covered, is superiority; so is to turn the back
first at parting, to accompany the departed but a little way; whereas your
equal you wait upon to the utmost door or gate, the superior to his Coach or
Horse.

The Visiter ends the visit, but not in the midst of a discourse; nor is he to
stay so long as the visited seems glad to receive him; but if he see his
company much desired, he may come the oftener.

Visits of congratulation and condoleance the sooner the better.

The uppermost place of a table ought not to turn its back upon the greatest
part of the room, nor to the door where the meat comes in; it should also have
the window before, or at least on one side of, it.

In making visits few things are observed; but in receiving visits many: as,
entertaining a superior or equal, he ought to be so clothed as to go abroad;
and drawing near to hasten his pace as if he would have gone further to receive
him; to meet a superior also at the bottom of the stairs, to accompany him to
his Coach. It being a general rule to accompany the departer one degree further
then where you receive him.

Equals (tho best received as you desire to be received by them) are commonly
received at the top of the stairs; and the Gentlemen meet them at the bottom.
It is always observed that the visiteds Gentlemen attend one degree at least
further then the Patron.

Inferiors are received according to their qualities, some in the Anti-camera,
some three, some two, or one Chamber off, or at the Chamberdoor, or half the
Chamber of entertainment. Only it is better to use too much, then to little,
courtesy.

With Strangers, extraordinary civility and freedom may be used; because they
come but seldom, stay not long, and have no emulation with persons of your own
Country. An eminent person not knowing how to entertain a Stranger, feigned
indisposition, and received him in bed.

If two send messages to have Audience of Compliment at the same time; to the
latter the Patron commonly answers, that A B. is Lord of himself and time, but
that at the same time he expects such a one.

If any one come to visit, whilst his superior is entertaining, ordinarily he
is conducted to another room, where he is entertained by the Gentlemen; or if
of lower rank, he stays in the Anti-camera.

If an equal come to visit, whilst an equal is in the room, the Patron asks
leave of the present, and leaving a Gentleman or two to keep him company goes
to receive the new comer.

To Persons of Quality, Audience is given with the Portiere (or hanging that
covers the door on the outside) down; public Audience with it open; yet if
then a Person of quality come, it is also let down. Likewise at their entrance
and departure the whole door must be opened (all their doors being made
double:) it being an action of great superiority to give but half a door.

Seats also ought to be set ready before the visitants enter; and chairs with
arms are more honorable then those with backs only: and these then stools. The
visitants or principal seat is to be set in such manner as it may look full
upon the door of entrance, and the greatest part of the room; the Patrons with
the back toward the door. If many visitants equal, their seats are to be set
one besides another, or ordered along the wall which has the foresaid
conditions. If two, their seats are to be set so as to have the door on their
shoulders, and that on the right hand of the door is the better place.

The M. de C. may deliver a message of compliment of a meaner person then the
Visitant: but he must be more careful if a message of business, except from an
equal, or that it require have. But all messages from the Prince or Superior
are instantly admitted, and no message must be whispered to the Patron in
company with equals, but spoken aloud.

If there be many visitants, and one depart before the rest, the Patron leaves
the rest and accompanies the departer. And if whilst he is conducting an
equal, another equal enters; he entertains the new comer a while with the
departer; then recommending him to some of his Gentlemen to conduct him to the
place of entertainment, he accompanies the departer, and then hasts to the
other.

When visitants are ready to depart, the Patron makes a noise with his foot or
chair, that the Attendant may understand to lift up the Portiere; but he ought
not to command him, or to do any thing which may show superiority in his own
house. But if there be need of any thing, to ask leave of the visitant to call
for it. But visited by inferiors, he may call or do what he pleases.

If the visitants stay till it be dark, the M. di C. causes to be lighted and
set up in the Footmens station, a torch of white wax; and in the other
Chambers, each two candles of white wax; and in the entertaining room two or
more, as shall be necessary, which are to be brought in by the Gentlemen; also
two or more in the Anti-camera must stand ready to be lighted, to be born by
the Gentlemen before the visitant when he departs; who yet are not to turn
their backs absolutely upon him. At the Hall door must be ready torches to be
carried in like manner before him by the Footmen, or Pages if there be any;
four at least for an equal, six for a superior, etc.

A Man meeting his equal, or not much inferior, makes his Coach stop; the
worthiest stops last, and departs first. A man in coach meeting his equal on
foot, lights out of his Coach, and when they part he walks on foot a while
after; and then remounts. For an inferior, he alights not, except he have
business with him.

A Governor of a Place, through which his equal is to pass, sends to invite him
before he enter his Jurisdiction; and if his invitation is accepted, he sends
to meet him 9. or 10. miles, some of his Gentlemen in Coach; and so others as
he draws nearer; when near, the Governor goes to receive him in person; or if
he please to honor him, under pretense of taking the Air, he may go abroad that
way he comes, and so receive him as he pleases.

7. Do nothing in a company where you design to show civility, that resembles
superiority, nor usurp upon their rights, nor do any thing whereby any of them
may think you do not love, prize, or respect them. As do not your own business,
command or chide your servants; assume not all the talk to, or of, your self,
family, wife, etc. nor tell your dreams, when perhaps your best actions when
waking are not worth the reciting; censure not nor contradict the rest; but
cede to the major part.

Desire not the highest place, nor be troublesome with impertinent debasing your
self by refusing to go first, etc. throwing the arms like a fencer, and
spending time in being entreated to do what you desire.

Some are dainty and nice, that take exceptions if not saluted, etc. in due
order, mode, etc. hence they become jealous, think themselves affronted, etc.
those men's conversation is a slavery; to be with them is to be in little-ease,
and a man had as good handle Venice-Glasses. Let them, I beseech you, enjoy
themselves by themselves, their conversation is a rope of sand, and no cement
of love and kindness can ty you to them.

8. THE beginning and end of Conversation with every one, is Salutation: nor
must you break company, tho with intention to return speedily, except you first
ask their leave. The inferior salutes first out of duty; and so does the
visiter.

Modesty is more graceful then boldness, boldness then bashfulnes, bashfulnes
then impudence. Country people know not how to look, but think they do best
when most extravagant.

Endeavor not to partake of other men's secrets, i. e. either Letters, Books,
Papers, Discourses, etc. if any thing be given to another to read, take it not
out of his hand, nor be hasty to see any curiosity the first; nor be curious to
know what any one is doing or studying, or with whom.

Whisper not with any in company, for the rest suppose you talk of them; but if
you have any private business, take him aside after you have asked leave, and
when none is discoursing: and when you discourse privately, eye no man of the
Company.

When you walk to and again, turn your face toward your superior; and if you
meet a superior in a narrow way, stop, and press to make him more room, for it
is an action of respect.

Beware of Sullennes, melancholic, furious, silence; as if you observed and
censured what every one spoke or did. Tho silence in a studious person may be
tolerated. And if all the Company laugh, do not you act the grave, nor be like
a pump to yield only what is forced from you.

Yet to be complaisant is not to echo to what every one says, or do whatever
any other would have you; to make up a number, and be a cipher in conversation.
To comply with all is worse then with none, as much as contemt is below hatred.

Pride, insolence, statelines, imperiousnes, angrines, are not signs or
qualifications of a Gentleman, but the scandals of Conversation, and proceed
from a spirit of presumtion and want of breeding, which conceives it self to be
above, better, wiser, then others; and that he alone ought to be the rule, to
which others ought to conform: that all others are wandering stars, himself only
in the Ecliptic. The greatest Magnetismes in the World are Civility, conforming
himself to the innocent humors, and infirmities, sometimes, of others; readiness
to do courtesies for all, speaking well of all behind their backs. And 2ly
Affability, which is not only to be used in common and unconcerning speech, but
upon all occasions. A man may deny a request, chide, reprehend, command, etc.
affably, with good words; nor is there any thing so harsh which may not be
inoffensively represented. Consider, that the meanest person is able to do you
both good and harm.

Esteem the faults you commit against others to be great; those of others
against you to be small.

Answer no man till he has spoken, for those who are impatient to hear, are
rash to censure: nor turn your back upon, nor correct, the speaker: depart not
before he has done, prevent him not by helping him out with what he seems to
have forgot. Tell not what comes into your fancy in the midst of another
discourse, nor seem to know what he would say; if you think fitting to
interpose, do it not without asking leave; else you hinder the discourse to be
understood, and make what is said to be misinterpreted; whence many unnecessary
arguings, and confused tattles before the matter can be cleared. Say not, I
knew this before, but accept what is said as new, and in good part.

Be not magisterial in your dictates; nor contend pertinaciously in ordinary
discourse for your opinion, nor for a truth of small consequence. Declare your
reasons; if they be not accepted, let them alone; assure your self that you are
not obliged to convert the whole World. It is also an uncivil importunity to
clash with every thing we dislike, or to confute every thing we think is false:
to formalize upon all the foolery and nonsense we hear. Let us not contrast
with the whole World, as if we were, universal reformers. In a controversy say
not all you can, but what is necessary. Also if what you report is not
believed, do not swear it, nor use any imprecations upon your self, nor lay
wagers, nor take your self engaged to defend it, or that he, who beleives you
not, affronts you. So neither repeat the same things frequently over; if the
company harken not to you, let them choose; suppose it your own fault, who speak
not what deserves their attention. If they understand you not, blame your self
who either speak not clearly, or accommodate not your self to your Auditory.

After a man has told a story in your presence, ask not, what is the matter;
for that shows that you contemned the speaker, and minded not what was spoken;
besides you make him your inferior, to tell a tale as often as you are pleased
to ask it.

He that speaks much, cannot speak all well. But indeed it is the dwarf-tree
that bears the first fruit, and the emtiest that makes the most sound. Besides
it is an injury to the rest of the Company, who expect to be heard, every one
in his turn. Yet better to speak much then nothing at all, except it be
apprehended to be Discretion.

If you live in a place where the Language is spoken in an evil Dialect, do not
affect to speak either purely, or badly, but as the best of that Dialect speak.
And avoid all big and hard words; remember how the Lion crushed the Frog, whom
he saw so contemtible, after he had made so great a noise.

All obscenity, whether in matter or words, proceeds from, and creates, evil
manners; and renders a Gentleman contemtible. But amongst clowns he is most
accepted, i. e. is the greatest clown, that uses it most. The pains we take to
be pleasing ought to be spent only upon things honorable and of good fame. The
reason why some words are immodest, others signifying the same thing, not, is:
because these represent the displeasing object at a distance, through another
light, and covered with another notion; so that the offensivenes is not that
which at first appears to the imagination; (so Toads and Vipers cause not that
effect in us when seen a far off.) It appears sometimes under a Metaphor, or
some other translatitious expression; which is a corrective to the harshnes and
unpleasingnes of the other.

The same cautions prescribed in speaking, or greater, are to be observed in
writing; the neglect of their pens has ruined very many; and particularly the
great Master of Civility, the Author of Galateo. For going to present to the
Pope a petition, by mistake he delivered a copy of licentious Verses writ by
himself: whereby he lost the Popes favor, his own reputation, and all hopes of
further advancement.

CHAP. II. Of Prudence.
1. THE Prudence here spoken of, is not that Wisdom of the Philosophers; which,
that we may live happily, would never have us experience sorrow, or trouble;
would reduce us to speculation, abstinence from emploiment, and a life
abstracted from common conversation. That teaches to menage action, public
affairs and negotiation with others; this shows how to escape inconveniences,
and sufferings, by withdrawing from business, and living with, and to, our
selves only; which that teaches to avoid by discreetly governing, and
regulating our actions. The Philosopher persuades us to choose the perfectest,
i. e. the most quiet, innocent, retired, manner of life; this Prudence to live
most perfectly, i. e. with the least inconvenience, or evil consequents, which
may disturb our happiness, in a common or active life. The one advises
temperance by abstaining from all Banquets, Feasts, etc. this shows how to be
abstemious, tho you come to them. The one tells us that the way to avoid
danger, v. g. is never to go to Sea; this, since we are embarked, would have us
govern our selves, and steer our course in the best manner. Whether of these is
better, I now dispute not; but supposing a man to have already made choice of
an active calling, then Prudence is of great force; to foresee all consequents,
and avoid the bad; to act effectually, and the shortest way; to choose the best
means; to menage crosses and hardships; and to be content with what success God
shall give.

2. SIGNS of a wise man are these; he rather hears then talks; beleives not
easily: judges seldom, and then not without great examination; deliberates as
long as his matter permits, and when resolved, is constant, and changes not
without solid reason; therefore having deliberated, fears not to repent. He
speaks well of all; defends the fame of the absent; courteous, not
flattering; readier to give then ask or receive; smiles rather then laughs; is
moderately grave; honoreth his Superiors; attributes the glory of good actions
to his companions, rather then himself; observes his friends, but does no
unworthy action for their sake; is ready to assist and pleasure all, even the
unknown; yet without offending others; considers both events, that whatever
happens, he may be like himself, neither exalted nor dejected; avoids anxiety,
melancholy, and morosenes; what he does, tho necessitated, yet does it not as
unwillingly, but makes a virtue of necessity; is even in his carriage, true in
his words, the same in show and reality, and beleives so of others when he has
no reason to the contrary; he admires none, derides none, envies none, and
despises none, not the most miserable: he delights in the conversation of wise
and virtuous persons; profereth not his counsel, especially when he understands
not well; is content with his condition: nor does any thing through contention,
emulation, or revenge, but strives to render good always even for evil. He
labors to know so much, as to be able to depend upon his own judgment, tho
he do it not. Abi tu and fac suniliter.

3. A FOOL talks much, and little to purpose; is angry without cause; trusts
any one; is restless and still changing place, troubles himself with what does
not concern him; the more fool he is the more he understands other men's
business, his own the less, and therefore is always ready to reprehend and
advise, seldom to obey; he discerns not when flattered; but sensible enough to
fancy himself abused. He desires without choice and discretion, and therefore
is quickly weary of what he enjoies; he resolves without advice, and therefore
suddenly changes, and that without reason. He is apt to refuse what he cannot
avoid, desire what he cannot obtain, and repent what he cannot amend; he
laments the past, is exalted with the present, and negligent of the future. The
first degree of folly is to think himself wise, the second to proclaim it; and
therefore he has an answer ready to every question, and is never better by
either counsel or affliction. As amongst wise men he is wisest that thinks he
knows least, so amongst fools he is the greatest that thinks he knows most.

4. PRUDENCE depends upon experience; without which no man, of ever so great
capacity, can any more arrive to be a wise man, then a fruit to maturity,
without time. And experience is either of other men, which we see, read, or
hear, or of our own affairs. This is the harsher Mistress; and happy is he that
can learn of the other, and arrive to perfection, tho in his old age. Hence it
is, that most men understand that only wherein they are most practiced; as many
know what is to be done, but neither how to go about it themselves, nor to
direct others; such have much study, little experience. Many can advise well,
but themselves cannot act. Many can menage a business if not opposed; and many
better if opposed: as many are not able to beat or chaffer, tho they know the
prices; and many ignorant of the prices, yet bargain cunningly. For the rules
of business are the same, tho the subjects are diverse; conversing much makes a
man bold and confident; and engaging in business fits for more business; And
therefore it is no wonder that many Citizens (Merchants especially) prove
wisemen, (and in the late Wars also excellent Soldiers) because much practiced
to treating, and negotiation. The like is also of Lawyers. But many of both
these Professions, thereby accustomed to value small gains, contract such a
narrownes of spirit, and tincture of interest, that it scarce ever leaves them.
Nor do I perceive Lawyers fitter for state emploiment then Merchants; they
having both particular Trades, and differing, as to public Government, no
otherwise then an East India, or an Hamborough, Merchant, in reference to
traffic. For tho the professing of Law may seem to entitle to somewhat more
knowledge in governing (of which Laws are the rule) yet in effect it does not;
because their practice and study is about just and unjust; about meum and tuum;
the petit iuterests and controversies of particular persons; not the Government
of a Prince over his people; or his negotiations with his Neighbors; which
depend upon different principles, seldom considered by those who deal between
private persons. Besides that the tying of Princes to the formalities of
Courts, tediousness of Processes; and casting the Laws of Government into the
mold of the Laws of private interest, must needs be great impediments unto it.

5. THIS Prudence, you see is quite different from cunning, the advantage of
Fools, and wicked men, who mistake them for the same. For the Prudent man's aim
is to secure himself, and interest, (the wisdom of the Serpent recommended to
us by our Savior;) to be in such a condition in all estates, as to be able
justly, honorably, and openly, to make use of all opportunities, and occasions
for his own advantage, toward the obtaining of the great end of his Creation.
Cunning measures Justice by escaping punishment, right by law, and wisdom by
success, reputation by wealth or power, and the satisfaction of others by his
own interest. A Prudent man deals so sincerely, that he fears not the
examination of his actions or purposes; and is not afraid to have witnesses, if
it were possible, of his thoughts. The crafty builds his House under ground,
celat, tacet, dissimulat, insidiatur, praeripit hostium consilia, and in order
to his own advantage he looks upon all other men as enemies. And to these
purposes, he uses many artifices; as taking advantage of the person, if in
necessity, entangled in vice, fear of punishment, or discovery; if in danger,
humor, passion, any weakness or ignorance: he also watches the time, if in
mirth, drinking, sorrow; if inadvertent, if easy; he makes use also of his
authority, reputation, and superiority, to impose upon inferiors. He pretends
great kindness and affection in general expressions; or particular ambiguous
ones; or such as he will not be obliged by; for he purposes nothing; nor has
he, or ever intends to have, any friend. But his great engine is a smooth
tongue, and a competent stock of Wit.

6. PERSONS passionate, fanciful, intemperate, are wont to apprehend things
strongly; and so apprehended to believe, and affirm to others, and act
accordingly thenselves: and if such men be of reputation or power, they often
do much harm. Very wise men also are oftentimes too resolute, and obstinate in
their opinions; for being used to thinking, they apprehend much of their
object, i. e. in a short time they overlook the reasons, circumstances,
probabilities, collect consequences, etc. which actions familiarize the object
to the faculty, and this renders the reasons of the contrary side, less
probable. Even as our conversation with a man breeds some degree of kindness
and friendship to him, tho the man himself be not worth our acquaintance.
Wherefore every Prudent man ought to be jealous and fearful of himself, lest he
run away too hastily with a likelihood instead of truth; and abound too much in
his own sense.

7. ALL estates are equal, i. e. Men may be happy in every state. For security
is equal to splendour; health to pleasure, etc. Every state also has its
enemies, for Deus posuit duo and duo, unum contra unum. A rich man because
rich; the poor man has as poor neighbors, or rich ones that gape after that
small which he enjoys: beware therefore how you offend any man, for the
offended joins against you; and be sure you hate no man, tho you think him an
evil or unjust person. Nor envy any one above you; you have enemies enough by
your own state, make no more; but rather, procure as many friends as you can to
uphold and strengthen you. Every man has also an enemy within himself; he that
is not choleric is covetous, is facil, I mean by Nature, for if he has subdued
these natural desires, it is otherwise. Nor can a choleric man say; I am to be
pardoned; it is natural to me; such a one is not so. For that such a one has
also his infirmity, his inclination, which perhaps is harder to conquer then
yours. Besides what is according to nature, is seldom perceived by us; a
choleric man perceives not when he is angry, at least thinks it no great fault.
Therefore it is necessary to have an Adviser.

8. ALL men, therefore are evil Judges of themselves, and think they do well
many times when they sin, and commit small errors when they are guilty of
crimes. It is also in our life, as in Arts and Sciences; the greater
differences are easily discerned, but of the smaller moments only the wise and
skilful in the Art can judge. Many vices also, tho contrary, yet are like to
virtues, the confines of both are the same; and the exact limits and boundaries
difficultly fixed; as of pride and greatness of spirit; Religion and
Superstition; quickness and rashness; cheerfulness and mirth; so of ambition
and sufficiency; Government and Tyranny; liberty and licentiousness; subjection
and servitude; covetousness and frugality; and so of the rest. And yet Prudence
chiefly consists in this very exactness of Judgment; to discern the one from
the other; and give to every cause his proper actions and effects. It is
therefore necessary for every one, that desires to be a wise man, to observe
his own actions, and the original of them, his thoughts and intentions, with
great care and circumspection; else he shall never arrive in any tolerable
manner to the knowledge of what he does well or ill. And lest all this
diligence should be insufficient, as the partiality to himself will certainly
render it; it is very requisite for him to choose a friend, or Monitor, who may
with all freedom advertise him of his failings, and advise him remedies. Such a
one, I mean, as is a discreet and virtuous person; but especially, one that
thrusts not himself upon the acquaintance of great Persons; nor upon
emploiments scandalous for opportunities of injustice; that bridleth his
tongue, and wit; that can converse with himself, and attends upon his own
affairs whatever they be. Insinuare your self into a confidence with him; and
desire him to observe your conversation, and seriously and friendly admonish
you of what he thinks amiss; and let not his modesty rest till he condescend to
you: for do not imagine that you live one day without faults or that those
faults are undiscovered. Most men see that in another, which they do not in
themselves. And he is happy, who in the whole space of his life can attain to a
reasonable freedom from sins; and that with the help of old age also, that
great dompter and mortifier of our lusts and passions. If he inform you,
whether true or false, take it not patiently, but thankfully; for the advantage
is the same (which is, to break the inordinate affection you bear toward your
self,) and be sure to amend: thus you both get a friend, and perfect your self
in wisdom and virtue. When you consider, that you must give account of your
actions to your vigilant reprover; that other men see the same imperfections in
you as he does; and that it is impossible for a great man to enjoy the advantage
of friendship, except he first disrobe himself of those qualities, which render
him subject to flattery, i. e. except he first cease to flatter himself. A good
Confessor in Religion will supply much of such a Monitors work; tho the one
does it judicially, the other only in familiar conversation. And how much more
worthy is such a one of entertainment, then those, who come to your table to
make sawces, eat your meat, censure their neighbors, flatter, and deride, you?

9. IF a friend tell you of a fault, imagine always (which is most true) that
he tells you not the whole: for he desires your amendment, but is loath to
offend you. And nunquam sine querela aegra tanguntur.

10. THERE is little or no difference betwixt not deliberating and deliberating
in passion; except that this is the worse, as engaging more, and more
irrevocably in error. For he that being out of the way, is resolved to go on,
straies the further.

11. THE fore-game, a wiseman plays, is to foresee and avoid; but the
aftergame is to carry himself with courage and indifferency. And therefore Cato
falling into a calamity, not by his own fault, should not have rid himself of
it by a greater wickedness; but by his constancy and generosity have showed to
the World, what a wise man should do in such a case.

12. ALL men's apprehensions naturally are alike: what one sees red, another
sees not green; and Aloes is not better to one, and sweet to another; and their
first thoughts upon them are the same. And that one man is more learned, is not
because he knows otherwise then another; but it is because he knows more
consequences, and more propositions by his greater industry and experience. The
conceptions according to truth are alike and the same, but false are infinite;
wherefore if you find one man single in his judgment, be wary of him; he either
knows more then all others, or there is some ill principle in him.

13. NO evil man but has irregular passions; which passions are offensive to
evil persons, more then to good; (for good men are humble, complaisant, etc.)
Therefore one evil man agrees not with, nor loves to deal with, another.

14. MUCH of the trouble of this world proceeds from certain irregular humors
and desires, which many men indiscreetly espouse; and because they are
innocent, they think them also prudent and rational. If other men endeavor to
repress them as inconvenient, etc. it is ill taken, and with trouble, and
disquiet; being these are not unlike to such as have antipathy to certain meats
that exposes them to needless passions, and impertinent affliction.

15. WISDOM is made to rule, and yet Magistrates generally are readier to make
use of their power then wisdom; of their will then reason. Because it is
easier, shorter, and complies more with the humor of mankind. Yet the subjects
prefer, and often expect, the other.

16. A GREAT General where ever he traveled, went continually considering the
situation of the country; and casting with himself, what was to be done, if
leading an army he should be assaulted there by an Enemy. By which means he was
always provided against surprises. The same care does every wise man take by
pondering all the cases of danger and difficulty which may or are likely to
occur in his emploiment.

17. EVERY man has a tender place; which when touched by the hand of God,
afflicts him, and he complains. And those, who are most engaged in the World,
have more tendernesses, as riches, family, reputation, bodily infirmities, etc.
Wherefore a wise man provides before hand a stock of patience; And fortifies
the dangers by good considerations, and by taking off his affections and
passions from them.

18. THE things of this World seem greater at distance; the things of the other
World greater near hand. Because those are fully known; and comprehended
always with passions of love, fear, etc. For they enter in by the senses;
which, being natural, and not free, Agents, work ad ultimum virium, and
entertain their object as much as they can. Besides, the objects are themselves
clothed with many circumstances, pomps, and shows; which make them seem great
and taking: and without these they would be naked, and nothing. But spiritual
things move only the Soul and spirit; which receives not without arguing and
disputing, i. e. without something of truth, and rejecting appearances.
Wherefore a wise man is wary of the things of this World, and admits them not
confidently.

19. CREATURAe Dei in odium factae sunt, and in tentationem animae hominum, and
in muscipulam pedibus insipientium. For that which is the occasion to wise and
virtuous men of obtaining and doing good, is by their ignorance turned by fools
to their disadvantage. Indeed all things, even wise counsel, are by fools made
either instruments or testimonies of their folly.

CHAP. III. Of Conversation and Discourse.
1. CONVERSATION casual with many, voluntary with few, of business to be denied
to none. Have many acquaintance, one friend, and no enemy.

Some keep company to spend their time, and saunter away their age; such care
not much with whom they converse; nor is their company either grateful, or
beneficial.

Others for pleasure and divertisement, to laugh and make themselves merry, and
so pass their time.

Others for interest; and that either honestly, or deceitfully, as by gaming,
debauching, hectoring, overreaching, flattering, etc.

2. GREAT care is to be taken in all conversation, for we must do as the
Ancients feigned of their lamiae, that within doors wore their eyes in their
girdles but going abroad put them in their heads; but still greater care is
requisite in choice of such companions, with whom a man is to converse much, or
a long time, or to trust with business of consequence. As the Italians say;
measure it a hundred times, before you cut it once; at first standing upon your
guard, till you discover their Inclinations. And

First, Avoid, as much as you can, the company of all vicious persons
whatsoever; for no vice is alone, and all are infectious.

Of Swearers, profane, and blasphemers; lest Almighty God lay to your charge
the neglect of his interest, and honor, in your presence uncontrolledly
affronted; whilst you are ready to resent and vindicate every small offense
done to your self.

Of Hectors, and those brutish persons; who either for gain, or satisfaction of
their bestial arrogance, care not whom they debauch or affront. Insolent
Children of Hell, ruiners of so many persons and families.

Of Scoffers; who put their own faults in the back end of the wallet, but
discover all they know of others. With such no peace is durable.

Of a person scandalous either for Profession, or manners; for you run his
hazard, and espouse his disreputation.

Never expect any assistance or consolation in your necessities from drinking
companions.

2. AVOID also consorting with those who are much superior, or much inserior,
to you: Inferior, not only in degree and external quality, but especially in
parts. Tanti eris aliis, quanti tibi fueris. Your own thoughts and designs will
be such as your companions are; and low fortunes breed many times degenerous
purposes. He that makes himself an Ass, it is fitting others should ride him.
And it is a very mean ambition to be the best of his company.

With open, upright, plain dispositions as also with the cheerful and
facetious, there is no difficulty in conversation; except where they meddle too
boldly with other men's lives; but theirs is Satyr, not calumny.

With resty, froward, ill natured humors, who are hard to please, and think it
grandezza to be harsh and parsimonious of good words, and supercilious toward
their equals, few converse who intend not to gain by them.

From all good natured persons, women, and drink, keep your secrets. And with
such as are wholly bent upon their own interest, discourse not upon what
concerns their interest.

3. THEY who pretend to cunning observe, and make much of a rule, which I think
it is not amiss to know, to beware of, and fortify against, but not to
practice, it; which is, to observe every man's imperfection, (for few there are
but have such a one) and accordingly to apply themselves. As for example

1. With such as are swelled with conceit of their Nobility or Wealth, if they
have business, they give them respect enough; if they have not, yet they pay
them with their own coin; no matter if they deceive themselves with the opinion
that they are honored according to their merit or desire.

2. All humorous persons are weak, and conscious to themselves, that they stray
out of the plain way of the reason of Mankind; for it is discretion and
judgment that corrects out irregular fancies, and (where virtue or vice
intervene not) conforms us to the common customs. Wherefore he, that will take
the pains to comply with, and seem to justify, their folly, rules them.

3. Such as having imposed upon themselves certain Laws of ceremonies, etc.
would also oblige others to the same; (which proceeds many times from
Melancholy and not pride) their weakness is manifest.

4. With morose persons, they deal freely, openly, and familiarly; that they
may think they see through their designs, and so they are stricken in the right
vein.

5. Those who are curious to pry into other men's matters, are commonly
malicious; no friendship with them, as neither with a proud, nor any angry,
person.

6. With such as are in disgrace with Superiors; they converse not much, and
are wary how they offer them help, etc. for they fasten as men drowning upon
any show of assistance.

7. With such as are in grace with the Prince, they keep good correspondence,
and seek their favor; and tho mean persons, yet they despise them not, for they
are chosen by his judgment. But they do as they, who in a dark night follow him
that has a torch, tho a rogue, or a beggar.

4. GIVE no man just cause of offense; nor resent too vively injuries toward
your self. But if after your care to avoid quarrelling, you happen upon such
brutes, as either to try your metal, or out of a bestial love of injuriousnes,
(for such Hectors this age has brought forth in greater plenty, then any other
I ever read of) the best way is to resent it briskly; and threaten seriously,
at least; if you do not chastize, the insolency, that makes injuring a
profession.

Choose therefore the conversation rather of ancient men, for their testimony is
of greater force; of such persons as are famed for virtue and wisdom; (for
something is always to be learned by them) and such there are many, but they
offer not themselves, but expect to be sought out, and admit not every
application without choice.

So much for Conversation, it follows of Discourse.

Men are commonly judged by their Discourse, and therefore it is necessary for
a wise man to regulate that, almost in the first place. Discourse is either
concerning. 1. Raillery and mirth. 2. Other men's lives and actions. 3.
Occasional, as History, News, etc. 4. Erudition and edification; or 5. Business
and interest of self or friends.

1. THOSE, who take pleasure in exposing others to contemt and derision, either
by imitating their actions, or imperfections, or by jeering and mocking them,
avoid, as you would the heels of an Horse, that kicks every one he can reach:
if you cannot, take the part of the abused; blame the action, spare the person;
or if the person be known, excuse the action; if neither can be done, praise
the person for some other good action or quality; so have you an Antidote
against the poison. Indeed there is no greater enemy to Peace and Charity then
the Railleur. For, as ordinarily it is the sooty oven that mocks the black
chimney; so one jeer seldom goes forth, but it returns with its equal; and
they together beget a quarrel. Besides, to abuse inferiors argues a mean and
contemtible spirit; Superiors, is dangerous; and a word often provokes them
more then an action. To abuse a friend is to lose him; a Stranger, to lose your
self in his and the Worlds esteem. Those mocks are most resented which touch a
man's reputation, chiefly that of wit or discretion; for of that even fools are
chary; and every one rather confesses his forgetfulness, then ignorance. next
those which are for particular actions, rather then in general, for they seem
to have more of truth, these of wit; which are of some secret imperfection;
which are of that wherein a man prides himself. Since Francis I. time (who
giving Charles V. the lie, and challenging him to a duel, was refused) the lie
has been counted a great affront; and many exaggerations are made of that
abuse. But had not that King (perhaps in justification of his own rashness)
said, that he was not a Gentleman that would take the lie; I do not believe
that would have deserved a severer chastisement then other imputations; I speak
in conversation, for Laws take no more notice of that then others.

Yet it seems, to condemn all raillery is to tether the wits; and therefore if
preserved in a mediocrity, it might be allowed. For it makes men stand better
upon their guard, when they know that they are likely to hear again of their
actions; besides it inureth them to bear harsh words, and bridle their
passions. But to railly hansomely is very difficult, for good jests are to bite
like Lambs, not like Dogs, tickle, not wound. And therefore it is requisite to
have a third person of Discretion, to stroke over the severer nips, and throw
dust upon them, when being heated they begin to sting one another. Also with
small miscarriages and misfortunes, and such as happen without the parties
fault, etc. you may be the bolder; and with such as bring no shame with them,
and such wherein many are concerned. The jeerer also must be content to taste of
his own broth; and the expert in this trade are wont to do; as he, who having
in his youth taken great liberty to railly upon married persons, in his
declining age took a Wife, where any one might have had her for his money; and
the first entertainment of his friends was the discourse of his own marriage,
to prevent all that could be said. In sum, jeers are only then good, when ex
tempore; when they seem to proceed from wit, not anger or malice; when they are
intended for mirth and pastime not calumny; when you are pleasant with his
error or mistake, not his shame; and seldom please at second hand. But because
these intentions are difficultly known; because many persons are very captious
and hasty; and because at best it argues not a solid, and universal wit, but a
peculiar dexterity and promtitude, which is frequently accompanied with want of
good Invention as well as Judgment; a Discreet person will not much engage
himself in it, nor render himself a fool to make others laugh; but after he
has tried 3 or 4 times and finds not himself fit for it, let him never
endeavor it more.

2. A KIN to the Railleurs are the Drolls, who turn all to Ridiculousnes. Their
censure see in Sen. ep. 29. Marcellinum nondum despero; etiamnum servari
potest, sed si cito porrigatur illi manus. Est quidem periculum ne porrigentem
trahat. Magna in illo ingenii vis, sed tendentis in pravum. Faciet; quod solet;
advocabit illas facetias, quae risum evocare lugentibus possunt, and in se
primum, deinde in nos jocabitur, etc. Christians have greater arguments against
this Drollery; that it grieves Gods holy spirit, and is contrary to that
seriousnes and consideration requisite to Religion. That there is nothing so
sacred or prudent, which by the petulancy of wit may not be made ridiculous,
consequently contemtible, fit to be neglected and abolished. Virgil we have
seen publicly, and even the holy Writings we heard to have been, travesty, by
those who spare neither their Souls nor reputation, to prove themselves
Buffoons; and show their abilities and ingenuity in folly. And this indeed is
the great engine charged against heaven, the only and trusty weapon wherewith
dirty potsheards (Disciples of Julian the Apostate, Porphirius, Epicurus, and
the rest of that brutish heard) bark and grin against a Deity. When all true
reason, and sober consideration as well as the other Creatures justify their
Maker, yea when even the Dogs revenged him upon Lucian the great Professor of
scurrility and scoffing as well as Epicurism and irreligion. But besides this
disposition proceeds from a laschety and levity unbefitting any person of
quality and emploiment; and increases the same inclinations both in the
Droller and the Auditors. For as a wit used to versifying is ready to put all
its thoughts into rhyme; or a Mathematician is presently reducing all his
fancies to somewhat in those Sciences; every one casting his thoughts into that
mold whereunto they are accustomed: So do Drolls reject all serious notions,
and accept and fix upon the light and emty. And therefore we see that when such
persons aim at any thing grave and serious, it misbecometh them, as done out of
order and season. Thus does mirth pleasingly by little and little steal away
the judgment, rendering it vain, studious of, and delighting in, that which wise
men avoid, laughter. And these men, whilst they think to fool others, become
themselves really, what others are in their imagination.

3. IN Discourse concerning other persons (familiar amongst Women) Backbiting,
and calumny is most frequent: because all men had rather hear evil of another
then good. Perhaps thinking thereby to justify their own faultiness; at best
indulging their self-love, which is grounded upon a too high estimation of
themselves, and too low of others.

This evil speaking is very frequently used by many, who pretend to
extraordinary Godliness; whose bitings are also more dangerous, and venomous
with those persons, who mistake their formality for seriousnes, and their
gravity, for reality, in Religion. But even in ordinary conversation men are
wont also to defame their neighbors open-fac'd, without any ceremony, design,
or remorse. From both these sorts of people, especially the former, turn away,
as much as you can; but be sure to be none of them; nor partake with them in
their calumniations. Consider what you say of others, others say of you. Before
you calumniate, think, am not I the same? or as bad? Take heed of doing that,
which may hurt, but cannot do good; for it is madness to make enemies without
cause; and it is better to suppress, then vent and satisfy, a piece of wit or a
foolish passion. The great rule is, Nothing but truth before the face, and
nothing but good behind the back.

Beware also of censuring Nations, Conditions, or States of Men, as well as
particular persons; for there is no Nation or condition, wherein are not many
good; and none so good, wherein are not many bad.

It Is also a great honor and wisdom to pass by the back-bitings of others
against your self. Charles the 7th of France demanded of one, much employed by
him, and on whom he had bestowed many favors, what thing in the world could
alienate his mind from, and bring him in dislike with, his Prince? the
Gentleman answered, An affront. This person seems to have bin very sensible
indeed, but whether his discretion had merited the favor of his Prince I much
doubt. Certainly the behavior of Antigonus was much more generous; who, when
one told him, that such a one affronted him, answered; it may be so, but I will
not be affronted. Augustus advised Tiberius not to be offended with peoples
speaking ill of them; it suffices, says he, that we can secure our selves
from their doing us harm. When one said, he was a Tyrant; he answered, were I
so, he durst not have said it. To one calling him Dwarf, well, said he, then I
will get higher shoes. P. Bernard, when one bid him get out like a dirty
Priest, replied, you are mistaken, I came in a Coach. And truly since all these
evil tongues are conquered by silence, one would think the victory easy; did
not experience show us, that the great remedy against bursting is giving vent.

There is no reason that the effect, which may proceed from diverse causes,
should be attributed to one. v. g. an action of seeming disrespect may either
come from an intention to affront, from negligence, from having some other
business in his thoughts, etc. interpret not therefore such actions as affronts;
and the rather, because it is our duty to take every thing by the best handle.

4. THE most innocent, grateful, and universal Discourse, is telling Stories;
and modern rather then ancient. Some are so well stocked with this trade as to
be able to answer any question, or parallel any case by a Story; which is (if
well done) a very great perfection of eloquence and judgment. And in telling
Stories avoid too often said he, and said I, hear you me, mark me, etc. be
perfect also, that you need not recant, stammer, or repeat things said before;
be not tedious in impertinent circumstances, nor make your own glory the
chiefest concern.

Tell no lie in your discourse; especially not Gasconades, and improbable
Rhodomontades, wherein some, out of weakness and lowness of spirit and parts,
take as much pleasure as others in drinking when not thirsty, and think they
then overwit the company. Be not hyperbolical and extravagant, especially in
praising and dispraising; for the wit takes away the credit; whereas the end of
speech was first to make us understood, then believed. And if you be convinced
of an error, for truths sake acknowledge it, and change your opinion; for this
ingenuity is greater, because rarer. And remember, that

One chance falling out, as the Astrologues prognosticate, gets them
reputation; and their thousand lies are not taken notice of; but to a wise man
one lie does more disgrace, then thousand truths can recover.

When news comes from an uncertain Author, tho probable and expected, yet
suspend your belief; because men easily report what they desire or expect; but
rather give heed to certain extravagant and unexpected Relations, as unlikelier
to be invented. And when you tell news, engage not for the truth of it.

5. IN your discourse rational or of erudition, skip not from one subject to
another; as do Fanatics, and other ignorant Sciolists, who are never at ease
till they have vented all they think themselves to know above other men.
Neither maintain an argument with ignorant, nor contradictive persons; nor
think that you are bound to convert or instruct the whole World; least of all
with vain drolls, who make your seriousnes their sport. Be content to satisfy
with reason, not (especially your own) authority (a refuge many fly unto when
worsted, if they know there is no examining Books) such as are capable and
disposed.

In reasoning, the most excellent way, wherein the best able is certain to
carry the cause, and which will bring the controversy to a speedy
determination, is by asking questions, and proceeding still upon the
adversaries concessions* which he cannot without shame retract; (by Syllogisms
is more Pedantic.) This is Plato's manner of discoursing.

Pedantry is a vice in all Professions, it self no Profession. For a
Schoolmaster is not therefore a Pedant; but he only who importunately,
impertinently, and with great formality, shows his learning in scraps of Latin
and Greek; or troubles himself with knowledge of little use or value; or values
himself above his deserts, because of something he knows (as he conceives) more
then ordinary; or despises others not skilled in his impertinencies; or
censures all Authors and persons confidently without reason. And whoever does
thus, be he Divine, Lawyer, Statesman, Doctor, or Professor, he is a Pedant.

Do not in ordinary company treat of matters too subtle and curious, nor too
vile and mean; nor of things unseasonable, as of Religion in mixed, or young
company, or at table; but in all Discourse have an intention to better your
self and others. Which that you may do, contrive, (as much as you can) before
hand of what to discourse; and lay your scene, which afterward you may menage
as you please.

A man may judiciously discourse, when either he knows the subject very well;
or when desirous to learn (a submission and ingenuity very grateful in company)
or when necessitated to discourse, and then he must do it discreetly and
doubtingly, unless he very well know his Auditory. Cautious also must he be who
discourses of that he understands amongst persons of that Profession; an
affectation that more Scholars then wisemen are guilty of; I mean to discourse
with every man in his own faculty; except it be by asking questions, and
seeming to learn.

You may freely and safely discourse of matters of Philosophy, Mathematics,
Travels, Government of foreign Countries, Histories of times past or present
of other Places, Husbandry, and the like, which subjects concern no man's
reputation, and therefore none much care what part you take.

Discourse, tho amongst learned men, lays no grounds of Science, but supposes
them, and therefore study is necessary; without which who so adventures amongst
Scholars, is like a Lady, that has excellent Medicines, but neither knows
whereof they are made, nor how to apply them effectually. Have a care also that
your income exceed your expenses, i. e. that you hear and read more then you
speak: for he that spends out of the stock of wit and memory is quickly
bankerupted; but knowledge and learning continually improve by discourse.

Cunning discoursers to avoid baffling are wont at first to lay down a
proposition easily defensible, to which they may retreat in case of necessity;
but defend the other out works also as long as they can.

Men's wits and apprehensions are infinitely various; nor is there any opinion
so extravagant, which has not some followers and maintainers, who fit their
hypotheses to it. Wherefore do not censure any thing on a sudden as
ridiculous, for tho it please not you, it may another, as wise.

Every man makes himself the measure of all others for truth and falsehood,
wisdom and folly. learning and ignorance, and the like. And who is able to
denudate himself of this false opinion, or prejudice at least to truth?

But from hence it proceeds that we esteem him knowing that knows more or as
much, and him ignorant, that knows less, then our selves. Him also virtuous
that is according to our sentiment and degree. Also that all men are more ready
to blame another errors, then praise his virtues. And that a man knowing what
another does not, and being ignorant of what another knows, yet knows not his
own ignorance; but consequently values himself and despises the other.

To man alone (not beasts nor Angels) has nature given a nauseousnes of the
present. The best things in the world if not accompanied with variety, become
distastful. And nothing sooner then Discourse: which is so much carefullier to
be menaged, as the ear is sooner cloyed then the eye. Prudent eyes are kept
open by reason, ordinary persons by wit.

Old men commonly discourse of grave and edifying Subjects, Divinity,
Government, History, etc. Young men rather of pleasant; Hunting, Fashions,
Travels, Wonders, etc. every man chooses to discourse of that he best
understands and loves.

CHAP. IV. Concerning Business.
A Doctor being entreated by his Nephew to give some rules for guiding and
securing himself in negotiation, and contracts; after long study told him, he
could give him but one; which was, always to have to do with virtuous persons.
But for many reasons this rule, tho a perfect one, is hard to be practiced; and
therefore I beseech you be content with such imperfect ones, as my reading or
experience can furnish.

If any one tell you, that it is to no purpose to think long upon any matter;
that they are only wise men who can dispatch business ex tempore; that
consulting is but a dull formality; and that a man sees as far into a thing at
first, as by much consideration; say boldly that man is a fool: the more you
think, the more and clearer you shall understand. Therefore Men of most leisure
do business the best; and those who have much business must have much pardon.
Therefore men used to business do it better; because they have thought of it
before, either in the same, or a like, case.

A prudent Man does no business rashly, i. e. without reason and advice; and he
advises also as long as he can; and that first with his own thoughts: which
being not sufficient, he takes in also the assistance of other men's counsel;
and hears others, tho he follow perhaps his own. Most men advise for their
own interest, and therefore happy is he who has a friend.

To order your thoughts well in Deliberation, endeavor to put your business
into an History, considering what is to be done or said first, what afterward.
For the hindrance of prudent resolutions is the confusion and disorder of
thoughts; which by this method is cleared: by it also you shall quickly
discover where the difficulty is, and know when you have done. It is also very
convenient to write down your reasons pro and con in deliberation; for the mind
by this means, is freed both from the confusion, and burden of those arguments.

Give not your advice or opinion before asked; for that is to upbraid the
others ignorance: nor attribute ill success to the neglect of your council; nor
be angry if your advice be not followed. Neither accustom your self to find
fault with others actions, except vicious; for you are not bound to weed other
men's Gardens.

Be not too eager in counselling others; for the evil success (which happens
frequently to good advice) will be laid to your charge, and seldom shall you be
thanked for the good.

It happens frequently to men that are wise by experience, and not learning,
that they cannot give a reason of their opinion and advise, tho it be really
the best: (as a mere mechanical workman knows there is a fault in the work,
(tho he cannot tell punctually what it is.) Despise not such men's opinions for
their want of Discourse,

In Deliberations where there is reason on both sides and that a man has
resolved one way, he commonly thinks that he has chosen the worse, because
then he only considers the reasons of the contrary part; which represented by
themselves (the other after resolution being no more considered) seem greater
and of more consequence then they are.

There is one great perfection in doing business, which is, That tho you set
your mind and thoughts upon business, yet do not engage your affections, at
least deeply, in it. For thus shall you both have your understanding clear at
all times; and not be disturbed if you miscarry; which you must make account
will often happen unto you. Besides precipitiousness, impatience, or not
staying to take the opportunity, and time your business, is frequently the
ruin of many noble designs; and all passion whatsoever deteriorates your
negotiation; if your reason will not bring you to this indifferency, experience
will. A l'adventure tout vient a point a qui peut attendre.

In treating about business you understand, you have an advantage to propose
first; in what you understand not, it is best to receive propositions. And if
you have a doubtful cause, an inconstant adversary, or find him disposed to
comply with your desire, defer not to dispatch.

In business (except buying and selling) you shall find very few persons speak
to the purpose; therefore let every man talk his fill: rather then interrupt,
provoke him to speak; for he will blurt out many things to your advantage: some
out of ignorance and inexperience; others on purpose standing on circumstances
and things of small consequence. Women commonly (as weakest) are most
extravagant; and at an end, or the midst, of their Story must drop a tear; for
being themselves compassionate, they think others are so too; and that is their
interest.

The difficulty of dispatch is not from the business it self, wherein a man may
easily see what is necessary, or fittest to be done: but it is in persuading
your interest; in communicating so much and no more then concerns you; using
such reasons only, as are proper for your matter; in applying them to every
ones understanding, inclination, and at a fit time; and in taking off the
opposition of Adversaries. For there is no interest that has not its contrary,
and sometimes also so forcible a one, as is to be conquered only with money;
which is a sword that cuts even a Gordian knot.

All things concernning the menagery of affairs are reduced to these heads.

1. The ground or occasion. 2. The end to be brought about. 3. The reasons
whereupon the affair is grounded. 4. The difficulties likely to be encountered
5. The answers which may be made to the reasons. 6. And the replies to them. 7.
The advantage of the affair to the other party. 8. Examples of like cases.
But always be sure to remove the principal obstacle.

Some men are apt to believe what they hope for, or desire; others are never
secure, till they see and enjoy. And this doubtless is the better; because it
increases diligence, good success, and less affliction. Wherefore of future
things, imagine and provide for the worst; tho of actions dubious of other
persons you conceive the best.

Fear is a necessary passion, and has a great share in all our affairs. The
great and general defect being negligence, laschety, and love of ease; fear
discuseth these. He that is in continual apprehension of evil watches to
avoid, prepares to rencounter, and is cautious not to give admittance to,
danger; but endeavors to secure his condition, and remove further from evil. In
things of the other world men are more apt to hope, because they have not so
clear an apprehension, nor so firm a belief, or not so frequent consideration
concerning them; but in matters of this world more apt to fear; for all men's
hopes frequently fail, their fears seldom. Besides the loss of what we enjoy
goes nearer and is more sensible to us, then the future good may advantage;
wherefore in treating with most men you know the best Topic. And seldom is it
seen but that fear also gets the better of love, and therefore good Magistrates
trust not only to love, but will in some degree be feared also.

Secrecy and reservednes is of infinite use; for, besides that such are not
easily prevented and interrupted, men are still commenting and in suspense
about every motion of theirs; which gets great reputation. Besides sudden
things do more amaze, and confound, then things foreseen or expected. But you
need not put your self to the trouble of secrecy, where you fear no opposition.

Many time; also your secrecy is to be concealed; nor is an inquirer into the
business you would hide rudely to be denied (for that many times breeds
jealousies, etc.) but by prudent and courteous dissimulation to be fenced
withal, and his thoughts dexterously avoided rather then forcibly returned upon
him. He that is a good Practitioner in this trade becomes oftentimes Master of
his thoughts that came to sist him.

Beware of trusting to your fortune; for most men are fortunate for a time, and
in some things only: nor is he fortunate, who has a good occasion offered to
him, for it is Prudence to take hold of, and use, it; but he that has it
presented twice.

Think not such as these to be good consequences. He is a good man, therefore
does nothing ill: he is a bad man, therefore does nothing well. He is a wise
man, therefore does nothing foolishly, etc. Consider this well and stand upon
your guard. For every one has errors, from whence sometimes greater, other
times lesser, mischeifs arise: happy are they, whose errors happen to be in
small matters, and which come betimes, and are remediable.

He that doubts not, knows either all things, or nothing. And he that imagines
never to commit an error, his next pretense must be to Divinity.

The things of this World never stand in one stay, but are always moving their
own way; and if we perceive not their alteration, it is because our age is
shorter then theirs. This observation is of importance to many purposes, v. g.
virtue and vice, wisdom and folly, are but good and bad, prosperous and
adverse, in the seed.

When we read in Histories the great changes of Government, we much wonder at
them, and are apt to pity the sufferers. But Providence has so ordered, that
great alterations ordinarily happen by little and little; so that both reason
and nature either accomodate to them, or have time to escape, and provide other
ways.

He that enters into danger without considering it, is a beast; he only is
valiant, who knowing the danger, embraces it cheerfully, whether out of
necessity or honor. Yea, tho he knows and supposes that all dangers have not
their effects; but that some are prevented by industry, some by courage and
prudence, and some fortune and the course of things (Gods Providence) casts of.

Dealing with Merchants and men of business and virtue cut of ceremonies; and
declare the business at length rather then too-short; for this is apt to raise
mistakes; besides a man is not always in disposition or ability to fathom the
depth of an affair with a short cord.

When you have extorted from a person what he obstinately denied, you need not
doubt, but at the same time also to obtain another he would not willingly
grant. For when a man is forced, as it were, to let go his hold of what he most
firmly grasped, he unbends his hand, and abandons whatever it contained.
Commota semel and excussa men's [a stabilitate sua] ei servit a quo impellitur.
Thus the Parliament proposed to the King, together with the bill of attainder
of the Earl of Strafford (which he was formerly resolved not to grant) a bill
for perpetuating the Parliament, which, tho of far greater consequence, he
scrupled not.

Deser, as long as you can, the doing of a thing against your mind, rather then
give a positive denial; for accidents many times divert the design, and deliver
you from that strait, wherein a refusal may deeplier engage you.

Never dispatch an evil and difficult business so absolutely, but that (if
possible) you leave place to undertake and introduce it again. Time and
opportunity alter many things, and make that pass smoothly which formerly would
have bin refused, had not your dexterity left open the door for a new treaty.

All men naturally avoid persons inquisitive into other men's affairs; for such
commonly are lavish of their intelligence, and thereby breed quarrels and
spread animosities: besides that themselves are apt to envy and malign others,
that being the concern which breeds their inquisitivenes.

The reason, why things conform not to the general desire and expectation of
the World, is, because they who give beginning and ending to business are but
few, and many are those who desire and expect.

He is often to blame, who neglects a present good for fear of a future evil,
except it be nigh at hand, and in a manner certain. So is he who strives to
avoid all difficulties; for more things affright, then hurt, us. And there are
many changes in this World. Di cosa nasce cosa. And in judgments of the future
we see wise men frequently mistaken.

Poor, meanpeople, and wranglers, etc. conclude not any treaty, nor offer all
they mean to give, till they be forced, i. e. till they see the treaty ready to
break up; and they think that they get a considerable advantage by such
restines, and importunity; as indeed they do, if they deal with ingenuous
persons. So petty Tradesmen love to call their customers back.

Since grateful and virtuous persons are so rare, value the service of such as
are joined with you in the same interest or danger; and you may more reasonably
expect to be assisted by him, that hopes to get by you, then by him, who has
already received favors from you. And remember that a Crown in your purse does
you more honor then ten spent.

When in consultations there are contrariety of opinions, seldom is the best
chosen; and the more persons argue, the further they are from agreeing; the
love of their own opinion insinuating it self by little and little with their
reason. Wherefore, sometimes the most importunate prevails, sometimes he that
finds out a medium; not that this expedient is always the best; but that
persons in heat of dispute, cannot easily pass over, or fully consent, to a
contrary.

Thrust not your self to be Moderator or Umpire in Controversies, till
required; and then it is better to exaggerate the mischeifs of disagreement,
then benefits of concord; for fear is stronger then love. Many are wont always
to take the Adversaries part. But it is a very hard thing to reconcile men at
first, their passions being high, and animosities great. But after they are
reasonably wearied with Law, or other inconveniences, it is not difficult to
find out a medium, which may save both their honors; which is that both
commonly desire. A worthy Gentleman being to reconcile two persons, first made
them swear both to stand to his determination; and 2ly that neither of them
should reveal upon what terms they were reconciled.

Every man is more apt to love, cherish, and trust in him, on whom he has
already bestowed most courtesies; esteeming him as his creature; [This is the
cause of the great love of Parents toward their Children:] and he, that loves,
and does favors, obliges, and submits himself to the receiver; so that for
fear of losing what he has already bestowed, he must bestow more. Wherefore if
you seek the favor of a great person, accept courtesies from him, and not from
others.

He that would persuade great men, let him first begin with the weakest; by
probable arguments, good words, and humble carriage he shall obtain their
friendship; and by their Authority (tho but fools) draw in the wiser.

Mean wits always distrust subtle arguments, and Logical heads: and great men,
for the most part, are of an inartificial understanding, and therefore by
seemingly naked truth, and plainness, are brought to your opinion.

In great Councils and meetings there are always some leading men, whom if you
gain, your business is done.

Amongst Multitudes, one adversary can do more harm, then many friends can do
good.

There are some who are children even in mature age; and of them a man must not
say, they are 40. years old, therefore they will do as men of 40. years old.
But concerning those and all such Heteroclites, look at their present customs,
and menagery of their private affairs. For if you see an aged man vehement,
sudden in his resolutions, following the impetus of his passions; hold that
man for a child; not moved with reason, unconstant; to day resolving without
consideration, and in the same manner reversing it to morrow.

Nothing is well done, or said, in passion; tho there may be just cause of
being passionate; but less or more all passion according to the degree of it
hinders reason and deliberation. But beware instead of passion you fall not
into slyness and cunning: for these two, passion and cunning, do many times
shoulder out one another; and generally people without passion are looked upon
as sly and crafty: which of the two is worse, there being more of the voluntary
in it. It is good therefore sometimes to seem passionate, if you be not so.

In all treating with other persons try first what may be done by fair means,
good words, hopes of gratitude, etc. before you come to power or passion. And
let power either of your self or the law be the last.

When you consult with a friend about any business, be not hasty to receive a
present answer; but give him time to consider; for the common and first
conceptions of all men are much what the same: at least his extempore is not
equal to your premeditated. Physicians and Lawyers answer out of their trade,
and, as they pretend, by certain rules and cases very like, if not the same,
with yours; but it seldom falls out, that the same case in dispatch of business
falls out twice; or if it do, yet it is clothed with such various and differing
circumstances (according to which a wise man frames his opinion) that it is
very difficult to give judgment.

The manner is when you propose a thing which you are afraid; will hardly be
accepted, or granted; propose it by parcels; that one piece be digested, before
the other be swallowed.

It is better to be near to, and serve, a prodigal, then a thrifty and
parsimonious, Prince; tho for the public this is more advantageous. For the
prodigal is forced to use diverse oppressions, etc. and more suffer by his
profuseness then are benefited by it; and they commonly are most benefited by
it, who least deserve it.

It seems that Princes are more free, and Masters of their own will, then other
men; but it is contrary in such as govern prudently: for they are necessitated
to act with infinite cautiousness and consideration; frequently to court even
mean persons; and swallow many a bitter pill at their hands. Wherefore pardon
your Prince if he do not all things exactly, according to the precise rule of
wisdom.

He, that having bin the means to advance another to high degree, thinks to
govern him, cancels his own courtesy.

If you find that any one has spoken ill of you to your Patron, take no notice
of it; nor be eager to vindicate your self; but continue your emploiment
without complaining; and your innocence will both appear, and prevail at last.

Great enterprises are not to be relinquished, because we cannot reconcile all
difficulties; for were all things easy, they were not great; and could all
objections, i. e. difficulties be solved, little were left to your courage or
discretion. Some things Gods providence, and the course of things render easy;
and others are difficult only, because we see not through them at present.

The more you come into favor, the less admit Cabals and Juntos, to avoid
suspicion. Nor converse much with the ordinary servants; for so they will
respect you the more. Yet, lest you be hated, be courteous in your salutes,
discourses, offers of service, but especially in giving them reasons in your
discourse: for then they think you do not despise them. But if they hate you
for any good service done to your Patron, sell it him dear; that he may be
obliged to protect you.

No Patron really loves a servant wiser then himself, let him pretend what he
pleases; and therefore if you be a person of understanding, covet not to be
too near him, as of his bedchamber, etc. for Patrons are not pleased that such
persons should pry too nearly into their actions and inclinations. Wise men,
when they have auy way come in competition with their Prince, have always
ceded.

Yet it is better to be feared and hated, then despised. Wherefore choose rather
to be a severe searcher into, and censurer of, actions; then to be undervalued
for taking no notice of them.

If Spies abound in a Court, discourse in generals; and give them no cause to
think themselves discovered by you.

Neutrality makes the slowest, but surest, progress: for the neuter is connived
at through the others mutual envying.

A weak Patron is easily gained, but no considerable advantage of honor, or
profit, can be got by him; a wise Master is jealous, easily lost, and then
never recovered. If your Master have any near kindred, keep fair with all, for
they will certainly prevail; and stick to the best beloved.

If you light upon a Master that is inquisitive after your words and actions,
know, that he intends to keep you under. Pray to God not to light upon a
cunning Master; for either you shall be ruined by him; or at best tired with
standing upon your guard. In this case make show not to perceive his subtilty,
but to admire his ingenuity. Sic ars deluditur art.

If your Patron, by discourse, or actions, endeavors to conceal any of his
vices; be sure he holds that dear, is deeply engaged in it, and would enjoy it
without a rival.

To avoid envy, affect not expense and ostentation; but mind reality. For be
sure that way, accounted so honorable, leads straight to destruction.

CHAP. V. Of Servants.
SINCE Slavery was banished Christendom, a Servant is no other, then one hired
to such emploiment; and under such terms, as if well observed, the difference
is not great between the condition of the Master and the Servant. For none can
compel another to serve him against his will; nor can I contract with him for
his service, but at the same time he will bargain with me for his salary. I
take him under my roof, I make provision for his sustenance, I defend him from
his enemies; as well as from hunger, cold, and diseases. And what does he for
this? he serves me? no, he serves himself. The same labor, he would undergo
in his own house to maintain himself, and perhaps with great anxiety, he does
in mine with pleasure. So that now service is nothing but a compact betwixt the
rich and the poor, for their mutual advantage.

And to demand or imagine, that a servant should quit his own interest, profit
and advantage, to procure his Masters, is a folly no considering man will be
guilty of.

Therefore let the Master command according to reason and sweetness; not so
imperiously, or with such opprobrious language as may justly discontent or
chase away a Servant. If he obey with cheerfulness, and affection, he may at
length perhaps make his Masters interest his own.

If you pay him not his wages, he will pay himself.

In controversies, let the Master sometimes cede to his servant, to keep his
metal in breath; and not too severe, if the faults be small, or committed for
want of Judgment, or through a little itch of liberty. Let the Master be
sometimes blind, and the servant deaf. But faults of malice, or impiety are not
to be pardoned. The first such fault is the Servants; the second divided
between Master and Servant; the third, wholly the Masters. Correct him not
before Strangers, but if correction amend him not, rid your hands of him; both
for his sake, your own, and the scandal of others.

Rich men are inclined to pride, and contemt of others; for having wealth,
which commands all things in the great Market of this World, they are apt to
become insolent, petulant, impatient of disobedience, denial, reproof, or
advice. And because ostentation of happiness is one part of it; therefore are
rich men vain glorious, desirous to be observed, and to live splendidly. And
men newly enriched, and without their own industry more vain then they, who are
born so, or have by industry acquired great estates. Men in power also are more
honorable, gallant, generous, and less vain then the rich.

Also because great estates are commonly acquired with little, and small ones
not without great, labor; therefore are rich men apt to exalt themselves as
either above others, in parts, or the favor of God, both which are very great
and dangerous errors, but difficultly to be eradicated.

Let them not, therefore, mistake morosity for grandeur, and passion for
greatness. It is better to subdue your Servants reason, as well as his strength
and diligence.

And those, who betake themselves to the rich, are to comport with their
follies, impertinencies, and contumelies; and to conceal them. It is better
they should love their Masters, but by no means hate them; or speak evil of
them behind their backs. Not dispute their Masters judgment; not vy wit, taunt
or rally, with them; not use familiarity without leave; but to put on patience,
when they put on a livery.

To admonish and reprehend is not an action of an Inferior; and an affectionate
disrespect obliges not so much by its sincerity, as it provokes by its ill
example; wherefore when you advise your Superior, do it so, as it may be
accepted. And let not the Master refuse to hear the advice of his Servant, tho
he follow it not.

No man ever miscarried through excess of respect; or was disgraced for
retaining a constant and proportionate sense of his Patrons grandeur. Yet
Patrons love not sullen, melancholic, austere, grave, or silent, Servants.

A Master ought not to divertise himself with his Inferiors, nor make his
Servants privy to his infirmities and failures; but if he do, the Servant must
not presume, nor heighten himself for it. But let him be secret, and faithful
to him.

Let the Servant also know, that it is harder to menage well his Masters
affairs then his own; let him therefore be more careful. For he has more
temtations to negligence and dishonesty. Besides his Masters business is not
always to be menaged the best way; but that he likes best.

Put your Servants to emploiments proper for their condition, years,
capacities, etc. but never upon unnecessary trouble; for that is to abuse, not
use, a Servant, and will cause them to hate you.

Those Servants justly expect to be rewarded extraordinarily, whose industry
and diligence seem to merit it. (For gratitude being the least of virtues,
ingratitude is the most infamous of vices; especially in a great person:) and
this rewarding is so to be done, as the other servants do not resent it. That
therefore is best done after some signal service. But beware of equalling all
your Servants in your gifts, or rewards: for the discreeter and Superior hold
it an affront to be equalled with the rest; and the Inferior made proud: but
none more obliged then they, who catch money thrown about in a solemnity, to
render thanks to the Donor. Some there are, who defer their rewards till some
festival, as Christmas, or Easter: But then the day is thanked, not the giver;
and after you are accustomed to it, it is expected as due, and part of wages,
not kindness and bounty.

It is better to be somewhat sparing then liberal to a good Servant; for as he
grows full, he inclines either to be idle, or to leave you. And his murmuring
you may govern by a seasonable reward.

It seldom happens that a reconciliation of Master and Servant is sincere;
therefore return not to a service, whence you have been ejected.

In places which concern money, employ not your kindred; nor use them as your
Servants; for they will presume upon their condition, and you cannot with
reputation break with them. And truly, if you be a single person, I cannot
forbear to recommend to you a saying of a great Prelate; that a Courtier at
Rome ought to have 1000. Ducats rent, 2000. in his purse, and be 1000. miles
from his kindred.

CHAP. VI. Of giving, receiving, and promising.
IT is uncivil and unfitting for a man to oblige another to keep a promise
disadvantagious to him; or one made in mirth, passion, have, unadvisedly, in
civility, or compliment, or one obsolete; as also not to admit of a reasonable
excuse for the failure of a promise.

It becomes every man to promise nothing but what he intends to perform: yet
many, tho justly denied, are much displeased; for all men govern not themselves
by reason. Insomuch that if a person desire to engage your endeavors in his
business, if you show him the difficulties, tho you promise your assistance, he
commonly takes it for a denial, or a sign that you intend not seriously to
befriend him. For these and such like reasons, the fashion now-adaies is, to
give good hopes to all suitors, and to promise very freely and largely. And
they find thereby great advantage (as they think) for carrying on business. The
performance is sometimes hindered by unexpected casualities; sometimes a good
and plausible excuse goes a great way; sometimes the party suffers himself to
be wheedled with good words. Yet it is so ignoble and dishonorable a thing for a
man to be worse then his word, that it never ought to be done. But this may he
do; he may entertain all suitors with general or conditional promises, and fair
words: and tho all men ought to look at effects, and not words; yet have good
words a wonderful power (take heed of being fooled by them) I suppose because
every one values himself, and his merits, at more then he is worth; and he is
offended when that price is not set upon him, as himself thinks to deserve.

At Court they are wont to promise and offer service largely, especially to
those, who are not likely to make use of them; but toward ordinary conversants
they are more wary, because better known.

Grant a Courtesy (if you intend it) without much asking, for that doubles it.
To keep long in suspense is churlish, and by long expectation the passion to
the favor dies, and the courtesy is not esteemed, nor thanks heartily given for
it. Monsignior Pamfilio (afterward Innocent X.) in his Nunciature in France,
and ever after was called Monsignior-non-si-puo. From his frequent use of that
answer to Suitors. Do your favors cheerfully, not as if they slipped through your
fingers, or were stolen or wrested from you. And do them readily, for the
intreater submits himself to the entreated; his modesty therefore must be
considered. Non e cosa piu cara, che quella, che con priegh* si compra. Do them
also without considering whether they be lost, or likely to be recompensed; for
a magnanimous and generous person looks not to receive as much again; for that
is the courtesy of Tradesmen. Be not as the Barbarous King of Madagascar that
demanded more for the cowes he gave, then his subjects for those they sold; for
he said, that his good will and kindness was to be recompensed. And if you
deny, do it with good words; as if you were sorry you could not pleasure him.

Be not niggardly of that which costs you nothing; as Counsel, Countenance, and
the like. But beware of being security; rather offer to lend money of your own
upon others bond.

And by no means sell your Ceremonies, nor pay your creditors, friends, and
servants with good words, looks, and smoke.

After a courtesy done, if you upbraid it, you lose it; one principal end of
giving being to oblige the receiver to your self and interest. Neither too much
undervalue, nor extol your gift; but rather diminish, and excuse, when you
give: seeming pleased so small a matter stood in such stead, and was so well
placed, and accepted; that you shall be ready to do greater service upon
occasion; but when you receive a favor, rather augment it.

He is not ungrateful, who cannot, but who will not, repay; will not through
malignity and evil disposition. Wherefore a generous spirit is satisfied, when
the receiver declares his acceptance of the courtesy, and acknowledges the
favor and honor; for that shows he has a good mind to be grateful; if he were
able.

After a courtesy received, be not in have to return another; for that shows
you are not willing to be beholden, nor return a much greater, for that seems
to reproach the smalness of the received.

Those who willingly always receive and never give, or those who would always
give and never receive, (of which melancholic generous humor some few there
are) are not much esteemed in conversation.

Toward other men's Servants the custom of the Country is to be followed. In
many places the Master takes it ill if his Servant be considerably rewarded for
what himself gives. But it is not so with us; where to lodge at a friends house
is dearer, besides the inconvenience, then at a common Inn; and where what a
friend sends, is perhaps a present, but not a gift; when the receiver paies
double, the value to the Messenger, and an acknowledgment to the sender.
However in all places in entertainment, great care is taken the Servants be
pleased, for the tongues of idle persons are loos-hung.

If you desire a courtesy from one beholding to you, it is ingenuous not to put
him in mind of it; least he think you tax him of ingratitude.

A favor done to a man sinking, or in any danger, is always very obliging;
both because it testifies sincerity without expectation of a return, and a good
opinion of the receiver; to whom the giver needs not to be favorable.

Most men do more for interest either of gain, or friends, then reason. More
for favor, then obligation. But money, if well and discreetly applied, seldom
fails of its effect.

A man apt to promise is as apt to forget it.

CHAP. VII. Of Prudence in acquiring emploiment, and preferment.
1. PRESUPPOSING, that a person, out of a good and sincere intention to serve
his Prince and Country, desires to employ himself, or be employed, in such a
condition; it is necessary, first, that he avoid such hinderan ces which are
contrary to, and destructive of, his design. 2ly That he use proper means to
the compassing it.

2. HINDRANCES are, 1. Pride, which renders him intolerable to him that should
raise him; and tho to avoid this, such men as are most insolent toward their
Inferiors, are most supple (even to baseness) toward their Superiors, yet is
it very difficult to conceal this vice from any considering person; even
because one of these actions betrayeth the other, both proceeding from the same
lowness and vileness of spirit. Where it is, it renders its owner impatient of
advice, admonition* contradiction, even in his own affairs; by which he becomes
a prey to flatterers, despised of all good men, odious to all upon whose dues
and interests he usurps, and unfit to be employed. 2. Anger, for what Prince
desires to be served by, or choose instruments out of, Bedlam? and if prudence
consist in much deliberation; precipitiousness, the daughter of Anger, is
incompatible with it. If it be said that angry men are good natured; yet what
discreet person will suffer such, and so many, impertinencies, to enjoy now and
then a little good nature, i. e. so many storms to have sometimes fair weather?
Who will be content to stay for a little reason, till the choler be scum'd, and
the boiling ceased? Two to one in all things against the angry man, was a
saying of Cardinal Mazarine. 3. So following good companions or intemperance,
and lewd Women, discover secrets, render a man contemtible, and unuseful; for
besides that strong Drinks and Tobacco fill the head with imaginations, hot
headedness, jealousies, etc. when a man should have to his emploiment, he must
go to sleep, or to his Mistress. 4. He that is by nature lazy and slothful
ought not to intermeddle with public affairs; for tho in quiet and dull times
he may serve well enough to pursue formalities; yet when any activeness, he
fills up the room of a better person. 5. Covetousness is not so detrimental, as
Liberality and bounty discreetly placed, are advantageous. But 6. there is
nothing worse then an unbridled tongue.

3. HE that would serve God as well as his King, and save his Soul as well as
make his fortune, must beware of such temtations as are most frequent in that
sort of life. Such are Ambition, i. e. desiring advancement for an evil end,
or more then he deserves, or at unseasonable times, or too eagerly, or for his
own private advantage, and not to serve the public. Envy at others preserment;
with all the consequents of it, hatred, detraction, faction, partiality and the
like. Adulation or complacency with the Prince, or other great person in
vicious, or unfitting, courses. And the like.

4. IT is impossible to be preferred if not known, and so known as approved
also: and no man can reasonably be offended for being passed by, and neglected,
if he use not rational means to make himself accepted. Such means are of many
sorts. As

1. By merit; and that either by ordinary, or extraordinary, good service. 2.
By friends, being introduced or recommended by such as are in favor and
reputation with the Prince. 3. By fear and terror, being so considerable as
that the Prince is glad for his own security to employ him. 4. By flattery and
evil insinuations into the Princes affections.

5. HE that has no other Introduction must show himself diligently; that the
Prince (who observes more then he seems to do) may take notice of him;
besides, there falls out frequent occasions of employing him, that is present;
and a constant attendance, tho voluntary, is a kind of service. And, he that
loses a beginning tho not so considerable, loses an introduction to greater
matters.

6. THERE are few of whose merits the Prince can be a just and accurate Judge;
because he is not witness to all the circumstances, etc. of their actions.
Besides to know a man, requires much familiarity with, and observation of, him.
But such precise knowledge is not requisite; and a Prince may, with but a
reasonable observation, discern a wise man from a fool, and a virtuous man from
one inclined to those vices, which render him unfit for service. But if a
Prince be forced to see only with others eyes, and hear with others ears, he
had need to be very wary; for those are very seldom indifferent toward the
person recommended; inform more frequently for their own interest, then the
Princes. Wherefore a wise man beleives little, but keeps himself in suspense
till the truth be manifest.

He that is chosen by the Judgment of his Prince, and not by the recommendation
of others, has a great advantage; for if he prove well, the Prince is inwardly
proud of his choice; and will certainly employ him further; for he looks upon
him as his creature.

Wise and subtle Princes seldom prize or advance a man wiser then themselves,
except in some case of great necessity. They are also commonly very wary of
employing such as are recommended by public fame; except it be in smaller
matters.

Consider therefore, what emploiment you conceive most suitable to your Genius
and condition, v. g. whether War or Peace; Sea or Land-service; action or
advice; governing; or finances, and providing money or necessaries. And endeavor
to render your self very able in that; tho it is fitting also you should not
neglect other matters. Also disrobe your self (as much as you can) of all
particular interest; and at least prefer in your designs the advantage of your
Prince and the public.

A small emploiment in youth, or betimes, is much more to be valued then a
great one in old age; for Di cosa nasce cosa. One business twists in another.
And suffer not your self (as much as is possible) to be out of possession of
doing somewhat. If you be, yet by continual presentation of your self, let it
be known that you stay there ready to be hired.

It is good sometimes to sue for an emploiment, tho you be sure to miss it. For
by that means, you show your self to imagine that you have some pretenses to be
considered. And your Superior, having once denied you, will be more ready to
pleasure you another time, for fear of discontenting you; especially if you be
a man of parts. But by no means put in for every thing, for that discovers your
Ambition; and a conceit of your self, that you are fit for every thing.

You cannot be Master of what emploiment you please; but your commendation must
be, well to perform that you are actually possessed of. In a Comedy, he that
acts a Slave well, deserves as much as he that personates a King. It Is a
comfortable hearing, friend come up higher. Neither refuse or contemn any
reward or gratuity, how small soever, your Prince bestows upon you.

Design not upon what is not in your power. And remember that being to deal
with other persons, you must drive the nail which way it will go. Therefore be
as indifferent as is possible. Your future gains also not being in your power,
spend not upon the hopes of them: and remember, that expectation is always
greater then the reality.

7. HE is happy that has an opportunity given him to show signally his
prudence and loyalty. Sejanus, by one action, I know not whether generous or
fortunate, of saving Tiberius's life with the hazard of his own, obtained that
reputation, that he governed the whole Empire; and had almost settled it upon
himself; through the great confidence Tiberius, otherwise a very jealous
Prince, had in him. But these cases fall out seldom, and by the immediate
Providence (as I may say) of Almighty God,

If you chance to do any great action, be sure to give the glory of it to the
Prince; as indeed he, in some sort, deserves it: for you follow his commands,
or instructions. Besides the means, and opportunity of all such are his only;
and it was performed under his authority. Seem not to be willing to draw all
businesses to your self; nor keep too great grandeur in house, followers, etc.
for that gives ombrage to the Prince; as great titles are offensive to the
Fellow Subjects.

Extraordinary service, if many engaged in it, is counted a piece of duty, and
seldom rewarded. Either because the Prince, pretending that he cannot gratify
all, to avoid murmuring and emulation, will reward none. Or because those about
him, if many others be to be considered, are likely to find the less share for
themselves.

It was a saying of Antigonus; first get power then good will. Power is ability
of parts, wealth, friends, emploiment; then good will and reputation by
courtesy, civility, and other acts of prudent conversation; as also by drawing
others by your interest. For you may then engage many unto you, and spread your
roots and fibers a great way: especially if by the reputation of Justice and
bounty, you have procured you a veneration amongst virtuous persons. For by
this they are assured, that they may securely lean upon you, and run your
hazzards.

And it is more desirable to be loved then honored: this indeed is more
splendid, but that is more safe; this is greater, that better; this is in the
imagination, that in the heart, of others; from that proceeds peace with
others, tranquillity in his condition, and a complacency in his own mind. Yet
is love harder to obtain, requires a greater time, the acquiring of it is
subject to many difficulties, which honor is not; and therefore make much of
honor; which also carries a tincture of affection with it. Only remember what
a great General said. I desire to honor my life not by other men's opinions, but
my own actions.

8. BECAUSE more men are drawn, then heaved, up. And that amongst ingenious
persons there is always emulation, and amongst rivals (and for all preferments
such there are) envyings also; which are great rubs; and difficultly surmounted
or removed; endeavor to make a friend; who may give an Antidote against their
poison; and by lending his hand raise you in spite of all the weight and
pressures they can hang upon you.

Friends are not easily made, and still more difficulty amongst great persons;
both because they have fewer equals, and amongst such equals emulation is
frequenter then friendship; yet are they not so rare, but they may be procured.
For long, especially youthful, acquaintance; kindred and relation; sympathy in
affections; partaking in a common danger; or such like, do reconcile
friendship, but not frequently: nor are these means in every man's power, they
are obligations by which Providence only ties men together. But there are
others also which are more ordinary; for you insinuate your self into the
affection even of a great person, if you can show him, that you are able to
strengthen, assist, and confirm him, in his estate; and be able by your parts,
or other way, to recompense the favors you expect from him. But money discreetly
applied is a plaster that unites and soders all affections: nor is there any
Heart, as well as not any Castle, that can resist its battery, if rightly
placed.

To desire wealth for its own sake, is low, sordid, and proper only for them,
who make the obtaining it their Profession: but to desire it moderately, in
order to do more good, is unblamable. Even Reputation it self is acquired, and
sustained by discreetly keeping and spending; so that it also is in a manner
subservient to wealth.

We seldom see that wealth increases in a family for three generations
together: perhaps because that he, who comes into a plentiful fortune, having
no occasion to employ his parts and industry, grows lazy, and negligent, or at
best betakes himself to some other affairs; or perhaps, because men not knowing
the difficulty in obtaining it value it not much; but rather look after the
splendour of the World, whereunto rich men commonly engage and enter their
Children; and for that reason live at the height of the reputation of their
estate.

The Prudence to obtain wealth is generally conceived to be cutting off
superfluous or unnecessary expenses: but that is not all; for there is also
required good menagery, or making your penny go further then another man's. But
in this, Caution must be used, for many have bin ruined by buying good
pennyworths.

In making friends by money Prudence also is required, lest you lose that also.
For it is best used upon an exigent; occasionally rather then frequently; and
actually rather then constantly; like a wedg, not like a saw.

Many can hurt who cannot profit. And the ill tongue of an Inferior many times
harms more then that of an Equal; for it is easilier believed, because less
suspected. Therefore endeavor to keep a fair reputation with all persons; with
Superiors humble and compliant, not low and flattering; with equals grave, not
morose; with inferiors courteous and fairspoken, not sullen or imperious.
Considering, that no man is willing to own him, that is out of fashion, as I
may say, out of the good opinion of the World.

It was more dangerous to offend Sejanus then Tiberius. For all men raised from
low condition are more jealous of affronts and contemts; which a natural and
generous Superior is not: who interprets nothing to be contemt but what is
merely so, or done on purpose to affront; and nothing to be so, but what cannot
well be construed otherwise. To such therefore, as Sejanus, you must carry your
self so, as not to be hated by him; for you will find it hard to please both
the Patron and him. Besides you know not how long he will last; and it goes
hard with a man of understanding and spirit, that his good must depend upon
two, and his ill upon one.

If you cannot be reconciled to a favorite, be sure to tell your Patron that he
is your enemy; so his ill offices cannot hurt you.

It is unpardonable folly to quarrel with them, who are much your Superiors;
for the thread breaks where it is weakest.

If you be so ill satisfied of any person, that you think not fit to pardon or
bear with him any longer, yet let him not know so much; for the time may come
when you shall have need of him. And if you resolve to chastise him, discover
it not, lest you be prevented. But this is not to be used but in extremity, and
toward persons incorrigible. For, according to the rules of our most holy
Faith, it is infinitely better not to revenge at all, but to pass by offenses;
then which no man can show greater wisdom. And this is not very difficult if
you stifle quarrels in the beginning. But there are some so wicked
dispositions, that nothing works upon them but fear; and he that lets them go
unpunished, encourages them in their evil courses.

Whether you expect emploiment and preferment, or choose a private life, if you
have any thing to lose, Endeavovr to be in Reputation with your Prince and
Superior: and trust not to your innocence, or wary living. For besides, that he
cannot want an occasion some time or other to punish you, you know not what may
happen, wherein you shall stand in need of him.

Much less presume, that your manners are undiscovered, or to commit any fault
upon hopes of secrecy; for a good Judge will so entangle and hamper you, that
you cannot escape. And if you be once suspected, more suspicions will be
continually suggested against you. And even to have much suspicion and little
proof makes against you, for it is a sign that you are more dangerous.

No man can stand always upon his guard, but sometimes he will fail and
mistake; happy he whose errors are in small matters, that he need not great
applications and much endeavor to get himself off the shallow. Nor can a man on
a sudden foresee the depth of a question, or the consequences of an action.
Therefore when you doubt, or see not clearly, be wary, and take time. Many
times small mistakes produce great evil effects; and great mistakes sometimes
none at all; wherefore contemn no danger, how little soever it seem to
threaten. Be vigilant; Cavendi nulla est dimittenda occasio. It is much better
to do so, then be beholding to your friend to fetch you off; for that is
accounted equal to, if not greater then, a considerable benefit.

Give not much heed to those, who would persuade you to quit your emploiment;
or pretend themselves to be weary of business; have they not a mind to succeed
you? or are they not like the Fox, that having lost his own tail, would
persuade all the rest to cut off theirs?

9. IT IS not an unusual way to obtain preferment to show a mans-self so
considerable as to fright his Prince into compliance. In reason this should be
an ill means, but experience shows, that under lasch Superiors, or such as are
under-hatches, it many times thrives well enough. Upon the same grounds proceed
also those, who endeavor to make themselves necessary to their Prince; and so
rivet themselves into his business, that they cannot be drawn out without
tearing the piece.

But of such the Prince is always jealous; and will at some time or other
emancipate himself. He therefore that takes this course walks upon a
precipice, and the further he goes the greater is his ruin likely to be. The
Count of S. Paul took his measures upon these grounds in Lewis X I. time. But
he had to do with a Prince of extraordinary parts.

The people (upon whose recommendation many persons think to raise themselves)
guide not themselves by reason, but chance; therefore he is not wise that
strives to make himself their favorite, or forces himself to gain their
affection. For they will never do the like for him again, nor forgo the least
of their profit for his greatest benefit. On the contrary, the Nature of the
people and of all mean persons, is, always to value themselves, as if all men
were obliged to augment and better their degree: it is best therefore to deny
them at first, when their desires are modest. For if you once grant, you must
never after refuse, lest your former courtesy be lost; and to think to satisfy
them is to give drink to an Hydropic. Yet, if occasion offer it self to be
favored by them; or if your virtue and good actions have procured their favor,
neglect it not. For a general plausibility may stand you in great stead;
besides that, it may be very advantageous by your good menagement to your
Prince.

Popularity is one of the lowest and meanest sorts of Ambition; a refuge
commonly of those who envy such as have prevented them in the lawful acquiring
advancement by the favor of their superiors. And the thoughts of the people
being meaner and lower then theirs, they are forced to do and say many things
contrary to their own judgments and inclinations. Besides the people, being
necessitous, measure all things by advantage, so that their favor is
chargeable, and seldom any other then breath and air, except Religion be in the
case.

If you arrive to any power, be very wary how you tamper to change governments
(which is usually the refuge of necessitous persons.) For not being able to
perform it your self, you must of necessity trust your cause and person to many
foolish and open persons. Yet nothing more frequently ruins such designs then
too much caution for security. For that requires longer time; and employs more
persons about the principal business; and is subject to many more accidents.

In court have many acquaintances, but make a friend for advice and
consultation out of Court, and one that is not likely to have any interest in
your Patron.

10. THE service of a Prince is procuring that his will and intentions be
fulfilled: for no man esteems that (be it never so good) that is not according
to his own desires. Such therefore as his desires are, such must they be whom
he employs: for they are looked upon as only the Instruments for his compassing
and bringing about his purposes.

Wherefore they, who seem most zealous to perform the Princes will in all
things, without deliberation, or interposing their own judgment concerning the
lawfulness or unlawfulness of them, seem to be in the plainest road to
preferment. Yet diverse of the wisest Princes have made even that, the criterion
to exclude men from their favor; and retain such, as upon trial were found
constantly virtuous.

Princes usually more esteem one that is Phil-Alexandros, then one that is
Philo-Basileus, that is, more one, that loves his person, then his state and
condition, then his Nation, then the public; tho this is indeed the more
honorable, and the other more easily counterfeited. But in reality Princes have
very few, if any, friends to their persons; for they have no equals, nor
familiars* for indeed few wise men will expose themselves to so much hazard,
nor set themselves as pales against the wind, but for their own advantage.
Besides they know that if any difficulty happen, it is reasonable they should
be deserted. Wherefore they ought to make much of those, who are truly
Philo-Basiless, for there are too few of them, who are sincerely even so
affected.

It is an action of very great Prudence to carry even between adulation and
sowreness. Neither to be as the Cook, that aims only at pleasure; nor as the
Physician, who intends only health; but to mingle and ajust them together.
Whilst we retain Justice and friendship, not to scandalize Prudence and
interest is a difficult matter. Yet not impossible, for M. Lepidus kept to the
end his authority with Tiberius, a very jealous Prince, as Tacitus observes.

Flattery and obsequiousnes is a more quick and ready way to advancement, then
either durable or laudable. For when discovered to be such, it is contemtible,
and afterward odious. It is but lead that bends and plies every way; nor is he
a man either of virtue or courage, that can condescend to make himself
universal Minister to any one. Consequently he is neither faithful in his
emploiment, when he eyes a greater reward; nor constant to him, when he spies
danger.

Of flatterers there are two sorts 1. Bouffons, whose chief insinuation is to
eat and be clothed. Who like the Ape, finding himself neither fit to carry
burdens as the Ass, nor to keep the house, as the Dog, betakes himself to make
sport. These are easily discovered, and their worst is not very dangerous. 2.
The other sort are more subtle, gentile, and mischievous; whose designs are to
intrigue themselves into business; to make fortunes, and get estates, or
perhaps honors, by universal compliance. These, by observing the actions and
discourses of their pretended Patron, discover his inclination, as Hunters do
the haunts of wild Beasts, that they may easilier entrap them. It is their
interest he should be vicious, careless, irregular, and extravagant; for by
that means, they can more easily withdraw him from all virtuous persons, and
ingross him to themselves: who have no other way to ingratiate themselves, but
their ready compliance with all his desires. This they endeavor should pass for
affection to his person; and they represent all other advisers, either as
contemners of him; or at best as morose and of evil humor.

Therefore they pretend to Idolize him; to observe his counsels and commands as
Oracles; not to converse with those he suspects; to inveigh against his
enemies; to make him the head of their own Counsels; and themselves to be even
in their particular affairs ruled by him; to take great content in serving him;
to praise him immoderately before those who will be sure to inform him of it;
to exaggerate every small favor received from him; and to dissemble the
injuries.

They also are careful to new-name all his vices. Covetousnes they call
Providence; jealousy, circumspection; Prodigality is generousness, etc. Then
they compare him with others either of a contrary vice, if the man be hated; or
of the same, if in any reputation. They feign also in themselves the same
inclinations, sympathy, sentiments with their Patron. And often undervalue
themselves in respect of him. They are also apt to praise him for what he has
not done, or extravagantly for what he has done, glosing and varnishing all
miscarriages, etc. and few there are who are not taken even with this one bait.
For who is he that values not himself above his deserts, and thinks not all is
his due which is given? In reality, the refusing or accepting of praise
rationally and discreetly, is as great a trial of a wise man, as the cupel is
of silver.

No Master esteems a Servant, of whom he has no need; and that either for his
abilities (of which few Masters can judge) or because he knows his secrets; this
then being the easilier and securer, is that way, which flatterers, and all
those who endeavor to make themselves great by unlawful means, choose to walk
in. And of all secrets, they most desire to be privy to his vices, for by that
means he becomes obnoxious to them.

In Doing ill Offices these flatterers observe, 1. to do them seldom. 2. To
tolerate, if not confirm, the praises of him they design upon; lest they be
suspected to have done it out of malice. 3. To pretend no small or
inconsiderable occasion, nor their own concerns, but a public one only, and in
defense of their Superiors. 4. To dispose their words so, as they may seem
casual and unpremeditated.

Artis est celare Artem; they endeavor therefore by all means to be accounted
sincere and upright persons; for they see that the fame of being crafty and
subtle (which is the great skill they really pretend to) much retards, and
impedes their businesses. In general conversation therefore none more open and
free; none seeming by their discourse more noble and generous. But their
confidence is in simulation and duplicity; which, because of other men's evil
dealing, they pretend is necessary.

They often pretend, and endeavor, to be in esteem with the Clergy; especially
those who make show of greatest severity, and holiness. And of so great force is
the show of Religion, that even an hypocrite is feared and reverenced. Hereby
also they have considerable advantages; that they can decry all vices, even
those themselves are guilty of; and can safely asperse those whom they hate or
fear; and unhappy are they, that fall into their hands.

11. PRINCES, when they have denied a favor, to one that importunately sues for
it, are apt to suspect that such a one hates them for the denial: and therefore
afterward look not well upon that person. Wherefore be not too earnest in your
requests. And if your misfortune be to be denied, be sure not to show such
resentment, as he may suspect you intend him any harm. Rather seem to be
content with any slender show of reason he gives you; so you may obtain, if not
this, yet some other favor.

But if you perceive his mind to be alienated from you, retire betimes; for a
man falling is by every one thrust downwards. Besides all the miscarriages and
errors will be surely laid upon your shouldiers, notwithstanding all your
innocence.

Do violence to your self rather then not conceal or dissemble the injuries
done you by your Prince or Patron. For should you declare your self
unsatisfied, so far would he be from compassionating, or making amends, to,
you; that upon the least occasion he will hate you.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 35. l. 27. first care. p. 57. l. 3. preternatural. p. 80. l. ult.
eradication. p. 117. l. 29. in matter. p. 136. l. 19. governed learning. p.
179. l. ult. dele actions. p. 264. l. 6. his thrusts.


