October. 20. 1693.
Imprimatur,

Geo. Oxenden, Procan. Jo. Beaumont, S. Th. Pr. Jo. Mountagu, Coll. Trin.
Magister. Ja. Johnson, Coll. Sid. Magister.


A SERMON Preached at Great St MARIE'S Church IN CAMBRIDGE, Before the Right
Honorable The Lord Chief Justice HOLT, AT THE ASSIZES Held there, August 1.
1693.

By THO. WALKER B. D. Fellow of Sidney-Sussex Coll.

(...)
(...),
(...).
Aristoph. (...). CAMBRIDGE, Printed by John Hayes, Printer to the University,
For William Graves Bookseller there. 1693.

To the Right Honorable Sr JOHN HOLT, Lord Chief Justice OF THE KING'S BENCH,
And One of Their MAJESTY'S Most Honorable PRIVY COUNCIL.
My LORD,
WHen I lately had the Honor and Happiness of waiting upon Your Lordship, You
were pleased to Encourage the Publication of this Discourse, in such Obliging
Terms, as I cannot here, in Modesty, relate. Your Lordship's Repeated Requests,
which to me are Equivalent to Commands, and Your Generous Proffer of giving
these Papers Protection, being such Powerful Arguments to me, as I could not
in Duty withstand, have ushered them into the Public Light. This is a
sufficient Apology to excuse me from Arrogance and Presumption, if there had
been no other Reason for my appearing in Print: But whilst I was in the
Country, I was not only surpised with a Letter sent me by an Unknown Hand,
misrepresenting my Sermon; but soon after I came to the College, I was Alarmed
with the Noise which some Men had made about it, and not a little Concerned at
the Invidious misconstructions which they had put upon it. And therefore as
well in my own Vindication, as in Obedience to Your Lordship's Command, I
submit it to a more Public Censure than it has already undergone. All Men, who
are Just and Impartial, have so High a Value for Your Lordship's Judgment, and
so Great an Opinion of Your Candor and Integrity, that seeing Your Lordship
has been pleased to cast a Favorable Aspect upon this Discourse, it raises
some hopes in me, that how contemptible soever it may seem in the Eyes of some
Persons; yet it may meet with a Candid Reception amongst others, of Your
Lordship's Character, who are Hearty Lovers of the Church of England, of their
Majesty's, and this Nation. As for those who are not, as I neither expect their
Favor, so neither do I much regard their Displeasure. If any are offended with
my Sermon, it is their own fault and not mine. I am persuaded no Honest Man
will Vindicate the Characters of those whom I undertake to expose. As I have
said nothing but what I really believe to be true, so I hope my Sincerity may
Atone for the meanness of my Performance; and Your Lordship's Kind Acceptance
of it, will, in my Esteem, overballance the Sleights and Reproaches of those
who vilify and condemn it. May your Lordship live many Happy Years, to Adorn
the Station You deservedly Possess, to do Justice, and Promote the Public
Good; and, after You have long been a Blessing to this Kingdom, may You be
received into that of Eternal Glory, which is the Unfeigned Prayer of

My LORD, Your Honor's Most Obedient, Obliged, and Very Humble Servant, THO.
WALKER.

Prove. xii. V. 26. The Righteous is more Excellent than his Neighbor.
THAT there is a real Distinction between Good and Evil, Virtue and Vice, which
was so antecedently to all positive Laws, whether Human or Divine: and that the
natural Deformity, and innate Turpitude of the one, and the amiable
Agreeableness and inherent Rectitude of the other do not barely depend upon the
arbitrary Sanctions of those who have enacted Laws concerning them, is a Truth
so obvious, and manifest to any one, who duly considers the Nature of things,
and soberly attends to the reasonings and reflections of his own Mind; that one
may justly admire how it comes to pass, that the dull and exploded Notions of
(...). Diegen. Laert. in Vita Aristip. p. 134. ed. Amstel.
Aristippus, V. Lactant. l. 5. de Justitia.
Carneades and other Philosophers of old, concerning these matters, should be
again, with Confidence enough, revived, (especially in this Thinking and
Philosophical Age) by Mr. Hobbs and his Followers, who pretend to a more than
ordinary smartness and sagacity in Reasoning and Speculation. Thus He, who
whilst he lived was the Greatest wonder of the Peak, in the Preface to his Book
de Cive, huggs, and applauds himself for having found out the great and
infallible Medicine for Wounded Consciences and troubled Minds: by dispelling
those mists of Error, as he calls them, in which Men, before this Phosphorus
arose, were involved, concerning Just and Unjust, Good and Evil: in having
clearly demonstrated, by solid Reasons, as he vainly insinuates, that there are
no Doctrines Authentic concerning them beside the Laws and Constitutions of
each particular City. And in his Book de Corpore Politico, he boldly, and in
plain terms asserts, that C. 1. p. 5.
Jus and Vtile right and profit is the same thing. So that, according to this
Doctrine, if it should happen, that two or more Cities or Nations should have
contrary Apprehensions, and different Sentiments concerning Good and Evil, Just
and Unjust, that then these Creatures of Civil Power must submit to new Names,
and change their Liveries as often as they change their Masters. But I can
never believe, that theft and cruelty, injustice and oppression, deceit and
treachery should become good and laudable Qualities, by what Laws soever they
were enacted, or by what Authority soever they should be confirmed: or that,
amongst Wise and sober Men, they should be reputed more excellent and
praiseworthy than Honesty and Clemency, than Justice and Integrity, than
Sincerity and Fair-Dealing in all the mutual transactions of our Affairs.
Certainly the Foundations upon which the laws and principles of Justice and
Equity are built, are as unchangeable and immovable as the Will of God, whereby
he establishes the immutable Decrees of his Wisdom and Goodness; and that we
may as well suppose Men able to change the Nature of things, to turn a Spirit
into a Body, or a Body into a Spirit, as that they should be able to alter and
unfix those steady Rules, whereby we take our measures concerning Good or Evil.
The laws of the invisible, and immaterial World are no less stable and certain
than those are by which we observe this visible Frame of things to be guided,
in the production of their necessary Effects, and in their stated and constant
courses, and periodical Revolutions. It Is as unnatural and irrational to say,
or make a law that God is not to be worshipped, to affirm that it is wickedness
and impiety to render to every one their due; or that it is sin and folly to
live soberly, righteously and Godly, as it would be for a Man to attempt to
make fire and water lose their innate Qualities of heat and coldness, by
commanding them to do so: and that they should mutually change their
Properties, that Fire should become naturally cold, and Water hot, whenever a
company of Men in Authority, should pretend to establish the Absurdity by a
Law. This would be as impossible and impracticable too, as that the Sun should
rise in the West, and take a contrary Course to what it has done from the
beginning of the World, when the Grand Seignior pleases to command it, who, as
I think, amongst his other magnificent Titles, styles himself Lord of the Sun
and Moon.

But farther, if there be any Advantage on either side, the Laws of Reason and
of the intellectual World may fairly challenge it: for as God can never cease
to be Holy, Wise and Good, and was so from all Eternity, so these Emanations of
eternal Wisdom and Reason, can never, no not for a moment, cease to be what
they are: whereas the material and visible World, having not been from
Eternity, but created in time by God, the laws by which he governs ^t are
changeable at his Will, and he can suspend the Execution of them when he
pleases. So he once made the Josh. 10.12.
Sun to stand still upon an extraordinary Occasion, and restrained the violent
Flames and intense Heat of the bu^ning fiery Furnace, that it should have no
power to hurt the Dan. c 3.
Three Children who were thrown into it. But tho we read of Gods altering the
Course of Nature, and of his suspending the Laws whereby this material World is
acted and governed, by virtue of his Supreme Dominion and Prerogative, which
are essential to him as Lord and Creator of all things beside Himself; yet we
no where read, that he ever either commanded or allowed any Man to do a moral
Evil; to Steal, commit Murder or Adultery; to Worship any other Gods beside
Himself; or to Blaspheme and take his Holy Name in vain etc. For tho God
commanded Abraham Gen 22
to sacrifice his Son, yet even then he did not tempt him to sin; but only made
Trial of the sincerity of his Faith and Obedience: and chose to show an
extraordinary Instance of his Providence, by sending an Angel to stay his
Hands, which were ready to give the Fatal stroke, rather than suffer him to
imbrue them in his own Blood, by shedding that of his innocent and only Son.

And although we read that God allowed the Exodus 3.22.12.35, 36.
Is. raelites, at their departure out of Egypt, to speil the Egyptians, by
giving them so much favor with their Cruel Taskmasters, as to borrow Jewels of
Silver and Jewels of Gold and Raiment of them, without paying them again; yet
neither in this Instance, can we charge God as the Patron of Sin. For he being
absolute Lord and Proprietor of all the World, can transferr one man's Right to
another when he pleases; but more especially then, when he forfeits it, by
rendering himself obnoxious to his Divine Justice and Vengeance, through
Oppression, Fraud or Injustice or any other heinous Crime. But farther, this
Action of the Israelites, which was approved of by God, may be accounted for
after another manner; for the Egyptians having oppressed the Israelites for
many Years, and defrauded them of their Wages, this Action, at their Departure;
was only a more Subtle way of Paying themselves the Arrears which were due to
them, and which they were in no capacity of procuring by Law, or by Cum Hebraei
diu servnssent Aegyptiis, multisque ab iis affecti fulssent injurits, voluit
Deus, eis mercedem servitutis suae and injariarum rependere. Id etiam notavit
Auter libri Sapientiae Cap. 10. v. 17. reddens sanctis mercedem sanctitatis
laborum suorum deducit eos via mirabili etc. Rivet. in Cap. 12. Exodus To the
same purpose Irenaeus c. 49. l. 4.

Lege Naturae, quae ex ipsa deminii natura ac vi sequitur, dupliciter fit
alienatic, expletione juris and succeshone. Expletione Juris fit alienatic,
quoties id quod meum nendum est, sed mihi dari debet, aut lcco rei meae, aut
mihi debitae, cum eam ipsam consequi non possum, aliud tantundem valens
accipio, ab eo qui rem meam detinet, vel mihi debet. Nam Justitia expletri^^ in
quoties ad idem non potest pertingere fertur ad tantundem, quod ex merali
aestimatione idem. Grot. de Jure Belii and Pac. Lib 2 c. 7. V. Annot. 2.


Compulsion.

As to another Objection taken from the 2d Book of Sam. 12. and the 8th, which
seems to encourage Incest, or Adultery, because it is said that God gave to
David his Masters Wives into his Bosom: Some say the Hebrew Word does not imply
Saul's. Wives, but the Maids of Honor or Attendants on the Court of Saul, out
of which David might choose Wives: for as the V^B. of Werces. Letter to a Deist
p. 127 Concub^^tus tunc nuptiae erant, and concubina etiam uxor h^bit^. Seldom
de Jure not. and Gent. l. 5. c. 7. See more in Seldom of this matter. Ambae
viz. Cethura and Hagar, and Vxores Abrahae and Concubinae sunt appellatae,
August. de Civit^t. Dei, l. 16. c. 34 v. Gen 16.3.25. 1. compared with v. 6.
Learned Author of the Letter to a Deist writes, it will be no e^sie matter, by
the Constitution of the Mosaical Law to prove Polygamy to be Adultery, tho it
be unlawful now by Mat 5.32. 1 Cor. 7.4.
the Law of Christ.

So that Men can never act these, and such like Wickednesses by pretending Gods
Authority, when they have it not: Because it cannot be that God should either
command, or allow them to do a Moral evil: for if he should, he must then be
both Holy and Unholy too, to affirm which is not only big with Contradiction,
but full of Blasphemy and Impiety. Thus as God neither can, nor will deny
Himself, so neither can he nor will he, be the Author of any sin, or the Patron
of any wickedness; because that would be to deny Himself, and to impeach his
own Goodness, and Wisdom, and Veracity, of falsehood, and folly and weakness;
which Imperfections are altogether repugnant to the Essential Holiness of his
Divine Nature.

If then the Distinction between good and evil be real, and not barely
notional, and the Foundation upon which that Distinction is built, be so firm
and steadfast, that it implys a Contradiction that it should be altered and
removed by God himself, it is beyond the force of any Human power to break the
Golden chain of Virtues, by which they are linked together, and to cancel the
laws of Piety, Justice and Equity, which are of eternal and immutable
Obligation. For indeed, as I hinted before, Si populorum jussis, si principum
decretis, si sententiis Judicum, Jura constituerentur: Jus esset latrcomarit
Jus adulterare, Jus testamenta falsa suppenere, si haec suffragiis, aut scitis
multitudinis probarentur. atquinos legem bonam a mala nulla alia nisi naturali
norma dividere possumus, Cicero de Legib. l. 1o.
if the nature of Good and Evil depended upon the capricious humors, and was
to be determined by the fallible Constitutions of human Lawgivers; it would
then be in their Power to reverse the Face of things, when they pleased, and so
in time they might quite abolish the Notions and Sentiments which are implanted
in Men's minds concerning Right and Wrong, Virtue and Vice: and the same Actions
might pass for Just and Pious at one time, which would be looked upon to be
highly Impious and Unjust at another. But this can never be; for if all the
World should conspire together to make it unlawful to worship God, and to
honor our Parents; to live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly: and should consent
to establish a Law to make it lawful to commit Theft, Murder, or Adultery,
etc. it would be null and void of it self, without being formally repealed by
another, and the same breath that pronounced it, would only deliver it up to
the sport and derision of the winds: and they who endeavor to establish
iniquity by such a Law, would only render themselves guilty before God, by
keeping it, and would pull down upon their own Heads that Curse denounced
against them by the Prophet Isaiah c. 5. v. 20 Woe unto them that call evil
good, and good evil, that put darkness for light, and light for darkness, that
put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter.

It Is the peculiar Excellence of God that he changes not, and therefore he
will never refix those Laws in any time which he had decreed and established
before the World began: for being infinitely Wise, and Just and Good, he could
not enact any Law which was either foolish, unjust, or wicked: because his
Knowledge, which is stinted by no other bounds than those of Infinity and
Eternity, cannot be deceived, and his Justice which is as essential to him as
his very Being, would not have suffered it, and his Goodness, which overspreads
the whole Creation, could have took no delight and satisfaction in imposing
false notions upon his Creatures, or in the reflection, and contemplation upon
an Irregular Action in himself, of which he is not capable. No, he saw all
things that He Genesis 1.31.
had made and behold they were very Good; as well in a Moral, as in a Natural
respect: so that there was nothing left for the wit of Man to perform toward
the Perfection of his own Nature; o^ the accomplishment of his own Happiness,
Peace, and Security even in this World: God having made such ample Provision
for him, and placed him in such a state of Perfection, that he might not only
have been Happy himself; but also have derived those Endowments with which he
was blessed, and that Felicity which he enjoyed, upon his Posterity too, if he
had not swerved and deviated from the Law of his Creation, in first wilfully
violating that of his Maker. For Men therefore to talk of the state of Nature's
being a state of War, wherein all things were Lawful, and all things Common;
wherein Men were obliged by no Rules and Laws of Justice and Equity; but that
they might, without control, follow the swing and bent of their own Vicious
Inclinations and Irregular Appetites, till by consent they tied themselves up
to be governed by certain Laws, is to reflect unworthily upon the Wisdom and
Goodness of God, as if Men could do better for themselves, than either he
could, or would do for them. Alas! the utmost we can do, cannot restore our
lapsed Nature to its Primitive Integrity; or re-engrave the defaced Characters
of Wisdom and Innocence, which were once imprinted on the minds of our first
Parents, by the Finger of their all Wise Creator. For God created man upright,
but they have sought out many inventions, Eccles. 7.24

This then being premised and granted, that the nature of Good and Evil is
invariable, and that they are not the Fortuitous result, and offspring of
Arbitrary Power and Will; but that the one is built upon the solid Foundation
of Everlasting Truth, and is conformable to the Will of God; and that the other
is a deviation from the dictates of Right Reason, which is a Ray that proceeds
from the Fountain of Light, and an aberration from the Divine Law.

I shall now come to a more strict discussion of the Words of my Text. Only be
pleased to afford your Patience, whilst I make this Reflection upon what I have
said: that I am sorry we live in such an Age, wherein the Prime Rules and
Fundamental Principles of Religion and Morality are called in question: wherein
Men affect to be witty at the expense of their own Happiness and Salvation; by
endeavoring to vindicate their Enormous Crimes with a show of Reason, which,
God knows, is often as corrupt and vitiated as their Morals; and therefore it
cannot but with Regret and Sorrow be reflected upon, that there should be any
Occasion for Discourses of this Nature.

Some, alas! in this Degenerate Age, wherein downright Atheism is dressed up in
the more plausible Colors of Deism, are apt to flatter and deceive themselves
with the vain and empty Hopes, of being accounted Men of extraordinary Parts,
and piercing Judgments, if they can but manage two or three weak and trifling
Arguments against all Revealed Religion: and so having shook off the Yoke that
so sorely galled them, they disdain to be under the restraint and government of
any other Law than what their Wild Fancies and Corrupt Imaginations dictate to
them: and so giving way to their Heacstrong Passions, and Craving Appetites,
they indulge and gratify their unruly Lusts in all the instances of Impiety,
Lewdness, and Sensuality. But as sure as there is a God that governs the World,
so sure has he revealed his Will to Mankind, by his only Son Jesus Christ,
who is the Wisdom of the Father, and the express Image of his Person; in whom
are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge; such Knowledge as will make
us wise unto Salvation, in respect of which all other worldly Wisdom is but
accounted Folly before God. To offer at the proof of this Point would be
foreign to my Purpose: and therefore I return to the Handling the Words of my
Text, which in the several Translations of the vulgar Latin, Greek and Arabic,
are so variously rendered, that they differ as much among themselves as they do
from the Original Hebrew: to which our Translation, especially taking in the
Marginal Reading of more abundant, comes nearer than any of those before
mentioned, and therefore I shall stick to that, and take the Words as they
fairly lie before us, without offending some of your Ears with the uncouth and
uncommon Sounds of Greek and Hebrew Words, which I could not avoid, if I should
attempt to make a Critical Disquisition about the different Interpretation of
the Original. Having therefore in what I have already said, fixed the Notions of
Good and Evil upon the solid, and immovable Basis of Unerring and Everlasting
Truth, which I thought necessary to do, to avoid a Skeptical Objection, viz.
That I precariously begged the Principles I went upon, without Offering at any
Proof for what I delivered: I shall in the following part of my Discourse
observe this Method.

First, I shall endeavor to show upon what Account a Righteous Man is more
Excellent than his Neighbor, who must be supposed to be a Bad man; otherwise
the Comparison would be put in vain; for a Righteous Man would not be more
Excellent than his Neighbor, if he were equally Righteous with him, and
therefore the Pre-eminence that the One obtains above the Other, turns upon
this Hinge, that the one is Righteous, and the other Wicked.

Secondly, I shall propound some Instances, wherein the Righteous Man is more
Excellent than this his Neighbor.

First, I shall endeavor to show upon what Account a Righteous Man is more
Excellent than his Neighbor, who is supposed to be an Ill Man: who tho he be
Superior to the other in the Outward Conditions of this Life, in having the
Advantage of a Nobler Birth, a Larger Estate, and a more Splendid Retinue; yet
if he wants the Qualifications of a Righteous Man; if he be not Just and Equal
in his Dealings with other Men; if he be not Moderate and Temperate in the
Enjoyment of worldly Pleasures, and piously and devoutly Affected toward
Religion and the Service of God: a Man of meaner Quality, and more narrow
Circumstances, if he be but Righteous, is of a more Excellent Spirit than he,
who is not so. Because the Righteous Man more resembles God than the other, who
is the great Pattern and Exemplar of all that is Good, Sublime and Excellent:
and therefore he propounds Himself to out Imitation, and we are commanded to be
Luke 6.36.
Merciful because our Heavenly Father is Merciful, and to be Levit. 11.44.
Holy because he is Holy. And by how much the nearer Approaches we make toward
God, in our imperfect Essays, and weak Endeavors after Holiness and
Righteousness, by so much the more do we ennoble our Natures, and distinguish
our selves more from the Plebeian Multitude, by acts of Justice, and Mercy and
Piety, in the esteem of the Wisest and Best Men, than by a Numerous Attendance
and Glittering Attire, which none but the injudicious Vulgar look upon as the
only distinguishing Badges of Honor, and marks of real Worth. The Heathen
Poet could discover the Truth of what I have said, by the Light of Nature, when
he expressed his Sentiment in that known Distich, Tota licet Veteres exornent
undique cerae
Atria, Nobilitas sola est atque unica Virtus. Juv. Sat. 8.
That Virtue was the sole and true Nobility: which really raises one Man above
another, more than all the external Advantages of Birth or Fortune nakedly
considered, without the Forementioned Qualifications of Righteousness and
Holiness: but when they are joined together, they then illustrate one another,
and Virtue is better able to exert it self, and appears more amiable, having
the Advantage of a comely Body, and prosperous Condition to support it, and set
it off. So true is it what the Greatness of Mind promoted by Christianity p. 9.
H. Mr Boil observes, that all that outward Greatness can do, is not to make a
Soul Great, but to afford one that is, the opportunity of showing it self to be
so. Facinus quos inquinat aequat, that Wickedness which pollutes men makes them
equal, tho their exterior Conditions be vastly different and unequal.

The mind of every Man is truly himself, and by how much that improves in
Virtue and useful Knowledge, by so much does it excel it self, and those of
other Men, which are not imbued with the Rare endowments of Piety, Justice, and
Integrity, and an universal Good Will toward all Men. Suppose a man
encompassed with all the external Felicity that this World affords, possessed
of a large estate, and graced with Titles of Honor suitable unto it; yet if his
Mind be sunk below all that is truly Noble and Generous; if it be overrun and
cankered with the Rust of Covetousness, and sharpened with the Keenness of
Revenge; if it be fretted and galled with Envy and Malice, and inflamed with
Lust and Intemperance; if it be swollen and bloated with Haughtiness and Pride,
and harassed with wicked Plots, and base Designs; if it be grown so savage as
to delight it self in sucking the Blood of the Innocent, and in glutting it
self with Cruelty and Oppression: the Righteous Man, tho he wants some of those
unnecessary Superfluities which the other enjoys; but yet exercises himself in
the constant Practice of the opposite Virtues: who endeavors to keep a
Conscience void of Offense both toward God and toward Man; who is moderate in
his Desires and Enjoyments of the Good things of this Life, and kind and
beneficent to those whom he is concerned to assist and relieve; who is Just in
his Dealings, and Faithful to his Promises; who is humble and obedient to his
Superiors, and Governors, civil and obliging to his Equals, and Courteous and
Condescending to those that are below him: who endeavors to relieve the
Oppressed, and to rescue the Innocent from the Snares of the cruel Hunter, this
Man is more Excellent than the other: he will find favor with God, and be
highly esteemed by all Good Men, he will be comforted and delighted with the
continual Applause of a good Conscience, and with the Joys of a serene and
cheerful Mind. This Man is a true Subject of the Kingdom of God, which
according to the 2 Romans 14.18.
Apostle consists not in Meat and Drink, in the outward affluence of Riches
and Honor, but in Righteousness and Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost: for he in
these things serves Christ, is acceptable to and approved of Men. Whilst the
other, who is not endowed with the Heavenly Virtues before mentioned, will be
slighted and contemned, and only reverenced out of Fear, if he happen to be
Great and Powerful: for he being a Friend to no man, none will be a Friend to
him, in vindicating his Reputation, by endeavoring to wipe off the Blots, and
Stains with which his Name is covered, by a mollifying and candid
Interpretation of his Actions.

2ly, The Righteous Man is more Excellent than his Neighbor, because he is not
only respected by Men; but likewise honored by God himself, who has declared
that they who 1 Samuel 2.30.
honor him he will honor; and that he being Righteous Prove. 15.5. Psalm. 11.
v. 7.
loves Righteousness in us, and that his eyes will behold the Just with
Complacency and Delight. Now there is nothing wherein we can honor God so
much, as by endeavoring to imitate the Holiness, and other Attributes of his
Divine Nature; wherein they are imitable by us: and by doing our best endeavor
to transcribe that Copy which he has set us, of doing Justice and loving Mercy,
of being kind and charitable to all Men, even to the Ungrateful, and of
diffusing our good will to those whom our Bounty cannot reach. We never read
that God has commanded us to be Omniscient or Omnipotent; because the
Attainment of these Sublime Excellencies, and peculiar Perfections of the
Godhead, is placed beyond the Sphere and Capacity of our weak and finite
Natures and Abilities. But, as if we had a sort of Infinity ascribed to us in
this respect, God has commanded us to be Merciful and Holy, as he is so, i.e.
according to the measure and proportion of our stinted Capacity, and our frail
and lapsed Condition. Which we cannot be without first being Just, and Upright
in Heart: because Justice is a Virtue of the First Magnitude, and is of so
comprehensive a Nature, as that it is said to contain all other Virtues in its
Fruitful Womb. For indeed the love of God, and of our Neighbor, which, as we
are assured by an Infallible Author, is the sum and substance of the whole Law,
is the Natural Result and Proper Effect of Primum Justitiae officium est Deum
cognescere ut parentem, eumqae metuere ut Dominum, diligere ut patrem. Secundum
Justitiae officium est hominem agnoscere velut fratrem. Lactant. Epit. p. 685.
Ed. Oxon.
Justice and Gratitude. For how can we absolve our selves from the
nonperformance of these Duties, without being highly Unjust and Ungrateful? If
after having been obliged by God, in so Extraordinary a manner, in his giving
us a being, and providing a comfortable subsistence for us in this World, and
in taking care for our Future Happiness, we should refuse to pay him the
inconsiderable Tribute and Homage of our Love and Service, no Name of Reproach
can be bad enough for us, except it be those of being Unjust and Ungrateful.
And as Men are not self-sufficient, or able to make themselves Happy like God,
in contemplating and reflecting upon their own Perfections; and so wanting the
help of others, are naturally inclined to Society, from which they expect
Relief and Comfort in all their Troubles and Necessities, so can They by no
means escape the Imputation of Injustice, who do not lend a mutual assistance
to others in their Afflictions and Calamities, from whom they themselves
expected and perhaps received Kindness and Benevolence when they labored under
the same or such like Inconveniences or Disasters. Omnium, quae in docterum
hominum disputatione versantur, nibil est prefecto praestabiliue, quam plane
intelligi nos ad Justitia esse natos; Neque opinione; sed natura constitutum
esse Jus. M. Tull. lib. 1. de leg. p. 326. Ed. Lamb.
For to that end were they born, and not for themselves alone, according to
that wise saying of Tully: of all those things which are disputed on by Learned
Men, there is nothing better than plainly to understand, that we are born to do
Justice, and that Right is the Constitution of Nature, and not of Opinion.
Hence it is that the Law Mat. 7.12.
of doing to others as we would they should do unto us again, has obtained so
much credit in the World; that tho the practice of it be often neglected; yet
it is every where, and by all Men commended to be most Just and Reasonable;
being taken in a right sense with some Restrictions and Limitations: as that
our Will must be supposed to be Regular, and to desire nothing of others, which
may infringe the Laws of Equity, Modesty, Decency, and good Manners. For if one
should tempt another to Lewdness, and Dishonesty; to be partaker with him or
her in Theft or Adultery; and should make use of an Argument grounded upon this
Text, that he desires nothing of another but what he should be willing to
Gratify him, or her in again, upon a like occasion, this would be to abuse the
Rule before us; which is never so to be understood, as to patronize Sin, or
elude the Laws of Justice, and the Precepts of Holiness.

Or, if a Criminal standing at the Bar, convicted of some Notorious Crimes,
which deserve that the Sentence of Death should be past upon him, should argue
thus: That if the Judge was in his case, he would willingly be acquitted, and
therefore that he ought not to pass Sentence upon him: because if he does, he
violates the Rule of doing to others as he would they should do unto him again:
In this Case a Judge ought not to take his Measures from the Irregularity of
another will, but from the Rules of Justice and Equity, which all Men are
universally obliged to observe; tho not always in their utmost rigor and
extent. For we are advised by the wise Man, Eccles 7.16.
not to be righteous over much: that is, not to stretch things beyond their due
measure, and make more of a Circumstance, or an Evidence than they will
naturally and fairly bear; but to mix Clemency and Mercy with our Justice, and
that where Right and Property, (...). Platon. Protag. p. 225. Ed. Marsil. Ficin.
Peace and Safety, and the Public Good, can be preserved, and secured without
inflicting Punishment, then to preser Mercy before Justice; because it is the
Attribute of God we most Admire and Adore and which is said to Jam. 2.13.
Rejoice, or Triumph over Justice, or against Judgment

2ly, I come now to propound some instances, where in a Righteous Man excells
his Neighbor.

First, If he be a Person who is entrusted with Rule and Authority, and the
Administration of Justice: if he be Advanced to some Eminent Station either in
Church or State, He prefers the Public Good before his own Private Interest.
He aims not at carrying on any base Designs of enslaving his Country to a
Foreign Power, and Papal Jurisdiction: whose Arbitrary Exactions and
Impositions have been so Intolerable, that they have been often opposed, and at
last cast off, even whilst the Nation professed the Roman Religion. He chooses
to stand up in Vindication of the Just Rights, and Legal Properties of Millions
of People, as much as he can, without resisting Lawful Authority, rather than
suffer the Wise and Ancient Laws of his Country, the Freedom and Liberty of his
fellow Subjects, and the True Religion established amongst us, to become a
Sacrifice and Prey to the Inveterate Rage, or insatiable Ambition of a few
Aspiring and Merciless Men. He cannot be persuaded that the Numerous Race of
Mankind were created, on purpose, to be trampled upon by some Nero's and
Caligula's, who are not contented with the Pre-eminence and Authority which the
Laws of God, and the Land whereof they are Governors, have Invested and
Empowered them withal: or that it is Reasonable to think that God has given
them leave, at their Pleasure, to dive^t their Cruel Minds, with exercising the
Patience and Fortitude of Innocent Men, with Racks and Gibbets, and other
Torments. No, as they have no Commission or Authority to do Evil; so the Man I
am speaking of, looks upon himself in Conscience obliged, as much as in him
fairly lies, to endeavor to repress the Exorbitant Growth of Arbitrary Power:
to stem the Tide of Tyranny, Superstition, and Idolatry, when it begins to
overflow the Land, and its Furious Waves attempt to undermine, and bear down
the True established Religion he Professes, which is dearer to him than his
Life, or any Temporal Concern. For he thinks there is no just Reason to expect,
that God should work Miracles to preserve a Church and Nation from Ruin and
Destruction, when other Means may be Lawfully used, toward the Resetling them
upon their old Foundations, according to their Ancient and Legal Constitution,
without their being concerned in Rebellion.

And here I have a Fair Occasion offered me, of drawing a Parallel between two
Printes, who are at open Hostility with one another; and of showing the Justice
of the Cause, in which One of them is Engaged, against the Unjust Invasions,
and Violent Usurpations of the Other. Whose Severe, not to say Inhuman Usage of
his own Faithful and Loyal Subjects, many of whom had obliged him in the
Highest Degree (and never disobliged him, except when they could not comply
with his Unlawful Commands) may teach us how he would deal with those of
another Nation, if they once should be so Unhappy as to Groan under his Heavy
Yoke. How would they then wish, and sigh for that Deliverer which too many now
so lightly Esteem. If Solemn Oaths and Edicts could not bind him, from
Banishing his own Native Subjects from their Habitations, to seek their Bread
in Foreign Countries because they neither could, nor would be Papists, how can
we, who of late, have been the Greatest Thorn in his Side, by endeavoring to
stop the Progress of his Arms, and curb his Growing Power; who, no doubt, have
exasperated him against us, in a more than Ordinary Manner, by Burning and
Sinking some of his Capital Ships; can we I say, whom he looks upon as the most
Formidable Opposers of his Designs, expect Better and more Favorable Dealings
from him, than they have met with? Can we think we have obliged him as much, as
his own Protestant Subjects have done, who set the Crown upon his Head? And all
the World sees how he has Requited them for it. It seems to me to proceed
either from want of due Consideration, o^ a right Understanding of Affairs, to
think that a Monarch so much devoted to his own Interest, should be at this
Vast Expense of Money, and Loss of Men, barely upon the account, of only
Reaping the Naked Glory, of Restoring an Unfortunate Deserting, and Deserted
Prince: without having any farther Design. According to my shallow Judgment in
these Matters, I am apt to think he had rather be a Conqueror of a Kingdom
himself, than Restore another to it. Can we imagine he should be touched with
such a feeling Sense of Honor or Conscience, as to impoverish his Subjects,
and weaken his Forces for the Sake of Reenthroning one Prince, when he shows no
Concern or Tenderness of either, in Dispossessing others, being of his own
Religion too, of their Lawful, and Hereditary Dominions? Why should not the
Duke of Savoy, the Elector Palatine, the Emperor, or King of Spain, be as Dear
to him as some Body else? And yet I am inclined to believe, if he had his Will
against the forementioned Princes, he would leave the Glory of Restoring them
to their Dominions to some other Potentate. So that I must beg to be excused,
if I cannot submit to the Judgment of those Men, who have so good an Opinion
of him, as to think he only Designs to do Justice, out of Pure Generosity, by
Restoring the late King. And therefore I hope without being Guilty of
misapplying my Text, or abusing Scripture, I may truly say that our Gracious,
and Righteous King William is more Excellent than This his Neighboring Prince.

It cannot but be Evident to a Man of an unbiased Judgment, that our King
seeks to Promote the Public Good; not only of these Kingdoms, but of all
Europe. If he could have been so Base as to have Betrayed the Liberty of his
Country; or so Tame as only to have fat still whilst the French had overrun and
subdued it, he might have made what Terms he pleased for himself, and have
enjoyed more Ease and Quiet than he now does. But the Safety and Welfare of his
Country, of which he has been an Hereditary Defender, the Liberty of all
Europe, and the Preservation of the Protestant Religion, were Dearer to him
than his own Private Interest and Repese: otherwise he would never have
undertook so Hazardous an Attempt, as was that of his coming hither, to Secure
and Settle the Right of his Princess to the Crown, by making his Appeal to a
Free Parliament, and to put our disjoynted Government into Frame and Order
again, without any imaginable Probability, that He should come to fill an Empty
Throne. His Actions since his being Possessed of these Kingdoms, sufficiently
manifest it to all the World, that 'twas neither Pride nor Ambition; nor love
of Ease and Empire, that prompted him to undertake our Deliverance, and Accept
the Crown. For since that, has he not exposed his Life to Danger, as much, or
more than ever he had done before? Has he not undergone the Greatest Fatigues
imaginable, in Watchings and Tedious Marches, and lived in a continual hurry of
Business ever since? Men who only Design their own Profit and Advantage, give
over Trading when they have acquired a Plentiful Estate; that they may Enjoy
themselves in Ease, and Pleasure, and Quiet. They then Retire from the Noisy
Clutter of the City and Exchange, and take some satisfaction in thinking how
others scramble for that, of which they have now, with Care and Industry got
enough: but the Acquisition of Three Kingdoms does only Inspirit and Invigorate
our King for Greater Undertakings; that, by the help of God, he might be the
Deliverer of other Nations, as well as of these Kingdoms: For it is plain he
does not so much Delight to wear a Crown as to Deserve it. Whilst others spend
their flying, and Precious Hours amidst all the Softning Divertisements, and
Entertainments of a Splendid Court; He chooses to tread the Rugged, but more
Noble Paths, which lead to True Glory and Immortal Honor: in shunning no
Opportunity of setting a Gallant Army a Brave Example of Heroic Courage, and
Undaunted Magnanimity, of Prudent Conduct, and Inimitable Valor; by too much
Exposing his Sacred Person to the Common Danger upon all Occasions. And
notwithstanding He has never declined to Engage the Enemy, upon Apparent
Disadvantage, and Unequal Number, yet the Watchful Providence of God has
Protected and Defended Him in a more than Ordinary Manner. When so many
Instruments of Death have flown so Thick about Him, that some of them have
gently wounded Him; yet none of them have had Power to touch his Life, for
which extraordinary Mercy Gods holy Name be praised.

I could willingly dwell longer upon this copious and delightful Theme, if the
Time would give me leave; but I think enough has been said to convince an
unprejudiced Mind, that both He and the Cause in which he is engaged are
Righteous: and if so, it nearly concerns every True Englishman and Protestant
of the Church of England to wish well to it, and to pray to God to prosper it
with Good Success; and that this War may end in a firm and lasting Peace, to
the Glory of God, and the Preservation and Prosperity of his Church.

I must confess, next under God, I owe my comfortable Subsistence to Him, as I
believe a great many more here present do, and therefore I do not only think
my self obliged to be inwardly grateful and thankful, for the Ease and
Safety, for the Freedom and Liberty of enjoying my Religion, without
Disturbance; for the opportunity and pleasure of Study, and improvement in
Learning, and all the other Advantages of a Retired and Academick Life, which I
have already enjoyed under their Majesty's Auspicious Reign; but also openly to
testify my Gratitude to others, that they may be excited to an Acknowledgment
of their Obligations to Him, and may be stirred up to pray that God would
continue these Mercies to us, which in all likelihood he will not long do, if
we be not Thankful for those we have already received.

Secondly, If the Righteous Man I am speaking of, be a Private Person; one who
is entrusted with no Power, or Authority in the Administration of Public
Affairs, he will be cautious and wary of being Turbulent, and Factious against
that Government which protects him: tho he may think he finds some Flaws, and
observes some Miscarriages in it, or may look upon himself not to be obliged to
comply with all its Laws and Injunctions. He will not be overhasty in
Censuring and Condemning others, as if they had neither Reason nor Conscience
on their side, tho he cannot come up to the same Height of Compliance with
them. A Man ought to have a care lest he forfeit his Claim to Prudence and
Discretion, by abounding too much in his own Sense; and to suspect least his
own Judgment misguide him, when it runs counter to the Public Laws, which are
established and promulg'd by the Supreme Power, by the Concurrence and
Authority of some of the Greatest, and Wisest, and most Religious Men of the
Nation: and in Modesty and Charity believe that other Men, from whom he differs
in Opinion, act upon Principles of Reason and Conscience as well as himself. So
that tho it does not belong to me to condemn those, who after an impartial
Examination of the Arguments on both Sides, are sincerely persuaded in their
Consciences, that they cannot Comply with Taking the Oaths; for to their own
Master they must stand or fall, provided they demean themselves modestly and
peaceably, who submit to it as far as they can, and do not obstinately set
themselves against it: yet I think, without being guilty of Censoriousness and
rash Judging, I may condemn those who are Turbulent, and Factious, and
Seditious; especially if they profess themselves to be Members of the Church of
England; who have all the Reason in the world to stand Neuters, at least, if
they think themselves obliged not to be Actors under This Government. For
certainly, however such a Man may think himself obliged to be Passive and
Vnactive under This Government, one can scarcely imagine how any one, who wishes
well to the Church and Nation, can let ^his Humor so far prevail above his
Reason, as to think himself bound in Conscience to be Active in pulling of it
down: because, in all likelihood, our Religion and Liberties must fall with it.
For howsoever he may flatter himself with the Hopes of finding more than
ordinary Favor under another Revolution, yet, if he keeps firm to his
Religion, he may chance to be deceived: But suppose he be not, but that some
distinguishing Note of Honor, or Preferment be conferred upon him, for
Adhering so steadfastly to the late K. yet, after all, he must be an Unnatural
Son, who can rejoice, and take Satisfaction in his Own, and a Few others Safety
and Advancement, whilst he beholds his Mother the Church of England depressed
and torn in pieces.

Thirdly, The Righteous Man who has sworn Fidelity to their Present Majesty's,
thinks himself in Conscience obliged to observe his Oath; because he took it in
Sincerity and Truth, and in the Integrity of his Heart. He did not with him
mentioned in the Tragoedian, keep his Mind unsworn whilst he swore with his
Tongue: but he then acted the part of an honest Man in Taking the Oath, as he
now does in Making his Words and Actions suitable, and conformable to what he
then did. He cannot but wonder at the Indiscretion, and Inconfistancy, as well
as sinful Folly of those, who having taken the Oath to K. W. and Q. M. are
still as much Enemies to the Present Government as if they had not; and
bespatter it with more odious Reflections, and fly Insinuations than some
Others, who have not Sworn: this is so open, and palpable a piece of
Hypocrisy, and such plain and downright Dissimulation, that certainly those
Men who are Conscious to themselves of being Guilty this way, can never, at the
same time, be so vain as to entertain any hopes of being Recorded in History,
for Men of Fidelity, Integrity and Honor.

For whilst they think to save Themselves, by Trimming on both Sides, and to
gain the Reputation of prudent and wary Men, they really loose the good Esteem
of both Parties; neither of which will think it safe to trust them with any
Secret of Moment, or Business of Concern, for fear of being Betrayed. So that,
in my Judgment, they have as little Reason as any to hope for Advancement, and
a Favorable Reception, if the Face of Affairs, and the Scene of Government
should change again.

To be firm and steady to a Principle we have Espoused, when there is no
apparent Wickedness in it, nor any notorious Evil and Inconvenience consequent
upon it, is worthy of Praise and Commendation. But to appear in one Dress to
the World, and in another behind the Curtain, is to act the part of a
Stage Player, and not of a sincere and honest Man. Faithfulness and Sincerity
in our Words and Actions, in our Oaths and Promises, in our Bargains and
Contracts, are the main Ingredients that compound a Righteous and Honest Man.
Thus the Psalmist in the 15th Psalm describing a Good Man, who is fixed upon
Mount Zion, and never shall be moved, introduces his Character with this
Question, Lord who shall abide in thy Tabernacle? who shall rest in thy Holy
Hill? to which he thus replys, He that walks uprightly, and works
Righteousness, and speaks the Truth in his Heart, he that backbiteth not with
his Tongue, nor does Evil to his Neighbor, in whose eyes a Vile Person is
contemned, but he honors them that fear the Lord, he that Swears to his
own hurt and Changes not. But perhaps, some may say, this last Verse might
have been more aptly applied to Those, who refuse to comply with the Present
Government, upon the account of Former Oaths, taken to the late K. To which I
answer with Tunc enim cessasse materiam censendum est cum rerum slatus inter
tempus jurandi, and tempus adimplend^ta immutatus est, at si quo
temporejurabatur praevideri potuisset is qui pestea insecutus est rerum status,
non omnino juratum fuisset. Respondetur breviter, cessante juramenti, voti, aut
promissionis materia cessare simul ejusdem and Obligationem que^admedum in
naturalibus and art^fi^alibus, desiciente materi^ deficere necesse est and
actionem agentis, nec en^m potest ignis urere, si desit materia combusiibilis:
nec Faber, ni adsint ligna, scamnum facere. de Juram. Oblig. Praelect. 7. ^as.
60.
Bishop Sanderson, who is acknowledged by all to be an Excellent Casuist: That
the Bond of an Oath is dissolved, when the Matter of it ceases, or any notable
Change is made concerning the Principal Cause of the Oath: For the Matter is to
be thought to cease, when the State of things between the Time of Swearing, and
the Time of Fulfilling, is so changed, that if that state of Affairs which
afterward followed, could have been foreseen by him that Swore, he would not
have Sworn at all. In short he answers thus: That the Matter of an Oath, or
Vow, or Promise ceasing, the Obligation to them does likewise cease; as in
Natural and Artificial things, the Matter being Deficient, there is a Necessity
that the Action of the Agent should likewise cease. For Fire cannot burn, if
there be no Combustible matter; nor a Carpenter make a Scaffold if he has no
Wood.

To conclude, the Righteous Man in this respect also excels his Neighbor,
because he prays for the Peace and Prosperity of Jerusalem; that is, for the
Safety and Welfare of the Church and Nation whereof he is a Member; and does
not rejoice and triumph in the sad Accidents and Disasters, which may happen
unto them, and which may tend to their Subversion and Ruin. He looks upon it as
a piece of Inhumanity not common amongst the most Unciviliz'd People, to be
devoid of all Compassion and Fellow-feeling toward his Countrymen,
Confederates, and Fellow-Protestants abroad, when they suffer Afflictions,
Losses and Calamities: and therefore cannot but stand amazed at the folly of
those, who exult with joy at their own Destruction, which must necessarily be
involved in that of the whole Nation, which God of his infinite Mercy avert.
This is as great at Instance of folly and indiscretion, as if a Man should
rejoice when his Neighbors house was on Fire, tho his own stood the next to be
devoured by the approaching Flames. O pray for the Peace of our Jerusalem, they
shall prosper that love her, Peace be within her Walls and Plenteousness within
her Palaces. What remains then, but that we all aspire after those things which
are truly Praiseworthy: and endeavor to excel one another in Righteousness
and Holiness here, that we may be received into the Habitations of Everlasting
Bliss and Glory hereafter. Which God of his infinite Mercy grant, for Jesus
Christ his sake. Amen.

FINIS.

