OF FAITH Necessary to SALVATION, And of the NECESSARY GROUND OF Faith
Salvifical; Whether this, always, in every Man, must be INFALLIBILITY.



OXFORD, Printed in the Year, M DC LXXXVIII.

FIVE SHORT TREATISES,
I. Concerning Faith Necessary to Salvation. II. Of Infallibility. III.
Concerning the Obligation of not Professing or Acting against our Judgment or
Conscience. IV. Concerning Obedience to Ecclesiastical Governors, and Trial of
Doctrines. V. Concerning Salvation possible to be had in a Schismatical
Communion.
Estius in Sent. 3. d. 23.. 13. -- Utrum in haereticis vera sit Fides
Articulorum in quibus non errant, Quaestio est in utramque partem probabiliter
a Doctoribus disputata. -- Ibid. -- Fidei impertinens est per quod medium
primae veritati credatur, id est, quo medio Deus utatur ad conferendum homini
donum Fidei. -- Ibid. -- Nihil vetat, quo minus haeretici, quamvis in multis
errent, in aliis tamen sic divinitus per fidem illustrati sint, ut recte
credant. Courteous Reader,
THese Treatises by diverse passages may seem to have been written before the
Author was fully united to the Catholic Church. So that some things in them
are not so cautiously and clearly explained; as, had himself lived to publish
them, they would have been. But we thought it our duty, rather to represent
them as he left them, than to make any breach in the Discourse it self; or to
pull any threads out of so close and well wrought a contexture.

CORRIGENDA.
Page 8. Marg. such points very few. p. 9. l. penult. necessary, besides the
assent. p. 32. l. 18. and is in some. l. 38. some degree of incredulity.

Of Infallibility. Page 15. l. 12. (tho this can never. p. 20. l. 1. pertaining
to Faith methinks sufficient. ibid. l. 9. in Doctrinals pertaining to Faith
certain of truth. p. 28. l. 17. But I say he shall never be so.

Of Submission of Judgment. Page 30. l. 7. that it was generally practiced.

Trial of Doctrine. Page 21. l. 18. by most of differing. p. 28. l. 5. He may
be free. l. 7. from the sin of Schisin, and invincibly ignorant of the errors
which are professed in his Communion, he may attain in such a Church life
everlasting, because in desire he is hoped to be of the true Church. l. 22.
sufficient through God^s infinite goodness. l. 23. crimes and invincibly errs in
not-fundamentals, errors unknown to them. l. 30. we may hope.

Danger of Schism. Page 3. l. 13. and if she deny it. l. 14. which are
accounted.

THE CONTENTS
PART I.
1. COncerning Faith necessary for Salvation. 1. 1. Concerning the object or
matter of Faith. 2. Concerning the necessity of our belief of such object of
Faith.. 2. 1. That it is necessary to our salvation to believe, whatever is
known by us to be Gods word. Where, 1. Concerning our obligation to know any
thing to be Gods word, which knowledge obliges us afterward to belief. 3. 2. And
concerning sufficient proposal.. 6.
2. That it is not necessary to our salvation, that all that is Gods word be
known by us to be so, or, in general, be known by us to be a truth.. 10. Where,
1. That it is necessary to salvation, that some points of Gods word be expressly
known by all Such points very few. Not easily defined.. 13. In respect of these
the Apostles Creed too large. 2. That it is highly advantageous to salvation,
that several other points of Gods word, besides these, be known.. 14. 3. And
our duty (each one according to his calling) to seek the knowledge of them. In
respect of which the Apostles Creed is too narrow.. 15. 4. That the obligation
of knowing these varieth according to several persons, etc. And. 17. That the
Decrees of Councils not obligatory (at least to some) against a pure nescience,
but only opposition thereof: and not any opposition, but only when known to be
their Decrees.



PART II.
II. Concerning the necessary Ground of Faith Salvifical; whether it must be in
every Believer an Infallibility; that the matter of such Faith is a Divine
truth, or Gods word. 20. Concessions. 21. I. Concerning the object of Faith;
that this is only Gods word. II. Concerning the Act of Faith, and the certainty
which it may receive from the external motives of Scriptures, Church,
Tradition. 22. That the Authority of Scriptures and Church is learnt from
Universal Tradition. 23. Concessions concerning Tradition. 25. 1. That there is
sufficient assurance in Tradition (whether infallible or no) to ground a firm
Faith upon. 2. That Tradition may have a sufficient certainty, tho such
Tradition be not absolutely Universal. 28. 3. That no one Age of the Church is
mistaken in delivering any eminent Tradition.. 29. 4. That the testimony of the
present Age is sufficient to inform us therein. 30. 5. That Tradition of the
Church is easier to be understood (in some things expounded by her) than the
Scriptures. 31. 6. That the Church is a sufficiently-certain Guide to us in
Doctrines proposed by her as Traditionary. 32. Digr. 1. That all Traditions
carry not equal certainty. 33. Digr. 2. The difference between the Church's,
and Mohammedan, and Heathen, Traditions.
III. Concerning the certainty which Faith may receive from the inward
operation of God's Spirit. 35. Concessions concerning the Spirit. 1. That it is
always required, besides outward means. 2. That all Faith wrought by the Spirit
is infallible. 36. 3. That sometimes the Spirit produces evidence beyond
science. 37.
IV. That from these Concessions it follows not, that all, who savingly
believe, have, or must have, an infallible, or such sufficient certainty, as
may possibly be had, of what they believe. 38. Neither from the evidence of
Scriptures. 39. Nor of the Spirit. 40. Nor of Church-Tradition. 41. For these
following reasons. 43. Necessary Inferences upon the former reasons. 51.


CONCERNING FAITH necessary to SALVATION, AND Of the necessary Ground of Faith
Salvifical: Whether This always in every Man ought to be Infallibility:
SIR,
YOU have importuned me to communicate to You my opinion on these four Queries,
as being (you say) the chief subjects which are debated by our modern
Controvertists; and in which, if one side should gain the victory, there would
follow a speedy decision of most other Theological Controversy. The First
concerning FAITH, What, or how much is necessary for our Salvation? The Second
concerning Infallibity in this Faith; Whether it be necessary in every Believer
to render his Faith Divine and Salvifical? The Third concerning the
Infallibility of the Church; Whether this is, at all, or how far, to be
allowed? The Fourth concerning Obedience, and submission of private Judgment,
Whether this be due to the Church supposed not, in all her decisions,
infallible? For the two latter I must remain for a while your Debtor. On the
two former I have returned you, as briefly as I can, my Conceptions, no way
swerving, that I know of, from any general Decree or Tenent of the Church
Catholic.

And First, concerning the former of these; What, or how much Faith is
necessary to Christians for the attaining of salvation. PART. I.


1. Faith, as it respects Religion or things Divine, in general. 1. 1.
Concerning Faith necessary for salvation. 1. Concerning the object or matter of
Faith.
seems to be an assent to the Truth, Goodness, etc of any thing that is God's
Word, or Divine Revelation. And all truths whatsoever revealed by God, even
every part and parcel of God's word, are the object, and so many points or
articles, of our Faith; i. e. are not to be denied, but believed and assented
to immediately, when ever we know them, or when ever they are sufficiently
proposed to us, that we might know them, to be God's word. Amongst these
therefore, all precepts of Manners are also matters of Faith; in as much as
they must first be assented to, and believed by us, to be God's commands,
lawful, good, holy, just, and most fit to be obeyed; or else we cannot, as we
ought, obey them. And he that should practice them, misbelieving them, either
to be things evil, or things in themselves indifferent; in the first way would
sin, in the second would perform a service utterly unacceptable, by reason of
an error in his faith. See Romans 14. 23. Surely every one of the fundamental
rules of good life and action is to be believed to come from God; and therefore
virtually includes an Article of Faith. Again, all necessary deductions, and
consequents of any part of God's word, or of any point or article of faith, are
also so many points or articles of faith. (See Discourse of Infallibility. 12.)
So that the articles of faith taken absolutely are almost infinite; for
whatever is, or necessarily follows that which is, divine revelation, may
equally be believed, and so is an object of faith; and, when it is believed, is
a point of faith. Consequently also all controversies concerning the sense of
any part of Scripture, are concerning matter of faith taken in this general
sense; even those concerning Grace and Free Will; as well as those about the
Blessed Trinity.

2. Next, concerning the necessity of believing all such points of faith. We
must say, in the first place: That it is fundamental,. 2. 1. Concerning the
necessity of our belief of such object of faith. 1. That it is necessary to our
salvation, to believe what ever is known by us to be Gods word.
and necessary to our salvation, That every part of God's word, (fundamental or
not fundamental it matters not) supposing that we exercise any operation of our
understanding about it, be not dissented from, but be believed or assented to,
when we once know and are convinced, that it is God's word. Else we knowing
that it is God's word, and not believing, or assenting-to, it to be truth, must
plainly make or believe God, in some thing to say false: which (if perhaps it
be possible) is the greatest heresy, subverting the very first principle of
faith, that God is Truth, and so necessarily excludes from heaven.

And here also, first, concerning our knowing a thing to be God's word, it must
be said, That we know, or at least ought to know,. 3. Where 1. Concerning our
obligation to know any thing to be Gods word, which knowledge obliges us
afterward to belief.
a thing so to be, whenever either so much proof of it is proposed to us, (by
what means soever it comes,) as actually sways our understanding to give assent
to it, (for which assent it is not necessary that there be demonstration or
proof infallible, but only generally such probability as turns the balance of
our judgment, and out-weighs what may be said for the contrary; for where so
much evidence is, either none can truly deny his assent, or cannot, without
sin, deny it); or else, when so much proof of it is proposed to us, as
(consideration being had of several capacities, according to which more things
are necessary to be known to some stronger, than to some others weaker) would
certainly sway our understanding, if the mind were truly humble and docile, and
divested of all unmortified passions, (as addiction to some worldly interest,
covetousness, ambition, affectation of vainglory, self-conceit of our own wit
and former judgment,) and of all faultily contracted prejudice and blindness by
our education, etc. which unremovedfirst do obstruct and hinder it from being
persuaded.

In which obstructions of our knowledge in things so necessary there are many
several degrees of malignity, which it will not be. 4.
amiss to point at. For 1. it is always a greater sin caeteris paribus, i. e.
the matter of the error being alike, obstinately to maintain a known error, and
to profess a thing against conscience convinced, than to have the conscience
unconvinced by reason of some lust that hinders it: because there is more
ignorance of my fault in this latter; and ignorance always aliquatenus excuses
another fault, even when it cannot excuse it self. 2ly, In holding the same
error not against conscience, tho from some culpable cause, some may be in very
much, some in very little, fault, according to many circumstances (which none
can exactly weigh to censure them) of capacity, condition, obligation to such
duties, accidental information, etc. varying in several persons. 3ly. The
sinfulness of the same man's erring in two things, tho both equally unknown to
him, and neither held against conscience, may be very different: for the
grosser and more pertinacious that their error is, the more faulty in it is the
erroneous. Both (1.) because the necessary truth opposed to such error has
more evidence, either from Scriptures, or from Ecclesiastical exposition
thereof; which exposition in the greatest matters we must grant either never,
or seldom errs; and to whose direction all single persons are referred; whence
any ones ignorance in these is much more faulty and wilful. And (2ly) because
such an error is the occasion of some miscarriage in manners; so that tho
formally he sinned no more in this than in his other errors, yet
consequentially he sins more in many other things by reason of it, than he does
in truth mistaken in some smaller matter. And hence 4ly, it follows, that an
error doing great mischief to manners, or to the purity of the Faith, on which
(tho this foundation does not always appear to support them) good manners are
built, can hardly be held without a very guilty ignorance; because such points
are, by God's providence and the Church'es care, to all men sufficiently
proposed. Indeed it is so hard a thing for a man to divest and strip himself of
all irregular passion, and especially from prejudice contracted by education,
that an error in some things of less moment, even out of some faulty cause, is
very often incident to men good and honest. But when our passion shall grow so
high, and our interest so violent, as to darken the light of truth in matters
of moment, especially if recommended to us by authority, and as it were openly
shining in our face, in such case there is but little difference between our *
denying a thing to be God's word when known to be so, and (by our own default)
* not knowing it to be so; between knowingly gainsaying truth, and wilfully
being blind; between shutting the door against knowledge, or affronting it being
entered; between conscience witnessing against us, or by violence silenced.

Again, concerning this removeal of all passion and interest; as,. 5.
when we have used our uttermost endeavor to find out, and lay them aside, we
are sufficiently excused; so we are not to presume, that when ever we are not
(...). and know nothing by our selves, that we are therefore presently clear
therefrom, (when as we have used no great examination or pains to discover or
remove them): for most men that are obstinate and self-biassed do not think
(tho they have reason to think) that they are so; and not without great
diligence it is that men espy the corruption of their own intentions; but yet
certainly this may with much vigilance be found out, and removed: else such men,
who can no way discover it, would be in their obstinacy as excusable, as in an
incapacity. Now in this search of our own integrity I can advise nothing so
necessary, as 1. to rectify our manners, where vitiously inclined, before we
trust much to our own reasoning, (for the vicious seldom judge aright in divine
matters.) 2. Then, to cast a jealous eye still upon the inclinations of our
education: And 3ly, lastly, * to mortify the self-love we have to our own
reason; by subduing and bending it to other men's, in the particulars which we
doubt of, or would learn, whom it once acknowledges in the general learneder
and wiser than we, and this especially when our judgment leads us to oppose
common doctrines; and * to employ our understanding, not so much to find out,
by it self, what is the true sense of disputed Scriptures, as what is the most
universal exposition of the Church concerning the sense thereof, wherein it may
soon be satisfied. But of this see more in Trial of Doctr.. 14. etc.

2. Next, our passions being rightly ordered concerning sufficicient. 6. 2. And
concerning sufficient proposal.
proposal; we may not think it enough to behave our selves passively, i. e. to
receive from time to time what happens to be evidenced to us; and till then
(concerning sufficient knowledge of divine truths) to think our selves in a
safe condition. We may not rely on the security of believing some few things,
in which all Christians agree; and on an implicit faith, and the preparedness
of our mind, whereby in general we assent that all God's word is true, and are
ready to believe with all willingness any thing whereof we shall be convinced
that it is so. By which implicit faith of the Scriptures we may also truly be
said to believe the contrary to what we believe. This, I say, frees not our
conscience from all guilt. For there lies a duty on all, not only willingly to
entertain knowledge in divine matters, when brought as it were to their door,
and infused into them, but to seek diligently and continually after it all the
days of their life, (due respect being had to their secular vocations); as
being the only foundation of a right obedience and service of God, which is the
unum necessarium for this world and the next. And certain it is, that the most
of men are much more obliged to the study of Divinity, (soberly undertaken, not
for the teaching of others, but the informing of themselves,) than (by reason
of their secular condition) they think they are. By want of which study it is,
that men become so fatally addicted to the doctrines, practices, religion of
the place wherein they are bred, tho these never so gross and easily
discernible for erroneous, and damnable to their souls.

Neither may we become careless in this search of divine truth by relying on a
general repentance (as too many do) of our errors;. 7.
as if it were, tho not for all other sins, yet for these, a sufficient remedy;
and this because, tho many of our errors are sins, (as proceeding from not an
unavoidable, but a culpable ignorance, which so far as it is culpable, so far
it is also voluntary,) yet those errors in which we err for the present (of
which we speak) they are always wholly unknown; nor can any man live a minute
in a known error: profess it afterward he may, but hold it any longer he
cannot, but that the very knowing or judging it to be an error is the very act
of forsaking it: and then if errors be unknown, a general repentance of them
only can be made. I say this plea, tho it serves the turn for some smaller, yet
not for grosser errors; because such, tho actually undiscovered, yet may be
easily known, for we suppose sufficiently perspicuous revelation and
proposition of the truths contrary to these. In such therefore the first and
not very difficult business or act of repentance is, to endeavor to know and
discover them, and so to make particular confession of them, nay further,
public recantation, if by them we have done much hurt to others; for many
times errors are more pernicious than lusts, when ever they tend to patronize a
lust: and so one heretic may do more mischief in the world, than a thousand
otherways grievous offenders. It follows therefore, that errors are forgiven
after no other manner, than other sins are. Some smaller sins and errors,
because less discernible, may be remitted to a general repentance; but greater,
as well sinful errors, as sinful lusts, we are to acknowledge and forsake, the
tenent of the one as well as the practice of the other. Only this difference
there is, 1. That the errors so soon as known are ipso facto forsaken, tho not
so other sins. 2. That, caeteris paribus, i. e. if the error by some ill
consequences of it be not more mischievous, a gross error undiscovered has
less guilt in it, than a known and wilful sin; because the more knowledge, the
more guilt.

What is our duty then? We are never to be secure of ourselves. 8.
in the search of Divine Truth, but are obliged according to, our several
conditions, the opportunity of teachers, the times of manifestation we live in,
etc. (for there lies a necessity or duty of knowing more of divine things, as
upon some capacities, so upon some conditions of life, and upon some times of
revelation, more than in others: and that knowledge is necessary to one man's
salvation (that is, he shall stand guilty before God, and be called to a severe
account for the want thereof) which is not to another): we are obliged, I say,
all our life to seek earnestly further knowledge of divine truths; and not to
acquiesce in our present knowing, no more than in our present working; but from
milk to ascend to strong meat, and to grow in faith, as in grace and holiness.
(See Romans 1. 17. Jo. 16. 22. 1 Cor. 3. 2. Heb. 5. 12. 14. Ephesians. 1. 17.-4. 13.
Col. 1. 10. Phil. 1. 9, 10. 2 Pet. 1. 5.-3. 18.) And then upon our using such
constant endeavor both for knowing, the wisdom of God to praise him, and will
of God to serve him, our implicit faith is accepted; whether in our defects, or
also errors, in matters of faith: implicit faith being then only serviceable to
us, where faith explicit (considering due circumstances) cannot be attained by
us.

Now what is said hitherto concerning knowledge of the Scriptures,. 9.
may be applied to the knowledge of the Church, (our guide in the Scriptures,)
and the obedience due to her. For he who believes, 1. Either that the Church is
infallible in her proposals to him what is the word of God; or 2. That, tho
fallible, in some things, yet she is appointed in those things to be his Judge,
and the final determiner of them; 3. or, at least that, in the exposition of
the sense of Scriptures, her judgment is better than his own; such a one is
bound to believe any thing to be God's word, if she affirm it to him to be so.
And he who does not believe any of these things of the Church, is not presently
therefore unobliged to her proposals, unless he has unpartially examined this
matter, and so finds no just cause to believe any such thing of her wisdom or
authority, as is pressed upon him. For when some argue thus: There is no danger
to me in so or so disobeying the Church where she ought to be obeyed, if having
used the uttermost examination I can, both of the point, and of my own
dis-interest, I can find no such obedience due to her; it is well reasoned, tho
such obedience were indeed due to her, if we grant the Supposition, that he
has examined to the uttermost, who yet after all remains mistaken: for a
mistaking examination, where there is no further power to discover it, is no
more blameable than a true one, and in this case invincible ignorance or
incapacity excuses. And God doubtless imposes nothing to be believed by us
under the penalty of sinning, but that he gives sufficient arguments to
evidence it to all men endued with the use of reason, and void of prejudice and
passion. But hence is our error, that we take an imperfect trial and
examination, for a complete, and suddenly rest in the dictate of our conscience
un- or misinformed, which is virtually a going against it: and to God must we
answer both for such a blind conscience, and all the acts of disobedience that
flow from it.

Thus much concerning our obligation to seek after the knowledge. 10.
of all divine truth, and concerning sufficient proposal; and 2 That it is not
necessary to our salvation, that all that is God's word be known by us to be
so, or, in general known by us to be a truth.
that upon this whatever appears to be God's word is necessary to our
salvation, to be assented to, and believed. But, this granted, in the second
place you are to observe; that it is not necessary to our salvation, that all
that is God's word be known to us to be so, or be known by us to be a Truth.
For of these parts of God's word which are proposed to us, some there are which
concern the business of our salvation; and again, some others which do not, (as
some passages of history, and perhaps some subtle consequences of some
beneficial point of Faith, etc:) Hence therefore arises a twofold necessity of
belief; either only in respect of proposal, because we know they are God's
word; or, besides proposal, in respect of our salvation, because they are some
way advantageous thereto.

Now concerning the first of these; tho such things, once evidently Where 1.
That it is necessary to salvation that some points of Gods word be expressly
known by all.
proposed are necessary to be assented to, or rather not dissented from; yet it
is not necessary at all that they should be either proposed to us, or known by
us: but we may be ignorant of or also err in them without any sin, any danger.
Concerning the second; Divine Truths necessary to be believed with relation to
our salvation, may be taken either in a more strict, or in a more large sense.
Taken in the most strict sense, they are such articles or points of faith, as
without which actually known and believed none at all can possibly enter into
heaven, and escape damnation; and of which not only the denial or opposition,
but the pure nescience and ignorance is a defect of faith, to all adulti
absolutely irremissible. And these must needs be very few; since we must make
(...) points very few.
them no more, than the knowledge whereof may be attained by the most
illiterate, indocile, and the lowest conditions of men. And likely, according
to the several degrees of the proposal, and revelation of the mysterys of
salvation, fewer of these are required in some times (as those before the
Gospel) than in some others, as those since it. Yet, that now also, in the
greatest illumination, there are but few, we may gather, both * from the short
abridgment of faith the Apostles proposed in their Sermons to the people,
commonly including the Articles of the Passion and Resurrection, and Kingdom of
Jesus the Son of God and of David, and the remission of sins to the penitent
through his Name: and * from the yet shorter Confessions of Faith, which the
Apostles accepted as sufficient for bestowing of Baptism, i. e. for admitting
men to salvation, and the Kingdom of Heaven; so that in that instant had they
died, (as the good Thief also did,) doubtless upon such a small stock of faith
they had entered into life eternal. See Act. 8. 37. -- 16. 31, 33. Act. 2. 38.
-- 10. 43.

Now these absolutely necessary points are either 1. of pure. 11.
faith; or also 2. of practice, 1. Again; those are either, * such, wherein we
more expressly give honor and glory to God; in acknowledging Him, and his
wisdom, and his works such as they are, (and that is much better and more
wonderful than any lie can make them,) or, * such whereby we * nourish our hope
concerning good things belonging to our selves obedient; and * quicken our fear
concerning evil things appertaining to the disobedient: Yet are not those
amongst them, which are most speculative, to be thought useless or unprofitable
to us, even in respect of our practice; they all generally conducing to the
advancing of our admiration, love, and affection to God; and of our confidence,
and reliance upon him; and so to the animating of our endeavors and obedience
accordingly to his commands. Nullum est dogma Christianum quod non sit
quodammodo necessarium ad praxim. So that an orthodox faith in Speculatives is
a main ground of a right practice; and a strong faith of a zealous practice.
2ly. Those points of faith which are also of practice, are such wherein we
learn our duty to God.

To particularize something in both these. 1. Pure faith absolutely necessary
to all in general, even to those under the law of. 12.
nature, perhaps * is that faith only, Heb. 11. 6. (made evident evident enough
to all by the works of God.) Again, faith absolutely necessary to those within
the Church before the times of the Gospel, is perhaps, besides the former
faith, * a general trust and hope in the Messiah to come. (See Jo. 4. 25. -- 1.
21. Mat. 2. 5. Jo. 7. 42.) Again, absolutely necessary to those under the
Gospel is * perhaps that faith Jo. 3. 18, 36. 1 Jo. 4. 2, 15. Jo. 11. 27. Act.
17. 18. Romans 10. 9, Mat. 16. 16, 17. Act. 8. 37. (both these last kinds of
faith being evidenced sufficiently to all where the sound of the Prophets, or
the Gospel, has bin heard.) And 2ly, for matter of practice and of holiness
(in which there are as undispensable fundamentals for attaining salvation, as
in pure credends: for as without faith, so without holiness none shall see
God,) there is absolutely necessary perhaps, besides the assent to the most
clear laws of nature, (which were also afterward the law written) repentance
from dead works, and the interior acts of Sanctification (in loving God and our
neighbor.) See Heb. 6. 1.

Now the set number of these, the pure nescience or non-practice. 13. Not
easily defined.
whereof certainly excludes from Heaven there where ever is the preaching of
the Gospel, I do not see what way it can be certainly known: but the Apostles
Creed seems too large a Catalogue (I In respect of these the Apostles Creed too
large.
mean in respect of pure Credends, not Practicals) of necessaries or
fundamentals taken in this sense.

This being said of Necessaries taken in the most strict sense. 2ly,
Fundamentals and Necessaries to salvation are taken in a. 14. 2. Other points,
only highly advantageous to salvation that they be known.
more large sense, for all such divine truths, the knowledge of which (and
practice, if they be practicals) is very advantageous and beneficial to
salvation; tho amongst these there are degrees of more and less necessary, and
some approaching nearer to fundamentals absolute, some further off removed.

These points are also said to be necessary, both * 1. because they (especially
if they be points relating to some practice) are such helps to our performing
the conditions of our salvation, and have such influence upon our lives, that
they much facilitate our way to Heaven, which would be either much more coldly
pursued, or much more difficultly proceeded in, without them. Concerning the
danger of erring in which points, methinks Mr. Chillingworth speaks very well.
There be many errors, says he, not fundamental, which yet it imports much, tho
not for the possibility that you may be saved, yet for the probability, that
you will be so: because the holding of these errors, tho they do not merit, may
yet occasion, damnation. So that tho a man, if remaining godly, may be saved
with these errors, yet by means of them many are made vicious, and so damned:
by them, I say, tho not for them. Thus Mr. Chillingworth: And this said he; for
a necessity of a reformation from the rest of the Church in such points: this
say I; for a necessity of the Church'es guidance of us in them. And 2ly, *
because God, both by a fuller revelation 3. Yet our duty (each one according to
his calling) to seek the knowledge of them.
of them to us in the Scriptures, and by the doctrine of the Church, has
obliged all men, according to their capacity and condition of life, and
opportunity of directers, to a certain measure of actual knowledge, belief,
profession thereof, and obedience thereto. So that, tho they are not absolutely
necessary to attaining Salvation, ratione medii, strictly so taken; yet they
are so ratione praecepti, and it is our duty to know and believe them, (and
doing of our duty is a thing necessary to Salvation): and we sin if we do not
learn and use all diligence (competent with our calling) for to acquire the
knowledge of them: and so also our teachers sin, if they neglect to instruct us
in them. (Act. 20. 26, 27.) Neither can we be saved in the ignorance of them,
but only by God's first forgiving us, both this sin of our faulty ignorance,
and our negligence or obstinacy that caused it, and our disobedience in
practicals that followed it: and then again, this forgivenes is not obtained
where our fault, so far as we our selves have discovered it, is not first
repented of; and, according to the time we have in this world after such our
repentance, rectified.

Now taking Necessaries in this sense, the Apostles Creed, as it. 15. In
respect of these the Apostles Cre^d too narrow.
was before too large, so now is much too narrow to comprehend them all: as
being * a Catalogue (at least for the most of the Articles thereof) 1. only of
pure credends without practicals; in which practicals our Salvation mainly and
fundamentally consists, as well as in speculative faith. By fundamental points
of faith [saith Dr. Potter Char. mist. 7. sect. p. 215. speaking there only of
pure Credends] we understand not the necessary duties of charity comprehended
in the Decalogue, nor the necessary acts of hope contained in the Lord's Prayer
etc, tho both these virtues of charity and hope are fundamentals necessary to
the Salvation of Christians. And as we are bound to believe such and such
things under pain of damnation; so, to do such and such: which doing still
includes belief first that they are God's commands, and ought to be done under
pain of being the least in the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5. 19. And 2ly, in those
pure Credends, the Apostles Creed being a * summary not of all, but the chief
of them, if we consider the Creed in the express terms, and immediate sense
thereof: Else Arrians, Socinians, Nestorians, the Pelagian, or late Anabaptists,
etc, may not be said to err in any necessary points, since they confess this
Creed. But, if you include all necessary consequences of those Articles within
the contents thereof to make it complete; yet neither thus can many necessary
points be reduced to it: and could they, yet secondly then where will there be
any one found that thus being strictly catechized, may not affirm something
contrary to some necessary consequence thereof.

We find nothing therefore in it expressly concerning some pure credends, and
those of great consequence. [For to say nothing of. 16.
the Deity of our Savior; of his consubstantiality with the Father; of the
procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son; and many other points added in the
latter Creeds of Councils: how necessary is the believing and acknowledging the
Grace of God empowering us to all good works, against Pelagius, etc?] Much less
find we any thing therein concerning many practicals of our duty toward God,
or our neighbor; yet is it as fundamentally necessary to Salvation to believe
the Ten Commandments as the Creed. For, since the practice of these is granted
necessary, to be saved, believing first is also a necessary precedent to all
lawful practice; and all acts of obedience are grounded upon a foregoing assent
of the understanding to the lawfulness or also divine command of what we
practice: and how many of them are not of faith are sin. And to affirm the
lawfulnes of any thing forbidden in Scripture, (suppose of adultery, or
drunkenness,) or to deny the lawfulnes and goodness of any thing commanded
there, (suppose of marriage, obedience to Parents and Magistrates,) would be as
fundamental an error (and perhaps more mischievous) as denying some Speculative
article of faith. And many dangerous Heretics have there bin in practicals.
Again; in the Apostles Creed we find * nothing concerning what writings are to
be believed by us to have bin heavenly inspired, and the undoubted word of God;
and hence the settling of the Canon was no small solicitude of the Primitive
Church; a point this of no small consequence, for the attaining of Salvation,
to be believed, yet not absolutely necessary; since one may be saved without
knowing the Scriptures, and many were so, before these writings. * Nothing
concerning Ecclesiastical Orders, Ordinations, Sacraments; the Church'es
absolving sinners, inflicting censures, prescribing public Liturgies, etc;
points fundamental (and so called some of them at least, Heb. 6. 2.) in respect
of the essence, and government, and unity of the Church, tho not in respect of
the Salvation of some member thereof. Yet why not necessary to every person
therein, as having reference, one way or other, to their particular good? *
Nothing express concerning the obedience due to the Church, and her Governors,
(else why do so many deny it, who confess the Creed, and in it the Catholic
Church?) and yet this a very necessary fundamental also in respect of Christian
duties: for ignorance whereof, whilst especially they will not believe the
Church in attesting her own authority, how many deprive themselves of the help
of her excellent rules? not to name here the Evangelical Counsels of Celibacy,
and emptying our selves of our superfluous wealth, recommended to us by her;
and her many injunctions sovereignly tending to the advancing of piety, and
bettering of manners; which we will suppose here not to be contained in
Scripture; as frequent confession of sins to the Priest; frequent Fasts; hours
of Prayer; Communions, etc; which who knows not of how much moment they are for
the abstaining from sin, acquisition of Christian virtues, and so consequently
for our Salvation?

Now the obligation to know and believe these, and such like Necessaries of
this 2d. sort, varies according to several persons. 17. 4. That the obligation
of knowing these varieth according to several persons, etc.
and conditions, and according to the more or less evident proposal of them. In
this dispute (as Dr. Potter acknowledges Char. mistak.. 7. p. 242.) of
necessary and fundamental truths, both truths and persons must be wisely
distinguished. The truth may be necessary in one sense, that is not so in
another; and fundamental to some persons, in certain respects, which is not so
to some others. 1. * More points ought to be known, and believed by one than by
another, according as more are made manifest to one than another, by the
Scriptures, by the decision of the Church, or any other way. Where note, that,
before the Church's determination of some points of faith, one may have an
obligation to believe them, when another has not, if, before this, they be
evidenced to him, when not to another, (what I mean by evidence, see before,.
3.); by what means or author soever it be he receives this evidence. And after
such evidence he that opposes it is (...), and heretical in God's sight, even
before that he happens to be declared so by the Church'es censure, and is made
yet more perversely erroneous after her definitions; and such obstinate error
again is more or less dangerous (besides the sin of obstinacy) as the matter of
the error is of more influence toward our Salvation: whilst meanwhile others,
not having the like evidence of them, are yet free to dissent or disbelieve
them: but then, after the Church'es definition those also, upon this stronger
evidence (shall I call it?) or authority, will become obliged to assent to
them. Again, * more points ought to be known, and believed by one than by
another, according as one has more opportunity than another, by studying the
Scriptures, the Church'es exposition thereof and her decrees, to find out and
discover such truths. Art thou a Master in Israel (says our Savior,) and
know not these things? See Heb. 5. 12. There are those who are not excused
in acquiescing in the tenants of their particular education; but who are bound
to examine the general traditions and doctrines of the Church, the ancient
Fathers, Ecclesiastical Histories, etc. Again; others there are of another
condition, who are not so far obliged. And in the former sort, if they either
depart from the foresaid doctrines themselves; or continue a separation first
made by others, it will be a damnable Schism; when perhaps the simplicity of
the vulgar, their followers, will remain excused (if the error be not in a
point absolutely fundamental); or will be much lightlier punished, Luke 12. 48.
[Which common people we must leave to God's secret mercies, in the same manner
as we do all those others, who have not believed because they have not heard;
which Heathens also, I charitably think, shall not suffer for want of that
Faith, of which they had no Teacher, as that Faith mentioned Jo. 3. 36. but for
want of that the sound of which has come to all the world in all times,
mentioned Heb. 11. 6. compared Romans 1. 20, 21.] Thus many truths are necessary
to be known by the Pastors and the Learned, And the decrees of Councils not
obligatory (at least to some) against a pure nescience, but, opposition
thereof: and not any opposition, but, only when known to be their Decrees.
that are not so by the illiterate people. And in respect of some vulgar, I
conceive, that form Quisquis non confitetur, or, non credit, Anathema sit,
concerning the Creeds drawn up against several heretics by the four first
General Councils, is not to be understood to be of force against a pure
nescience of some Articles thereof; for there are many subtilties exceeding
vulgar capacities, and which they need not distinctly know: but against an
opposition of them, or denial, or non-confession of these points, when they
come to know the Church has established them, and condemned the contrary; for
thus to oppose the Church, is not to be ignorant of them, but heretical in
them. Tho it is not necessary to Salvation, that either they should know the
Church has determined such a thing; or that such a thing is a divine truth; if
such knowledge be beyond the compass of their moral endeavors (suitable to their
capacity and their vocation) in the search of divine truth. (See this matter
more largely discussed in the Disc. of Infallibility.. 15.)

Nay, if the Learned also should (I say not be ignorant of, but). 18.
err in, some point of such moment, that by consequence such error destroys
some chief principle of our faith; yet, this being supposed and granted
possible, that, having used their just endeavor in the search of the truth,
they are by no sufficient proposal convinced of it, and that meanwhile they
contend for the principle with the same or more pertinacity, than for it, with
a resolution to desert it, if once appearing to them any way repugnant to the
other; such an error will no way hazard Salvation. Upon such Supposition; Tho
the Lutheran is conceived, from his new fancied Ubiquity, by consequence to
destroy the verity of Christ's Humanity, Again the Calvinist is conceived, from
God's eternal predetermination of all our actions etc. by consequence to
destroy God's Holiness and Justice in making him the Author of all sin; points
highly fundamental: yet are not these, holding most firmly the principle, and
ready to quit the point controverted when to them apparently repugnant to it,
charged by the contrary party of the Reformed to be fallen from Salvation; but
are easily admitted to one another communion. So the Roman, or rather all the
visible, Church of God before Luther, whether Eastern or Western, in adoration
of the Eucharist is conceived, by consequence of this not being the Body of our
Savior, upon which ground they worship it, to worship a mere Creature, and so
to commit idolatry, and give God's honor to another: yet this Church holding
the contrary principle, That no Creature may be worshipped with divine
adoration, is not said by this practice to err in a fundamental; nor are those,
unconvinced of their error, dying in the Roman communion and in this practice,
by the contrary reformed parties denied Salvation. See Dr. Potter sect. 3. p.
78. sect. 4. p. 123.

But note; That if the Sentence of the Church be a sufficient ground in such
dangerous points, to regulate and guide our belief,. 19.
and that her Definition of them may be called a sufficient proposal: now after
such decree we stand guilty in any of these erroneous Tenants, tho our reason
perceives not the ill consequences thereof; because here, contrary to the
Supposition made before, we have a sufficient proposal of the truth, or an
authorized proposer, what in such doubtful points we are to hold. For if we
know, or, being impartial, might know, that there is such an authority as it to
which we are bound to submit our judgment, we are convinced by this authority
determining, as well as by arguments proving. Neither have the first Councils
endeavored to prove their Creeds to those to whom they did enjoin them. And
thus much of Necessaries or Fundamentals in the second place; the set number of
which (varying so much according to several persons, and conditions, yet all of
these obliged to acquire as much knowledge as they can, tending any way to
their Salvation) can much less be prescribed than of the former.

The next consideration will be concerning the Ground of Faith Salvifical:
Whether it ought to be absolute Infallibility, or, Whether. 20. PART. II.
Concerning the necessary Ground of Faith Salvifical: Whether Infallibility;
that the matter of such Faith is a divine truth, or God's word.
we cannot savingly, and with such a faith as God requires, believe some divine
truth, unless we be infallibly certain, that it is a divine truth.

1. First then, concerning the object of Saving Faith, It is true. 21.
Concessions. 1. Concerning the object of Faith; that this is only God's Word.
and granted, that the object thereof is only God's Word; and that this Word is
infallible: and that, since God cannot lie, fidei non potest subesse falsum.
Which saying refers not to the act, but the matter of faith: i. e. the matter
of faith Salvifical cannot be false; because it is the Word of God, which is
apprehended by this Faith: Thus therefore true faith is always grounded on (or
ultimately resolved into) something which is infallible, i. e. God's Word,
(whether this be written or not written,) and in believing divine things we
cannot savingly for the matter (tho we may unfeignedly for the act) believe any
thing but what is certainly true.

Saving Faith then requires both 1. that that which is believed be God's word:
and 2. that it be believed by us to be so; So the Schools, Fides non assentit
alicui, nisi quia est a Deo revelatum: And 3ly, that this word be believed to
be utterly infallible. From whence this therefore follows: 1. That Faith
believing any thing which is false is no true faith. 2ly. That Faith believing
any thing which is true, yet not as divine revelation or God's word, or this
word not to be infallible, is no divine or saving faith. So that there is always
an infallible object for faith to rest upon. But our Quaere goes further:
Whether it be requisite to Saving Faith, that we not only believe what is God's
infallible word, but likewise that we be able to prove infallibly that it is
God's word which we believe.

2. Concerning the act of faith, and the certainty and assurance. 22. 2.
Concerning the act of faith, and the certainty which it may receive from the
external motives of Scriptures, Church, Tradition.
which it may receive from the external motives of Scriptures, Church, and
Tradition. 1. First it seems, that whatever certainty our faith may receive
from these, these again, both the authority of the Scriptures, and of the
Church, do externally derive only or chiefly from that which is ordinarily
called Universal Tradition. By which I mean * a Tradition so universal, as
these things are rationally (considering all circumstances) capable of; i. e.
from all persons who could come to the knowledge of them, and who have no
apparent interest which may incline them to corrupt truth; and * a Tradition so
full and sincere, as that the like in other matters leaves in men no doubt or
dispute.

1. For first, supposing the Church infallible, yet is she finally proved to be
so only from Universal Tradition, which universal. 23. That the authority of
Scriptures and Church is learned from universal Tradition.
Tradition has its certainty and infallibility from the nature and plenitude
thereof, and not from the testimony of Scripture, and so escapes a circular
proof. The series then of proof is this; The Church is proved infallible (at
least in Necessaries) from our Savior's promise of assisting her etc testified
in Scripture. These Scriptures are proved to be God's word, and so infallible,
from universal Tradition; and universal Tradition is allowed to be infallible,
from the evidence and nature of it self: because it is morally (i. e.
considering their manners and reasonable nature) impossible for so many men of
so many ages, so dis-interested, to conspire to deliver a lie in such a matter.
Or, as some others express it, such Tradition (tho it were not so plenary) as
is delivered to us by that congregation of men which is called the Church, must
be allowed to be infallible, from its being invested and endued with such marks
and signs, (amongst which are Miracles,) as it is contrary to the veracity of
God (supposing that he requires from his creatures a due service and worship)
to permit that they should be fallacious. The series of the probation runs
thus. The Scriptures are proved to be God's word, and so infallible, from the
testimony of the Church: which testimony of the Church, or of so many people so
qualified, is proved to be infallible, not from our Savior's promise testified
by Scripture, (for thus the proof would run in a circle: tho to any one
acknowledging first the Scriptures this proof is most valid; I mean the proof
of the infallibility of the Church from the testimony of Scripture is most
valid; tho it be true also, that the Scriptures are rightly proved to be God's
word from the Church's testimony:) but as being so universal a Tradition, or a
Tradition so sufficiently testified and confirmed, as it is morally impossible,
especially considering God's veracity and providence, that it should deceive
us. But, as I said, to prove the Church the other way to be infallible, i. e.
by testimony of those Scriptures, which Scriptures (to be divine) we learn only
from the Church: Or more plainly thus; to prove the Church to be infallible in
all her traditions or doctrines from the testimony of the Scriptures, (our
Savior's promise etc. delivered there,) and then to prove the Scriptures to be
God's word or infallible, because this is one of her traditions or doctrines,
is granted, even by some of the Roman writers, to be a circle. See Dr. Holden
1. l. 9. c. Non audentes fidem divinam in certitudine and evidentia naturali
(i. e. in universal tradition, and he gives the reason, because they cannot be
persuaded, quod illi nulla prorsus subsit aberrandi facultas) fundare, in
circulum hunc inevitabiliter illabuntur, and in orbem turpissime saltant etc.
Indeed such argumentation would have no more strength in it, than this of
Mahomet, If he should first write a law, which tells the people, that whatever
he delivers to them is infallible truth, and then prove to them that law to be,
or to say, to them an infallible truth, because he delivers it. A circle I say
it is to those who will not grant the Supposition, that Scriptures are the word
of God: otherwise to men as to Protestants) supposing the verity of Scriptures,
tho unproved by the Church, it is no circle, if any one (suppose a Catholic) from
them being granted, attempt to prove ad hominem the Church's authority or
infallibility, tho the same Romanist also does affirm, that the Scriptures are
proved to be God's word from the Church'es testimony, or from tradition. Only
where both these (Scripture and Church-infallibility) are denied; neither can
be proved by the other, till one is either supposed as true, or proved by some
other medium; which medium is received to be tradition: and if so, then I say
there can be no more certainty, that the Church is infallible, than that
certainty which lies in universal Tradition.

2. And secondly, the same may be said for Scriptures: which being supposed to
be infallible, because God's word; yet if they are. 24.
proved only by the same tradition to be God's word, all the certainty that I
have of their infallibility is also from universal tradition. For the
Conclusion can have no more evidence than the Premises or Proof has. Again;
suppose I were (without tradition) infallibly certain, that such Books are
God's word; yet can I not, for all this, quit the dependence upon Tradition in
some points at least of my faith. For my faith being grounded not on the bare
words, but sense of those books; and the sense of the same words being diverse,
(especially since the sense of no one text must oppose the sense of any other;
and hence Scriptures most clear in their expression, by reason of other
Scriptures as seemingly clear that express the contrary, notwithstanding this
clearnes, become very ambiguous) and that in some necessary points of faith; as
appears in those many controversies concerning their sense, some of which
contests doubtless are in very necessary points and matters of faith: to know
therefore amongst these which is the true sense (as suppose in the
controversies about the sacred Trinity, Grace and Free will, Justification,
etc.) upon which first known I must ground my faith; I am no way helped by
knowing that the writing is God's word. Here therefore, tho the Scripture for
the Words should not, yet my Faith, for their Sense would, have a dependence
upon, and repair unto, universal Tradition: and wherever the Sense is doubtful
to me, as the Scriptures may be doubtful to one, where perspicuous to another,
the chief certainty I can have for that Sense, which my Faith ought to embrace,
will be from the universal Church-tradition.

Now concerning this Universal Tradition therefore, on which. 25. Concessions
concerning Tradition,
as the Final assurer of the Scriptures, or of the Church'es Infallibility, the
act of Faith must rest, let it be granted; 1. First, (without disputing whether
it be absolutely infallible, because it is needles to the stating of our
business,) That there is in it certainty 1. That there is sufficient assurance
in Tradition (whether ^^fallible, or no) to ground a firm faith upon.
or assurance sufficient to ground a firm faith upon. For tho it is willingly
assented to, that Tradition, being in its nature a relation of a thing, gives
not nor cannot give us such an assurance, as that we know the contrary thereof
to be absolutely impossible, (for it is not absolutely impossible for all men in
the world, from the beginning thereof till this time, to have lied in every
thing they have said; but yet he were no ordinary madman, that, upon this
nonimpossibility, would believe no relation at all; only because it is not
absolutely impossible that they may err, and himself hit the right:) yet 1. we
must either allow a sufficient certainty therein; or else, that we have no
sufficient certainty of the Scriptures, that they are God's word. Which,
granting that some few learned and studied men may sufficiently discern from
the light of Scripture; yet for this, the most of men, especially as to some of
the books thereof, depend on the certainty of Tradition. And indeed it were
impious to affirm; that we have not a sufficiently sure ground of that knowledge
of good and evil, upon which our eternal happi nes is to be acquired, or misery
sustained; or that God has not left an undoubtable evidence of those truths,
whereby we are to direct our lives to that end, for which he has created us.
But this can be assigned no other, at least to most men, than Tradition.
Therefore it is the interest of all Christians, as well those who submit
themselves only to the Scripture, as those who submit also to the Church,
unanimously to maintain a sufficient certainty therein; lest whilst the grounds
of our faith ascend not to a Mathematical or sensible demonstration, they be
made Skepticism and Quodlibets.

2. But 2ly, we must either hold certainty in Tradition; or that. 26.
we can have no assurance at all of any thing past or absent. Yet, transfer
this discourse to any other temporal matter, and who can wish to be more sure of
any thing, than he is of many such which have to him only a general tradition
for them. As for example: that there is such a City as Paris; or was such a man
as Henry the 8th. But yet in divine things compared with other temporal
matters, that are of the same distance of time from us, there seems to be much
more certainty; in that the providence of God has appointed a selected company
of men, successively in all ages, to be the Guardians, Conservers, Divulgers,
thereof to the world for ever.

3. Lastly, if this Tradition, and the doctrines we acknowledge divine, were to
be delivered authoritatively from God to men,. 27.
not in all, but some determinate, time and place; (see Christ's Ben. p. 35.):
say how posterity can receive these from any other evidence; unless perhaps we
further require the voices from heaven, Christ's preaching, miracles, death, to
be presented before us; and that before every one of us; excluding all
relations from others, because these may be fallible. But such a ground of our
faith destroys the nature of faith; and it will be no more belief, but sight,
and science; which are opposed to faith properly so called. See 2 Cor. 5. 7.
Jo. 20. 29. The knowledge and assurance then of things past for time, or far
distant for place, must be conveyed either by relation; only or extraordinary
revelation.

2ly. Again; let it be granted, That Tradition may be certain. 28. 2. That
Tradition may have a sufficient certainty; tho notabsolutely un versal.
enough, tho contradicted by some, (for what is there also in nature or sense,
that has not by some bin opposed?) and not absolutely universal: Else the
Scriptures themselves are not received by sufficient tradition; for most of the
sacred books have bin opposed by some, and that for a long time; and some books
by many. But if, notwithstanding this, they be thought sufficiently attested,
so also may many other things, whereof has happened some contest.

3ly. Let it be granted likewise; that the universal Church of no one age can
be mistaken in the delivering of any eminent and. 29. 3. That no one age of the
Chapter is mistaken in delivering any eminent Tradition.
more material tradition, wherein her care is interested. For who so denies
this, must either affirm, that no Tradition can be certain to us; or, that it
is so only by the records and histories of former, and those the very first,
times, (for if the present age may fail in these, so might any present age
before it, except the first,) whereby the traditions of the present must be
confirmed. But, since these records and writings of former times were casual,
and since our Savior established his doctrine only in a succession of his
messengers, (and from them only, without any writings, for a time, the Church
learned her faith;) surely Christians, according to this tenent, if destitute
of writings, would have bin left uncertain in their religion, notwithstanding
the provision made by our Savior of Teachers of his Gospel to the worlds end.

4ly. Let it be further granted; 1. Not only that he, who diligently. 30. 4.
Tha^ the testimony of the present age is sufficient to inform us therein,
searches after the truth of a Tradition, cannot ordinarily err or mistake
that for a Tradition that is not; or that for no Tradition that is: but 2. that
the general testimony of the present age is enough to warrant a Tradition to
him; from which he may receive a sufficient certainty, without examining a
succession of the same doctrine from the first age; or searching the conformity
of the present with former times; as well as he is sufficiently assured that
there was such a man as William the Conqueror, or is such a City as Rome, only
by the general undisputed accord of all of the present time, namely, amongst
whom he converseth; without reading the Chronicles up to the Conqueror, or
consulting the several interjacent Provinces between his abode and Rome. Nay
3ly, let this also be yielded concerning the present age, That tho quo
universalior (as well universalitate loci, as temporis) traditio, eo certior;
yet one, without searching the universality of the present age, may have
sufficient assurance of what he believes from the public Liturgies, Canons,
Articles, Catechisms, and other common writings, such as come to hand, where
they all or most accord one with another; of which books also that such Fathers
and Synods etc. are the Authors, as are pretended, let it be likewise granted,
that he may learn from the same surenes of Tradition, as he does, that such an
one was an Emperor etc. (for so he believes the same Tradition for Tully, or
Livy being the author of such books, as for Caesar being Emperor of such a
people; and then the same assurance which he has of Secular Authors, he may
have of Sacred); or as he does, that such are his Princes Proclamations or
Edicts, which he submits to without any signed testimony, or any scruple that
they are such; nor does any venture to transgres them upon the not absolute
impossibility that they are forged.

5ly. Let it be granted, (which we know by experience,) That. 31. 5. That
Tradition of the Chapter is easier to be understood (in some things expounded by
her) than the Scriptures.
the Tradition of the Church is easilier understood in those points which she
undertakes to expound, than the Scriptures themselves, which are by her
explained. For supposing the contrary, then were Creeds, Catechisms, and all
the Church'es teaching needles; since of two things equally obscure, the one
can never illustrate or explain the other. Therefore men may be more assured in
many things of the doctrine and meaning of the Church, than of the Scriptures.
As for example, it is easier (especially when not some single text is considered
apart, but all those, which both sides urge, are confronted together) to
understand what we are to hold, concerning the Trinity, from the Nicene Creed;
and concerning Grace and Free Will, from the decrees of the Milevitan Council;
than from the Scriptures. So, in Luther's time it was easy for those to know
the Church'es tenent and practice concerning Adoration of the Eucharist,
Auricular Confession, Invocation of Saints, etc. who were not able to examine
the doctrine of the Scriptures in such points; so that it must be yielded, that
Tradition is a more evident Guide for many things, than those Sacred writings
are.

6ly. Lastly; since this Tradition of divine things, in which. 32. 6. That the
Chapter is a sufficiently certain Guide to us in doctrines proposed by her as
Traditionary.
above we have pleaded sufficient certainty to be, is contained in the Church,
and delivered as it were from hand to hand by the successive Guides thereof;
therefore let it be granted, That the Church (which pretends not to make any
new Articles of Faith at all, but to recommend to her children what is
delivered to her) is infallible, or a certain Guide to us in doctrines proposed
by her as Traditionary, in the same manner as Tradition may be said to be
infallible or certain. For to say Tradition is certain, is to say we have some
way to know Tradition (suppose that Tradition of the Scriptures being God's
word) without being deceived in it. and this way is the testimony of the
Church; therefore is this also certain.

Having made these Concessions concerning the evidence of Church-tradition, and
the sufficient testimony it affords us to. 33. Digression. That all traditions
carry not equal certainty.
ground our faith on, at least in all the principal points of our religion,
wherein such Tradition (both as to delivering a sufficient Canon of Scripture,
and the true meaning of this Canon) is most full and unquestionable: Yet I must
mind you, before I proceed further, to avoid your mistaking, that I hold not
all Traditions that we meet with to have an equal certainty or creditablenes,
one as anther; because, all circumstances considered, they have not an equal
evidence, but very different, and therefore ought carefully to be examined and
compared. For example. The Tradition, that such a person (suppose Mahomet)
lived in such an age, may have much more certainty, than that Mahomet or such a
person said or did such or such a thing in that age. Neither is the
argumentation good, The one is believed from Tradition, therefore the other
ought to be so; because caetera non sunt paria, and there may not be the same
plenitude of Tradition for both; and more may bear witness, both in that and
latter times, of the one, than do of the other. Of Traditions therefore some
there are (and those as well within as without the Church) much more doubtful,
obscure, and questionable, than others. For 1. both truths committed to
Tradition may fail in successive times, (vel per omnimodam cessationem, vel ex
eo quod oppositum introducatur) viz. where Tradition is not come to a
convenient and due pitch of universality (as is granted by the strongest
abettors of Tradition: See Dr. Hold. Resol. Fid. 1. lib. 8. cap.) And 2. the
unfailing Tradition of successive times may be defective, in its first
original's being false; or else in its having many falsities, in its current
through posterity, superadded to, and mingled with, the truth, as persons are
interested or fanciful. As Gentilism did superadd many things to the
groundwork of religion received from the Jew and writings of the Old
Testament. For falsum poterit quodammodo, caeteris paribus, aeque certo ac
verum per traditionem communicari: else lies cannot be commonly believed. But
many such we know were credited amongst the Heathen concerning their Gods, and
are, amongst the Mahometans concerning their Prophet: and so it may happen,
that as undoubting an assent may be given to these, as is to the truth, (for
ignorance many times doubts less of a thing than knowledge does.) But yet this
we contend, that it will never be so rational.

And indeed many disparities there are between the credibility of Heathenish or
Mohammedan, and of Christian, Tradition: * Such. 34. Where concerning the
Church'es and the Heathen and Mohammedan Traditions.
as are in Heathenism these; 1. that (except some foundations of religion
borrowed from the Jews, and so free from error) there is no constancy or
agreeance in the tradition thereof, but it is varying according to each city or
country; whereby any one of them much fails of universality; and contradictory
Tradition destroys it self. And 2ly that, as we have said, that falsities under
the notion of falsities may be conveyed by Tradition; so, many of the absurd
stories of Heathenism seem not to be believed even by the most, or wisest, of
those who propagated them, (therefore are their Poets their Divines, out of
whom chiefly such tradition is learned).

And * Such as are in Mahometanism, these. Its spreading, 1. * by the force of
the Sword, contrary to the nature of Tradition, and 2ly, * by its plausibility
and compliance with carnal lusts; both great corrupters of the truth of
Tradition: whereas Christianity, flowing down to all ages in opposition to both
these, by how much it was less pleasing, or less protected, seems to be
strengthened in all times with so much greater evidence of truth, and testimony
irresistible. Its wanting that universality which Christianity possesses,
never having had so large a circuit (the Western part of the world having
always bin a stranger to it), and the growth of it now for many ages being
stopped, and it decreasing in the world, and this great falsehood by little and
little giving place (as is seen in the Eastern Countries) to its elder the
Truth. I say these, and many other disparities there are, but besides these the
main thing, whereby all such Traditions are convinced of falsehood, lies in
this, that they came into the world still later than that of the Truth; and so
are known to be false by their contradiction to it, so that Truth against them
may always plead prescription. * So Heathenism was younger than the Tradition
of God's word in the Old Testament: (and so indeed than the Gospel, which also
was contained in the Old Testament, and taught from the beginning: see Romans 3.
21, 23.) So that I may say, Heathenism was the Antichristianism of the former
Ages, springing up after the tradition of God's true worship. Again, * so
Mahometanism was later than the tradition of the New Testament, being the
Antichristianism of the last times: but lest the world, I mean that part of it
to whom it pleased God to divulge the truth, by false traditions should be
deceived, God has always provided true Tradition to pre-occupate Faith, and to
anticipate and antidate error. Therefore tho we yield to the truth also of
Mohammedan tradition in some things; as that there was such a one as Mahomet, a
Lawgiver, a Conqueror. etc. yet we know that Tradition, that he received his
writings from the Angel Gabriel, etc. to be false, because contrary to that
divine Tradition, which, besides many other advantages, ought from its
antiquity to be preferred; God having given to Truth the Eldership of Falsehood.
And on the same grounds may we reject that Heathen-tradition in the Acts, of
the Image of Diana falling from God, etc.

III. And thus much be granted concerning the certainty which Faith may receive
from the external motives or proponents, the. 35. 3 Concerning the certainty
which Faith may receive from the inward operation of God's Spirit.
Scriptures, Church, and Tradition. 3ly. Concerning the illumination,
adherence, certitude, which this Faith, that ordinarily first comes by
hearing, receives from the inward operation of God's Spirit, 1. First let it be
granted; that the interior working of the Holy Spirit opening the heart is
always required, besides the outward means, for the conception of all saving
Faith: that we cannot exercise any act thereof without particular grace and
motion Concessions concerning the Spirit. 1. That it is always required besides
outward mean.
of the Holy Ghost; that it is the infused Gift of God, as well as other graces
of hope and charity; (see Jo. 6. 29, 44, 45, 64, 65. Matt. 11. 25, 26. -- 16.
17. Act. 13. 48. -- 16. 14, 15. Romans 12. 3. 1 Cor. 12. 3, 9. 2 Cor. 3. 3. Gal.
5. 22, 23. Ephesians. 1. 17. etc. -- 2. 8. -- 6. 23. See Ben. Spir. p.) Whence Faith
is said to be supernatural, as in respect, * of its object, things above the
comprehension of reason, and * of its ultimate ground it builds upon, which is
divine revelation; so * of its act, being caused by the Spirit. All the acts of
faith being in some kind supernatural, for such a degree of adherence as they
have, both because the relater or proponent thereof is many times not (at least
known to be) infallible; and because the object thereof many times (tho there
be all certainty from the relater) is capable of much doubt and vacillancy from
its supernaturalness, and seeming-repugnancy to reason. Therefore we see our
first Father, or at least his wife (see 1 Timothy 2. 14.) failed in not believing
the words spoken by God himself to him: and the Disciples, when rationally
believing our Savior to be the Son of God, and all he said to be truth, and
seeing his miracles, yet desired the increase of their faith, and were in it
many times not a little shaken, through the contrariety or transcendency which it
had to sense or reason. And it is reckoned to Abraham as strong faith, that he
believed the word of God himself, in things contrary to nature, (See Romans 4.
18, 19, 20.) which Sarah his wife flagg'd in. See Genesis 18. 12. 2 King. 7. 2.
Thus Faith, to make it vigorous and lively, comes necessarily to be a work of
the Spirit, either in regard of the sublimity of its object, or also, of the
incertainty of the Proponent.

2ly. Again, let it be granted as freely, That that Faith which is. 36. 1. That
all Faith wrought by the Spirit is infallible.
the Gift of God, and work of the Spirit, must needs be infallible, and exempt
from all possibility of error; because the supreme verity cannot inspire a
falsehood.

3ly. Let it be granted also, That the Spirit produces many times in the soul
such a supernatural and undiscursive light, and evidence. 37. 3. That sometimes
the Spirit produces evidence beyond science, etc.
to the understanding, and (following this) such a strong inclination of the
will, and adherence of the affections to the matter believed, as do far exceed
all science, sense, experience, demonstration: Tho this intuitive, rather than
argumentative or probative of such truths, either to other's, or, our own,
reason (which this Spirit captivates, and brings into obedience) * moving us to
the strongest faith upon very small evidence (and the smaller the evidence, the
stronger the power of the Spirit) against many temptations of infidelity; and *
opening the heart to such a degree of undoubtedness, that we are willing to
undergo any Martyrdom, rather than quit and renounce our belief. See for such
certainty, 2 Timothy 1. 12. Act. 2. 36. Jo. 6. 69.

IV. All this therefore being granted; namely, That all true saving. 38. 4.
That from these concessions it follows not, that all who s^vingly believe have,
or must have, aninfallible, or such sufficient certainty as may possibly be
had, of what they believe,
faith is grounded on God's word, which is infallible; That all true faith is
wrought in us by the Spirit of God, which Spirit is infallible; That there is a
certainty or assurance sufficient (if not infallible) to be had from universal
Church-tradition of both the former; namely both * that such writings, on which
our faith is grounded, are God's word, and such their meaning; and consequently
* that the belief of such things contained in them is the work of God's Spirit.
Yet our Query remains still uncleared: Whether (I say not, some, for I grant
many have, but) every one that truly and savingly believes, must have an
infallible certainty of his faith; or must have a known-to-him infallible
teacher or motive external, (as Tradition;) or internal, (as the Spirit); to
ground his faith upon: by which he is (not fully persuaded, but also)
rationally sure of the truth of that which he believes? And this to me
(notwithstanding the former Concessions) seems not at all necessary, for the
producing of a saving Faith.

And first for the assurance we may have from the Scriptures; by knowing either
in general that they are the word of God; or that. 39. N^i^ther from the
evidences * of Scriptures.
in such places or points, where their sense is doubtful, this and no other is
the certain meaning of them; I have showed (. 23. and 35.), That the knowing
this must either be devolved upon Ecclestastical Tradition, or upon the Spirit.

And first for the assurance of these Scriptures, and so of our faith,. 40. Nor
* of the Spirit.
from the inward testimony of the Spirit, (to which many fly for succor; and
first taking this for granted, that every believer must be infallibly certain
of his faith, and then that tradition, tho the most full, (and much more any
private instructor,) being some way liable to error, suffices not for to
produce such an effect, they labor to ground this certainty upon the assurance
of God's Spirit.) None can plead this at all from our faith being caused by
this Spirit: for it follows not, that if the Spirit begets faith infallible in
our hearts, or also the most unexpugnable adherence thereto, therefore we know
this faith to be begotten by the Spirit; or if it move us, that therefore we
can certainly tell when it does so, so that we can say, to this God's Spirit
moves me to assent, to this not. For we may have from the Spirit the greatest
persuasion, or internal evidence (if you will) of a truth that may be imagined,
and yet not have any rational or discursive evidence thereof from it; neither
by other proofs, nor by this (which is sufficient) that we clearly discern the
good Spirit to produce it: since the like assurance or confidence, to some
degree, is frequently begotten by an impetuous lust, or by the evil Spirit, for
most pernicious errors; so nearly imitating the Spirit of illumination, as not
to be discernable from it by this sign of strong persuasion, since many have
had it so strong as to dye for them. The assurance therefore or full persuasion
of a Divine truth by the Spirit, is one thing; the assurance, that this
assurance comes from the Spirit, is another. And indeed, tho in some general
things, as of the Bible being the Word of God, and of some universally-believed
points of faith, all men are confident of their assurance in them, that it is
from God's Spirit, because indeed all Christians are in these agreed; yet, in
descending to particulars, as, whether such or such a Book of Scripture be
God's Word, or be written by an heavenly-inspired author; whether such a
particular point of faith be to be stated thus, or so; whether such be
certainly the meaning of some particular place of Scripture, etc; here I say,
where there is contradiction and doubt between parties, few there are, who will
offer to plead such assurance from the Spirit, as that they cannot be mistaken;
but labor to inform themselves as well as others, the best they can, from
other reasons. And indeed did the Spirit thus always bear witness to it self;
had we any such internal assurance ordinarily, (for, extraordinary assurances
of it, happening to some greater Saints of God in very many things, I deny not)
I mean not of the belief of the thing, but that such belief of the thing comes
from the Spirit, there needed no more confirmation of any point, either from
Church, or universal Tradition, or collation of other Scriptures, or any other
way, but this For thus, tho some men might profess an error against conscience,
yet err in very deed, in matter of Divine faith, none could; for, knowing that
the Spirits operation is necessary to all true faith, and knowing again when it
operates; he may be sure that that which it operates not, is no true faith. But
this sufficiently argues, that there is no such ordinary effect thereof, in
that the pretenders of the Spirit so frequently by this Spirit contradict one
another: and indeed this arrogant persuasion, and ultimate refuge of
singularity, has bin the great Source of all Heresy and Schism, by reason of
men's departing from Tradition, and from the Church, upon confidence of this.
Therefore we conclude a man may believe by the efficiency of the Spirit, and
yet not certainly know its efficiency; and may know that by it he believes all,
which he truly believes in divine matters, and yet not know, that by it he
believes such or such a particular thing. So that tho this be laid for a
ground, That all true Faith is the work of the Spirit, yet we must by
Scripture, or, in things doubtful, by the Church'es traditionary exposition
thereof, first know our faith to be true; and thence by consequence gather,
that it is the work of the Spirit; not e contra argue, that it is the work of
the Spirit, (in which we may easily be deceived,) Ergo, That it is true.

This for the Spirit. In the next place to come to consider, Whether all, to
have true and saving faith, must be rationally assured. 41. Nor * of
Church-Tradition.
thereof from the to-them-known Church-tradition. And here we will grant, as
it is said before, 1. That there is in Tradition sufficient ground for such
assurance as is necessary: and that it is a medium, for necessary points of
faith, free from error. 2. That the says of very many has this rational
assurance, and that any, or most, by some reasonable diligence may attain it
for necessary points, from the traditionary doctrine and practice, which they
may see and hear dispersed through the Church: for doubtless our careful Savior
has provided a rational means sufficient for producing a full persuasion of
faith in all sorts of men there, where his Gospel is preached; and this means,
all men, for the ascertaining of their faith, as much as may be are bound to
seek after all their life, according to their condition etc. 3. That the
Church-decrees may be certainly known, and are easily understood, and more
easily in many things than the Scriptures; namely, where these happen to be
doubtful to us, (and doubtful they are or should be, where ever
Church-tradition expounds them otherwise than we,) and hence that (this point
being supposed that the Church is infallible) those who believing her to be so,
do rely upon her judgment, have for the most part a stronger persuasion, and
those knowing her to be so, have a more rational assurance of the truth of
their faith in all other points, than only relying on the perspicuity of
Scriptures: because the former persons faith rests on a double ground; the
saying of Scripture, and the sense of the Church interpreting it. And thus one
adhering to the tradition and doctrines of the Church, has more warrant for
his Faith, than a single Scripturist. 4. That those, who hold Church-tradition
fallible can have no other way an infallible evidence, whereby they can
demonstrate the truth of their faith.

But, all these granted; yet such a degree and measure of certainty. 42.
or assurance, as that of Tradition or Church-infallibility is, seems not to be
necessary to make faith salvifical; or defect of such a motive sufficient to
void it, and render it no true, divine, and acceptable faith, but an humane
opinion and persuasion; as some contend. But saving faith may be begotten,
where the proponent of the word of God, or of divine revelation, mediate or
immediate, is not, or at least is not known to be (which is all one with the
former to the believer's certainty) infallible: and it suffices to it, that
what one believes, is the word of God; and that he believe it (in some degree
or other predominant to unbelief) to be so. And this I think may be shown in
many instances, and by many reasons.

1. For first, some at least of those primitive converts of the Apostles
(questionles endued with true faith, yet) believed before. 43. For these
following Reasons.
any certainty of the infallibity of their teachers, or before, or without
seeing their miracles (tho these also seen afforded to some no certainty, who
thought that such might be done by the Devil's power, see Matt. 12. 24. Deuteronomy.
13. 1.) merely by the powerful operation of God's Spirit. So the Eunuch, to be
a true believer, needed no more than the bare exposition and relation of S.
Philip: So Cornelius, and his friends, some words of St. Peter: The Jailer and
Lydia, of S. Paul; strangers, and formerly altogether unknown to them; the Holy
Ghost presently unlocking their hearts, and finishing the work. For so the
three thousand converted by S. Peter in one day, supposing he at that time
wraught miracles, yet it is not probable, that all these were spectators of them;
or yet auditors of his doctrine from his own mouth; but believed only the
relations of others, persons fallible, who stood near him. The Bereans, why
examined they the Apostles doctrines, if they knew or esteemed him infallible?
The Believers at Antioch, zealous of the law, why contested they with St. Paul?
and those of Jerusalem with S. Peter, Act. 11. 2. if acknowledging them
infallible? Or the weaker brethren, tho of the number of true Believers, why
doubted they long time of some meats unclean, contrary to the Apostle's
instruction? It Is true, that whoever believes that which another relates, must
ipso facto believe the relater in that thing not to be deceived; but yet he,
who in any other one thing does not believe him, does not believe him to be
infallible. And granting that all the primitive Christians assented to the
infallibility of the Hierosolymitan Council; yet many points of their faith
were learned not from the Council, but private Doctors, whom I have showed that
some of them accounted not infallible, nor yet was their faith nullified
thereby.

2. Believers, no way heretical or schismatical, but submitting. 44.
unto the Church in all things, and believing her and her traditions to be
infallible, etc, and consequently, whose faith is allowed by the most rigid
exactors of certainty to be most safe and secure, yet, if things be well
examined, all of them cannot be said to have an infallible means, or motive, or
proponent of their faith: I mean so many as are neither able to search the H.
Scriptures, nor the Tradition of former times, nor universal present Tradition,
nor yet the Catechisms and common writings of the Church; neither for other
points, nor yet for this, That the Church, or the Tradition they rely upon, is
infallible: But being young, (as many undoubtedly are made faithful Christians,
when children) or illiterate, necessitated to handy-labour, quiescent in one
place, or perhaps inhabiting deserts and solitudes, etc, do receive the
doctrine of their faith (believing and yiedling obedience thereto) only from
their Parents, or the Curate of the place, or from their bare reading, or
hearing read some portion of Scripture, recommended to them for, but not proved
at all to them to be, the word of God. Believing indeed what is truth, and
obeying it, but having no more external argument or assurance thereof, than
another (suppose educated in an erroneous Church, and taking the false
Tradition thereof for Apostolical) has of his error? Now private teachers even
within the Church may first possibly by their negligence be themselves
ignorant, or rationally uncertain of what they teach; and a Catholic Priest be
able to give no better account for his religion, than the Protestant; both
inheriting their tenants from their next Ancestors. For Error once begun is
propagated afterward by Tradition, as well as Truth. Or 2ly, being rationally
certain of the truth, yet may he wilfully, for filthy lucre, for fear, for
lasciviousnes, etc, (see 1 These. 2. 3, 5, 6. 2 Pet. 2. 14.) misguide his
disciples. Or 3. lastly, teaching only the truth which he perfectly knows, yet
is this his certainty, tho something to the truth of the others faith, nothing
to their certitude thereof, as long as they are not certain that he is not
deceived. Neither does any ones believing the Church to be infallible ascertain
him of the truth of his faith, if he believe this her infallibility only upon
the relation of his Pastor; for so he has no more certainty of the Church'es
infallibility, than he has of the truth of such a relation; which we have
showed is liable to error. And then again, it is much to be noted, that one
believing only, and not being certain of the Church'es infallibility, tho he
immediately received all his doctrines from her self, yet this could produce no
certainty of the truth of what he receives: it being no good consequence, I
believe such a one is infallible, therefore I am certain what he says is true.
But lastly, let one be certain of this one point, That the Church or her
tradition is infallible, (which how many are there, that cannot clearly prove?)
and then from this known let him have infallible certainty at once of all other
points whatsoever, that are delivered by her or it; yet supposing any to learn
what are these her doctrines, not from her self, but from his private Curate,
(which doubtless many true believers within the Church'es communion do,) his
faith cannot plead any certainty this way. For there is some distance between
my knowing the Church's tradition to be infallible, and knowing in every point
what is her tradition. That which is said by Mr. Knot [against Chill. p. 64,
and 358.] in this point; That a fallible motive applying divine revelation by
God's supernatural concours may produce an infallible act of faith, is granted.
But then this act of faith is infallible not from the proponent, but God's
Spirit; (in respect of which, as is showed before) all saving, is also
infallible, faith, but not therefore known always to the believer to be
infallible. See before. 38. Again; that which is said by Dr. Holden, Resol.
fidei 1. l. 2. ^. That their faith, who depend on their Pastors instructions,
is tutissima, ipsique in rebus fidei securi, modo sint membra illius Ecclesiae,
quae veritatem omnem revelatam amplectitur and docet; cujusque pastores and
rectores medii [istius], quo sibi divina haec doctrina applicatur, veram and
rationalem habuerint certitudinem, is also granted; but it seems to affirm only
sufficient safety in their faith, without their certainty of the truth thereof.

Now as those of one side cannot plead their faith certain and infallible from
their hearing and believing their private Pastor; so. 45.
neither may those of another side from their reading and believing, and
resolving their faith into the Holy Scriptures. For since, not so much the
Letter of Scripture, as the Sense, is the infallible word and revelation of
God; and the letter many times is capable not only, when in expression
ambiguous, of diverse senses; but also, when most seemingly-plain, of another
sense than they import, because of the consonancy they are to have with some
other Scriptures, lest God's word be made to contradict: Hence is one man's
Bible, where thus ambiguous, as fallible a proponent to him, in respect of the
possibility of his mis-intepreting it, as another man's Pastor, in respect of
his possibility of erring. And indeed the former interpreting Scripture to
himself seems to be less infallible in his faith, than the other learning of
his Pastor expounding it; because he is more likely to mistake the sense
thereof than the other; else why is he appointed for his teacher, whose faith he
is to follow, Heb. 13. 7? tho I affirm a sufficient and saving faith may be,
and is, attained by either means, hearing ones Pastor, or reading the Scripture.

3. Since all saving faith in us is the effect of the Spirit, why may not our
faith be so, without any precedent rational certainty. 46.
thereof? According as it seems before granted; That God's supernatural
concours may advance an act of faith relying on a fallible motive, into a
belief infallible, why may not this Spirit show its strength then in the
weakness of external proposal? But if we suppose it a partial cause, and add to
it for the production of faith not only some external proponent, (which that
there is (ordinarily) is granted,) but this infallible, and known also to be
so: Then [to say nothing of the instances given before of the contrary; nor to
urge here, why such an infallible proponent sometimes at least, namely where
the matter of our belief is (as in many things it is) most conformable to
reason, should not be a sufficient cause to beget saving faith, without the
supernatural concours of God's Spirit, and what needs that to be also
spiritually, which is rationally, discerned?] I ask what do we mean by a
stronger and a weaker faith so often mentioned in Scripture? Do we mean several
degrees thereof, the least of which is certain? No. For we find doubt, nay some
degree of unbelief, and that of the same thing, sometime mixed with true faith.
See Mar. 9. 24. Mat. 14. 31. Which unbelief or doubt, that it never happens in
respect of the truth of the relation, but always only in the supernaturalnes of
the object, I think none can rationally affirm. See Luke 24. 11. Only if there
be not so much of assent, as to turn the scale of our judgment, then will it
not be faith, but either pure doubt, or, (further) unbelief. Faith therefore as
it comes both from the outward hearing of God's word, and the several proofs
thereof, and also by the inward operation of the Spirit, so is it capable of
many degrees, both from the several evidence of those proofs, and also from the
several influence of the Spirit: God giving more external evidence to one, than
to another: (as to those who see miracles, or who read and compare Scriptures
and Councils, than to those who only hearken to their Pastor); and, upon the
same evidence made to many, God giving a stronger adherence to such a truth to
one, than to another; either * from the energy of the Spirit; through which many
can die for Christ, that cannot well dispute for him: or also * from a natural
more passionate temper; or * from hiding from them contrary verisimilities, and
* from ignorance of the weapons of error etc. So the unlearned many times
believe and adhere to a truth more strongly through ignorance of any arguments to
the contrary, than the learned do to the same through reason assaulted with many
doubts; and a small argument to a weak understanding begets a more firm
credence, than a stronger to the learned. So a true believer may be less
confident, through a rational persuasion, in his faith, than another through the
violence of a misguiding lust, in his falsehood: nay; he may have less reason or
proofs (tho there be more) for the one, than this man has for the other; and
yet his faith vivifical and acceptable; and oftimes there is the greatest glory
and merit in it, when having stronger adherence upon smaller evidence,
(provided, no evidence attainable be neglected. 1 Pet 3. 15.) See Jo. 20. 29.
The reason of which is; because faith is no way acceptable to God or saving, so
far as it is by true or by seeming demonstration forced upon the understanding,
with a reluctance meanwhile of the will; for then the faith of Devils would be
so, who doubtless have much more evidence of their faith, than many Christians)
but only so far as it is embraced and accepted of by the will, and affections,
and in some manner becomes our election and choice: which election, so contrary
in many things to the flesh, being never made without the power of the Spirit;
hence chiefly is faith, such as is saving, said to be its work. See Ben.
Spirit..

4. Again; if men for the sufficiency of their faith depended on the
infallibility of the Church or her traditions, it follows, none. 47.
can have of any thing true faith, which is not first determined by the Church,
or known from universal Tradition. Therefore none can be said fide divina to
believe, or assent to any of those Theological verities which are ordinarily
drawn by clear and necessary consequence from the Scriptures, and (tho not by
the Church) decided by the Schools: which seems absurd.

5. Lastly, Let but a rational certainty from the infallibility of Tradition be
necessarily required to faith for one point; namely. 48.
this, That our Scriptures are God's word; (for which all sides are agreed in
admitting it,) and I do not see how it can be denied, that for many other
points, i. e. those wherein God's word is clear, and which are by no side
controverted, one may be sufficiently certain from the Scriptures themselves
independently on the Church or Tradition, fave for the one point abovenamed.
For since God's word may be in some things (I mean such as are uncontroverted)
as plain and consonant to it self as any Synod-Catechism, if such a Catechism
is thought a sufficient ground to one to assure his faith, why may not the
Scripture?

Now after all, that I may not seem to you, in this my judgment, heterodox, at
least to other Catholic writers, you may be pleased. 49.
to view what Estius, the famous Divinity-Professor at Doway, and what Card.
Lugo a Spanish Jesuit, have delivered on this subject. See Card. Lugo, tom. de
virtute fidei, dis. 1.. 12. n. 247. etc. where he brings reasons for this
opinion, not much differing from those abovementioned. As 1. Since the belief
of Infallibility it self must be produced from some other motives, if such
motives be sufficient for the begetting the faith of this, why may they not be
sufficient for some point of faith besides it? 2. New converts embrace and
truly believe some other articles of faith, before they are acquainted with
that of Infallibility. 3. Rusticks commonly resolve their faith into no further
proof than their Parish Priest, and what he relates to them. 4ly. Under the law
of nature before Moses, most were believing only upon the authority of their
Parents, without any Church-proposal. His words are these, number. 247. --
Probatur facile; quia hoc ipsum [Ecclesiam habere authoritatem infallibilem ex
assistentia Spiritus Sancti] creditur fide divina, quae docet in Ecclesia esse
hujusmodi authoritatem, ergo ante ipsius fidei assensum non potest requiri
cognitio hujus infallibilis authoritatis. Et experientia docet, non omnes
pueros vel adultos, qui de novo ad fidem accedunt, concipere in Ecclesia hanc
infallibilem authoritatem and assistentiam Spiritus Sancti, antequam ullum
alium articulum credant. Credunt enim articulos in ordine quo proponuntur. Hunc
autem articulum authoritatis Ecclesiae contingit credi, postquam alios plures
crediderunt. Solum ergo potest ad summum praerequiri, cognoscere, res fidei
proponi ab Ecclesia; concipiendo in Ecclesia secundum se authoritatem maximam
humanam, quae reperitur in universa fidelium congregatione. Again; number. 252.
Probatur Conclusio: 1. Quia in primis in lege naturae plures credebant ex sola
doctrina parentum sine alia Ecclesiae propositione. Deinde in lege scripta
plures crediderunt Moysi and aliis Prophetis, antequam eorum Prophetiae ab
Ecclesia reciperentur and proponerentur; quia soil. vitae sanctitate, and rerum
convenientia, and aliis de causis objectum reddebatur prudenter credibile;
praesertim cum viderent aliqua ex iis, quae Prophetiae praedicebant, quotidie
impleri. -- Denique in lege Evangelica Act, 3. and 4. c. Beatus Petrus,
miraculo facto, testatus est se illud fecisse in nomine Christi; and, nulla
facta mentione authoritatis Ecclesiae vel suae, convertit tria millia hominum,
qui sane prudenter moti sunt, licet non conciperent Ecclesiae authoritatem. And
number. 251. Non requiritur ex natura rei Ecclesiae propositio ad credendum. In
all which note, that this Author speaks of sides divina and salvifica, as
appears, in the first instance naming fides divina; in St. Peter's converts
etc. and all his discourse otherwise were besides the purpose.

See Estius to the same purpose, in 3. sent. 23. did. 13. sect. where after
many considerable arguments he goes on. -- Fidei impertinens. 50.
esse, quo medio Deus utatur ad conferendum homini donum fidei; quamvis enim
nunc ordinarium medium sit Ecclesiae testificatio and doctrina; constat tamen
aliis viis seu mediis fidem collatam fuisse aliquando, and adhuc conferri etc.
Nam antiqui multi, ut Abraham, Melchisedech, Job, ex speciali revelatione;
Apostoli ex Christi miraculis and sermon; rursus ex Apostolorum praedicatione
and miraculis alii fidem conceperunt; alii denique aliis modis crediderunt, cum
nondum de infallibilitate Ecclesiae quicquam eis esset annunciatum. Sic ergo
sieri potest, ut aliquis non inhaerens doctrinae Ecclesiae tanquam regulae
infallibili quaedam ad fidem pertinentia pro Dei verbo recipiat, quia vel nunc
vel olim miraculis confirmata sunt, vel etiam quia veterem Ecclesiam sic
docuisse manifest videt, vel alia quacunque ratione inductus, licet alia
quaedam credere recuset. -- Again; Haereticus potest quaedam tenere ea
firmitate assensus and promptitudine voluntatis, qua ab aliis omnia quae fidei
sunt tenentur. Again; Nihil vetat, quo minus haeretici, quamvis in multis
errent, in aliis tamen sic divinitus per fidem illustrati sint, ut recte
credant. Where note, that Estius also speaks of sides vera, and fides donum Dei
quo divinitus illustramur, such as that was of Abraham, Melchisedech, and the
Apostles converts. And note again, that tho this Fides vera and divina is in no
Heretick's integra, as to all points of faith perfect, because if one failed
not in some point of faith he could be no Heretic; yet many times it is not
his mere misbelief of that point for which he is accounted an heretic, which
excludes him from salvation: Because perhaps many good Catholics, before the
Church'es determination, have mis-believed the same point (as for example the
point of rebaptization) as well as he, without any danger to their salvation.
But that which condemns him is, that he has fidem (tho divinam,) yet not
operantem per charitatem, that he is obstinate and disobedient to the Church'es
orders and decrees; or (if you will) that he dis-believes this great Article of
Faith, (which dis-belief is the fountain of his dis-obedience,) That the Church
has such an Authority committed to her by Christ, as that he ought to conform
to all her determinations, and preserve in every thing the unity of her faith.
[Of the Donatists, heretics, thus S. Aug. (Gesbacum Emerito.) Extra Ecclesiam
Catholicam potest [Emeritus (Evangelium tenere, potest in nomine Patris, and
Filii, and Spiritus Sancti, fidem and habere and praedicare, sed nusquam nisi
in Ecclesia Catholica salutem poterit invenire, giving the reason afterward, --
quia charitatem non habet: and (Ep. 48. ad Vincentium,) -- Nobiscum estis in
Baptismo, in Symbolo, in caeteris Dominicis Sacramentis, in spiritu autem
unitatis and vinculo pacis, in ipsa denique Catholica. Ecclesia nobiscum non
estis.] To Estius and Lugo add a third, Layman, a Casuist of great reputation.
Thus he therefore, Theolog. moral. 2. l. 1. Tract. 5. c. -- Fieri saepe solet,
ut alii Articuli fidei nostrae, puta, quae sunt de Deo Uno and Trino, explicit
credantur ante hunc, qui est de infallibili Ecclesiae authoritate. Quinimo haec
Ecclesiae infallibilitas Spiritus Sancti promissione nititur: ergo prius
oportet credere Spiritum Sanctum, adeoque Trinitatem in divinis esse. Praeterea
constat, Beatissimam Virginem, Apostolos, primosque Christianos fide divina
credidisse; non ob authoritatem Ecclesiae, quae vel fundata non erat, (v. g.
cum S. Petrus credidit Christum esse Filium Dei vivi, Mat. 16.) vel nondum
fidei dogmata definierat. -- Again, Formale assentiendi principium, seu
motivum, non est Ecclesiae authoritas. Si enim ex te quaeram, Cur credas, Deum
esse incarnatum? respondeasque, Quia Ecclesia Catholica, quae errare non
potest, ob S. Spiritus assistentiam, ita testatur: iterum ex te quaeram, Unde
id scias; vel, cur credas Ecclesiam non errare, vel S. Spiritum ei assistere?
Quare recte dicit Canus, l. 2. de loc. Theol. 8. c. post med. Si generaliter
quaeratur, Unde fideli constet, ea quae fide tenet esse a Deo revelata, non
poterit infallibilem Ecclesiae authoritatem adducere; quia unum ex revelatis
est, quod Ecclesia errare non possit. Interim non negamus (says he) quin
resolutio fidei in authoritatem Ecclesiae, quatenus Spiritu Sancto regitur,
fieri possit, and communiter soleat a sidelibus ipsis, qui infallibilem
Spiritus Sancti assistentiam, ac directionem, Ecclesiae promissam certa fide
tenent: his enim ejus testimonium, ac definitio certa regula est ad alios
articulos amplectendos. -- Imo talis regula, seu norma exurgentibus circa fidem
dubiis, omnino nobis necessaria est, put a ad discernendum Scripturam Canonicam
ab Apocrypha; traditiones veras a falsis; denique credenda a non credendis; --
Sententia Scoti and Gabrielis, qui in resolutione recurrere videntur ad fidem
acquisitam propter authoritatem Ecclesiae, quatenus ea est illustris
congregatio tot hominum excellentium: Exempli causa; Credo Deum esse
incarnatum, quia divinitus revelatum est; revelatum autem hoc esse divinitus,
seu revelationem hanc a Deo profectam esse ideo accepto, seu credo (fide
acquisita,) quia it a scriptum est in Evangelio S. Johannis, cui omnis
Ecclesia, seu congregatio hominum vitae innocentia, sapientia illustrium,
testimonium and assensum praebet: Haec sententia (inquam) si recte explicetur,
a vero aliena non est. Non enim men's est Doctorum illorum, quod fidei divinae
assensus in fidem acquisitam propter authoritatem Ecclesiae resolvatur, tanquam
in principium; sed tanquam in extrinsecum adjumentum, and conditionem sine qua
non. Etenim authoritas illa Ecclesiae, non quatenus consideratur ut organum
Spiritus Sancti; sed ut illustris congregatio hominum prudentum etc. est quidem
formale principium credendi side humana; sed non fide divina. Quia fides divina
est, qua Deo dicenti credimus ob authoritatem and veritatem ejus: consequenter
qui credit propter authoritatem hominum, vel simile motivum humanum, is fide
solum humana credit. Accedit quod (sicuti ipsemet Scotus and Gabriel
argumentantur) assensus cognoscitivus non possit excedere certitudinem
principii, quo nititur: assen, us autem fidei divinae certitudinem infallibilem
habet: ergo fieri non potest, ut assensus fidei divinae, tanquam principio
nitatur authoritate hominum, vel simili motivo humano, quippe quod secundum se
absolute fallibile est. -- Major autem, imo maxima and certissima animi
adhaesio, quam sides divina continet, non ex viribus naturae, aut humanis
persuasionibus provenit; sed ab auxilio Spiritus Sancti succurrentis
intellectui and liberae voluntati nostrae. By this it seems, that ultima
resolutio sidei divinae is in illam certitudinem, quam habemus per auxilium
Spiritus Sancti etc.] Hear then his last stating of the point. -- Quod ad
formalem, de qua nunc agimus, fidei resolutionem attinet; expeditus ac verus
dicendi modus est iste, [citing Cajetan for it 2. 2. q. 1. a. 1.] Quod sides
divina ex part objecti, ac motivi formalis resolvatur in auhoritatem Dei
revelantis: Credo Deum esse incarnatum; [Credo] Ecclesiae item definientis
authoritatem infallibilem esse; quia prima and summa veritas id nobis
revelavit. [But if you ask, whence or why he believes Deum summam veritatem id
revelasse; he goes on,] Deum autem veracem talia nobis revelasse, ulterius
resolvi, vel per fidem [i. e. divinam] probari, non potest, nec debet:
quandoquidem principia resolutionis non probantur, sed supponuntur. [I wonder
why he adds not here, that the believer has fidem divinam and infallibilem,
Deum veracem talia revelasse ex auxilio Spiritus S. succurrentis intellectui
etc. for he says it before. But then, if asked again; How he knows or believes
that this his faith Deum revelasse etc, is ex auxilio Spiritus Sancti; here at
least he must have stayed as at the first principle of Resolution of Faith
divine. But now, that fides, which he calls humana, and fallible, can go on
further, and give a ground or motive why it believes Deum veracem talia
revelasse, or se hanc fidem, Deum revelasse, habere ex auxilio Spiritus Sancti,
and this a motive morally infallible; namely consensum Ecclesiae, or Universal
Tradition: concerning which he thus goes on.] Verum in ordine ad nos, revelatio
divina credibilis and acceptabilis fit per extrinseca motiva, inter quae unum
ex praecipuis merito censetur authoritas and consensus Ecclesiae, tot saeculis,
tanto numero hominum clarissimorum florentis: [But then this evident or
morally-infallible motive is not held always necessary neither, for the humane
inducement to divine faith. For he goes on:] quamvis id non unicum, neque
simpliciter necessarium motivum est: quandoquidem non omnes eodem modo, sed
alii aliter ad fidem Christi amplectendam moventur. (His add.) -- Non tantum
variis motivis homines ad fidem amplectendam moveri; sed etiam alios aliis
facilius, partim propter majorem internam Spiritus sancti illustrationem and
impulsionem, sicuti not avit Valentia q. 1. p. 4. arg. 18. partim propter animi
sui simplicitatem, quia de opposito errore persuasionem nullam conceperunt. Qua
ratione pueri apud Catholicos, cum ad usum rationis pervenerunt, acceptant
sidei mysteria, tanquam divinitus revelata, quia natu majores and prudentes,
quos ipsi norunt, ita credere animadvertunt. So then; if all saving faith must
be sides divina infallible, that which can rightly be produced to advance sides
humana into it, is not the authority of Scriptures, or of the Church, (for Qui
credit propter authoritatem hominum, vel simile motivum humanum, is fide solum
humana credit); but only auxilium Spiritus Sancti succurrentis intellectui etc,
in the stating of this learned Casuist. Thus you see by what is quoted here out
of Estius, Lugo, and Layman, that the moderate Catholic writers concede divine
and salvifical faith where no infallibility of any outward evidence or motive.
And perhaps it might conduce much more to the prayed-for union of Christ's
Church, if so many Controvertists on all sides (perhaps out of an opinion of
necessary zeal to maintain their own cause to the uttermost) did not embrace
the extremest opinions; by which they give too much cause to their adversaries
to remain unsatisfied, and to make easy and specious replies, being helped
also by the more moderate writers of the other side: As if they chiefly
endeavored to fright their enemies from any yiedling or harkening to a peace,
whilst they hold it still upon higher terms than those the Church Catholic
proposes; which has redounded to the multiplication of many needles
controversies.

From what has bin said I think we may infer, 1. First; That it is not
necessary to true and saving faith, that all the mediums by. 51. Necessary
Inferences upon the former reasons.
which we attain to it be infallible. That neither an infallible Judge, nor a
known-infallible argument from the Scriptures or writings of Fathers, etc. is
absolutely necessary to it; but that it is sufficient to believe the things
revealed by God, as revealed by him, (see. 1.) holding whatever is his word to
be infallible, (which is a principle to all men, and needs no proof,) by what
weak means soever we attain the knowledge of such revelations; whether it be by
Scriptures, Catechisms read, or Parents, Pastors instructing, yea tho these
instructers did not know whether there were any Scriptures, (as the Eunuch
believed without those of the New Testament,) and how unevident soever their
confirmation thereof to us be; only if we receive from them (whether from the
credit we give to their authority, or to their argument) so much light, as
(together with the inward operation of the Spirit, opening the heart to receive
and accept of it, of which Spirit yet we are not so certainly sensible, as to
know the proper movings thereof, for then this were a motive all-sufficient
without Scripture or Teacher) does sway and persuade the understanding, and so
produces obedience. Which faith, tho it is not such, for its immediate ground,
as cui non potest subesse falsum, by reason of any humane evidence it has; yet
many times it is such, as cui non subest dubium, of which we doubt no more than
we do of a Demonstration, by reason of the strong adherence we have to it,
either from the power of God's Spirit, or probability of arguments etc. See.
35. etc. But neither is this actual non-doubting necessary, (for there is many
times doubting in a true (but weak) faith, see. 46.) but this is enough, if any
thing be so far made probable, as that it turns the balance of our judgment so
far as to win our assent: nay, nothing can be without sin disbelieved, which
seems generally (including here also the argument from authority) more probable
than another thing, tho it have no demonstration. Which demonstration, or also
an infallible proponent, that the faith of most men wants, see the plain
confession (as it seems to me) of Mr. Knot, in his Answer to Mr. Chillingworth,
4. cap, p. 358. A man may exercise (says he) an infallible act of faith, tho
his immediate instructor or proposer be not infallible; because he believes
upon a ground which both is believed by him to be infallible, and is such
indeed, to wit, the word of God; who therefore will not deny his supernatural
concourse necessary to every true act of divine faith. Otherwise in the
ordinary course there would be no means left for the faith and salvation of
unlearned persons; from whom God exacts no more, but that they proceed
prudently according to the measure of their several capacities, and use such
diligence as men ought in a matter of highest moment. All Christians of the
primitive Church were not present, when the Apostles spoke or wrote, yea, it is
not certain, that every one of those thousands, whom St. Peter converted, did
hear every sentence he spoke, but might believe some by relation of others who
stood near. And (1. c. p. 64.) the same Author says: -- that a Preacher or
Pastor, whose testimonies are humane and fallible, when they declare to their
hearers, or subjects, that some truth is witnessed by God's word, are occasion,
that those people may produce a true infallible Act of Faith, depending
immediately upon divine Revelation applied by the said means. -- And if you
object (says he,) That perhaps, that humane authority is false, and proposes
to my understanding Divine revelation when God does not reveal; therefore I
cannot upon humane testimony, representing or applying Divine revelation,
exercise an infallible Act of Faith. I answer: it is one thing, whether by a
reflex act I am absolutely certain, that I exercise an infallible act of Faith;
and another, whether indeed, and in actu exercito I produce such an act. Of the
former I have said nothing, neither makes it to our present purpose. Of the
latter I affirm, that when indeed humane testimony is true, [tho not certainly
known by me to be so,] and so applies a divine revelation which really exists;
in such case I may believe by a true infallible assent of Christian faith. The
reason of this seems clear, because although a truth, which I know only by
probable assent, is not certain to me; yet in it self it is most immovable and
certain, in regard that while a thing is, it cannot but be, for that time for
which it is, etc. Thus he..: The sum of which is; That the infallibility of
many men's faith is not from any external Proponent, but only from God's
concourse. See Dr. Hold. 1. l. 2. c. p. 36, 37. de resol. fid. saying the like.

2. Again, in the 2d. place it may be inferred, * That receiving. 52.
of the Articles of his Creed from the Church'es proposal is not necessary to
true faith: or, * That one may truly believe some, who does not believe all
the, points of faith, which the Church proposes; or, any for, or upon, her
proposal: or lastly, * That one may truly and savingly believe an article of
faith, who is not certain of the divine revelation thereof. I willingly grant
here, 1. first; That he who believes aright any divine truth, must believe that
it is revealed by God, or that God has said it; and, That he that denies any
one thing which he believes is revealed by God, can believe no other thing at
all as he ought, that is, as from divine revelation: he must believe all such,
or none at all aright. 2. Since a rational certain knowledge of divine
revelation (as of the Scriptures, or also of the Sense thereof where doubtful)
is only receivedd from the Church and her Tradition, I accord, that none can
rationally or so infallibly believe any things to be revealed by God, but such
as he knows to be proposed to him, by the Church, or Tradition, to be such,
either immediately, in her exposition of obscure Scriptures, or mediately, in
her delivering to him the Canon of Scripture; and therefore, that who denies
this authority in some points, (suppose in those points, where this authority
is granted by him to be of equal force) has no rational ground or certainty of
his faith in any other of those points, according to the Schools; Qui inhaeret
doctrinae Ecclesiae tanquam infallibili regulae, [i. e. in omnibus quae
proponit,] omnibus assentit quae Ecclesia docet, [i. e. quae scit Ecclesiam
docere,] alioqui si de his quae Ecclesia docet tenet quae vult, and quae non
vult non tenet, non inhaeret infallibili doctrinae Ecclesiae, sed propriae
voluntati. [But note, that every one who does not inhaerere doctrinae Ecclesiae
tanquam infallibili, may not therefore be said inhaerere propriae voluntati,
because he may hold such tenants, not quia vult, but * for some other reason
abstract from the Church'es authority: as Protestants do * for the evidence of
Tradition in this point, That Scripture is God's word.] So those who rejected
some parts or books of Scripture, because containing something opposite to
their opinions, could not ground any certainty of their faith upon the rest:
because that Scripture they refused, came recommended to them by as much and
the same authority, as that they accepted.

But these Concessions destroy not the former proposition: because (for the
former concession) it is one thing to believe such a. 53.
truth to be divine revelation; another, to be rationally assured thereof: the
first we grant is, the second I think we have proved not to be, necessary to
all true faith. For the second, tho he who certainly knows not
Church-tradition, cannot have a rational or discursive certainty in his faith,
(abstracting here from what internal certainty one may have from the Spirit,)
nor upon that principle can believe one thing, unless he believe all the rest
that have the like Tradition with it; yet he may without such a certainty or
such a ground truly believe: as I think is before-proved. And hence it follows,
that one may truly believe some other points of faith, who does not believe
this point in particular; That the Church, or Universal Tradition, is
infallible.

Thus much, * of the non-necessity of infallible certainty in every believer,
to render his faith true, divine, and salvifical; * and of. 54.
the erring in some one article its not necessarily destroying the true faith
of all the rest. But (to conclude this Discourse) Three things meanwhile are
acknowledged and confessed. 1. First; that he that truly and divinely believes
all the rest of the Articles of our Faith, and erreth only in one Article that
is absolutely necessary to salvation, such error may be said to destroy his
whole faith in some sense, (that is) in rendering his faith in other points tho
not false, yet non-salvifical to him. 2. Again, he that disbelieveth and
opposes the propositions of the Church (known to him to be so) in some point
not absolutely necessary (I mean to be explicitly believed for attaining
salvation, as some points there are so necessary,) tho this error does not null
the body of his belief, yet this opposition in that error is, by the common
doctrine of the Church, accounted so great a crime, as that, unrepented of, it
renders his true faith, being destitute of due obedience and charity,
unprofitable for his salvation, (which I thought fit here to mind you of, that
none may presume salvation from the truth of his faith in all necessaries, as
long as he stands, tho in some (as he accounts) smaller points, after
sufficient proposal, in opposition and disobedience to the Church, i. e. to his
supreme Governor and Guide in all Ecclesiastical and Spiritual matters. (See
before. 50.) 3. And lastly, if this Article of Faith [That the Church'es
authority is either absolutely infallible in all things she proposes to be
believed, or at least so supreme, that none may in any wise dissent from her
determination] can be proved one of the points of faith absolutely necessary to
salvation, to be by every Christian believed; then, since there can be no
disobedience and nonconformity to the Church, but that it is grounded on the
dissbelief of this Article, it must follow, That every one that opposes the
Church, is also, from his disbelief of this Article, excluded from salvation.

FINIS.
OF INFALLIBILITY.

CONTENTS.
PART 1.
COncerning the Infallibility of the Church, how far this is to be allowed.. 1,
2. 1. Infallibility of the Church in necessaries granted both by Roman and
Protestant, writers.. 3. Where How far points necessary are to be extended.. 4.
That the Church (not private men) is to define what points be necessary.. 6. If
these points be necessary at all to be defined, and exactly distinguished from
all other her Proposals.. 7.
2. Infallibility of the Church in matters of Universal Tradition (tho they
were not necessary) conceded likewise by all.. 8. 3. Infallibility Universal,
in whatever the Church proposes and delivers, is not affirmed by the Roman
writers.. 9. But only in those points which she proposes tanquam de fide, or
creditu necessaria.. 10. Where Concerning the several senses wherein Points are
affirmed, or denied, to be de Fide.. 11. That as only, so all, divine
Revelations, or necessary deductions from them are de Fide, i. e. the objects
and matter of Faith. 12, 13. And That the Church can make nothing to be de
fide; i. e. to be divine Revelation etc, which was not so always from the
Apostolic times.. 12. That all divine Revelation, or necessary deductions
therefrom, are not de fide, i. e. creditu necessaria.. 15. That the Church
lawfully may, and has a necessity, to make de novo, upon rising errors, such
Points de fide, i. e. creditu necessaria, which formerly were not so.. 16, 17.
Or (as some other of the Catholic writers usually express it) only in Points
clearly traditional.. 18. Whether, and by what marks, those Points which are
proposed by the Church tanquam de fide or creditu necessaria, or which are
proposed as constantly traditional, are clearly distinguished by her from her
other Proposals.. 27. Anathema no certain Index thereof.. 29.




PART 2.
Concerning Obedience and submission of private Judgment, whether due to the
Church, supposed not in all her decisions infallible.. 30. 1. That no
submission of our judgment is due to the Proposal of the Church, where we are
infallibly certain of the contrary.. 33. 2. That no submission is due to an
inferior Person or Court in matters whereof I have doubt, when I have a
Superior to repair to for resolution.. 34. 3. That submission of judgment is
due to the supreme Ecclesiastical Court in any doubting whatever, that is short
of infallible certainty.. 35. Submission of judgment proved, 1. From
Scripture.. 37. 2. From Reason.. 38. Where Several Objections and Scruples are
resolved.. 39.
3. From the testimony of learned Protestants.. 44. 4. From the testimony of
learned Catholics.. 51.

Conclusion.. 54.
OF INFALLIBILITY. PART 1.
IT remains that I give you an account touching the other two Queries proposed.
The First concerning the Infallibilty of. ^.
the Church, Whether this is at all, or how far, to be allowed? The Second
concerning Obedience and Submission of private Judgment, Whether this be due to
the Church supposed not, in all her decisions, infallible? Two Points, as they
are stated on the one side or the other, either leaving us in much anxiety and
doubt, or (in the moveal of this) swelled with much pride and self-conceit; or
leaving us in much tranquillity and peace, accompanied with much humility and
self-denial. Points, as they are stated one way, seeming much to advance the
tender care of the divine Providence over his Church, and to plant obedience
and unanimity among Christians; or as stated another way, seeming to proclaim
great danger in discovering truth, to call for humane wit, prudence, sagacity,
and caution, and to bequeath Christianity to perpetual strife, wars, and
dissentions. And therefore it concerns you to be the more vigilant, that
affection carry you not on more than reason to the assenting to any Conclusions
made in this Discourse.

To take in hand the former of these. Concerning the true measure of the extent
of the infallibity of the Church, (by Church. 2. Concerning the Infallibility
of the Church; how far this is to be allowed.
I mean the lawful General Representative thereof, of which see
Church Government 2. Part,. 4. and 24.) in the beginning I must confess, that I
know nothing expressly determined by Councils, except what is said Conc.
Trident. 4. Sess. -- Praeterea ad c^ercenda petulantia ingenia, decernit, ut
nemo suae prudentiae innixus, in rebus fidei and morum ad aedisicationem
doctrinae Christianae pertinentium, sacram Scripturam ad suos sensus
contorquens, contra eum sensum, quem tenuit and tenet Sancta Matter Ecclesia,
(cujus est judicare de vero sensu and interpretatione Scripturarum S.) aut
etiam contra unanimem consensum Patrum ipsam Scripturam sacram interpretari
audeat. Neither is there any mention found of the word Infallibility in the
Decrees of Trent, or any other received Council, or yet in the Fathers; as F.
Veron in his Rule of Faith, 4. c. has observed, and therefore (says he) let
us leave this term to the Schoolmen, who know how to use it soberly; and
content our selves with the terms of the Councils. The best is, as the exact
limits of this Church-infallibility seem no where by the Church to be
punctually fixed; so they do not (in respect of yiedling obedience to the
Church) seem necessary at all to be known; except to such a one, as will not
submit his judgment to any authority less than infallible; of which more anon.

1. First it is granted, as by all the Catholics, so by the most learned of
the Protestants, (see them quoted in Church Government,. 3. 1 Infallibility of
the Church in Necessaries granted both by Catholic and Protestant writers.
2. Part.. 29.) That the Church, or the lawful General Representative thereof,
is infallible in its directions concerning necessaries to Salvation, whether in
points of pure faith, or of practice and manners: [tho I yield Mr.
Chillingworth denies this; (see the discussing of his opinion in
Church Government, 2. Part.. 26.-3. Part.. 76.) without which doing, I think he
could not have made a through Answer to Mr. Knot; nor could he have denied those
other points, which seem to be consequents of this: as namely, -- That we must
know from the Church also the distinction of Necessaries from others: Or must
assent to Her in all she proposes as Necessary. That, the Defense of any
Doctrine, the contrary whereof is proposed as necessary, against the
determination of the Church or lawful General Council, is Heresy; as being
always, after such sufficient proposal, obstinate. That any separation from the
external communion of all the visible Church is Schism, as being always (in her
professing and practicing all necessaries) causless. Which Propositions the
defense of his cause seems to me to have forced him to disclaim, and so also
this ground of them, That the Church is an infallible Guide in Fundamentals or
Necessaries.] And this infallibility the Church is said to have, either from
the constant assistance of God's Spirit, (according to our Savior's promise,
at least for such points,) or also from the Evidence of Tradition, much pleaded
by some later Catholic Writers.

But since here by Necessaries may be understood either Doctrines etc,
absolutely necessary to be known explicitly for salvation, and. 4. Where, How
for Points necessary are to be extended.
that to every one that shall attain salvation, (for to some perhaps more are
required than to others, according to their several capacity and means of
revelation; see Necessary Faith. 10. 11. 16.) which may be perhaps only some
part of the Creed; or else by Necessaries may be understood all other doctrines
and rules that are very profitable and conducing thereto. The Church being
granted by both sides an infallible Guide and Director in Necessaries; 1.
First, it seems most reasonable, that the Church'es infallibility in
Necessaries should be taken in the latter sense, there being nothing in our
Savior's promise, that appears to restrain his assistance; or in the
conveyance of Tradition, that appears to restrain its certainty, to the former
sense. (See Church Government, 2. part.. 31.) In which former sense if it be
only allowed; the Church'es insallibility in guiding Christians will be
confined only to two or three points, and those scarce by any at all doubted-of
or disputed. In this latter sense therefore, both because of our Savior's
promise, and the evidence of Tradition, it must be said that the Church cannot
be mistaken in defect, but only (if at all) in the excess; not in substracting
from Christians any part of such necessary faith or duty; but perhaps in
superadding thereto something as necessary, which is not.

2. And here also, secondly, concerning such excess, I think you. 5.
will grant me, That it will be hard for a private man to judge that any
particular point decided by the Church is not (some way or other) necessary to
be stated, known and believed, by reason of some ill influence which the
contradictory thereof may (by some consequence at least) have upon our other
faith or manners necessarily required, and formerly established. Nay farther,
that it will be hard to say that any point decided etc, is not necessary
(either directly and immediately, or by connection with some other points that
are so) to the actual exercise of Christian Religion, and the practice of a
completely holy life, (to which the most contemplative points of faith are very
much conducing, tho they mistakenly seem to many in this respect useless,) and
therefore that they ought not to be so rigidly vindicated.

3. And thirdly, yet further, if the Church be granted infallible in
Necessaries, (however we take them,) it seems also most reasonable,. 6. That
the Church (not private men) is to define, what Points be necessary
that from her we should learn, (if this be at all requisite to be known,)
which or how many amongst many other decrees of hers, (if she makes any besides
those concerning Necessaries,) which, I say, or how many, are necessary. For to
what other Judgment can we repair for this, unless to our own? But how
unreasonable this? That, whilst she is appointed to guide us with her
infallibility in some points, we are to state to her, in what points only she
can infalliby guide us. This Mr. Chillingworth well discerned, when he said,
(2. c.. 139.) We utterly deny the Church to be an infallible Guide in
Fundamentals; for to say so, were to oblige our selves to find some certain
society of men, of whom we may be certain that they neither do, nor can err in
Fundamentals; [it follows,] nor in declaring what is fundamental, what is not:
and consequently to make any Church [we may say, or Representative of the
Church, i. e. a General Council] an infallible guide in Fundamentals, would be
to make her infallible in all things which she proposes and requires to be
believed. [i. e. In as many things as she says are fundamental; and she may
say all are fundamentals, or necessary, if she will.] Thus he. So (3. c.. 59,
60.) to that objection, [since we are undoubtedly obliged to believe Her in
fundamentals, and cannot precisely know what be those fundamentals; we cannot
without hazard of our souls leave her in any point.] He answers by granting the
consequence, and denying the supposition; I mean the former part thereof; That
we are obliged to believe her in fundamentals; in delivering of which he says
she may err. As for that Objection ordinarily made against the Church'es
defining what points they are, that are necessary, and wherein by consequence
she is infallible, viz. that then Ecclesia non errabit quando vult; because she
may, as she pleases, nominate the points fundamental, etc. We answer, that it
being supposed necessary, that the Council or the people must know not only the
fundamental points, but an exact distinction of such from the rest, (of which
presently,) the same divine hand, that will not suffer the Council appointed
for the peoples guide, to err in any fundamental, neither will permit them to
say or to define any point to be fundamental, that is not: because this latter
thing is supposed as necessary as the former: i. e. God will never permit them
to say they do not or cannot err in any point, wherein they may err.

4. But fourthly, after all this it seems to me not to follow necessarily;. 7.
If these points be necessary at all to be defined, and exactly distinguished
from all other her proposals.
that, if our Savior by his Spirit preserve the Church an infallible Guide in
necessary points of Faith, 1. Therefore she must be infallible in
distinguishing them from all other points; which perhaps are not the same (if
we speak of those, whereof men are to have an explicit knowledge) to all
persons; and from whence (if it be true) it will follow, that the Church shall
travel in vain to prescribe any set number of such points. (See Dr. Holden de
Resol. Fid. 1. l. 4. c. Solutio Quaestionis hujus (i. e. of absolute
necessaries) inanis and impossibilis). Nor 2ly, does it follow, that therefore
the Church should certainly know in what particular points she is infallible,
and in what not. Certainly know, I mean not for some, but for every point to
the uttermost extremity of Infallibility. For who can doubt that, she is both
certain, and may profess her certainty and infallibility (and the absolute
necessity that lies on all to believe some of them) for many of those points
she delivers: namely for those at least which are of clear revelation; of
universal Tradition; and also for the immediate, manifest, and natural
consequentials thereof? Nay, who denies, that private men also, from the
abundant clearnes of Scripture only, may attain sufficient certainty of many
doctrines of Christianity? But I say certainly know that she is inerrable for
every point in which she is so. For as to one ground of her infallibility, the
assistance of the Spirit leading her into all truth necessary, since men may
be, and all regenerate men are, guided by the Spirit of God, and yet without
extraordinary revelation cannot certainly discern and distinguish the
particulars wherein they are guided by it, nor sensibly perceive the motions
thereof; why may not the Church also be ignorant in what particular points she
is so far assisted by God's Spirit, as never to give an erroneous judgment in
them? And as to the other ground, evidence of Tradition, tho I grant sufficient
assurance or infallibility in it if plenary; yet 1. Tradition of some points
being greater, and of some other lesser and more obscure; this Tradition seems
not always, in all points to be such as to amount to that certainty some of
late pretend, 2ly. By this the Church can only know her infallibility in points
traditionary. But then some determinations of Councils, and that under an
Anathema, will be found to be, not of doctrines clearly traditional, and such
as have bin the common tenants of the former Church; but of new emergent
controversies, not discussed or heard-of in precedent ages, which the Church
decides by the judgment and learning of her Bishops, considering * texts of
Scripture, wherein such points seem to be included; and * other doctrines of
former and present times, to which they seem to have some relation. All which
points, I believe, few Catholics will agree * that they should be excluded
from necessaries, if not found to be of evident Tradition; or * that in new
controversies nothing ever is determined by the Church, and that under
Anathema, but only what was formerly evident Tradition; which new
determinations if there were not sometimes, then what need is there of the
superassistance of the holy Spirit, that the Church err not. This * concerning
the first Concession by both parties, That the Church is infallible in her
directions touching Necessaries, and * concerning some consequents thereof.

2. Secondly, it must be, and I think is, granted by all that own. 8. 2.
Infallibility of the Chapter in matters of universal tradition (tho they were not
necessary) conceded likewise by all.
Christianity, That the Church is sufficiently infallible in all points that
are of Universal Tradition, (or at least of Tradition so general, as that is,
which we have of the Scriptures,) tho such points were not necessary at all:
else they must deny, that we have certainty enough from Tradition that the
Scriptures are God's word. And this undeceivableness of general Tradition is
the only or chief ground, that some Catholic writers of late build the
Church'es infallibility upon; not that they deny her infallible in all
necessaries too; but that they make all Necessaries to be eminently, and beyond
all mistake, traditional.

3. Thirdly it is granted, I think generally by those of the Catholic. 9. 3.
Infallibility universal, in whatever the Chapter proposes and delivers, is not
affirmed by Catholic writers.
Church, That the Church is not absolutely infallible in all things whatsoever
that she shall say or propose; but only in such things as she proposes to her
children tanquam de side, or necessario credenda, whether they concern
speculatives, or practicals and manners.

Concerning this matter, I will give you the several limitations as I find them
set down in some of their latest writers. To begin. 10. But only in those
points which she proposes tanquam de side or creditu necessaria.
with Bellarmin, one who is thought sufficiently rigid in vindicating the
Church'es infallibility. Thus he (de Council. authoritate 2. l. 12. c.) --
Concilia Generalia non possunt errare nec in fide explicanda, nec in tradendis
praeceptis morum toti Ecclesiae communibus. I may add out of another place (de
verbo Dei 4. l. 9. c.); nec in ritu and cultu divino, for the present times of
such Councils. For, (says he) as Ecclesia universalis non potest errare in
credendo; so neither, in operando; recteque August. Ep. 118. docet
insolentissimae insaniae esse existimare non recte sieri quod ab universa
Ecclesia sit: tale est Baptisma parvulorm, licet actu non credant etc. But then
(he says again) in conciliis maxima pars actorum ad sidem non pertinent; [i.
e. non proponitur ut necessario credatur:] non enim sunt de fide disputationes
quae praemittuntur, neque rations quae adduntur, neque ea quae ad explicandum
and illustrandum adferuntur, [nothing incidently spoken, and without purpose to
define it], sed tantum ipsa nuda decreta, and ea non omnia, sed tantum quae
proponuntur tanquam de fide. Interdum enim Concilia aliquid definiunt, non ut
certum, sed ut probabile. Vide Council. Viennense. parvulis in Baptismo conferri
gratiam. He grants ibid. That Concilia in Judiciis particularibus, (i. e.) ubi
non affirmatur aliquid generale and toti Ecclesiae commune, errare possunt. So
he grants (2. l. 7. c.) quoad aliqua praecepta morum Concilia plenaria priora
emendari per posteriora, sed non quoad dogmata fidei, [i. e. such as are once
proposed by an Universal Council tanquam creditu necessaria]. Emendari, says
he, therefore they may err. He goes on: quod confirmatur ex verbis Augustini,
qui dicit tunc emendari Concilia, quando experimento aliquo aperitur, quod
clausum erat, [clausum, i. e. in the time of the former Council;] experimento
enim aperiuntur (says the Cardinal) quaestiones de facto, vel de moribus, non
quaestiones Juris universalis. And I suppose Bellarmin also will not deny the
same of Speculative doctrines, of which it appears not, that in the former
Councils they are peremptorily defined ut certa and tanquam de fide necessaria:
for this well accords with what is but now recited out of him de Council.
authoritate, 2. l. 12. c. According to which c. 8. in his answer to the 10th.
Objection, concerning a difference between two Councils about the number of
Canonical Books of Scripture, and so pertinens ad fidem, he writes thus,
Concilium Carthaginense esse majoris authoritatis quam Laodicenum, quia
posterius. -- And, Concilium Laodicenum posuit in Canone eos libros de quibus
Episcopi ejus Concilii certi erant; alios autem omisit; non quidem negans eos
esse Canonicos, sed nolens rem dubiam definire. Concilium autem Carthaginense
re magis discussa definivit id quod prius Concilium reliquerat sub dubio. Where
we see that latter Councils may discover something even in rebus pertinentibus
ad fidem, which former have not; and may define the others doubtings. Again,
tho he numbers amongst points of faith, in which the Church cannot err, not
only quae express continentur in, but also quae evidenter deducuntur ex,
Scripturis Prophetarum and Apostolorum, and so makes it the business of a
Council, as declarare quodnam sit verbum Dei scriptum vel traditum; so
praeterea ex eo per ratiocinationem deducere conclusiones; which conclusions
also he numbers amongst dogmata sidei: yet he grants that in some deduction, as
he calls it, and ratiocination, the Council may err; in saying neque rations
quae adduntur, quoted before; affixing the Church'es Inerrability only to those
deductions, quae deducuntur evidenter; and to such deductions only as are her
express decreta, and as are proposed tanquam de fide. See the former quotations
out of him, de Council. Authoritate, 2. l. 12. c. Like things (much-what) you
may read in our learned Countryman Stapleton. See in his Principia fidei
doctrinalia 4. controv. and 2. quaest. his septem notabilia: where he says,
first, that Ecclesia non expectat doceri a Deo immediate, solis Enthusiasmis
and novis afflatibus sreta, sed utitur certis mediis ad dubii dogmatis
determinationem, quia docetur nunc non per Apostolos aut Prophetas, quibus
immediate a revelatio frequens erat, sed per Pastores and Doctores. 2ly. That
Ecclesia in singulis mediis non habet infallibilem and peculiarem Spiritus
sancti directionem, (quae necessaria erat Apostolis omnia de novo docentibus,
and fundament a ponentibus, sed non succedenti Ecclesiae:) sed potest in illis
adhibendis probabili interdum, non semper necessaria, collectione uti. But 3ly.
That Ecclesia nihilominus in conclusione fidei semper est certissima and
infallibilis. But then 4ly. he says, that Ad Ecclesiae infallibilitatem in
docendo satis est ut sit infallibilis in substantia fidei, and publico dogmate,
and rebus ad salutem necessariis: quia hic est finis datae infallibilitatis,
viz. ad consummationem Sanctorum, and ad aedificationem corporis Christi; i. e.
ad publicam salutem fidelium. Deus autem and Natura, ut non deficit in
necessariis, it a nec superabundat in superfluis. Nec ad quaevis particularia
Dei providentia specialis deducenda est: quae ut multos particulares defectus
in gubernatione universali permittit ad decorem ipsius Universi, ut not at
Augustinus in Civ. Dei, 11. l. 18. c. sic multos privatos in Ecclesia errores,
and multarum rerum non necessariarum ignorantiam etiam in doctissimis
permittit. -- And again to Calvin, charging the Papists that they said,
Ecclesia nulli errori potest esse affinis; he answers, -- Infallibilitas
docentis Ecclesiae ponitur tantum in rebus ad salutem necessariis, atque adeo
in ipsa conclusione. Thus he. [But then he both assirmeth the teaching Church
infallible in all her conclusions, and then affirming her infallible only in
necessariis ad salutem, consequently he must hold all the conclusions, which
she peremptorily proposes to be believed, to be necessary ad salutem.]
Hitherto Stapleton. Lastly, in matters of fact, Bellarmin grants general
Councils to have erred. See 2. l. 8. c. Resp. to 14. and 15. Objection.

The Church therefore is not infallible in all her decrees, but only. 11. Where
conc. the several senses wherein points are affirmed or d^nied to be de fide.
those which are de side, or (which is all one in his sense) which are proposed
tanquam de fide. [Now things are said to be de Fide in many several senses: and
therefore you will excuse me here, if I make a digression (tho something has
bin said thereof in the discourse of Necessary Faith,. 1.) to declare them, that
the different Notions, wherein Authors use this term, may be the better
understood.

1. First then you must observe, as Bellarmin notes, (de verbo Dei 4. l. 9. c.)
that Nihil est de fide [and therefore cannot be proposed. 12. That as only, so
all, divine revelations, or necessary deductions from them are de Fide. i. e.
the o^jects and mat^ters of Faith.
tanquam de fide] nisi quod Deus per Apostolos aut Prophetas revelavit, aut
quod evidenter inde deducitur. Illa omnia quae Ecclesia fide tenet tradita sunt
ab Apostolis, aut Prophetis, aut scripto, aut verbo; [either by verbal, or also
written Tradition, which is the Scriptures,] therefore he affirms, ibid. Non
novis revelationibus nunc regitur Ecclesia, sed in iis permanet quae
tradiderunt illi, qui ministri fuerunt sermonis. And, -- Concilia Generalia non
habent, neque scribunt immediatas revelationes aut verba Dei, sed tantum
declarant quidnam sit verbum Dei scriptum vel traditum. [Quidnam sit, (i. e.)
from the Apostolical times, before the meeting of the Council,] and quomodo
intelligi debeat, and praeterea ex eo per ratiocinationem deducunt
Conclusiones. It aque Concilia cum definiunt qui libri etc. non faciunt sed
declarant esse tales. Bell. de Council. l. 2. c. 12. But note here therefore,
that no points become de fide in this sense, i. e. that they are verbum Dei or
revelata, because the Church defines them; much less are all things that she
proposes straight de fide: but that she defines them to be so, only because
they are so before, even from the Apostles times, either explicitly, or
implicitly; either express and traditional, and well known from age to age; or
necessarily involved in, and clearly deducible from, those points that are
traditional. For, as is said before, the Church has no And that the Chapter can
make nothing to be de Fide, i. e. to be divine Revelation etc. which was not so
always from the Apostolic times.
new revelation of any thing of necessary knowledge not formerly delivered,
(not that I deny, that some new revelations from God's Spirit concerning things
Theological, and of the next world, can be now made to any in the Church; but
only affirm, that all necessary ones are received from the beginning of the
Gospel; and that the Church can build upon no such new ones, because she has
no certain way to discern them): neither can the Church make any new Article of
faith (which much differenceth the Church succeeding from the Church
Apostolical; that none may argue the like fallibility or infallibility in both,
as to making or composing Articles of Faith;) but only the Church can declare,
what has bin always formerly, and explicate the sense; or also educe out of it
the necessary consequents thereof.

2ly. You may observe, that all necessary deductions or conclusions, tho
perhaps formerly unknown, yet being the necessary. 13.
consequents of some other Articles known and common, are properly called
Articles of Faith; or else we must deny those added to the Apostles Creed in
the Nicene and Athanasian to be such: or granting these two propositions, [Est
unus tantum Deus,] and [Pater est Deus, and Filius est Deus, and Spiritus
Sanctus est Deus; (Deus here being supposed to bear the same sense as in the
Major Proposition)] to be Articles of Faith, we must deny this drawn from them
[Pater and Filius and Spiritus Sanctus sunt unus tantum Deus] to be so.

3ly. You may observe, that such deductions are also necessary to be made and
manifested by the Church from time to time, in opposition to contrary errors,
destroying by consequence that known Article from which these deductions flow;
that as new Errors arise against the Faith, so new Explanations of the Faith
may counterpoise them, and may preserve that former faith in its true sense and
in its necessary consequences, by which the explicit articles of our faith must
needs increase to the end of the world, if errors against the faith do so.
Which also we may call new Articles of Faith, in respect of the arguing newly
made, and the proposition it self newly formed; yet by no means are they new in
respect of the principles out of which they are formed, and do necessarily
follow. Now therefore they are for the form rather than the matter: as if this
proposition, Omnis homo est corpus, should be said to be newly formed, when as
these two propositions whereof it is made, Omnis homo est animal, and omne animal
est corpus, were well known, and received truths before. Therefore in such
sense to make new Articles, there is no need of new revelation; but, for those
more evident, only the operation of common reason. And thus many things become
known to posterity, even in things most supernatural, which were not discovered
to, or discoursed of, by their forefathers, from a further examining (upon
some occasion given) and discussing of ancient principles, and comparing of
former revelations: as out of Mathematical principles new Demonstrations (yet
undeniable) are daily minted. In which respect knowledge of divine things, as
well as humane, may be said to have a continual progress and increase to the
end of the world. Dan. 12. 4,

But 4ly, observe concerning these derivative articles; that, since the
deductions which may be made from such as are express and. 15.
tradititional are almost infinite, tho we cannot deny, that all of That all
divine revelation, or necessary deductions therefrom, are not de Fide, (i. e.)
creditu necessaria.
them even to the least are still de fide, or matters pertaining to faith, (for
how can the premises be so, and not the conclusion?) yet all not necessary to
be believed, or matters pertaining to necessary and required Faith. For so
neither is every thing that is plainly set down in the Scripture necessary to
be believed; tho it is all matter of faith, being made known to us, that it is
there written: as the Cardinal says de verbo Dei, 4. l. 12. c. Necessario
creduntur, quia scripta sunt, yet not ideo scripta sunt, quia necessario
credenda erant; such as are many things historical there. A pure nescience, or
also a blamelesly-ignorant contradiction of such things, hurts no man's faith,
so we deny them not to be truth, when we happen to know they are Scripture; but
that we should also know them to be Scripture, there lies no tie upon us. So is
it with these Deductions, which if in themselves (as some points are) they were
necessary to salvation to be believed, they would have bin so always, not only
after the Church has made them, but before: But so they are not; for then
former generations, perhaps not knowing some of them at least, would be
deficient in requisite faith. A pure nescience of them therefore, in the
simplicity of which they are neither affirmed, nor denied; or also when denied,
not knowing the contrary determination of Scripture or Church, hurts none; but
only a peremptory denial of them, or the asserting and maintaining of an error
contrary unto them, or destructive to that former express traditional Article
of Faith, from which they are drawn: and this, when we have a sufficient
information, from Scripture or the Church, to know that it is so; which we have
always, after it is known to us that a Council has determined against it; and
many times may have so before. And hence it is, that, also after the decision
of the Church, still to many not the pure nescience or contradiction of such a
point; but the opposing it, and asserting the contrary, when we know it to be
proposed by her, is pernicious. In Dr. Holden's Phrase de Resolutione fid. 1.
l. 4. c. lectio 2. Cum quis sciens vidensque universam esse Ecclesiae
sententiam, illam tamen pertinaciter and obstinate denegaverit, aut etiam
oppositum sustinuerit etc. But concerning the unwittingly affirmers of the
contrary to some decision of a Council, thus Estius, in 3. sent. 23. did. 13..
Diligenter distinguendum est inter eos, qui retenta generali promptitudine
credendi quicquid Ecclesia Catholica credit, per ignor antiam tamen in
quibusdam fidei dogmatibus errant; propterea quod nondum iis satis declaratum
sit illa Ecclesiam credere: and eos qui post manifestatam sufficienter
Ecclesiae doctrinam adhuc ab ea, vel contrarium asserendo, vel certe dubitando,
dissentire eligunt; quod Hoereticorum est proprium. Fidem illi in universali
atque in habitu (ut loquuntur) totam atque integram retinent, dum quicquid
Ecclesia credendum tradit, suscipere se ex animo profitentur. De quorum numero
fuit Cyprianus etc. Where also we see, that the Church does not lay on all men
an obligation of knowing whatever she defines in matters of faith; but of not
contradicting or doubting of them, when made known to any.

5ly. Neither is it necessary for the Church to make or propose. 16. And that
the Church lawfully may, and has a necessity to, make, de novo, upon rising
errors, such points de fide, i. e. creditu necessaria, which formerly were not
so.
any such deductive Articles, (suppose such as those in the Nicene or
Athanasian Creed); nor perhaps ought she to charge the faith of Christians with
them; but only where some error arises contrary to, and undermining some
former received Article or practice, whereby her Sons to the damage of their
Christianity are in danger of infection. But any such errors spreading, the
Church does not her duty, if she neglect to promulgate the truths opposite to
them. (See before. 14.) For tho the explicit knowledge of such truths is not
necessary; yet this is necessary to the believing such fundamental and prime
Articles of faith as God requires, that one together with them do not believe
and affirm any thing contrary to, and destructive of them, after he may have
sufficient assurance that it is so: and this he may have, so often as the
Church states it so. So (I suppose) the pure nescience of some deductive
Article contained in the Athanasian Creed condemns none, but the maintaining of
the contradictory error thereto, after such light given him by the Church:
which light she is bound continually to hold forth to her children, so often as
any mists of false opinions begin to overcast the clearness of the former faith.

6ly. But in the last place note from what has bin said, that tho no points
become de side because the Church defines them, but are. 17.
either so before, or never can be so at all; yet some of those points which
were always de fide, objects of faith, or dogmata fidei, (so Scotus said
Transubstantiation was no dogma fidei till the Lateran Council, meaning by it
dogmata credenda, i. e. which men were then tied to assent to) may become
creditu necessaria (for all points de fide or appertaining to faith, are not
necessaria creditu) after the Church'es determining of them; which were not so
before. Creditu necessaria, not in themselves or affirmatively, as if they
ought to be explicitly known (as some other points de side must) with reference
to attaining salvation; but only so as not to be denied or opposed, or the
contradictory to them maintained, whenever they are first known to us to be
declared by the Church, (whom we are to presume never to divulge such truths,
but upon necessary occasions pressing Her to it): and this out of the obedience
and submission of judgment which we owe to her Decrees.

And of this submission due to Councils even when they determine. 18. Or (as
some other of the Catholic writers usually express i^) only in points clearly
traditional.
points not of clear Tradition, but (some-way) formerly dubious, we have a
pattern in the business of Rebaptization; which tho formerly not so evident
before the decision of the Church, (Scripture seeming to favor one side, and
Ecclesiastical custom the other, so that Provincial Councils varied in their
judgment of it, some pro, some con;) nor they heretical that affirmed it: yet
decided once, submission of judgment was unquestionably (by St. Austin)
reckoned as due from all; and they Heretics; who after this opposed. See for
this S. Austin. de Baptism. cont. Don. 1. l. 7. c. Quaestionis hujus obscuritas
(he speaks concerning Rebaptization) prioribus Ecclesiae temporibus ante
schisma Donati, magnos viros and magna charitate praeditos, Patres, Episcopos,
ita inter se compulit, salva pace, disceptare atque fluctuare, ut diu
Conciliorum in suis quibusque regionibus diversa statuta nutaverint; donec
plenario totius orbis Concilio; quod saluberrime sentiebatur, etiam remotis
dubitationibus sirmaretur: Again, 2. l. 4. c. Nec nos ipsi tale aliquid (he
speaks of the same point) auderemus asserere, (which argues some inevidence in
the matter) nisi universae Ecclesiae concordissima authoritate firmati; cui and
ipse [Cyprianus] sine dubio crederet, si jam illo tempore quaestionis hujus
veritas eliquata and declarata per plenarium Concilium solidaretur. Yet were
the after-opposers anathematized as heretical. Again, cont. Ep. Parmeniani, 2.
l. 13. c. Haec quidem alia quaestio est: Utrum Baptismus and ab iis, qui
nunquam fuerunt Christiani, potest dari? nec aliquid temere inde affirmandum
est sine authoritate tanti Concilii, quantum tantae rei sufficit. -- De iis
vero qui ab Ecclesiae unitate separati sunt, nulla jam quaestio est, quin and
habeant [verum Baptisma,] and dare possint. -- Hoc enim in ipsa totius orbis
unitate [i. e. in the Council of Nice] discussum, consideratum, perfectum atque
firmatum est. So contr. Crescon. Gram. 1. l. 33. c. Quamvis hujus rei certe de
Scripturis Canonicis non proferatur exemplum, earundem tamen Scripturarum etiam
in hac re a nobis tenetur veritas; cum hoc facimus, quod universae jam placuit
Ecclesiae, quam ipsarum Scripturarum commendat authoritas; ut, quoniam sacra
Scriptura fallere non potest, quisquis falli motuit obscuritate hujus
quaestionis, eandem Ecclesiam de illa consulat, quam sine ulla ambiguitate
sancta Scriptura demonstrat. Obscuritate quaestionis, for tho elsewhere (de
Baptismo cont. Don. 5. l. 23. c.) he supposes it an Apostolical Tradition on
one side, [Apostoli quidem nihil exinde praeceperunt, sed consuetudo illa quae
opponebatur Cypriano, ab eorum traditione exordium sumpsisse credenda est:
sicut sunt multa quae tenet universa Ecclesia; and ob hoc ab Apostolis
praecepta been creduntur, quanquam scripta non reperiantur]; and tho this
custom was by the Bishop of Rome and his party much pressed against Cyprian and
his adherents, and Agrippinus St. Cyprian's Predecessor is said to be the first
that introduced a contrary practice, (see Aust. de Bapt. 3. l. 12. c. non novam
se rem statuisse Beatus Cyprianus ostendit, quia sub Agrippino jam coeperat
fieri): yet it appears, that St. Austin did not think all common customs and
traditions, (tho pretended Apostolical) before they were approved and warranted
by the judgment of the Church in her Councils, to be so simply obligatory, as
that they may not be disputed, if seeming opposite to another (surer)
Apostolical Tradition, i. e. the Scriptures: as St. Cyprian thought this custom
was, and so answered Steven, (see Cypr. Ep. ad Pomp. contra Steph.); and in
this answer is defended by St. Austin, (see de Bapt. 2. l. 8. c.) quia tunc non
extiterant etc. Noluit vir gravissimus rations suas (etsi non veras, quod eum
latebat, sed tamen) non victas (veraci quidem, sed tamen) nondum assertae
consuetudini cedere. Assertae, i. e. by * any Council; or, cleared not to be *
against the Scriptures urged (but mistakenly) by Cyprian. And St. Austin also
himself says the same thing with Cyprian, de Bapt. 3. l. 6. c. Quis dubitat
veritati manifestatae debere consuetudinem cedere?

This I have set you down the more fully, that you might see the. 19.
power and authority of General Councils, not only in declaring points
traditional, but in deciding questions some way obscure and doubtful; and what
submission was due to such points once determined, in St. Austin's opinion: who
yet held former, by latter, Councils might be amended; and consequently their
(in some things) liability to error or doubting. And so such points are to be
believed in consequence only to another point of necessary faith, namely, That
private men ought in all things, at least not demonstrative on the contrary, to
submit their own to the Church'es judgment: as many things written in God's
word are necessary to be assented to, when known to be there written (which are
not written there because they are necessarily to be known, or believed,) in
consequence to that necessary point of faith, that whatever is written in God's
word is true. And hence also are there two sorts of Heretics; some are such
before any Council condemning their Tenent, if it happen to be against points
de fide clear, necessary, and universally or eminently traditional; so were
there presently after the Apostles times many Heretics, before any Council
assembling or condemning their opinions; others, only such, after their error
condemned by a Council, if the points be of less evidence etc. These latter
rendered Heretics not from the nature of their Tenent, but their obstinacy and
opposition to the obligation which the Church'es Authority lays upon them in
her determinations. Whose public proposal of such doctrines as divine truths
is sufficient for their belief, and further embracing the same as such, (and
therefore their further opposition of it is not error, but heresy); unles they
can infallibly demonstrate the contrary. In which case (if ever any such can
happen) they are free from wilful opposition or heresy: (i. e. I mean in their
denying their assent to the Church; but in public contradicting, even those
infallibly certain etc. may be still faulty): else they stand guilty thereof,
and also of Schism, if for such a decision they go on to forsake the Church'es
communion. So St. Cyprian's followers, after a General Council, were counted
Heretics, (tho the matter of this Heresy, as also of many others, so called
from opposition to General Councils, seem not to be in themselves of very great
importance); not so He before it. In which opinion (namely, that the Baptism of
Heretics was ineffectual) says Dr. Potter sect. 4. many good Catholic
Bishops accorded with him and the Donatists: as likewise with the Novatians in
another, [viz. that the Church ought not to absolve some grievous sinners,]
before the Nicene Council. So tho since the Decision of the Florentine Council
1439, those who hold, animas justorum non visuras Deum nisi post
resurrectionem, are by the Church of Rome counted Heretics, from opposition
etc: yet those who before that time maintained it, (amongst whom was Pope John
the 22d.) they acknowledge were free from it. See Bell. de Romans Pontif. 4. l.
14. c. Respondeo Johannem hunc revera sensisse animas non visuras Deum, nisi
post resurrectionem: caeterum hoc sensisse, quando adhuc sentire licebat sine
periculo haeresis: nulla enim adhuc praecesserat Ecclesioe definitio. In such
sense Scotus says Transubstantiation was no dogma fidei before the Lateran
Council.

Thus you see, tho all divine Revelation, and necessary deduction. 20.
from it, is de fide, and the object and matter of faith; and tho the Church
can make nothing de fide (i. e.) to be divine Revelation, which was not so
always from our Savior's and the Apostles times; yet all divine Revelation is
not de fide in another sense (i. e.) proposed by the Church to Christians as
necessary to be believed; and thus a proposition may be de fide to day, which
yesterday was not. And those who affirm the Church to be unerrable in all
points de fide, mean not in all points absolutely which may possibly be derived
from some traditional principle of Faith; but only in so many of them as she
proposes to Christians tanquam de fide, or necessary to be believed: whilst
very many theological propositions probably deducible from the delivered
principles, and even mentioned affirmatively in Councils, yet are no part of
these necessarily enjoined credends.]

To return now to our matter whence we digressed. 11. and. 21.
to pass from Bellarmin to some other late writers of the Roman Church of the
moderatest sort.

These seeing, that some deductions and consequences from revealed and
traditional doctrines are neither so immediate and clear, nor yet so necessary
to be known, and the contradictory of them to be confuted as others, do assert
and derive the Churches inerrability chiefly or only from evidence of
Tradition; not certainty of reason, or extraordinary illumination of the
Spirit. Whence these also, holding the Church'es infallibility in all things
which she determines tanquam de fide, do likewise maintain all things
determined by her tanquam de fide to be only doctrines traditional; or those so
evidently deductive as that in substance they are coincident with that which is
traditional.

See Dr. Holden de resol. Fid. 1. l. 9. c. I will transcribe you some part.
Quaedam consecutiones adeo evidenter constant primo intuitu, ut. 22.
nemo sanoe mentis (supposita praemissarum veritate) possit ullatenus de rei
veritate ambigere: as there he names this; Duas esse in Christo voluntates
proved ex duplici natura Christi, against the Monothelites. Quoecunque autem
sub hac ratione and condition declarantur and denunciantur ab Ecclesia
universa, seu a Concilio Generali, veram habent divinae fidei seu veritatum
revelatarum and Catholice traditarum certitudinem etc. Aliae sunt consecutiones
and sequelae, quae non adeo manifest and evidenter emicant and effulgent; quin
studium aliquod and scientia requiratur etc. Hujusmodi autem veritates (quarum
aliquas vidimus in Conciliis Generalibus definitas) supremam illam and
Catholicam certitudinem, quam vi traditionis universae attribuimus articulis
fidei, habere nequeunt. Nullos etenim agnovit Ecclesia divini luminis radios
sibi de novo affulgentes, quibus veritatibus recenter detect^s and
particularium hominum ratiocinatione quodammodo develatis, possit certitudo ab
omni prorsus periculo erroris immunis, atque fidei revelatis and catholice
traditis articulis par and aequalis succrescere. Thus Dr. Holden: to whom I may
add Mr. Cressy in his Motives, (approved by several Sorbon-Doctors) 33. c.
Besides the certain Traditional doctrine, [of which he speaks before] other
points of doctrine there are sometimes decided in Councils rather by the
judgment and learning of the Bishops considering texts of Scripture, wherein
such points seem to be included, and weighing together the doctrines of ancient
Fathers and modern Doctors: now such doctrines or decisions many Catholics
conceive are not in so eminent a manner the necessary objects of Christian
faith, etc. Then after. -- If in such Decisions, as these latter are, there
should happen to be any error, (which yet we may piously believe the assistance
of God's H. Spirit promised to the Church will prevent,) but if this should
happen etc. And c. 41. And many Catholic writers there are, who upon the same
grounds with Mr. Chillingworth extend the promise of the holy Spirits
assistance to the Church, not to all inconsiderable circumstantial doctrines,
but to substantial and traditionary only. Thus he.

See like things in F. Sancta Clara, syst. fid. 12, 13, 14. c.-12. c. p. 110.
Singula, quae in Conciliis tractantur, non sunt ejusdem considerationis.. 23.
Illa quae a Theologis hinc inde agitantur, and ante definitiones examinantur,
and tandem non nisi magno labor, and rerum and consequentiarum subtili
trutinatione ex discursu longo and perplexo ad Conclusiones statuendas
devenitur; hujusmodi omnia si tanquam non necessaria and errabilia putantur,
nihil est contra Ecclesiae infallibilitatem. And 13. c. p. 147. Cum hac tamen
doctrina been stat proloquium illud Scholasticorum, Ecclesiam simpliciter non
posse errare in fide, licet been circa fidem, seu in appendicibus fidei, hoc
est, ut alii loqui malunt, in non-fundamentalibus seu non-necessariis. -- [And
one such point, which he instanceth in, tho not as a determination of any
Council, (yet see Council. Lateran. 3. Can. which seems somewhat to favor this
opinion), yet as a common received tenent in some former times, is this: --
Papam ex Christi institutione plenissimam habere in universum orbem
jurisdictionem temporalem, eamque in Imperatores and Reges transfudisse, adeo
ut habeat toti mundo dominari, and omnia regna disponere: 12. c. p. 124. where
he quotes many Authors. Quod tamen (says he) hoc saeculum in Scholis non fert,
ut satis colligitur ex Suaresio, Bellarmino, and aliis. See likewise the
Authors quoted in Bellarmin. de Roman. Pont. 5. l. 5. c.. Argumentum postremum.
and. Sanctus quoque Bonavent. where he names Hugo de S. Victore about 1130. who
was one of the first qui temporalem potestatem summ^ Pontisici ex Christi
institutione tribuit.]

And is not Stapleton, quoted before, of the same opinion with these? when he
says; It is sufficient that the Church be infallible. 24.
in the substance of faith; in public doctrines, and things necessary to
Salvation, (as Bellarmin grants some points de fide are not,) being the end of
infallibility given; God and Nature, as they are not defective in necessaries,
so neither being superabundant in superfluities, etc. And does not St. Austin's
Saying, so much noted, show him too of the same opinion? I will transcribe it
somewhat more fully than usual, as being very considerable. Answering to St.
Cyprian's Authority, (urged against him by the Donatists) for rebaptization of
such as had bin only baptized by Heretics, amongst other things, he goes on,
de Baptism. 2. l. 3. c. Quis autem nesciat sanctam Scripturam etc,
posterioribus Episcoporum literis ita praeponi; ut de illa omnino dubitari and
disceptari non possit, utrum verum vel utrum rectum sit, quicquid in ea
scriptum esse constiterit. Episcoporum autem literas, quae post confirmatum
Canonem scribuntur etc. per Concilia licere reprehendi, si quid etc. and ipsa
Concilia, quae per singulas regiones vel Provincias siunt, pleniorum
Conciliorum authoritati, quae fiunt ex universo orb Christiano, sine ullis
ambagibus cedere; [quis autem nesciat] ipsaque plenaria saepe priora
posterioribus emendari? cum aliquo experimento rerum aperitur quod clausum
erat, and cognoscitur quod latebat; which he applies afterward to the point of
Non-rebaptization, when it was by the Church better considered. (See a like
passage to this de Bapt. 2. l. 9. c. -- Si Concilium ejus [i. e. Cypriani, the
Provincial Council called by him] attenditur, huic est universae Ecclesiae
posterius Concilium praeponendum. -- Nam and Concilia posteriora prioribus apud
posteros praeponuntur, and universum partibus semper jure optimo praeponitur.)
Now that St. Austin (as Mr. Cressy well observes, Motives 33. c.) understands
this emendation of Councils in points not of fact etc. but of Doctrine, (I mean
of such doctrines as are not expressly delivered by former plenary Councils, and
those Councils accepted by the Church catholic tanquam de fide; which
determinations the Church is conceived only to make in points more evidently
certain to her, and so never after amendable,) appears from the context both
precedent and consequent; where he goes on: Quapropter S. Cyprianus qui etc.
satis ostendit facillime se correcturum fuisse sententiam suam, si quis ei
demonstraret Baptismum Christi sic dari posse ab it is qui for as exierunt;
quemadmodum amitti non potuit, cum for as exirent: unde multa jam diximus; nec
nos ipsi tale aliquid auderemus asserere, nisi universae Ecclesiae
concordissima authoritate firmati: cui and ipse sine dubio cederet, si jam illo
tempore quaestionis hujus veritas eliquata and declarata per plenarium
Concilium solidaretur. Which answers to what he said before, [aliquo
experimento rerum aperitur, quod clausum erat etc.] as elsewhere he intimates
the former obscurity of this question, de Bapt. 1. l. 7. c. Tho indeed it is
well noted of some concerning this passage of St. Austin, that by the Concilia
plenaria he means only such larger Councils as were composed of many
Provinces, inferior to the most General; such as that of Nice: because he
says, -- Quis nesciat priora saepe posterioribus emendari. When As before his
time there had bin only two of these most general Councils, and of these the
latter making no such emendations, as to reverse or contradict any one doctrine
of the former. Now that Councils, inferior to those collected ex toto orb
Christiano, only if consisting of many Provinces, were by St. Augustine and
other Africans styled Concilia plenaria or universalia, see de Baptis. 2. l. 7.
c. -- 3. l. 2. c. -- Contra Parmenian. Epist. ^. l. 3. c. Contra Crescon. 3. l.
53. c. Codex Canon. Ecclesiae African. passim number. 19. 28. 65, 25. -- Conc.
Carthag. A. D. 403. number. 127. 138. of these inferior plenary Councils then St.
Austin seems to speak, when he mentions the latter correcting the former,
reading the words quae fiunt by way of Parenthesis. -- Quis nesciat ipsa
Concilia, i. e. quae per singulas regiones vel Provincias fiunt [Councils
Provincial] plenariorum Conciliorum authoritati [those comprehending many
Provinces, and especially those quae fiunt ex toto orb Christiano, as that of
Arls or Nice, for one of these he means here, but rather that of Arls 1. see
Canon 8. and St. Aust. Ep. 162. ad Eleusin.] sine ullis ambagibus cedere,
ipsaque saepe plenaria [those Councils comprehending many Provinces; for this
saepe emendari cannot be applied to the universally-General, that were before
St. Austin's times; neither can his arguments against the Donatists stand good
upon such a supposition of such Councils errability] priora etc. Again
Bellarmin himself, since he grants that Councils may err in the reasons they
give for some Conclusions; (which I conceive extends also to the
mis-interpretation of some Scriptures, whence they draw them,) and, in the
deductions to be made, that they may be de side, puts in evidenter, aut quod
evidenter inde deducitur; and allows latter Councils may determine what former
Councils doubt of, (which determination, when as both of them have the same
assistance of the Spirit, is only from some rational light that latter Councils
from more weighing and discoursing such points do attain:) does he not affirm a
Council, in some smaller and less evident or less argued points of doctrine,
liable to some error?

And lastly, that the Church does not pretend to infallibility in all doctrines
pertaining to faith, but only to some, as being more. 25.
evident, me thinks sufficiently appears from this; That in her General
Councils she decides not all pre-extant controversies, but has left many sharp
ones (namely where there is neither clear revelation, nor tradition, nor
consequence from them for either side) undetermined; and in that she has
defined some others as probable, see Council. Viennense fore-quoted. But if she
were by divine assistance in all doctrinals pertaining to faith (whereof some
are granted not necessary, Bell. de Ecclesia 3. l. 14. c.) certain of truth,
she ought never to state any as probabilities. Whence also it appears, that of
all controversies that arise, tho some way pertaining to faith, one side is not
presently to be called necessary, and to be decreed; and the contradictory
thereof necessary to be confuted, and exterminated. But if in all truths
(necessary or not necessary) when she offers once to decide them, the Church
must needs be infallible (notwithstanding any mis-arguing) by the supervising
of the H. Spirit; lest any should be induced to believe something false: Is
there not the same reason, that in matters of fact (notwithstanding any
misinformation) she should be by the same holy Spirit preserved from erring;
lest any should be obliged, and that sometimes under her Anathema's, (for these
also she uses in matters of fact) to submit to what is wrong?

Thus much concerning this tenet, That only Traditional points and their
undeniable plain Consequences are the matter of the Churc'es infallibility,. 26.
and de fide necessaria of Christians. But note, that the Church'es
infallibility must not be enlarged to all points which may be called
Traditional neither: for surely, of all things pretended to be traditional,
there is not Tradition equally evident; but of some less than of others;
according to which the evidence of the Church must be of many several dogrees;
neither may we reasonably ascribe to her the infallibility in all of them,
which we do in some other: tho her evidence in the least may be so much, as
that none ought to reluct against her sentiment or practice.

The next thing which will be enquired after is, How to know amongst many
decrees of Councils, which of them, according to. 27. Whether, and by what
marks, those points which are proposed by the Church tanquam de side or creditu
necessaria, or which are proposed as constantly traditional, are clearly
distinguished by her from her other proposal.
the expression of the former opinions, the Church proposes tanquam de fide,
or tanquam necessario credenda; or which she proposes as clear and plenary
Tradition, or undeniable deduction therefrom; it being agreed, that all her
proposals or decrees are not such. A Quaere very necessary to be resolved for
those (if any such there be,) who affix obedience of assent only to
infallibility, and this infallibility again only to such decrees; but a Quaere
for all others (methinks) not of so much concernment.

I find the marks of such distinction set down in Bell. de Conc. 2. l. 12. c.
thus. -- Quando autem decretum proponatur tanquam de fide, facile cognoscitur.
28.
ex verbis Concilii: semper enim dicere solent, 1. Se explicare fidem
Catholicam, 2. vel Haereticos habendos, qui contrarium sentiunt; vel (quod est
communissimum) dicunt Anathema, and ab Ecclesia excludunt eos, qui contrarium
sentiunt. [What then, what if it be only Anathema iis, qui contrarium dicunt
aut docent?] Quando autem nihil horum dicunt, non est certum rem esse de side.
Thus Bellarmin. But note here, that Bellarmin tells us not plainly, whether
something in Councils is proposed tanquam de side, without any Anathema set to
it; only he doubtingly says, non est certum: and those others (again) who
build the Church'es inerrability on Tradition, and the evident Consequences
thereof, tell us not, whether some of those Decisions that are enjoined with
Anathema's, are not sometimes some of those secondary consequences more
doubtful, ad quas colligendas studium aliquod and scientia requiritur: or which
are made by the judgment and learning of the Bishops considering texts of
Scripture, the doctrines of ancient Fathers, and modern Doctors etc. As indeed
it is likely some of them are; Anathema's being added so frequently even in
smaller matters, and in the newest controversies. And perhaps it can hardly be
shown by these writers, that every Proposition in a General Council that has
an Anathema affixed to it, is traditional to such a degree of evidence, (since
some Traditions are much more universal and evident than some others) that it
amounts to infallibility (not from the assistance of the holy Spirit, but) from
the clearnes of Tradition. In this distinction therefore of points de fide or
necessary credends, wherein the Church is infallible, exactly from others, I
think these Authors cannot speak out so clearly; because tho some points are of
much more certainty, and also of much higher concernment than others, yet
Councils seem not so punctual in severing them by a diversity of expression,
unless in very few: (perhaps a thing not possible to be done by them, see. 3.)
See Dr. Holden, 1. l. 8. c. acknowledging some such thing: In tradenda doctrina
Christiana nunquam audivimus Ecclesiam articulorum revelatorum and divinarum
institutionum catalogum exhibuisse vel composuisse, quo separatim cognosci
possint hujusmodi sidei divinae dogmata ab omnibus aliis, quae vel
Ecclesiasticae sint institutionis, vel quae centae revelationi divinae haud
immediate innitantur; atque ideo omnia simul confuse and indistincte semper
docuisse and tradidisse. Yet the same Councils may and do require subscription
and obedience to all their definitions, as they being the supreme and
unappealable Judge * authorized by Christ (for the peace and unity of the
Church) to give the law to all men, * abundantly assisted by the Spirit of
Truth for all Necessaries, even the obscurest and most unacquainted doctrines,
if you can once prove them necessary: and besides this if, in some other
matters of less concernment they be liable to error; yet how much less they
than private men? And therefore their submission of judgment to these remains
still most rational, as well as obligatory.

The chief note, which I find for the distinction of these points de fide,
wherein the Church is infallible, from other determinations. 29. Anathema no
certain Index thereof.
or proposals, is the affixing of Anathema's, (which are the same with
Excommunication.) But 1. first, several of these Anathema's (if we do rely on
their form) may require, not internal assent, as looking merely at faith; but
non-contradiction, as looking perhaps (in some points) more at peace; many
running only, si quis dixerit etc, Anathema sit. But if it be said, that the
Anathema's only, that are set upon a Si quis sentiat or credat, are the Index
of such points de fide for necessary credends; then will very few decrees of
Councils pass for such, (for example, not above four or five of all those made
in the Council of Trent, I mean, as to this particular Index of Credends, viz.
Anathema): and doubtless many more of the decisions of Councils are contended to
be such credends, than those that can show this mark of Anathema fixed expressly
to dissentients; of which see more in Church Government, 4. Part.. 79. Again,
this injunction of Non-contradiction or of keeping silence, tho it be * such as
opposes the saying, that the contrary to the Church'es determination is a
truth; or, that the Church erreth in any such decision; much more, an open
departing for such unnecessary matter (for the Church errs in no necessaries)
from her communion; yet perhaps it is not * such as opposes the making or
humbly proposing of any doubt thereof, at least in a second convening of the
same Authority. See, I pray you, in the denouncing of her Anathema's, the great
warines of the Council of Trent, in 24. sess. 7. c. Si quis dixerit Ecclesiam
errare, cum docuit propter adulterium etc, Anathema sit, noted by Soave in his
History of it, p. 755. Engl. Ed. to be done, because she would not censure *
some of the Greek Church, who held the contrary opinion; as likewise * some of
the Fathers, as S. Ambrose. And surely this Council's affixing Anathema's
sometimes to so many Lutheran errors, some doubtless of smaller moment, (as they
were gathered here and there by some persons, appointed to that purpose, out of
Luther's writings,) because they were opposite to the common doctrines of the
Church, shows, that her Anathema sometimes eyed more the petulancy and
contradicting spirit of the Author, than the importance of the Tenet; and was
sent forth, more to secure her peace, than her faith. What should hinder, I
pray, since some questions possibly may arise in the Church, undecidable
clearly by Tradition; and since (no doubt) of all questions now agitated among
the Schoolmen, or other Catholics, one side is not traditional; for then how
could so many Catholics oppose a thing of such evidence; again, since it is
the Church'es duty to provide for peace and unity among her children, as well
as faith and truth; and lastly, since sharp and vehement contests may arise in
such new controversies, to the great disturbance thereof; what should hinder, I
say, that the Church in such cases may not impose silence on both parties? or,
secondly, using her best search, and going upon such Scriptures and reasons, as
perhaps some side urges, declare her judgment; and that under some penalty on
the opposers and gainsayers thereof? or require submission of their judgment
also to her, not as she declares her judgment infallible; but only as it is
definitive and unappealable? (else her orders are no more than good counsel).
On the gainsayers etc. not as subverters of some necessary faith, but as
troublers (for an unnecessary (if) truth) of the Church'es peace, and rebels to
her authority; whom Christ has commanded to hear; not only how far they list,
or in their private judgment see cause. And if she may impose some penalty;
then why not anathematize, or excommunicate? This Anathematizing even
Protestants do not so far charge as a trespass of charity, or a sign of rigor
upon the Church of Rome or her Councils; but that they allow, that those who
turbulently, or pertinaciously speak against the Doctrines of the Church in
smaller points, may be anathematized for it. See Dr. Fern in his Preface to
Consider. of present Concernment etc. We acknowledge, that he who shall
pertinaciously, turbulently speak and teach against the doctrines of the Church
in points of less moment, may deserve to be anathematized, or put out of the
Church: for such a one, tho he denies not the faith, yet makes a breach of
charity, whereby he goes out of the Church, against which he so sets himself.
Thus he of pertinacious and turbulent contradiction; but then modest
contradiction he allows. Was Luther's and Calvin's modest? Are not Anathema's
used by her against Schismatical as well as Heretical spirits? May not she
excommunicate as well disturbers of her peace, as subverters of her faith? How
come Schismatics then thrown out of the Church? Does she not use Anathema's or
Excommunications in matters of Fact, wherein she is confessed to be liable to
error? If in decisions not traditional etc, we are bound to yield obedience,
(as I shall show anon); what reason have we, why the Church may not
anathematize for these points those, who contradict and disobey? But if she
may: then Anathema (for any thing we know) is joined to some point not
traditional, nor in which the Church is infallible. 2. To put this matter more
out of doubt: why have Provincial Councils (granted fallible) used
anathematizing (than which nothing more frequent) toward those under their
Jurisdiction? If any say they use Anathema's indeed, but not to be in force (I
say not after they be contradicted (which we grant) but) till they be confirmed
by a General Council; then why may they, and have they, bin put in practice,
before they were by any such Council confirmed? Nay to what purpose such
Council convened, since it has no power of excommunicating the resisters? and
since, when a General Council sits, that sufficiently obliges; before it sits,
the other obliges not. 3. Again, many Heresies (as the Pelagian etc.) by
Provincial Councils have bin censured and suppressed: but who may judge heresies,
i. e. errors against points of faith, may pronounce Anathema's. Judicium non
infallibile tamen sufficit ad excommunicandum: -- and debent privati homines
acquiescere ejusmodijudicio; donec non judicaverit aliter Apostolica Seeds, vel
Concilium Universale; and si secus egerint, merito excommunicantur, says Bell.
de Council. 2. l. 10. c. Judicio, in points of Doctrine too: for as for matter
of fact, he will allow the same liability to error may be in particular which
in General Councils.

Thus much touching your first Quaere, concerning the Infallibility PART. II..
30. Concerning obedience and submission of private judgment* whether due to the
Chapter supposed not in all her decisions infallible.
of the Church. Now I come to your second, concerning Obedience due to the
Church, and submission of private judgment. Where I think this will be made
clear unto you, That (to what point soever the Church'es infallibility be
enlarged, yet this) the Universal-Infallibility of this Supreme Judge of
Controversies is not a necessary ground, or the only rule of the duty of
obedience thereto, (neither of the obedience of Non-contradiction, nor yet that
of Assent): but that there may be, and is, just obligation of obedience (I mean
that of submission of judgment, i. e. to believe what it delivers) to a
fallible Authority, i. e. one that may command us perhaps to believe sometimes
what is an untruth.

And if this be a truth, I conceive it may be of some good consequence. For
first, so, those also may be rationally induced to. 31.
yield obedience to the Church; who now think themselves to be clearly freed
from it, unles it can first be showed them, that the Church is infallible in
all her Propositions: neither will they (then) suppose themselves so easily
discharged (by showing the contradictions of General Councils in some few
matters perhaps) from their obedience in all other points, wherein these agree;
or which some defining, none other have reversed, and the Church has received
in her general practice; or also wherein they find even a later Council
contradicting a former. For if (as St. Austin says) later Synods may amend and
correct the former; they ought also, in what they amend them, to be
submitted-to, non obstante the contradiction of the former. Secondly, so those,
who have not opportunity of consulting the highest Tribunal, may not think
their duty cancelled (excepting where they are certain) to other their
Superiors and Spiritual Guides, because fallible or suborordinate; nor will
oppose so frequently to them, not the Dictates of an higher Court, but of their
private judgment. When As certainly this submission of our judgment and reason
to a Superior, tho fallible, authority, is a duty most acceptable to God, and
which, tho much unpractised by, and (I am afraid) quite unknown to, many
Sectaries amongst Protestants; yet has bin always most religiously observed
elsewhere in the Church of God by those who have bin most eminent in piety:
nothing conducing more to the preservation of truth, unity of minds, peace,
security, and serenity of a man's conscience, and lastly to true humility,
mortification, and self-denial, (there being no mortification, nor self-denial
like this; and therefore perhaps so many refuse it, because there is nothing so
much our self as our judgment): And again, the contrary thereof, as it is the
fruit of pride and self-conceit; so, having bin always the promoter of error,
and mother of distraction and confusion. I cannot here but set down two or
three words of Mr. Hooker, 2. l. 7. sect. This opinion, says he, (which T.
Cartwright maintained against Councils, etc,) [that an argument of authority of
Man is in matters divine nothing worth,] being once inserted into the minds of
the vulgar sort, what it may grow into, * God knows; I may add, * we have
seen.

Now to show this Truth, 1. first, I must grant to you; That God has obliged
no man to believe a known-to-him error, or to. 32.
believe an error quatenus error: for this I think is a contradiction in
terminis; to believe that to be a truth which he knows (I do not say, which he
thinks, or doubts) is not a truth: (the same may be said of obligation to the
doing or practice of any thing certainly known to one to be unlawful,) and
therefore I grant the consequence; That, if any be bound to believe or assent
to a fallible Authority in all they determine for truth, either they de facto
shall never determine an error; or at least a private man shall never certainly
know that, which they determine, to be an error. 2ly. Again, this I hold most
certain; That God cannot propose any error to be believed by us for a truth;
for this would mainly oppose his veracity, as any impiety does his holiness. And
3ly, I see not that God, in obliging to obedience of fallible Councils, can be
said to have absolutely necessitated any to believe an error, tho unknown to
him to be so; unless we can say also, that God has necessitated that Authority
to err; for it is possible for one errable not actually to err.

But (granting actual error of our Guides in some things) to come now to some
stating of this matter: (which note, that it. 33.
will be the same case in every thing concerning their injunctions of believing
truths or falsities; and of doing things lawful, or unlawful.)

1. First then, I am not obliged by God to obedience to any authority ^^ That
no submission of Our judgment is due to the proposal of the Church, where we
are infailibly certain of the contrary.
(inferior or supreme) in any thing, I certainly or infallibly know to be an
error or unlawful. Some case therefore there is, which if it happen, I cannot
be justly obliged to obey an authority fallible. Therefore I willingly assent
to such sayings as that of Mr. Hooker, 2. l. 7.. (quoted by Mr. Chillingworth,
5. c. 110.. as if it weakened or qualified that Author's judgment elsewhere for
submission to Church Authority:) Although 10000 General Councils would set down
one and the same definitive sentence, yet one demonstrative reason alleged,
[demonstrative, that is, infallible,] or one manifest [truly manifest, not
seeming so, for what Sect has not their (called) demonstrations and manifest
texts] testimony cited from the word of God himself to the contrary, could not
choose but overweigh them all etc. Will any Catholic writer deny this? He may
say further, If an Angel from Heaven etc. Let there be submission of judgment
where such manifest texts and demonstrations are not, and all is well. And
(again) I must grant that it follows not, from the Church'es infallibility in
Fundamentals or Necessaries being supposed, that therefore all are tied to
assent to her in whatsoever she proposes, if they can certainly know that she
errs in any point; because then they certainly know that such point is not
necessary, or fundamental; since in such necessaries she is granted to be
infallible. Again, I grant, that if any can be certain that two General
Councils do point blank contradict one another, (tho one of them is in the
right) he may be certain that such point, wherein they contradict, is not
fundamental; but yet nevertheles he is in such point to assent to the latter
Council, unles he can infallibly demonstrate the contrary.

2. Secondly, I am not obliged by God to obedience of assenting. 34. 2. That no
submission is due to an inferior person or court in matters whereof I have
doubt, when I have a Superior to repair to for resolution.
or acting to any inferior Court or Magistrate, in a thing whereof I doubt
only, whether it be truth, whether it be lawful; if there be any higher court,
to whom I have opportunity to repair for better information: but if otherwise I
am (notwithstanding my doubting) to acquiesce in the judgment of a lower court.

3. Thirdly, to the supreme Ecclesiastical court, tho supposed fallible in some
things, I am obliged to obedience, both of assent and acting (at least in such
a manner as is described before,. 28.) in all things which are not certainly
known by me to be errors,. 35. 3. That submission of judgment is due to the
supreme Ecclesiastical Court in any doubting whatever short of infallible
certainty.
or unlawful. What do I gain by this for obedience to them? very much. For 1.
if all, who cannot be sure that a General Council is erroneous in any point,
must submit their assent to all; very few they will be (most men being
ignorant, and not pretending at all to demonstrate against General Councils)
that may withdraw it in any thing at all; and none at all in most things. But
2ly, by what way can any one in any thing be infallibly sure (not think only,
or suppose that he is sure) that such a Council errs? By divine Revelation? But
whence can he certainly know, that it is Divine? especially when these contrary
to the proposals of the Church'es supremest Council? By the Church? But that is
She (in the way wherein only she is capable of delivering it) whose judgment he
opposes. By the Scriptures? Has he any other (then), besides those the Church
has, and which she first recommended unto him? Or understands he them better?
He, whoever pretends evidence of Scripture against the Church, in very deed
objects only his own interpretation thereof against that of the Church; and for
doing this methinks he might blush before so many Reverend Fathers. For suppose
he find the contradictory to their decision totidem verbis in Scripture, words
are capable of diverse acceptions: and the true contradiction lies in the sense,
not the terms. But then has he well compared Scriptures? And is he sure that
no other text is again totidem verbis contradictory to that he urges? If it
be, then one place must not be understood as the letter sounds; and then why
not that which he presses? I ask a Protestant; Is a Catholic presently
infallibly certain, that the Protestant Synods are erroneous in denying of
Christ's presence-corporal in the Sacrament, so soon as he reads the words, Hoc
est Corpus meum? I could heap up many instances in this kind. But I would not
have this so understood, as if I held, that a private man might not be
sufficiently certain in many things, from the exceeding evidence and clearnes
of the Scriptures therein. But hardly, I say, shall he ever be so, in any such
thing, where a General Council is not certain of the same, from the same so
clear Scriptures; but (at least) thinks its self from these Scriptures (or
notwithstanding them) certain of the contrary. Lastly, by Reason? But what
arguments from their Reasons can counterpoise this, from the authority of so
many of much greater reason? (Ipsa sola Ecclesiae Catholicae authoritas
argumentum est majoris ponderis, quam alia quaevis ratio, quia credendum
judicamus quicquid maxim and vitam and societatem humanam dirigit ac
conducit): Especially if this be considered, That as many matters of our faith
are obscure, and exceeding the natural light of reason; so evidence of private
judgment in them against the Church can hardly be so pressing and irresistible,
as that he may not conform to her judgment). Again, what certainty can any
presume-of in such a pretended demonstration, as being communicated and made
known to others, yet convinces none but himself? The authority even of
Councils less than General (i. e. fallible) to punish dissenters from their
decrees, (unless they have unjustly hitherto usurped it,) methinks argues their
errors to be by private men not easily discoverable. But of this see more in
Obligation of Judgment,. 15. 22. etc. Trial of Doct.. 14. Church-Governm. 2.
part.. 36. etc.

It remains then that I go on to show; That, where we have not this infallible
certainty, God has obliged men to submit their. 36.
own opinion to, and to acquiesce in, the judgment (tho fallible) of those
Superiors whom he has appointed to guide them: and so per accidens has
obliged them to believe a falsity; so it be not certainly known to them to be
false: or (as you say) to obey another in any thing, right or wrong; so long as
it is not certainly known to them to be wrong, (and so long they know not, but
that it is right); and that under pain of sinning against their duty. Obliged
them, I say, not only for opinions, but actions, which depend on their
opinions. For note, that if we owe no obedience of assent to any judgment
fallible, lest they teach us something untrue; neither owe we to them any
obedience of our actions, lest they command us something unlawful; or also lest
we act something contrary to our conscience, which we never may. Again, To
their Superiors, I say; if so be that they have no other higher Superiors (in
respect of whom the authority of the inferior is always voided) whom in their
doubtings they can repair-to, and consult; as in respect of General Councils,
tho they should be fallible, we have not a superior Director.

1. First for such obedience due, not only to the supreme Synods or Courts, but
also to inferior Spiritual Governors fallible, see the. 37. Submission of
judgment proved,
express divine command in many Scriptures, Heb. 13. 7, 9, 17. [whose faith
follow.] Ephesians. 4. 11. etc. [Pastors and Teachers sent, that we might not be
carried away with other doctrines than those which they 1. From Scripture.
deliver.] Matt. 18. 15. etc. We appointed to hear the Church, upon penalty of
being treated like Heathens, and of being bound as on Earth, so in Heaven.
Acts. 20. 28, 29. The clergy appointed Episcopi to feed the flock; that must
be, amongst other things, surely with their Doctrine, which is the Spiritual
nourishment of the Flock not to be refused. -- Luke 10. 16. [He that hears them
hears Christ, and the despiser of them despises Christ.] To which may be added
all those texts which authorize Ghurch-Governors to judge controversies, and
inflict their censures upon false teachers, and spreaders of errors. 1 Timothy 4.
11.-6. 3, 5. Tit. 1. 11.-3. 10, 11. Acts 15. 2. etc. 1 Timothy 1. 20. compared
with 2 Timothy 2. 17, 18.-4. 14, 15. Rev. 2. 2, 14, 15, 20. 1 Cor. 14. 29, 32.
Again, all those texts wherein Christians are exhorted to note, and avoid,
those that cause divisions. Romans 16. 17. 2 These. 3. 14. 2 Jo. 10. Again, those
texts also wherein Christians are charged to be all of one judgment, (which
cannot be but by adhering to the judgment of some one person or assembly); to
speak the same thing. Not to be wise in their own conceit. 1 Cor. 1. 10. Romans
12. 16.-15. 5, 6. Phil. 1. 27.-3. 16. Again, those texts which require
Christians to acquiesce in the doctrine of their Spiritual Superior; who is not
only the Apostle, but the Apostles Successors to the world's end. 1 Cor. 4. 16,
17. -- 11. 1, 2. Phil. 3. 17. Romans 16. 17. 2 These. 3. 14. -- With which
Successors is left the charge of continuing to the world the doctrine of their
predecessors: 1 Timothy 1. 3. 2 Timothy 1. 13, 14. -- 2. 2. which texts see more
largely explained, and the extent of obedience that is required in them,
vindicated in Success. of Clergy.

2. Secondly, after these Texts commanding obedience, and submission of
judgment to the authority (but not to the Universal infallibility,. 38. 2. From
Reason.
for who will maintain this?) of all those Spiritual Superiors, who are thus to
be obeyed; let us consider also the common practice in our Secular converse.
Does not there lie upon children an obligation of duty (especially in their
minority) to yield the obedience of assent (for else they may not the obedience
of their actions) to the rules and injunctions of their parents? That saying
Col. 3. 20. does it not either argue all parents infallible in what they teach
or command? or that God has bound children (not capable of repairing to an
higher Director) to submit their judgment and actions to those who may guide
them amiss? Again, whether no obligation of Scholars to their Masters, and
those experienced in the Science they learn? I say, whether it is not a duty in
these to yield their assent to them, not only for the charge they have of
obedience; but also for the great disproportion of their judgments, tho the
other are not infallible, and may possibly teach them wrong; for there is no
infallible Judge at all in the Sciences. The like instances may be made, in the
People to their Pastor; the Penitent to his Confessor; the Christians to any
Synod less than General: for these are all fallible. What mean those rules?
Oportet discentem credere. -- Unicuique credendum est in sua art. To which I
may add; That right reason binds any to yield faith to another, not only if
infallible, but if (all circumstances considered) less fallible than himself.
If these be dictates of right reason, what difference between this and the law
of Nature? And again, what difference between that and the law of God?

Many Scruples (I know), and demurs and difficulties usually arise in our
minds, endeavoring to defeat such obedience and resignation. 39. Several
objections and scruples resolved.
of our selves to another authority when any way fallible. You will give me
leave therefore, before I go further, to take notice of some of them, and to
see whether they may not be rationally silenced. 1. First then, to this you may
say; that wherever we doubt once, upon reasons no way satisfied, of any thing
which such Governors enjoin, whether it be true, whether it be lawful, here we
are quit from our obedience to them. R. True; if you have any other higher
Judgment appointed to repair to, and accordingly deciding such doubt; in which
case theirs is voided. But mark here, that thus you decline not their judgment,
because fallible; but because you have another Director or Guide appointed less
liable to error than they. But wherever this cannot be had, duty obliges you
not to follow your own, but your former Directors judgment: whose Faith follow.
Heb. 13. 7. Will you restrain such Scripture-rules of obedience only to General
Councils? But if not their judgment whom we have named, (in case you can attain
to no higher Tribunal); whose does your duty oblige you to follow? your own?
But thus also then is it not your duty to follow a fallible judgment, which may
guide you right or wrong? Tell me, has not God obliged every one to follow his
* own conscience right or wrong? Conscientia erronea obligat. From what law but
God's? Obligat, because he does not know that it is erroneous: how much more an
* erring Council, whose mistakes he has many times less means to find out,
than those of his own conscience? One therefore that in a doubt cannot have the
solution of a Superior court infallible, (aswho can have it in every matter of
faith or practice he scruples at, it either not sitting, or too remote, or not
at leisure to satisfy all Queries;) ought to acquiesce in the judgment of an
inferior guide. Does not a child offend against his duty, if he should say to
his Father, or a plebeian to his learned Pastor; Since you are fallible, I will
not follow yours, but my own, judgment? Does not natural prudence guide him, in
two, liable to error, to follow him, who, all circumstances considered, is
likely to be the less fallible? or is He further from fallibility if he guide
himself? But if you will acknowledge a submission and obedience to their
judgment in some only, not in all things; since they may in something guide you
amiss: I ask (then) in what things it is, that you think fit to obey them? In
what you approve and like of? But this is primarily not obeying their, but your
own, judgment. Therefore, in things also which you do not approve? But this
(for any thing I know) is obeying in all things. But if you say; that you would
have men also yield in some things not altogether approved by them; yet not in
things whereof they have much doubt, or wherein they think themselves, as it
were, sure of the contrary, (for if they be absolutely sure, I yield to you):
Still thus you open a gap large enough to let all out of the fence of
obedience; and the more ignorant, soonest; for they knowing little or nothing
to the contrary, think themselves sure of every thing they say.

2. But secondly, you will ask, if I ought to obey in things I approve. 40.
not, Am not I thus obliged to go against my conscience, which was said but
now, tho erroneous, to oblige me? This is answered, I think, sufficiently in a
discourse concerning what obligation we have to follow our own judgment,. 2. n.
3. to which I I refer you, and is spoken to below,. 46. Again, you will say, Do
not we thus take away all use of our own judgment, in things wherein our
Superiors lay their injunctions upon us? R. Yes: the use of our judgment
against the Supreme. Again; all use of our judgment, not for reasoning or
proposing difficulties, perhaps in some things to that supreme Judgment to be
further confirmed in truth; but at least all judgment, from such difficulties,
pronouncing and defining against such Authority. But neither is this restraint
of our judgments (which see more fully discoursed of in Church-Govern. 3.
part.. 39.) by the Determinations of Councils (if these observed to the
uttermost) so great as to some it seems; if they well consider how few, and
cautelous, and sparing their decisions are, in comparison of the voluminous
Theological questions agitated amongst Christians, even before the sitting of
such Councils. For how few, and how laxe, and general do we find the decisions
of the last Council of Trent, (not thought to be the most impartial) in
comparison of the many questions proposed in the Schools (and hotly agitated in
those times) about Grace and Free Will; Justification, Merit, [without mention
at all of such terms as de congruo, or de condigno,] about Purgatory,
Invocation of Saints, Transubstantiation, etc? not to name here the present
point of Infallibility. Therefore are those even accused by Protestants to
swarm with opposition and diversity of opinions; all whom they yet do grant to
yield a captived judgment and undisputing obedience to all the Canons of
Councils. But if, as when Councils define nothing in points controverted, we
argue their ignorance, and want of divine assistance to discern the truth; so,
when they define any thing, we complain of their tyranny in restraining our
judgments, How shall they please us? Our judgment has a field of matter, large
enough to exercise it self-in, without practicing and trying its skill upon the
determinations of Councils; and if it were yet more directed and regulated by
them, had no reason to complain, since those who have bin more prone by it, to
call all things into question, and to examine both the foundations and
superstructures of the received Christian faith, have showed us sad examples of
the most miserable failings thereof, and frequent falls from most evident
truths. Qui amat periculum, peribit in illo. But as here is objected the taking
away of our judgment, so consider whether something worse follows not on the
other side; namely, the taking away of all obedience to Superiors; not only in
submission of our judgment, but actions, which must follow the judgment. For,
as I said before, and have showed more fully elsewhere, that can be no
obedience or submission to them, when we yield to their judgments, because they
agree with ours; or because they have with clear arguments convinced ours: for
so we yield to a Counselor, a companion, and cannot do otherwise. As long as
this proposition stands firm, That General Councils have greater light and
evidence of truth, than particular men; how can it be less than duty to submit
to them, tho not altogether infallible? But since in the necessary and chief
points infallible, and these points no way perfectly distinguishable by us from
the rest, how much more reason yet have we? The same thing (as dictated by
common prudence) we see practiced in temporal courts; where, in controversies
arising, to know what is the law of the Kingdom, or the intent thereof, or what
is not, the people are referred to submit to the judgment of some others
experienced in those laws, tho not infallible; and sometimes contradicting one
another. Why should the children of this world be wiser than the children of
light?

But 3ly, you will reply to this, that in such a business, at least concerning
your eternal salvation, you dare not rely upon others,. 41.
nor trust any but your self; and that it is safest for you to depend on God's
word, and not on any human authority. R. I answer first, that the breach of
God's express command (such is that of your obedience in these things to your
Spiritual Superiors, see. 37.) can be no good way to secure your Salvation.
2ly. This is just as if, in a difficult passage, wherein (mistaking) you may
incur some danger of your life, (such are the Scriptures in several things, 2
Pet. 3. 16.) having Guides appointed well experienced in the way to direct you,
and of whom you are assured that they cannot misguide you into any dangerous
precipice, you should say; I do not think fit to make use of a Guide, save in a
way where there is no danger. But why so? because you are more faithful to your
self than others may be. But then so much reason as you have to trust to your
self as the most faithful, so little have you to trust to your self as not
being the most able, guide. As for your not depending on human authority, but
only on the word of God: you say something, if that word could never be
mistaken in the sense, nor alleged amiss. See Mr. Hooker's Answer to
Cartwright on this point Eccles. Pol. 2. l. 7. sect. The force of Arguments
drawn from Scripture etc. So that now and then they ground themselves on humane
authority, even when they most pretend divine. Even such as are readiest to
cite for one thing 500 sentences of H. Scripture, what warrant have they, that
any one of them does mean the thing for which alleged? etc.

But 4ly, here you will reply: That surely God's wisdom in matters concerning
Salvation has provided some way or other. 42.
whereby we may certainly know the truth. R. What truth mean we? If necessary:
so he has; in this General Councils err not. If all truths whatsoever: there
are many truths not only Natural, but Theological, for which all grant that
there is no infallible Judge to be had. If the truth of all those things which
shall be proposed by a General Council. Why so? Why may not God order them (in
their fallibility in such things) to use the same prudence for ending
troublesome and violent contests, that any other temporal Courts do? And since
in these, from God, as in the other, from the King, the people have an
injunction unlimited, in all things to hear them; why may not they punish the
rebellious?

5. But yet lastly, if such be fallible in any thing (you may say,). 43.
there will be some error, of which there can be no remedy; because they are
unappealable. R. Not so: For in such things as former Councils may err in, none
denies but that latter Councils may correct them. Only such will be errors
indeed that private men cannot remedy: and what matters all this, I pray, if
these errors be not committed in things necessary; as (it is showed before) they
never can be? Again, why are such Councils willingly granted by all to be
unappealable in other things wherein they may err, i. e. in matters of fact?
Nay, why, if some make them infallible in judging all truths, so may not some
others think it fit they should be so in all causes that come before them; all
which are afterward remediles? But also in those doctrinals, where, because no
Anathema's are affixed, Bellarmin says, Non est certum si sint de fide, (and
so neither is it certain whether the Church in them may not err); yet is not in
these submission of judgment required? For if we withdraw this, how if it
should happen that they are de fide? The same may be said in general: That if
the Church, being infallible only in things de fide, has made no clear
distinction of these points from the rest, it is plain she obliges us to the
same submission in points where she may be fallible.

3. This having bin said from. 39. to remove such scruples and demurs as we
ordinarily use to make for the not yiedling up and. 44. 3. From the testimony
of learned Protestants.
resigning in any thing of our own private judgment, 3ly. to show you, That the
duty of submission of judgment to an Authority fallible, in all things wherein
we are not certain that it errs is no Paradox, I will produce you therein the
consentient doctrine both of Catholic and Protestant writers, of no mean note.
1. For Protestants, see the quotations out of Bishop White, Archbishop Laud,
Dr. Jackson, in Church Government, 2. Part.. 36. Oblig. of Judgment,. 29. 30.
it is too tedious to repete them here. To which I will here add that eminent
testimony of Mr. Hooker, (in his Preface, the 6th. Sect. throughout,) who
writing against Puritans, there speaks much of submission of private opinion to
the determinations of Ecclesiastical Authority. The place is well worth your
reading, as likewise the 2. l. 7. sect. which Mr. Chillingworth produces as a
qualification of this passage in Hooker pressed by F. Knot. But I can see no
such matter in that Section, which proves against Cartwright the validity of
Humane Authority, where is no infallible demonstration against it; see
especially the latter end of that Section. To return to the former.

Mr. Hooker there quotes Deuteronomy. 17. 8. etc. where he has these words. God was
not ignorant that the Priests and Judges, whose: 45.
sentence in matters of controversy he ordained should stand, both might, and
oftentimes would, be deceived in their judgment. Howbeit better it was in the
eye of his understanding, that sometimes an erroneous sentence definitive
should prevail, till the same Authority perceiving such oversight might
afterward correct or reverse it; than that strifes should have respit to grow,
and not come speedily to some end. [And there he answers the Objection; That
men must do nothing against conscience, saying,] Neither wish we that men
should do any thing, which in their hearts they are persuaded they ought not to
do; but we say this persuasion ought to be fully settled in their hearts, that
in litigious and controverted causes of such quality, [that is (as I conceive)
where they have no infallible certainty, but only probability, see the end of
2. l. 7. sect.] the will of God is to have them to do whatsoever the sentence
of Judicial and final Decision shall determine. [Now they are to do nothing, but
what they are persuaded in their hearts that they may do, when the Judge in
some cases determines the lawfulnes of a thing, tho they may do many things
which they may think still that they are unjustly obliged by the Judge to do,
as when the Judge determines something to be their duty which is not:] yea tho
it seem in their private opinion [i. e. according to their own reason, and
arguments drawn ex part rei] to swerve utterly from that which is right: as no
doubt many times the sentence amongst the Jews did unto one or other part
contending: and yet, in this case God did then allow them to do that, which in
their private judgment it seemed, yea and perhaps truly seemed, that the law
did disallow. For if God be not the Author of confusion, but of peace etc.
[Where note; that whatever Mr. Hooker means by that limitation, [controverted
causes of such quality,] yet the Commission (Deuteronomy. 17.) extends to the Priests
interpreting to the people, and giving the sense of the law, in whatever
matters should be controverted; (as also it is more clearly expounded afterward
in 2 Chronicles. 19. 5, 8, 10, 11. where it runs, -- What causes soever shall come
to you of your Brethren, between blood and blood, between law and commandment,
statutes and judgments, ye shall etc.) And, Thou shall do or practice according
to whatever they show thee, requires not only a passive, willingly paying the
mulcts, or undergoing the punishments, but active, obedience. Again, an active
obedience; not only in doing of something to which I think I am not in duty
obliged, as paying 100l. to one, upon their sentence, to whom I never owed any
thing; which I may do without believing their sentence therein to be true or
just; but in doing also of something, where the lawfulnes of it is questioned,
which thing also here by the text I am to do, if they command me, as well as
the former: and yet which thing I may not do, unless I believe, either their
sentence therein to be true, and the thing in general lawful to be done, or at
least lawful for me, rebus sic stantibus, their sentence past, to do it; i. e.
unless I believe, that tho it be against God's law that they command me, (since
they may err), yet God excuses or holds me guiltles in doing it, in that he
has peremptorily obliged me to adhere to their sentence and judgment, not my
own. So that in any thing they once determine lawful, whatever my opinion was of
it before, yet now I am obliged to believe it lawful for me to do it, since I
am commanded by God to obey them in doing it, and may do nothing at any time
against my conscience, and whilst I hold such thing unlawful to be done by me.]
And again: -- Not that I judge it a thing allowable for men to observe those
laws, which in their hearts they are steadfastly persuaded to be against the law
of God; but your persuasion in this case [i. e. where Superiors have determined
otherwise] you are bound for the time [i. e. till the same Authority reverse
it] to suspend etc, unless they have an infallible demonstration. [And there he
shows, against pretense, (in every thing) of a Demonstration.] -- An Argument
necessary and demonstrative is such, as being proposed unto any man, and
understood, the mind [i. e. of him that hears it] cannot choose but inwardly
assent. Which trial of a demonstration Archbishop Laud also allows,. 32. n. 5.
It Is no demonstration then, as long as those think notwithstanding it, they have
cause to dissent, to whom I propose it.

But when you have read these things in Hooker, look on Mr.. 46.
Chillingworth's Answer, 5. cap. 109, 110. sect. etc. to me seeming very
unsatisfactory. First there Dr. Potter saying [it is not fit for any private
man to oppose his judgment to the public;] Mr. Chillingworth defends him thus:
Dr. Potter by judgment means not his reason or Scripture, as Mr. Knot imagines
the sense of it, (for these he may oppose to the public,) but his bare
authority. But search Dr. Potter, p. 105. and you will see he speaks both of
Reason and Scripture. Then coming to Mr. Hooker, Mr. Chillingworth expounds
what he says on Deuteronomy. 17. 8. not of yiedling assent to the judgment of the
Judge, or any active obedience (which presupposes assent); but of obedience of
suffering only the sentence of the Judge, and paying the mulcts he (tho
unjustly) lays upon them. But 1. did no other sentences pass in the Sanedrim
about the law, but concerning satisfactions and punishments? Did none of their
judgments command the doing of such a thing; the observing of such a fast; the
offering of such a Sacrifice; marrying or forbearing to marry such a woman?
wherein those (says Mr. Hooker) were to do as the Judge decided; those, who
thought, and perhaps truly, that the law disallowed it; that to the like
purpose he might urge the Puritans to wear a Surplice etc, after the
Ecclesiastical Magistrate had commanded it, tho it seemed to their private
opinion unlawful. For that he speaks of opinion, and active, not passive
obediedience, (which passive obedience the Puritans willingly granted, and was
out of controversy), it is plain; in that he says, that such a sentence once
passed was ground sufficient for any reasonable man's conscience to build the
duty of obedience upon, whatsoever his own opinion were, as touching the matter
before in question. And in the close of the Section he says; God, the Author
of peace, must needs be the Author of those men's peaceable resolutions, who
concerning these things [i. e. where is no infallible demonstration to the
contrary] have determined with themselves to do and think as the Church they
are of decrees, till they see necessary cause enforcing them to the contrary.
And this is plain also out of the places which he urges: that place in the 17.
Deuteronomy. and the injunction of the Council Act. 15. For Acts 15. speaks of active
obedience (abstaining from blood, etc.) which always supposes precedent
opinion of the lawfulnes thereof. And Deuteronomy. 17. runs thus: If there arise a
matter too hard for thee etc. Thou shall do according as they shall show thee:
Thou shall observe to do according to all that they shall inform thee;
according to the sentence of the law which they shall teach thee etc. And the
same is set down after the same manner 2 Chronicles. 19. 10. And what cause soever
shall come to you of your brethren between blood and blood; between law and
commandment; statutes and judgments; ye shall even warn them, that they
trespass not against the Lord etc. Certainly these places may not be restrained
only to the patient undergoing of the punishment sentenced by the Judge for the
non-observance of his decrees, or of that which he says is Law.

Another part of Mr. Chillingworth's Answer is, that Mr. Hooker. 47.
limits the matters, wherein they were to yield obedience, to the injunctions
of Authority; namely, to such matters, as have plain Scripture or Reason,
neither for, nor against them; and wherein men go only upon their own probable
collection: which I grant. But this plain Scripture and Reason (as Mr. Hooker
expresses it) is a really infallible argument or demonstration; and not such
pretended. For the Puritans also pretended they had most plain reason and
Scripture for the things wherein they were unconformable. Now if Mr. Hooker
here requires submission in all such points, where there is no infallible
argument to the contrary, (whether he intended it or no, etc); in very few or
no matters can such submission be denied, especially to a General Council:
neither do we find in Mr. Hooker's proof Deuteronomy. 17. 8. any restrictions of
obedience of submission only to certain points where they had not plain law or
reason to the contrary.

Now in the last place to consider his main answer to those words of Mr.
Hooker. [The will of God is to have them to do whatsoever the. 48.
sentence of judicial and final decision shall determine, yea tho it seem in
their private opinion to swerve utterly from that which is right.] Here
(answers Mr. Chillingworth) he says men are bound to do whatsoever etc. but
he says not they are bound to think that determination lawful, and that
sentence just, [giving an instance of a man cast wrongfully at law, and
sentenced to pay an 100l.] I answer, in some sentences or judgments this, which
Mr. Chillingworth says, is true: viz. where they enjoin me a thing to which I
think I am not obliged, which I may cedere meo jure, and do, tho I do not think
their determination right and just: and so it is in the instance he gives. But
in some other sentences it is false, viz. when they enjoin me an action, the
lawfulnes whereof is questioned. For since I may never do a thing believed
unlawful for me to do; therefore here I must either believe their determination
for my doing it just and right; or I must not do it. Now, as I said before,
this I may believe, either by believing the thing in it self lawful, which they
judge so; or at least, that it is lawful for me to do it rebus sic stantibus,
tho the thing in general prohibited or unlawful to be done without such
circumstances; because God has peremptorily obliged me to obey their sentence,
tho in some things errable. As may be showed in many instances which were
decidable by such Judges. For example; a controversy arises between a bounden
servant and his master, whether he is to obey his Masters command in watering
his cattle on the Sabbath day? The Servant arguing from Exodus 20. 10. In it
thou shall not do any work, etc, that it is by God prohibited. Here, upon the
Judges sentence, well weighing this text with other Scriptures, I say, the
Servant is bound by them to water his Master's cattle, and therefore bound to
think it lawful to do so; none being obliged to do what he thinks unlawful to
do; for Conscientia erronea obligat. The same it is, if any one upon Levit. 18.
16. refusing to marry the wife of his brother deceased without issue, making
some false gloss upon Deuteronomy. 25. 5. should receive a command from these Judges
to marry her. My last instance shall be in the very matter whereof Mr. Hooker
discourses; tho Mr. Chillingworth avoided it. The Church of England passes a
sentence in the supreme Ecclesiastical court, That every Minister in
celebrating Divine Service shall wear a Surplice. Here I say a Puritan may not
do what the judicial sentence has determined etc, by no means, unless he first
think or believe the determination of the Council lawful, i. e. That his doing
this (namely wearing the Surplice) is not against the law of God. The reason
is, because here they enjoin him the doing of that, of which the question is,
whether to do it be lawful. But had they enjoined him to pay a mulct for not
wearing a Surplice, then the question is not, whether he may lawfully pay this
mulct; for unusquisque potest cedere de suo jure, and he who does this thing,
is supposed to be satisfied in this point, that he may cedere suo jure; but
only whether that court had a just and legal cause, for which they enjoined
this mulct; which, as to the point of lawful, concerns them, but not him at
all. But had the law said, or did such a one mulcted doubt whether the law had
said, no man shall submit to any mulct or punishment, which he thinks the Judge
unjustly sentenceth him to; then must he not pay the mulct till he thought the
determination lawful. A sentence therefore may be conceived unjust two ways: 1.
Either in enjoining men to do a thing, which the law (as they conceive) has
prohibited to be done: such a thing may never be done, as long as the sentence
is thought unjust. i. e. Enjoining them to do what the law prohibits to be
done. Or 2ly, in enjoining men to do what the law has prohibited the Judge in
such a case to enjoin; but not the others in any case to do: tho to do such a
thing in such a point ought not to have bin imposed. Here the judged doubtless
may obey the sentence, whilst he thinks it unjust. To make things plain, I fear
I am too tedious. See more of this matter in Success. Clergy.

Mr. Chillingworth goes on to show an impossibility, that such a. 49.
yiedling to judgment against our private opinion can be. His words are; If you
will draw Mr. Hooker's words to such a construction, as if he had said, [they
must think the sentence of a judicial and final decision just and right, tho it
seem in their private opinion to swerve utterly from what is right]: it is
manifest you make him contradict himself, and make him say in effect; They must
think thus, tho at the same time they think the contrary. Thus far he. To this
I have spoken more fully in the following Discourse. 2. To make Contradictories,
the terms in both Propositions must be taken exactly in the same sense; else
they will be only verbally so. As, I will show you this to be, after I have
first premised this, That taking thinking in the latter Proposition for
infallibile certainty, (but it is clear Mr. Hooker means no such thing), the
words imply a true contradiction: for he, who says he believes, for any
authority whatsoever, humane or (per impossible) divine, contrary to what he
is infallibly certain of, says he believes what he believes not; or what he
cannot believe. So that where there is infallible certainty, it voids all
argument from Authority: neither can any one say, I do or will submit my
judgment to such or such, in a point, whereof he is sure. But let thinking
therefore or private opinion be taken in any degeee below absolute certainty,
and then I think that expression, had it bin Mr. Hooker's, (as it is, tho not
totidem terminis) is far from contradiction. To show which, give me leave to
change this word think in the latter proposition into some other words, which
yet are plainly what Mr. Hooker means by thinking; and you shall see they will
be very well consistent. I think or believe, from the argument of the
authority, prudence, etc, of such persons, their determination of such a point
to be right, tho all the arguments I have from seeming reason of the thing, or
from that sense which I conceive of Scripture, incline me to think that such a
determination is not right. Now I suppose (as the terms are here explained)
none will deny; That one may think or believe a thing to be truth, not against
his belief or thinking, but against all arguments which are drawn from his
seeming natural reason or otherwise (except that ab authoritate); if these do
not amount to infallible certainty: or, that a man may yield an assent of
belief in respect of authority, contrary to his assent of evidence in respect
of the thing; so that evidence be in any degree below infallible certainty. Else
we must deny, that we can believe any mystery of faith, which seems to us
contrary to natural reason, (see Romans 4. 17, 18. 2 Cor. 10. 5.); and these two
propositions will contradict also, I believe or think such a thing a divine
truth from divine authority delivering it, tho my natural reason inclines me to
think or believe the contrary. Does a man speak a contradiction, if he say to a
Scholar or a child, Do not believe or give credit to your own reason, (meaning
by it the reasons or arguments his brain suggests to him about such a matter,)
but to the judgment or directions of your father or master? for your reason
(that is considering another argument of the prudence and experience of his
father or master etc, or of the command which God has given him to obey them)
teaches you, that you, (subject) or you (unskilled) should yield to their
judgment. Thus may not one truly say: For this reason I think such a thing is
so; but for such a reason again, I think it is not so? Else how come any to
doubt? Now when one sort of these reasons is a natura rei, such as his own
brain suggests to him, and the other ab authoritate; and this ab authoritate
sways, and is the more powerful with him; then may he be said to side with
authority against his private opinion or judgment. But then here by private
opinion or judgment is meant, not simply that which is so, (i. e.) as he now
assents to authority, (for two contrary judgments or opinions swaying him none
can have): but that which (abstracting from authority etc) from other reasons
his opinion or judgment would be professed to be, should any one demand it. But
indeed whilst against such reasons he yields to authority, (and yield he may,
wherever such reasons are conjectural or less than certain) his private
judgment simply considered is the same with the public judgment of that
authority: and such a one (suppose a Catholic, that is persuaded that he ought
to assent to all the Church shall decree) should he notwithstanding against
this follow his own private reason or reasons, (which may be many times
contrary to such decree, as also they are sometimes to divine mysteries) may
rightly be said, in this doing, to go against his judgment or conscience. But
if a man cannot submit his judgment against his private opinion; then cannot a
Council justly oblige any to believe any thing, tho never so necessary and
clear a point; unless they know first, that his private reason is not against
it: for they may not oblige him to impossibilities. But how often is this done
by them, even the four first (generally allowed), and that under Anathema? And
St. Austin also writ a Treatise, De Utilitate Credendi, (he means of believing
the Authority of that Church, which was found first to be the Church
Catholic), from seeing the great benefit that came by this captivating our
reason to authority; by which act of believing he observed (Epist. 48.) men not
unfrequently came at length to be assured also by true reason of those things,
which first they believed only from authority. Quamdiu intelligere sincera non
possumus, authoritate quidem decipi miserum est; sed certe miserius non moveri.
Si enim Dei Providentia non praesidet rebus humanis, nihil est de religione
satagendum. Sin vero etc. non est desperandum ab eodem ipso Deo authoritatem
aliquam constitutam, qua (velut gradu incerto) innitentes attollamur in Deum.
Haec autem [authoritas] seposita ratione, quam sinceram intelligere, ut saepe
diximus, difficillimum stultis est, dupliciter nos movet, partim miraculis,
partim sequentium multitudine. De Util. Cred. 16. c. This he writ to a
Manichean; endeavoring to persuade him, in religione turpe non esse credere,
antequam scire. Thus much of the possibility of thinking or believing a
judicial determination right, when it seems in our private opinion (as
explained above) not so. But note here, that I do not extend our yiedling
assent to authority against private reasons (in all matters whenever this
assent is given) to a necessary belief in all such things, that what they say
is absolutely just, and right; but this our assent is capable of less degrees;
as a belief, that what they say is more likely or probable to be so; or also,
that it is more safe for me to err with them, as long as I am not, by any
private reason, infallibly certain that they err, but have reason to think they
do not err; than to oppose their authority perhaps with the retaining of a
truth, but to me uncertain.

Thus much of Mr. Hooker's testimony, and the justification. 50.
thereof against Mr. Chillingworth's exposition. See also Dr. Potter, speaking
the same thing much-what with Mr. Hooker, sect. 4. p. 105. where, after he has
said, It is not lawful for a private man to oppose his judgment to the public,
he adds, He may offer his contrary opinion to be considered of etc. but if he
will factiously advance his own conceits, [conceits, I suppose he means that
which seems reason, and the sense of Scripture to him, yet of which he is not
infallibly certain. Advance, i. e. against the contrary determinations of the
Church,] and despise the Church so far as to cast off her communion; he may be
justly condemned for a Schismatic, [for casting off her communion,] yea and an
Heretic also [i. e. for advancing his own conceits] in some degree, and in foro
exteriori; tho his opinion were true, and much more if it be false. Heretic in
some degree, and in foro exteriori: Sure Dr. Potter says, he is this, because
he allows him some-way faulty in factiously advancing his own conceits against
the Church; and then I ask, why is he not an heretic, or (if that name may not
be so used) guilty of an equal crime in foro interiori too? For what great
difference is there between him, that, having no sufficient reason for it,
obstinately defends against the Church'es determination that which happens (but
is not to him certainly known, or by him proved) to be a truth; and him that
obstinately defends an error? Those reasons which such a one has, but short of
certainty, I grant, afford him some, but not a sufficient, excuse of his
opposition.

This for Protestants. Next for Catholics, that they also allow a submission
of judgment to an Authority fallible. See what Bellarmin, who holds that
particular Councils are fallible, yet says. 51. 4. From the testimony of
learned Catholics.
concerning submission of judgment to these errable. (de Council. 2. l. 10. c.)
Etsi hoc judicium non sit prorsus infallibile, tamen sufficit ad
excommunicandum. And -- tamen debent privati homines acquiescere ejusmodi
judicio; and si secus egerint, merito excommunicantur, donec non judicaverit
aliter Apostolica Seeds, vel Concilium Universale. Therefore if these have
formerly decreed nothing contrary, we are to submit to it, until they shall.
Again. There is no reason of non-acquiescing to such a sentence, but only the
contrary judgment of a superior Court; therefore if the Court be supreme, there
is no reason at all. Again, Quod Concilium particulare facit argumentum adeo
probabile, ut temerarium sit ei non acquiescere, planum est: (and before he
says* ex communi sententia Catholicorum asserimus,) quia si aliquot sancti
Patres casu in eandem sententiam convenientes faciunt argumentum probabile;
quanto magis 50 aut 60 Episcopi simul convenientes, and invocato Spiritu Sancto
aliquid communi consensu statuentes? -- Faciunt argumentum probabile, therefore
by acquiescence here, is not meant only a passive submission to their censure;
nor yet that of silence only, and non-contradiction; which in any things of
practice suffices not: for unles one do what they command, he cannot be said
to acquiesce in their sentence; neither may any exteriorly act that, to the
lawfulnes whereof he does not inwardly assent.

See Dr. Holden, who holding, that in some doctrines of less moment a general
Council may possibly err, yet exacts obedience. 52.
notwithstanding to those Decrees we think such, de resol. fid. 1. l. 9. c.
Veruntamen quando a Conciliis Generalibus ad evitandum schisma and pacem in
Ecclesia conservandam definitae fuerint hujusce naturae and conditionis
veritates (he speaks of those in which there is not certitudo ab omni erroris
periculo immunis) eorum decretis obediendum esse novit unusquisque Ecclesiae
Catholicae vere Filius. He goes on. Quaeret hic forsitan aliquis curiosius, an
liceat hujusmodi decreta interno saltem mentis actu in dubium revocare? Cui
respondeo. Quod imprudentis and superbientis animi indicium esset haec
dubitatio, aut saltem hujusce dubitationis publica significatio. Ad quid enim
valet supremi tribunalis judicium etc. si cuilibet subdito aeque liberum foret
post ultimum denunciatum litis judicium ac antea, oppositum censere and public
praedicare? An discipulus supra magistrum? nonne unicuique in sua art
credendum? etc. See the like in S. Clara's Systema Fid. 20. c. And thus Mr.
Cressy, c. 33. Such Decisions many Catholics conceive, are not in so eminent a
manner the necessary objects of Christian faith, because not delivered as of
Universal tradition. But however an extreme temerity it would be in any
particular man to make any doubt of the truth of them, and unpardonable
disobedience to reject them; now in matters of practice, not to obey in doing
them, is to reject them. If in such decisions an error should happen, since it
etc, it were far better such an error should pass, till (as St. Austin says)
some later Council amended it, than that unity should be dissolved for an
unnecessary truth. Lastly, it is commonly said, that in a point controverted, and
not yet determined by any Council, a man's private judgment ought to be swayed
by the stream or major part of Catholic writers; yet are not these fallible?
The same thing is ordinarily said of submitting our judgment to the Fathers in
all things, wherein we find the most of them to agree: yet are not they liable
to error? But those of the Church of Rome, that submit their judgment to a
General Council, and cannot prove it to be infallible, (as doubtless some of
the simpler sort cannot), do not so many submit to a Council, for any thing
they know, fallible? and yet they should offend, if do otherwise. For such
submissions not the pretense of infallibility, but the dictates of common
Prudence are used and thought suffici-

Thus much of the Duty of obedience to all the decrees of General Councils, tho
these Councils be some way fallible; wherein I. 53.
have spoken of the obligation and rationalness of assent to their doctrines,
in case of our uncertainty of the contrary to be truths. But remember, that
here I do not undertake to determine whether the Church (thinking it fit perhaps
to leave to her subjects, in points of less consequence, and such as are
speculative, more liberty of enjoying their own judgment, so that only they
disturb not her peace, nor make faction) has only in some points of evident
and universal tradition, and more necessary consequence and practice, required
the submission of judgment, and profession of assent and belief, etc, under the
peril of Anathema, * where perhaps she expresses her self in such terms as
these: Si quis non confitetur; -- non profitetur; -- constanter tenendum; --
firma fide credendum; -- nemo salva fide dubitare debet, etc: And again,
whether in many other points of less necessity, and not so common tradition,
(tho perhaps certain deduction from those which are so) she has, for only the
preserving of her peace, required the obedience and submission only of
Non-contradiction and silence, or Non-profession of the contrary, under
Anathema likewise; * where she expresses her self, Si quis dixerit, (the most
usual form in her Anathema's), without any firmiter tenendum affixed to the
contrary truth. I meddle not to decide, whether in the prohibition of the
affirming an error, the Church'es intention does not always involve the
profession of the contrary truth* or, whether all her Anathema's are not set
only to points necessary to be believed; but some to points fit not to be
contradicted: some Anathema's for consent; some for peace and silence. Again, I
attempt not to resolve here, whether under the former of these (the requiring
of assent) she means an internal plenary act of faith, which perhaps is not in
every man's power at all times, (faith having a great latitude of strength or
weakness according to the repugnancies of some verisimilities of the contrary,
running in a man's mind not fully settled and convinced, and many times some
mixture of unbelief, Lord I believe, help thou mine unbelief); or else, whether
she means only a submissive endeavor and willingness to believe and assent to
her propositions. In these things I can determine nothing: neither, if I have
before argued that we may rationally yield in such points more than the least
of these submissions, therefore will I deny that the Church may, or does
require only the less; as I cannot on the other side affirm, that she has not
required the more. But surely no more duty needs be paid to avoid her
Anathema's, than she charge us with, tho she claim not all her due: nor is
more (if so much) necessary to salvation to be believed, than she exacteth of
us to be believed.

To conclude this discourse. 1. Infallibility of the Church in all necessaries
[be they clear revelations, and points traditional, or consequential;. 54.
Conclusion.
consequential clearly or not clearly deducted from the former; provided, that
they be necessary to attain salvation for to be known, or believed, or
practiced by all Christians] is not denied: being had either by evidence of
Tradition or assistance of the Spirit from the promise of our Savior; who
fails not to guide the Church in all such truths for ever, that she may in
these also for ever securely guide others.

2ly likewise, at least for the most of these truths, namely such as. 55.
are of universal tradition, or natural and immediate consequences thereof, not
only certitudo objecti, but subjecti is granted: not only that de facto the
Church cannot err in them, but that she knows she does not err in them. For it
follows not, that if the Church may err in something, and not know that she
errs, therefore she cannot know or be sure but that she errs in every thing;
unles first it be showed that she knows all things from an equal evidence.

But 3ly, these two not hindering, infallibility general in all things which the
Church shall propose or decide, (unles it can be proved. 56.
that all hitherto passed in the General Councils is only necessaries; or that
she can determine nothing unnecessary to salvation) I see not that it is, nor
any need that it should be, affirmed; neither from our Savior's promise,
(which we have no reason to extend beyond necessaries,) neither from the force
of those reasons which are well urged by some to prove General Councils
infallible in necessaries, but are faulty if any will apply them to an
infallibility General.

The chief of which reasons I think are these. The 1. A Generali Concilio
appellari non potest, [which is granted,] unde apertissime. 57.
sequitur non errare. Nam alioquin iniquissimum esset cogere Christianos, ut
non appellent ab eo judicio quod erroneum esse potuit. R. The argument is good
for points de fide necessaria, but no further: for by this reason the same
Councils could not err in judging particular causes and matters of fact; for
from a General Council in these also is no appeal, unless in infinitum, to the
same court. Again, some points there are in Non-necessaries wherein General
Councils are granted liable to error, by those Authors who urge this argument
for infallibility; as is showed before. 9. But yet there can no appeal be made
from them, and peremptory obedience is required to be yielded to them in these.
Lastly, supposing that no court were infallible, yet unappealable some must be,
that contests and strifes may have an end. As also it is no less in temporal
courts for temporal causes, tho these courts fallible. Therefore from
unappealablenes does not follow infalliblenes.

2. The Second: Haeretici sunt, and excommunicandi omnes, qui non acquiescunt
Conciliis plenariis: -- and haec Concilia dicunt Anathema contradicentibus:. 58.
but Anathema's and Excommunications for contrary opinions proceed only from
the Council's infallibility. R. Not always from infallibility; for such things
are done by Councils less than General, (and therefore fallible,) and lawfully
(see Bell. 2. l. 10. c.) done by plenary Councils in cases wherein fallible.
Anathema's always (where lawfully used) argue, in some authority, in others a
duty of submission to it; and are lawfully used, for any thing I know, by
particular, as well as general, Councils; and against the Schismatical, for
smaller matters or opinions disturbing the peace of the Church after dubious
things determined, as well as against the Heretical for necessary and certain
points of faith denied. As for applying the word Heretic to those who oppose
things established in General Councils, it is granted that such Council is
infallible in all fundamental, or absolutely necessary truths. If therefore it
be affirmed, that it never defines any points, but such; it is granted to be
infallible in whatever it defines: and this proof thereof, taken from the
opposers thereof their being called Heretics, may be spared. But if we
suppose, that a General Council may define or determine some points which are
not such; then the word Heretic must be a little better examined, before any
thing for infallibility of Councils can be proved from it. For either he is
said to be an Heretic, who knowingly opposes any definition whatever of a
Council proposed under Anathema etc. tho it be not in a fundamental or
necessary point of faith: but if thus, then we cannot argue the Council
infallible in every thing; because he that opposes her in any thing is
accounted an Heretic. Or he is an heretic only, who opposes such a Council,
not in any, but such definitions, as are made in matters of necessary faith:
But if thus, then we must know Conciliary Definitions exactly, which are such,
which are not, before we can know whether the opposer thereof be an heretic;
neither can we prove the Council Universally infallible, because he who
opposes it thus in some points, is heretical.

3. The 3d. If the Church be not infallible in all that she proposes, none
could have any certainty of his faith; which faith he must. 59.
receive and learn from the Church. R. Yes, he that believes the Church in all
she says, will still have a certainty, (I mean, for the certitudo objecti),
and will be free from error in all necessary faith, which is sufficient, if the
Church be in the proposal of all necessary points of faith infallible; which is
affirmed. But as for certitudo subjecti, i. e. his being certain that in all
such points he is free from error, (which concerns not this place), I refer you
to those fuller Notes about it, Concerning the necessary ground of Saving Faith.

4. But fourthly, tho Universal infallibility etc may perhaps not be made good
by these, or any other reasons: yet I think, by what. 60.
I have said, it appears, That none may from this not proved, or his proving
the contrary, think himself discharged of his obedience, which is due upon
other grounds sufficient without this; namely, 1. * upon her Supremacy, and
unappealablenes, (whom Christ has commanded him to hear and repair to as his
guide and governor, under pain of being treated, as a Heathen and Publican was
amongst the Jews;) and 2. * upon her Infallibility in all necessaries, by which
there is no danger to him for any error or mispractice, wherein she may mislead
him; neither will God for such error call him to account; but let him certainly
expect this, if deserting his guide he does mislead himself: and 3. * besides
these, upon the dictate of common and natural prudence, according to which none
may justly withdraw his belief and submission of judgment, to those of the
greatest skill and integrity in the things, wherein he wants instruction,
merely upon this pretense, that every man may possibly err, or lie to him.
Suppose he thinks that he is infallibly certain in some thing, that that which
she teaches him is false; yet thus will his obedience be still obliged, and
kept entire for most points, as with which at least he may not dispense for any
lesser scruples and doubtings, but apparent counter-demonstrations: but perhaps
for all points, if he please to examine his own knowledge, (who goes upon no
evidence which the Church also has not), and be not willing to mistake seeming
for true certainty; from which commonly the most ignorant are appearingly most
certain. Again, suppose he discover General Councils to contradict in any
point, (which yet if it be, must needs be, in a point not necessary), yet may
he not therefore totally withdraw his obedience, save only to those things
wherein they contradict; nor perhaps in these neither: for (according to St.
Austin's rule) of Councils differing the last obliges him, by which the former
may be amended; amended, therefore also contradicted. But then in things,
wherein he finds all or many of them, unanimously agreeing; or, being
established by some, not contradicted or amended by any other succeeding; but
by the General practice of particular Churches conformed to: these he may
presume to be truths, from their accord; as the other falsities, from their
variance; and therefore by no means may plead a release from the one, by
showing the other.

FINIS.
CONCERNING The OBLIGATION of not professing or acting against our JUDGMENT, or
CONSCIENCE.

AND Whether the obedience of Non-contradiction only, or also of Assent, be due
to the Decrees OF COUNCILS.

CONTENTS.
IN what sense it may be lawful to believe, or do, a thing against our own
Judgment.. 2. Concerning the Church'es lawful Authority to excommunicate
dissenters in non-fundamentals.. 4. As likewise to decide, which Points are
fundamental, which not.. 7. Several exceptions against obedience only of
non-contradiction for Non-fundamentals. And that at least all those, not
infallibly certain of the contrary, are bound, in Non-fundamentals, to an
obedience of Assent; and therefore the most are so bound.. 11. Replies to
several Objections.. 12. The 1. First concerning an inferior Councils decreeing
some new dangerous error, which no former Council superior has condemned. 2d.
Concerning faith salvisical, that it must be infallible. 3d. Concerning union
of Charity, sufficient.. 14. 4th. Concerning trying of doctrines, necessary..
15. 5th. Concerning what Church'es determinations, when several contradict one
another, we are to adhere to.. 16.
A Postscript. 2d Paper.
Concerning infallible Certainty.. 19. 1. Infallible Certainty excusing all
submission of judgment to others. 2. Infallible Certainty to be had in some
points. Of the difficulty of knowing when one is infallibly certain. 3.
Infallible Certainty at least not pretendable against any General contrary
judgment of the Church. An instance in the Controversy about giving the
Communion in one kind only.. 27. 4. The greatest probability, short of
infallible Certainty, not excusing our dissenting from the judgment of the
Church. An explication of Romans 14. 23.
Conference at Hampton Court, p. 72, 73. Mr. Knewstub's 2d. quest. -- Lastly if
the Church have that power also, (i. e. to ad significant Signs; as the Cross
in Baptism, etc.) yet the greatest scruple to their conscience was; How far
such an ordinance of the Church was to bind them, without impeaching their
Christian liberty. -- [The King in his Answer has these words.] I will have
one doctrine, and one discipline; one Religion, in substance, and in ceremony;
and therefore I charge you, never to speak more to that point, (How far you are
bound to obey?) when the Church has ordained it.

A LETTER concerning the obligation of not professing or acting against our
Judgment or Conscience.
SIR;
YOU ask my Opinion; 1. Whether we are bound to the obedience only of
Non-contradiction, or also of assent, to the Decrees. 1.
of acknowledged lawful General Councils in Non-fundamentals; wherein such
Councils are supposed by you errable, (supposing that such Councils require our
assent therein)? And 2ly, Whether one is, or can be, bound to assent, when
these their Decrees are contrary to his own private judgment? and Whether one
may go against his conscience in any thing?

Answ. I answer, (on which subject I desire you also to peruse what is said in
the Discourse of Infallibility..) That, if you take. 2. n. 1. In what sense it
may be lawful to believe, or do, a thing against our own judgment.
judgment here for infallible certainty, (which see more largely explained
below. 19. etc.) I can soon resolve it negatively; That you are not, nor cannot
be, so bound. (Of which see more below. 20.) But if you mean, by your private
judgment, opinion short of infallibility, (i. e.) some reasons that you have
(either drawn from the natures of things, on from the sense you make of divine
revelation) to think that a thing is thus, or so, contrary to that general
judgment; 1. First, this question seems * decided on the affirmative part, viz.
that you may go against your private judgment, in men's ordinary practice. In
secular affairs, do not we commonly, upon receiving the advice of an
experienced friend, both, believe him to be in the right; and do a thing
contrary to our own judgment, i. e. contrary to those reasons, which our selves
have, not to do it? Is not Abraham said to believe a thing seeming contrary to
his own reason? Romans 4. 17, 18. And so the man in the Gospel, Mar. 9. 24? Yet I
know you will not say, that they went in this against their conscience. What is
the meaning of that ordinary saying, [These and these reasons I have for my
opinion, but I submit to the Church?] Is it only, I submit my judgment in
regard of the publishing of it? [So Dr. Fern comments upon it, 2. Treat. 1. c.
numb. 1^.] But thus the phrase seems very improper; for this is a submission of
our speech or silence, but not of our judgment at all; and is a submission
which may well be professed also in things, wherein our judgment is utterly
unchangeable; namely in things, whereof we are infallibly certain.

2. Again, * decided by the concessions of several Protestants,. 2. n. 2.
which seem to yield the very same thing. See Dr. Fern, ib. n. 13. where he
allows; that in matters of opinion and credibility, or of discipline and
rites, till we have sufficient evidence or demonstration of truth to the
contrary, our conformity [i. e. of judgment, which he expresses afterward by
submitting our belief and our practice] remains secure. Secure, (says he) till
we have sufficient evidence, etc. But sufficient evidence we have not, in
opposition to the Church, in things where possibly we may be mistaken; and we
may be mistaken in any thing, whereof we are not certain; ergo sufficient
evidence in such cases is only certainty. Likewise Dr. Hammond, Reply to Cath.
Gentl. 2. c. 3. s. 18. n. when the person is not competent to search grounds [I
add, or not so competent as those, to whose definition he is required to submit
his assent] allows a bare yiedling to the judgment of Superiors, and a
deeming it better to adhere to them, than to attribute any thing to his own
judgment; a believing so far as not to disbelieve [them]. Which [he saith] may
rationally be yielded to a Church, or the governors of it, without deeming them
inerrable. -- And in Schism. 2. c. 10. s. he says; A meek Son of the Church of
Christ will certainly be content to sacrifice a great deal for the making of
this purchase, [i. e. of enjoying the communion of the Church]: and when the
fundamentals of the faith, and superstructures of Christian practice are not
concerned in the concessions, he will cheerfully express his readiness to
submit or deposit his own judgment in reverence and deference to his Superiors
in the Church, where his lot is fallen. Where surely this submitting, and
depositing our own judgment, implies something more than the concealment of it
only; since the concealment of our judgment, being the least degree of
obedience we can give to our Superiors, will be due to them in some of those
definitions made by them in fundamentals of faith and Christian practice; which
points he excepts here from submittance or deposition of our judgment. See
likewise (which especially I recommend to your reading) what Mr. Hooker, as
writing not against Catholics but Puritans, copiously says in behalf of
submission of judgment to the Church, even when thwarting our private opinion;
in his Preface, 6.. and in 2. l. 7.. near the end, (which you may find more
fully set down, and Mr. Chillingworth's Comment upon it in Answ. to Mr. Knot,
who pressed him with it, discussed, in the discourse of Infallibility,. 45, 46.
etc.) In the Preface, speaking upon Deuteronomy. 17. 8. etc, he has these words: God
was not ignorant, that the Priests and Judges, whose sentence, in matters of
controvesie, he ordained, should stand, both might and oftentimes would be
deceived in their judgment. Howbeit better it was in the eye of his
understanding, that sometimes an erroneous sentence definitive should prevail,
till the same authority perceiving such oversight might afterward correct and
reverse it, than that strifes should have respit to grow, and not come speedily
unto some end. [And there he answers that Objection, That men must do nothing
against conscience: saying;] Neither wish we, that men should do any thing,
which in their hearts they are persuaded they ought not to do: but we say; this
persuasion ought to be fully settled in their hearts, that in litigious and
controverted causes of such quality, the will of God is, to have them to do
whatsoever the sentence of judicial and final Decision shall determine; yea tho
it seem in their private opinion to swerve utterly from that which is right:
as, no doubt, many times the sentence among the Jews did, unto one or other
part contending: and yet in this case God did then allow them to do that, which
in their private judgment it seemed, yea and perhaps truly seemed, that the law
did disallow. Thus judicious Hooker. And see what Dr. Jackson says to the same
purpose below. 29, 30. Thus the reformed seem to allow in some things a
submission of private judgment to the Church; a submission not only of
concealing it, but of renouncing and deserting it, in believing and harkening
to the Church rather than to it.

Now the Church does never exact, that you should profess or subscribe, * that
your own reason or private judgment, caused. 2. n. 3.
from some evidence in the thing, suggests or assures to you such a thing to be
truth; but, * that you believe her in such a thing more than your own reasons
to the contrary: or, * that you confess her judgment better than your own; and
so, are content to be swayed by it in such a thing. For, if you heartily
believe, that the Church'es judgment is likely to be better than yours; or,
that she is authorized by her judgment to guide yours; it necessarily follows,
that, in obeying her, you do according to your judgment one way; tho contrary
to it, in another way. For, your final judgment upon the points is this; that
tho you see reasons, ex part rei, most or all contrary to what she defines;
yet, that her judgment is better than yours, or ought to guide yours; and upon
this, you, against your own judgment or reasons, assent unto hers. [Note here,
that by the Church'es judgment, I mean the ultimatest judgment, and the highest
court thereof that we can have. So that when your Pastor teaches any thing
which is contrary to your private judgment, you are not obliged to assent to
him, if another Ecclesiastical judgment superior be contrary to his. For the
decision of the Superior (to whom in any doubting you may repair) voids that of
an inferior unto you, and so voids also his Excommunications, and
Ecclesiastical censures; and if the superior (man or Council) tell you one
thing, and the inferior another, you are to hear the Church in the superior,
not in the inferior.] Neither can that of the Apostle Romans 14. 23. Whatsoever
is not of faith is sin, (which text see further explained below. 31.) be
applied to any, for so doing: because who so does thus submit, does this out of
faith; namely this faith, that the Church is wiser than he; or that he is
obliged to obey her expositions of Scripture, directions, counsels, etc, when
contrary to his own. It is not only possible then, but usual, for one to
believe a thing against his own reason, or judgment, or conscience, (if you
will take these in such a sense,) i. e. against the reasons drawn a part rei,
which he has for disbelieving it; but it is not possible for one to believe a
thing against his reason, or judgment, or conscience, in general; or against
some other reason taken ab authoritate, which he has still for believing it.
For certainly, * when a fool believes a wise man against some conceit he had of
his own; or, * when Roman Catholics consent to the Church, in something
doubtless wherein some of them may see reasons for the contrary, and no reason
perhaps for it, save that ab authoritate, viz. the Church'es determination and
command; or, * when an Israelite submitted to holding or doing a thing which
the Judges decided. (Deuteronomy. 17. 11, 12.); none of these may be said to do thus
without, or against, reason, because perhaps their private judgment is not
convinced in the thing: for they have that reason still, for going against
their other reason, that the others, whom they follow, are wiser than they: or
also a 2d. reason, that the others are by God appointed to guide their judgment
and opinion in such things; and that they are commanded by God to consent to
what ever those shall decide.

3ly. This thing seems decided by the allowed practice of the Church in
excommunicating, at least for such matters as she esteems. 4. 11. 2.
necessary and fundamental, those who dissent from her judgment. For, if in any
thing at all, if at least in fundamentals (in which some say she cannot err)
the Church may excommunicate dissenters: hence it follows, both that it is
possible, and that a man ought, in some things, to consent to the Church even
against his own judgment; unless we will affirm, that no man in such points (as
suppose in fundamentals) can possibly have another judgment than hers. But so
there would never have bin any man erroneous or heretical in a point
fundamental. I say, ought to consent. For, if God has given power to the
Church (I mean the highest court thereof) of punishing by excommunication all
those who do not consent to some decision which she makes; then all ought to
consent to such decision, whether it be right or wrong to his seeming arguments
or reasons, whose consent is required; for every one ought to do that, for the
not doing of which God appoints him to be punished: besides, that he, who
consents not to the Church'es judgment, refuses it only to consent to another
judgment much more fallible, i. e. his own.

Now, that God has granted such a power to the Church, of excommunicating
dissenters to some of her decisions at least, is. 3.
acknowledged by the Reformed, * who allow the Church'es practice of it in her
first 4. General Councils, concerning the additions in the Nicene and other
Creeds; * who allow the Church'es practice in commanding something to be done,
or forborne, by her subjects under the penalty of Excommunication: but wherever
the Church enjoins any thing to be done, she inclusively enjoins assent, or
belief, that such a thing is lawful to be done. Lastly, * who practice such
excommunication themselves, not only toward men for contradicting, or for
declaring their dissent, but for dissenting from, their decrees. 1. As appears
in the closes of the 3. 4. and 5. Canons etc of the English reformed Synod held
under K. James 1603. where (Can. 5.) Whosoever does affirm any of the 39.
Articles to be in any part erroneous, stands excommunicated [not till he
recants his public contradicting the Church'es doctrines, but] till he repents
of, and publicly revokes such his wicked errors: and as appears in all those
Canons, wherein that Synod enjoins any Agends upon pain of Excommunication;
which injunctions of Practicals (as I said before) involve also an injunction
of Assent first, that such practicals are lawful, See Can. 9. 12. 59. of that
Synod. 2ly. As appears in the English Synod under K. Charles 1640. * where, in
the 3. 4. and 5. Canons, any accused of Popery, Socinianism, Anabaptism, are to
be excommunicated, till they abjure such errors; and that is, till they assent
to the contradictory of those errors; and that is, till they assent to the
doctrine of the Church of England, where it is contradictory to those errors:
and * where Can. 6. There is required an approbation and sincere acknowledgment
(which is no less than assent) to the doctrine and discipline of the Church of
England, as containing all things necessary to salvation; and this confession
required upon oath. See this matter discoursed more at large in
Church Government, 3. part.. 29. And hence a sober man may discern, how that
without submission of judgment in some things, none, that are learned, and much
studied in Theological controversies, can enjoy the external communion of any
Church. For since (for example) the English Church excommunicates all that
shall say, that any of her Articles or Canons is erroneous or repugnant to
Scripture, (see for this her 4. and 5. Can. set down before, 2d. part of
Church Government) until they shall publicly revoke, not such their saying,
but such their error; and since the Romans Church is said to require belief of so
many Decrees of the Tridentine, and other former Councils; if any one Canon or
Article, tho of never so little moment, of the Church of England, or Canon of
those other Councils allowed by the Church of Rome, whereto assent is required,
does appear mistaken to such a one's private reason: hence he can be of neither
of these external communions, and sic de caeteris; yet one of which certainly
is the communion of the true Catholic Church, of which we say, Credo unam
sanctam etc. I may add; Neither could he heretofore be of the external
communion of the former Church Catholic for many ages, wherein, by reason of
new rising heresies, the Church'es determinations (and those requiring assent)
have bin multiplied; from some one or other of which a learned man is likely to
vary in his private judgment, being perhaps not every way so well informed, as
that of the Church was, who made them. So suppose one, holding all the rest
with the Council of Trent, should differ from it in this one tenet, That the
Baptism of S. John Baptist, and of Christ, were not of the same efficacy, -- or
one holding all the rest with the Church of England, should only differ from it
in this point of her 28 and 29th Article, That the Real Body of Christ is
received in the Eucharist only by those, who have a lively faith: for which see
Mr. Thorndike (Epilogue to the Church of England, 3. l. 2. c.); or (before the
Reformation, and Council of Trent) one should in some thing hold differently
from the Decrees of the 2d. Nicean or Lateran Council: he is thereby excluded
from the external communion both of the Church of Rome, and the Church of
England, and of all the former Church following the 2d. Council of Nice, unles
he be in something content to mortify his rationale, and make a submission of
his judgment-Therefore the Schoolmen, so subtle in their disputes, and so
various in their resolves, yet laid aside their private reasons, and bended
their judgments to the yoke thereof, where any controversible point was
formerly stated by the Church; taking liberty to expatiate and exercise their
science only in those disputables, wherein she had no way bounded them.

Now to come to your other Query: Whether if, in non-fundamentals, the Church
require our assent to something contrary to our private. 4. Concerning the
church'es lawful authority to excommunicate dissenters in non fundamentals
judgment, we ought to yield to it? To this I answer; We ought: Because the
Church'es power of punishing by Excommunication all that do not consent to all
her decisions and determinations, wherein she requires consent, seems to be
absolute and unlimited. For to some of her decisions, the reformed grant that
he who assents not is justly excommunicated by her. I ask therefore to which?

1. Is it only to those decisions, which she makes according to the
Scriptures, that if any assent not to them, he may be justly excommunicated. 5.
by her? See the 20. and 21 Article of the Church of England. But then, before
she may justly exercise such Excommunication, some body must judge, when her
decisions are made according to the Scriptures, when not. This Judge must
either be her self, or private men. If she must judge this, then it is all one, as
if there were no such limitation: for we may be assured, she will never make
any such decision, as her self will judge not to be according to, or to be
contrary to, the Scriptures. If private men must judge this, then this her
authority is null toward so many private men, as shall judge her decisions to
be contrary to Scriptures; and to the rest, that judge them according with
Scripture, she has no use of this authority, because they already consent. It Is
null, I say, to the former, because as the power of excommunicating those who
do not consent to her decisions, when made according to the Scriptures, is
committed to her; so the power of judging, when they are so made, when not, is
here supposed to be left by God to private men. Therefore these being judged by
them not to be so; her authority, which was thus limited, is now, toward all
such men, voided. And how will this consist with God's giving Pastors etc, for
the unity of the faith, and that men may not be carried away with every
doctrine etc. (Ephesians. 4. 11, 13)? Her authority (I say) toward all such men is
voided: because these two, the giving private men power thus to judge, and then
the punishing them, if they do not consent, or if they declare their dissent,
do contradict. For it is saying to them, I grant, and teach you, that when you
shall judge any thing which I enjoin you, to be contrary to God's word, (as
possibly it may be); so often it is your duty, not to obey me: nevertheles, for
doing this your duty I may justly punish you by Excommunication.

Or 2ly, Is it only to those decisions, which she makes in points,. 6.
of the truth whereof she is actually certain? For thus it is pleaded by some,
That a Church which confesses, that she may err, and mislead others, and upon
this consideration allows, that private men may lawfully dissent from her,
may yet be sure, that she does not, in such and such definitions, contradict
Scripture; and therefore may (according to the power given her by God Matt.
18.) excommunicate her children, for preaching contrary to, or dissenting from,
her definitions, and for violating her truth, and her peace, and upon this
ground may affirm, that what she thus binds on earth, is bound in heaven: as a
man that may sleep, run mad etc, may yet be sure, that now, at this time, he is
awake, and in his wits. See much-what the same said by Dr. Hammond concerning
General Councils affixing Anathema's to their Decrees. (Paraenes.. 12. p. 158.)
But this plea seems to ground the Church'es power of excommunicating, and
consequently her subjects necessity of obeying, (at least so far as not to
contradict her definitions,) not upon her authority, tho she (as those Judges
Deuteronomy. 17. 8.) may be in some things liable to error: but only upon her
certainty of the truth in those things which she enjoins; as it is willingly
granted, she, or any else, of some things may be certain enough. But then, if
others obedience depends not upon her determining or commanding, but upon her
being certain; what is said before returns again, they must have some means to
know, not only what she commands, but also when she is certain in what she
commands, (or that she commands nothing wherein she is uncertain): in which she
may be still uncertain, even when she says, nay even when she thinks, she is
certain. But, there being no means to know this, all men again will be left to
their liberty. The Church of England (see before. 3.) has excommunicated all
that shall say any thing is erroneous, either in her Liturgy, or 39. Articles.
Was she sure, that she could not possibly mistake in any of these things, which
she has said there? if not; such her Excommunication of contradicters will be
(according to this opinion) unlawful. Deuteronomy. 17. 12. it is said; The man that
will do presumptuously, and not hearken unto the Priest, even that man shall
dye. -- Matt. 18. 17. it is said; If he will not hear the Church, let him be as
an heathen. Are these punishments lawfully inflicted, only in case that such
Priest and Church be certain and infallible in their judgment? or that such
Priest and Church do not seem to any to mis-interpret the divine law?

3ly. Is it only to those decisions, which she makes in points fundamental?
But here the same doubts arise still. For I demand;. 7. As likewise to decide
which points are fundamental, which not.
Whether are you to judge, or she, which these are? or how many? Surely this is
very necessary to be known. If you grant that she must judge this too for you,
which, or how many be fundamentals; (as Mr. Chillingworth says (3. c. 39..) in
all reason she must, if in fundamentals she be acknowledged your guide, and
therefore he denies her to be a guide at all); then this thing, To how many of
her decided points you are to consent, lies only in her judgment. And then I
ask; Since some Non-fundamentals are plain in Scripture, and since in these
Non-fundamentals if a private man may be infallibly certain of somethings, (as
they say he may, and upon this infallibility of his seems to be grounded all
his dissent from the Church; for in things, tho not fundamental, wherein he is
not infallibly certain of the contrary, I suppose, he is also to consent to the
Church'es judgment); then surely the Church may be so too: why should you not
be here also tied to take her sentence, when she says, that she is infallibly
certain of them too, as you do take her sentence when she tells you how many
are fundamental? And, if you are to consent, tho it be against your own
judgment, in the greatest matters; what reason is there you should not do it in
lesser? You will answer; because in these greatest matters she cannot err, but
she may in others. My reply is; and may not you in others also err much more?
Is she to guide your judgment in the main, and not in less, matters? Is
Scripture be plain in these smaller points, for you to guide your self by it;
is it not so, much more, in fundamentals? why therefore relinquish you your
own, and adhere to her, judgment, in these things most plain in Scripture? and
then take up your own, and leave hers in the rest; especially when, being asked
your reason for this, your plea is, because such points are plain in Scripture?
But then if our Savior, as this opinion makes him, enjoins only subscription
to the Church in fundamentals; who sees not, that it is as necessary, that our
Savior should have told us, which points those were? else we may assent too
much to her in things, wherein she may err; or too little in the other, wherein
she cannot err, (I mean fundamentals,) and so be certainly damned. But then;
since, tho the General Church cannot, yet a National Church may, err in
fundamentals also, and may apostatize; therefore you are, here, (according to
that opinion) to assume to your self to judge, what points are truth, and what
not, even in pretended fundamentals, before you yield any consent to any thing
at all, called fundamental, or other, which a National Church proposes: and
thus a self-opinioned man may easily throw off the yoke of obedience to all the
proposals of all, except General, Councils; a thing very unreasonable. And as
unreasonable is that, which some say on the other side; That we may not
contradict or oppose our Pastor, or Bishop in smaller matters, but may in the
greater; when as indeed in these greater matters there is more reason for our
obedience, and far more danger, if we err, in our contradicting, Therefore
neither in Non-fundamentals, nor yet in Fundamentals, may we properly
contradict them; i. e. in opposing our particular judgment upon Scripture, to
theirs. What then must be done (you will say) since our Pastors and Bishops may
err in fundamentals, and particular Churches may apostatize? Resp. Why, both in
fundamentals and non-fundamentals also, where any considerable doubting
arises, we may repair from them to a further information from the Church
General, such as we can have: and then we are to follow her judgment, when
evident and undisputable (as many times it is); and, if we be Presbyters, we
are also to teach her Doctrines, (and that in not-fundamentals, as well as in
fundamentals) tho contrary to the commands of some inferior Bishop or Council.
Nor is this properly our, but the Church-Catholick's, contradicting such a one;
and our obeying only here is, rather than her inferior's, injunctions.

This discourse arises from that term [Non-fundamentals] put in the Quaere:
when as meanwhile you may observe, that this curiosity. 8.
of knowing precisely what are fundamentals, what not, presses only one side:
namely that, which will allow obligation of assent to the Church'es decrees
only in some things, not in others: but it does not concern the other side at
all, because they hold assent necessary to all points, wherein the Church (I
mean the supreme power in it) requires it. And so also, 1. ancient Councils,
under pain of Anathema, require, as in some things non-contradiction, so in
other things consent; with whom [Siquis non confitetur etc, Anathema sit] is
ordinary, without setting down that the point is fundamental; as likewise [Si
quis dixerit, only] is used by them in other points of greatest consequence:
which shows, that the Church, expecting the same obedience to her also in the
points we call not-fundamental, took not such exact care to deliver them
distinctly; nor indeed perhaps knows how to sever all points under such a
distinction. To say therefore, that all such points, where assent and
confession is required, are fundamental, is gratis said, and as easily denied:
but that all such points are very profitable to salvation, I doubt not. 2.
Again; all practical points cannot be said to be fundamental; but where ever
the Church enjoins any practical things under Anathema, she requires more than
Non-contradiction, as has bin noted already: for I may not practice a thing,
when I do not first assent to the lawfulnes thereof. In practical things
therefore, commanded by her to be done, I either owe her no obedience at all,
or else more than Non-contradiction (Now the ancient Councils are frequent in
these); but if God had given her subjects liberty, not to practice such things
as are enjoined by her, if against their judgment; neither has he given the
Church liberty to anathematize them, for thus following their conscience. For I
pray you consider these two Propositions, how they can both agree to the
Church: [I know God has given order, that in non-fundamentals no man shall owe
me such, so much, duty, as to yield his assent to me; or to practice what I bid
him, when his judgment is contrarily persuaded; but only so much as not to
contradict me etc; yet I do require of those same men, not only not to
contradict, but to consent etc, or else I anathematize them.] Certainly if, in
Non-fundamentals, a man of a contrary judgment to the Church can be only faulty
in contradicting the Church; she can excommunicate none such upon any other
terms, but only if they shall contradict her. 3. Again; the Scriptures have
appointed Pastors, Teachers, etc, have bidden us hear the Church [he that
hears you, hears me etc,] without limitation to fundamentals; sure this
obedience to teachers is not fulfilled in reserving my own opinions, and in not
openly contradicting or confuting theirs. Sure, that power of teaching,
exhorting, reproving, correcting, the word of wisdom, the word of knowledge,
given to our Spiritual Governors, for 2 Timothy 4^. 1 Cor. 12. 7, 8.
the edification of the Church, in truths and practices any way profitable to
salvation, as well as in fundamental, are not sufficiently answered on our
parts with the obedience of Non-contradiction of them, when they shall speak
any thing contrary to our sense, except it be in fundamentals only, i. e.
perhaps in two or three points: but these Scriptures oblige us to submission of
Judgment, either to our particular teacher, or (when he seems to guide us
contrary to the word of God, or contrary to the rest of the Pastors of the
Church,) to his, and our, Ecclesiastical Superiors, in whose judgment we must
acquiesce, and consent, that we may not be tossed etc, (Ephesians. 4. 14. compared
with 11); as we see they are, that take only their own sense of Scriptures. See
Heb. 13. 7. I Tim. 4. 11. I Tim. 6. 3, 4. [Where note, that consent is not to
Scriptures, that were not then so common, but to the doctrine of Godliness
delivered by Timothy.] If therefore, any dissent from an inferior Pastor or
Council, (as he may, upon any suspicion, that such goes against the
Scriptures, or the Church'es doctrines,) he may not therefore acquiesce in his
own judgment, either concerning the sense of Scriptures, or the sense of former
times, the Fathers, etc; but is to repair to his Superiors, and to hear the
Church then in being, (in all things wherein he clearly sees her opinion, and
in which she requires his subscription): which Chapter is set, for a guide to him,
on an hill, to interpret to him the Scriptures in all controverted matters; for
if she be worthy to be heard in fundamentals, as well agends, as credends; is
she unworthy to be heard in smaller matters? And such a Church, eminent and
conspicuous, there always was, even in the Arrian times, to which Athanasius
fled for succor also, and with which he joined himself; and always such there
will be, nor will she ever be hid: and who goes with her, shall go with the
Scriptures, and with the Fathers too; but whosoever will go with them against her,
shall also lose them, and vanish away in his own self-conceit.

If we now on the other side take into consideration the obedience. 9. Several
exceptions against obedience of non-contradiction. only, for non-fundamentals.
of Non-contradiction, much pressed by the Reformed, as (in many cases) only
due; yet the limitations which they annex to it are such, as leave not the
matter clear, to what points, and from what persons, such obedience-only is
required as necessary. For, 1. it is not said by them, that all men are bound
even to this lesser obedience of Non-contradiction. For, if this were affirmed,
that all inferiors, whether Pastors, Bishops, or Councils, were obliged to such
obedience in respect of their superior Councils, it were something: but, as I
think, it is affirmed, that a National Council may contradict a superior Council;
and so a Diocesan, a National. And 1. I ask; Why may not then a Pastor
contradict his Bishop, or the Diocesan Council? (which the reformed will not so
easily allow,) since this Pastor also is a teacher, and an over-seer over God's
flock, (Act. 20. 28). and if private men may, so may he, be infallibly certain,
that such a thing is in God's word; and that thing too, wherein he
contradicts, may be very beneficial for salvation. Neither is the peace of
the Church disturbed more by him teaching contrary to a Diocesan, than by a
Bishop teaching contrary to a Provincial Synod; and as other men's contrary
doctrines may consist with their charity to other Churches, (i. e. with not
condemning them to be no Churches,) so may his. Considering these things, may
not such a one say, Whether it is better to obey God than men, judge ye? 2.
Again, I ask; If the power, in the Church, of Excommunication of private men,
binds them not to contradict her; why does not the same power, in superior
Councils, to excommunicate Bishops, and to annul the acts of inferior Councils,
bind such inferior Councils also to Non-contradiction? 3. Again; the obligation
of Non-contradiction of private men to their Bishop, or to his Synod, in
not-fundamentals, will signify little; because an Episcopal, or a National,
Synod may err in fundamentals; and the judgment of this Synods erring in a
fundamental is by the reformed left, not to It, which will never judge such a
thing to be; but, to its subjects; and they may misjudge a point
not-fundamental to be fundamental, and so may break their due silence: neither
can there be of this any remedy. For none hitherto have contradicted the
Church-decisions, but they have made that which occasioned their contradicting
to be a thing of great consequence. Here therefore again; in the yiedling of
our obedience of Non-contradiction to a Provincial or National Church, the
Queries concerning Fundamentals will return. Who is to determine, what are such,
both for agends and credends? which it is extreme necessary to know, that, in
such, we may be sure to vindicate God's truth against that particular Church
wherein we live. Is not idolatry an error against a fundamental truth? and does
not the Roman Church then err in fundamentals, in worshipping bread, as the
Protestants think they do, for Christ? So that tenet of the Greek Church [a
Patre per filium] is said to destroy the Trinity: and so the Lutheran's
Consubstantiation is said by consequence to destroy Christ's Humanity: the
Trinity, and Christ's Humanity, fundamental truths. In such points and the like
therefore none must be tied, in obedience to their Bishop or Church-National,
to a Non-contradiction.

2ly, In respect of the Church in general, the obedience of
sole-Non-contradiction. 10.
is limited by the reformed (as we have said before) to Non-fundamentals,
wherein the Church may err; whereas in fundamentals, wherein this Church cannot
err, here they also allow an obedience of assent. But I ask again; Who shall
determine, both in credends and agends, which are fundamental? And why in these
fundamentals especially are we wished in our judgment to conform to the
Church'es? since these are the points most clear in Scripture, and such as,
without the Church'es direction, we cannot mistake. And methinks those places
of Scripture concerning Trial of Doctrines, which we have learnt to turn
against the injunctions of the Church, hold as well, or more, for trying her
Doctrines in Fundamentals, than in any thing else; because the rule, by which we
try, is the most plain in these points. Again, I ask; Are all the necessary
consequences of fundamentals to be accounted fundamental? If so; then who knows
how far these points may extend, in which we are to consent to, and not only
not-to-contradict, the Church'es decisions?

3ly. This obedience (not of yiedling assent, but solely) of
Non-contradicting,. 11. And that all at least not infallibly certain of the
contrary, are bound, in non fundamentals, to anobedience of assent. Therefore
the most are so bound.
is allowed and secured by the reformed, only to those persons; who, upon
examination of Scripture and Tradition, are certain of the contrary; surely
then it must extend to very few persons, and in very few things: for how few
are there, that are able to compare the Scriptures, or search Traditions?
Therefore the Scripture seems to make rules of our obedience to our present
Spiritual Governors; as if we were void of writings; and not according to the
extraordinary skill and learning of some few, that are not rulers, but
according to the general capacity and knowledge of the flock of Christ. 1.
Therefore it were well, if these men, who would not have their own knowledge
restrained by authority, would yet let the people know, That only those, who by
long studying the Scriptures and Fathers have arrived to infallible certainty,
are tied, only-to Non-contradiction to the Church-decisions; but that all the
rest, to assenting. For does it not make our hearts yet to bleed, to see so
many thousands of the common people amongst us, upon this mistaken privilege,
even to disbelieve, and not to yield consent to the Church in fundamentals? 2.
When this is done; how few are there of the learned, that can say; they are
certain (without some doubt) that what the Church proposes is false? Are not
all the rest then, who are not infallibly certain, to be taught, that they
must, in Non-fundamentals, subscribe to the Church-decisions? Why labor we
then, more, to free, then subjugate, men's judgments? 3. But then, for a private
man's being infallibly certain, (upon which the reformed opinion seems to build
much) methinks this concession of [the Scriptures which he reads to be the
infallible word of God] is not enough for his certainty almost in any point;
because there must be a comparing of Scriptures, and a not interpreting of some
places so, that other places contradict: and because the sense of the words may
be diversely taken, tho he were to judge only of one place by it self. Besides
there are many degrees of seeming certainty; and it is hard to know when it is a
presumption only, and when a true certainty. That men are ordinarily deceived,
in making this judgment, is plain: because two, contradicting one another, will
often both affirm, that they are infallibly certain. The thinking ones self
infallibly certain mostwhat arises from knowing no objections of any
difficulty to the contrary: which objections as one afterward discovers, so his
former certainty by degrees abates. Hence we see the greatest Scholars many
times dubious, when the ignorant are either certain, or strongly confident.
Four texts of Scripture, that seem plainly to say a thing, make one sure, as it
were; and then two texts suggested to him, that seem to say the contrary,
reduce him to doubt, and make him begin to deliberate of the sense of the
former. I speak not this to affirm, we are certain in nothing at all: but that
we have almost always reason to doubt, where the same certainty, that we have,
appears not to others. But then if private men may be infallibly certain; much
more may the Church, and so many Doctors be so, they also all agreeing in their
certainty. So that all proofs of certainty to be had in divine truths rather
strengthen the argument for obedience to the Church. And she deals but with us
in our own kind, if she plead infallibility to require our submission to her,
even in Non-fundamentals, as we do plead infallibility to avoid it.

As for those objections, which the Reformed opinion makes:. 12. Replies to
several Objections.


1. That possibly a National, or Provincial Synod, may, or also has, broached
some new mischievous tenet; the contrary to which tenet neither the Creeds
expressly, nor former Councils have decreed; into which error therefore my too
secure obedience 1. Concerning an inferior Council's decreeing some new
dangerous error, which no former Council superior has condemned
may betray me. I answer: That from this judgment of such a Church, so often as
it is suspected by me, I will not retreat to my private judgment, but I will
appeal to a more general judgment of the present Church: which judgment I can
either have conjunctim, or divisim; (as it was ordinarily procured in ancient
time,) and (by the reformed opinion) I shall be secure, if I part not from the
present Church: for in fundamentals she shall in no age err, but hold forth to
me visibly the truth; and if this error be in Non-fundamentals, it amounts not
(as the reformed say) to a heresy: therefore will I still cleave to her, (i.
e.) the present Church, and the supremest Authority I can find therein; neither
will I embrace any sense put upon Scriptures, or Fathers, against her; because
she cannot be (at least in points of great consequence) opposite to them. And,
if that religion (as it might have bin) had bin conveyed to our days by
unwritten Tradition, and only so as the Apostle directed in 2 Timothy 2. 2, and
that we had had neither New Testament-Scriptures, nor writings of Fathers; then
I must have relied only on the guidance of the present Church: neither needed
she, for this, to have bin made more infallible than now she is; and doubtless
my faith should have bin (nevertheles) sufficiently grounded, i. e. on the word
of God still orally delivered by her: neither could any have made an argument,
that my faith was not salvifical, for this reason, because fidei non potest
subesse falsum; for she must then, in defect of all writings; have bin
confessed the pillar and ground of truth, and the dispenser or steward of the
mysteries of God, (1 Cor. 4. 1.): the same (then) must she be still; and
Nations now, as at the first, before writings, are still converted by her; by
her preaching, before they come to peruse those Scriptures. And so are we all
also taught our faith first by her; neither suffers she diminution in her
authority from co-extant Scriptures and Fathers. But yet, besides that in these
Scriptures is ascribed to her great authority; any help, that is from these
writings enjoyed by any other, is also by her: that no body may boast over her
in these advantages.

2. It is objected: That our faith, to be salvifical, must be grounded on
something that is infallible; and therefore only on. 13. 2. Concerning faith
salvifical: that: it is to be infallible.
God's word. See this answered at large, in the Treatise of Necessary faith,.
43. etc. Surely, the Church groundeth her faith, which she recommendeth to us,
on the Scriptures, as well as private men think they do theirs, when they leave
hers, to follow their own, judgment. And, if the Church'es judgment is not,
neither is their own, infallible; for which, they desert the Church'es. But,
tho it is most true, that true faith is always grounded on the word of God,
(which word of God is infallible); yet is it not necessary, that every one, who
has true faith, do know that it is infallible, or be infallibly certain of it:
For many have saving faith, doubtless; that learn this word of God only from a
fallible man; suppose from their Father, or from their Pastor. Neither is it
necessary, that this faith should be received from another person infallible,
besides God; nor that it should be received from a writing at all. There may be
a strong adherence, beyond evidence; neither can it be unsufficient, if it be
so strong, as to produce obedience to God's commands.

3. It Is said: That one is, for his salvation, secure enough, where ever these
two are; Unity of faith with the Church, in. 14. 3. Concerning union of
Charity, sufficient.
fundamentals; and then Charity toward the Church, in the points
not-fundamental, wherein I disagree from her. Charity, i. e. not condemning
her, for them, to be no Church, etc. I answer: 1. First, such a one must know
well, what are Fundamentals, that perhaps he take not liberty to differ from
the Church in any of them. The Apostle reckons doctrines of Baptism and of
laying on of hands among foundations, (Heb. 6. 2.); if we will make unity in
fundamentals so large as he does, I know not how many other points may be
brought in. And I am persuaded by reading the Catalogues of anciently-accounted
Heresies, that the Fathers and Primitive times would not have stuck to have
pronounced some side highly heretical, in those differences between the
Reformed and the Catholic Church, and even in those differences that are now in
this Church of England about Baptism, Bishops, Ordination, etc. 2ly. Without
doubt there may be a larger unity of faith, than only in fundamentals; (unles
all points of faith be fundamental; and if so, then Churches that differ in any
point of faith, differ in fundamentals.) 3ly. If there may be a larger unity
etc; then Spiritual Guides, doubtless, are set over us, to build us up in the
unity also, of this faith, and not only of fundamentals. (See Heb. 5. 11. etc.
-- 6. 1. And therefore, why [Eph. 4. 11. compared with 13.] should be
restrained only to fundamentals, as it is by some, it seems to me strange. I
cannot think, that the Corinthians differed amongst themselves in fundamentals,
(see 1 Cor. 1. 4. etc): and yet the Apostle is very angry with them for their
divisions, and exhorts them to be all of one judgment; which union of judgment
could not be by following the judgment, each one, of their private reason, but
of the Apostle, and of their orthodox teachers appointed by him. See 1 Cor. 1.
10. Romans 12. 16, 18. Romans 15. 5, 6. Phil. 1. 27. Phil. 2. 2, 3. 1 Pet. 3. 8.
where [speaking the same thing, and being joined in the same judgment;
contending for the faith of the Gospel with one mind; glorifying God with one
mind, and one mouth, etc.] argue an unity required, not only of charity, but of
opinion and judgment; and that, not only in fundamentals, (in which, as I said,
all the factious Corinthians, or most of them, accorded,) but other beneficial
truths: which union how could so many judgments, undependent of one another,
attain, but by, all of them, retaining the same doctrine of their Pastor, or
Pastors? 4ly. If these points, wherein the reformed recede from the authority
of superior Councils, be not very necessary, tho not fundamental; how can a
separation for them be justified? but if necessary; why should we say, that God
requires not an unity of faith in them? 5ly. Again; as faith and charity secure
not our salvation, if we be guilty of some other vice, (adultery, etc); so they
do not secure it, if there be any denial of obedience, where it is due;
especially to the Church, disobedience toward whom is, in a more special
manner, disobedience to Christ, and to God himself: and why may not this then
endanger us, if God has provided teachers, to keep us in the same judgment,
and we (to the great hurt, both of the Church, and of our selves too, by these
divisions) will every one follow his own judgment? especially since union of
charity, as this opinion limits it, excludes not all separation from a superior
authority, but only requires non-condemning of such authority, or those that
adhere to it, in our separation. But here methinks the words of Cassander.
(Consult. Art. 7.) are of some weight: where, granting that the reformers did
not condemn the Church from which they separated, yet, Non video (says he)
quomodo illa interna societas consistere possit, si publicam Ecclesiae
consuetudinem, in observatione tam universalium, quam particularium rituum,
violes, and condemns, and institutis majorum pertinaciter repugnes; quod certe
est contra officium charitatis, qua maxim internam hanc unitatem consistere
certissimum est.] Contra officium charitatis, I say; if we take charity not
negatively, for not hating, cursing, damning, but positively, for love and
amity: which sure the Apostle requires in all the members of Christ, especially
toward their Mother, the Church: which charity he describes (1 Cor. 13. 4.
etc,) to think no evil, and well to interpret all things: and we may judge this
in private amity, where our love ordinarily happens to be very cold toward the
person, whose ways, customs, conditions we once hate and condemn. Certainly, in
the many sects now in this Church of England, and in the division of the
Protestant from the former Church, tho it be supposed all these agree in
fundamentals, and have all such an union of charity to one another, as is
mentioned before; yet there is a great fault somewhere for diversity of
opinions, that must be answered for by some side at the day of judgment: nor
does the Church seem sufficiently in charity toward those superior
Church-governors, whose decisions, and Canons she not only refuses, but also
proceeds so far, as to reject their external communion, and not to admit
them, or the Churches adhering to them, to her communion, because of the
faultines, wherewith she charge such their canons and decisions. 6. Lastly,
let this be considered, (which you may find more prosecuted in Trial of Doctr..
42. etc.) that, tho one follow the Church in fundamentals, yet, by departing
from her judgment in other points, he may lose many wholesome advices in things
practical extremely profitable and advantageous to attaining salvation. Our own
judgment sways us to liberty; and God knows how many souls have perished in the
reformed religion, by throwing away the Church'es counsels and commands, tho in
tothem-seeming small matters, as Fasting, Confession, etc. And that text 2 Pet.
3. 16. methinks might a little affright us, wherein the Apostle says, that
there are things in Scripture that are hard to be understood, [sure these are
not Fundamentals then, which we contend are plain,] which are wrested by the
unlearned and the unstable [sure he means here men not adhering to the fixed
doctrines of the Church] to their own [not harm, but] destruction.

4ly. It is urged, that the H. Scriptures have commanded, that all men, lest
they should perhaps be misguided, should try, and. 15. 4. Concerning trial of
Doctrines, necessary.
that by the same Scriptures, their teachers doctrines; that so if they find
these doctrines not to agree with the H. Scriptures, they may withdraw their
belief from them. See Jo. 5. 39. Act. 17. 11. 1 Jo. 4. 1. 1 These. 5. 21. 1 Cor.
10. 15. Matt. 16. 6, 12. -- 15. 14. Gal. 1. 8, 9. Esaias 8. 20. In answer to
this, for a stricter examination of some of the texts here urged I must refer
you to Succession of Clergy,. etc. and to Trial of Doctrines. 3. 11. etc: Only
here this I say to them in general. Trial of Doctrines by Scripture is; 1.
either of the doctrines of private teachers by the Church-governors; of which
no question is made: or 2. of the doctrines of private teachers by private men:
and these they may try by the Scriptures, so that they guide themselves (left
their trial be mistaken) in the sense of these Scriptures, according to the
exposition thereof by the Church; i. e. * in her General Councils; or * in the
most unanimous consent of those, whom our Savior departing left to be the
Guides of the Church, and Expositors of the Scriptures; and if thus searching
we find the doctrines of the teachers contrary to the Scriptures so expounded,
we may and ought to withdraw our belief from them. Or 3ly, this trial by
Scriptures is of the doctrines of the Church, i. e. of those doctrines which
are delivered not by a private teacher, but * by a general consent of the
Church-guides, (at least the fullest which we can discover); or * by General or
other Superior Councils; or * by the Apostles, or by our Savior Himself. Now
the allowance of such a trial may be understood in two senses. 1. Either in
this sense: Search and try my, or our, doctrine by the Scriptures, for you will
surely find my doctrine agreeing thereto, if you search aright, and as you
ought. And in this sense the trial by the Scriptures, of the doctrines of the
Church, nay of the Apostles, (St. Paul's by the Bereans); nay of Christ
himself, whether the Old Testament, as he urged, testified of Him, is both
allowed and recommended. For since there is no difference of the teaching of
Christ, or of S. Paul, or of the Church, from the teaching of the Scripture;
the one will never fear, but freely appeal to a trial by the other, if it be
rightly made. Or, 2ly. it may be understood in this sense: Search and try my
doctrines by the Scriptures, and if you in your search do not perceive it
agreeable unto them, I declare, that you have no reason to believe, or that you
are excusable in rejecting my doctrine. Now in this sense our Savior, or S.
Paul, or the other Scriptures, never recommended private men's searching, or
gave any such privilege to it: unles you put in this clause, that they have
searched aright. But if you put in this clause, then is the searcher, after his
searching, not yet at liberty to disbelieve the Apostle's or the Church'es
doctrine, till he is sure first that he has searched aright. I say our Savior
or the Scriptures cannot recommend searching in such a sense, or upon such
conditions. 1. Because such a searcher or tryer by the Scriptures there may be,
as is prejudiced by passion, or interest, ormis-education; or as searches
negligently and coldly; or as has not a sufficient capacity to understand the
Scriptures, he searches, when perhaps it is in some difficult point, wherein
they are not so clear; as if he should search the text of the Old Testament in
the point delivered by St. Paul, of the abrogation of Circumcision under the
Gospel. Neither can any be easily secure of his dis-ingagement from all such
Letts of using a right judgment in searching. 2ly. Because however the search
or searcher prove, there are other means and mediums by which is proved to men
the truth of such doctrines, and by which not bearing witness to a falsity, one
may discover himself to have made his search of Scripture amiss, so often as he
thinks it to contradict them. Such mediums are; Miracles, and other mighty
operations done by the power of the H. Ghost, upon which our Savior (Jo. 5.
36, and elsewhere,) and S. Paul (Romans 15. 19. 2 Cor. 12. 12. 1 Cor. 2. 4. Mar.
16. 20.) required belief and submission to their doctrine. And Universal
Tradition; upon which the Church also requires belief to the Scriptures: the
same Tradition that delivered the Scriptures delivering also such doctrines and
expositions of Scriptures, as are found in the Church* So that a Pharisee
searching and not finding in Scriptures (by reason indeed that he searched them
not aright) such testimony of Jesus his being the Messiah, as was pretended;
yet ought to have bin convinced, and to have believed his doctrines, from
seeing his miracles; and from hence also to have blamed his faulty search. So a
Berean searching and not finding in Scripture such evidence of S. Paul's
doctrine, suppose of the abrogation of the Judaical Law by Christ, as was
pretended; yet ought to have believed it from the mighty works he saw done by
S. Paul, or from the authority he or the Council at Jerusalem received from
Jesus working miracles, and raised from the Dead, as Universal Tradition
testified. And the same may be said for the Church'es doctrines. And therefore,
as there are some Scriptures, that bid us search the Scriptures, because, if we
do this aright, we shall never find them to disagree from the doctrines of the
Church; and because some doctrines of the Church are also in the Scriptures
very evident: so there are other Scriptures, (if those who are so ready to
search them on other, would search them also on this, point,) that bid us Hear
the Church; because our searching of Scriptures is liable sometimes to be
mistaken; and because in some things the Scriptures may seem difficult: in
which case God having referred us to the judgment of those whom he has
appointed to be the expounders thereof, (Deuteronomy. 17. 8, 9, 10. Matt. 18. 17. Lu.
10. 16.) cannot remit us again to the same Scriptures, to try whether their
expositions be right. Therefore that text Gal. 1. 8, 9. is far from any such
meaning: If the Church or Churchmen shall teach you any thing contrary to the
Scriptures, as you understand them, let these be Anathema to you. But rather it
says this, If an Angel, or I apostatizing (as some shall, Act. 20. 30.) shall
teach any thing contrary to the doctrines ye have received, i. e. from the
Church let him etc. which makes for the Church'es authority very much. The
Scriptures then recommending trial do no way warrant to us a trial of the
public doctrines of the Church by our private sense upon the Scriptures, that
so we should adhere to it against them; but a trial of the doctrines of private
teachers by the Churches public sense of the Scriptures, that in adhering to
it we may be always secure.

5ly. They question, since there are many present divided. 16. 5. Concerning
what Churches determinations, when several contradict one another, we are to
adhere to.
Churches, to the judgment of which of them they shall repair? I answer. Had
this question bin asked an hundred years ago in Luther's time, any one could
have solved it. What any one would have done then, let him do now: since all
grant that the Church, which was then Catholic, is not changed since in its
doctrines or practices; only some men are since gone out of it: and he may know
by this, that he is not to follow them, because they are gone out, if he
resolve once to be a follower of the Church'es authority. All or most of modern
controversies either Councils, which the present Church allows, have decided;
or collectively the solution of them may be known by the agreeing tenets of
particular Churches and their Bishops, even before, and without, any General
Councils. Most of the decrees of the Council of Trent (tho it should stand for
nothing) yet we must grant, were the general tenets and practice of the present
Church of that age, and of many ages before that: and many Councils also (which
must be granted at least Patriarchal, or Provincial) have decided the points
now in controversy, or many of the most considerable of them; and we find no
other superior Synod at all contradicting them in those or later times, but the
same things ratified by the general practice which followed. If therefore there
was a church Catholic in those days, that had or exercised any authority, (and
this I think we confess in our Creed), surely such tenets were established by
it: neither can we acknowledge one Holy and Apostolic Church in those times,
save only that, by whom such things were used, and by whom also many of them
decreed* After that therefore we have once yielded to conform, in our judgment,
or in not-contradiction, to the Church; we need not demand, and expect (for
these things) a future General Council; for we are judged already: we learning
what is the Church'es judgment sufficiently by the decrees of former Councils,
(Provincial at least), which, with this universal practice following them, are
equivalent to General. Else many ancient heresies (as Pelagianism etc) remain
yet uncondemned in the Church, these having bin censured only by Councils
Provincial, whose judgments afterward were generally approved; and by the
general practice of that Church, which Church we cannot deny to be the same
with that, which once was the total Catholic, and which is also now (if we
look after the major part of the Church) the greatest communion of Christians.
Such things as these are said; and you must tell me, what I must reply to them.
And indeed, if Protestants saw no eminent Church, to which, if all her
decisions were made authentical, men would presently apply themselves, their
contention would not be so earnest against our ascribing too much to the
Church'es authority. But suppose (say they) that the church present determine
things against Scripture, and against the former Church? Why may not I (say I
again) as well suppose you, who think thus of the present Church, to mistake
Scripture, and the former Church your selves? and why may I not say again to
you; suppose that she err in fundamentals, where are you, that in these do
follow her judgment? Yes: but the fundamentals, she directs me in, are more
plainly set down in Scripture. Well then: since you may not judge against her,
in the plain; may you, in other things less plain? But, say you, our Savior
has promised, in these, she shall not err. Then you need not fear erring with
her, in the rest: for were truth in the rest so necessary as you pretend, God
could and would, here also, have made her an infallible directer. And we are to
know this, that the Church may be faulty in something that she enjoins, and yet
he, that assents to her judgment, not be so: but faulty he will be, if he do
not assent. Else what shall we answer to Deuteronomy. 17. 11? unles we will say, that
those Judges were absolutely infallible.

Now, after all; let Non-contradiction be all the obedience we (when otherwise
persuaded) ow to the Church; and this Non-contradiction. 17:
be due only from the subjects of a Diocese, in respect of the Bishop or
Diocesan Synod; not from the Bishop or Diocese, to superior Synods: yet hence
it will follow; 1. First, that the Reformation abroad was unlawful, which we
followed; and that no Minister might then preach against Popish doctrines,
unles these things had bin first decided by his Bishop; which, I think, is more
than many of the reformed will defend. 2. Again; from this distinguishing of
our obedience to the Church, according to several things commanded by her,
methinks this may reasonably be demanded, since neither King nor Church can
justly punish, or anathematize any, for not yiedling that obedience to them,
which God has not bound men to yield them; Therefore if they are bound to
yield obedience of consent, in some points, (as in fundamentals,) and only
obedience of Non-contradiction in others, (as in Nonfundamentals), when our
private judgment therein happens to be contrary to the public; methinks, I
say, this may reasonably be demanded, That there should be some certain way,
how both the Church may know, when to enjoin the one, and when only the other;
and how the subject may know also, when the one, and when the other is due: for
none can be justly punished in an invincible ignorance of his duty. And if this
be the rule of their non-obligation to consent; namely, when the point is not
fundamental; and when they are also infallibly certain of the contrary: there
must also be some way for men to know, when they are infallibly certain, and
when they think only that they are so. For I should have thought any one might
know when he is sure, but that I see so many, that say they are sure, when
mistaken; and but that I have also found my self afterward mistaken in things,
of which I once thought my self infallibly sure. Another thing: methinks.
Non-contradiction sounds well in speculatives; but in practicals what must be
done? For unles the Church in practicals may bind men (tho of a contrary
persuasion) to consent to what she defines, she cannot enjoin them to do what
she commands, or to forbear what she forbids; because this doing or forbearing
necessarily presupposes consent first to the lawfulnes thereof, else the action
will be sin. Now the Church many times commands and forbids several practices
(doubtless not-fundamental) under Anathema's. And indeed might not people (in
matters practical) be tied (beyond their own inclinations and opinion) to
conformity in these; the church, that is founded by the God of holiness and
order, what a disorderly Society would it be? and how full of several impieties?

To conclude the whole matter: since, in this division of Christendom, one
party in general seems many ways to crush the. 18. Conclusion.
Church'es authority; and the other to crush private judgment; and since there
seem to be some inconveniences on all hands: a wise man will choose that way
which seems the more safe; which, I think, is to adhere, not to our own, but
the common, judgment of the Church. In which there seems to be much humility
also, and mortification of our rationale, (in which we are all very strong),
and also the not hazarding the breach of the great duty of our obedience to the
Church; which I think had far better be yielded too much, than too little. And,
besides these motives, we have seen more evidently the effects of both these
tenets upon men in our days: and there seems to be no comparison between the
mischiefs, which too much obedience to the Church has wrought; and those,
which the following of private judgment has produced.

A Postscript.
IN the former Discourse (. 2.) it is said; That our Judgment, if it be taken
for any degree of private opinion, short of infallible. 19. Concerning
infallible certainty.
certainty, ought to be submitted to the judgment of our Ecclesiastical
Superiors. Where, infallible certainty, a thing so ordinarily mistaken, seems
to stand in need of some further explication. By infallible certainty;
therefore, I mean, either, * that which arises from demonstrative arguments,
drawn from the nature of the thing, (but this is a certainty which consists not
with faith; for faith walks not by sight): or (which most concerns our business)
* that certainty, which arises ab authoritate dicentis, when we know
infallibly, both, that he says it, who cannot lie; and that such is the
meaning of what he said, else the former of these, without the later, breeds no
certainty.

1. Now; if you make your proposal thus: Supposing that I am infallibly certain
of a thing, that is contrary to the Church'es judgment,. 201 1. Infallible
certainty excusing all submission of judgment to anyother.
whether am I obliged to consent to that judgment etc? I must answer, No, by no
means. For indeed, if we speak of interior assent, such a thing as this assent
cannot be at all; unles one can hold two contradictories to be true. And 2ly,
for exterior assent, (that is, professing an assent, when you do not assent,)
this you may not do neither, for this is hypocrisy and lying; which the God of
truth always hates and forbids: neither has he tied any man to forsake or
renounce, tho in profession only, an infallibly known truth, great, or small.
And therefore, from hence, as long as you cannot believe, that the Church has
any authority to guide you; or that her judgment is, so good as your own, or,
fit to be followed, etc; so long you cannot profess a consent unto her
judgment, against your own, without sinning; but, whilst you may not do this
without sinning, you sin again in not believing otherwise. For no man may do
what he thinks he ought not to do; and yet he does sin in not so doing, because
he ought to think otherwise. When I show you, that you may without sin obey the
Church, contrary to what your judgment is in the thing which you assent to; I
do not tell you, that you may without sinning obey the Church contrary to this
your judgment, that you ought not to obey her; or, when your judgment is, that
you ought not to obey her. Where ever the mouth or hand goes contrary to the
heart, it is hypocrisy and lying, contrary to Christian simplicity, and
unlawful. But if the mouth and hand go with the heart, and the heart go not
right; here also will be sin, tho not the same sin.

2. Now, in the 2d. place, if you ask me; Whether, hoc dato,. 21. Infallible
certainty to be had in some things.
that such a book is the word of God, rightly translated etc, you may be
infallibly certain of the sense of it in some things? This, I also grant, you
may be: for, hoc dato, that the New Testament, which we have, is the word of
God; and that God, in this word, meant to speak so, that it should be
intelligible to us, (else it were no revelation of any thing): a private man,
that hears, or reads it, may be as certain of something therein clearly
delivered; as, for example, that, Jesus is the Lord, or that he died, in some
sense or other; as, hoc dato, that he is the Lord, he may be certain that he is
the Lord: or, as he may be certain of identicals. (And, as I think, one may be
certain of this, so I do not think, that ever there was any heretic, that
allowed the Scriptures, i. e. as we have them, that ever denied any such thing
in general terms: for this would be to affirm contradictories both true.)
Again; since the Chapter may be infallibly certain of something in the Scriptures,
from the evidence of revelation; why a private man may not be so too, I see no
reason: since the Church consists only of so many particular men; and the
reasons appearing to the Church may also be clear to him. Tho here I must put
some difference; because as there is a certainty arising from clearnes of
revelation; so there is another from illumination of the H. Spirit, (see Jo.
16. 13.) which illumination is promised to the Councils of the Church; but not
so to particulars: and, for this it is (I think well) said; that the
conclusions of such Councils may (from the superintendence of God's Spirit over
them) be orthodox; when the reasons, upon which they are grounded, may be
fallible, or not proving such conclusions.

A private man, then, in some things may be infallibly certain;. 22. Of the
difficulty of knowing, when one is infallibly certain.
but, since he (also) may be mistaken, not only in * very plain Scriptures, by
not comparing them with other places, that say something contrary to the sense,
which they seem to him to bear; by education in such mis-interpretations, and
many other thousand ways, (as we have much experienced of late in the
Socinians, and our English Sectarists, both great Scripturists); but also, * in
thinking himself infallibly certain of something there, when he is not; (which
conceit many times arises, not from the places incapability of any doubt, but
from his not being then acquainted with any objections against his sense of
it): The chiefest signs, that I know, by which any one may gather that he is
infallibly certain indeed, when it is in any point that is controverted, are
these two, (and they are such, as will little nurse him in his opinion of
infallible certainty.). 1. The first is; that no other man, or at least not the
major part of men, having the use of reason, understanding our terms, and
granting all the suppositions which we do, does contradict, or frame any
objections against, our tenet. The 2d. That all having use of reason, etc, or
the most that were formerly of another persuasion, to whom we propose all our
grounds, become certain of the same thing also. I say the most, because it is
not here altogether, as it is in Mathematics; the demonstrations whereof never
any, that see them, contradict. Now, that you may not think these marks of
certainty too rigid, see the same proposed by the Reformed against the
Puritans, whom they think too rashly to pretend certainty in heterodox
opinions. See Hook. Eccl. Pol. preface 6. sect. and Bishop Laud,. 33. Consid.
5. n. 1. Therefore thinking one's self certain, and his not having any doubt at
all of the truth of the thing he holds, is no sure note of certainty. For
potest non subesse dubium, where yet subest falsum, from the ignorance of those
texts or arguments which prove the contrary of what he holds. And tho there may
be no doubt from contrary arguments, yet is the greatest reason that can be to
doubt from a public contrary judgment, where the much major part of such, as I
have opportunity to know their opinion (these having all the same evidences as
my self) dissent from me.

Now, against these indications of certainty proposed by us, it may be, and is,
said: That passion, self-conceit, pride, love of contention,. 23.
and especially contrary education and custom in error, may blind some men's
judgment, so as not to discern the plainest things. But mark first, that this
is said, ordinarily, by a man that is singular against the contrary judgment of
the Church of God. Thou that judge another, judge thou not thy self? What
can be a better argument for the Church, than her former customs, which thou
accusest to mislead her present judgment? Who are liker to be clear of passion,
those that submit to another judgment, or those that adhere to their own?
Lastly, from this it will follow, that we also, to be infallibly certain of a
truth, must be infallibly certain, we are not misled by passion, or education
in an error, as well as that others may be so; and this surely is very hard to
know. In dissent from our Pastors (says Dr. Jackson) we cannot but doubt,
whether we have learnt, as we should, the precepts of Christian modesty:
whether learnt to deny our selves, and our affections, to reverence him as
God's Minister, taking no offense at his person: whether we have abandoned all
such delights, and desires, as are the usual grounds of false persuasion. And
in another place, he grants, that to the disobedient, and those who hate the
light, even plain Scriptures are difficult. If we cannot be resolved in these,
then must we doubt (whether we will or no) whether our doubt and scruple be of
faith and conscience, or of humor. What Dr. Jackson says here of doubt, I may
say of certainty, (since many also are deceived, in thinking themselves
certain, when they are not): that till we are certain that we are void of such
passion, we cannot be certain that we are certain, etc.

Again; it is said: That in points, which we must needs grant to be most
certainly plain to any rational man, yet some heretics. 24.
have bin of a contrary judgment: as it is instanced in the Manichees, and in
some frantic people of late, acknowledging no obligation to the practice of
Christian virtues etc. I answer: this comes about, for the most part at least,
by their denying some principles, which others argue upon. The Manichees
acknowledged divine Scriptures, but not such as we have them; but said, that
our Scriptures were miserably corrupted. Our Sectarists of late acknowledge our
Scriptures; but say, they were writ for, and belong only to, new beginners in
Christianity, not to the perfect, etc. So likewise, those that vary in their
conclusions, it is notable to see, how much they vary also in their suppositions.
Some, in Scripture, hold those to be counsels only, which others take for
absolute commands: some suppose those precepts temporary, (as I think we must
needs confess that Act. 15. to be) which others will needs have to be eternal:
some will have the practices set down in Scripture to oblige, as well as
peremptory precepts; others not, etc. And upon these various grounds, which
others grant not, every one builds, from those grounds most infallible
conclusions; which all the world, if they yielded to his principles, would also
with him assert. Meanwhile he, looking at the plainnes of his deductions, and
seldom examining the soundnes of some ground, which he (irrationally) takes for
granted, becomes infallibly certain (as he thinks) of what is indeed an error,
and many times a gross one.

But it may be said again; that where we can show none of these differences in
principles, yet there have bin heretics, that. 25.
have gone against tenets even in fundamentals,, of which tenets we must needs
grant, that any man may be infallibly certain: as the Arrians, Socinians,
Nestorians, Eutychians, etc. To you I may speak my opinion. In all these, and
many more, which, being chief foundations, we usually also call most manifest
truths, yet the most of Christians (E will not say all) are very much beholden
to the determinations of the Church, from time to time; by which they are kept
fixed, and not shaken in them. And you see how the contrary tenets grow upon
the sharpest men of reason, where the authority of the Church is laid aside.
Certainly (to name some of them) the omnipresence of God, not in his power, but
substance; his certain foreknowledge of, not only what may, but also what
shall, be, yet so, as not to destroy man's free election; Christ's
non-inferiority, as touching the Godhead, to the Father; and all those
particulars about the Trinity, Person, Natures, and Wills of Christ, can hardly
be said to be so plain in Scripture (to every one that grants it to be
Scripture) that all men, without the Church'es guidance, and education in such
a faith etc, would have bin infallibly certain of them.

2. But, to let these pass, and suppose, in private men, what infallible
certainty you please, of them, or also of many other divine. 26.
truths: yet in the 3d. place, I do not see how, from the former instances, we
can proceed to make any use of this plea of infallible 3. The plea of
infallible certainty at least not usable against any general contrary judgment
of the Church.
certainty, against the judgment of the Church of many former ages, for the
controversies now on foot between the Reformed and the Catholic Church, against
whom this infallible certainty is chiefly made use of.

One of the most seemingly gross and unreasonable points on. 27. An instance in
the controversy about giving the Communion in one kind only.
their side, I suppose, is Communion in one kind only: which has this
prejudice also accompanying it; that it was practiced by the Church Catholic
in the public ordinary Church-communions only in some latter times before the
Reformation. Yet, I think that none will offer to affirm that he is (I say not,
much persuaded, but infallibly certain, of) the unlawfulnes of such a practice,
when he has seriously considered these things which I shall briefly name unto
him: * That many practices in Scripture are alterable by the Church, and some
precepts there only temporary, not perpetual, (as Act. 15. 20. and Jam. 5. 14.
as some will have it): * That the Church has altered many other things, not
only without our complaining thereof, but with our imitating her. Nay further;
* That some learned Protestants number the communicating the people in both
kinds, not amongst things strictly commanded in Scripture, but amongst
Apostolical Traditions only. See Montag. Origin. Eccles. p. 396. Ubi jubentur
in Scripturis Infantes baptizari, aut in Coena Domini sub utraque specie
communicantes participare? And Bishop White on the Sabbath, p. 97. Genuine
Traditions derived from the Apostolical times are received and honored by us.
Such as are these which follow. The Historical Tradition concerning the number
and dignity of Canonical Books of Scripture. The Baptism of Infants. Perpetual
Virginity of the B. Virgin. Observation of the Lord's Day. The Service of the
Church in a known tongue. The delivering of the H. Communion to the people in
both kinds. -- When he has considered * the practice of the primitive times,
even in the Eastern Churches also, of giving it in one kind to sick men, to
Seamen, to Travelers, to the absents (upon necessary occasions) from church;
to those also, who came to church, to carry home with them, that they might
there reserve it in readiness, and communicate themselves therewith, when they
thought fit, on those days when there was no public communion, or they hindered
from it by distance, danger, (as in times of persecution), or necessary secular
business; that which they carried home with them being only of one species, viz.
that of the bread. And * these things; tho so done, to avoid some
inconvenience, (I suppose the spilling, and the not-keeping of the wine, as
also it is now); yet so done, without any absolute necessity; for, the sick can
take wine sooner than bread; and it might be conveyed from vessels without
spilling, and those vessels also be first consecrated; and might also be
possibly preserved in a close bottle for some long time. When he has
considered * the ancient practice of giving the Communion sometimes to Infants
newly born and baptized (to whom this Sacrament was thought also necessary)
only in one kind; namely that of the wine. -- When one considers, * the ancient
custom likewise in time of Lent (in the Greek Church, for all days save
Saterdays and Sundays (because, says Balsamon, Deo sacrificium offerre, they
accounted to be, festum diem agere) in the Latin Church, for Good Friday) to
communicate expraesanctisicatis; i. e. on what was consecrated on another day,
and reserved till then; which Symbol reserved was only that of the bread. * The
great cautiousnes of the former times, against the too frequent casualties of
spilling that precious blood (which could not be gathered up again, as the
bread might) in their receiving it, in some places sucked up through a pipe; in
others, by intinction, and dipping only, or sopping the bread in the wine; a
custom also used at this day in some of the Greek and Eastern Churches. Again;
(whereas one of our greatest complaints in this matter is an imperfect
communion, and robbing the people, as it were, of the chief part of their
redemption, yet) when he has considered, * their never questioning the
compleatnes of such Communions, who thus received it in one kind; which it most
concerned people going out of the world, and some of them perhaps then first
communicated, for their last viaticum, to have most perfect. Where note also;
1. First; * that the sufficiency of such a communion was so constantly
believed; that the use of the Cup also in public communions was (upon many
abuses committed about it) by little and little, in a manner generally laid
aside in the ordinary practice, some hundreds of years before any determination
passed in any Council concerning it: and * that that decree made first in the
Conc. Constant. 13. sess. was only to warrant and justify the Church'es former
custom against those, (Petrus Dresdensis, the Hussites, and others,) who then
began, to inveigh, against it, saying; AEn. Sylv b^st. Bohem 35. c.
hanc consuetudinem observare esse sacrilegum and illicitum; as likewise
against that custom, to communicate men fasting; and hence began to change it,
and to communicate after Supper, and in both kinds. And 2ly, * That some of the
Reformed also acknowledge, totum Christum to be contained in, and exhibited to
us by, any one species, and by the least particle thereof. See Confessio
Wirtenberg. Chamier de Eucharist. 9. t. 8. c. our Savior's boby, and blood,
and soul, and Deity, suffering now no separation. See a further proof of the
things said above, in the discourse on this subject. And lastly, if he has
considered a case not much unlike; i. e. the communicating of Infants; wherein
if the Protestants had retained a contrary custom to the rest of the present
Church, perhaps they might have accused the Church for changing it, not with
less evidence than they do in this. For first; the Scripture says plainly, as
of Baptism, he that is not born again of water etc; so, of the Eucharist, he
that eats not my flesh etc, shall not inherit eternal life. 2ly. And then the
Primitive times, according to these precepts, practiced it. 3ly. No more
knowledge and preparation is required to the Lord's Supper, than to Baptism;
for examining ones self, and repenting, is required to Baptism as well as to
the Eucharist; therefore, if such things are not required of children for the
one; so neither are they for the other. And I could press the like in Extreme
Unction; which suppose that we had retained, and the Roman Church left off (as
it is contrary); how easily could we have charged them for abrogating a plain
Apostolical precept, Jam. 5. 14? And the same may be urged concerning the great
act of humility, washing one another feet before the Communion: for which,
after that our Savior himself had first begun the practice thereof, there
seems to be a plain precept. Jo. 13. 14. -- And so the Church'es changing the
celebration of the Lord's Supper into a morning exercise, and that it should be
received fasting, was not done without some men's scrupling it; See Januarius
his consulting S. Austin about this, Epist. 118. etc. But, if we can allege in
this matter the desuetude of former Church to be a sufficient rule and warrant
to us for omitting of it; then why may not the same plea of the Church'es
desuetude be as well by some others enlarged to some other points, wherein
Scripture is urged against them? I say therefore, if such cases as these be
well considered, together with the understanding and the holiness of these men,
who, after our reasons given them, are not convinced by such an evidence, as we
pretend; methinks for one to say, notwithstanding all this, not, that he is
much persuaded, but that he is absolutely infallibly certain, of the
unlawfulnes of such a practice, would not consist with that Christian humility
which we ought to have, and to which only God gives true knowledge; nor with
that charge of the Apostle, not to be wise in our own conceits. Whereas it is
noted, that the more eminent in sanctity any one has bin, the more eminent
obeyer and defender (not opposer) has he bin of the Church'es authority. A
like instance might be made in that mainly opposed doctrine of
Transubstantiation: where, as long as a possibility thereof is granted, (as it
is by many of the Reformed); and such a declaration is found in Scripture as
this, [Hoc est Corpus meum,] (the most literal and proper sense whereof that
can be, tho the most heightning this mystery, is Transubstantiation of the
Elements; See Treat. of Euchar.. 28. n. 2.); and as long as this Scripture is
not found contradicted by any other Scriptures, but that with less force the
literal expression of them may be brought to comply with it, than the literal
expression of it to comply with them; we also adding to these the final
determination of the Church (long before Protestancy thought on) after so long
and subtle disputes for about 300 years, from the 2d. Nicene Council till the
days of Berengarius, and after so curious an examination on all sides of
Primitive Tradition by Paschasius, Bertram, and others, 800 years ago; I do not
see, where a man can ground an absolute infallible certainty against it. It Is a
dangerous case to disobey, where we see others of great judgment and integrity
yiedling obedience with alacrity, says Dr. Jackson. And indeed I cannot but
approve of that constitution of Ignatius; and think him a too much
self-conceited man, who, when he has, I say not, to the Church, but, suppose
only to three or four, whom he knew wise, and learned, and uninterested men,
showed his reasons, and they have weighed them, and concluded against his
former opinion, would not quietly acquiesce in their contrary judgments,
supposing no superior judgment to have prejudiced them; and this especially in
a point not fundamental. Tho (I know not how it is, that) when we plead our
security in our dissent from the Church'es judgment, we presently say, that the
point we differ from her in is not fundamental, and that unity of faith in
those fundamentals is sufficient: but again, when we plead the necessity of
using our own judgment, and not trusting or relying on any other man's, we
presently represent the same Not-fundamental truths, as of great consequence;
and say, the blind (meaning the Church, which may perhaps err in such things)
leading the blind, both may fall into the ditch: and that that ditch also is
damnation.

I cannot conceive therefore, how any man can assure himself (in any thing that
is not of fact or sense, but that is only a deduction. 28.
from Scripture and Tradition) contrary to the judgment (I say not of his
private Pastor, but) of the supremest Court of the present Church, that he is
infallibly certain of any thing, small, or great. Small, I say, as well as
great: for from the Church'es being liable in some things to error does not
follow any likelihood of his being infallibly certain in those things of the
contrary truth; but rather otherwise: because it is a sign, that such things are
not clearly revealed, and that they being dark to her, will be so much more to
him. To confirm which, add these two. 1. That in Fundamentals this thing is
granted; That none can be certain of the contrary to what the Church defines:
and then, that how many points are fundamental, is to him uncertain. 2. That
amongst many tenets of the Church, this is one; That private men are bound in
all things to yield their consent to the Church'es decisions, where they are
required so to do. This tenet is plain in the practice of General Councils;
which Councils, as well for Non-fundamentals as Fundamentals, and for things of
practice as well as of belief, have anathematized the (not only contradicters,
but) Dissenters and Non-conformists. Now then, unles any one be infallibly
certain of the contrary to what the Church determins, and that this is no
fundamental point also; his judgment, against hers, cannot be infallible in any
point whatsoever, where she requires submission of his judgment. In prosecution
of which submission of our judgment in Non-fundamentals, also it is to be
noted; that, if our submission to the Church in fundamentals were performed
from any such obedience, as we confess is by the command of God's word due to
her determinations; then the texts, which may be urged to oblige us to
obedience in these points, would oblige us also in others: for these texts are
without any limitation of our obedience to fundamentals only. But indeed, our
not so much assenting to her, as consenting with her, in fundamentals seems to
proceed from other motives than obedience: as from this; that our Savior has
promised, that the Church (for fundamentals at least) shall not err: and from a
second; that all fundamentals are most plain in Scripture: and therefore, as
they cannot be hid to us, so neither can they to her; and therefore in
fundamentals we must necessarily both agree; in which agreeing, we obey not
her, but, together with her, the Scriptures. Mr. Chillingworth well saw this.
And hence, those who withdraw one of these motives, as those amongst the
reformed, who say, Christ's promise (beforementioned) is only conditional, (i.
e. if the Clergy shall do their duty); or who say, that Christ's promise is
more general, i. e. made to Christianity, but not to the Clergy thereof, or to
any General Council; those, I say, make nothing to dissent from any Council, or
any Church, that can authoritatively declare her opinion. To conclude this
Query; I do not see then, how any man can be, or at least can know, that he is,
infallibly certain of any point, wherein the Church'es judgment is contrary to
his.

4. Now (next) if you be not infallibly certain, then, tho you have never so
great probability (that is short of certainty) for your. 29. 4. The greatest
probability, short of infallible cer tainty, not excusing one dissenting from
the judgment of the Church,
private opinion, yet I think, and I think the Reformed Divines conclude, that
you are notwithstanding to consent to the contrary determination of the Church
or Council. Else if only probabilities may serve to counterpoise the Church'es
or Council's authority, when or where will these be wanting? You have seen Mr.
Hookers, and Bishop Laud's, and Bishop White's opinion in Church-gov; 2. part..
36. -- Infallib.. 45. And Dr. Jackson on the Creed, 2. l. 1.. 6. c. I find
saying thus, Our disobedience is unwarrantable, unles we can truly derive some
formal contradiction or opposition between the injunction of Superiors, and
express law of the most high. And elsewhere he says: Every doubt or scruple,
that the Church'es edicts are directly or formally contrary to God's law, is
not sufficient to deny obedience. And again: In doubts (says he) [and I say,
all is but more or less doubt until we be certain] it will abundantly suffice,
to make sincere protestation in the sight of God, or before the Magistrate, if
need require, that we undertake not such actions upon any private liking of the
things enjoined, but only upon sincere respect of performing obedience to
Superiors etc. And elsewhere: We may not put the Superior to prove what he
commands, but he is to be obeyed, till we can prove the contrary. Again: We can
no more obey, than love, God whom we have not seen, but by obeying our
Superiors whom we have seen. True Spiritual obedience will bind us rather to
like well of the things commanded for Authorities sake, than to disobey
Authority for the private dislike of the things commanded. Again: If Pastors
are only to be obeyed when bringing evidence out of Scripture, what obedience
perform we to them more than to any other man whomsoever? for whosoever shows
the express undoubted command of God, it must be obeyed of all. If we thus only
bound to obey, then I am not more bound to obey any other man, than he bound to
obey or believe me: the flock no more bound to obey the Pastor, than the Pastor
them: and so the donation of Spiritual Authority, when Christ ascended on high,
were a donation of mere titles. You see how we plead for obedience, against our
own Non-conformists: yet, for the former Church, we support our selves against
her authority, with having infallible certainty. But the Non-conformists cease
not to plead this certainty also against us. But indeed, this, he says here,
is most reasonable. For if you do not submit to the Church'es judgment, when
you have greater probability to the contrary; you never submit to her judgment
at all: for when ever you have not greater probability to the contrary, you
have either greater probability of what she says; or are in a pure
equilibration: and in either of these you do nothing with, or for, which you
would not, and may not also, do without, her. Well, then we may not exact of
the Church that she should prove, nor may not only then yield obedience, i. e,
consent and conformity, when she does prove, to us that that is truth, which
she commands us to believe; and that that is lawful, which she commands us to
do. But it is our duty to obey, if our selves have not infallible certainty and
proof that such things are untrue or unlawful. It is not enough, to license us
to withdraw our obedience or assent to her, that she may possibly err in what
she commands us, unless also we know, that we cannot err our selves: for the
power of giving our assent requires not infallible knowledge, that the thing,
we assent to, first is true; but only, a not knowing infallibly, that it is
false. It is not enough, that we are not certain that she erreth not; not
enough, that we have some scruples, some reasons and arguments, whereby it
seems to us that she erreth: but only certain infallibility that she does err,
this indeed excuses our non-obedience. Else our Spiritual Superiors are in the
place of God, and of Christ, to us: and we are to show to them, whom we do see
and hear, the humble obedience we are ready in all things to render to God,
whom we do not see nor hear: and, as we are to show our love to God in our
Neighbor, so are we to show our obedience to him in his Substitutes. 1 These.
4. 8. compared with 2. And it is not only lawful, but a great virtue in us,
(since the contrary is most-what an effect of self-conceit and arrogance of
wisdom and knowledge), as to suppress the seeming suggestions of reason and
sense about natural things, which suggestions are against the revelations of
God and divine truths; so, to captivate our understandings also, and crush the
suggestions of any singular interpretations and senses about these divine
revelations, which are against (I say not, every private teacher, but) the
common exposition of the Church.

Were then all those, which are the Church's, decrees acknowledged; and 2ly,
our infallible certainty (so much pretended by. 30.
us) so strictly examined, that weak probabilities be not accepted by us in
stead thereof; how few would the points be, in which (upon our concessions) we
could oppose the H. Church? But again; were all those people, that had not, in
these few points, that infallible certainty, which the others (learned) have,
(as one may be certain of a thing, of which another is not, tho he also might
be, certain), conformable to the Church's definitions, how near would this come
to a perfect union? Thus Dr. Jackson, on the Creed, 2. l. 1.. 6. c. Superiors
are to be obeyed in all such points as their inferiors are not at leisure to
examine; or not of capacity to discern, whether they be lawful or no. And in
another place. Some may sin in obeying authority, whilst some others do not
sin. And again, ib. Unles a man can justly plead some peculiar reason or
privilege, it is a very dangerous case to disobey lawful authority in such
matters, whereunto he sees many men by his own confession of great judgment and
integrity of life yiedling obedience with alacrity etc. (For indeed I suppose
all inferiors not bound to examine the doctrines they receive from the Church.)
But how is it then, that those that are not certain, are taught to believe
those, that (upon this certainty) depart from the definitions of the Church,
rather than to adhere to the Church? Surely, they ought to be taught otherwise,
even by these that are departed. For suppose Luther, upon some private
certainty, might not yield his consent to former Church-definitions, yet all
the rest not having the same certainty (even by the Protestants stating of this
question) ought to adhere still, not to Luther, but to the former Church. And
again, Luther, in this certainty, being bound at least to Non-contradiction of
the Church, neither might he then go about to teach others that infallible
certainty which he had, of those points which oppose the Church.

You know the ordinary objection, against what is abovesaid, out of Romans 14.
c. 23. Where the Apostle says: He that doubts. 31. An explication of Romans
14. 23.
of the lawfulnes of a thing, and yet does it, sins: and therefore it is
urged, that he that practices a thing upon the Churches command, whereof he
doubts, whether it be lawful; or subscribeth to the Church's judgment in a
thing, whereof he doubts whether it be true, sins. To this I answered
before, (. 2. and. 20.) that he that believes, or is persuaded, that he ought
to yield obedience to the Church in things contrary to his private judgment,
sins not in this sort, because such a one doubts not, but is satisfied in
what he ought to hold, or to do. But, if the question be asked of those, who
have some doubt whether they ought to obey the Church, or to follow their own
judgment; whether such at least ought not to follow their own judgment, to
avoid sinning? I answer; neither do such sin in obeying the Church, rather than
themselves. Indeed where one side is undoubtedly lawful, and the other only is
doubted of, whether lawful; he who does that, which he doubts of, sins.
But where one has, or has reason to have, a double doubt; and a doubt of the
lawfulnes of both sides: you see, that here he must (go what way he will) do
something, when he doubts, or has reason to doubt, of the lawfulnes thereof.
And thus it is, where ever the Church commands me to do a thing on one side,
and my particular judgment in the thing disswades me from doing it on the
other; for here, in not doing it, I may, or ought, to doubt, that I sin against
the obedience I owe the Church; as well as, in doing it, against the obedience
I owe to my own judgment or conscience. Here therefore, I am not to say, [my
judgment being against it I must not do it,] or [I sin if I do it,] and so
oppose the Church'es authority out of conscience, as I think: but when a
command of the Church is now come in upon me to do it, and so it is not left
free to me in respect of external authority (as before, and as it is in the
Apostle's instances) not to do it; here I am first to examine, whether this my
judgment is not to be submitted to the Church'es judgment: for if I am
persuaded, or so much as doubt whether, it ought to be submitted, I may now
sin, in not doing according to her judgment, against my own; i. e. I may sin in
not doing it, tho it is against my judgment to do it. As in two instances it
will be plain. For, suppose a Church-injunction come forth for Christians not
to observe Jewish Sabbaths, and some Christian, Judaic in his own particular
judgment, thinks such Sabbaths are to be observed; yet such a one sins, if
he does according to this judgment, after, and against, the Church'es
injunction; (see Gal. 4. 10.) tho before this he had sinned, if he had not done
according to his own judgment. (See Romans 14. 5. 14.) Again; suppose a decree of
the Nicene Council, that all men should subsubscribe their Creed, and that some
particular Christian thinks (thinks, I say, is not certain) in his own
particular judgment something in it to be false: if such a one does not
subscribe it, tho against his own particular judgment, he sins: because he
either knows, or ought to know, that, in fundamentals at least, his particular
judgment is to yield to the judgment of the Church. But 3ly, if the question be
asked again; Whether he that doubts not, but is fully persuaded, that he ows no
such obedience to the Church; and that he is to follow his private judgment
rather than to follow that of the Church, when they cross; whether such, I say,
may or ought to obey the Church, against his private judgment? I answer; No, by
no means: because an erroneous conscience obliges; i* e. our words or actions
may never go contrary to our heart. And if any one, tho in doing well, thinks
he does evil, he (in his intention) does evil. But yet, if his judgment owes
obedience to the Church'es, tho he does not think so, in this following of his
conscience he sins, because he does against his duty; of which he ought to
have informed his conscience better: and this no small sin, after such a known
declaration; He that hears you, hears me: and, If he will not hear the
Church, let him be accounted as a heathen, etc.



Concerning the Use of Private Judgment.
1. FIrst, it is true, that we are in all things to follow our own judgment, as
our judgment, reflecting on the former acts of the intellect, and considering
all reasons, (as well those taken from authority, as those taken from the
appearance of things in themselves to us) finally determines what we ought to
do. (But note, that such judgment, when ever culpably mistaken, excuses not
from sin our acting according to it). But 2ly, it is false that we are always
to follow or act after our own judgment, as our judgment is taken for our own
private argumentations, reasonings, and evidences, concerning the subject we
examine and judge of against the authority of whomever judging otherwise. See
Oblig. of Judgment, p. 1. and the Canons quoted before, Chapter Governm. 2d. part,
how far the Reformed Synods have thought fit to restrain men's private judgments
in obliging them to that of the Church. 3ly. It is granted, that as our
judgment is taken in this 2d. sense, namely, for the private reasons and
evidences we have of a subject in it self secluding from authority, in some
things we are allowed to use and follow it, or to follow such reasons. But we
cannot collect from hence, that we are permitted by God, or have equal reason
to follow it (I mean our private opinion or reason) in every thing; unless it
be proved [1.] That all things are equally easy to be discovered by it: and
[2ly,] That there is no divine command for our yiedling obedience in some
things to another judgment. If any one should advise one to find out some
reputed wise and experienced person in such affairs, to consult with about
something wherein himself knows little, and, such a one found, wholly to rely
on his directions and judgment therein; answered he well that should say: If I
may rely on my own judgment in seeking out such a person, why may I not as well
rely on it for the matter about which I seek to him? which only is well
answered, if these two be equally easy or difficult. So the Reformed granting,
that we are to use our own private reason for discovering what books are the
true word of God, yet will not allow us, having found such books to be his
word, to use our own private reason to examine by it, whether what we find
delivered to us therein be truth or no; or when ever any thing therein seems (I
say not is) against our reason, (as a Trinity of Persons in an Unity of
Essence), then to follow our reason in expounding it otherwise then it appears:
but now we are to lay aside the arguing of our reason, and to believe all these
Scriptures proposed, after that by our reason we have found them to have divine
authority. So supposing that some Church were infallible, it will not follow,
that if one may use his judgment in finding her, he may afterward also use his
judgment against her, or any her decrees. 4ly. If you ask therefore in what
things we may use and follow our private reason and opinion; I answer, in all
things wherein God or right reason has not submitted us to the judgment of
another. We may use it therefore in the discovery and search, whether there be
any such Judge at all appointed by God over us in Spiritual matters: and what
person or court it is, to whose judgment he has subjected us: And in order to
this, we may use it in the finding out, which, of the several religions that
are in the world, is the true; and which, in the several divisions and sects
that are in the true, i. e. where some truth is by all retained, is the
Catholic; and whether that particular Church, wherein we were bred, has any
way departed from it. So in the finding out which Councils, in some doubt
concerning them, are legitimate and truly General, to whose acts we are to
render up the submission of our judgment, and which is the right and genuine
sense (where any ambiguity) of their decrees; in finding them out (I say) by
the judgment and testimony, which we find the present Church of our own days,
or that part thereof which seems to our private reason the Catholic, to give
thereof. In this search, that Proposition of Dr. La: is very true; Intellectus
cujusque practicus judicare debet, utrum is, qui pro Judice haberi velit, sit
utique verus and legitimus; and an media, quae adducuntur ad hoc probandum,
fidei faciende sufficiant. But, such a Judge by our private reason being found
to be, and found who it is, we may not, for the things once judged and decided
by him, use or follow our own private reason any further; but are now to quit
it; and our judgment, having once discovered that such is appointed our Judge
in such matters, in this excludes it self: and this Resignation we make of our
judgment is also an act of our judgment. In this manner the Apostle exhorts
elsewhere, not to trust every teacher, but to try their doctrines, whether
agreeing with those of the Apostles, i. e. with those of the appointed
Governors of the Church; and elsewhere, that doctrine which they find the
Church-governors to have delivered to them, to stand constant and steadfast in
it. (See Col. 2. 7, 8. 2 These. 2 15. compared with 1. 1. Tit. 1. 9. Ephesians. 4. 11.
compared with 14. Jude 3. 4.) But you will say; What if upon using my private
reason, I find not that there is any Judge or Lawgiver in Spiritual matters,
cannot I then in all such matters use my private reason, and follow the
dictates thereof without sinning? No, if your reason in such search was faulty;
for, as I said, vitiously contracted ignorance never excuses omission of duty.
5ly. As it is our duty (where any cause of doubt) diligently with our best
reason to seek out the true Spiritual Guides; and then having found, to submit
our judgment and reason as readily unto, them: so it seems much more easy to
find out the Church, which is to be our guide, and to decide things to us, than
to find out the truth of all those things she decides: more easy to find out,
who are those Spiritual Magistrates and Substitutes of our Savior, left to
govern and guide his Church until his second coming, (lights not put under a
bushel, but set on high upon a candlestick to give light to all, and a
corporation and city set on an hill to be seen of all), or, amongst several
sects and divisions, to find out which is the Catholic communion (from which
all the rest in their several times have gone forth, at the first very few in
number, v. Trial of Doctrines,. 32.) than by our own guidance and steering,
entering every one as a rasa tabula upon search of truth amongst the many
subtleties of contrary pretenses of contrary traditions in Antiquity, to find
out what is orthodox in all those points: which points wean-while after so many
hot contentions, and wavering of opinion, and mis-quoted Authors, the Guide, we
neglect, in her several Councils has prudently fixed, that we might no more
like children be tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of
doctrine by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in
wait to deceive. What wise work have the Socinians made, and what strange
truths have they discovered, by waving the authority of Councils, and laying
hold of private reason to conduct them, and be their judge, assisted with plain
Scripture, after that they had made quest after some other Judge, and could
find none sufficiently infallible for their turn? Who have bin so much, so
dangerously, deceived, as these wise and wary men, who would trust none but the
infallible? 6ly. (Against that which is usually said, that the words of
Scripture are as plain and intelligible as the decrees of a Council, and
therefore our private reason or judgment may make use of the one for its guide
as well as the other; and, when there seems contradiction, against the other);
it seems much more easy by our private understandings to apprehend the
Councils decision, than to apprehend the sense of Scripture in such points as
the Council decides; and many may learn (for example) the orthodox tenets
concerning the Trinity out of the Athanasian Creed, that could not learn them
out of Scripture without mistaking in some of them. For tho it is true, that a
text of Scripture may be as plain as any decrees of a Council; and that as we
may judge what is the sense and meaning of such a decree, so we may also of
such a place of Scripture: yet it may be presumed, that none of these plain
Scriptures will ever be found opposite to the decree of such Council: for if
the place be so plain and intelligible to us, surely so it would have bin to so
learned and numerous a Council, as well as to a private judgment. Again, what
is said in Scripture, concording with the decrees of Councils, yet, it may be
presumed, is not there every way, considering the counterpoise of other
Scripture-texts, so plainly said. Else such Conciliary decisions are vain: and
we must likewise say, that all expositions, comments, catechismes, are no
plainer than the text, and, to those who read Scriptures, useles. For words are
only multiplied without necessity, where what is said before is as plain as
what is said after, and the authority of the first infallible. Thus, if the
Council remained as ambiguous as the Scripture, supposing the Church
infallible, yet those who followed her sentence could receive no more
satisfaction to their doubts than they had before; and the sense of the
Conciliary definitions might be disputed as much as of Scripture, and both
sides, who subscribe to the Scriptures, would also subscribe to them; which we
ordinarily see refused.

FINIS.
Concerning Obedience to ECCLESIASTICAL GOVERNORS, and Trial of DOCTRINES.

CONTENTS.
SUfficient Truth always to be found in the Church.. 1. Yet false Doctors must
be; And their followers not safe.. 2. Doctors therefore may be tried.. 3.
Several ways of Trial. 4.
1. By the H. Scriptures.. 5. Where 1. Concerning Trials of Doctrines, and
Commands, wherein Scriptures are silent.. 6. 2. Concerning Doctrines, and
Commands, where the Scripture seems to us doubtful.. 12. 3. Concerning
Doctrines etc. to which Scriptures seem to us contrary.. 13.
1. Where we must proceed to use a second Trial of Doctrines by the Doctors of
the Church.. 14. And beware of depending on our own judgment made upon the
Scriptures.. 14. That there is always some external Communion of Christianity
or other, not erring in knowledge necessary.. 18. We necessarily to follow the
judgment of the Church'es teachers, where universally agreeing.. 19. n. 1.
Where divided; 1. We to follow either side rather than our own judgment
opposite to both.. 20. 2. Of the two, to follow those, whom the other
acknowledge to have the judgment or practice of former times on their side..
21. Where this judgment or practice is pleaded by both; we to search, and to
follow that, which we find so by our experience.. 22. That this thing is not
hard to be found.. 23. The Fathers being not, for the main, either repugnant to
one another; or ambiguous; or impertinent. Where, Of certain Cautions in making
judgment of the tenets of the Ancients.. 23. And some Church also in all ages
being like the former.. 30. And Heresy still either going, or being thrust, out
of this Church.. 32. And its beginning discerned by its paucity. So that
discreet Trial cannot mistake.. 33. Who can search no further, They to adhere
to the judgment of the Christian Church wherein they live, rather than to their
own judgment against it.. 36.
3. Trial of Doctrine and Doctors, by the Holiness those produce, and these
practice.. 37. Where more Truth, more Holiness.. 38. And where more Holiness,
more Truth.. 39. Where more Error, more Vice: and e converso.. 40. In Churches
therefore, we to compare 1. the strictness or liberty of their doctrines,
discipline, etc.. 41. 2. Their abounding, or deficiency, in doctrines tending
to Perfection.. 42. 3. Their writings of Devotion.. 46. 4. The Lives of their
Saints, or Holy men.. 47.
4. Trial of Doctrines by the Conversion of Nations.. 49.
Concerning Obedience to Ecclesiastical Governors, and Trial of Doctrines.
THat God, by his Great Apostle Jesus Christ, sent the clear. 1. Sufficient
truth always to be found in the Church.
light of all the mystery of our salvation into the world; and that Christ
has, and will, continue it (so much as is sufficient) to us, by his
Substitutes in the same office, unto the end thereof; so that we need not
remain in darkness but by our own default, has bin showed you elsewhere, in
Sav. Ben. p. 12. etc. and Succession of Clergy, p. 1.

But yet 1. it seems, that notwithstanding these Substitutes there shall be
some false teachers; and as we hitherto see not all his other enemies, so
neither all error, put under our Saviors feet; as, not sin, so neither
ignorance yet quite vanquished: (1 Cor. 13. 12.) because it so seemed good unto
him, (for whom are all things), as to permit evil always, to make good arise
more gloriously out of it; so to permit error always, (2 Pet. 2. 1.) the more
to illustrate truth; and to make the followers of truth, as well as of
righteousness, by these oppositions, more approved (for their adherence Yet
false Doctors must be.
to God) and capable of greater reward: it being far more glorious, more
acceptable, to have discerned, held, defended, the truth; where there was a
possibility, a facility, a pattern, an opposition, of error. (See for this 1
Cor. 11. 19. Matt. 10. 34, 35. -- 17. 15. Act. 20. 29. 1 Timothy 4. 1. 2 Timothy 2.
20. compared with 16. etc. 1 Jo. 2. 18. Luke 2. 34. Jo. 9. 39. Romans 9. 32. This
is showed also by experience: even when there were infallible teachers, there
were also false ones mingled; a contending for the law at Antioch;
Nicolaitanisme at Ephesus, (Rev. 2. 15); Divisions about their teachers at
Corinth; Circumcision at Galatia; opposers of the Resurrection; deniers of
Christ's true Incarnation; (Hymeneus, Diotrephes, etc.) Else; could not God at
the beginning have published his truth to all Nations, as well as to Abraham?
or spread the Gospel, at first, over all the world? Could not our Savior have
laid the chief foundation of the Gospel so firm and evident, that the whole
Nation of the Jews, together with the chief Priests, and Pharisees, and Herod,
and Pilat, should have bin convinced thereof by their own senses; in showing
himself with his wounded side, and pierced hands and feet, publicly at that
grand Festival, (as formerly he had done,) in the Temple and in the Streets, in
their Palaces and Courts? and then before all the people have ascended into
Heaven to God? and so have sealed for ever to that whole Nation the Confession
of his being the Messiah, and thus, with a great access to his Glory on earth
have prevented their so great and long Apostasy? What meaned he then to appear
so sparingly, and in corners, the doors being shut, and not to all the people
(says the Apostle), but to some few chosen to be witnesses, tho he was not
here defective in what was sufficient? Again; could not his Spirit (that has
led some) have led all, into all truth, if he had pleased to give it to them,
in a greater measure? How easy had it bin for our Savior, who foresaw that
sharp controversy concerning observance of the Ceremonial law by Christians,
(the maintainers of which ceremonies contended only for them, because they
thought Christ had not abrogated them), to have declared himself openly in that
point, when he was here on earth? How easy for him, foreseeing the
controversies ever since, even those so many about his own person, those now
between the Reformed and the Roman Church, to have caused (instead of an
occasionally-written Epistle) such a Creed as the Athanasian, or such Articles
as those of Trent, or of the Augustan Confession, or such a methodical clear
Catechism as now several Sects draw up, for the instruction of their followers
in the principles of their religion, to have bin written by his Apostles? Will
any one say, that had such writings bin H. Scripture, yet these controversies
had not bin prevented, or at least not in some greater measure prevented than
now they are? Or would not (brieflier) all controversies have bin prevented,
had our Savior as plainly said, that the Roman Bishop should regulate the
faith of his Church for ever, as it may be said, and is said by others? There
must be heresies then; and 1 Cor. 11. 19.
therefore it seemed good to the wisdom of the Father, that all things should
not be done (that might, but only so much that was sufficient), whereby they
should be prevented. Neither is it a good reasoning; This was the best way for
taking away all controversy and error in the Church, that the Scriptures should
plainly, so as none may mistake, set down all truths necessary to salvation;
or, that there should be a known infallible Judge; therefore, they do so; or,
therefore, there is so: because this seemed not best to God (for the reasons
forementioned, and for many other perhaps not known, which made the Apostle
cry, (...)! Romans 11, 33.) to take away all controversy and error etc, no more
than it did to prohibit in the world the being of evil. I know not whether
Tertullian's saying, in praescript. cont. haer. concerning this matter, be not
too bold: Ipsas quoque Scripturas sic esse ex Dei voluntate dispositas, ut
haereticis materiam subministrarent. -- And, -- haereses sine aliquibus
occasionibus Scripturarum accidere non poterant. But we may make good use of
it, in being less rash, and more circumspect, in interpreting, (especially when
we are singular), where we may be so easily mistaken.

2ly. It seems, (since there is supposed sufficient means, for all. 2. And
their followers not safe.
those who are in the Church, to attain to the knowledge of all necessary
truth; for God and our Savior have not bin wanting to his Church in
necessaries), that those, who blindly obey such false guides as shall be in the
world, shall not be free from punishment, tho they offend through ignorance. See
Matt. 15. 14. Ezekiel. 33. 8. -- 3. 18.

3ly. There being some doctrines false, and danger in being. 3. Doctrines
therefore may be tried.
misled by them; it seems all doctrines may be tried, and that by all persons.
See, Jo. 5. 39, our Savior bidding them try his; -- Act. 17. 11. the Bereans;
-- and, Act. 15. 2. the Antiochians, trying S. Paul's. -- See to this purpose 1
Jo. 4. 1. 1 These. 5. 21. Rev. 2. 2. 1 Cor. 10. 15. -- 11. 13. And the more
trial the better; so it be rightly performed, whereby we may discover false
doctrines and teachers, that we may not be seduced by them; whereby we may know
more of God; may confirm our belief (of which there are many degrees) in what
we are taught; and may be able to give better account to others of our faith,
(1 Pet. 3. 15. Col. 3. 16.) and whereby truth will always have a great
advantage of error. For verum vero consonat.

4. Now seeing that all Spiritual knowledge comes first by. 4. Several ways of
Trial.
Revelation from God, the trial of any doctrine, we doubt of, is to be made
either by the holy Scriptures, written from the beginning by men inspired by
the Holy Ghost; or, by the Interpreters of these Scriptures, and those who were
ordained by these men that were inspired, and who had the form of sound
doctrine committed unto them, viz. by the Doctors and Pastors of the Church:
where also the doctrines of some Doctors, whose tenets we doubt of, are to be
tried by the rest of the Doctors of the present times; or the doctrines of all
the present Doctors to be tried by the writings of the Doctors of former times.
Trials by the Scriptures were those Act. 17. 11. Jo. 5. 39. 2 Pet. 1. 19. --
Trials by the Doctors of the Church, those Act. 15. 2. Gal. 1. 9. Romans 16. 17.
2 These. 3. 14. 1 Cor. 14. 32. etc. 2 Jo. 10. -- Now these H. Scriptures and
Holy Doctors collectively taken to the not-yet-so-far-grounded and illuminated
are capable of being tried too. The first Scriptures and Teachers, by those who
lived in the same times, were tried by Miracles; by those who lived afterward,
are tried by Tradition: the second Scriptures are tried by their accord with
the first, as also by Miracles: the 2d. Teachers are tried by their Ordination
from the first. which Teachers, if we find all agreeing in one judgment, we
need try no further, our Savior having promised his perpetual presence with
them, and that the gates of Hell shall never prevail against the truth taught
by them.

5. Now first concerning trial of our Superiors commands and doctrines. 5. 1.
By Scrip tures.
by Scriptures; of which there are many several ways. As trying, 1. Whether
such doctrines or commands be contained or commanded in Scripture. 2. Whether
the contrary to them be contained or commanded in Scripture. Again, if the
contrary of them be contained there, 1. whether, as fact only, 2 or also as
precept.

1. Now the first of these trials seems not necessary to be used.. 6.
Concerning trial of Doctrines and Commands, which are not also enjoined in
Scripture.
1. For it does not follow, that it is unlawful to do or to believe a thing,
because H. Scripture does not say or command it. Angumentum ab authoritate non
valet negative. Some things both in doctrine and discipline may possibly
descend from the Apostles, that are not set down by them in writing, (and
these, tho not absolutely necessary, which very few points are, yet very
useful, to Salvation.) Timothy might hear some things from S. Paul more than
are set down in his Epistle, (see 2 Timothy 1. 13.) and Timothy might also commit
these things again to other faithful men, (for them again to teach others), and
not perhaps write them, or not, all. (See 2. Tim. 2. 2.) So, when he was sent
to Corinth, 1 Cor. 4. 17. he might acquaint them with more of S. Paul's
doctrines and ways in Christ, than St. Paul writ to them. See 1 Cor. 11. 34.
where the Apostle possibly might order somewhat more concerning the receiving
of the Sacrament, which is not mentioned in the Scripture. As S. August.
thinks, he ordered receiving of it fasting. See Epist. 118. ad Januarium, near
the end. -- See 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15.

2ly. As we may not argue things unlawful in themselves, or untrue, so neither
useles, or superstitious and will worship, because. 7.
we do not find them in the Scriptures. For there are many things which may be
enjoined by Ecclesiastical authority, which are not only not unlawful; or which
are required only for the preservation of order and unity in the Church for
God's public Service etc; but which are very useful, and much helping us for
our Salvation, for the advancing of holiness, suppressing of lusts, etc, and
granted to be so, even by those who think them not all commanded in Scripture.
As Confession of sins to the Priest; observing certain times of Fast; frequent
hours of Prayer; several Penances. (See Common Prayer Book, Preface to
Commination.) etc. And there are also many other customs received from a
constant tradition; which those, who think them not to be set down in
Scripture, yet do not therefore deny them to be true and Apostolical, or affirm
them unlawful to be observed: as Episcopacy; Baptizing of Infants; the
Eucharist administered only by the Priest; the observation of the Lord's day,
etc. Nay, some precepts in Scripture there are, quietly acknowledged to be
temporary and antiquated, (as that of observing that day of the week on which
God rested, and that Act. 15. 29.) and some other things, not in precept,
willingly admitted to oblige, for no reason, but only because the first were
anciently laid aside, and the second practiced by our Mother the Church. And by
the same reason as some admit these, tho not contained in Scripture, they must
admit many more.

3ly. But were some of these things enjoined needless, yet as long. 8.
as they are not by God's word forbidden, and are by the Church commanded; if
S. Paul would abstain from flesh, whilst he lived, not to offend his brother;
how much more should we obey in these, not to offend our governors? or rather,
to perform the divine command of yiedling obedience to our Governors? which
submission to them is due, I suppose, in all things not contrary to the
Scriptures. In which our Superiors may offend many times in their injunctions,
when we do not in our obedience. the preservation of so reverend an authority,
(which cannot in all things be menaged for the best,) and of the unity of the
Church, being more benefit to any member thereof, than the observance of a
command, which is fruitles, yet no way contrary to the Scriptures, can be
inconvenience. Our Superiors may offend, I say, in enjoining, when not others
in obeying. Because injunctions and laws become unjust and unlawful (not one,
but) many ways; as in respect of the matter, when contrary to God's word, so
(where the matter is not a thing evil) in respect of the end, author, or other
circumstances. As when such injunctions are no way conducing to the public
good: when enjoined, as God's command; or, as to be preferred before something
that is so; or, as something necessary to Salvation; when not enjoined by a
lawful authority, etc. Now the matter of the command being not faulty, the
thing may be done; (provided, that no unlawful end be expressed in the
injunctions, for thus it becomes part of the matter and substance of the
command:) because the end, by them that obey, may be changed; and, as
concerning the Legislator, it is no fault to obey another, who ever he be, in
that which we may impose upon our selves. Lastly, for the matter; tho it is
everlastingly granted, that I may do nothing that is contrary to God's
commands; yet I have no reason to refuse obedience to my Superiors, unles it be
a thing, which (not, I think, but) I am sure is so, (as the Apostles were sure
in their refusing, Act. 4. 19.) for where there is reason to doubt concerning
the matter, whether it be contrary to God's command or no, (and so, I think,
there is always, where the Church's judgment is opposed to mine), there it is a
duty to obey my Superiors.

But here, what if that which is not commanded in the Scripture be. 9.
enjoined by the Church to be obeyed as a thing commanded there; or as
commanded by God? (Which thing our Savior blamed in the Pharisees, and
justified his Disciples in not observing their commands: In which if we may
conform to authority, it seems that there will scarce be any superstition, or
will worship at all, but only in the imposers of laws). Answ. 1. It Is to be
noted: 1.
that the Pharisees traditions, in which the instance is made, were many of
them other than those here supposed; some being contrary to the Scripture, as
that tradition mentioned Matt. 15. 5. some recommended before the commands in
Scripture; and whilst those done, these omitted; in which respect such service
became most odious; (see Mark 7. 8. Matt. 23. 23. -- 15. 9.) others required to
be done as necessary, which were not only needles, but upon a false ground
recommended: as that of washing hands, because they held that unwashen hands
defiled. But 2ly, this shall be granted; 2.
that, that which is commanded, tho it be not contrary to Scripture, yet when
it is pretended by the imposers to be in it self necessary, (as, when it is
pretended either to be Scripture, or, to be reverenced and equalled to the
Scriptures, and God to be as much worshipped in it (when as men only, and not
God, require it) as in what himself has commanded, and that rather to be
omitted than it, and when it is by others obeyed and reverenced as such;) is
superstition and will worship both, in him that commands, and in him who obeys,
whenever he has sufficient evidence for conviction. [And this, I suppose, was
the fault of those who sat in Moses's chair, not that they required obedience
to their decrees, such as were not contrary to God's word; but an equal
reverence and belief of them (in this obedience), as of the written law; nay,
placed the substance of holiness and of God's honor in these, wherein it did not
consist, more than in the other; and so required the omitting of the other
rather than of these: as should one now impute the power of prayer to the
posture or place he makes it in, or to the number of times he does it, and not
to the devotion and purity of the Suppliant, the mercy and promises of God,
etc, this would be Superstition and will worship, i. e. a worship, which
himself devises, put in the place of that which God requires. So not only
men's traditions, but divine commands, from a mistaken end and use of them,
become will worship too; as, * Sacrifice; (See Psalm. 50. 8. Isa. 1. 12, 13.
compared with 16. and see Jer. 7. 21, 22. compared with 23.) the chief service
not consisting in the offering, but in the devotion of the offerer. And *
Fasting; (Is. 58. 3, 4, 5. compared with the 6th. Zech. 7. 5. compared with the
9th. See the like Matt. 23. 23.) Therefore God calls those lower duties
himself has commanded, when done with an omission of the higher duty and
service of him, to which they were ordained, will worship. See Isa. 1. 12.
compared with 11, 13. who has required etc, because tho he commanded the thing
done, yet the doing of it was not according to his command.] 3ly. Were
therefore any one certain, that something not commanded in the 3.
Scriptures, or by God, were enjoined by the Church to be obeyed as commanded
by God, or also were preferred to something commanded by God etc; he ought to
refuse to obey what the Church commands, in such a manner, or with such an
intention, as she is here supposed to command it. But 4ly, there may be an
obedience performed to such ordinances (so long as we think them not 4.
also contrary to the Scriptures; but if we think them contrary, then see the
course we are to take. 13.) without being guilty of the Superstition: for we
may do them, tho not in that way as they are commanded, (when we certainly know
the contrary concerning them,) yet as things in themselves indifferent, and
commanded by the Church. [As doubtless the Disciples, upon an injunction from
the consistory, might have washed their hands before meat in obedience to such
order, so that they had no opinion that they were defiled in not washing them.
So the Feast of Dedication, kept by our Savior; of Lots, Esther 9. 20. their
Fasts mentioned in the Prophets, (Zech. 7. 5. Joel 2. 15. etc. Zech. 8. 19.)
and ceremonies in burial of the dead, in which the Priests were dispensed with,
(Lev. 21. 1. etc,) and many other practices mentioned in the Old Testament,
were no where commanded in the Law, but acts passed by the Consistory; which
yet were not neglected to be observed.] Which doing of them avoids offense, and
sufficiently preserves the peace of the Church; and doing them not as God's
commands, satisfies our own conscience. All this is said, supposing that we
certainly know these things not to be God's commands, which the Church enjoins*
as such. But 5ly, we being secure, upon our Savior's promise, that the Supreme
Guides of the 5.
Church cannot mis-guide us in necessaries to Salvation; and again not being
infallibly certain, that that is not commanded by the Scriptures or by God
which they say is so, so long we ought to yield obedience to such injunctions,
in the same manner as it is required; and if we err herein, we are excusable,
tho the Church-Guides should therein be faulty. For it is not so easy a matter
with the same infallibility to discover the Superstition of the traditions of
the Church, as our Savior did of the Pharisees; especially since all sides (in
some things) besides Scripture, must, and do, allow of useful Traditions. And
therefore let it be well considered by every private man, when the Church
pretends Scripture or Tradition for their Articles, whether he, or they are
more likely to be mistaken; and then, whether he should not yield obedience to
this command of theirs, (of which it is doubted, whether it be God's also), as
well as he does to their commands, in matters which are of themselves
indifferent. Thus much of the trial of Commands, the contrary of which is not
contained in Scripture.

2. Next; of the trial of our Superiors doctrines or commands:. 10.
whether the contrary of such commands be contained in the Scripture. Where 1.
first, if it be contained there, as fact only, and not 1.
precept; here also seems no opposition ought to be made to the Church's
authority. For we find, * both the Apostles themselves, according to change of
times and circumstances, to have changed something also of their former
institutions and practices: (See 1 Timothy 5. 9. compared with Act. 6. 1. [Widows
being formerly admitted without limitation of age,] 1 Cor. 8. 7. etc. and 1
Cor. 10. 25, 29. compared with Act. 15. 29.-16. 3. and-18. 18. and-21. 24. and
1 Cor. 9. 20. comp. with Act. 15. 1.-and Gal. 4. 9, 10.-5. 2. and Gal. 2. 3, 4,
14. circumstances altering the practice): And the Church, to have changed
others since with general approbation; as, abrogating Love Feasts; receiving
the Lord's Supper in the morning; and, by the same reasons that these have bin
altered, others may be.

2. In the Second place then, to come to the trial and search by. 11.
Scripture, Whether the contrary to what the Church commands, 2.
be not contained therein by way of precept? And here this is certain, that we
are to obey no commands whatsoever, that we are certain to be contrary to the
precepts of Holy Scriptures. But it happens, that in many controversies the
Scriptures are not clear, (for we may not call that a clear truth in Scripture,
that some one, that reads it, is confident of, whilst others, as intelligent,
think contrary; for so that is many times clear to the ignorant, not comparing
places diligently together, (for qui ad pauca respicit de facili pronunciat)
which remains doubtful to the more learned); and there we must either look
after some other trial of such controversies, or leave them undecided. Now to
say here (with some), that Scriptures are clear to all in all necessary
credends, etc; and, for all things not necessary, that we need not be
inquisitive of truth, satisfies not: for tho Scripture be so perspicuous in
things absolutely necessary to salvation (which are very few), yet, that it is
not so in many truths very useful, and of great importance to be known, the
differences between the Reformed and the Roman Churches plainly show; the
Scriptures being so ambiguous, that whole Nations, both using them, are of
contrary opinions; and the points of difference so considerable, that both
doubt of, or deny, one another salvation, in a mis-credence of them.

In this case therefore: 1. First, where our spiritual Guides determine a thing
on one side, wherein the Scripture seems to us. 12. Of Doctrines and commands:
where the Scriptures seem to us doubtful.
doubtful; and this doubt is in aequilibrio, and, as I may so say, on both
sides equal and indifferent, (as much Scripture seeming for, as against, it);
here the authority of such Guides, pro, or con, ought to sway us, as it does in
things in their own nature indifferent.

2. But if the Scripture seem clear to us on one side, and the determination.
13. Of doctrines etc, where the Scriptures seem to us contrary.
of authority be on the other; that is, the contrary seems clear from Scripture
to others: then we are to use the 2d. trial, by the rest of the Doctors and
Teachers of the Church, present, and past; by whom we may learn what is the
constant tradition of the Church: which Church has always preserved and
perused the Scriptures; and against which the gates of hell shall never prevail.

2. To conform our minds the better to the expositions of which. 14. Here we
must use a 2d. Trial, by the Doctors of the Chapter
Doctors of the Church, we are advised not to rely much on our own reason and
judgment. See Romans 12. 16. Prove. 3. 5. -- 28. 26. Is. 5. 21. Prove. 12. 15. --
11. 14. And to be the more perfectly convinced by experience also how easily
our reason is misguided, (by Reason, I mean reasoning upon, not its own, but
Scriptureprinciples), And beware of depending on our own judgment upon the
Scriptures.
after having recollected how many times our selves have changed our opinion in
Theological matters, (the same holy writings guiding us at all times), being as
confident in our former then, as now in our present, tenet; 1. Consider; that
whilst in every Nation doubtless there are many, of excellent judgments, 1.
turning the same Gospel, reading the same books of controversy, which they
both mutually answer, yet in a manner all those of one Kingdom or Government do
so espouse one opinion, and all of another a contrary, that they will both lay
down their lives in defense thereof; and so their posterity after them. And
this happens partly because there is no tenet, but that there is some
verisimility in it, and some reason for it, that seems to many hard to be
answered, which reason (according to our party) we lay for a foundation: and
then fit all other contrary arguments by distinctions (how absurd soever) unto
it; being certain that no truths contradict one another; and hence do both
sides, especially in answoring objections, accuse the other of going against
their conscience. But this happens more from, (not equality of arguments for
every side, but) opposite interests of the controvertists; which interests
commonly prevent the access to, or just force of, those arguments upon the
understanding, where the truth, if it should prove contrary to those interests,
will undo them. Therefore they make either none, or a very negligent search
into their adversaries tenets and reasons, as delivered in their own writings;
or into the doctrines of Antiquity, when quoted against them. Notwithstanding
which interest (being rather hereditary, than by themselves contracted) they
mistake themselves to be indifferent, and any way unbiassed.

2. Consider; how those, who have the Scriptures most common,. 15.
yet when free from the yoke of Ecclesiastical authority, do run into most
diversity of opinions; and those not slight, or void 2.
of danger to their salvation. In particular, the Socinian, abstracting from
all Church Authority, and committing himself only to Scripture and his reason,
yet who more than he opposes things which seem most clear in Scripture? For
what more plain there, than that this world was created by the Word, the Son of
God? Jo. 1. 1. Heb. 1. And therefore also the Reformed, more than the Romanist
(tho in both there are many differences), is censured for diversity of
opinions. Nisi adsit spiritus prudentiae, nihil proderit verbum Dei, says
Calvin: witness those of Munster. And worthy here of serious consideration is
the reason, why Timothy and Titus* are advised to avoid [i. e. not to interest
much, or practice, themselves in, or meddle with] vain curiosities, and
questions of science, (falsely so called,) because they will increase [still]
unto more ungodliness, and eat further as does a Canker or gangrene, and strife
gender strife, and questions minister more questions. See 2 Timothy 2. 16, 17, 23.
1 Timothy 1. 4. 2 Timothy 3. 7. Tit. 3. 9. compared with 10. [which argues he was
forbid much disputing with such perverse men]. And it is likely Hymeneus, etc, at
their first differing from doctrines delivered, attempted not the denial of the
Resurrection. -- Which continually greater intanglings of Reason, left to it
self, do extremely prove the weakness of it, and the unreasonablenes of trusting
to it.

3. Consider; that as the Pharisee, that was so blind, (Matt. 23. 16.) thought
he only saw, (Jo. 9. 41.) and that others were. 16.
blind (Jo. 7. 49.); so whilst we think others misled with passion, 3.
we are no less misled therewith than they, (and so they also think of us),
only we do less discern it: And in thus standing upon, and preferring our own
judgment before others that search the Scriptures as well as we, we presume,
either that we have better naturals than they, or else more integrity and
honesty than they; and what root can this proceed from, but pride, and
uncharitablenes? no good pre-dispositions for the discovery of truth: see 1 Timothy 6. 4. 1 Cor. 8. 2.

4. Consider; that, for ordinary readers, over the New Testament is spread a
veil, as was over the Law for the Jews; 2 Cor. 3.. 17*
14. and the knowledge thereof is attained not through the strength 4.
of Reason, but illumination of the Spirit; and the like entertainment, as the
word preached then found with several persons, the Heb. ^^^.
same now does the word written. Now, self-conceitednes of their own wisdom was
then the greatest impediment that could be to the understanding of the mystery
of the Gospel; for that which was truth, was some way or other, to them,
foolishnes. And no where were there so few converted, as at self-conceited
Athens. See 1 Cor. 1. 17. etc. 1 Cor. 2. 6. etc. -- 3. 18. etc. Romans 1. 22. Lu.
10. 21. Why so? because knowledge, or a great stock of (falsely so called)
reason, makes proud, 1 Cor. 8. 1. and pride hinders the Spirit; by which
Spirit only is had true knowledge; the way to which is humility, mortification,
and abnegation of that, which of all things is most our self, the rational part
of man; and extremely addicting our selves unto holiness, that so we may discern
truth: (see Psalm. 25. 12, 14. Ps. 111. 10. Jo. 7. 17. -- 14. 21. -- 8. 12. see
below. 39.) And he, that is so disposed, is more inclined to obedience of
others, than reliance on himself; and then Qui didicit obedire, nescit
judicare. And if we prove this way also betrayed to error, yet is this error
more excusable before God, accompanied with these qualities, than truth can be
acceptable to him possessed with pride.

There is great reason then, that we should not depend only on. 18. Always some
external Communion, or other, not erring in knowledge necessary.
our own judgment, or on the Scriptures as we interpret them; but diligently
search also the former practice and tenets of the Churches of God, and consult
the present judgment of those, * who have the promise of not erring, at least
in knowledge necessary to salvation, nor in other things so far, as that any
may therefore lawfully reject their external communion; (for which see
Churchgov. 2. part.. 31. 3d. part.. 62.) * who are, the Successors of the
Apostles, 2 Timothy 2. 2. the Apostles of the Churches and the glory of Christ, 2
Cor. 8. 23: * who are appointed by Christ for the building up of the Church,
and perfecting of the Saints, and especially, that they should not be tossed to
and fro with every wind of doctrine by the steight of men, till they may all
come in the unity of the doctrine of faith to the fullness of Christ Jesus. Ephesians.
4. 11. Heb. 13. 7, 9. Neither may we say, that so also we quit only our own
reason to accept another man's; for as we are guided by their authority; so are
they guided, not by their own reason only, but by former authority, till we
ascend to the first founders of Christian religion: See Ecclus. 8. 9. To the
judgment therefore of such visible Doctors and Teachers of the Church we ought
to repair; to some or other of these, nay to some or other external communion
of them. For the promises of perpetual assistance etc, are not made to the
Church at random, or in obscurity and unknown, viz. that some man or other on
earth either of the Clergy, or if not, of the Laity, shall be an orthodox
Christian, so far as to be capable of salvation till the end of the world; but
* to those, to whom our Savior also committed the Keys, (to whom indeed it is
most necessary, they being the Shepherds, and the rest the flock committed
always to their guidance). See Matt. 16. 18. compared with 19. -- 28. 20.
compared with 19. -- 18. 20. compared with 18. -- * to such a Church, as people
might know, and repair, and make their complaints, to, (Matt. 18. 17.) as is a
light of the world set on a Candlestick, and shining before men; a city set
upon a hill that cannot be hid, (Matt. 5. 14, 15, 16.) never was, nor never
shall be hid; of the perpetual being of which we make confession of our faith
in the Apostolical Creed, [the holy Catholic Church], and yet plainer in the
Nicene; [one Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church]; which who so understands
not of an external visible profession and communion, as theirs then was, may
retain the words, but not the sense and faith of that Council. See this matter
more largely discoursed in Succession of Clergy,. 2. etc. and in
Church Government, 2. part,. 25, 26.

First therefore, in this humble repair to their Judgment, where we find all
these Doctors of Christianity disagreeing from what. 19. n. 1. We necessarily
to follow their Judgment, where universally agreeing.
we take to be Scripture, (which holds also in the determinations of any
Christian Church whatever, so long as we can come to know no other, or no
better, (see. 36.) we ought in such a case to relinquish our judgment, and
submit to theirs; who also have the same light of Scripture as we, and (in
humility we ought to think) more ability to judge of it; and who likewise have
the promise of indefectibility in truths necessary to salvation. Therefore here
also, the more high and weighty the point is, the more firmly ought we to
adhere to them, trusting to the protection of our Savior, the Head of the
Church; that, in these points especially, they shall not all so conjoined be
mistaken. And again, in smaller points, since there is less danger in our
erring in them; and the more guilt still, the smaller they are, in our making a
schism from, or division in, the Church, for them; more humility exercised in
obeying; no truth of consequence vindicated by contention; wisdom perhaps would
think it fit to subscribe to the same Guides. For, as the Apostle said in
another case, If they are sit to judge the greatest, are they not so to judge
the smallest matters? 1 Cor. 6. 2. And if any thing herein may be indulged to
singularity of opinion, it is only so far, as to make known the reasons, that
move us to it, to the Church or some few therein, whom we count men of learning
and integrity, and void of passion, and after this to submit to whatever they
(who now together with us apprehend all the reasons which sway us) shall
determine. The contrary to which can be only the fruit of self-conceit, or
obstinacy. This, if they unanimously deliver any thing to us which we think
against Scripture; and much more yet ought we to submit to any order of
their's, tho we do not find it in Scripture, if we find nothing in Scripture
against it, without calling such their sanctions Will Worship and Superstition;
making sure to use the same charity to the Church, which we are obliged-in to
private men: in whom nihil est damnandum, quod ulla ratione bonum esse queat.

Neither is this assenting to them against our own reason or judgment, as we
call it, going against conscience; which conscience. 19. 11. 2.
is nothing but our judgment; and that we call judgment many times nothing but
our own (and that a slight) opinion. In not following of which opinion or
judgment we are faulty only then, where we have no wiser person, caeteris
paribus, nor no established law to guide and direct it. Nor is it going against
our reason; when as nothing is more reasonable than to go against some of our
own particular reasonings, when we have another stronger reason to the
contrary, that is, the submitting of it to such an authority: nothing being
more ordinary than for arguments from a Reason, to give place to those from an
Authority, (upon which Authority also, and not upon Reason, is grounded our
Faith.) See Submiss. of Judgment,. 2. etc.) But let me add this for our further
contentment, that he who not only demands of the Church, but takes pains also
(as all ought) to be informed by the Church, concerning the proof and evidence
of what she requires him to believe, shall seldom or never be put to believe,
that what she says is truth only from her authority, because she says it; but
also from his own judgment, because she manifests it. Obj. But does not an
erring conscience then bind us to follow it, tho it be so? or may I sometime do
a thing which I think unlawful, upon another's judgment, without sinning? Answ.
He that is persuaded in conscience, that, tho he thinks such a thing unlawful,
yet he ought rather to follow a wiser man's judgment than his own, whose
judgment says, it is not unlawful, cannot absolutely say he is persuaded that it
is unlawful. And he, who thinking such a thing is more likely in reason, yet
thinks likewise, that he ought rather to obey the Church's judgment than his
own reason, if he here follows his conscience, (that is) in respect of his own
reason he goes against his conscience (as I call it), in respect of the
submission he thinks he ows to another judgment. For whilst his judgment
prefers another man's judgment before his own, this man, in following the
others, must needs also be said to follow his own, judgment, and consequently
his conscience. Now he that is not thus persuaded of the duty of submission of
his judgment etc to wiser men, or men authorized to guide his judgment, it is
true, that he sins in doing against his own opinion or conscience, so long as
he is not so persuaded: but then he ought better to inform his conscience; not
only or chiefly in the confutation of the reasons he has for his opinion,
(which confutation cannot always be had, or, when had, perhaps is by him not
well understood): but in the reasonablenes, and many times duty, of the
submission of his private and singular judgment and opinion to those more wise,
more religious than himself, or to those authorized to direct him,

2ly. Where the Doctors of the Church are not all of a mind,. 20. Where divided
to follow either side, rather than our own judgment opposite to both.
but divided in their opinions, it seems better to follow any party of them,
rather than our own judgment opposite to both; because they having the same
light of Scripture as we; a calling to teach and interpret it; being those to
whom Christ has promised more assistance; using perhaps more means to
understand it; having more understandings agreeing in such a sense of it; tho
they may (possibly) err, yet we are the more likely to mistake. And experience
daily shows, that they, who renounce (fallible) authority, and stand to their
own judgment, to avoid one error, incur twenty, and those (by God's desertions)
sometimes in the most plain points of practice, * far grosser, than ever any
Church Authority or Synod has lapsed into: Neither are the diversities of
opinion between Churches any thing in comparison of those millions of private
men's singularities; and as in sight we say many eyes see more than one, so in
blindness or dimnes of sight many eyes are never so blind as one. Let us avoid
self-conceit, and put on humility, and then we * shall be glad rather to use
the judgment, for our way, of another eye; which if it has motes in it, we
have reason to think that ours has a beam; and * will be ready to say, [if the
Church be not infallible, how much less I?] rather than [the whole Church is
not infallible, therefore let me trust to my single judgment:] an illation not
more unreasonable, than usual.

3. In following one party of the divided Clergy, we are to avoid. 21. Of the
two to follow those whom the other acknowledge to have the practice of former
times for them.
those rather, who acknowledge the former practice of the Church against them,
and appeal to Scripture; as long as the practice also pretends the same
Scripture, either for it, or not at all against it. For tho Scripture is a more
sure foundation than the Church's practice; yet, since the practice also
pretends, as well as those who oppose it, to be guided by the Scriptures, so
that Scripture and Practice is pretended on one side, and Scripture only on the
other side; and since there is so great odds, in number, of those judgments
concerning the Scripture, that have ever so practiced, and also a succession of
truth promised to be continued in the Church, it is more probable, I say, that
the practice is not mistaken in the sense of Scripture; and of two, we are to
choose the more probable.

4. But if, besides Scripture; there be practice or tradition of. 22. Where
this pleaded by both, to search, and follow that we find so by our experience.
some times of the Church (the more ancient) pretended against the practice of
other (later) times; here search is to be made by us: and if such an opposition
of the present and former Church seems to be discovered, (which indeed can
never be, by reason of our Savior's promise in any matter of necessary faith),
the contrary course to heady Rehoboam is to be held, the old men's counsel is to
be taken, and the former times are to be preferred; except it be in matters not
prescribed by God's word, wherein the Church of all times has power to
constitute what she thinks fit. Where therefore the Scriptures, tho pretended
by both sides plain, yet are not so plain that both sides agree; there let all
the trial rest, not * upon reading arguments pro and con in
controversie-writers, where wit and continual agitations of the question make
any side tenable, as men are biassed by interest and education; but * upon this
search of the Fathers, and history of the Church; and I am persuaded most
controversies will quickly end.

For who tries them; 1. First, he will find in those voluminous writings many
things more express, and full, and positive, than. 23. That this is not hard to
find.
they are in Scripture, especially most of the practices of the Church put out
of all dispute; so that tho several men read those writings, with a several
interest, as they do the Scriptures; yet they shall find too much clearnes
there to be corrupted by such interest. (For example; those who dispute
Episcopacy to be against the Scriptures, yet are clearly convinced in the
Fathers writings that it was practiced in the primitive Churches, and thought
consonant to the Scriptures.) -- 2. Again he will find a most unanimous consent
among them in most things, and in many Of Fathers being not (for the main)
repugnant, ambiguous, or impertinent.
of those of present debate; contrary to the opinion of many, who seeing them
quoted constantly by both sides almost in all controversies, (and that, not
only one Father against another, but the same against himself); seeing likewise
books written of their many disagreeings, which books are silent of the many
more things wherein they accord, do in this prejudice condemn them of the same
ambiguity as the Scriptures, and of much opposition besides; and lastly of
impertinency to modern controversy, and so forbear to consult them, and laugh
at Vinc. Lirinensis his Rule, Quod omnibus etc, as, tho most true, yet utterly
useles.

But here some cautions must be given to the searcher, which it were most
unreasonable that he should not observe.

1. * That in a search of the antiquity of opinions, and not of. 23. Certain
Cautions concerning making judgment of the Tenets of the Fathers.
the reputation of authors, he would not reject writings which are evidently
very ancient, and likewise then approved, (since they are quoted by latter
Fathers and Councils, (suppose those of the 3d, 4th, and 5th age after Christ.)
Because (tho granted by all very ancient for the time) they are uncertain for
the author, and bear a false title. Such are, for example, the Apostolical
Canons; Clement's Apostolical Constitutions; Dionys. Areop. works, (of which it
being disputed so early, as A. D. 420. whether these were the genuine works of
St. Dionysius, shows that they were very ancient.) Again, * that, from
discovering some corruption in some of the Fathers writings, he would not argue
there not to remain so much purity and incorruption in the rest, as that in any
thing controverted their true opinion can be known; neither argue, from his
discovering their erring (perhaps every one) in something, and that many times
in a thing very inconsiderable, that therefore in nothing they can be fit
witnesses of truth; and lastly, from his finding them obscure or ambiguous in
some places, that they cannot be clear, upon such subject, in any other place,
or also in that place, cleared by the context. Yet such we find are most of the
arguments that are urged for weakening their authority.

2. That, for the primitive times of the Church, he would not only take those,
wherein she lived in persecution, and left few records of her doctrines or
customs, as the first and second age; but extend them to the end of the 6th or
5th, or at least of the 4th age, so as to involve S. Austin etc. these being
the times wherein she flourished, under the protection of Christian Governors,
more ample in her power, public in her doctrines and discipline, frequent and
copious in her writings, active against all sorts of heretics, as also more
exercised with them: which the present times (as enjoying still the same
happiness) must needs and ought more to resemble than the other; and to which,
taken in this extent, ordinarily differing Churches appeal.

3. That he would not think, that those practices, which he observes to be used
in the latter of these times, and omitted in. 25.
the former, therefore are justly to be rejected, unles they be also (in that
sense as they are afterward used) disallowed and opposed by the former; and
that by the more general vote thereof. For what is said of Scripture, (. 6.)
may here be said of the Church; that it follows not negatively that such
practices are either unlawful or unexpedient, because a former age did not
recommend, or did not use them. Therefore that he would compare the practices
and tenets of the present Church, not with those of every, but of any age of
those primitive times, (so not contradicted by the rest): In which age if any
doctrine held, we may lawfully say; such is no new, but an ancient, doctrine;
or a doctrine of the Fathers.

4. That he would not with such a conceit repair to them, as if he should find,
in writers, of so many ages, and of so many several. 26.
countries, no differences at all; for there he will find several, both of the
former of those times, or at least of a many in them, from the latter. [* As
the more common opinion and practice of the more ancient times of the Church
are by some quoted somewhat to differ from the succeeding; in the Millenary
doctrine, communicating of Infants; vision of God before the day of Judgment;
in the rarer use of Images; less observance of the Relics; in Invocation of
Saints; in the punctuality of Auricular Confession for some sorts of sins, etc.
Quoted, I say; not, that the difference in these is granted so great
altogether, as it is by some made, concerning which, as to some of these
particulars, see what is said in Church Government. 55. etc; but that, in the
more and less practice of some of them, and in the commoness of the belief of
other of them, there may be some difference in several times. So the Millenary
doctrine, and non-vision of God, in some places and times, perhaps was the
opinion more common. So a common practice in some times was used, of
communicating Infants: Images in some times also were less used, tho (then) not
the use of them (I mean as practiced by latter ages) opposed; and so of the
rest that follow. (Concerning such things see what the 3d. caution says.) But
observe touching such things, wherein difference is named; That it is either
difference of practice, secundum magis and minus, not opposition of doctrine:
or opposition of doctrine, only in some matters of small moment; or the
opposition of such times not universal, but only of some places, or Churches,
others practicing or teaching the contrary.] And, in the same times he will
find many differences, of those of one Church from another. [As of the Eastern
and Western Church about Easter; the Roman and African Church about
Rebaptization; and afterward about Superiority of the Sea of Rome for Appeals
etc; and so many things practiced in the Eastern Churches, not at all, or
latter used in the Western.] And in the same Church he will find, one party
against another, (as Epiphanius and Chrysostom, etc): And the same party (when
of a more mature judgment) differing from himself, (as S. Austin in the business
of Free Will, and Grace, etc.) But it is sufficient (if in some other
differences he finds them (all, or by much the most) agreeing in most, or in
many points of those, which are now controverted, especially points of
practice, which are of greater moment) to render up his judgment to them in
those uncontrolable and plain things, wherein they consent; and more is not
desired of him: (amongst which are the contradictories to most of those hurtful
opinions related below. 41. etc.) and not to make that fallacious induction,
(with which many satisfy themselves.) * They are not sufficient Guides in
this, or that point, wherein they differ; ergo they are in none at all; or not,
in the many other, wherein they accord; and in this main point especially, that
universal obedience is due to Church-decrees, and that it is lawful in no case
to desert her external communion, which settles all the rest: * Or, they clash
in this and this point, (which truly, for the most part, are things of less
moment, (see Church-gov. 2* part.. 55. etc.) tho by the then contenders much
aggravated,) ergo they clash in all, or in almost all: when as such arguments
have force only against their infallibility, or absolute unanimity in all
things; not against their accord in those things which are more necessary, and
for which we have occasion to search them. So, whereas we find the Millenary
tenet, and the place of faithful souls out of heaven till the day of Judgment,
and Infant-Communion, (anciently common tenets, by latter times, as is thought,
justly rejected), to be urged as a proof of no safe adherence to all common
opinions and practices of former Church, because in some things errable; we are
to consider, that these, besides that they never were Church-decrees in any
Council, nor granted to be universal, are not points of such consequence, as to
prejudice the ancient Church her authority, judgment, or guidance in all other
necessary matters. Hear what Dr. Fern (Preface to Consider. touching Reform.)
very judiciously says of two of them, after he had made much use of those
instances. Having spoken (says he) the intent of this Treatise, I must, before
I leave him, entreat the Reader to remember one thing in the former, (the error
of the Millenary belief, and Infant-communion often instancedin there,) and to
take notice; that nothing was intended or can be concluded by those instances
to the prejudice of the whole Church; as if thereby might be proved, that the
whole Church universally, and in all the members of it, may err, and be
infected with error in points of concernment, or prejudicial to the faith: For
that of the Millenary, as it was not universal, so not of such moment; and that
of the In-fant-communion, tho more universal, and of longer continuance, was
but a tolerable mistake. So that all errors of the whole Church by his
concession are ever either not universal, or not of concernment.

5. That he would not with such a conceit repair to them, as if. 27.
he should always find in them an unanswerable reason or justification of such
and such practices or tenets, (for this we promise not); but that such things
they practiced, such things they held; and then perhaps this may be a
sufficient reason to him to admit them, that so the Church of God has always
done or taught, before him.

6. That he would not repair to them, as if he should find every thing now
controverted, there considered, or stated: but that for. 28.
what he shall find there stated (at least) for the substance of the practice
of it, (as most points of government and practice are), tho not for the
quatenus, or in what respects it is performed, that to it he would conform.

7. That he would not entertain such a conceit, as if in this search he should
find any Church of present being so perfectly to. 29.
resemble Antiquity, as in no point to differ from the general customs thereof,
for in some all differ, none giving the Eucharist to Infants: Nor, as if he
should not find several Churches, in some one thing or other, more to resemble
the primitive, than a Church of a better constitution does. (As, the Reformed
is said to resemble the Primitive times in celebrating the Communion in both
kinds; and the first or 2d. century thereof, in not using Images, not
invocating Saints, etc. The Roman, in the obligation of, and obedience to, the
decrees of the Church, and her Councils, in prayer for the Dead, merit of
works, penances, Church-ceremonies, the Christian Sacrifice of the Altar, Real
presence, Reservation for communicating absents, domestic Communion in one
kind, frequent celebration of the Eucharist, frequent hours of Prayer, and set
times of Fasting, Confession, recommendation of Evangelical counsels, vows of
Poverty, and Celibacy, single life of the Clergy): But that he would conform to
that Church rather, which he finds to tread the footsteps of Antiquity in the
most points, (as all do in some), or in those of the most moment and
consequence, especially in those of government and practice; which, as they are
not so easily changed as those of simple belief; so, do they more concern this
search, when as the absolutely necessary points of faith are perhaps
sufficiently acknowledged by all those of differing communions. Thus much of
the Cautions to be used in searching Antiquity. Now to go on.

3ly. He will find one present external visible communion and body of
Christians much more, than all the rest, (tho perhaps none. 30. Some Church in
all ages like the former.
in all things) agreeing with the doctrines and discipline of Antiquity,
especially if considered after the settlement of it under Christian Emperors.
Which things if they be found, (which discovery presupposes first his.
search), this I desire may presently be granted; that any one has little
reason to bear himself up upon the arms of his own, or others newer,
interpretations of the Sacred text, and not-unhandsomly stated theses, and
subtlely-urged objections, against so constant, so strong a stream.

And here also note; that if any side rip up the faults and errors. 31.
of the Fathers; and, whilst they seem to appeal to them, yet, as much as they
can, weaken their authority; if they defend their own differing from them much
more, by showing that the other side differs from them in something, but yet
much less than they; if the more candid of them at least confess a recession
from the Fathers in many points, [for informing your self in this, turn over
Calvin's Institutions, and see in how many places he ingenuously confesses the
opinion of Antiquity opposite to his decisions. 2. lib. 2. c. 4, 9. sect.
compared with 3. l. 11. c. 15. sect. -- 2. l. 14. c. 3. sect. 3. l. 3. c. 10.
sect. 3. l. 4. c. 38. sect. -- 3. l. 5. c. 10. sect. -- 3. l. 22. c. 1. sect.
-- 2. l. 3. c. 7. 10. sect. [where, multis saeculis, is as high as Chrysostom.]
-- 4. lib. 4. c. 10. sect. -- 9. cap. 8, 9, 10. 11, etc, weakening the authority
of Councils. -- 12. c. 8. sect. -- 12. c. 19, 20, 24, 27. sect. -- 18. c. 11.
sect. -- 3. l. 3. c. 16. sect. -- 4. l. 17. c. 39. sect. -- 4. l. 13. c. 16,
17. sect. many of which places I have transcribed in Church-gov. 4. part..
100.] and if some others of the same side, who yet maintain the same opinions
with those other of them that appeal to the Fathers, do refuse a trial by the
Fathers at all, to say nothing that this relisheth of much pride and
self-conceit, and pride is an ill Reformer; this shows, that such a side, tho
not willing to confess it, yet is convinced of loosing their cause in this
trial, by the practice of former Church; and that they are (...) for this
appeal; and then the resolution set down before in. 22. is in all reason to
take place. Again: if the contrary party seems on the other side to attribute
too much to the Fathers, in quoting them, in their disputations and
conferences, as well as the Holy Scriptures; and as it were superstitiously
treading in their steps in the external forms of Government, and in the most
inconsiderable ceremonies; adhering still to the same expressions which the
Fathers used in those points which are now controverted, [as Merit,
Satisfaction, Supererogation, Sacrifice, Altar, etc,] which the other more
willingly change; compiling their Body of Divinity out of the Fathers common
doctrines, (as the first beginning of School Divinity, (see Peter Lombard), was
only a design of putting the Fathers tenets in an orderly method): This argues,
that these rather are the true Successors of the doctrines of the Primitive
Church, and that they are unjustly charged to recede from the Fathers in those
points which are controverted; and then, according to the resolution above. 22.
we are to adhere to them. For what likelihood is there, That he who thinks
their testimony makes much for him, and much against his adversary, will, all
he can, strive to weaken the authority of these Witnesses in showing their
errors in general, their contradictions of one against another, of the same
against himself etc. (See Daille's Uray usage des Peers): and that the other,
who is conscious that they are more against himself than his adversary, should
by all means establish their testimony, even by holding them in all their
joynt-verdicts infallible? What probability, that they should most declame
against the certainty of Church-tradition, whose doctrines it most confirms?

For we are to believe this, (or we, for as much as I can apprehend,. 32.
nullify our Savior's promise, and his mission of other teachers, and all
appeals to the Church, etc,) * that there shall be a Church of God in all ages
like it self in the former: and * that as the Jews might, (Jo. 5. 39.) and the
Bereans did, (Act. 17. 11.) find the Old Testament to confirm the doctrine of
the Apostles of the New; and the Gospel to establish the Law, (Romans 3. 31.) so
the Church's practice shall establish the Gospel; and the latter practice
thereof the former, to the end of the world; * that Christ's sheep shall always
know his voice, and shall not follow strangers. And tho there shall be
Antichrists, and falling away from the faith, (as there was even in the
Apostle's times), yet that falling away from the faith shall be also from the
Church; but the Church it self (i. e. that whole external communion which was,
in times before, the Church of Christ, (for I speak not of any one particular
place, from any of which I conceive, one time or other, Christianity may be
Heresy still either going, or being, thrust out of it.
banished), or (if you will) the visible body of the Clergy openly cohering in
that external communion, shall never go into Apostasy: Nor shall the Apostates
fall away in, (but out of) the external communion of the former Church, and so
always be (...), not in respect of their opinion, but decession; not in respect
of the truth of, but their dissent from, the Church, in what they maintain, and
shall for ever be known; * either by their going out of the former, and setting
up new, communions, (Jud. 19. Heb. 10. 25. 1 Jo. 2. 19. 2 Timothy 3. 8. Jude 11.
[opposing those in authority:] and so Tertullian, Praejudicatum est adversus
omnes haereses, id esse verum quodcunque primum; id esse adulteratum quodcunque
posterius): * or by the former Church thrusting them out; which shall never
join with them. [But it is to be noted, that most of those divisions of the
Church, if not all, which have separated from a former communion, are such, as
have not bin first expelled by the Church, and then set up a new communion upon
necessity, but such as have left it; always pretending that there be some
tenets or practices in the former Church, for which, tho she permitting to them
all their own opinions, they could not communicate with her. Now that communion
which they, tho indulged their own tenets, will not return to, it is plain that
at first they did reject, whatever they pretend to the contrary, and tho the
other Chapter also ejected them; for both these well consist.] And such Apostates
also may be known always at their first going out (tho not so well afterward)
by the smallnes of their number. As Arrianism, which was the greatest division
that ever happened in the Church for 1500 years, never prevailed upon all parts
of the Church's communion, the Western continuing for a major part untainted
with it: touching which see Chapter Gov. 2. part. 40.. etc. and, in both the
Eastern and Western, it ever had an external communion And in its beginning
discerned by its paucity of followers
of the Catholics opposite to it; and in its first rise was easily discerned by
the paucity of that Sect; as the beginnings of all heresies are easily known:
neither are they, tho some of them of very speedy growth, yet of long
continuance. See 2 Timothy 3. 1, 8, 9. Jude 11. Act. 5. 38. Neither had the
contrary conceit, to wit, of the external visible body of the Church her
falling away from Christ (by which the sheep are to seek for a right shepherd)
ever got so much strength amongst Christians, but from a supposing of
Antichrist to be in profession a Christian, and one of that Church, in which
it is said he shall sit, notwithstanding that others, of whom the same thing
was said, viz. that they shall sit in the Holy place, (see Matt. 24. 15. Dan.
11. 41.) were not in their outward profession members of the Church. But this
is an opinion (as is elsewhere showed) groundless; and the going out of Babylon
(Rev. 18. 4. which is there spoken of place, not of former communion; as
suppose it were said to the Christian Churches, that are now in Turkey, to
remove from thence) interpreted in this sense is a dangerous principle to breed
Schisms, and ruin souls, in causing men's forsaking of the external communion of
the Catholic Church of Christ that is in present being. [Which Church, many
think, shall be (always) so conspicuous, and set on an hill, that it shall in
all times out-number any separating Sect, both for the multitude of people, and
extent of Nations. And we have found it so till Luther's time, the
forementioned Arrianism never ruling in the most of Christians, (who adhered
still to the Nicene Creed), but in some of the chiefest of the Clergy, the
Bishops, such as were intruded by the Emperor, (the orthodox Bishops being
thrust out,) and carried away with his inclinations, and these chiefly in the
Eastern Churches. As for the objection of Antichrist's times, those who think
the Supposition, that he shall be a professor of Christianity, false, will
easily grant, that the Church then shall be a smaller number in respect of
Infidels, but not in respect of Heretics. And, for that objection Matt. 24.
11, 12, 13* Luke 18. 8. we have seen our Savior's words fulfilled in Mahomet,
and those seduced by him, and in many heretical Sects also, and in a more
general corruption of manners even amongst the orthodox, without any
infringement of what is here affirmed. See more of this in Success. of Clergy.]

1. First therefore, those within the bounds of the Church, that follow blind
leaders without all trial, are void of excuse. Not because. 33. So that difence
trial cannot mistake.
they do not quit all leaders absolutely, and guide themselves by the
Scriptures; but because (the Church of God, i. e. the Pastors and Teachers
thereof) having our Savior's promise never so to be blind, but that salvation
and escaping the pit should be always had in her; (as it in all times has bin,
both in the Jewish, and since, in the Christian Church) there are at all times
other leaders, who are illuminated with God's Spirit, and whose light, not put
under a bushel but set on a candlestick, shines before them, whom they may
securely follow. So that the people are never left nakedly to the Scriptures,
or to the Law, without orthodox Teachers and Guides therein, or without an
external communion lawful and safe to be adhered to; nor such Teachers left
without manifest testimony (to all that will look after it) that they are sent
from God, and that their communion is the true Church, either by their showing
miracles, and other signs of their mission; or by their succession to, and
consent with, the former Church which showed miracles; and by all other Sects,
tho perhaps at length out-numbring them, yet discerned always to be few at
first, and to go out from them. So under the Law, the whole Order of God's
Priests never fell so away at any time, neither before, nor in, nor after, the
Babylonish captivity, till the coming of Christ, (according to the promise Genesis
49. 10. and our Savior's testimony Lu. 16. 16. Jo. 4. 22. Matt. 23. 2.) but
that there was always a remnant of them (by the former marks to be easily
discerned from the Apostatizers) serving the Lord with a true worship, and
having a flock amongst the people obedient to them. And at Christ's coming,
when Satan was let loose to deceive the Sanedrim, and Lu. 22. 53.
infatuate all the former chief Ecclesiastical Governors, God gave all the
people sufficient testimony by miracles etc, (see Jo. 5. 36. Matt. 16. 3.) that
Jesus was the Messiah, and the Prophet whom he had promised to raise unto them
like unto Moses, to whom they were now to obey in all things, and to hearken to
none contradicting his doctrines. The many expressions therefore in the Old
Testament, that seem to speak of a total falling away of the Priest, and a
failing of the Church, (many of which were urged by the Donatists, and answered
to by St. Austin and other Fathers, which see more fully discoursed in Success.
of Clerg..) either speak not of the Priests ignorance at all, but vitiousnes
and neglect of duty; or not of their teaching false doctrines as Priests, but
of their making false predictions as pretended Prophets: or are texts
Prophetical of their falling away after the coming of the Messiah: or speak not
of their falling into Heresy, but of their open Apostatizing unto Idolatry. For
Heresies and Sects, retaining a distinct communion in the worship of the same
God, and acknowledgment of the divine law, in those times of the Jewish Church
we find none, but both the Priests and people divided between true worshippers
of God, and flat idolaters. Here therefore the Trier had always those to whom
he might safely adhere, and might always clearly discern who they were.

2ly. Nor those that try, and after it make choice of falsehood,. 34.
are thereby excused, because since there is evidence enough one way or other
given of the truth, they, who in searching find it not, are some way or other
defective in their trial. Perhaps because they will not try, * by all those
ways which God has left to witness his truth; as both by Scriptures, and also
by the authorized Expositors thereof; but only by one way, which themselves
most fancy. Whenas doubtless the Jew, or the Berean, after their search of
Scriptures, had not bin excused in dissenting from the Apostles or from our
Savior's doctrine, so long as this doctrine was also confirmed to them by
other sufficiently evident and convincing arguments besides the testimony of
former Scriptures, viz: * by the mighty signs and wonders which our Savior and
the Apostles did through the power of the H. Spirit given them from God; * by the
Resurrection of Jesus, and their mission by his authority, etc. After which
confirmation the Apostle's advice to believers is, to hold to Tradition; to the
doctrine formerly delivered, Romans 16. 17. Heb. 13. 7, 9. and to prove and try
the new spirits, (1 Thessalonians. 5. 20. 1 Jo. 4. 1.) that perhaps might speak under
pretense of that frequent gift of prophesying (which the Devil also then
imitated) something dissenting from doctrines formerly received: as appears by
1 Thessalonians. 5. 20. and the clause of 1 Jo. 4. 1. the one bidding that they should
not altogether despise these Spirits; the other, that they should not
altogether credit them. But of the Apostles doctrines, coming with such a
testimony of the Spirit, (Gal. 3. 5.) they would not have them at all to doubt,
pronouncing Anathema to any that should contradict these. Gal. 1. 7, 9. Col. 2.
6, 7, 8. 1 Jo. 4. 6. [Which 6th. verse shows, that the first verse is meant,
of the Church's or others trying the spirits of private men, 1 Cor. 14. 29, 32.
not of particular men trying the Spirit of the Apostles, or of the Church.] And
should any now, not out See Submiss. of judgm.. 15.
of affection to learn, and to strengthen his faith, nor to know, what was the
reason of them, but whether there be any reasons for them, try the doctrines of
the ancient Councils, as some have lately, and (by the just judgment of God
upon curiosity) have dissented from them: such trial would argue much
infidelity against our Savior's promise, and his vigilance over his Church;
would much offend, against the obedience we owe to the decrees of the Church,
and against the humble conceit we ought to have of our selves. Whereas, on the
contrary, the more indisputing obedience is, which is the daughter of true
humility, the more christian the spirit; especially where one is not in a
communion of a Church of a later original, nor that has professedly departed
out of another Church elder than it self.

And if any think, that such an humble submission and assent. 35.
to Church-decrees forfeits the use of reason, and patronizeth ignorance. 1.
First, the same thing may be said of our assent being tied to the larger Nicene
and Athanasian Creeds. 2ly, Again, the Church's decrees are but very few (if we
take only the decrees of Councils, and not all the Theological controversies
and determinations of private Divines of any side, for such) in comparison of
the large field of divine knowledge, wherein great intellects may still freely
expatiate: as appears in that great liberty which we find in the Roman writers,
(I mean, the Schoolmen,) freely dissenting from one another in many points.
Which differings when as we also urge against them, they defend themselves,
that such are points undefined in Councils. But 3ly, in things defined also; we
must acknowledge, that learning, and searching all arguments for truth, well
consists with obedience to Church-definitions, (as it did with our Saviors and
the Apostles): inasmuch as we find those, who most profess this submittance, as
skilful and copious in giving reasons of their faith, as any others; and no way
laying aside the use of reason, or pursuit of knowledge. Even as they, who,
from the testimony of Scripture, believe there is a God, yet seek arguments
from the Creation and Nature, to strengthen or, if I may so say, multiply their
faith. Faith, both to what the Scripture, and to what the Church says, being
always capeable of a further growth. And as, oportet discentem credere, so
credentem discere. See more concerning this in Infallibility,. and Chapter gov. 3.
part.. 39.

But next; since one may be born and bred in a Church Schismatical,. 36. Who
can search no further, to adhere to the judgment of the Christian Church they
live in, rather than their own against it.
and here also, by his condition and profession, not capable of making this
trial by comparing his present teachers with other modern and ancient Doctors;
yet, upon the reasons above (. 20.) he is in far less danger in obeying his
Spiritual Guides, than in steering himself: and, in obeying them, so long as
heknows none better, tho they be Schismatical, he is free from Schism; (whereas
following himself, he becomes guilty of a 2d. Schism); and being free from
Schism, he may attain in such Church life everlasting* nor can there any doubt
be made, but that a pious man, living in the state of Schism, and free from the
crime, is in a far better condition than an orthodox christian, living in the
habit and state of sin. For tho Heresy, (Gal. 5. 20.) (i. e. either an error
opposite to some truth necessary to be explicitly known to enter into heaven,
(such as that Mar. 16. 16. Act. 4. 12.) or an obstinate professing in other
things against the known definitions of the Church); and tho Schism, (i. e. a
factious breaking the unity and peace of the Church) unrepented of before
death, must needs, as other sins do, exclude all such out of heaven; and tho
the Excommunications of the Church have also here a dreadful power, whereby he
is deprived of her prayers also, and receives her curse: yet in such a Church,
by the great light of Scripture therein retained, there may be and ordinarily
is so much truth asserted, as, joined with christian obedience, is sufficient
for his salvation, who is guiltless in these crimes. Neither are the
Church-Excommunications further powerful in their censure, than others are
guilty of the offense. But yet such a one must know; 1. First, that he becomes
guilty of Schism, not only by not forsaking a known error, or a byhim-counted
unlawful communion, but by (where there is any remedy for it) a purposed
ignorance and carelesnes of further knowing truth, where he has reason to be
jealous; and sees a breach made in the Church of Christ. 2ly. This misfortune
happens to those not guilty of the Heresy or Schism of the Church wherein they
live, that, the matter of the Heresy or Schism most times being in doctrines
or practices if not necessary, yet very beneficial, for attaining Salvation;
that I say, either by erroneous doctrines taught in such Church's, or many
profitable doctrines not taught, or looser discipline practiced there, they run
a much greater hazard of their Salvation. (See Dr. Potter, sect. 4. p. 115.)
Yet blessed be God for those, whom he has so far enlightened, as to abide,
without obstinacy in their errors, in any christian Society; for we may
presume, that thence also many go to heaven, and these not only hearers, but
perhaps some teachers also; if not with their doctrines destroying the
foundation Jesus Christ, nor acting against conscience, nor wilfully negligent
to inform it, (as I fear many of them be.) See Chapter gov. 3. part.. 84.

Besides trial of Doctrines by Scriptures, and by the Doctors of the Church,
there is also a 3d. way of trial both of the Doctrines,. 37. II. Trial of
doctrines, and Doctors by the holiness these produc^ (...) they practice.
and Doctors, and Churches, which is much recommended by our Savior, Matt. 7.
15. etc. and by his Apostles, 1 Timothy 4. 7. -- 6. 3. 2 Timothy 2. 16. Tit. 1. 1.
Jam. 3. 17. and that trial is; as their doctrines tend more unto holiness of
life; and as this fruit is more or less produced by them. For tho this holiness
is by all doctrines equally pretended, yet is it not by all doctrines equally
advanced. For many ill consequences there are following some doctrines more
than others; which tho they are disavowed and shaken off in the expositions of
the teachers, yet do they still adhere to them in the peoples practice. As
there are other doctrines, which whereas perhaps, as some mis-understood them,
they seem pernicious, yet we find the followers thereof excelling in holiness;
where the doctrine seems to commend and induce ignorance, very studious and
knowing; where the doctrine seems to nourish boasting, presumption, and pride,
very humble and contrite in spirit: whom when we find, and that frequently,
walking just contrary to what we suppose their doctrines, we are to imagine
their doctrines not to be what we suppose; the practice of the Church being the
best expounder (generally) of her opinions. But were it otherwise, yet I
conceive, far better it were to have faulty doctrines mis-understood so as to
produce holiness, than even those that are good mis-understood so, as to produce
profanenes and impiety. Again; there are fewer divine truths acknowledged in
one Church perhaps than in another, and so obedience less perfect; and in a
Church where there are no false doctrines affirmatively and positively taught,
yet perhaps many true ones areo mitted, or also rejected, such as are exceeding
beneficial to produce sanctity.

Now 1. first, this is certain; that no lie abounds so much to the producing of
holiness, as truth does: and the more true and. 38. For where more truth, more
holiness.
orthodox any Church is, and the more truths of God are embraced by her, and
none of his counsels rejected; the more purity is in her. For the whole design
of our Savior's coming into the world; of the moulding of all the doctrines of
the Law and of the Gospel; these, and not others; was the advancing by them her
sanctification. So that I may say; had there bin an error that could more have
advanced it than these truths, truth had bin error, and that error had bin made
truth. Where then more of these divine rules are known and observed, there will
flourish more holiness. And therefore we may reflect, Where more holiness is
found, there probably are these better known and taught; because where they are
most taught, there in all likelihood also they are most observed. Therefore
since all acknowledge the excellent sanctity and purity of the primitive times,
they must likewise grant that Church more orthodox, which more closely retains
their doctrines, their discipline, etc. And it is an astonishment to me to see,
that those who so much admire the one, yet so freely cut off and reject the
other, that effected it, (and now, where practiced, do still effect it); which
they might by this know to have caused it, for that where all other doctrines
are put, and these (which, used anciently, are now cast aside in some Church's)
abrogated, there such sanctity grows not; nor is the brick made at all, where
the straw is denied. How is it then, that the fruit is so much commended, and
yet the root that bears it called superstition, will worship; tyrannical
abridgment of christian liberty; * the equalling of things indifferent and of
men's traditions (so are all things called, which (in their conceit) are not
strictly commanded in Scripture, notwithstanding all the holy examples which
they may find in these Scriptures thereof, and that the commands of God are
made thereby not of none, but of much more, effect) with the commandments of
God; * the placing salvation in men's devices, and in the practicing of their
own inventions.

Again: besides this, that, where more divine truths (for I speak not here of
other knowledge, which many times proves a great. 39. And where more holiness,
more truth.
enemy to piety) are revealed, there (generally) must be more holiness; because
all divine truths tend to it, (see Psalm. 119. 104, 128.) and ordinarily where
the judgment is very much illuminated, the affections cannot but follow it, and
the more light the soul has in it, the less likely it is to miss its way: it is
yet further to be observed; that holiness, where ever we find it, if not
begotten by, yet quickly begets, truth; that the passions brought into order do
readily admit that heavenly light, which less or more enlighteneth every one
that comes into the world. The H. Ghost is a fire, Matt. 3. 11. so that
wheresoever the Spiritual light thereof is, there is heat also; and much more,
e contra. And the mortification of lusts soon brings in orthodoxnes of opinion,
when the inclinations of the soul are so well regulated, as truth is rather
for, at least not against, them. So that in that Church where most holiness is,
is also most truth, either causing, or else caused by, it. See for this those
many promises * of illuminating the Saints, Jo. 7. 17. Psalm. 111. 10. 2 Pet. 1.
9. Ephesians. 3. 17, 18. Phil. 1. 9. 2 Cor. 3. 16, 17. Psalm. 25. 12. Jo. 8. 12. Jo.
14. 21, 23. Jo. 15. 2. Wisd. 1. 2, 3, 4. Romans 12. 2. Psalm. 37. 23, 30. Prove. 2.
7. Matt. 11. 25. 1 Cor. 2. 11. etc 16. Psalm. 119. 100. Jo. 14. 15, 16. Act. 16.
14. -- 10. 34, 35, 44, compared with 2. -- 15. 8, 9. Jam. 4. 8, 10. Matt. 25.
29. -- and * of granting it the Spirit unto prayer and devotions. Luke 11. 13.
1 Cor. 2. 7. 1 Cor. 3. 3. compared with Col. 1. Jam. 1. 5. 1 King. 3. 9. 11.
For true knowledge, not only of understanding divine truths revealed, but of
understanding the revelation also of them, I mean the Scriptures, comes more
from the operation of God's Spirit, than the discourse of Reason; Jam. 1. 5. 1
Kin. 3. 9, 11. (tho this Spirit is working with Reason.) See Act. 16. 14. Luke
24. 32. Heb. 4. 2. Ephesians. 1. 17. 1 Cor. 2. 14.

And the same connection that is found between truth and holiness,. 40. Where
more error more vice, and e converso.
is also between vice and error or blindness; they also mutually producing one
another. For, whether we say, that the passions run counter to the judgment;
(so they will soon vitiate it, especially in things, tho very reasonable, yet
not plainly evident, as matters of faith are; and, by hindering any light that
may descend into it, they will make it study things only in their defense;
suffer it to consider no arguments that make against them; and over-aw it with
fear, lest any truth should oppose the satisfaction of them, Facile deos non
esse credit, cui deos esse non expedit; and so vice begets error;) Or, whether
we say, that the affections follow judgment; (so error and blindness here will
soon cause in ordinacy there): the unholy are always, some way or other, blind.
See 1 Jo. 2. 4. 2 Timothy 3. 5. 1 Cor. 8. 2, 3. -- 2. 14. Hos. 4. 11. Romans 8. 5,
6, 7. 1 Cor. 3. 3. compared with the first. Jo. 3. 19, 20. -- 5. 44. 1 Timothy 1.
19. -- 6. Tit. 1. 11. Lu. 16. 14. Phil. 3. 19. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 12. 2 Timothy 2. 19.
compared with 18. Our Savior accused the blind Pharisees of many vices,
especially of ambition and covetousnes, who therefore placed religion more in
ceremonies, washing, fasting, etc, than in justice and judgment. Lu. 11. 42.
And the Apostles noted the false teachers much guilty in their lives both of
sensuality (lust and gluttony), and of covetousnes, and vain glory, by which
their doctrines became such as pleased men, such as tended to liberty and
licentiousnes. See 2 Pet. 2. 3, 18, 19. and were contrary to mortification and
the cross. Phil. 3. 18, 19. See 2 Pet. 2. cap. and Epistle of Jude, -- Men of
corupt minds. 1 Timothy 6. 5. Lovers of their own selves. 2 Timothy 3. 2.
Self-willed, or self-pleasers. 2 Pet. 2. 10. Loving to have the Preeminence. 3
Jo. 9. Their spirit proud, 1 Timothy* 6. 4. contentious: Jam. 3. 17. Tit. 3. 9. 1 Timothy 6: 5. ever learning and never able to come to any certainty. 2 Timothy 3. 7.
Separating. Jud. 19. Heb. 10. 25. Nor can such teachers, unholy themselves, by
the truths they teach, propagate holiness easily in others. For tho many truths
are taught by the most erroneous, yet are they truths not such as more
immediately tend to holiness, or not to those parts of holiness, wherein himself
is deficient; else if their doctrines could have had any effect in the auditor,
they would have had so in the teacher: which as long as they have not, and that
he wants experience and the practick; the theory is nothing worth, but like
him that reads a lecture of war, and never was Soldier. Or, if they be such as
tend more to holiness, yet they are but a few, with the omission of many other
that are mainly conducing to the production of piety; so that the effect
follows not a partial cause. or, if they be sufficient, yet are they
ineffectual and unperswasive, whilst he speaks them from the brain, and not
from the heart; from the memory, not from the affections: and whilst they are
unaccompanied with the power of the Spirit, (Jude 19. 2 Cor. 3. 6. [the Spirit
applying what they say.] See Luke 18. 34. compared with Act. 16. 14. which
(ordinarily) does not cooperate in the word with such a ministry, (see 1 Cor.
4. 19, 20): the ministry, tho not for necessary Sacraments, yet for many other
things, becoming much less effectual, when in the possession of a wicked person
endued with a lawful mission, yet void of the sanctifying Spirit. Certainly it
much matters, whether we be recommended to God, and God's grace recommended to
us by the prayers and teaching of an holy, or of a wicked, man. S. Cyprian
says, Oportet eos ad sacerdotium deligi, quos a Domino constat audiri, quoting
Hos. 9. 4. Jo. 9. 34. -- And S. Hierom says the like, quoting Lev. 21. 17. --
And Gelasius. Quomodo coelestis Spiritus invocatus adveniet, si sacerdos, qui
eum adesse deprecatur, criminosis plen^is actionibus reprobatur? And very much
every where is said in the Prophets of the mischiefs descending on the people,
from the superintendence of a vicious Clergy. Whereas the holy man speaks with
power; the Spirit, both in, and from, him; working upon the people, (God
imparting it unto his auditors, as Moses's unto the Elders: See Matt. 10. 20.
Act. 6. 10.) and also * from God cooperating with him, 1 Cor. 7. 9. God both
hearing his prayers and intercessions, Jam. 5. 16. Job. 33. 23. and also
blessing his labors more than other men's.

Now what has bin said of particular persons, is to be understood. 41.
the same of Churches, being a collective body made up of particulars: in all
of which Churches, tho there are some men holy, and in the best of Churches
many bad; yet where more light and truth, there doubtless are the more good, and
the fewer wicked, and so e converso.

1. To try then what Church is such. 1. You are to observe and. 42. n. 1. 1. In
churches therefore to compare the strictnes or liberty of their Doctrines,
Discipline, etc.
weigh well their Teachers and Divines; who are educated and prepared for their
office, in speculations and controversies more; and who more in mortifications;
who strive rather to rectify the peoples manners, and who rather to inform the
peoples understandings: their doctrines, their discipline, their ceremonies;
which Church gives stricter education to her children, whose doctrines tend
more to liberty; whose discipline is more remiss; whose ceremonies are more
reverent, and by all manner of ways helpful to devotion. For, the severest
religion is the best; and Spiritual comforts are in it to such a degree
possessed, as worldly consolations are by it retrenched; and wherever more
liberty, there less holiness. For liberty is 1. First, both the most used
pretense of false teachers, and is absolutely the aptest instrument for
bringing in vices, and making men (in stead of being free from) servants to
their lusts. See 2 Pet. 18, 19. And we know what was the art of Jeroboam, 1
Kin. 2. 28. [It is too much for you etc.] Which thing wise Bacon also has
observed: Nova secta ita se tantum late diffundit, si portam luxuriae and
voluptatibus aperiat, authoritati repugnet. And 2ly, when such pretense of
liberty is not used for these things, (as doubtless many times it is not by the
Doctors), yet where there is no express restraint made of it, it is almost
irremediably abused to these ill ends by the people, I mean, to licentiousnes
and satisfying of lusts; to an occasion for the slesh, Gal. 5. 13. to a cloak
for wickedness; and particularly (as that place imports) disobedience to
authority, 1 Pet. 2. 16. Therefore S. Paul, (much mistaken to be a patron of
it, Gal. 5. 1.) tho he so much vindicated it, in one thing, against Jewish
ceremonies; and against these in one case, that is, when required as necessary
to salvation; for else himself many times conformed to them; yet, in the free
using of all things, lawful unto us etc, no man opposed liberty more than he;
nor practiced it less. See Romans 14. cap. 1 Cor. 8. and 9. cap. 1 Cor. 6. 12. He
would teach for nothing, and work at his trade; would not eat and drink; would
not carry about a wife; would keep under his body so, as that he might not be
brought under the power of any thing, so as not to be able to abstain from it;
nay would not eat a bit of flesh as long as he lived, if (not himself, but)
another, should but receive any hurt by it. And so no man more strict in his
orders, than he, (see 1 Cor. 14. cap. -- 11. 2, 16. -- 4. 17.) and in requiring
obedience in all things. For indeed, however we slight small helps, maxima
pendent ex minimis.

2. In Churches therefore, in prosecution of this search, we are. 42. n. 2. 2.
Their abounding, or deficiency, in doctrines tending to perfection etc.
to observe; not only, whether they retain all truths absolutely necessary to
be known to attain salvation, (for, I think, both the soberest of the Roman
Church grant this to the Reformed; and of the Reformed grant this to the Roman:
and both of them grant, that the Scriptures plainly set them down); nor only
whether their doctrines are not untrue; or their commands not unlawful; or
either of these contrary to antiquity: but also, whether these Churches be not
deficient in, or also oppose, many truths and practices delivered by Antiquity,
and taught and enjoined elsewhere, which neither are absolutely necessary to
men's salvation, nor yet absolutely indifferent, but things very profitable, and
much conducing to it. Where note, that it is a great wrong to the perfection of
Christianity, if any should rank all points, not absolutely necessary to
salvation, amongst things purely indifferent and of free use, and wherein we
may take our liberty of opinion or practice. Those points, which receive no
excuse of impossibility, nor no exception of time, place, or persons, for the
believing or practicing of them, are very few; perhaps one Sacrament, Baptism,
one Article of the Creed, [the belieiving in Jesus Christ our Lord and
Savior.] And yet those points, without which the Church nor Christian religion
cannot subsist, and which those, who have sufficient revelation, are not to
oppose, or neglect to practice, under some peril of their damnation, are many.
We are therefore to observe in a Church, whether these are not some way
deficient; whether, as all vice is disallowed by her, so all those means are
recommended by her, whereby vice may be destroyed; and contrarily whether, not
some, but all, virtue, and all the perfection thereof, be proposed and pressed:
whether Christian virtues be recommended by her in the whole latitude of their
efficacy and use, or only in some part thereof. As if something by her be
pressed only as a duty of obedience to a command, when as it is a special means
also to procure some benefit. [As should she recommend alms only as a duty,
when as it is also a special means to appease God's wrath, and to procure (through
Christ) remission of sin. So should she recommend works only as a fruit of true
faith, when as they are a necessary condition of salvation;] since men will
much sooner do these, pressed to them in one sense, than only in the other. As
many would sooner give some alms, to appease God's wrath for some sin that
afflicts the conscience, than only not to commit the breach of a precept.
Again; whether not only the precepts, but all the higher counsels of the Gospel
are held forth to her children.

For we must know; that as, under the Law, none of all the Sacrifices were more
grateful to God than the free-will-offerings;. 43.
i. e. when they willingly did more than God exacted from them, in, and
conformably to, those ways wherein he was pleased then to be worshipped by
them: So, under the Gospel, there is an acceptable free-willworship answering
to that legal; i. e. when one does something, for the measure, time, place, and
other circumstances (of those holy duties, wherein God is pleased to be served
by us, not in any thing else that is besides, and unconformable unto, them)
more, than the Gospel has prescribed. Yet so, that he, who meanwhile omits to
do the like, sins not against any command. And this acceptable
free-will-worship consists * either in an higher degree of performing some
duty, than is required under penalty of sin; as praying seven times a day with
David; giving half his goods to the poor with Zacheus; or yet more with the
widow, Lu. 21. 4. etc; * or in using some means, truly conducing to better
performance of such duty, more than is required, or than we are confined to by
any command. As, abstaining from some things lawfully used, to help us the
easilier to avoid some vice, or excel in the practice of some duty: as when
one lives single; uses course apparel; plain and spare diet; chooses an
Ecclesiastical vocation (more duly to wait on God, more to subdue lust, more to
help the poor, etc.) and when one restrains his liberty with Vows. Provided
always, that this free-will-offering which is not required, be always
undertaken for the better doing of something commanded and required, and be
only a circumstance as it were of something that is in it self duty, and be
such as God has recommended, tho not enjoined, and Saints of God before us
have practiced. Now since such things may lawfully be done upon our own
undertaking, much more are they not to be refused upon the Church's injunction;
which, always with the command, fails not to express a profitable end,
concerning which, it is the duty of our humility to submit-unto, and not
question her judgment. See more of this in Dr. Hammond's excellent note upon
(...), Coloss. 2.

We are therefore well to consider, whether a Church be not, in such profitable
helps of an holy life, deficient. For example: If. 44.
a Church should impose no affirmative credends, nor enjoin no practices, but
what all the Christian world will subscribe to; and yet should hold, That to
abstain from any thing, which it is lawful by God's word to enjoy, is
fruitless, will worship, and superstition; -- should disallow professedly or
tacitly (i. e. by suffering any such good custom to be diswonted, for want of
being recommended) the confessing of sin to the Priest, whether it be for more
shame and humiliation of our selves for it; or for their advice against it, or
their ministerial absolution from it, or for their prayers and intercession
against it, etc. -- should affirm, confession to God or the Priest sufficient
for remission without reformation of life; -- or being sorry for them
sufficient repentance, without any further penances, humiliations, or punishing
of our selves for them; or without those of the body at least, (yet which,
still pampered, no way consists with a soul afflicted); -- or that these are
necessary only, when they are imposed to satisfy the scandal of the Church,
not to appease the wrath of God: -- or, that they are remitted by money or
indulgence, which is not preceded by penitence: -- should not teach her
children * the distinction of greater and lesser sins, that so they may be more
extraordinarily cautious of those which more provoke the wrath of God; -- and *
the several degrees of penitence required according to the several measure of
their faults, that so they may practice greater humiliations upon the
commission of more grievous offenses: -- should hold, that good works are not
necessary to salvation; or necessary only out of gratitude, or as fruits that
will necessarily spring out of true faith; or that promises of reward are not
made to good works, but only to faith: -- should require for our salvation
faith only in our Savior's merits, i. e. his good works so as to avoid
inherent righteousness; or faith in Christ's satisfaction, (i. e. his
sufferings,) so as to avoid all our self-afflictions, mortifications, and
conformity to his death: -- should teach our inability, tho we be in the state
of grace, to keep all God's commandments and fulfill his law, as touching all
greater sins and offenses against any part thereof; and to please him in our
works: -- should hold no degrees of perfection in obedience; nor any latitude
of goodness beyond that of being void only of sin; making none better than him
that sins not; or him, whoever is not most good, an offender; and the
falling-short of the highest degree of prayer, charity, etc guilty of sin, to
the taking away of all confidence in God from our good deeds, and emulation of
being perfect, and pre-eminence of Saints: -- should make the heavenly reward
equal to all, so that who is more holy than the least that enters in thither
(suppose S. Paul than the Publican) in the overplus of his mortifications etc,
serves God for naught: -- should extol predestination, election, grace,
certainty of salvation, etc (i. e. the mercies of God) so far, as to remit and
weaken all humane endeavors: -- should deny the continuance of God's miraculous
works now, as has bin in former times, to holy men; to the great weakening of
prayer, and faith, and making use of the intercessions of holy men: -- should
make an equal facility of attaining heaven to all conditions of life, not
noting to the people those, which have more temptations or hindrances in them
than some others; as marriage, wealth, honors: -- should disallow or discourage
Vows, and other prefortifications against those things which have bin
former-occasions of sinning: -- should not exact of her children frequent hours
of prayer in the day, (but discommend rather frequent repetitions, i. e.
importunity, of prayers); not exact frequent days of solemn worship in the
year, frequent celebrations of the Eucharist, frequent fasts and macerations of
the body, etc; -- or should not require some of these, more especially from her
Clergy at least. -- Should use no public, or at least private, Sacerdotal
censures and penitences upon greater sins, and should remit the reins of the
obedience that is due unto her authority; making her self incapable to
restrain, except where her children are first persuaded she judges right, (i.
e. according to Scripture as they understand it). -- Should by her doctrines,
That such and such christian duties are not required with such and such a
quatenus, in such and such a sense or respect; as, not good works, i. e. to
justify, or to merit, or to obtain remission of sin by them; not penance, i.
e. to satisfy God's justice; not confession, i. e. as jure divino; not such
and such ceremonies, set times of fast, hours of prayer, etc, i. e. as divine
commands, or essential parts of worship: not poverty, celibacy, etc, i. e. as
counsels to all; but only contend that they are necessary duties to some,
whilst none know to whom in particular they are so, (which thing quite voids
the duty) -- Should, I say, by teaching much more vehemently how such duties
are not required, than how they are to be understood, (especially to one
considering both the peoples and the teachers practice), as if they argued that
they were not required at all; or by teaching that such and such practices are
not absolutely necessary, should be conceived to say they are no way
beneficial, or no way useful at all, because they are not useful alone; as is
true of all manner of mortifications and castigations of the body. -- If any
Church, I say, should hold, or is ordinarily by the people understood to hold,
such tenets as these; who sees not that in such a Church, tho commanding
nothing unlawful, yet omitting only the contrary doctrines to these
before-named, the people must needs desert many good duties, grow cold in
devotion, and left to their (most grateful) liberty, use it to their
destruction. But were it not so, and that such a Church were free from blame;
yet were that Ecclesiastical Economy more to be preferred, and would have a
reward and something to glory of beyond the rest, (as S. Paul beyond other
teachers. 1 Cor. 9.), that should, through these restraints of lawful liberty,
aspire to the more perfection.

That Church therefore seems more safely to be preferred and. 45.
adhered unto, which is more accused of excesses in religion, than which is
blamed of defects; as that which is said to attribute too much to good works;
to extol too much the virtue of self-mortifications and penances; to superadd
to God's commands a great deal of spontaneous and free-will-worship; to abound
too much in religious rites and ceremonies; too much in corporal bowings and
gestures; too much in fasting-days; to use too many vain repetitions in their
prayers; to reverence holy places, and things, and persons in excess; to give
too much authority, and require too strict a submission, to the governors and
laws of the Church; excessively to practice and recommend religious vows; to
make too great a mystery of, to attribute too great a virtue, to give too great
a reverence, to the Holy Sacraments, etc.

3. You are to peruse their writings and books, not of controversy, but of
devotion and instructions for the practice of holy. 46. 3. The^r writings of
Devotion.
living. In which you shall find certainly what fruit their doctrines bear, and
what strength and virtue they contain in them; and a great difference between
them in their operations upon the affections: a much fainter and more
languishing heat from the one than from the other, (as indeed what fervent
motives to piety could one raise from such foundations as have bin
abovementioned?) Some teaching as it were from Experience, the other from Art;
some full of wit, the others of zeal; the one more enlarging, the other
straitning, the way to heaven; some laying light, the other more heavy,
burdens, but more full of hope and present consolations: more punctual and
particular in their directions, as from those who have first tried the way
wherein they direct others; more high in their aim, carrying men to these
heights, which the other imagine impossible to attain. It remains that you
observe, which do inflame you to more sanctity and purity of life, and to them
adhere; for there is the power, there is the Spirit, of Christ. And commonly
the purer the Church, the more with these writings does she abound, as others
do with controversy and questions, (as error is ever unsettled); laying
foundations; always learning, but never coming to the perfect knowledge of the
truth; whilst one controversy still gendreth another, after the business is
committed wholly to our reason. 2 Timothy 2. 23, 16. -- 3. 7* 1 Timothy 1. 4.

4. Lastly; after their books and precepts, peruse their lives and. 47. 4. The
l^ves of the^r Saints.
practices, by reading the stories of the pretended holy men of all sides, and
those the nearest to the present age, wherein the relations are more certain:
of which stories those Churches that afford very few, it is to be suspected, that
where little is said, there is likewise little done, that may be talked of. In
which compared you shall find, a plain difference in their strictnes according
to their doctrines, and a transcendency in their virtues according to their
principles; some much more mortified and weaned from the world, and accordingly
more enlightened and honored of God than the other; in each of them their
doctrines perfectly designed and copied out. And here, in perusing their lives,
as their rules and doctrines, it is wisdom to adhere to those, by whom you most
profit.

And since we find, in the Church which the Reformation forsook,. 48.
frequent relations concerning holy men therein, as having frequent ecstasies
and revelations, doing many miracles, foretelling things future, exercising
most rigid abstinences and penances, every day confessing and communicating,
etc, and find not in the Churches reformed any one holy man at all, of whom the
like things are told by them in the histories of their lives; methinks it
follows, either that all those writers of Saints lives in the Church
reformed-from, have bin most intolerable liars, and this in all ages, as well
those before, as those since, the reformation began, (for in those ages we find
the like stories); or else that this Church is much more favored of God, than
that of the reformed is. But if those writers of lives have bin all such
intolerable liars, it is a wonder (in so frequent a fault) that no Protestants at
all should fall into the same, but all be so strict observers of truth, that
none of them should at any time, for the advancing of the reputation of their
religion, make the same fictions. But from their universal silence herein, may
it not rather be guessed, that such things as are writ in these lives,
involving the testimony and knowledge of so many nominated persons, living in
the same time and place where such facts are alleged, cannot be so easily
forged and counterfeited, as some would persuade. Not that I affirm, that there
is any Church or Religion, wherein you may not find some persons that are
virtuous in their conversation, and exemplary in their lives. For many
excellent men also have there bin amongst the Philosophers, and in the
heathenish religions, walking only in the light of nature; much more therefore
may some such be found in any Christian Sect whatever, who enjoy, besides that
of Nature, the light of Scriptures. But yet in that Church, where the doctrines
are purest, and tend most to holiness, certainly will be found a much greater
number of holy men and Saints, than in any other; and these also of a greater
purity and perfection, and consequently more honored also with singular favors
from heaven, not unlike to those of primitive times.

To these three ways of Trials of Doctrines etc, me thinks, upon the weighing
of our Savior's promise [That the Gospel and the doctrine. 49. IVth. Trial of
Doctrines by the conversion of Nations.
of his Kingdom should be published to all Nations] may be added a fourth, not
unconsiderable. And this is, diligently to observe (in the many divisions of
faith, and diversity of opinions that are in Christianity) what profession of
faith (doubtless sometimes attested by miracles, if histories deceive us not)
that was, or is, to which usually the heathen nations have bin, and are now,
converted; and of what persuasions and communion those men are, whom God has
made his instruments of their christianity. For we cannot rationally think,
(tho it may so happen to some few particulars; as the Goths are said to have
bin at first converted by Arrian Bishops, under an Arrian Emperor, yet so, that
God's mercy soon promoted them into the faith of the Church Catholic), we
cannot rationally think, I say, that, for the general, the good God, having
promised to the nations bread, would give them a stone; having promised them
the revelation of his truth would plant amongst them instead thereof, a
manifold idolatry, (as worshipping of dead men; and of bread, as God etc, as
some would persuade us,) and would not give them the waters of life to drink
of, unless these poisoned with such errors, as from which the external
communion of all true believers ought to separate. And if (considering the
promises of God Romans 11. c.) at the time of the conversion hereafter of the
Jews to Christianity, no wise man would doubt to conform to their external
communion; why should we not also choose rather (as more safe) to be of the
external communion and faith, in which the Nations generally, both who have
bin, and are, converted to the faith, have bin, and are initiated? and that
upon the same promise, Matt. 24. 14. Mar. 13. 10. as the Jews hereafter shall
be. Now to these I will add only one thing more: That the most part of the
Northern world have received (at least) the public plantation and profession
of the Christian faith in, or since, the times of Gregory the Great; as the
Ecclesiastical histories plainly show). In whose time we know what were the
public doctrines in most of the modern controversies; and by whom God has
visited the people that sat in darkness in China, in the East and West Indies,
we cannot be ignorant. One Religion granted muchwhat the same as at the
present, for the last 1000 years, in its Liturgies and Public Service; in its
Altars, and quotidian Sacrifice; in its high veneration of the celestial
Favorites, and daily communication, by a commemoration of the Saints in glory,
with the Church triumphant; as likewise in its unbounded charity even to the
Souls of its supposed-necessitous brethren of the next world; in its variety of
Religious Orders, Fraternities, and Votaries; in its holy love to chastity,
silence, solitudes, and poverty; in its unarguing (and miscalled blind)
obedience to the laws of its Superiors; in its glorying, through all the past
ages, of miracles, and prophecy. One religion, I say appearing in all these for
so many ages much-what the same, and very reverend for its antiquity; yet still
going on resistless, flourishing, and spreading its arms abroad further and
further toward the East and toward the West with continued and unwearied
missions. And another religion every day varying from its self, and subdividing
into smaller Sects, after the 70th or 80th year of its age beginning to
decline, and wither, and loose ground in many places where it was formerly well
rooted; and, whilst it promises its self still to destroy Antichrist, growing
each day feebler, and He, that it names so, stronger.

To sum up all; the surest trial of the doctrines of any Church after that by
Scripture, (which is pretended for all sides) is. 50. Conclusion.
First, by their conformity with Antiquity, i. e. by the doctrines of the
former Church. 2. By the holiness which these doctrines produce in the members
of such a Church. For the first, we are to search the Fathers, or some of them;
or if it be but one of those who are more voluminous, concerning such points as
are now controverted: not as such Fathers are quoted by others, but in their
own writings. For the 2d; to read the books of Devotion, and the Lives of Holy
men of either party. Which two who carefully examines, (notwithstanding the
commonly used objections of disagreement, ambiguity, or impertinency in the
first, the Fathers; of forgery in the second, the Lives of Saints,) he shall be
abundantly satisfied concerning truth and error. And the grand causes of the
continued distractions of opinions, I conceive, are, either the not perusing of
the Fathers writings themselves, but quotations of them in others, where many
times a sentence, taken by it self, may be (without any forcing) capable of a
sense contradictory to the context: or the not casting of the search upon the
Fathers, but Scriptures only: or the searching of the Scriptures also not only
in an affirmative, but negative, way; taking all that for false, or unlawful,
or unuseful, not only what is against them, but what is not in them. Again, in
the searching of the Fathers, Councils, etc, the reasons why we assent not to
them, when found contrary to our former opinions, are 1. The being bred-up in
doctrines repugnant unto their decrees, and in places persecuting such tenets;
which makes us averse from truth, that will destroy us: averse, not by denying
it when we know it; but by preventing to our power the apprehension of
arguments persuasive to it; and by a willing entertaining reasons (which are
never wanting) against it. Now, that this conformity to opinions happens by
education and interest, rather than argument, is plain, in that all other
things remaining the like, (i. e. as much judgment, and diligence, and books,
etc,) and our education or interest being only changed, contrary opinions are,
as readily the one as the other, entertained. See before,. 14. 2. A general
inclination in our nature to opinions that give more liberty, and that more
throw off yokes. 3. A conceit (false), that Antichrist is to be a Christian in
profession, and a ruler in the Church. Which, with the texts of S. John 1 Ep.
2. 18. -- 4. 3. at one blow cuts off the head of all Church Authority,
Tradition, Fathers, Councils, how ancient soever, farther than we find them to
agree with Scripture; and that is, with our fancies upon Scripture, or
sometimes upon one, uncompared, text thereof.

According to what has bin considered in this Treatise, methinks some of those
passages urged long since by Sr. Edwin Sandys (in his Relation of the Western
relig. p. 30. etc.) as the ordinary plea of the Chapter of Rome, and her adherent
Churches, have something in them not easily to be answered, if we join with
them the notion of Catholic Chapter as explained by Mr. Thorndyke (in his printed
letter to his brother) and the experiences of our times, since Sr. Ed. Sandys's
decease. -- Mr. Thorndyke's words are these. Christians, when they profess to
believe [i. e. in the Creed] the Catholic Chapter do not believe, that there is in
the world a number of men, that profess to be Christians etc, but that there is
a Corporation of true Christians founded by our Lord and his Apostles, which
heretics and schismatics cannot have communion with; and this is that which
the style, Catholic and Apostolic Church, signifies; as distinguishing the
body of true Christians (to wit, so far as profession goes) from the
conventicles of heretics and schismatics. For this title of Catholic would
signify nothing, if heretics and schismatics were not barred the communion
of the Chapter Thus far he. Where his interpreting the believing of the Catholic
Chapter to be the believing of a distinction of the profession of Catholics from
the conventicles of Heretics, must needs infer; that the Church Catholic
(which soever it is) is a Church (or Churches) distinguished not only in its
internal communion with Christ its head, but in its external profession and
communion of its members amongst themselves, from the external communion and
profession of heretics. -- Sr. Edw. Sandys's discourse (by way of objection)
is this. -- If all other Churches [besides the Roman, and those united with
her] have had either their end and decay long since, or their beginning but of
late: if this being founded by the Prince of the Apostles, with promise to him
by Christ, that hell-gates should not prevail against it, but that himself will
be assisting to it till the consummation of the world, has continued on now
till the end of 1600 years, with an honorable and certain line of near 240
Popes, Successors of Peter; both tyrants and traitors, pagans and heretics in
vain wresting, raging, and undermining: If all the lawful General Councils that
ever were in the world, have from time to time approved and honored it; if God
has so miraculously blessed it from above, as that so many sage Doctors should
enrich it with their writings; such armies, of Saints with their holiness; of
Martyrs, with their blood; of Virgins, with their purity, should sanctify and
embellish it: If even at this day, in such difficulties of unjust rebellions
and unnatural revolts of her nearest children, yet she stretches out her arms
to the utmost corners of the world, newly embracing whole nations into her
bosom: If lastly in all other opposite Churches there be found inward
dissensions and contrariety, change of opinions, uncertainty of resolutions,
with robbing of Churches, rebelling against governors, [much more experienced
since this Author's death in the late Presbyterian wars,] confusion of Orders,
[invading of Episcopacy, etc.] whereas contrariwise in this Chapter the unity
undivided, the resolutions unalterable, the most heavenly order reaching from
the height of all power to the very lowest of all subjection; all, with
admirable harmony, beauty, and undefective correspondence, bending the same way
to the effecting of the same work, do promise no other than continuance,
increase, and victory; let no man doubt to submit himself to this glorious
Spouse of God etc. -- This then being accorded to be the true Church of God, it
follows, that she be reverently obeyed in all things without further
disquisition; she having the warrant, that he that hears her hears Christ;
and whosoever hears her not, has no better place with God than a publican or
pagan. And what folly were it to receive the Scriptures upon credit of her
authority, [the authority of that Church that was before Luther's times], and
not to receive the interpretation of them upon her authority also and credit?
And if God should not always protect his Church from error, [i. e. dangerous to,
or destructive of, salvation], and yet peremptorily command men always to obey
her; then had he made but very slender provision for the salvation of mankind:
which conceit concerning God (whose care of us even in all things touching this
transitory life is so plain and eminent) were ungrateful and impious. And hard
were the case, and mean had his regard bin, of the vulgar people, whose wants
and difficulties in this life will not permit, whose capacity will not suffice,
to sound the deep and hidden mysteries of Divinity, and to search out the
truths of intricate controversies, if there were not others, whose authority
they might [safely] rely on. Blessed therefore are they, who believe and have
not seen; the merit of whose religious humility and obedience does exceed
perhaps, in honor and acceptance before God, the subtle and profound knowledge
of many others. -- This is the main course of their persuading at this day etc.

FINIS.
Concerning SALVATION possible to be had in a SCHISMATICAL COMMUNION.

AND Concerning the danger of living in, and the necessity of departing from, a
KNOWN-SCHISMATICAL COMMUNION.

CONTENTS.
Tho it be conceded, 1. FIrst, That the Catholic Church contains in it not
many opposite, but only one, external Communion.. 2. 2ly. That there is no
salvation out of the communion, (i. e. internal) of the Church Catholic. 3.
Yet Salvation must be allowed to some, that are out of the external communion
of the Chapter Catholic. 4ly. That of those who live out of the Catholic, and in
a schismatical external Communion, there are several sorts. 1. Those, who make
such separation; who are not salvable without repentance. 2. Those, who follow
such leaders, and continue the division, upon the same motives and passions:
not salvable without repentance. 3. Those, who follow such leaders in
simplicity of heart, and out of (their condition considered) invincible
ignorance. Such seem to be in a salvable condition; tho incurring great
disadvantages for their salvation.. 7. 4. Those who, convinced of Schism in
such a Church, yet rejoyn not themselves to the external communion of the Chapter
Catholic, tho consenting in all things with her, Hindered, 1. Either by some
respects merely temporal. Such faulty; but how highly, is hard to determine. 2.
Or by some considerations and designs merely spiritual. Such less faulty than
the other: yet seem not wholly justifiable. 1. Whether they continue still in a
communion schismatical.. 9. n. 1. Which communion seems forbidden both 1. By
the Scriptures. 2. And by the Injunctions of the Church Catholic.. 10. -- To
which all owe obedience.. 11.
2. Or whether they communicate with no Church at all: who seem of the two the
less unjustifiable.. 13. yet not wholly excusable.. 14.

5. Those, who 1. much doubting the Church, they live in, to be schismatical,
yet are not fully convinced thereof. Or 2. convinced, defer their intended
reconcilement till an expected opportunity.. 17. That (several circumstances
considered) both these may, or may not, be culpable. A Query: What is to be
done, if the Chapter Catholic require some conformity to doctrines or practices
against his conscience or particular judgment, who seeks her Communion.. 19.
Several propositions tending to the solution of this Query.. 20.

Bishop of Chalcedon (in Protest. plain Confess. 2. c.) -- If Protestants allow
not saving Faith, Church, and Salvation, to such as sinfully err in
Not-fundamentals sufficiently proposed, they show no more charity to erring
Christians than Catholics do. For we allow all to have saving faith, to be in
the Church, in the way of salvation, (for so much as belongs to faith) who hold
the fundamental points, and invincibly err in not-fundamentals: because neither
are these sufficiently proposed to them; nor they in fault, that they are not
so proposed. -- 13. c. -- If they grant not Salvation to such Papists as they
count vincibly ignorant of Roman errors; but only to such as are invincibly
ignorant of them; then they have no more charity than we: For we grant Church,
saving Faith, and Salvation, to such Protestants, as are invincibly ignorant of
their errors.

Id. (in Survey of L. Derry, 8. c. 3..) in answer to Bishop Bramhal's objecting
the Pope's excommunicating of such Churches. -- Neither does the Roman Church
excommunicate all the Christians of Afric, Asia, Greece, and Russia; but only
such as vincibly, or sinfully, err; such as are formal or obstinate heretics,
or schismatics. For Excommunication is only against obstinacy: [Si Ecclesiam
non audierit, sit tibi sicut Ethnicus and Publicanus.] In these Churches there
are innumerable, who are but credentes haereticis and schismaticis, because the
Catholic faith was never sufficiently preached to them; and these the Pope
does not excommunicate. Nor does he exclude formal Heretics or Schismatics,
but Juridically declares them to be excluded. (For by their Heresies or
Schisms they had already excluded themselves:) or juridically confirms their
exclusion begun by themselves.

S. Aug. Confess. 8. l. 2. c. -- Legebat (Victorinus Doctor tot Nobilium
Senatorum etc,) sanctam Scripturam, omnesque Christianas scripturas
investigabat studiosissime, and perscrutabatur; and dicebat Simpliciano non
palam, sed secretius, and familiarius: Noveris me jam esse Christianum. Et
respondebat ille: Non credam; nec deputabo inter Christianos, nisi in Ecclesia
Christi te videro. Ille autem irridebat eum, dicens; Ergo parietes faciunt
Christianos? Et hoc saepe dicebat; Jam se esse Christianum. Et Simplicianus
illud saepe respondebat; and saepe ab illo parictum irrisio repetebatur. Amicos
enim suos verebatur offendere, superbos daemonicolas, quorum -- graviter
ruituras in se inimicitias arbitrabatur. Sed posteaquam legendo and inhiando
hausit firmitatem, timuitque negari a Christo coram Angelis sanctis, si eum
timeret coram hominibus confiteri, reusque sibi magni criminis apparuit,
erubescendo de Sacramentis humilitatis Verbi Tui, and non erubescendo de sacris
sacrilegis superborum daemoniorum, -- depuduit vanitati, and erubuit veritati:
subitoque and inopinatus ait Simpliciano, Eamus in Ecclesiam; Christianus volo
fieri etc. -- mirante Roma, gaudente Ecclesia. Superbi videbant, and
irascebantur: dentibus suis stridebant, and tabescebant. Servo autem tuo
Domine, Deus erat spes ejus; and non respiciebat in vanitates and insanias
mendaces.

S. Aug. de ordine 2. l. 9. c. -- Cum docilis factus fuerit, tum demum discit;
and quanta ratione praedita sint ea ipsa, quae secutus est ante rationem, and
quid sit ipsa ratio, quae, post authoritatis cunabula, firmus and idoneus jam
sequitur.

Grot. Votum pro pace. Preface. -- Facile vidi id voluisse Christum, ut omnes,
qui ab ipso nominari, and per ipsum beatitudinis compotes fieri vellent, unum
essent inter se, sicut ipse cum Patre unum est. (Jo. 17. 11. 21, 22, 23.) Neque
vero unum animo tantum, sed and ea communione, quae conspici potest, and maxim
conspicitur in regiminis vinculo, and in sacramentorum participatione. Est enim
Ecclesia, aut esse debet, corpus quoddam. (Romans 12. 5, 12, etc. 27. Ephesians. 1. 23.
-- 2. 16. -- 4. 4. -- 5. 30. Coloss. 1. 18. -- 2. 17, 19.) Quod corpus Christus
(caput ei a Deo datus) per varias junctur as praefecturarum compaginari voluit,
(Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 16.) and in hoc singulos baptizari, ut unum corpus fierent, (1
Cor. 12, 13.) and de uno consecrato pane vesci, ut sic magis magisque
coalescerent, and unum se corpus esse testarentur. (1 Cor. 10. 17.)

Note, that in this Discourse by [Schismatical] I mean in that sort of Schism
which is a separating from lawful Ecclesiastical Superiors. And that Churches
(not only private persons) may be (thus) schismatical, see Dr. Hammond, Of
Schism 3. c.. 10, and 21. -- and what is said in Ecclesiastical Government 2.
and 3, parts.

Of the danger of SCHISM.
SIR,
COncerning the hainousnes and danger of Schism, I have read over those
quotations you directed me to in Mr. Cressy's. 1.
Motives, c. 46. but cannot consent to what he there (sect. 5. compared with
the former quotations) deduceth from them: [i. e. that no man, if living in a
Communion or Church schismatical, tho he has no influence upon the beginnings
of the separation; tho he judge charitably of the Church which others have
separated from; and approaches as near to it in his belief, as that which is
truth, in his opinion, will permit him, can be saved.] Unless 1. first this be
true also, (which he indeed seems to affirm, 47. c. 2.. that the true Church
cannot be hidden from the eyes of any man, who does not willingly shut them),
That any ones opinion, that such a thing as he or his church holds is truth (I
add; or, that that Church, wherein they are baptized and educated, is the true
Church), of what condition, age, calling, capacity, soever he be, must needs
proceed in him from some corrupt passion, (as S. Austin instanceth in two such
passions which chiefly make ones error an heresy; qui, alicujus temporalis
commodi; or, qui, gloriae principatusque sui gratia, falsas and novas opiniones
vel gignit, vel sequitur), and from ignorance, not invincible, but obstinate
and affected. Now I hardly think any one will affirm this of every man
whatsoever, that is born and educated in a Communion schismatical. [Tho indeed
I believe that this may be truly said of very many (especially the learned),
who notwithstanding think themselves very free from it. For, the necessity
(which is ordinarily pleaded) of following or not-doing contrary to our
conscience freeth not us from being guilty of Schism in doing after it, (no
more than it could free a Donatist etc) if there be any defect, from
negligence, interest, passion, etc, in the information of it. See Notes of
Necessary Faith,. 6. And see Archbishop Lawd, Conf. 37. sect. 6. n. where he
says; That an error (and that in points Not-fundamental) may be damnable to
some men, tho they hold it not against their conscience: -- If they neither
seek the means to know the truth; nor accept truth, when it is known:
especially being men able to judge. Now, I conceive, in most learned that abide
in a Schismatical communion, such a fault there is. Namely, either much
negligence: and this, either in not reading the controversies of religion at
all; or in their reading the tenets of their adversaries only in their own
writers; or in their taking, and arguing against, the extremities of some
private men's opinions for the Catholic doctrines of that Church, from which
their Ancestors have departed. Or (if they deficient in none of these) 2ly,
much interest, and passion, and addiction to worldly conveniences or honors,
(therefore S. Paul and S. Jude observe much carnality in Schism, 1 Cor. 3. 3,
4. Jude 19): which passion (unknown to them) restrains the free liberty of
their judgments. Hence, the ignorant people in a Schismatical Church may well
be saved, whilst the learned thereof (in their uncharitablenes to, and
opposition of, the true Church) perish.] Or 2ly, unless this be true, that
where invincible ignorance is, and no actual breach of charity at all, yet the
pure want and privation of external unity or communion with the Church, without
any their default, damns such men; tho meanwhile they do receive all the
benefit of the Sacraments, well know and believe all the necessary Articles
belonging to faith and manners, and conform in their lives thereunto, even in
strict obedience to their Ecclesiastical Superiors of that Church which they
live in, and which they only know. Now this I think as unreasonable an
assertion as the former. See. 6, 7, 8. -- Now, to consider the quotations in
Mr. Cressy, and what may be said in this point, you must give me leave not to
shuffle all together; but to distribute the matter into many Propositions, that
we may see which of them are disputable, which not.

1. Let it be granted for the present, that the Church cannot. 2. Upon
confession; 1. that the Chapter Catholic. contains not in it many opposit^^^ but
only one, external Communion.
have in it many opposite external communions, but only one: so that he, that
enjoys not that one external communion, is rightly said to be out of the
communion of the Church, i. e. out of the external communion thereof. Only here
note; that one may elsewhere, out of this external communion of this only true
Catholic Church, be partaker of the Sacraments, and those the true Sacraments:
for none deny that the administration of true Sacraments may be in a Church
Schismatical, or also Heretical. So S. Austin (de vera Relig. 5. c.)
acknowledges the Arrians and Photinians, Heretics, to have had all the same
Sacraments with the true Chapter Qui [i. e. Photiniani, Arriani, etc,] paria
Sacramenta celebrantes, tamen, quia sententia dispares, sunt -- exclusi a
Catholica communione etc. And of the Donatists schismatics he says, (Ep. 48.
near the end); Nobiscum estis in baptismo; in symbolo; in caeteris Dominicis
Sacramentis etc. And the Roman Church, which esteems the Greek schismatical,
denies not them to have the true Sacraments. And if some of them deny it of
the Protestants, it is only from the Protestants not using some forms which they
count essential to the Sacraments, (especially the form in the ordaining
Priests); not from their being a schismatical Church. See 6, 7, 8,. Therefore
of that place of Fulgentius, de remiss. peccat. 22. c. quoted in Mr. Cress.
Motiv. 46. c. 4. sect. [Out of this Church neither does the title of Christian
secure any man; neither does Baptism confer salvation; neither does any man
offer a sacrifice agreeable to God; neither does any man receive remission of
sins; nor attain life eternal, etc,] the meaning of it is only; That the
Sacraments, tho true, do not profit to salvation a Schismatic; as they neither
do, a drunkard or adulterer etc: because as the drunkard, notwithstanding
these, is damned for his drunkenness; so is the Schismatic for his faction, and
uncharitablenes, and pride, in not submitting his judgment to the Church. And
many the like sayings concerning the inutility of the Sacraments to
Schismatics, before Fulgentius, has St. Austin, in his writings against the
Donatists, who urged, from the true use of the Sacraments, and the belief of
the Creed, etc, the security of their salvation. See de Baptismo 1. l. 3. c.
Esse baptismum and apud Donatistas nos concedimus, sed apud Donatistas
Baptismum non recte accipi etc, -- Qui ab aliqua haeresi veniunt ad Communionem
Catholicam, incipit illis prodesse, quod inutiliter habebant. -- Certus est in
ea sola [i. e. Catholica Ecclesia] illi prodesse baptismum Christi, etiamsi
alibi acceptum fuerit etc. But then the reason given by him of these Sacraments
not profiting etc is, the want of charity in those, who, in such Church, use or
receive them: as we may plainly see by his fuller arguing the business in other
places. (Epist. 48. near the end.) Nobiscum estis in baptismo, in symbolo, in
caeteris Dominicis Sacramentis; in spiritu unitatis, and vinculo pacis, in ipsa
denique catholica Ecclesia, nobiscum non estis: Haec si accipiatis [i. e.
vinculum pacis etc] non tunc aderunt, sed tunc proderunt, quae habetis. Here
the want of spiritus unitatis and vinculum pacis renders the true Sacraments
received, as to their salvation, uneffectual. And (de unitate Ecclesiae 19. c.)
Accipiat vinculum pacis quod non habebat, sine quo illi prodesse non poterat
baptisma quod habebat. Utrumque enim necessarium est ad regnum Dei
adipiscendum, and baptismus, and justitia. Baptismus autem and in eo qui
justitiam non habet, potest esse; sed non potest prodesse. Justitia autem
haereticis deest, quam sine charitate ac vinculo pacis habere nullus potest:
and for this also he quotes 1 Cor. 13. 1. But then take one in a schismatical
Church that is void of that fault, which the Father alleges here to render
the Sacraments uneffectual to them, and to expel them from salvation, (as you
must grant to me some are, when I name a child to you that is not yet come to
the full use of his reason), and such a one, baptized, and then dying, is
certainly saved. And then I ask; Why not some other? who, tho living longer,
yet through an invincible ignorance may be as free from division, and faction, and
breach of charity, in this kind, as when he was an infant; or as any others
are, who are educated in the bosom of the true Church. For which purpose see S.
Austin de Baptism. contra Donatistas 1. l. 10. c. -- Ecclesia Catholica
quicquid suum habet, etiam in communionibus diversorum ab unitate separatis,
per hoc quod suum in iis habet [i. e. per baptismum, of which he is there
speaking] ipsa utique generat [i. e. filios Christo, non illae]. Per hoc quod
suum in iis habet, therefore the Church has aliquid suum in other heretical
and schismatical Churches. Generat filios, therefore some also in Schismatical
Churches thus may be said to have the Church for their Mother. Else if Baptism,
when administered by such, were utterly effectless in it self; how could it
profit them to salvation, without any second administration thereof, who
afterward return into the bosom of the true Church?

2. Be it granted: That there is no salvation to any that are out of the
communion (i. e.) internal of the Church. (For certainly. 3. ^. That there is
no salvation to any who are out of the internal communion of the Chapter Catholic.
none are saved that are not the members of Christ, the Head; and then, it is
impossible, that any should be one of the members of Christ, and not have those
of the church for his fellow members, unless Christ have two distinct bodies.)
-- Of this S. Austin against the Donatists, De unitate Ecclesiae 2. c. speaks
very fully. Quaestio certe inter nos versatur, ubi sit Ecclesia; utrum apud
nos, an apud illos? Quae utique una est; quam majores nostri Catholicam
nominarunt. Haec autem Ecclesia corpus Christi est. Unde utique manifestum est,
eum, qui non est in membris Christi, Christianam salutem habere non posse.
Membra vero Christi per unitatis charitatem sibi copulantur, and per eandem
capiti suo cohaerent, quod est Jesus Christus. [He continues afterward, cap.
4.] Quicunque de ipso Capite Scripturis sanctis consentiunt, [i. e. are never
so orthodox in their belief,] and unitati Ecclesiae non communicant, non sunt
in Ecclesia; quia de Christi corpore (quod est Ecclesia) dissentiunt ab ipsius
Christi testificatione, [i. e. that she is toto orb diffusa, and shall never
perish, etc,] and apertissimis ac notissimis Scripturarum testimoniis
contradicunt. -- Again: Quicunque credunt quod Christus Jesus in carne vener it
etc, sed tamen ab ejus corpore, quod est Ecclesia, ita dissentiunt, ut eorum
communio non sit cum toto quacunque diffunditur, sed in aliqua part separata
inveniatur; manifestum est eos non esse in Ecclesia Catholica. In aliqua part
separata, for the reason given by him above; because they want charity: Membra
vero Christi per unitatis charitatem sibi copulantur, and capiti suo; and
because notissimis Scripturis contradicunt.

3. But, all this being granted, yet 3ly, if any happen to be extra. 4. 3. Yet
that salvation must be allowed to same who are out of the Chapter Catholics
external communion.
Ecclesiam, out of the Church's external communion, or also in part separata;
so he be not guilty of that fault which makes such separation damnable, but
still retains the necessary bond of charity; such a one, (once joined unto it
by baptism), tho amongst other Separatists, seems to remain himself still
unseparated (tho not from the external, yet) from the internal communion of the
Church. And if any be so strict, as, besides this internal (effected by the
same Spirit of Christ in all the faithful, and always seen to God) always to
exact an external also, such assertion will in many instances prove false, even
in S. Austin's concessions; who freely acknowledges both many, that are in the
external communion of the Church, no true members thereof; and many to be true
members of the Church, who are out of the external communion thereof. See de
unitate Ecclesiae 20. c. -- Multi tales sunt in Sacramentorum communione cum
Ecclesia, and tamen jam non sunt in Ecclesia: Alioquin and tunc quisque
praeciditur, cum excommunicatur. Consequens erit, ut tunc rursus inseratur, cum
visibiliter communioni restituitur. Quid si ergo sictus accedat, atque adversus
veritatem and Ecclesiam ^or inimicissimum gerat? Quamvis peragatur in eo illa
solemnitas, nunquid reconciliatur? nunquid inseritur? absit. Sicut ergo, jam
denuo communicans nondum insertus est; sic and antequam visibiliter
excommunicatur, quisquis contra veritatem, qua convincitur and arguitur,
inimicum gest at animum, jam praecisus est. Again; de Baptism 1. l. 17. c.
Semper ab illius Ecclesiae, quae sine macula and ruga est, unitate divisus est,
etiam qui, in carnali obduratione, congregationi Sanctorum miscetur. --
Spirituales autem sive ad hoc ipsum pro studio proficientes, non eunt for as
[i. e. when they are excommunicated]: quia and quum aliqua vel perversitate,
vel necessitate hominum, videntur expelli; ibi magis probantur quam si intus
permaneant; cum adversus Ecclesiam nullatenus eriguntur, sed in solida unitatis
petra fortissimo charitatis robore radicantur. Add to this the place quoted
below,. 13. and that Discourse of his de unit. Eccl. 20. c. of the several
degrees of their culpablenes who may live in a Schismatical communion, set
down. 7: Where the Father affirms, God has some good corn amongst those tares:
ubi radice viva herbae vigor atteritur, etc. Several instances therefore there
may be given, wherein such assertion will prove false. For example: It is
granted to be false, in those who are unjustly excommunicated, (as some, it is by
all conceded, may be); and in Penitents, after a just Excommunication, who are
not yet actually reconciled. Of whom Bellarm. de Eccl. 3. l. 6. c. says; Tales
esse in Ecclesia animo sive desiderio, quod sufficit illis ad salutem: bringing
in St. Austin's saying, de vera relig. 6. c. of such like; Hos coronat in
occulto Pater in occulto videns. (See below.) -- Again: false, at least, in
those dying after baptism, before the use of reason, in a schismatical Church.
-- Again, false in Catechumeni, that dye before they receive baptism, or are
entered into the Church. Of whom Bellarmin (de Eccl. 3. l. 3. c.) says: Quod
dicitur, extra Ecclesiam neminem salvari, intelligi debere de iis, qui neque
reipsa, neque desiderio, sunt de Ecclesia, (sicut etiam de baptismo communiter
loquuntur Theologi); quoniam autem Catechumeni, si non re, saltem voto, sunt in
Ecclesia; ideo salvari possunt. Neque repugnat similitudo Arcae Noe, extra quam
nemo salvabatur, etiamsi voto in ea fuisset: nam similitudines non in omnibus
convenient. I add, that some of the Catechumeni were such, as, for secular
reasons etc, deferred baptism long after they might have bin admitted to, and
received, it: and amongst such, I suppose was Valentinian; who dying before
baptism received, after baptism willingly deferred, yet S. Ambrose doubted not
of his salvation. What then? was there no fault in baptism so deferred? Whether
in all, I know not; in many, I believe there was. But we must put some
difference, between the committing of a fault (in the want thereof), and the
incurring of certain damnation. And doubtless, this fault, as others, was
remitted to them upon a general or a particular repentance, the votum
meanwhile of what they wanted and purposed, that in convenient time they would
receive, and presumed they should, saving their souls. I say therefore, in such
cases, the position above, being meant of external communion, is false: and
then why may it not also be so in some other cases? As namely in one, whose ill
hap it is to be born in a Schismatical communion, yet where he partakes the
true Sacraments; when it is supposed, that such a one may be guiltles of that
crime, for which the Schismatical are damned.

4. In the next place; of those who all live in the same Schismatical communion
there are several sorts: who must be carefully 4. Several sorts of those who
live in an external communion Schismatical.
distinguished.

1. The first are those, who make a separation, and set up a new. 5. 1. Those
who make such separation, not salvable, without repentance.
communion diverse from the church Catholic; be it upon any pretense of error,
or other thing whatsoever, (for there can never be, to the end of the world, a
just cause of so doing). [See Aug. Ep. 48. Si possit (quod fieri non possit)
aliquis habere causam justam, qua communionem suam separet a communione orbis
terrarum, etc. (See this place quoted and approved by Dr. Hammond, (of Schism,
1. c.) only let me add to his words there, visible Church; else no division from
the church Catholic can ever be known. -- And again: Ibi enim erit [i. e.
Ecclesia] ubi primum forsitan factum est [i. e. separation] quod postea vos
fecistis, si potuit esse ulla justa causa, qua vos a communione omnium gentium
separare possetis. Nos autem ideo certi sumus neminem se a communione omnium
gentium just separare potuisse; quia non quisque nostrum in justitia sua [as
the Donatists did, saying no wicked could be of the Church,] sed in Scripturis
divinis quaerit Ecclesiam, and, ut promissa est, reddi conspicit, [i. e. toto
orb diffusam, civitatem super montem positam, crescentem in messem etc.] See
contra Ep. Parmen. 2. l. Praecidendae unitatis nulla est justa necessitas.]
Such men therefore as make this separation dying in this guilt unrepented of,
tho this their death should be a martyrdom for the truth, cannot be saved (no
more than a drunkard or adulterer impenitent, and continuing in such a sin till
his death, that dies for Christianity), for without charity (says the Apostle)
none can be saved. 1 Cor. 13. 1. And this falling out (so causless) with their
mother the Church, disobeying her, and violating her peace and unity, accusing
her of error, (for no Schism but pretends some error in the Church, that it may
have a just cause of departing from her), and of error also so intolerable,
that none at all ought longer to live in her society. [As, if any should say of
her, (what the more moderate Protestants say of the Roman Ch.) That by reason
of her superstitions, or her (material) idolatry, or her Antichristian
principles, none may safely communicate with her: That, in the division made,
not they, but she is the schismatical Church: That she retaining the expression
unchanged, yet has, in the exposition both of Creeds and Councils, quite
changed and lost the sense and meaning of some of the Articles of them: That
there is great peril of damnable both Schism, and Heresy, and so of damnation,
by living and dying in her faith and persuasion, tainted with many
superstitions: That her errors are reductively fundamental, if any
pertinaciously adhere to them. (See Archbishop Lawd's Conference, 35.. punct.
5, 6. -- and 37.. 1. numb. 5. numb.)]: Such things, I say, are a very high
breach of charity, and that to a person of nearest relation to us, our
Spiritual Mother; tho perchance many Schismatics are so far charitable to her,
as not to say, that her errors exclude her from all salvation; or that she is
no Church at all: but this spark of charity left in some toward her little
excuses their many other wrongs. Non video (says Cassander, Consult. 7. Art.)
quomodo illa interna societas consistere possit, si publicam Ecclesiae
consuetudinem in observatione tam universalium quam particularium rituum
violes, and condemns, and institutis majorum pertinaciter repugnes; quod certe
est contra officium charitatis, qua maxim internam hanc unitatem consistere
certissimum est. Thus he. Neither does it excuse them, if any do all this
against the Church out of ignorance and not-contrary to their knowledge, as
being persuaded, the Church may apostatize from Christ etc; because, as S.
Austin says, (see before 3..) notissimis ac apertissimis Scripturarum
testimoniis contradicunt etc, and such ignorance must needs be highly faulty,
and proceed from a judgment blinded with pride, ambition, or some other
self-interest. And this desperate condition of the authors, or fautors, of
Schism, I think, all sides acknowledge. See what Dr. Hammond says, (of Schism
1. c.) There is no one vice, which has fallen under so much of the
displeasure, and correption, and severest discipline of the holy Fathers of the
ancient Church, as this of Schism, and the ingredients and preparatives to it,
have done. Where also see the aggravations thereof in many pages.

2. The second sort are those in all after-ages who follow such. 6. 2. Those
who follow such leaders, and continue the division upon the same motives and
passions not salvable, without repentance.
leaders, and continue the same division (after they know how at first it was
made) upon the same motives as the other began it, and blinded with the same
passions, and culpable ignorance. And these, being in the same guilt, are in
the same condition, for salvation, as the former. Only the first of the two,
caeteris paribus, the far greater sinners, because the first seducers; if the
followers no way outvy them in further prosecuting the principles received from
them, and accumulating their uncharitablenes and contumelies against the
Church, and resisting greater light given them, and plainer discoveries made
unto them. But note, that by reason of these, as many times the Scholars
transcend their Masters, the followers may easily become twice as much the
children of hell as their first leaders were. See Matt. 23. 15. And of these
two only I suppose are meant all those quotations of the Fathers: the reasons
there mentioned being ambition, interest, etc, and (upon these) breach of
charity, and of the unity of the Church.

3. The third sort are those, who follow such leaders (being not. 7. 3. Those
who follow such leaders in simplicity of heart, and out of (their condition
considered) invincible ignorance: such in a salvable state, tho suffering great
disadvantages.
schismatici so much, as, schismaticis credentes) in simplicity of heart; and
out of, not a faulty, but (considering their condition, or age, etc) an
invincible ignorance; perhaps such a one not knowing of any other Christian
church save his own, (as some travelers have noted, that the Maronites or
Armenians in Persia, ignorant of any division of theirs from the Roman Church,
heartily joined in Divine Service with the Romish Covents there); or, if
knowing of another Chapter not knowing whether it departed from his Church, or his
from it; or what its different doctrines, or customs, and practices are, etc.
And here, to persuade you that such ignorance may be; consider now an
ordinary-Laic-Christian-Greek, what breach of charity or Ecclesiastical unity
such a one following his Ancestors and Ecclesiastical governors, who have
continued even ever since the Apostles times a visible succession, can be made
guilty of, whilst this his Church is meanwhile condemned for Schismatical: and
if we find him hereof no way guilty, what warrant have we to deny to him,
baptized, and holding all fundamentals, salvation? It Is true indeed, in some
heresy, i. e. such as denies some fundamental point, (without the belief of
which none are saved), that the haereticis credentes are in somewhat the same
case with the haeretici; and these blind, tho led by others, likewise (for want
of faith necessary to salvation, and for crimes committed against the light of
nature, not extinguished in them,) fall into the ditch. But in Schism it is not
so; because it is not necessary, that the follower in the same practices should
be guilty of the same breach of charity, or contumacy, as the leader; nor of
such irregular passions, (which are the causes alleged, why Schismatics
cannot be saved.) And, for other things, Schismatics have, or may have, all
the Sacraments rightly administered, (see 2.. even the Eucharist, as well as
Baptism; as is the common tenet of the Schools: Sacerdotes etiam haeretici, and
schismatici, and excommunicati revera conficiunt seu consecrant hoc
Sacramentum; dummodo neque ex part verborum, quibus ad consecrandum utuntur,
[i. e. if they use the words of Institution,] neque ex part intentionis, ullum
sit impedimentum. Estius 4. sect. 13. d. 3. sect.) may have all necessary
points of faith rightly taught and believed, as all confess: and therefore how
can such a man, yiedling obedience accordingly, following only the good
directions of his Schismatical Superiors, but not knowing them to be such, miss
or come short of salvation? (...). Nazianz. or at. 21. In the Scriptures quoted
by Mr. C. (which are Matt. 18. 7. Romans 16. 17. Phil. 2. 1. Jo. 14. 27. -- 13.
35.) those only are by texts of the Apostle condemned, who make, or by whom
come, Schisms and Scandals; to which I may add Tit. 3. 11. where S. Paul pleads
autocatacrisy; and (in the rest) love and unity is recommended: but such a man,
as we here speak of, is free from the first; and possessed of the second. And
if, as the position, so the reasons, which the Fathers give for it, had bin set
down by Mr. C. you would have seen (I am confident) such a man cleared from any
such censure. How does that saying of S. Austin touch such a one? Schismatici
sunt, qui discissionibus iniquis a fraterna charitate discedunt: quapropter
Schismaticus non pertinet ad Ecclesiam, quia Ecclesia diligit proximum. See
before 2.. etc. But if any say; That, in Schism, not any actual breach of
charity, but the bare want of unity, excludes him from heaven, (as pure want of
some knowledge is supposed to do, in Infidelity, or in some kinds of
fundamental Heresy): what unity, I would know, does he mean? Internal? But
that, I hope, is conferred in Baptism rightly celebrated to all that do not
ponere obicem; as it is supposed some here in Schismatical communions do not.
External therefore? But why not Votum, for this, serve the turn for these, as
it does for some others? (4..) Which votum in general of being every way united
to his fellow members in the Church (which is the body of Christ) every good
man has; tho every one discerns not in particular this true Church from all
other Sectarists; of which, without his own fault, some may be ignorant. And
the Father's so great aggravation of the crime of Schism, That such men divide
and rend the body of Christ etc, shows, that they speak not of all (happily)
livers in, but the makers of, Schisms; or the continuers thereof upon the same
grounds and motives, and with the like passions, as did the Authors. Therefore
see S. Austin making much difference amongst the followers of the
Donatist-Schism in Afric, and not denying that some of God's wheat might
remain amongst those tares. De unit. Eccl. 20. c. Itaque illis relictis [i. e.
when discovering them enemies to the Church] mox ad Catholicam pacem multi and
Episcopi, and Clerici, and populi redierunt: quod and antequam facerent, in
tritico deputabantur. Tunc enim non faciebant, cum adversus homines [i. e.
Caecilianus, who was falsely accused] non adversus Ecclesiam Dei illa eorum
contradictio tenebatur. -- Nonnulli etiam bonae voluntatis per carnalem
caliginem etiam post confirmatum malignorum [i. e. the Donatists] furorem in
illa dissensione diutius erraverunt, (tanquam si adhuc mollia conculcarentur
frumenta, and radice viva herbae vigor attereretur) etiam ipsa tamen frumenta
sua noverat Deus; quamvis, ut reviviscerent, arguenda and increpanda. (Non enim
eo modo dictum est Petro; Redi post me Satana, quomodo dictum est de Juda, Unus
ex vobis Diabolus est.) -- Quidam quoque and apertissimae veritati malo studio
contradixerunt: Illi vero eradicati, vel praecisi erant. Tunc enim quisque, --
cum pro ipsis operibus etiam veritati apertissime (qua redarguitur) resistere
coeperit, praeciditur. And -- Multi tales sunt in Sacramentorum communione cum
Ecclesia, and tamen jam non sunt in Ecclesia etc. -- So in answer to the
Donatists Query, Utrum generet filios baptismus in part Donati? (that if he
granted this, they might collect that they had a true Church,) the Father
answers, (de baptism. 1. l. 10. c.) Una est Ecclesia, quae sola Catholica
nominatur, and quicquid suum habet in communionibus diversorum a sua unitate
separatis, ipsa utique generat, non illae. Therefore it may have aliquid suum
in such communions. And (Ep. 162. directed to some followers of the heresies of
the Donatists) he says thus to them in the beginning thereof. Dixit quidem
Apostolus Paulus haereticum hominem post unam correptionem devita etc. sed qui
sententiam suam quamvis falsam atque perversam nulla pertinaci animositate
defendant, praesertim qui non audacia praesumptionis suae pepererunt, sed a
seductis atque in errorem lapsis parentibus acceperunt, quaerunt autem cauta
solicitudine veritatem, corrigi parati, cum invenerint, nequaquam sunt inter
haereticos deputandi. Tales ergo vos nisi esse crederem etc. Nor may any extend
those texts Matt. 15. 14. Romans 14. 15, 20. 1 Cor. 8. 11, 12. to all any way
misled by others. For, in the first, the follower falls into the ditch together
with his leader, because blind in the same manner as his leader, i. e.
wilfully, not inevitably, (which is here supposed): for which compare Matt. 15.
14. with Matt. 23, 15, 16. where such blind followers, as our Savior there
speaks of, become many times also worse than their leaders, (tho they become so
first by occasion of the example of such guides), and so fall much deeper also
into the ditch than they. In the second, (Rom 14. etc.) it is to be noted, that
this brother, weak in knowledge, who upon occasion of another's act (who, by
reason of his right-informed judgment, sins not) does amiss, perishes not
for that wherein he is weak, or for the error of his judgment; but for doing a
thing contrary to his judgment or conscience, tho erroneous, drawn on thereunto
by seeing another do the like. But no such thing happens in this case. Tho I
here deny not, that, in such a communion, the truly innocent of the guilt of
Schism may be in great hazard of their salvation, upon other reasons: namely,
by such looser discipline as may be exercised in it, or by such erroneous
doctrines taught in it, as are prejudicial, or such omitted to be taught, as
are some way beneficial, to a holy life. See Trial of Doctr.. 42. etc.

4. A 4th sort are those, who educated in a Church Schismatical,. 8. n. 1.
and afterward fully convinced that it is so, yet neglect, or think not
necessary at all, their return to the external communion of the church
Catholic; meanwhile agreeing 4. Those, who convinced of schism in such a
Church, yet rejoyn not themselves to the external communion of the Chapter
Catholic, tho consenting in all things with her.
with her in faith; preserving perfect charity and internal communion with her
etc. And these are either such as only forbear the external communion of the
church Catholic, yet absent themselves also from all other; or such as
continue in their former external communion. Again; both these are either such
as are, 1. hindered Hindered, 1. either by somerespects merely temporal. Such
faulty, but how highly, I cannot pronounce.
from professing the Church Catholics external communion, and deserting
another's, for some considerations merely temporal: and these doubtless are
blameable in the same kind as those Jo. 12. 42, 43. Jo. 7. 13. -- 5. 44. Matt.
10. 27, 28, 33, 37, etc. Jo. 12. 25, 26. Gal. 6. 12, 14. For as it is our duty
to confess Christ, so to confess him to the uttermost; as in himself, so in
every truth of his; as in himself, so in his members, and in all things that
belong unto him; especially in his Body, and Spouse, the Church. And as he that
is ashamed of him before men may be peccant in such a degree of shame, as that
he shall not be acknowledged by him before his Father, as a member of his body;
so he that is ashamed of his Church may be peccant in such a degree of shame,
as that he shall not at that day be acknowledged by it as a fellowmember of the
same body. But yet I cannot say that all such are blameable in the same degree;
or that all such (whether less, or more, deniers of Christ) shall at the great
day be denied of him, and certainly incur eternal damnation: Nicodemus, Joseph
of Arimathea, and others, being, to some degree, guilty of this; (and perhaps I
may add to them Naaman the Syrian,) yet not excluded from all mercy: nay, to
some degree, who is not so? Yet, who thus deny him in some kind, may be such as
confess him in many other; as also Joseph and Nicodemus did. (See Jo. 19. 38,
39. Jo 7. 50, 51. 2 Kin, 5. 17.) Neither may I make the return of such a one as
lives in a communion less Christian, yet where Christ is professed, and the
true Sacraments received, to the Church, as necessary, and his staying out as
desperate, as of one relinquishing heathenism, suppose Victorinus, or the like.
Austin. Confess. 8. l. 2. c. But doubtless such a one, convinced, and, for
motives merely temporal, staying out, must needs be in a very great fault; and
how great, we know not; and, on the other side, he oversees an opportunity put
into his hands of honoring and serving Christ through difficulties and
crosses; the action of his reconciliation being so much more worthy and
heroical, by how much the obstacles are greater.

Or 2ly, such as are hindered etc for some consideration and design. 8. n. 2. Or
by some considration and design m^e^y Spi^itual. Such less fau^ty than the
other, yet ^em ^^^ wholly justifiable.
merely Spiritual; as for the procuring a reunion (upon a better understanding
of the Church's tenets) of Churches divided from It; as also some reformation
of some manners in the Church Catholic, by which others were scandalized; the
best mediators of such business being thought to be such persons, as are not
openly engaged on the contrary side. [Such seems to have bin the project of
Grotius, Militier, etc; if the design were not rather to reduce all Christian
Churches to some union and middle complexion, by every Church's relinquishing
their several errors and faults i. e. such as seemed to these men to be so in
every one) upon some Council of them all to be assembled to compound
differences. In which project they seem to suppose either no Church truly
Catholic, and the only orthodox communion, distinct from the rest, as
Schismatical; or, that they see truth clearer than she that is the Catholic;
and that she is not sufficiently able from time to time (assisted by the Holy
Ghost) to correct what may be amiss; within her self, without the directions of
others who stand without. Now this to me tastes of too much arrogance and
self-conceit of their own judgments, in comparison of hers; and also supposes
the Church Catholic fallen into deeper corruptions than can well stand with
God's providence and care over her, and his; promises to her.] Or, for the
gaining at least from amongst Schismatics of many more [particular] souls;
with whom, in such disguise, they may converse and act more freely etc,
meanwhile being real factors for the Church; and themselves forbearing, in some
way, to confess Christ, only to procure a further confession of him; and
staying themselves without the Church-door, only that they may invite the more
to come in. In which thing they seem to have much encouragement from the
Apostle, who also caught men with [an innocent] guil; who upon occasion used
ceremonies of Legal vows, shaving the head; purifying; offering sacrifices for
the persons purified, (Act. 21. 23.) Circumcision it self, Act. 16. 3. (tho it,
in some cases, and for some ends, unlawful and mischievous) becoming all things
to all men, even himself as it were without law, yet under the law to Christ,
that he might gain the more. 1 Cor. 9. 19, 20, 21. Now for such, tho I much
less dare damn them, than the former, (8.. 1. n.) for their want of the
external communion of the Church; yet can I no way justify such their doing.
For charity must be so wise as to begin at home, and we ought not any way to
neglect our own souls, to gain other men's.

Now such a one is supposed either to continue still in the external communion
of a Schismatical Church, or else to communicate. 9. n. 1. Whether they
continue still in a communion schismatical.
with no Church at all. If he continue still in the communion of a Church
Schismatical: First 1. it may be such perhaps, as has not the right use of the
Sacraments in it; or also is defective in some of them, and in many other
doctrines and comforts, wholesome discipline and strict orders; of the
administration of which almost no Soul is so perfect but that it will have much
need. 2. But 2ly, Suppose no want of any such thing in it; yet, what if all
such communion be utterly, absolutely, forbidden? For if so, then this is
undoubted of; that we may not do the least thing that is absolutely prohibited
or unlawful, that all the good in the world may come thereof. Now such a
communion seems forbidden both by many passages of Scriptures, and by commands
of the Church. 1. First, for the Scriptures; See 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. Which
communion seems forbidden them. 1. Both by the Scriptures,
1 Cor. 10. 20, 21. Romans 16. 17. 1 Cor. 16. 22. -- 1 Cor. 5. 9, 11. compared
with 6. 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 17, etc. 2 Jo. 10, 11. Matt. 18. 17. Tit. 3. 10. Ephesians.
5. 7, 11. -- some of which texts contain a strict injunction for not keeping
company, or conversing with wicked livers, and more especially with the
infidel, heretical, schismatical (more pernicious than wicked livers) even in
things indifferent, as eating with them, etc. Which injunction of the Apostle
seems to be made in imitation of the former law of the Jews forbearing eating
or companying with the idolatrous Gentile. According to which we read, that S.
Austin's mother forbear sitting at table, or eating, with her Son, when
addicted to Manichean opinions. (S. August. Confess. 3. l. 11. c.) [Which
Apostolical injunction, concerning converse in things indifferent, I conceive
always in force: 1. first, where it may probably serve to do some good to those
we separate from; as, to make them ashamed etc. and that is most likely, where
the heretical or debauched etc are few in number, in comparison of the orthodox
and pious. Or 2ly, to do some good to our selves by separating from them; as,
when we are in danger, of infection from them, or also of partaking God's
judgments with them. But other cases I grant there may be, where such
Separation is not obligatory. As 1. first; when probably more good may come to
them by our converse, (if there be no prohibition thereof by the Church); as,
where the accompanying of them is used by the more confirmed in virtuous
habits, some way to help those who are not found yet altogether incorrigible.
See for this Matt. 9. 12. 2. Again, when such Separation may bring more hurt to
our selves, to the Church, etc, than the benefit is, we can reasonably hope
from it. As, where the most are perverted, the upright few in number; where
much hindrance, or sometimes also mischief, may come to the one by it, and no
shame or amendment to the other. Quando plus perturbat infirmos bonos, quam
corrigit animosos malos. 3ly. When such Separation may offend against some
duty; to which we are obliged, either by the Divine, or Civil, laws. As, the
children may not abandon their parents, or the wife her husband, on such
pretense: neither is it required, where necessary commerce, or natural, or
religious relations, will not permit it. This is clear from the Apostle's
permission of the Christians commerce with the heathen and idolaters: 1 Cor. 5.
10. [yet not altogether with the fornicators of this world, -- with idolaters,
etc. for then must ye needs go out of the world.] So likewise, when we cannot
communicate in the public, or also private, worship of God, in the Sacraments
etc with the orthodox and godly, with whom we ought, without such a mixture of
the impious and profane, as is not in our power to prevent: here no necessity
of Separation from those impious and profane lies upon us; for so must we needs
go out of the Church; or relinquish those, from whom we receive much benefit.
The same it is for relinquishing near relations; for so we must abandon our
habitations. But note always, that at such times, when such necessities, theirs
or ours, do not force or exact from us such converse; it is a far better
practice, if not a necessary duty, to separate, even for diet, cohabitation,
discourse, etc, from the Schismatical in opinions, or notoriously wicked in
manners; tho by their great numbers we are confined to much solitude.]

Now, to come closer to our matter in hand; tho in some pretenses, which may be
made here, (as, of our selves being sufficiently. 9. 11. 2.
grounded in truth, and out of danger of seducement or infection, and of our
good purpose in our association with the Schismatical, only for converting some
of them, (for which our Savior allows converse with publicans), some of the
reasons for separation, contained in these Scriptures, seem to be removed: as,
that of avoiding infection, and partaking of their sin; (tho give me leave to
interpose here, that, in such conversation, it is very hard to be so innocent,
that some compliances must not be made (by one who would by no means be
discovered what he is) both in discourse and actions, some way prejudicial to
the truth; neither can there scarce be any Schismatical Church, wherein some of
their public practices, prayers, discipline, will not be contrary to the
conscience of one that is orthodox): Tho thus, I say, some of the reasons for
Separation be removed; yet are there some other of those reasons remaining
still of force. As; that we may not seem to countenance them in evil; and that,
by our deserting them, some of them at least may be ashamed; when (especially
if it be in such a conjuncture of time, wherein the foundations of a Schism are
shaken) our open profession of truth may startle those, whom our discourse
cannot work on; and our example, in going before them, perhaps be more
effectual than our reasons, in only directing them the way. But, in our
continuing still in their Society, tho our private instructions and reproofs
may manifest to some that we countenance them not: yet to most these cannot do
so; nor to any perhaps so much as we ought. For whilst we pretend our
fellowship with them to be only to reprove them; how can we do this so fully,
and so far as duty obliges, when we are to reprove them chiefly in that also,
wherein we continue fellowship with them; namely in their separated communion
from the Church? In which separation yet we bid, or seem to bid, them God
speed, so long as we also abide with them in it. But, besides these reasons of
Separation; the preserving our selves from infection from their judgments, the
discouraging of the offenders, etc, touched in some of these texts; yet some
other of those Scriptures (as 1 Cor. 10. 20, 21. 1 Cor. 5. 5, 13. 2 Cor. 6. 14,
17.) seem to lay yet a more special injunction upon us, especially not to
communicate with them in their Sacraments, and public Divine worship; and this
upon some other yet higher reasons, namely the duty of the public owning and
professing our religion, and the keeping it pure, and unmixed with any
unbelieving, schismatical, or heretical assemblies. For the Sacrament being
instituted, as, for a sacred instrument of our communion with the Deity, so
also, for a public testimony and mark of a strict league and amity between all
those, who together partake it: neither will the honor we owe to God the
Father, who dwells in us, and adopts us for his children, (2 Cor. 6. 16, 18.)
nor, to God the Son, whose members we are, (1 Cor. 6. 15, 16.) nor, to the Holy
Spirit, whose Temples we are, (1 Cor. 3. 16, 17.) suffer us, by such a sacred
and solemn ty, to link and unite our selves to any congregations that are
estranged from him, or disclaimed by him. This is making fellowship between
righteousness and unrighteousnes, mingling light and darkness, [2 Cor. 6. 14.]
joining the members of Christ to a Spiritual harlot; by which they two become
one body. [1 Cor. 6. 15, 16.] For the Sacrament has this virtue, that those
become one body amongst themselves that partake it; (See 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17.)
and by touching the unclean, we also become unclean [Lev. 5. 2, 3.]: and all
those separations, under the law, of the corporally unclean from the
congregation of the Lord, because they were to be a sanctified people unto the
Lord, and holy as he is holy, (see Lev. 11. 43, 44.) were only types of the
Separation, which ought to be from notorious sinners, which we here speak of;
to which the Apostle makes application of them, 2 Cor. 6. 17. [Be ye separate,
and touch not the unclean thing, says the Lord] taken out of Esai. 52. 11. And
hence also takes he strict order for the sudden separation and ejection of
such persons out of the Church, (especially from communicating the Sacraments
thereof,) as of Leaven from a lump unleavened, that the Passover may not be
celebrated with such a meslange, (see 1 Cor. 5. 2, 5, 7, 13): ejection, or
casting them out, where the Church has the power; or her going out from them,
(2 Cor. 6. 17.) where they have the power: but still a separation there must
be. Else in consorting with them we provoke the Lord to jealousy, [1 Cor. 10.
22.] as if we are not true and loyal to him, and entirely his. Now tho some of
the texts urged by us speak only concerning non-communicating with idolaters;
who worship not the same God with us, nor use the same Sacraments; which I
grant is a much greater crime in any: Yet 1. first, they may be enlarged upon
the same grounds, (namely the public signification of the Sacraments, that the
partakers thereof are co-united in the same faith and charity) to those
congregations, who worship the same God, but not in that way he requires; and
who are any way opposite, by a division of themselves from it, to that one
Society, which only has its union with the head. But 2ly, are there not some
other of the texts, that speak as plainly of the avoiding of the heretical and
schismatical, as these do of the unbeliever, or idolater? See Matt. 18. 17. If
he neglect to hear the Church, let him [i. e. thy brother in Christianity] be
unto thee as an heathen, [i. e. an idolater.] -- Romans 16. 17. Those that cause
divisions, contrary to the doctrine which ye have received, mark, and avoid. --
Tit. 3. 10. A man that is an heretic reject. -- 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. If any man
obey not our word etc, note that man, and have no company with him. -- 2 Jo.
10. If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not
into your house, nor say (...) to him: which is not spoken of plain idolaters,
but some half-christians, of whom other Christians might be less aware. But if
you say, that some of these Scriptures forbid only private familiar converse
with those who are factious, tho such perhaps as are not yet excommunicated by
the Church; then how much more obliging must they be, for our not communicating
with whole congregations, and separating-assemblies of them, in holy things?
This last then, or also more than this, is prohibited in them. And indeed were
such conformity in the public Service, and the Sacraments, allowed with
Sectaries, what a confusion would it cause in religion? there being no sign now
left, whereby the orthodox professors may be distinguished from the
schismatical. And if we may be thus far dispensed with, to consort with divided
communions, only upon design of doing the Church thereby the more service; how
many are there, who, engaged only in secular ends, may make use of such
dispensation upon holy pretenses!

To conclude this matter, about the restraint found in Scripture: 1. We are not
obliged (for any thing I know) as to speak, so neither. 9. n. 3.
in any other action to profess, all that is truth at all times; (tho in matter
of religion, especially even where it is lawful to conceal something of our
profession, it is more honorable and more glorifying of God, upon all
occasions, to confess him to the uttermost): We are not obliged, I say, to do
all acts amongst heretics, which may show us Catholics; no more than amongst
Turks, which may show us Christians. 2. Not obliged to forbear absolutely the
company, converse, eating, negotiating, nor perhaps private praying in the same
place with heretics, etc: for (as is said before. 9. n. 1.) many worldly
accounts may in a sort necessitate us to such things: and then the Apostle's
dispensation [1 Cor. 5. 10.] will be applicable unto us, (I mean, supposing no
express injunction of the Church, concerning the forbearing of any such
communication; in which (I must add) if she at any time should think fit to
restrain us, then would such forbearance become, upon another account,
obligatory to us): much more are we not debarred any entercours with them,
whereby we may the better confute, or instruct, them. Again; 3. Perhaps we are
not obliged (especially where probably we, not they, shall suffer some
detriment thereby, and that in regard of our Spiritual affairs; as where a
country is orespread with such an infection) to expel schismatics from our
communions, if such not by name excommunicated: for who knows whether some
such, having never personally affronted our religion, may not at last also be
gained thereby? -- Time and place do alter much in all these matters. See S.
Aug. Ep. 50. -- Ubi per graves dissensionum scissuras, non hujus aut illius
hominis est periculum, sed populorum strages jacent, detrahendum est aliquid
severitati, ut majoribus malis sanandis charitas sincera subveniat. 4ly. We are
by no means obliged to forbear every thing, whereby de facto we may be mistaken
by others to favor or profess some heresy or schism: provided, that we give no
just, and commonly received, grounds of such mistake. But to do that thing in
conjuction with heretics and schismatics, which either is, or there is none
at all, the ordinary test and token to the world of such a profession, [such as
is our communicating with them in public prayer, and the worship of God, and
in the Sacraments,] this I conceive, by the places above, utterly prohibited.

Lastly; I would not have this discourse above so mis-understood, as if none
could have union with the head, who are out of. 9. n. 4.
the external communion of that body which belongs to him: or also are in the
external communion and participation of the Sacraments of the Lord with another
sect factiously divided from it; but only, that those have it not, who, knowing
them schismatical, yet in their Sacraments dare to join with them. But, where
is not such knowledge, nor affected and culpable ignorance; to the integrity
and simplicity of such people the true Sacraments, wherever received, are
still effectual. (Which makes a great difference of those persons who live in,
and communicate with, a Church schismatical, from those who communicate with
infidels; in which see what danger there is even to the weak, 1 Cor. 8. 11.
compared with 10. c. 20, 21. v. because such weakness can never be blameles.)
Are still effectual, because here no guilt in the person factiously disposed,
or practicing against conscience and known commands, hinders the benefit
thereof unto him. (See Levit. 5. 3. If he touch the uncleannes etc, when he
knows of it, then he shall be guilty, and bound to make expiation for it.)
Neither does here the participation of the same Sacrament by both render one
guilty of the impious schism of his fellow-communicants; no more than when, in
the true Church it is received in the company perhaps of some abominable
livers, it does render the rest partakers with these in their crimes; or no
more, than a good Christian, who, by the fraud of others, without any his own
fault, is joined to an harlot in stead of his wife, may be said to make
Christ's members the members of an harlot. Tho such, who knowingly join in
their external Sacraments with any separated worship, shall thereby be
partakers of their guilt. See 1 Cor. 10. 20, 21. which I conceive was spoken by
the Apostle, not only to the erroneous, who with some conscience of the idol,
as if it were something, did eat of the sacrifices, (see 1 Cor. 8. 7.) but to
the orthodoxly-minded, who, counting the idol nothing, thought such external
compliance lawful and no prejudice to their Christian profession.

2. Now, in the 2d. place, to come to the commands of the Church; which are
justly obligatory, even in such things as by. 10. 2. And by the injunctions of
the Chapter Catholic.
the Scriptures are left indifferent, and not prohibited unto us. And therefore
we are as well to examine what liberty the Church permits us, as what the
Scriptures: or also, what our Spiritual Superiors, according to the obedience
which we owe to them (Heb. 13. 17.) think fit to allow us; and not to
transgress it. Now if the Church has in a lawful Council excommunicated and
anathematized such congregations; surely this is a sufficient prohibition to
all those, who will retain any relation to her, to have no fellowship, at least
as to the public prayers and sacraments, with them. For Excommunication, being
an expelling of such from being members any longer of the Church's communion, a
fortiori is a prohibiting any, who pretends to be a son of the Church, from
becoming a member of their communion. If we may not give the holy Sacrament to
them, where they submit to us; much less may we receive it from them, where we
submit to them. If she will not suffer us to be mingled with them in her
society; much less, in theirs: If when they happen to come single to us, we
must avoid them; much more may we not, where they are gathered in a body,
repair to them. If we may not join with them, where there is also other good
and orthodox society; much less, where we have none but theirs. Now, not to
examine here, what later Excommunications of any particular heretics or
schismatics have bin, (of which every one, that professes himself a son of
the Church, is carefully to inform himself), I will set down some ancient Canons
etc, (for any thing I know still in force,) expressly prohibiting such society.
Council. Laodicenum held by the orthodox in the times of the reigning of
Arrianism before the 2d. General Council, approved by the 6th
Constantinopolitan Council, Conc. in Trullo; where, as it is decreed, Non
oportet cum Paganis festa celebrare, [39. Can.] -- and, Non oportet a Judaeis
azyma accipere, [38. Can.]: so; Non oportet cum haereticis vel schismaticis
orare, [Can. 33.] and, Non oportet haereticorum benedictiones accipere. [Can.
32.] -- Conc. Carthag. 4tum. (Anno D. 436. a little after S. Austin's death)
Can. 72. -- Cum haereticis nec orandum, nec psallendum. -- Can. 73. Qui
communicaverit vel oraverit cum excommunicato, sive Clericus, sive Laicus,
excommunicetur. Here may be considered also, * the cautious and scrupulous
practice of the primitive times, in their letters commendatory, called
Epistolae formatae; which, because of the Church's careful avoiding of all
mixture with sectaries, were procured by those who had occasion to travel from
one Church to another; without which testimony they could not be admitted to
their prayers, etc. And also, * the strict separation of the Catholics that
was made from that potent division of the Arrian sect; who, tho in many of
their Councils they required subscription of no positive heresy; but only
omission, in the Creed, of some truth, the word (...), (see what is said hereof
in Church Government 2d. part. 40. etc.): yet were the orthodox (tho much
persecuted by the secular powers, and tho, by the banishment of their Pastors
in some places destitute of the Sacraments) strictly prohibited to come at the
Arrian assemblies, tho these having the same Sacraments with them, and
possession of the Cathedrals, and other Churches: and chose rather to
relinquish their Temples; to pray at home; to live without the Sacraments; nay,
to be without these in their sickness, and at their death; than to receive them
from the Arrians. See Athanas. Epist. Synodica in Alexand. Council. -- Ep. ad
ubique orthoxos. -- Hilarii lib. contra Arrian. -- Basil. Ep. 293. to some
Egyptian Bishops. -- Thus much of the Church's injunctions.

Now such a one, as intends to have any relation and interest in. II. To which
such owe obedience.
her, must know; that, besides our agreement in the faith, and our being in
full charity with the Church Catholic, as being a body consisting of our
fellow members and brethren in Christ, there is also a duty of obedience to be
yielded to all the injunctions and commands of the governors thereof, as of our
Spiritual Fathers in Christ: which none that hopes to enjoy the privileges of
a son, unless so far as he is by these dispensed with, may, without sin and
great danger to himself, on his own head disown and omit. For what is this,
but, as if a son should come and say to his temporal Father, from whom he has
formerly run away, that he embraces him with all inward affection, is sorry
for any fault formerly committed, will love and honor, and do all the good he
can for, him; but that he must excuse him, if that (for some reasons) he does
not submit to, or practice, his commands: except only, that this our
disobedience to spiritual Superiors is so much the more inexcusable; for that
all their commands are directed to the benefit of their children: so that by
omitting them, out of this pretense of benefiting others, such a one forgoes
very much profit to himself. None then can be a Son to the Church, unless he
render himself subject to her laws, as well as affectionate to her practices.
Now of her laws (the yoke of which, if he reverence and bend to in some things,
he must not shake off in others) non-communicating with Sectarists seems to be
one, and very considerable. In which, if some dispensations for good ends may
be given by her, (yet none can be given by her for so far, as the Scriptures
have restrained us,) yet, till such grant obtained from her, he stands obliged
to her commands. Which grant from her, if there were no other motive, this is
enough to obstruct; that it is liable to be made use of (instead of zeal to
convert souls) to many unworthy ends, of serving our temporal interests, and
protecting a spiritual cowardice, an avoiding of the cross, and a not
confessing of our Savior before men; contrary to Matt. 10. 27, 32, 37, 38, 39.
See before. 8. n. 1. But, laying aside this command of separating himself from
schismatics; if he will be counted a Son, he is to live conformably to all her
other injunctions. Now some, and not a few of these are such, as involve an
outward communion with the Church. And also many other of her injunctions (see
below. 14. which do not involve it,) if strictly observed by him, will quickly
render him incapable of any disguise to what party he belongs, and bring the
same jealousies and temporal inconveniences upon him, which follow a public
reconciliation; and, which to avoid, he yet stays out of the Church: only with
this difference; that he shall incur likewise the odious aspersion of
hypycrisie and dissimulation, with which an open professor cannot be reproached.

And indeed, setting aside any Church-command of such separation; yet-a
dissimulation or compliance (tho it proceed not to. 12.
the practicing any thing in the matter of God's worship against our
conscience, yet) that ventures so far, as to use that sacred ceremony (which is
taken to be the greatest tessera and symbol of communion, and by which all the
world publish and distinguish their religions) with those, from whom he so much
dissenteth and disalloweth; I say, a dissimulation that proceeds so far,
seems to be much against the simplicity and ready vindication of our Christian
profession. In the times of persecution before the days of Constantine, it was
not only held unlawful (tho this required upon pain of death) for Christians to
cast a little incense into the fire before an Idol or the Emperor's image, (a
thing which a Christian might externally have done, with the greatest vilifying
of the same idol in his heart) but also to procure with money a Libel or
testimony from the officer (tho most false) to be showed by them upon occasion
that they had done any such thing; or to procure the officer to recite or
return their names that they had done such a thing, or to subscribe that they
would do it. See the Epistle of the Roman Clergy to S. Cyprian, (inter Cyprian.
Ep. 31.) -- Non est alienus a crimine, cujus consensu, licet non a se admissune
orimen tamen public legitur. -- Et qui vult videri propositis adversus
Evangelium vel edictis vel legibus satisfecisse, hoc ipso jam paruit, quod
videri paruisse se voluit. See Cyprian de Lapsis. Professio denegantis [i. e.
se esse Christianum] contestatio est Christiani quod fuerat abnuentis; fecisse
se dixit, quicquid alius faciendo commisit. Tho see how plausible the same
Father draws up such a ones excuse, Ep. 52. Ad magistratum mandavi Christianum
me esse, sacrificare mihi non licere. -- Dare me ob hoc praemium, ne quod non
licet faciam. But note: that the magistrates freeing him for this reward, was
by bringing in his name, as if he had sacrificed, which the Christian ought by
no means either to have procured, or admitted. As for that which is urged
concerning S. Paul: that he became as a Jew, to the Jews; as without law, to
those without law, etc. practicing some things whereby he seemed (at the first)
to his converts of another opinion than indeed he was, that he might, out of
this mistake, produce their greater good: yet note; that, for this good, he
practiced nothing absolutely unlawful or prohibited, either by Divine, or
Ecclesiastical, injunction; but some things, which, tho they were no longer
necessary to any ones salvation, and some ways also inconvenient, and
troublesome, yet were things indifferent, at least as yet to those infant-times
of the Gospel, before Christ was perfectly understood to be the end of the Law;
and to that nation, and in some respects very beneficial, to the propagation of
the Gospel, that they should be used. The Apostle therefore, in some places and
times, used them for very good ends: as namely thereby to enjoy still the
freedom amongst the Jews of preaching the Gospel, and the benevolence of his
auditors; so to gain them that were born under the law (as himself says 1 Cor.
9. 20.). Again; to preserve the new Jew-converts, converted by others observant
of the law, from apostatizing from the faith, upon such a scandal of his
neglecting the commands of God by Moses: as likewise (as it is probably collected
from Act. 21. 21.) to undeceive the new Christian Jews, in that sinister
opinion they had of him; as if that he not only licenced the Gentile-converts
from any use of these Legal ceremonies, (at which they took no offense,) but
also persuaded the Jews converted by him, not only that such ceremonies were no
more absolutely necessary to salvation; but that they might by no means use any
of them, nor walk after the former customs. Therefore he practiced these
himself sometimes for this reason also, (says S. Austin, Ep. 19.) ne Judaeis
etc viderentur, qui ex gentibus in Christum crediderant, sic detestari
Circumcisionem, sicut idololatria detestanda est; cum illam Deus fieri
praecepit, hanc Satanas persuaserit; or discindi a Prophetis Christi, tanquam
Mosis doctrinam detestantes, atque damnantes. Again; used them only, when more
evil than good was not probable to ensue thereof; by his giving more dangerous
scandal to more, by his avoiding the giving thereof to some few, (for, in case
of double scandal, that of less dangerous consequence, and of less extent in
the offense, is to be chosen), therefore he used such compliance with the Jews
only in such places (as in Jerusalem, (Act. 21.) or in other quarters where
many Jews abode, Act. 16. 3.) where no offense could be taken by the
Convert-gentiles. But he never, when both were present to observe his
behavior, so corresponded and sided with the weaker brethren, the Jew; as to
desert, or shame, or weaken, the strong, the Gentile. But, we may see how
tender he was of using such things, where any prejudice thereby might possibly
come to the truth: in that tho elsewhere, out of charity to the weak, he
circumcised Timothy, being to assist him in his preaching to the Jews; yet he,
when he was amongst false brethren, (tho at Jerusalem) would not do the same to
Titus a preacher, lest, from such condescension, their malice, who came only
for Spies, might, by their false comments upon it, raise some prejudice to the
liberty of the Gospel, Gal. 2. 4, 5. -- See (Gal. 6. 12, 14,) his detesting
such compliance, to avoid the cross.) And again; in that he so sharply and
publicly reproved S. Peter, tho in some sort his superior, (Gal. 2. 14.) for
his dissimulation, in forbearing the company of the Gentiles, and complying
with the former fashions of the Jews, in a place (namely in the Church of
Antioch) which chiefly consisted of Gentiles, or Jews also much more moderate
than those at Jerusalem; where much more scandal must come of such an action,
(which, by his withdrawing from them, did bear the show of a repentance of the
freedom he had formerly used toward them, in making those believe that they
ought to conform to the Jewish laws) then good, in not offending some few that
came from Jerusalem, and perhaps were such false brethren as those S. Paul
(there) opposed. Whereby it appears, that dissimulation many times, even in
things in their own nature indifferent, is not free from guilt: how much more,
if it be in things, which we have showed, by several strict prohibitions of
them, that they are not to be reckoned of such a nature. Something like this
case of ours perhaps it would have bin; if the Apostle had complied the least
with those false brethren and leaders of faction in Jerusalem, that he might
have gained some from amongst them, (but he saw there the defense of the truth
against the opposers more necessary, than was the gaining of a disciple to that
truth, with a public show of deserting it); or had he (or S. Peter) so become
a Jew to the Jew, that he had concealed his Christianity; or not professed
always every where, publicly, privately, that after the way which they called
heresy, so he worshipped God, [Act. 24. 14.] -- which he did before all the
people of Jerusalem, [Act. 22. 4, 8. etc.] -- before Felix, [Act. 24. 14.] --
before Agrippa, [Act. 26. 22, 23.] -- before Nero; for, the same witness to the
name of Jesus he bare at Jerusalem, the same did he bear at Rome, (Act. 23. 11.
-- 2 Timothy 4. 17. [that all the Gentiles might hear,]) and that with great
success even upon some of the Courtiers themselves; Phil. 1. 13. compared with
4. 22. For which boldness, in professing his religion at Rome, we find him
desiring men's prayers, Ephesians. 6. 19, 20. and in which we find his example
encouraging many others. Phil. 1. 14, 20. Therefore also that speech of his,
Act. 23. 6. mentioning the resurrection, was no mincing or dissembling his
Christian profession, which he had made so publicly and particularly before
them all but the very day before; but the showing only, how in a main point
thereof the most considerable persons amongst themselves concurred with him.
Which thing appears, both by the answer of his Auditors and Judges, ver. 9.
which answer refers to the story of what (he told them) happened to him in the
way to Damascus; of which they say, [If a Spirit or an Angel has spoken to
him, let us not fight against God]: and from our Savior's testimony of his
worthy behavior; ver. 11. and from the like expressions made by him, Act. 24.
15. yet joined with the free confession of his dissent in other things, ver.
14. His legal observances therefore, upon some occasions, were only, joining
some things besides with his Christian profession; not a covering it over with
them, or hiding it under them: and, in this compliance, not any observance, of
those Jews that were out of the true Church, (who, notwithstanding his
conformity, were still his persecuters for Christianity, Act. 21. 27.); but
only of those weaker brethren within it, Act. 21. 20. of whom we read not, that
they any way molested him, the tumult proceeding from the unbelieving Jews of
Asia, v. 27. -- What I have said of the manner, of his becoming a Jew to the
Jew, I may also of his becoming as a Gentile to the Gentile; which was only in
the laying aside some of the Jewish ceremonies, not in the least conformity to
any of their heathen Sacraments: concerning which see his judgment 1 Cor. 10.
20, 21.

Thus much from. 8. upon the supposition, that one orthodoxly persuaded
continues still in the communion of a Schismatical. 13. Or, whether they
communicate with no Church at all; who seem of the two the less unjustifiable.
Church. But, in the next place, suppose he presently withdraws himself from
that, but only (for the same good ends) forbears communion with the orthodox;
yet neither so, can I find a way to excuse him. Indeed the living in no
external communion at all seems the less faulty of the two, and this condition
(as coming a step nearer to the Church of Christ) to be preferred before the
former. This seems to appear in those, who, either by the oppression of the
civil power hindered, or by the Church's authority (whether with, or without,
just cause) expelled, cannot enjoy her external communion: who yet are not
therefore licensed either to set up a new external communion of their own, or
to repair to one that stands severed from the Catholic; tho there they may
enjoy the Sacraments no way differing from those celebrated by the orthodox:
but are advised rather patiently to want them, till they are restored to the
participation of them in the bosom of the Church. Such was the practice of the
orthodox, where their Clergy was expelled, in the prevalent Arrian times. Certe
ista indignitas in causa est (says Athanasius) quod populi, sacerdotesque
seorsim sine synaxibus vivant etc. -- And, Praeoptant potius ita aegrotare, ac
periclitari, quam ut Arrianorum manus capititibus suis imponi sustineant. See
Athan. Ep. Synod. in Alexand. Conc. and Ep. ad ubique orthodoxos. Yet did the
Arrians (according to S. Austin's testimony de vera relig. 5. c.) paria
sacramenta celebrare with the Catholics. And S. Austin, of good men happening
to suffer sometimes an unjust Excommunication, (de vera relig. 6. e.) says
thus: Quam contumeliam vel injuriam suam cum patientissime pro Ecclesiae pace
tulerint; neque ullas novitates vel schismatis, vel haeresis, moliti fuerint
etc -- sine ulla Conventiculorum segregatione, usque ad mortem defendentes, and
testimonio juvantes eam fidem, quam in Ecclesia Catholica praedicari sciunt;
hos coronat in occulto Pater in occulto videns. And (de Baptism. 1. l. 17, e.)
Ibi magis probantur, quam si intus permaneant, cum adversus Ecclesiam
nullatenus eriguntur; sed in solida unitatis petra fortissimo charitatis robore
radicantur. From which I gather, that for whatever cause or reason a man
happens to want the Catholic communion; it is better, than to enter into any
other, to have none at all. In which sequestration he may justly more hope for
God's blessing, upon that means of his salvation, which, in such a condition,
he is yet capable to make use of; and upon that service, which alone he may
still offer unto God, according to the customs and rites of the Church; than,
upon that he shall offer, tho it be, for the matter of it, faultless, in
conjunction with a society divided from the members of Christ: and if the
orthodox, in the time of the Arrians, thought their condition safer in the want
of the Sacraments, than in the enjoying and partaking them with any Sectaries,
so may he.

For these reasons, I conceive to live out of all communion a less fault, than
to join with a Schismatical one; but yet a fault. 14. Yet are not wholly
excusable.
also it will be, and that for many of the former, Scriptures, and other
reasons. See. 9. where the Scriptures enjoining separation from Sectaries, seem
also to imply uniting with the orthodox. Neither indeed can we have any reason
to desert one Church, but we must have the same to join with some other; since
we must, from the article in the Creed, ever acknowledge one true, as well as
others false; and that whatsoever outward dislike and abhorrence we are bound
to express toward these assemblies of adulteresses to Christ, (as S. Cyprian
and S. Ambrose calls them), the same outward affection, and love, and duty in
all things we are obliged to give to the true Spouse and Body of Christ. See.
8. where those texts requiring the glorifying of God, and the confessing of
Christ before men; confession of him with the mouth, as well as believing on
him with the heart (Romans 10. 9, 10.) of all,; with one mouth, as well as with
one mind, (Romans 15. 6.) seem in a special manner to imply that confession which
is made in the public assemblies of the Church, which therefore were never
intermitted in those greatest persecutions, when the Civil magistrate was a
professed enemy to the Church. Again; see those many precepts of unity and
charity enjoined amongst all the fellow members of Christ; Ephesians. 4. 3, 11, 12. 1
Cor. 10. Phil. 1. 27, 28. Jo. 10. 4, 5. which seem to extend, and oblige, to
all the external, as well as internal, acts thereof; especially for what
concerns the public and solemn worship of God. Consider the Article of our
Creed, (of which Creed we pretend a constant and public confession), that we
believe one Church Catholic and Apostolical; i. e. one external, visible
communion upon earth, that always is, and shall be, such: but how is this
sufficiently attested, and professed by any, who forbears to join himself
openly unto it? Such denying of the body of Christ before men seems to be next
to the crime of denying before men the Head himself. But chiefly there, where
this Church, the Spouse of Christ, happens to be under any disgrace or
persecution, our taking up the cross with her may be much more acceptable to
God, than the conversion of souls; and the doxology of confessing him and her,
beyond our other best service. See particularly that command of the Apostle
Heb. 10. 25. Now if it be said, that some of these texts forenamed are not to
be understood as strict precepts always for avoiding sin; but counsels only for
attaining perfection: yet thus also every generous Christian will think them
prescribed for his practice. Again, consider, that as both many Divine and
Ecclesiastical commands (from which I see no just authority any one has to
exempt himself at pleasure) cannot be observed in our adherences to another
communion; so neither can they in our absence from the true Church. For how
(then) do we observe the public intercessions commanded, 1 Timothy 2. 1. public
teaching and exhortations etc, recommended by the Apostle Heb. 10. 25. 1 Cor.
14. 23, 24. Col. 3. 16. -- frequenting of the Sacraments, 1 Cor. 11. 17, 24. --
Confession and Absolution, as need requires: For the necessity of which Christ
has substituted some officers to be made use of from time to time, for heinous
sins committed after Baptism, in his stead; Jo. 20. 21, 23. as likewise to
guide and govern in all Spiritual matters those, who pretend to be his sheep;
to withdraw our selves from whom, is to withdraw our selves from Christ; in a
subordination to whom all must live: Ephesians. 4. 5, 11, 12. Heb. 13. 17. and God
tolerates no Anarchical persons in religion. Add to this, the benefits of the
public prayers and intercessions, and oblations of the Church, which such a
one, acknowledging himself a member thereof, seems, to his great loss, to be
deprived of. As for that internal communion with the Church, which some,
excluded from the external, may nevertheless enjoy; or the security, in the
actual want of participation of the Sacraments, that such may have; they seem
no way appliable to such a person as this, who is not by force hindered of her
communion, but, invited to it, voluntarily depriveth himself; tho the reasons
he has in the doing thereof seem to himself never so plausible. To partake the
Sacraments in voto signifies nothing, where de facto we may have them, and de
facto refuse them: and where (in case of necessity) votum signifies something;
yet it is probable, that to such a one necessitated the actual reception of them
would have bin more beneficial, could he have obtained it. There seems to be no
small danger in a silly sheep's staying out of the fold, (when invited and
offered to be taken in), and that without leave of the shepherd; tho upon a
to-himself seeming good design.

But yet, supposing such leave indulged to any; I see not at last. 15.
what advantage can be made thereof: but that all the scandals, all the
jealousies, all the secular inconveniences, or also disappointments of
Spiritual designs, that can happen to one actually reconciled to the orthodox
communion, will happen to one after absenting himself wholly from a false. From
which sequestring himself the ordinary jealousy, that uses to be in religion,
will conclude, that he who is not with them (especially where many secular
advantages accompany it) is against them. And whereas our conjunction with the
true Church may be done with much privacy, this desertion of theirs is the
thing most liable to discovery. Lastly since he, that now is of no external
communion at all, was before a member of an unlawful one; and perhaps there not
only seduced, but also a seducer of others, or at least culpable of many
misbehaviors toward the Church: so much the more cause he has, with what speed
he can, to fly into the bosom thereof; both, because so he may, procure his own
safety and pardon; and, by an open subscription to truth and unity, make an
amends for his former error, and division, (if he have bin any way consenting
thereto;) and also, because the truth etc will receive a greater testimony and
honor from one that publicly converts to it, after educated first in error;
than from many, that, from the benefit of their first institution and breeding,
continue in it: to some of whom a right opinion may be rather their good
fortune, than their choice. The sum of all is; The case of one's stay, after
such full conviction, in the external communion where he is, or of his staying
out of the other, who stretches forth her arms to receive him, tho upon never
so pious pretenses, is doubtful; his reconciliation safe; therefore this rather
to be chosen: and, as for the good he hoped to produce, God is able, and either
will otherwise by lawful means effect it; or is not willing it should be
effected; and meanwhile will rather accept of our obedience, than of much
sacrifice.

Note, that in this discourse I speak of a Church certainly Schismatical, and of
men (after all convenient means of information. 16.
diligently used) fully convinced thereof, and, amongst these, chiefly of such
as, in purposing some good ends to themselves, intend to continue always, or
for any long space of time, either in their former communion, or out of the
orthodox; not of such as, convicted, are removing all impediments as fast as
they can, to unite themselves to the Church. But 1. first, concerning Churches
schismatical; I apprehend not Schism to be of such a latitude, as that there
cannot be any difference (especially between Churches wherein are diverse
Apostolical Successions (suppose the Eastern and Western, the Grecian and
Asian, and the Roman, Church) before a General Council has decided it) without
such a crime of Schism and violated unity of the Church on one side, that all
good men therein are presently obliged to render themselves of the opposite
communion. And 2ly, concerning conviction; I think men ought to take heed of
being any way hasty (which may proceed from a natural ficklenes of mind, and
over-valuation of things not tried) to desert that Church wherein God's
providence has given them their education, and which has taught them the word
of God, and first made them Christian, and which (as it is said in the Law
concerning possession) Quia prior est tempore, potior est jure, (i. e. caeteris
paribus): to desert the Church, I say, without much conference with the
learned, much weighing of reasons, much study of Theological controversy (even
tho their condition be not that of a Scholar) delayed and mature
considerations, long prayer, etc; lest if, in such change, they should happen
to light on what is worse, and to forsake truth and embrace error; they should,
besides the hurt which may come to their soul otherwise, be in a far worse
condition than any others of the same erroneous communion are; by reason, of
the disobedience they have showed to their mother, from whom they sucked the
true milk of the Gospel; and of the ungratitude to God, by whose providence
they were placed in such a light. Especially men ought to have a greater
jealousy of their mistaking, if they perhaps find themselves invited to the
change of their Religion from any worldly advantages, or contentments of the
flesh, profits, honor, pleasure; for our affections ordinarily (yet very
insensibly) corrupt our judgments. But for what is said here by me, that it
ought to be done after full conviction of a communion Schismatical; I think all
men (as taking every one their own to be the orthodox, and others to be
sectaries) are but too ready to maintain this point, That all factious
communions, once discovered, are to be forsaken; and the true, [understanding
by it their own,] once found out, to be adhered to, not only by internal
affection, but external profession. And this counsel constantly shall a
tottering Romanist receive from a Protestant; and so e contra.

5. The 5th sort are those, who, being educated in a Church Schismatical, and
prejudiced with many formerly received opinions,. 17. 5. Those who 1. much
doubting the Church, they live in, to be schismatical, yet are not fully
convinced thereof: or, 2. who, convinced, yet deser their intended
reconcilement till an expected opportunity.
are not yet fully convinced that it is so; but yet are already in a great
jealousy thereof, and in a serious quest of a further discovery of truth etc:
Or again; who, being fully convinced of, and being in perfect charity with, the
Church; and having also already in voto the external communion thereof; yet
whilst wanting, and rationally expecting, a better opportunity for their
reconciliation to the Church Catholic, defer it for some time till this may
happen. [As, many cases for such delation may be supposed. -- As, if one have
reasonable hopes shortly of a Toleration; and, upon a present reconcilement, is
likely to be plundered etc. -- Or, if one have some treatment with kindred or
friends about the same matter, and is in hopes by a further discourse to carry
them with him; which intercourse, by his sudden separation, he probably
foresees will be stopped, and his admonitions rendered fruitless. -- Or, if one
happen to be in a Service, and cannot, till such a time, leave his Master; or
in an employment, which such a declaring of himself requires that he should,
and yet which he cannot, but with much temporal inconvenience, immediately quit,
(as that of S. Austen's was, Conf. 9. l. 2. c.) Or, if one be in a place where,
declaring presently, his restraint or life is endangered; and therefore he
stays till he may remove himself to a place of more: security, (as doubtless it is
lawful to seek our safety by flight.). -- Or, if he have a design of publishing
something tending to the advancement of Truth, which opportunity (in
appearance) will be for ever lost in such a place, if he suddenly discovers his
intentions. Many such cases may be put, and if none of these be reasonable to
produce any delay, yet it follows not, but that there may be some others that
are so.] Now, for such men as these, That, several circumstances considered,
both these may, or may not, be culpable.
1. First, those seem not to sin, in suspending their reconcilement, and in
continuing their former communion, who are not as yet fully convinced. [But yet
concerning full conviction, note, that after such diligence, delay, inquisition
used, as is mentioned before. 16. it seems not necessary to it, that every
objection and difficulty, that can be made against any practice or tenet of the
Church we conform to, be first fully satisfied (which perhaps will never be,
and so neither will be any ones deserting his native Sect, however erroneous);
but only that, for the most part of things in contest, full satisfaction is
received. For, if in all other things we are swayed by the over-ballancing of
reason any way, notwithstanding that some weight also remain still on the other
side; why should we neglect it in this? Since it is as much (nay more) ordinary
to be born in a wrong, than in a right, religion, we may justly, I conceive,
relinquish our former profession for that; which, if we were of no profession,
we should sooner make choice of: especially since we may be more confident of
our reason rightly used in such a matter, if our new persuasions procure to us
no secular honor or advantage, but rather (the contrary) loss and disgrace; as
also if the principles thereof produce in us any singular reformation of life.
See Trial of Doct.. 45.] 2ly, For the fully convinced, tho it seems prohibited
by God's word, that such any longer abide in their former communion, (see 9..
1. n.) yet 1. first, they seem not to sin or do ill, in not reconciling
themselves outwardly to the Church upon the very first possibility they have to
do it, if that they have a reasonable cause of delay; and especially if some
Spiritual advantage be considered in it, and if that they have probability of
health, and likelihood to attain to the time and opportunity they wait for. I
do not say; that they may not do better sometimes in a suddenner return, but
that they sin not always in the delay. Which if they did, the same will hold
for Baptism, and for many other Christian duties, which often are deferred (and
we think not unlawfully) for some time after possibility of doing them, for the
want of some convenience. Yet I cannot conceive, that there can be a reasonable
cause, to the fully convinced, of any long delay, (see before. 8. etc.) no more
than there can be such of long delaying Baptism; because initiation, or
reconciliation to the Church, are things of the highest concernment. But 2ly
--, Suppose they sin in such dilation, and procrastination; yet I see no ground
why any one should affirm (tho we grant none dying a Schismatic in the sense.
5. can be saved) that such, dying without, or before, actual reconciliation,
are certainly damned; which since it cannot be justly said of such others, tho
remaining perpetually within a Schismatical Church, as are named. 7. much less
can it of these, that are in their way and progress homewards. Again; by the
same reason must all those be damned named in the 2d.. (if they had any
possibility of sooner performing that, of which they are by death prevented):
because also these, as well as those, have a votum of what they want, and
heartily repent of their delay, if it were any way offensive to God.

As for the motives of delay mentioned above; 1. First, if this once be
granted, That, upon a full conviction, we are presently to abandon. 18.
such schismatical communion, many of them seem to be voided: because such a
retreat from our former communion cannot be concealed; or if it can, then may
also our conjunction to a new society; nay, this much more easy to be hid than
the other. So that I suppose few cases will happen, for which, after the one
done, the other should be deferred. 2ly. If such cases should be put for a
heathens deferring Christianity, I think many of them cannot justly be allowed.
(See 1 Cor. 7. 20, 21. many converts professing Christianity when servants, and
probably some of them having infidel masters.) And I think every one is obliged
to a more speedy return, as the defection, wherein he lives, is more impious
and perilous, and opposite to true religion, tho he must pass through many
temporal misfortunes, to make this escape. They (says the Apostle, of the
teachers complying out of fear of suffering from the Jews, Gal. 6. 12, 14.)
constrain you to be circumcised, only lest they (i. e. if they did not observe
the Jewish customs) should suffer persecution for the cross of Christ. But God
forbid, that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom I am crucified unto the world. And happy he, who embraces and rejoiceth
in all occasions given him, of bearing this cross, and suffering cheerfully the
loss of means, friends, good name, employments, and whatsoever is here gain
unto us, for Christ's sake, and the profession of a good conscience: My
brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into diverse temptations, Jam. 1. 2.
because if we here suffer with him, we shall also hereafter reign with him.
And, that here we might suffer with him, he came not to send peace, but a
sword; and that a man's enemies should be those of his own household, even
father and mother; and he that loves any of these more than him, is not worthy
of him; and he that takes not up his cross, and follows after him, is not
worthy of him; and he that confesses him not before men, him will he deny
before his Father, and his holy Angels in heaven.

In this discourse it has bin (all along) supposed; That the Church is ready to
entertain, and invites, this person convicted. 19. A Query: What is to be done,
if the Chapter catholic require some conformity to doctrines, or practices,
against his conscience or particular judgment, who seeks her communion.
of Schism, to return into her bosom: So that all the aversnes has bin on his
side. But now, what if such Church admits entrance to none, but upon their
subscription to all her doctrines, and engaging conformity to all her
discipline, and public practices? And then, for some points of her public
doctrines or practice, what if it be against the conscience of such a one to
subscribe or conform to them? Ought he not then to continue still in his former
communion, tho thought by him Schismatical? or at least to be content to live
out of her communion, whom he thinks to be the Church Catholic?

To this, having many Queries involved in it, I have many things to say. 1. No
man may do any thing at any time against. 20. Several propositions tending to
the solution of this Que^^.
his conscience, or which he is persuaded (without doubting) he ought not to
do: therefore if it be absolutely against his conscience to subscribe any
thing; whether truth it be, or whether it be error; he ought not to do it. But
let none please himself too much in this liberty: for tho he shall thus (in
refusing to subscribe) escape the sin of lying and hypocrisy; yet, if his
conscience happen not to be rightly informed, he may remain nevertheless guilty
of schism and heresy. See Dr. Ham. of Schism 2. c. 8.. where he says, That if
the doctrines proposed, as a condition of her communion, by the Church, be
indeed agreeable to truth, but yet be really apprehended by him, to whom they
are proposed, to be false and disagreeable, tho it be in this case hard to
affirm, that a man may lawfully thus subscribe contrary to his present
persuasion; yet it being certain, that he, who thus errs is obliged to use all
probable means to reform and deposit [such] his error; as long as he remains in
it, he is so far guilty of sin, as he wants the excuse of invincible ignorance;
and, being obliged to charity and peace, as far as it is possible and in him
lies, he cannot be freed from offending against that obligation [to preserving
peace and charity], if he do not communicate with those, the condition of whose
communion contains nothing really erroneous or sinful: and therefore such a man
[tho acting according to his present perswasion] is or may be, in several
respects, criminous. And afterward he says. -- Which way soever such man
turns, he is sure to sin, (the worst and most unhappy kind of strait); he
remains in error and schism on the one side, [i. e. in not subscribing]; and by
flying from that, he advances to lying and hypocrisy on the other. So then
one following his present persuasion may be notwithstanding guilty of Schism,
in refusing the Church's communion. 2. Subscription to the contradictory of
what I am infallibly certain is truth; or conformity to any thing, which I am
infallibly certain is unlawful, may not be made: for this must needs be
contrary to ones conscience. 3ly. Upon exclusion out of the Church, in these or
any other cases, one may not therefore anew join himself to, or longer continue
in, any communion he grants schismatical; but is rather to forego the external
administration of the Word and Sacraments, and enjoy no external communion at
all. See 13.. 4ly. No Church there is, tho pretending never so much indulgence,
but that requires subscription, from some persons at least, to her public
Constitutions and Articles; even tho such Church confesses her self in these
liable to error. And the Church of England in particular, in her 5th Canon,
excommunicates any, who shall say that any of her Constitutions are contrary to
the word of God; and that is, who shall say, that any of them, concerning
divine matters, is false or erroneous, or not true: See more of this in
Submission of Judgment 5..) higher than which no Church can easily go. And
therefore, if such subscription should be strictly required; one revolted from
the Roman Church, and coming to render himself of her communion, shall find as
difficult an entrance thereinto, as, we complain, is into theirs. 5ly. It is
considerable; That such Subscriptions in the Church Catholic, are only
required to the Decrees of her General Councils, not to the tenets of private
Doctors. 6ly. The Church Catholic (as we imagine this Convert supposes that
Church, in whose communion he desires to be) in these her decrees, for all
points necessary to salvation, is granted (see in Ancient Church-gov. 2. part..
and Infallibility. 3.) to be infallible; and so in these can require
Subscription to no error. 7ly. For as much as respects other points merely
speculative, and not of like necessity to be believed or known, if Subscription
be required of us, only for acquiescing to and not gainsaying, them, (as
certainly to many of her proposals and that under pain of anathema, she
requires no more, the disturbers of her peace, in smaller matters, deserving
her anathema's, as well as the dissenters from her faith, in greater; whilst
she determins some matters for settling peace, as well as others for necessary
faith:) (See Notes of Infallibil.. 29.) I think none will deny this lawful
enough; and what communion is there, which does not require it? 8ly. But if she
requires, to them also, a Subscription not only of non-contradiction, but of
assent, and of submission of our private reason or judgment to hers; yet I see
not, considering that she, in such a collective body, is much wiser, and more
seen both in the holy Scriptures, and writings of the Ancients, than we; and
the duty we owe to her, as being our appointed Guide in such things; our Guide,
I dare say, as much as those under the Law were: Deuteronomy. 17. 8. etc. to the 14th:
I see not, I say, but that in things where we are not infallibly certain, but
only have some private reasons or opinion that is short of assurance, that such
things are untrue or unlawful, we may thus subscribe her decrees, or practice
her commands. See what Dr. Hammond says, Schism 2. c. 10.. A meek son of the
Church of Christ will certainly be content to sacrifice a great deal for the
making of this purchase, i. e. of enjoying the Church's communion; and when the
fundamentals of the faith, and superstructures of Christian practice [I suppose
he means such as are immediately built upon the fundamentals.] are not
concerned in the concessions, [one would think, in these points especially,
that a person to be safe should rather trust to the Church's judgment, than his
own,] he will cheerfully express his readiness to submit or deposit his own
judgment in reference and deference to his Superirors in the Church, where his
lot is fallen. [Methinks he might better have said, where his obedience is due;
for the Church, where his lot is fallen, may by heresy or schism stand divided
from the Church Catholic.] (See this point discoursed at large in Obligation
of our judgment or conscience. 2. and in Infallibility. 35..) Now a
subscribing, professing, or acting, in this manner, I conceive will never be
construed a going against our conscience or judgment considered in general,
(tho it should be against some private reasons of ours): because this
preferring of hers, before our own, judgment, is also an act of our judgment.
For there being such a weighty authority on the one side, and such reasons of
my own, but short of certainty, on the other; my judgment here sits upon, and
examins both; and at length gives sentence, that here it is more safe for me to
submit to the first, than to rely on the second. Here therefore I shall only go
against my conscience, if I go against this my judgment, in adhering to the 2d,
and forsaking the first. But indeed, if the Church should require me to
subscribe, not, that I believe her authority more than my private reasons; but,
that I have no private reasons nor scruples in my mind for the contrary of her
tenet when indeed I have so; the subscribing thus would be going against my
conscience, and must at no hand be done. [But I am confident, no Church will
exact such a confession; nor would ever reject, I say not from bearing any
office in her, (wherein perhaps she may be more strict), but from her
communion, such a submission as this. Wherein one first acknowledges her
infallibility, or actual unfailance, in all doctrines necessary to salvation:
and 2ly, promises in no other point publicly to gainsay her Conciliary
doctrines: and 3ly, in these points to endeavor, as far as is in his power, to
submit his private reason and judgment to hers; tho perhaps the repugnances of
some verisimilities of the contrary may hinder his yiedling so plenary an act
of belief to the truth of some of them, as some others do.] Or again; if any
one is persuaded in his judgment or conscience, that, when the judgment of the
Church is contrary to this his private reason or judgment, so often he ought to
adhere to his own, not to hers; such an outward submitting or subscribing to
her judgment, when this is against his own private reason in that matter, would
be going against his conscience, and he ought at no hand to do it. But yet, in
the not doing it, he may be guilty of great crimes, heresy, schism, etc. But
9ly, such subscription of a firm belief of all her doctrines, or of exact
conformity to all her public rites, I think is by no Church required from all
that either are born in, or are afterward converted to, her communion; but only
from those, whom she prefers to be the Spiritual guides of others, and admits
into Ecclesiastical revenues. For those of the Roman communion (of the
strictnes of whose profession of faith I find our men much complain) the
Council of Trent requires a profession of their faith to be made, or her
decrees (of which Pius 4tus has compacted a form, particularly expressing the
chief of them) to be subscribed, or sworn to, only by Bishops, and by others
who undertake curam animarum. (See 24. Sess. 1. c. and 12. c. de Reformat.)
Neither does Pius the 4ths Bull, so much accused, require it of more, unless it
be of Regulars: [In which Bull observe, that the Oath or Subscription of such
persons, having curam animarum etc, is required, not only to some Articles or
Canons of the Council, namely to those expressed in the Bull, (for the naming
of which, being about some twelve Heads, the Council of Trent is said to have
added twelve new Articles to the Apostles Creed, to be believed under peril of
losing salvation) but to all the rest of the decrees of that Council whatever,
as well as those; and likewise to all things tradita, definita, declarata, by
any other Council, which by the Roman Church is reckoned Ecumenical, as well
as those delivered by that of Trent. See the words, Caetera item omnia a sacris
Canonibus [that is yet something more too] and Oecumenicis Conciliis, ac
praecipuera sacrosancta Tridentina Synodo tradita, definita, ac declarata
indubitanter recipio, atque profiteor etc. After which it follows: Hanc veram
Catholicam fidem, extra quam nemo salvus esse potest, -- sponte profiteor, and
veraciter teneo. From which words (if we will say, the Roman Church has added
new Articles of Faith to the Apostles Creed, to be explicitly professed and
believed under pain of damnation) we must argue, not only those 12. points to
be added by her, but also all the rest; not only whatever the Tridentine, but
any other of those she calls General Councils, has delivered or declared. But
indeed, from this large reception of, and subscription to, not only some, but
all, points determined by such Councils, we may gather 1. That it is only a
subscription and profession in such a manner to, and of, them, as the Councils
have proposed to be received and professed; and that it is not such, that the
same degree of belief or assent must necessarily be given to all. For no
Romanist will say, that nothing is stated or defined in General Councils, or in
that of Trent, but only points de fide extra quam etc; (see Notes of
Infallibility,. 9.) nor yet will say this of those 12. heads mentioned in the
Bull, of which this is a part, Baptismum sine sacrilegio reiterari non posse:
but if this be an articulus fidei, extra quam nemo salvus; then is Cyprian,
whom they acknowledge a Saint, damned. And some Anathema's may be showed in
latter Councils against such other points, as were affirmed by some of the
Fathers. See Conc. Trid. 24. Sess. 7. c. the contrary whereof was held by S.
Ambrose: and 21. Sess. 4. c. compared with S. Austin's known opinion. But if it
be said, that, after the determination of a Council, it is fides extra quam etc,
not before; then is the matter sufficiently explained, that the damnation lies
not in the great moment of our erring in such a point, or in the matter of the
tenet; but in our opposition of, and division from, the Church's judgment, to
whom we are commanded obedience and submission, after we know that she has
determined it. See Dr. Hammond, (Of Fundamentals, 9, and 10. c.) of our
obligation to the additionals to the Apostles Creed, made in the Nicene and
Athanasian Creed, very appliable, as I conceive, to the additions of other
General Councils. And again, 2ly, from hence it will follow, that the clause
[Catholica fides, extra quam nemo salvus esse potest] must not be
distributively applied to all that is mentioned before it; for no Romanist will
affirm this of all the decrees of Councils whatever, nor yet of these twelve,
and the several branches of them, which are before expressed; nor perhaps of
all the Articles whatever of the Apostles Creed. But * must 1. either be
understood collectively: not, that every thing, that is contained in such
decrees, is absolutely sides Catholica, extra quam nemo salvus; but that all
the fides, extra quam etc, is involved and contained in, or amongst, those
decrees; whilst meanwhile this phrase [extra quam] chiefly refers to the
ancient Creed, placed in the beginning of this Bull. To which see a like phrase
applied in the 3d. Session of the Council Tridentine: Principium illud, in quo
omnes, qui fidem Christi profitentur, necessario convenient, ac fundamentum
firmum and unicum, contra quod portae inferi etc. Where observe, that this word
[unicum] seems contrary to the [extra quam] here, if taken distributively. So,
if it were said of the Scriptures, or of the will of God declared in them;
These are the Holy Scriptures, or, This is the will of God; without the
knowledge of which Scriptures, or Will, there is no salvation: Yet would it not
follow, that without the knowledge of every part and particle of such Will or
Scripture, no salvation could be attained; but that, without the knowledge of
some part at least thereof. For, if only some part thereof be necessary to
salvation, it verifies sufficiently the expression, extra quam there is no
salvation. Or else; * by extra quam, must be meant only this; That, in opposing
of such faith, and sacred decrees of General Councils, or of the Church, when
made known to them to be such, none can be saved; because such men must needs
be guilty of Schism and Heresy, and do remain out of the Church's communion.
But whatever the meaning thereof be; this it cannot be, even in the sense of
the Roman Doctors; That all the decrees of General Councils, or of that of
Trent, or that perhaps any at all of that, beyond the Apostles Creed, (much
less all the branches of those twelve points named in the Bull, to all which
the Bishop subscribes), or perhaps, that all the Apostles Creed is necessary
explicitly to be known or professed; or else that such person cannot attain
salvation. See more of this Church-gov. 4. part.. ^.) Thus much concerning what
Subscription is required in the Roman Church of those who have curam animarum,
(by which perhaps it will appear, not to bear such a rigid sense, as many
construe it in.)] And as for all others, the Council has only these words.
(25. Sess.) Sup^rest nunc, ut Principes omnes in Domino moncat ad operam suam
it a praestandam, ut quae ab ea [i. e. Ecclesia] decreta sunt, ab haereticis
depravari aut violari non permittant, sed ab his and omnibus devote
recipiantur, and fideliter observentur. To these I will set you down what F. a
S. Clara says in his system. Fidei 24. c. 6.. Addo, quod in modo reducendi
errores, expedit aliquando nonexigere ejurationem haereseos, ad hoc ut in
Ecclesiasticam communionem admittantur Sectarii, ut olim Johannes Antiochenus
fecit cum Nestorii fautoribus; eo scil. animo, ut melius Ecclesiarum paci
consuleret, ut notarunt aliqui posteriores scriptores. Et certe non solemus ad
erroris ejurationem noviter conversos cogere; sed displicentiam ejus and
reliquorum peccatorum concomitantium, cum proposito de futuro persistendi in
fide and communione Ecclesiae, ut juris sacramentalis est, exigimus. Alia, quae
potius forum fori, quam poli, spectant, de industria utplurimum omittemus: ne,
ut facile fit, absterreantur. And perhaps an orthodox Church may use such
gentleness toward novices with very good effect, for those considerations of S.
Austin's, mentioned before this discourse; because, Cum docilis factus fuerit,
tum demum disces quant a ratione etc. -- and, nos falsis rumoribus etc.
therefore it seems they entered, before they knew certainly all such rumors to
be false.

But here perhaps this scruple may be urged: That tho a new convert be admitted
into such a Church and communion, without. 21.
any universal subscription to all the doctrines thereof; yet is he, by such
communicating with her, reasonably supposed to acknowledge these, and so the
untruths (if any be) thereof; especially those, the belief of which is strictly
enjoined under Anathema, and so gives the same scandal as if he had subscribed
them: which scandal ought to be avoided by the simplicity and sincerity of a
Christian. To which I answer: That from this commun cating with a Church,
wherein are some errors, one cannot therefore rationally be supposed to hold
all the errors thereof; tho the holding of them be enjoined under Anathema's.
Neither is any just scandal given by him, as that he should rationally seem to
do so: for communion neither makes me accessory to the sins, nor errors, nor
unjust censures of all those I communicate with; especially where I have no
power to redress them. Neither can I, from my submittance in things (wherein I
think I ought) to those whom I account by Christ appointed my Spiritual
Fathers, be justly supposed by any therefore to justify all their Acts, Laws,
Injunctions, or Censures whatsoever; no more, than from my peaceable obedience
to my temporal Prince, will any such thing be collected. Suppose the Church
pronounces an Anathema on all those who do not believe her decrees; yet can
none hence justly conclude, That every one, that is in her communion, believes
them: unless we are certain, that every one does what another requires, who
does not quit all relation to him who requires it. Neither have her Anathema's,
being universally pronounced, more force upon, nor are they more to be feared
by, one, when he is now within, than when he was before without, her communion;
or than they are to be feared by all those, who continue still without; the
further any one runs from the Church, he the more justly incurring her
censures. Neither reasonably may those through the Kingdom of France, after the
conclusion of the Tridentine Council, who lived and died in the communion of
the Roman Church; or Father Paul the Venetian, who writ the history of that
Council, dying also in the same communion; be therefore presumed to have
assented, or subscribed to all the decrees thereof. Does the 5th. Canon of the
Church of England bind all, tho Non-Subscribers, to forsake, or not to enter
her communion, who think some one thing she says not agreeable with the
Scriptures, for fear of their giving scandal, by being thought to believe such
points? Did the many false doctrines of those, who sat in Moses's chair, and
ruled in the true Church of God, therefore warrant the Samaritan discession
from the Church? (Consider well Jo. 4. 22. Matt. 10. 5.) We may not, being in
her communion, openly gainsay the errors of a Church, such as are not
fundamental; as all, I think, grant: how much less may we quit her communion
for them? And if one may not leave that which he imagines the true Church for
such faults or defects; neither may he forbear to return to it. And if a member
of a Church may not disturb her peace in an open speaking against some things
he supposes to be errors in her, but not fundamental, (now for erring in
fundamentals, the true Church of Christ is secure; and, in the Protestants
opinion, the Roman Church does not err in any such,) upon this pretense,
because else some may be scandalized, as if himself also held such errors: why
may not one likewise enter into the Church's communion, without an obligation
of declaring against her supposed errors, for fear of giving such scandal? And
indeed upon such terms, i. e. of fear of giving scandal, no man may be of any
communion, wherein he thinks any one untruth is held: and then, by being of
none, shall he not give more scandal? as if he denied there to be on earth a
Catholic and Apostolic Church, to which he may securely join himself? He that
may not pass over to another Church, because she has some (in his opinion)
errors, may not stay in his own, if he imagines the same of her. But meanwhile
he that takes such offense, may perhaps too magisterially accuse a Church of
errors; who 1. first, ought not hastily to conclude, especially the decrees of
Councils to be untruths, unless he be infallibly certain thereof. And if he be
so, yet 2ly. ought he not to be offended at another submission to the Church
that holds them; unless he knows also that the other is infallibly certain of
their being errors. But yet 3ly, from the others submitting he cannot indeed
gather so much, as that such a ones private opinion in all things is the same
as the Church's doctrine is: but only this; that such a man's judgment is; that
he ought to submit (as much as is in his power) his contrary reasons or opinion
to her wiser and more universal judgment.

To conclude. No man may neglect a duty, for fear of giving some scandal, or of
having his actions by some weak men misconstrued. (For it is only in the doing
and forbearing of things indifferent that we are to have an eye to scandal).
Now our communion with that which we suppose to be the Church Catholic must
needs be a duty, and that a high one. Of which S. Austin says so often, (see
5..) That there can be no just cause of departing from her. Therefore either
she errs not at all in her decrees; or else we may not desert her communion,
because therein are maintained some errors; tho some, upon these, be
scandalized, that we still abide in it. I add, as no just cause of departing
from her, notwithstanding such errors; so no just cause of not returning to her
when she is willing and ready to receive him. By Him, I mean here, as likewise
in the rest of this discourse, such a one, as, tho he scruples at some of her
(in his conceit) errors, yet is persuaded, that that Church, to which he
desires to join himself, is the truly Catholic.

Luke 9. 59, etc. -- And he said unto another; Follow me. But he said; Lord,
suffer me first to go and bury my Father. Jesus said unto him; Let the dead
bury their dead, etc. Another also said; Lord, I will follow Thee, but let me
first go bid them farewell, which are at home at my house. And Jesus said unto
him; No man having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the
kingdom of God.

FINIS.

