THE ANTIDOTE: OR, A Seasonable Discourse on ROMANS 13.1.
SHOWING The Necessity and Reasonableness of Subjection to the Higher Powers.

With an Account of the DIVINE RIGHT Or ORIGINAL of GOVERNMENT.

By John Walker, M. A.

Honor thy Father and Mother, that thy days may be long upon the Land which
the Lord thy God gives thee,

Exodus 20.12. LONDON, Printed by Th. Hodgkin, for Anthony Stephens Bookseller,
near the Theater in Oxford. 1684.

To the Honored SIR ROBERT SAWYER, Attorney General to His Most Sacred MAJESTY
of GREAT BRITAIN, etc.
Honored Sir,
THough the Real Esteem and Great Veneration I have for Your Integrity and
Worth, has been the cause of the Trouble, yet I fear it will not be
Justification and Excuse for the boldness of this Address: Not but that I know
You to be a Person of very great Candor and Condescension, of Complacency and
Goodness, very ready to Accept and Commend, Encourage and Promote any
Undertaking of this Nature, any thing that may persuade and contribute ought
unto Loyalty and Obedience, in so Seditiously and Rebelliously Profligate an
Age. And indeed it was this Consideration, viz. of that Great Love to the
Subject here Treated of, that gave me the Assurance and Confidence of Prefixing
Your Name to this so mean a Discourse. I could not but persuade my self, but
that to One who has so vigorously and eminently Asserted and Practiced Loyalty
and Fidelity to His Prince and Sovereign, such seasonable and necessary Truths
as are here delivered, would, from how mean a Hand soever, be very grateful and
acceptable: Especially when there are so many Sheba's, Sons of Belial, still
blowing the Trumpet to Rebellion, and endeavoring to Dethrone the Lords
Anointed, and to Involve these Nations in a Miserable and Bloody War, a
Lamentable Confusion and Ruin. It was a prospect hereof that at first excited
me to Pen what I here Present You with, and that has now encouraged the
Publication. I am not very Solicitous what Entertainment it will meet with;
there is nothing that will please or satisfy some Men; that are obstinately
resolved and prejudiced against a Truth, be the Arguments from Scripture and
Reason otherwise never so cogent and convincing. Nor am I so vain and fond as
to imagine and believe, that I shall turn Apostle, and convert such
unreasonable Ethnicks. It is utterly impossible to persuade a Man that the Sun
shines, if He will not believe His own Eyes; and it is as difficult to convince
any one of the Truth, how perspicuously and fully soever Represented and
Demonstrated, that rejects all Scripture and Reason in the disquisition. It is
this that has rendered me hopeless, as to any profit and advantage that this
sort of Men will reap from this Discourse; but as to reasonable and ingenuous
Men, all that will open their Eyes and see, I doubt not but that They will find
enough and sufficient to convince and persuade Them of, and to confirm Them in
the Truths here represented; and it is for such as These that I have taken all
this pains. However, it comes not to inform and instruct You, it being only a
Copy and Transcript of Your Life and Practice; and as such, I Hope, You will
Vouchsafe it Shelter and Protection under Your Roof, and the Author a place
amongst Those that really Honor You, it being the Highest of His Ambition, to
be in all Sincerity and Faithfulness,

Your Most Obedient and Humbly Devoted Servant John Walker.

THE PREFACE.
READER,
MY Design when I first Writ, and now Publish this Discourse, was and is to
Serve Truth, my King, and my Country. To do my duty as a Minister and
Christian, as a Good and Loyal Subject, and to Act as One that had a real
Tenderness, Care, and Concernment for the Prosperity and Welfare of that
National Community, whereof He is a Member. To serve Truth, by Opposing,
Censuring and Refuting those damnable and false Doctrines and Positions, that
have been but too much the Judgment and Practice of too many amongst us, and
that have abundantly contributed to all that Faction, Sedition, and Rebellion,
that have so frequently dared and threatened Authority. To serve my King, by
giving a Just and Rational Account of the grounds and causes of a Dutiful
Subjection and Obedience to be paid unto Him, and thereby persuading unto, and
enforcing its performance; as also by more largely and particularly showing
what it is, and wherein it consists. And my Country, by endeavoring to unite
and conjoyn all the Parts of this Great Body with the firm Band of Fidelity and
Allegiance, and thereby under the Divine Protection and Goodness, secure a
lasting Happiness and Peace unto the whole: Union in the Body Politic being
like to that in the Body Natural, its best defense and preservative. And this
being my design, I doubt not but that I shall have the concurrent Approbation
and Suffrage of all Good Men.

But to all this it may be Objected, that it has been already performed by
Others, and then what need of this? Whereunto I return, First, That I have so
far adverted to the Objection, as to suppress the Publishing of this Piece for
above a Year, it being so long since it was prepared and fitted, as it is now
presented to the view of the Reader. Secondly, That when a general Ruin
threatens, We do not call in only the help of the Neighborhood, but of the
whole Country; and this being so much our case, it need not be wondered at, if
I, out of an honest Zeal for the Prosperity of Sion, have put to my Helping
Hand, and endeavored to avert the destruction and Ruin of the best State and
Church in the World. But Thirdly I answer, That I never heard of, or saw, any
Author that has so fully and largely, and in that method, treated of the
Subject as it is here performed: So that this as to me may be a sufficient
Apology and Reason for the Publication, and a reasonable and satisfactory
Answer to the Objector.

As to others (if any such there shall be) that are so unreasonable as to
Object, that I have put a Text of Scripture before it, and thereupon bottomed
and grounded my Discourse; I do not think it worth my while to make any Reply,
it not being likely that They should be pleased or delighted with my Comment,
that are not so with St. Paul's Text. Although I could tell Them that this
Discourse was principally Designed to persuade to Practice, and that therefore
I judged I could not so well effect this, as by Discoursing from so Good and
Just an Authority. And for my part, I always apprehended and believed, that
there could be no more effectual way of convincing, or better method of
Reasoning and Discoursing (especially on Subjects of this Nature) than by
Scripture and Reason; and They that will not be satisfied by this, are too
foolishly capricious, and have too much of the Buffoon, so as to be considered
or taken notice of by any grave and sober Writer; and till They can suggest a
better, They only Proclaim Their Impiety, Folly, and Unreasonableness unto the
World.

These Objections being removed, I think I need not fear one from Its
Vnseasonableness, the too great Iniquity and Impiety of the Times, but too much
Apologizing for me and it, as to this particular, wherein Faction and Sedition
have formed and invented Imaginary and False Plots, and Real and True Ones. I
say Imaginary and False Plots, as that the King should endeavor to bring
Popery and Arbitrary Government into the Nation: Pretenses and Suggestions as
false as Hell, without the least appearance of Truth and Honesty, and as
malicious Falsehoods and Lies as were ever belcht from the Infernal Pit. For as
to Popery, what has He done to encourage and Abett it, or to give its Factors
and Emissaries any such hopes? Has He privately owned or frequented its
Worship, or openly endeavored to have the Public Acts of the Nation against
it Repealed? Has He sent for the Jesuit to come in, or given the Priest
public allowance to make as many Proselytes as He can? If He has done naught
of this, nor any thing which with any probability of Truth can be suspected to
look this way, except the Favor once indulged to all His inveterate and
implacable Enemies, and which was as much to bring in Presbytery and all
false-named Protestantism, as Popery (they being all alike tolerated, and all
of them of as equally direful an Aspect to the Government, one as the other) as
certainly He has not, nor ever will, if we will believe His Royal Word; what
Reviling, Lying Caitiffs must these be, openly to traduce and bespatter their
King and Governor? And how hellish a falsehood must it be to say He does this
still? Especially if we consider, that He has all along frequented and adhered
to the Usage and Rites of the Church of England, and suffered the Laws to be
Executed upon this sort of Men. But we need not wonder that He has been thus
used by them, when they have been so frontless, so possessed with a lying
Spirit, as to utter this Calumny and Untruth against the Best and Truest
Protestant Church under the Heavens: And when they speak most modestly and
tenderly of us, we are then no less than Popishly affected, Tantivying it at
least (in their own dialect and phrase) toward Rome. And as for His
endeavoring to Rule by an Arbitrary Government, it is as false and malicious an
Untruth as the other; and they that have had the Impudence to invent and broach
it, cannot give one instance wherein He has transgressed the Rule of the Law,
entrenched upon His Peoples Rights and Properties, and exceeded the Royal
Prerogative. And though it ought to be presumed and believed, in behalf and
favor of the Prince and Ruler, even upon the account of common Christian
Charity, (which Commands us to believe and hope the best of all men) that He
never has, nor ever will do any such thing, especially when there is no plain
evidence and appearance to the contrary; and in that also He has given His
People all the assurance He well can, that He will not Rule but according to
Law, as by His Coronation Oath, and His repeated Promises and Declarations
since, particularly that which He caused to be issued out, immediately after
the Dissolution of the Parliament at Oxon: I say, though Charity, the
reasonableness of the thing, and common Equity do oblige us thus to think and
believe, yet these men will not be persuaded hereby, and rather than beloved
Association and Rebellion shall want a Pretext, they will stoutly bear it out
with the help of a modest Forehead and Tongue, that their Governor is a
Perjured and falsifying Person. But if He has done naught of this to^, neither
the one nor the other, (as we have all the reason in the World to believe and
persuade our selves that He has not) then it is plain and apparent that
Fanatics can invent and tell Lies, are the open and downright Liars, and that
formal Saints are herein at least real Devils. These are the False and
Imaginary Plots: The Real and True Ones are those of Killing the King and
Subverting the Government, against the Crown and Dignity, the Life and
Happiness, the Tranquillity and Peace of the Lords Anointed, Herod and Pontius
Pilate, and all the Nation of the Jews, Papist and Fanatic, and all the
Rascally Rabble of Pharisaical Hypocrites have conspired, as is apparent from a
Nemine contradicente, the joint consent of the Two Houses of Parliament as to
the former, and the Confessions of Interested Parties as to the latter: So that
whatever may be Objected against the Discourse, yet I am sure its
Vnseasonableness cannot. I could wish that it were altogether Unseasonable, but
alas! the Shimei's, the Sheba's, the Achitophel's, the Absalom's, the
Raviliac's, and the Clement's amongst us, do but too much justify the
undertaking and attempt.

The Blessing and good Influence that it is to have upon the Heads and Hearts
of those that Read it, I am to leave to Him that only can give the Increase,
and make the Dry Bones live. I have done my Duty as a True Protestant Divine,
and Christian, have here told Judah of his Sins, and Israel of his
Transgressions, and have endeavored to show unto all, the good and the old way
of Obedience and Subjection to the Higher Powers, by Representing Truth in its
own Native Dress, without any artificial or false Colors. My Request to the
Reader is, that He would carefully and impartially Peruse and Read it without
Prejudice and Passion; and with me offer up and present this Supplication and
Prayer to the Throne of Grace, that It would Please the Divine Clemency and
Goodness, so far in Mercy to Look down upon us, as to Open our Eyes, and make
us see what those Things are, the End whereof is Peace.

Farewell.
THE ANTIDOTE: OR, A Seasonable Discourse OF Subjection to the Higher Powers.
ROMANS xiii.1. Let every Soul be subject unto the Higher Powers. For there is no
Power but of God.


HAd that foul Calumny and Aspersion wherewith the Enemies of the Christian
Institution at first branded and traduced both It, Luke xxlii.2. Acts xvii.7.
and its Professors, viz. That it contrived and abetted Faction and Sedition,
Mutiny and Rebellion, against the Supreme Power and Government of every Polity
and Kingdom, been as true and real, as 'twas indeed false and malicious,
Princes and Rulers would have had an abundant reason and cause of jealousy and
watchfulness against a thing so pernicious and baneful to Society and Mankind;
and the following Persecutions have been as just and reasosonable, as fit and
necessary. Nay, such a Practice would have been an irrefragable Confutation of
all that Sanctity and Innocence they so much cried up, and pretended to, and
have justly made the Propagators of so wild and extravagant a Doctrine, a
Spectacle of Contempt and Scorn, of Villainy and Injustice to the World, to
Angels, and to Men. But as Christianity, the Religion of the Holy Jesus did
never allow or countenance any thing of this kind, much less authorize the
Subverting of Governments, the pulling down of Empires, or the destruction of
that Order and Subordination God had placed in the World; but, of the other
side, with the strongest Sanctions, and most powerful Arguments persuaded to
the contrary; so never did any true and sincerely honest Christians exert and
avow such wicked and damnable Exploits, or by a Covenanting Dispensation
presume to make so large Entrenchments upon the Law of Nature and of Grace.
That there have been Treasons and Rebellions acted in a Kingdom, and amongst a
People professing Christianity, if we look no farther than our selves, we have
an undeniable Testimony and Evidence; but then certainly this was not done by
us as we were Christians, or by the Authority of our Religion, but as we were
sensual, carnal, and devilish; acted by a spirit of Pride and Ambition, of
Hypocrisy and Dissimulation, of Malice and Revenge, of Self-interest and
Covetousness. For the wisdom that is from above is first pure, Jam. iii.17.
then peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good
fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy. The Christian Institution,
like its Author, is of all things the most innocent and harmless, the most meek
and humble, the most self-denying and condescending. Its design and business is
to inflame us with the love of God, and of our Neighbor; to promote and
establish Peace within, and Peace without; and to make our Conversation and way
of living here on Earth, in some degree and measure a resemblance and
expression of that more perfect Concord and Unity, Love and Amicableness we
shall fully possess hereafter in Heaven. And therefore as it equally detests
and forbids whatsoever may hinder or lessen the increase and growth of these
excellent fruits of the Holy Spirit in us through the whole course of our
Lives, so in order hereunto does it strictly enjoin and command us to render to
all their dues. Romans xiii.7, 8.
To owe no man any thing, but to love one another. Romans xii.16.
To be of the same mind one toward another. 14.
To bless them which persecute us; to bless and curse not. 17.
To recompense to man evil for evil; to provide things honest in the sight of
all men. And, if it be possible, 18.
as much as lies in us, to live peaceably with all men. Not to avenge our
selves, 19.
but to give place unto wrath. 20.
And therefore if our enemy hunger, to feed him: if he thirst, to give him
drink. Finally, Not to be overcome of evil, Ult.
but to overcome evil with good. And agreeable to this is what St. Peter in
other terms expressly commands, That we should honor all men. Love the
Brotherhood. 1 Pet. ii.17.
Fear God. Honor the King. Indeed so full and copious is the Gospel in
asserting this Truth, that as one may run and read it; so there needs no
abusing of Scripture by straining it (as has been maliciously and untruly
suggested) to evince and prove it: For what can be more plain and full, if
we'll believe either the Text or Context, than what our Savior enjoins and
prescribes? Render unto Caesar the things which are Cesars. Mat. xxii.21.
And what they are, St. Paul acquaints you, viz. first in general, Subjection;
then in particular, Tribute, Custom, Fear, Honor and Love: Romans xiii.5, 7, 8,
10.
For love works no ill to his neighbor. And as express and clear is what he
infers in ver. 5. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but
also for conscience sake.

Religion then, you see, utterly disclaims and disowns all Invasions and
Usurpations of PRINCES Thrones and Dominions, of their Persons and Affairs. It
has secured and bounded their Rights and Properties, by an unalterable and not
to be violated Fence and Law; and separated and lifted them up above all
others, by a special mark of Sacredness and Majesty: For I have said ye are
Gods. Psalm lxxxii.6.
From whence then come Wars and Fightings among us? All those horrid and
hellish Rebellions, Conspiracies and Treasons; all those injurious and
scurrilous Speeches, and foul Language; all that unjust and unnatural Resisting
and Gainsaying; and all that unworthy and dishonorable Usage and Treating of
our Superiors and Governors, by subtle and sly, false and malicious
Insinuations, Suggestions, Back-bitings, Whisperings, and Slanderings: Come
they not hence, Jam. iv.1, 2.
says the Apostle, even of your lusts that war in your members? Ye lust, and
have not: ye kill, and desire to have, and cannot obtain: ye fight and war, and
yet ye have not.

Come they not from our Ambition and Haughtiness, that will not suffer us to
sit still, and acquiesce in that state and condition of life Providence had
placed us in, but to be more Honorable and Great, Eminent and Powerful?

Come they not from our Avarice and Greediness, which will not be satisfied
with the Christian allowance of Food and Raiment, but like the Horseleech,
cries, Give, Give; Et per fas nefasque: And by right or wrong, Oppression and
Injustice makes way to greater Riches, and more plentiful Treasures?

Or come they not from our Self-love, which, whilst it exceedingly magnifies
our own merits, will as much decry and depress those of others? And then, are
we so fit for and worthy of Honorable Employs, to be thus slighted and
contemned, will be the next Suggestion, and the next to that, a desire to
revenge and right our selves, joined with an implacable hatred against those
that stand in our way, and oppose us.

These, and the rest of this accursed Litter, are, no doubt, the true Fountains
and Springs of our evil Thoughts, bad Words, and worser Actions, against our
Governors: of our despising Dominions, speaking evil of Dignities, and
stretching forth the Hand against the Lord's Anointed.

These are the great Boutefeu's and Incendiaries in Church and State; they who
excite and teach us first to murmur and complain, then form Parties, and enter
into Associations, and, in fine, openly to Resist and Rebel. And would we be
but so Christian and prudent, as once to make the Experiment, i. e. extirpate
and banish them all out of our hearts and lives; lay by all our Prejudices and
Passions, our Sins and Follies, we should upon a review of our former practice,
easily and quickly find, and as readily confess, that our Complaints and
Murmurings were unjust, or at least impertinent; our bandying together in
Parties unnecessary and dangerous, and our open resistance wicked and
abominable. And as it would extort this just Confession and great Truth from
us, so would it make us better natured, and better manner'd; more civil, kind,
respecful, and obedient to the Higher Powers. For now having none of these
unruly and boisterous Passions and Lusts to support and cherish, to maintain
and defend, we should be fitly prepared and disposed to embrace and receive the
Truth in the love of it, and so be able to understand and see the necessity and
convenience, in respect at least of our present welfare, of a dutiful
subjection to our Superiors.

And though this very Consideration that thereby we shall become good Subjects,
and so quietly and peaceably enjoy the benefit and happiness of the Government
we live under, may be thought a sufficient Argument and Motive to every
reasonable Man to deposite and abandon his unreasonable Lusts and Desires, yet
there is another of far greater moment and importance, which, if he has any
serious Regard or Concern how he shall live for ever, will certainly be so
prevalent as to effect it; and that is, that without the doing hereof, He can
never be a good, an upright, and sincere Christian. For it cannot be rationally
supposed, that God can be loved, honored or obeyed, by our Lusts and Vices;
and if he cannot, then it is as necessary that we should hate and reject them in
respect of God, as of his Vicegerents. And if we do it upon this account, we
shall also do it upon that, because what makes us good Christians, will also
make us good Subjects: For no Man ever yet truly loved, feared, and honored
God, that did not as truly love, fear, and honor his King; in that our keeping
of God's Commandments being the best and truest expression of our love to him,
and our obedience and subjection to his Deputies, those whom he has set over
us; one prime instance of our Duty, if we love God more than in word and in
tongue, we will make it our especial care, that we serve and obey them in deed
and in truth.

And this, as it is every Man's Concern, in as much as every Member of the
Community has a common interest and benefit in the Government; so is it every
man's indispensible Duty, in that all are equally tied and obliged hereunto by
God. And so is it expressed by our Apostle, in the words I have read unto you,
Let every Soul be subject unto the Higher Powers, etc.

This is that St. Paul, with a great deal of Reason and Cause, confronts to our
seditious Mutinings, and saucy Gain-sayings; to our Rebelling against, and
Disobeying the Gods of the Earth. This is that excellent Remedy and Catharthick
he prescribes, to expel and purge out the noxious humors and qualities of the
Body Politic of any Kingdom and People. And would we but be so just to God,
our Governors, and our selves, as to attend unto, and follow the Instructions
and Command, or seriously and in earnest to address to, and hasten its
Application, we should find it the best and most suitable Advice and Counsel
for our condition, as sovereign and effectual, as it is indeed necessary: Nay,
we should have Reason to hope, even in this Age of Undutifulness and
Disobedience, that Kings and Rulers would once more, upon the account of
Conscience and Religion, be loved and revered, honored and obeyed. But when we
play at fast and loose with the Precept (as God knows we do with too many
others) and use it, as some do their outward Dress and Attire, only for Pomp
and Gaiety, to serve the present Scene of Affairs, or in that it is modish and
fashionable, and with the same levity and inconstancy reject and throw it off,
when the times, our Interests and Humors are served, no wonder that it has so
little prevalency and force, that the Evil grows and spreads, that we publicly
and openly rebel, and as publicly and openly own and avow it. We must first
cordially and sincerely love, fear, honor and obey God, the great Universal
Governor of all things, before we can as truly and in obedience to his Command
and Will, pay Subjection and Reverence to those whom he has set up, his
Substitutes and Delegates; otherwise they, as well as their Master and Lord,
must expect to meet with Indignities and Affronts, to be disrespected and
disobeyed. For as Religion is the best security, and strongest support to
Princes Thrones and Scepters, as it is the most uncontrolable tie and
obligation to a dutiful Obedience to be rendered unto Caesar; so when this
through the Debauches and Profaneness, the Hypocrisy and general Impiety of a
Nation shall decay, and as to its energy and power become utterly evacuated,
what can be the effect and consequent hereof, but that the Superstructure and
Building should fall and p^^^^h with the Foundation, and the Dues and Rights of
Government be buried in the ruins of Piety?

And would we but thoroughly and impartially search to the bottom, we should
trace and manifestly perceive all along the spirit of Irreligion and
Atheisticalness, to be (as I have already hinted) the Original and Spring of
all that Rebellion and Disobedience, Sedition and Faction that has so
frequently and boldly appeared, and been acted amongst us. And the truth is,
had we been as good and honest Christians as we profess and pretend to be, so
sincerely devout, pious and holy, as the Laws and Conditions of our Religion
enjoin us, we could never have been such bad Subjects, such very Devils and
Satan's, Calumniators and Revilers of, and Adversaries and Enemies unto the very
Name and Being of Monarchy and King.

It Is not, I hope, a Question now, Whether Subjection and Obedience to our
Governors be an Injunction and Precept of Christianity? If it is, their own
Eyes may soon satisfy and give them a resolution of the Case; but if it is
not, as it cannot well be, except we are wilfully stupid, and obstinately
ignorant, how severe a Reckoning must some, too many of us expect, without a
real and speedy Repentance, Reformation and Amendment for sinning against so
much light and knowledge: And therefore to such as I cannot offer a greater, so
not a more seasonable piece of Charity, than to re-mind them of their Duty, and
address my self to them in the words of our Apostle, Let every Soul, etc.

The Design then and Scope of my Text, is at once to enjoin and persuade us to
yield, and pay a dutiful Subjection and Obedience to the Supreme Magistrate or
Governor, let him be of what Religion or Sect, Denomination or Party soever;
let him be good or gentle, severe or froward: He cannot well be worse than a
Nero, under whom the Christian Romans lived, who was both Infidel and Tyrant,
yet St. Paul strictly commands them to be subject; Let every Soul be subject.

And as this is the best, so is it all, the whole of State Policy that any
Christian Member or private person of any Community or Kingdom is left or
empowred by Christ and his Apostles, to busy and employ himself withal: Not
saucily to intermeddle with Public Affairs of State, not impudently to suggest
what is fittest or most convenient to be done; but modestly to think his
Governors wiser and better able to judge of State-conveniencies than himself,
justly to leave the management of the Public to their discretion, and humbly
and peaceably to acquiesce in and submit to what they shall impose and ordain.
What undeniably concerns us, is, to study to be quiet, and to do our own
business; to take care that we worthily and Christianly behave and order our
selves in that calling or condition of life God has placed us in; and that we
fail not in the just performance of what properly belongs unto us, and is the
matter of our Employ and Duty. And therefore should there happen any
miscarriage or indiscretion in the Public Transactions of the State, (as what
is free from them, and so prudent to foresee and provide against all
Contingencies and Events?) certainly it is not for us, no part of our Business
and Duty by Murmurs and Whispers to reveal and find fault with, by unjust
Slanders and Misrepresentations to belie and libel, and by undutiful Petitions
and Remonstrances openly to revile and accuse the Government. I say it is no
part of our Business, because (as he in the Historian well observes) Tibi
(Principi) summum rerum judicium Dii dederunt, Tacitus, Annal. lib. 6.
nobis (subditis) obsequii gloria relicta est. The Governor has the chief
Sway and Rule of all things given him by the Gods, the Glory of Subjects is to
obey. Much less is it any part of our Duty, in that it is diametrically
contrariant to what the Apostle enjoins, as I now come to evince and show. Let
every Soul, etc.

My Text needs neither Commentary nor Paraphrase, except that of our Life and
Practice; for it is as soon understood, as read or heard, and obvious to the
very meanest Capacity. And as little necessity is there that we should be
over-nice and curious in straining for a Division, when the words naturally
resolve themselves into these two things.

First, A Precept or Injunction, Let every Soul be subject, etc. Secondly, The
Reason or Enforcement thereof, For there is no Power but of God.
I begin with the Precept: In the discussion or handling whereof, for your
greater Edification and Instruction, I shall make use of this method: First,
Consider who are to be obeyed, viz. The Higher Powers. Secondly, The Duty
required, Subjection to them. Thirdly, Them who are to perform this, Every
Soul, i. e. by a Hebraism, Every Man.


First, In the first place then the Apostle tells us, That we are to be subject
to the Higher Powers, the Rulers and Governors of the Earth; Those whom God,
by conferring on them a special Sacredness of Eminency and Dignity, and a
warrantable and lawful Authority and Power, has substituted and in his place
appointed to supervise and inspect, direct and order the Transactions and
Affairs of this lower World; Those whom he has called hereunto, though not
immediately, and after an extraordinary manner, as Moses, David, and others,
yet in a way prescribed and allowed of by the Divine Wisdom and Providence, now
become the only usual and ordinary one, and which the long usage and custom of
so many Ages has (by its own force and power) authorized and confirmed,
rendered lawful and regular. These then whom God has thus appointed and called,
whether by an Hereditary or Elective Right (...). Aris. Pol. lib. 3, 10.
(according to the several Constitutions of Kingdoms or People.) These, I say,
are our Governors, and whom we are to obey.

And this I the rather mention, that we may not run into those dangerous
Extremes that Popery and Fanaticism, in opposition as well to Truth, as the
Rights and Regalities of Princes have suggested. The one, that all Dominion is
founded in Grace; and that therefore be a Crown never so much a Prince's due,
except he be one of God's Saints, that is, I suppose, one of their Brotherhood,
(for, in their judgment, they alone are the Elect, the Precious and Holy Ones
of the Earth) he does to all intents and purposes lose and forfeit all; and in
consequence hereof, that a Gifted Brother, such as John of Leyden See his
Character and Actions described by Alex. Ross, in his View of Religions. Part
II. p. 12. etc.
at Munster, has more Right to the Throne and Scepter.

This then is one of the Heads of the Fanatic Hydra, that the most impudent,
unjust and seditious Varlet, so that he has but Cunning and Craft enough to
whine zealously, pretend spiritually, and look demurely, shall be preferred his
Sovereign, esteemed and judged the better man, and if it is possible for
Treachery and Murder to effect it, actually seated in his place.

The other, that of Popery, very near akin to the former, and as injurious to
the Right of the Higher Powers, viz. That the Pope has power given unto him by
Christ, and as Vice-God here upon earth, to dispossess and depose any Emperor
or King, Governor or Ruler whomsoever in case of Heresy; (that is, if he does
not think and act as he does; for he that can make new Articles of Faith, can
make any thing Heresy:) and as to throw down and disposses, so to lift up and
collate it on whom he will. We see then (to note this by the way) that the
Conclave and Consistory, Pope and Fanatic, like Herod and Pontius Pilate, can
agree, if it be to crucify Christ, destroy the Lord's Anointed.

But is not this strange and odd Doctrine, very wicked and diabolical, that
smells rank of Lucifer and his Accomplices, for a Christian Bishop, a Successor
of St. Peter's; and a company of Saints of the newest and best Mint, of the most
Reformed Reformation, (if you will believe them) to disgorge and broach, abett
and practice in the World? Of this we may certainly and truly say, That from
the Beginning it was not so; that neither Christ, nor his Apostles, ever
preached or acted such Divinity? No, Caesar was to have his due of Honor, of
Tribute, of Submission for the Lord's sake; and of Reverence, Fear and
Subjection, because he was of God, set up and appointed by Him. This is the
language of the Spirit, and the fruits of it, Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering,
Gentleness, Gal. v.22, 23.
Goodness, Faith, (Fidelity) Meekness, Temperance. Nay, our Savior has
expressly told us, That his Kingdom is not of this world, John xviii.36.
and therefore he would not be a Judge and a Divider here. Man, who made me a
Judge, and a Divider over you? Luke 12.14. From whence then is it, That his
Holiness of Rome, and our Saints of the Reformation do act thus unholily, by
judging and dividing, by giving away and disposing of what does not at all
appertain unto them, and whereunto they cannot by any Divine Warrant or Law
pretend and claim the least Right? Is it not from him, who said to Christ, All
this power will I give thee, Luke iv.6.
and the glory of them; for that is delivered unto me, and to whomsoever I
will, I give it? And do they not imitate the Tempter, as well in the Falsehood,
as Pride of it? For when or where did God ever give such a Paramount Power or
Authority to the Father of Lies, or these his lying Children? I am sure the
primitive true Saints were never possessed of it, what ever our modern false Ones
may challenge as their due: nor St. Peter himself, what ever his Successor may
pretend unto. All the power that was given unto them, was for Edification, not
Destruction; and this too, not in Temporals, but Spirituals: To build us up in
a most holy Faith, and sincere Love; to make us humble and patient,
self-denying and obedient; and to render us thoroughly conformable to the
Institution and Gospel of the Holy Jesus. This was all the purple and tissue,
all the Ensigns of Royalty they endeavored or desired to clad and adorn their
Followers withal: Nor did they covet and ambition any other Scepter than that
of Righteousness, or any other Crown than that of Martyrdom. Let then both
Consistory and Conclave peremptorily define and determine what they please
against the Higher Powers, to advance their own secular Pomp and Grandeur,
Interest and Authority, we are not to attend unto and obey it. Let him be the
greatest of men, so that he be but less than God; let him be the holiest of
Saints, so that he be but less than Christ; let him be an Apostle, nay, let him
be an Angel from Heaven, if he brings this Message, this Doctrine, so repugnant
and contrary to that of God and his Christ, to that of Truth and the Gospel, we
are to reject it.

And therefore should another Pope Pius with his Cardinals from Rome, or
another Pope Knox See Mr. Willocks and Mr. Knox 's Opinion concerning the
deposing of Princes, in Archbishop Spotswood 's History of Scotland, with the
just Censure of the Historian. Fol. 136, 137 Edit. Land. 1677. 1 Kings xix.11,
12, 13.
with his Fellow-Presbyters from Scotland; these by a Bull, the other by a
Remonstrance, endeavor to dissolve and break the Sacred Bond and Tie of your
Duty and Allegiance to your Natural Liege Lord and Sovereign; you are to look
upon these big words only, as Bruta Fulmina, empty Cracks, and the Breathings
of the Spirit of Antichrist; you are to assure your selves, that the Lord was
not, nor ever will be in this whirlwind, earthquake and fire; but in the still,
small voice, that of Love and Peace, that of Humility and Obedience; and to
remind your selves of that Doctrine and Lesson, St. Paul, the more infallible
Doctor has taught you, and accordingly to direct and order your Lives and
Manners.

Add to this, That none can dispense with God's Laws but God himself; nor any
cancel that Bond wherewith we are justly obliged and tied to pay Subjection and
Obedience to the Supreme Magistrate, but He who at first ratified and confirmed
it, the Great Almighty Lawgiver: so that it is as absurd as wicked, at once
both vain, irrational, and irreligious, to attempt and endeavor to alter,
disannul or make void that, which in the nature of the thing is to us
impossible. And therefore the Bishop of Rome, (the Great Ringleader of the
Antimonarchical Faction) and the Chiefs of his Bigoted Party here, should, ere
they went about and proceeded to exert that transcendency of Power, as to alter
and change the tenure of Crowns and Kingdoms, undeniably evince and prove by as
good Records and Evidence, as that of the Word of God, (which in this case is
impossible) that they are lawfully empowred hereunto; otherwise they do but
obtrude for Doctrines, the Commandments of Men, even their own, and mock and
fool themselves into destruction.

And 'twill be the same repeated Impudence, Folly and Madness in us, if we obey
the mere Ipse Dixit saying of the Bishop of Rome, though a Pope; or zealous
Assertion of a Covenanting Minister, though a Presbyter, before the Voice of
God certainly and undoubtedly revealed and manifested unto us in the Holy
Scriptures.

You see then, that it is to the Higher Powers we are to pay Subjection and
Obedience. Come I now in the second place, to show unto you what that
Subjection and Obedience is.

To be subject, or Subjection, in the general Notation and Use of the word,
signifies Subordination and Inferiority: And so is well defined by the Reverend
and Learned Bishop Davenant In Annotat. in cap. iii. ver. 18. Ep. ad Coloss.
, to be Nihil aliud quam divina dispositio qua imperfectiora perfectioribus
subordinata sunt, ut per hanc subjectionem illa ab his perficiantur, regantur
and conserventur. Which Mr. Daille Daillaeus in locum.
according to his Translator, has thus paraphrased, viz. To be an Order that
God has generally established in all things which constitute any kind of Body,
whether it be in Nature, or in Angelical and Humane Society, that some should
depend on others: That is, that as God has made some things more, some less
excellent; so some should be above, some beneath; some higher, some lower; and
so the feeble and imperfect find their perfection in the conduct of such as are
more perfect.

Now though this is very true, considered in the general, and ex part Dei
subjicientis; and in respect of God subjecting, that is, constituting such an
Order, (as the Bishop well distinguishes) yet ex part Creaturae subjectae, if
we consider it in respect of the Creature subjected hereunto, it farther
denotes a ready inclination and willingness to obey this Divine Disposition or
Ordination of God's: And this is the virtue of Subjection, that properly of my
Text whereunto the Apostle has obliged and enjoined us, viz. when being
sensible of that Inferiority and Subordination, Lower Rank, State, Quality,
Condition or Order God has placed us in this World, we heartily submit
thereunto, and sincerely endeavor to perform and pay all that appertains unto,
and are the Requisites and Appendages of that state and condition; and, so
being by rank and place but Subjects, to give that Obedience and Dutifulness to
our Governors, which by the Divine Dispensation and Will is become their Due
and Right.

Now that we may the more fully and distinctly understand and know what the
Particulars of this Subjection are, or wherein it consists; 'twill be fit and
necessary for us to take a survey and prospect of those several excellencies
God has impressed upon the Higher Powers exclusively to all others; in that
these, as well as the Positive Divine Will, are a reason and cause of our
Obedience, and from which, as from several Springs and Fountains, flow and
derive the Severals of our Subjection.

The Excellencies then to be considered in the Higher Powers, are: First, Their
Eminency and Dignity. Secondly, Their Authority and Power: And, Thirdly, Their
Necessity and Usefulness to Mankind.


First, If we consider the Dignity of the Higher Powers, we shall find it to be
very great and excellent, in that God has placed them above all others, and
made their Persons sacred, by a peculiar Unction and Consecration: For
designing them by their Place and Office more immediately and specially to
represent his Majesty and Image, he prescribed the Solemnity of their
Inauguration, 1 Samuel ix, ^^ x, ^
by the effusion of oil or anointing. A Ceremony as of his own institution and
appointment, so always made use of by him, to signify and denote a more
peculiar Eminency, Sacredness and Dignity; Separation and Hallowing, Nearness
and Relation to himself. Hence is it that we find them in Scripture called, The
Lord's Anointed: So David concerning Saul, The Lord forbid that I should do
this thing unto my master, to stretch forth my hand against him, seeing he is
the Anointed of the Lord. 1 Samuel xxiv.6.
And accordingly we find him speaking to the Amalekite, that brought him
tidings of the death of Saul, How wast thou not afraid to stretch forth thy
hand to destroy the LORDS anointed? 2 Samuel i.14. xxiii.1.
So David himself is called the anointed of God. The Ensigns of their Royalty
are God's indeed, derived only and especially from him, who has said, Psalm.
lxxxii.6.
I have said, Ye are Gods. And by his saying so, has given and conferred upon
them not only in shadow and title, but reality and substance, that
extraordinary honor and dignity of being as he is, superior unto, and above
all the rest of mankind. And in this sense is it, that St. Paul calls them
Principalities; Titus iii.1.
in my Text, Powers: And, Ver. 3. Rulers; i. e. the Chieftains, or Chiefs, and
so (...), uncontrollable, above being asked or questioned for what they do: Dio
Prusae.
(...) (as the Historian speaks) above giving a reason for what he commands.
They are the Captains, Numb. xiv.4. Judges xi.8. Micah vi.1, 2.
the Heads of the Body Politic. The Mountains which stand aloft, and overlook
the Earth. The truth is, so great and excellent is their Eminency, that Earth
cannot afford us a Parallel, or fit Representation of it; If we would find out
one, we must ascend into Heaven, and there behold it in God the grand
Archetype, in whom alone it is infinitely seated and placed: For what he is in
Heaven, they are on Earth, Supreme and Superlative to all others.

Now from this (...), excellency of Dignity, Exposition of the Commandments.
Fol. 326.
does derive and flow (as the learned Bishop Andrews observes) one part of our
Subjection or Duty to our Governors, viz. Honor: And this both inward and
outward.

First, Inward Honor; which is, when we have a worthy esteem, an honorable
and good Opinion of their Persons and Places: when considering that eminency
and height God has placed them in, we no longer look upon them as common
persons, as men of our rank and quality, but as those that are very much above
us, as exalted to a Throne of Majesty, and made to partake of a Respect and
Esteem, though less in degree, yet the same in kind with that we are to pay to
God himself. I do not mean a Religious Esteem or Respect, such as is to be paid
to God as he is God, viz. a thinking him to be infinitely great and honorable,
as in his Essence and Nature, so in his Properties and Attributes: But such as
is to be paid to him, as he is the great, universal Governor, viz. a believing
him to be Chief of the Community of those he rules and governs: And of this
sort his Vicegerents and Deputies, as they bear and express his Character and
Excellency, are to have their share and part, as you may see, Romans 13.7. 1 Pet.
2.17. It Is that we call a Civil Respect, and indeed is so: When the Members
depending upon the Head, as in a Body Natural for life and energie, motion and
spirits, so in a Body Politic for Union, Preservation and Strength, do judge
and believe it ( the Head) to be the principal, the best, and most precious
part of the whole. Honorable then and worthy thoughts are we to entertain of
our Governors, such as become their Quality and Place.

But as this their Excellency claims an inward, so secondly, an outward Honor
and Respect. And this consists in a decent and worthy Demeanor and Behavior
of our selves toward Them, when we pay unto Them all those marks and
expressions of Respect and Honor the Customs of the Country where we live, and
Prescriptions of the Divine Writ oblige us to: It Is generally called good
manners, and is neither a speaking nor acting either in their presence or
absence, any thing that is contumelious and dishonorable, unworthy of and
derogating from their place and dignity.

And now, would we but impartially reflect and consider, what could we
apprehend or judge more just and fit, than thus to dignifie and honor those
whom God has so greatly honored and dignified? It Is a justice that he may
very rightly and truly challenge from us, to give his wisdom the preference and
precedence to ours; to acknowledge and confess that he better understands and
knows who is worthiest and fittest to be preferred and exalted than we do: And
it is as just that we should take our measures from him, be directed and guided
by that rule and way he has prescribed and set down for us to walk in,
especially here, where his very Example is implicitly a Command, and our
following it the safest and wisest course we can pitch upon or propose to our
selves. Indeed were he as Man, of a finite, terminated understanding, easy to
be deceived and imposed upon, there would be some reason of suspecting his
wisdom and prudence, and the reasonableness of his prescriptions, and of
withdrawing, or at least withholding our assent: But when he is infinitely
wise, as well as infinitely great, ordering all things after an admirable and
excellent manner, and choosing the best and most suitable means for the Ends
designed and intended by him, 'twould be the height of folly and madness, as
well as of temerity and presumption in us, not readily to comply with, and obey
the Dictates and Commands of so wise and infallible an Instructor and Guide.

And as it is just, so is it fit and decent for us thus to act. For what can
better become us, than to honor those who best merit and deserve it; and are
the fittest and most proper Objects of our respects and service? Others may be
above us, but none in that degree as our Governors. Others may call for our
Esteem and Honor to be paid to them, but none can lay claim to so much as the
Supreme Magistrate: He is eminently above all, and therefore to be honored by
us before all.

Besides the Thrones they sit upon, the Dignity they possess, is God's; his in
the Origination and Spring; his too, when derived and communicated to them: So
that to honor them, is in the consequence and result of it to honor him, to
perform that obedience and dutifulness he exacts and requires of us, when it is
not only an implied and interpretative, but an explicit and express Command of
his, That we should honor the King, and render unto Caesar the things that are
Caesar's.

To all which we may add, That though Honor is one of the easiest and cheapest
Oblations we can offer unto them; yet it is the most valuable and precious
Jewel of the Crown, and best Supporter of the Throne; in that without this, the
one will quickly lose its majesty and luster, the other fall and tumble down;
and the substracting or taking of it away, is like the Prisons of Princes,
always ominous and fatal, and the next step to ruin and desolation. A King
without Honor, is only one in imagination, a mere titular precarious thing.
And therefore as Princes and Rulers have a great deal of reason and cause of
jealousy and care that they part not with the least moiety of it, or suffer it
to be abused, trampled upon, and laid in common, and outrag'd by noise and
tumult; so should it be our especial study, diligence and endeavor, as we ever
hope to approve our selves unto God, that neither by vile and traducing
speeches, nor unjust and injurious actions, we in the least contribute hereunto.

Away then with all reviling Rabshakehs, and cursing Shimei's; with all Corahs,
and SONS of FACTION and SEDITION, out of our Israel: O my soul come not thou
into their secret, (nor enter into their habitations) unto their assembly, mine
honor, Genesis xlix.6, 7.
be not thou united: Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath,
for it was cruel. So let all thine (and thine Anointed's) enemies perish, O
Lord; but let them that love (thee and) him, be as the sun when he goes forth
in his might, Judges v. ult.

But, Secondly, Another Excellency to be considered in the Higher Powers, is
their Authority and Power. And this consists,

First, Either in prescribing, ordering and commanding what they would have
done by the Subject, and so comprises and includes all that right of making,
constituting and publishing such Acts, Laws, Statutes and Ordinances as they in
their judgment shall suppose and apprehend convenient and conducive to the Ends
of Governments, viz. the Honor of God, and their own and their Peoples welfare
and good.

Or, Secondly, in restraining and punishing all Disobedience, and so implies,
that they are not to bear the Sword in vain, but to be revengers of God, to
execute wrath upon them that do evil.

Or, Thirdly, in honoring and rewarding the good and virtuous, the dutiful and
obedient, a being a praise to those that do well.

Now that all this must necessarily be supposed to be the inherent and
unalienable Right of the Supreme Governor, will be very evident, if we
consider and reflect that without this, he would differ nothing from a private
man, nor be in the least able to provide for his own, or his peoples safety and
happiness. For the Nature of Government, and so consequently the Business of
Governors, is to make and ordain Laws, to see these Laws executed and obeyed,
to encourage to the performance hereof, by the marks of their love and favor,
and to deterr and dissuade from the contrary hereunto, by as suitable mulcts
and penalties.

And if they cannot do this, what is their Authority and Power, but a mere name
and shadow? For do they govern, who cannot command? Or can they command, who
cannot enact and ratify Laws, and public Edicts* Or can they enact Statutes
and Decrees, who cannot force their Execution? Or can they enforce their
Execution, who cannot reward and punish?

And if they cannot do ought of this, neither command, nor enact, nor execute;
what advantage or benefit can accrue to any Nation or Kingdom, from such a
Mock-government, or Governor? It Is then both vain and absurd, to suppose either
the one or the other without this Power. If then the Nature and End of
Government do require this Authority in the Supreme Magistrate, as certainly
they do, we have from the various consideration hereof, some more of the
severals of our Subjection arising and flowing. As, 1. From their Authority and
Power to constitute and ordain Laws, springs our Obedience; for it is that we
may obey them, that they either make, ratify, or promulge them. 2. From their
power of punishing, derives our fear or reverence of them. And, 3. From their
power of conferring and bestowing the Badges and Ensigns of Honor springs
Benevolence or Good Will toward them.


As to the first of these, our Obedience (another part of our Subjection to the
Higher Powers) we may consider it in an active and a passive sense.

1. In an Active, and so it denotes not only a readiness and willingness, a
preparedness and fit disposition of mind to obey and perform what they require
and command, but also the actual execution and just performance of it: And this
too in all things, as St. Paul speaks, Col. 3.22. Nimirum in quibus Dominus
carnis, Domino Spiritus contraria non imperat, viz. in those which are not
contrary to God, his Will revealed and declared unto us in his Word, St.
Hierome.
as the Father rightly states and limits it; that is, in all things lawful and
honest; and all are such, that are not directly and by immediate consequence
forbidden in the Sacred Writ. For that being the great Rule of Good and Evil,
the Pandect of the Law of Nature, and of the Law of Grace, and the whole of
whatever relates unto, and concerns our Duty and Piety toward God, being fully
contained therein, whatsoever does not oppose, contradict and thwart ought of
this either in the general or particular, in whole or in part, may lawfully and
warrantably be the matter of our practice and obedience, and ought so to be,
when enjoined and commanded by the Higher Powers.

And this I the rather note unto you, because there is a sort of men amongst
us, who, when their Governors call for and require their Obedience and
Subjection to their just Injunctions, (as being not against any thing that God
has commanded or prohibited) with an unreasonable and impudent importunity,
demand Texts of Scripture for the Particulars of the Magistrates Commands; as
if God had written Bodies of Statutes, of Political and Municipal Laws for
every Kingdom and State in the whole World; and except he had done so, it is
utterly impossible for any Governor ever to satisfy and answer the unjust
Pretenses of these men in their own humor and way. But when God has described
only the general lines of the power of Rulers, and of the duty of Subjects, it
must necessarily be supposed and concluded by every reasonable man, that he
has left the particulars of it to be determined and laid out by them; or else
farewell all Government, and we must unavoidably lapse into the Malmsbury
Philosopher's state of Nature. And if then Anarchy and Confusion is far worse
than Tyranny, one of the greatest Curses and Evils (as certainly it is) that
can befall a People considered in their Political Capacity; and God and Nature
has made us sociable Creatures (...). Aris. Pol. lib. i. cap. 2.
, and there is no Member of the Community, but receives some benefit from it;
how very bad must that opinion and project be, notwithstanding all its
plausibleness, that thus immediately and in its own nature tends to defeat us
of the fulfilling our natural appetites and desires as men Hominem Homini
natura conciliat. Sen. Ep. ix.
, to rob us of all the outward comforts of this life Nullius Boni sine socio
jucund a possessio est. Ep, vi.
, and brings in naught but desolation and ruin upon the whole.

A great reverence and affectionate zeal for God and his Word is pretended, but
lay aside the Vizor, and you will easily perceive that Faction and Rebellion,
Sedition and Anarchy lie at the bottom. These men would make Jesus their
Political, as well as Spiritual King, only that they may the more triumphantly
tread upon the Necks of Kings and Princes, and with greater contempt and scorn
resist and disobey them. But he has avowedly disclaimed and rejected all
things of this kind (as has been showed above) nor is his Gospel a Royal
Charter or Code of Imperial Edicts, Immunities and Privileges, but of Divine
and Eternal Truths, Laws and Rewards supernatural and celestial, to fit and
prepare, refine and purify us for the glory and bliss of his Kingdom in
Heaven. And therefore as to what concerns us as Members of a Nation or Body
Politic, he remits us to the Constitutions and Laws of that Kingdom whereof we
are a part; to be regulated and ordered according to the will of those he has
set over us, and to demean and behave our selves suitably to that station, rank
and quality he as Universal Governor has placed us in. And as to this, he
has sufficiently supplied us with Texts of Scripture, so plain and evident,
that we may at once run and read them. So, Deuteronomy. 17.10, 11. And thou shall do
according to the sentence which they of that place (which the Lord shall
choose) shall show thee, and thou shall observe to do according to all that
they shall inform thee, according to the sentence of the Law which they shall
teach thee, and according to the judgment which they shall tell thee thou shall
do: thou shall not decline from the sentence which they shall show thee, to the
right hand nor to the left. So, Eccles. 8.2. I counsel thee to keep the King's
Commandment, and that in regard of the Oath of God. So Mat. 22.21. Titus 3.1.
So 1 Peter 2.13, 14, 15. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the
Lord's sake; whether it be unto the King as supreme, or unto Governors, as unto
them that are sent by Him for the punishment of Evildoers, and for the praise
of them that do well; for so is the Will of God. Now as in all these we are
strictly enjoined and commanded to obey the higher Powers, and the matter of
our Obedience as to its various Instances, being not at all set down and
determined in the holy Writ, the Rule we are to walk and guide our selves by
here, is this, viz. To obey and be subject to our Governors in all things that
are not morally and intrinsecally Evil, that is, in their own nature and of
themselves; or made so by a positive Command of Gods, disallowing and
forbidding it (as has been already suggested.) And this is the resolution of
the best Casuists and Divines I ever met with: Exposition of the Commandments,
fol. 339, 340.
They tell us, and in particular our Learned Andrews, that Subjects are not to
busy themselves about the things commanded, to know particular Reasons for the
Lawfulness; but if after moral Diligence fit to be used in all Actions of
Weight, it appears not unlawful and forbidden by God, they are to obey: And the
Reason is evident; because the Superior has his Commission from God, and so
his Commands are to be looked upon as proceeding from God whose Deputy he is,
and therefore they are sufficient Ground and Warrant for our Obedience, (God
having commanded us so frequently in Scripture to obey our King) unless it
appears clearly that He exceeds his Commission, and that his Commands are cross
to the immediate Commands of God. I say clearly and evidently, because in
things doubtful we ought to obey, (the Command of a Superior being a
determining of the Doubt.) For though it is true, that no man ought to do any
thing with a doubting Conscience, for whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin, Romans
14. ult. yet the Command of a Superior is sufficient Cause to remove the
Doubt, He being God's Deputy to resolve us in (such) doubtful Cases, so that
his Command is a resolving of the Doubt, after which we ought no longer to
doubt. For as St. Bernard says, Ipsum quem pro Deo habemus, in omnibus quae
non sunt aperte contra Deum, tanquam Deum audire debemus. Him who is in God's
stead to us, we ought in all things which are not plainly against God, to obey
as God himself. So the Learned Bishop excellently and rightly. And somewhat
after tells us; That though Conscience is immediately a Judge under God, yet as
the School-man Alex. of Ales observes, it is only in such things as are
immediately commanded or forbidden by God; but in other things which he has
left to Authority, it must be guided and regulated by Authority: And that this
Doctrine is so necessary in Praxi, as Suarez well notes, for the preserving of
Government, and preventing of Sedition, that public peace cannot otherwise be
maintained. So far He, with more to the same purpose, concluding the whole with
this, viz. That the Excellency of Obedience is to look at God's Will
represented to us in his Substitutes, which may make the same Act, which it may
be was sinful in Him that commands, (I suppose He means as to its
Circumstances) become an Act acceptable, and rewarded by God in Him that obeys.

In a word, If we would be thoroughly active in our Obedience to our Governors,
the Temper and Practice of the Children of Israel in the days of Joshua would
well become us, and be a fit and worthy Example for us to transcribe and
imitate. And they answered Joshua, saying, All that thou command us, we will
do; and whithersoever thou sendest us, we will go; according as we hearkened
unto Moses in all things, so will we hearken unto thee; only the Lord thy God
be with thee, as He was with Moses; whosoever He be that does rebel against thy
Commandment, and will not hearken unto thy words in all that thou command
Him, He shall be put to death, Josh. 1.16, 17, 18.

But then, of the other side, if it evidently and plainly appears, that what
our Superior commands, is directly and immediately contrary to the Word of
God, we are not any longer to yield an active, but 2 ly. Passive Obedience to
Him; i. e. we are not to do and perform it, but patiently to suffer what He is
pleased to inflict for our refusal.

1. We are not to do it, in that God has antecedently obliged us hereunto, by
commanding the contrary; and we are to obey God before man, as being the
supreme Lord and Ruler of all things; and therefore where our obedience to man
is an instance of our disobedience to God, there we must disobey man, at least
not yield him Active obedience, that we may actively obey God.

2. But as we are not in this Case to obey, so neither are we to withstand,
gainsay and impugn, but humbly and quietly to submit to the punishment they
shall impose upon us for our not obeying; because all the Weapons Christ has
put into the hands of his Followers and Disciples, wherewith to defend and
revenge themselves, (in respect of the Magistrate especially) are only Prayers
and Tears. And therefore all Conspiracies, Treasons and Rebellions, all
seditious Pamphlets, factious Meetings, and disobedient Resistings, are not to
be named amongst us with liking and Approbation, as becomes Saints. For (if
we'll believe St. Peter) this is thank-worthy, 1 Ep. ii.xix, xx.
if a man for Conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully; and if
when ye do well and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable
with God, for even hereunto were ye called. And herein we may rejoice, 1 Ep.
iv.xiii.
in as much as we are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his Glory
shall be revealed, we may be glad with exceeding Joy.

But let us take care that none of us suffer as a Murderer, Ib. Ver. xv.
or as a Thief, or as an Evil-doer, or as a busie-body in other men's matters;
that is, That none of us by our Folly and Obstinacy, our Irreligion and
Wickedness, our disobeying and resisting Those whom God has set over us, and a
scandalous pretense of Piety and Conscience, (when they are no way interessed
in our Cause) draw and force the public Rods and Ax upon our Backs, for a just
punishment and revenge of our Unrighteousness and Sin: And then think we suffer
upon the account of Faith and a good Conscience, when indeed it is because we
have made shipwreck of both. It is one thing to suffer, for so every Malefactor
does; and another thing to suffer for Righteousness: It is the Cause, not the
Punishment, that makes the Martyr; and Religion and Holiness, not the Gibbet
and Stake, that can entitle unto, or secure us of, the incomprehensible Weight
of Glory. Very careful therefore must we be, ere we reject and disavow the
Commands of our Governors, so as not actually to obey and perform them, that
we are upon God's side, do it out of Love and Obedience unto, and Fear of Him,
otherwise they that resist, Romans xiii.ii.
shall receive to themselves damnation. The Rule here is, 1 Ep. Pet. iv. ult.
That they that suffer according to the will of God, commit the keeping of
their souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator: i. e. That they
have respect unto all his Commandments, that they endeavor all they can to
perform and keep them, and to have a Conscience void of offense both toward
God and toward man: And if we act thus, as we shall be sure never to rebel, so
too our non-Obedience to man, will be an Obedience to God, a grateful and
delightful Sacrifice to him. He will accept and own our Persons and Cause,
assist and help us in it, and crown and reward us for it.

In fine, Humility and Patience, Self-denial and Meekness, Submission and
Resignation to the divine Will, are the true Christian's Robe and Attire, the
just Ingredients of his Obedience. Let his Prince then be a Nero, let him be a
Diocletian, if he cannot lawfully do and obey, he will patiently suffer and
die: With the three Children in the fiery Furnace, with Daniel in the Lions
Den, with his Savior on the Cross, with St. Stephen amidst a shower of Stones,
he will pray for, and bless his Enemies; not curse and confound them, not raise
Mutinies and Seditions in the State, not enter into Parties, and make solemn
Leagues and Covenants to pull off the Crown, subvert the Throne, and break in
pieces the Scepter of his lawful King and Governor. No, he has not thus
learned Christ, he gave him no such Lesson nor Example: When he was reviled, he
reviled not again, when he suffered, he threatened not, 1 Pet. 2.23. This was
his Practice; and can he do better or more worthily, than to imitate and copy
out so great, so excellent, so good a Pattern? And as it was the Practice of
his Savior, so of his Apostles, so of all primitive Christians, of the best
and purest Ages of Christianity. H. Grotius, l. 1. c. 4.. 4, 5. de Iure Belli
and Pacis. D. Cave's Primitive Christianity, part 3. chapter 4.
And if we are sincere and truly Christian, it will be ours too; if we can
obey, we will, if not, we will submit to their Sentence, and suffer what they
inflict; but we will prefer and choose a Dungeon and a Rack before Sedition and
Mutinying, a Gibbet before Associations against our Governor, and Death it
self before Rebellion.

2. But 2 dly, Another Particular of our Subjection, deriving from their
Authority, is, a Fear and Reverence of them. And that is, when considering and
acknowledging the Majesty and Power inherent and residing in them, as God's
Representatives, Vicegerents and Deputies, we have such an awful, just and due
regard to their Persons and Laws, their Acts and Ordinances, (those Limits and
Bounds they have set us, that Rule and way of ordering our selves as Members of
a Body Politic they have prescribed us) as that we use our utmost Care and
Endeavors not to transgress and violate them, and so not to provoke the higher
Powers to punish and execute God's Wrath upon us for our evil Deeds. It Is a
dread of the consequence of our Disobedience and their Power; of what they are
authorized and empowred to inflict upon, and chastize us with, according to our
Demerits. A Fear of displeasing and offending them by any unjust and unlawful
Action, in that by their Place and Office they are to be the Avengers of all
such, Romans xiii.4.
and appointed by God so to be, that we may hear and fear, Deuteronomy. xvii.13.
and do no more so presumptuously.

Now that this is a part of our Duty will be very evident, if we will but
consult what the Holy Spirit has delivered and revealed unto us. It Is
Solomon's Charge, Prove. xxiv.21.
My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King. And a greater's than Solomon, Ye
shall fear every man his Mother and his Father, Lev. 19.3. Haec sententia haud
dubie ad quinti praecepti explicationem spectat. Calvin in locum.
And so St. Paul, Render to all their dues, fear to whom fear, Romans 13.7. The
same is enjoined to Masters in general, Ephesians. 6.5. Servants be obedient to your
Masters according to the flesh, with fear and trembling. Servants be subject to
your Masters with all fear, 1 Pet. 2.18. To stand in awe then of Masters,
whether private ones, as those of Families, or public, as those of Kingdoms
and Nations, our Governors and Rulers, is certainly no Popish nor
Popishly-affected Doctrine, (in the worse sense of the Phrase) that is, it is
nothing related or akin to Idolatry and Superstition, but purely derived from
God and his Word. It is not to make our King an Idol, (as some ignorantly
prate) for wherein do we by this give Him divine Worship? And as little of
Superstition is there in it, for that is an unreasonable and groundless Fear,
but that we pay to Him is very reasonable, in that without this He would soon
become vile and cheap in our Eyes: And as good ground is there for it, when it
is to obey God, who positively and expressly commands and requires us, to give
this kind of Subjection to Him. The truth is, both upon the account of Wrath
and for Conscience Sake, are we obliged to fear the higher Powers: Upon the
account of Wrath, because the wrath of a King is as the messengers of death;
Prove. xvi.14.
and where the word of a King is, Eccl. viii.4.
there is Power, and who may say unto him, what do thou? So that if we have
any Love and Kindness for our selves, we will endeavor to be so prudent, as
not to incur their Displeasure, who can so severly animadvert upon, and punish
us for our Folly and Disobedience. And if we have any true Fear of God before
our Eyes, ought of that Universality and Sincerity of Obedience we pretend
unto, we will be no less careful and concerned even for Conscience Sake, to
exert the same Wisdom and Prudence, when God has made it a standing and
indispensable Law for us thus to act. I know it is objected by some, (that are,
I fear, more scrupulous then wise, more peevish then religious) that we ought
to fear God before Man. I say so too, nor is there the least shadow of Reason
to assert the contrary; but this is a mistaking, or rather a perverting of the
Question. For that is not whether we are to fear God before Man? (none I
suppose that had any sense of Religion, ever doubted of that) but the Question
is, whether we may not fear God and Man at the same time? or whether our
fearing of Man may not be an instance of our fearing of God? If it may be (as
certainly it is in all things that are not contrary unto and against God,
especially when he commands it, and we plead no farther for it then that
Command extends) then as we may lawfully and safely do it, so are we bound and
tied to the just performance of it, as ever we expect and hope to come to the
Seat of his blessed and truly holy ones. For Holiness being the way to
Happiness, and no Holiness attainable without fearing of God, and no Fear of
God without keeping his Commandments, and no keeping his Commandments without
doing his Will, and no doing his Will without fearing the King; if we ever
design to do God's Will and keep his Commandments, truly to fear him, and be
holy here, or happy hereafter, we must resolve to fear our King, in that there
is no Holiness on Earth, no Happiness in Heaven without it.

3. But 3 dly, Another Several of the Duty we owe unto the supreme Governor,
is, Benevolence. By this I understand, a sincere and hearty desire of serving
him, and procuring his Good in all things that relate and appertain unto him in
his Soul and Body; in his Spirituals and Temporals; in his State, considered as
a King, or as a Christian; that his Reign may be long and prosperous, and his
days many; that his Enemies may be clothed with shame and confusion, and upon
himself his Crown flourish; that he may truly fear God, study and obey his
Laws, make them his Guide and his Counselor, his Rule and way of living and
acting; that he may be another Solomon for his Prosperity and Wisdom, and
another David for his Piety and Goodness; and so Felicity be his Portion now
and ever, on Earth and in Heaven.

Now as this is a piece of Charity we owe unto the whole World, and what we are
obliged unto by the Laws of our Religion: for we are to do good unto all men,
Gal. 6.10. yet as the Apostle there adds, more especially unto them who are of
the household of faith; so amongst them more especially to the Pater Patriae,
the public Parent or Father of the Country or Kingdom, in that the Good of
the whole Community or Body is involved in his, and his Happiness and Welfare
does derive and extend unto all. So that if we would have the Effects of our
Charity become more large and diffusive, if we would do good to a whole Nation
and People, there is no better way of effecting it, then by contributing all we
can to the Security and Strength of the Royal Throne, the Dignity and Honor of
the Crown, and the Peace and Safety of the Prince, the Head and Life of the
Body. This as it is to love and wish well not only in word and in tongue, but
in deed and in truth, so is it far more generous and Christian, not so much to
regard the benefiting and doing good to a few, as to whole Nations and Kingdoms
together. We may indeed provide for the Good and Happiness of those that are
more nearly related to us, but certainly the greater and more communicative our
Charity is, the better is it, the more noble and praiseworthy. But besides
that it is a part of Christianity, and thus excellent so to act, (not to
mention the blessing and happiness of a good Conscience, the Delicacies and
Sweets resulting from a sense of having done our Duty) the prospect and
foresight of mere temporal Goods consequent hereunto, may vigorously and
effectually excite us to a prosecution hereof. For if we do in the least
believe or think, that the righteous and virtuous person has any right to the
Promises of this Life, or that Godliness is not quite excluded the Blessings of
Earth, (as St. Paul asserts it is not, 1 Timothy 4.8.) but that Providence does
even here dispense a bountiful Portion to the holy Man, we may well conclude
and reasonably collect, that as he has more right to them (from the divine
Promise) so more reason to expect them, as the present Reward of his Virtue and
Honesty, then others of wicked and ungodly Lives, from their unjust and
dishonest Practices. For he has God's Veracity and Justice to assure and
encourage him, and then, as Balaam told Balak, Numb. 23.19. Has he said, and
shall he not do it? or has he spoken, and shall he not make it good? The other
has naught but the Wretchedness of Falsehood and Wickedness to support and
assist him. God is this man's Friend, has him under his more special
Protection, Favor and Care, and therefore he needs not doubt or despond, but
that he will one time or other acknowledge and make good his word to him. He is
that man's Enemy, has rejected and banished him his Love and Favor, and
therefore though he may have suffered him, like wicked Haman, to be exalted to
high Place, yet it is, ut lapsu graviori ruat, that his Fall may be the
greater, the more exemplary and notorious. It Is as the Psalmist speaks; Psalm.
lxxiii.18, 19.
Thou set them in slippery places, thou castest them down and destroyest
them; O how suddenly do they consume, perish, and come to a fearful end! Most
certain is it (what the Prophet tells us) that promotion comes neither from
the East nor from the West, Psalm. lxxv.6, 7.
nor yet from the South; but God is the Judge, he puts down one and sets
up another: And if he is this, or does that, in how fair a way of Preferment
are they, who by Uprightness and Integrity, Sincerity, Obedience and Holiness,
endeavor to approve themselves to God and his Vicegerent? The Heavens and
Earth may fail, but God and his Word cannot; 1 Samuel xv.29.
He is not as man that he should lie, or as the son of man that he should
repent; Those that honor him, ii.30.
he will honor. This then may farther encourage us to render unto Caesar the
things that are Caesar's; to pay unto him that Fealty and Allegiance, that Duty
and Subjection we owe him as the Lord's Anointed. The Advancement of Joseph in
the House of Pharaoh, and of Mordecai in the Court of Artaxerxes, are memorable
Instances of God's Providence, in rewarding Fidelity and Obedience to Princes.
Nay, all Histories both ancient and modern, sacred and profane, do abound with
Examples of this kind. And were we but so wise as to reflect and look back, we
should find, as from the constant Experience of all Ages, so from the nature of
the thing it self, that there is no Aphorism of State Policy more true then
this, viz. that Loyalty and Fidelity is the best and readiest way to Honor and
Preferment. For God having given the power of advancing and rewarding, into the
hands of Princes, on whom can they be supposed to be more inclined and willing,
to confer the Badges of Honor and Marks of their Favor, then on those who by
a long Series of eminent and faithful Services, have approved themselves to be
true Liege-men to their Crown and Dignity, their Persons and Government? A
common Gratitude will acknowledge and reward a good Turn, much more that of a
King, who is as an Angel of God, to discern betwixt Good and Evil, Just and
Unjust, Honorable and Base. If then Princes both can and will reward Loyalty
and Honesty, Prove. xvi.15.
and if in the light of the King's countenance there is life, and his favor is
as a cloud of the latter rain, it will be our Wisdom and Understanding, at all
times, and in all places, to abet and adhere unto the Royal Cause, and by all
the good Offices and Actions we can, declare and evince our Allegiance and
Dutifulness to our King and Sovereign. By this it is very possible, and
probable too, that we may with good and loyal Barzillai, 2 Samuel chapter xvii.
go down to our Graves full of Days and full of Honor: but if with Dathan and
Abiram we conspire against our Moses; chapter xix.
if with Achitophel we consult and plot his Ruin; with Shimei curse the Lord's
Anointed; and with Absalom actually rebel against him, as we cannot upon any
good and warrantable Grounds, promise to our selves a happy Issue and Event of
these our wicked and unjust Actings, so generally the Consequent and Success of
such a blacked Villainy and Impiety is, that with them they perish in their
Gainsaying, fall into the same Pit of Destruction, purchase a Curse and
Confusion to themselves, and an indelible Blot of Infamy and Reproach upon
their Name and Memory now and for ever.

We have now beheld two of the Excellencies of the Higher Powers (their Dignity
and Authority) and the Severals of our Duty arising and resulting from them;
proceed we now to the Consideration of the third and last, and that is, Their
Necessity and Usefulness to Mankind.

3. That Government and Governors are a Blessing and Happiness to any Nation
and People, Community or Kingdom, will be very evident and apparent to any,
that shall but reflect and consider of the Calamities and Evils, the Misery and
Ruin that must unavoidably attend and follow a State of Anarchy and Confusion.
It Is the Remark of the holy Penman, Judge. 17.6. That when there was no King in
Israel, every man did that which was right in his own eyes. And most certain is
it, that when there is none to restrain, control and punish the Impetuosity
and Rage of men's Lusts and Vices; In pejora datur suadetque licentia luxum;
things will quickly grow worse; and this Licentiousness and Impunity of Acting
soon persuade to Luxury and Excess, and these to Injustice, and that to Rapine,
Murder, Profaneness, Irreligion, and all manner of Evil. And then as it is in
vain to look for any protection from the Laws in a lawless Estate, or to expect
the Rights of Liberty and Property to be kept inviolable, when there is no
distinction of Meum and Tuum, Mine and Thine, so is it as absurd to imagine,
that any Persons or Things can be exempted or freed from this public Distress,
when both they and theirs lie open and ready to be seized and preyed upon, by
every one that has more Courage and Strength then themselves. Of this kind and
sort was that state of Nature (if ever there was any such) Mr. Hobbs speaks of.
Though it is very hard to think, that God would so very meanly provide for the
Welfare and Safety of the noblest part of his Creation on this side the Stars,
and expose them, like Beasts of Prey, to be devoured one by another; or that
his infinite and unbounded Goodness would have suffered him to have sent Man
into the World, attended with such a Curse and Plague: a Curse that would have
better answered and more fitly suited the Effects of his avenging Justice upon
succeeding Ages, for their Iniquity and Sin; and a Plague that undoubtedly was
never designed by him to be the Portion of the best and most innocent part of
Mankind, but of those, (if of any) who have so learned and practiced to despise
Dominions, and speak evil of Dignities, as rather to choose not to have, than
to honor and obey a public Parent, a lawful King and Governor; though
certainly of a contrary Judgment and Opinion to that wise and worthy Statesman
and Historian Tacitus, who has left us this great and excellent Truth upon
record, that Praestat sub malo Principe esse quam sub nullo; It is better to
live under a bad Prince then under none. For notwithstanding that great and
many Mischiefs and Evils may redound to the Subject from the Reign of a bad
Governor, Et vitia erunt donec homines, and there will be Lusts and Vices to
be served as long as there are Men, Sed neque haec continua (and meliorum
interventu pensantur) yet these are neither so great, nor so many, nor so
lasting, (and which are sufficiently repaired and made amends for, by the
greater and more considerable Benefits and Goods we reap and enjoy under their
Government) as those which that state of Confusion and Disorder must of
necessity bring with it: wherein not Law and Justice, but Power and Force, are
to be the Bounds and Rule of Right and Wrong; wherein we have not the least
assurance and security of enjoying and possessing any thing that is desired and
esteemed of by us, and wherein our Lives and Liberties, as well as Properties
and Goods, are equally at the disposal of the strongest Invader and Aggressor.
(...), as the Philosopher speaks, Pol. lib. 3 cap. ult.
It Is therefore necessary that there should be Governments and Governors. And
then if as the Government is lawful and well established, so the Governor be
good and gentle, one fearing God and hating Covetousness, a true nursing Father
to his People and Kingdoms, a Moses or a Joshua, a David or a Solomon, (as
blessed be God that we have is) how great, how many Blessings will derive to
the Subject from such an excellent Prince's Reign? How very useful and
serviceable must such a One be to his Peoples Welfare and Good? and how
exceedingly happy must a People be that are in such a case? Is it a Happiness
and Blessing to have and enjoy the free exercise and use of the best Religion
in the World, in the best and most decent manner; to worship God in spirit and
in truth according to his Will and Word* Is it a Blessing to have Judgment run
down our Streets like an overflowing Stream, and Righteousness like a mighty
River? Is it a Good to live in Peace and Quiet, Security and Safety; for every
one of us to sit under his own Vine, and eat the Fruit of his own Vineyard; to
be out of the reach of every devouring Harpie, and fearless of any griping
Oppressor? Is it a felicity, is it a comfort and satisfaction to us, to have
the unrestrained use and enjoyment of all that is near and dear to us; to live
under the protection of good and wholesome Laws, and the good Government of a
merciful and tender Father and Prince? If ought then and All of this is a
Blessing, a Good and Happiness to any People it is, it must be so to us, who in
a large and plentiful manner do possess and partake of all and every part of
it; and is to be in the merciful designation and appointment of the divine
Providence, the Portion and Felicity of every well-governed People and Nation
under Heaven; all Government being at first constituted and intended by God, to
be as instrumental to his Glory, so to the general Good and Benefit of Mankind.
And that it is so, a Heathen could tell us; (...), For doing Good, Kings were
first made. Arist. Pol. lib. 3. cap. 11.

Now from the Consideration of this their necessity and usefulness to Mankind,
do spring and flow some more of the Particulars of our Duty and Subjection to
Them.

First, A sincere and affectionate Love for their Persons and Government.
Secondly, A Gratitude or Thankfulness for the Benefits fits we receive under it
and them. Thirdly, A paying them Tribute. And fourthly and lastly, A praying
for them.

1. As to the first of these, A sincere and affectionate Love for them; It
denotes our having a tender Regard for all that relates and appertains unto
them; a making their Case, their Interests and Concerns, their Losses and
Crosses ours: so that be they healthy and vigorous in their Bodies, happy and
prosperous in their Estates, we exult and rejoice for it; Prove. iii.8.
it is as health to our navel, and as marrow to our bones. Be they diseased and
afflicted, be they injured and oppressed, we too suffer under the Calamity, our
Souls are full of Anguish and Bitterness, of Grief and Trouble, and we go
heavily, as one that mourns for his Mother. Psalm. xxxv.14.
And this is no more then what the Rule of Christian Charity suggests and
enjoins, to be practiced toward all men in general. Rejoice with them that do
rejoice, Romans xii.15.
and weep with them that weep. And may with greater Reason and upon better
Grounds be supposed to be pressed upon and commanded us, as it respects
Governors in particular; in that as they are more nearly related to us, as the
public Parents of their Countries, so the Good and Evil, the Prosperity and
Calamity that betides them, must be of a far greater and more considerable
account and consequence, then that of any private man can be. And then if we
are obliged to congratulate and condole in respect of a lesser Felicity and
Misery, we must certainly much more do this upon the score of a greater. If my
private Neighbors Happiness (which generally extends no farther then his
Family) can fill me with Transports and Exclamations of Joy, why should not I
be as much, nay more affected, for that of my Prince and Sovereign, which by
being His becomes public, a Benefit to the whole Nation and Kingdom? And so of
the other side, if I can readily communicate with his Afflictions, and suffer
with him by a Christian Compassion, why should not I be as much dejected, and
as Christianly sympathize for the Miseries and Infelicities that attend the
Royal Throne? The truth is, did not Prejudice and Passion, Sin and Folly, stand
in the way, and obstruct and hinder this excellent Property and Fruit of a
Christian Love, we should do so; but when from groundless Conjectures and
Surmises, scandalous Reports and libellous Defamations, unreasonably fostered
and cherished, abetted and vouched by us, we begin to suspect our Governor to
be our Enemy, and think that he has a Design upon us for our Ruin, (because
forsooth he will not hearken to all our unjust Offers, and answer all our
unreasonable Demands) and so in that he will not love us, we will not love him,
no wonder that such an Unchristian Christianity and Temper will sooner provoke
and stir us up to rejoice at, then bewail his Losses, and to bewail and grieve
at, then exult and be glad at his Prosperity. But is this the way ever to
discharge or pay that Debt we owe to the whole World, and so to our King, of
owing no man any thing, but to love one another? Romans 13.8. It is looked upon
by our Savior comparatively, as a mean expression of our Love, to love those
that love us; do not Publicanes (the worst of Sinners) the same? Mat. 5.46. But
to love our enemies, to do good to them that hate, to bless them that curse us,
(ver. 44, 45.) this is Christianity indeed; a quality altogether divine, a just
imitation and resemblance of his illimited Goodness, who makes his Sun to
shine, and his Rain to rain upon the just and unjust, and a true and infallible
Mark of a sincerely true Disciple and Follower of Christ's: What Publicans and
Sinners never do, nor Infidels and Heathens practice and delight in, but a
Sacrifice that God is well pleased with, and which he will one day openly
reward, and make full Retribution to in Heaven. And therefore were our
Governor really our Enemy, did he actually design and endeavor our
Destruction, yet we ought to love him, and to express it, by having the same
Desires, the same Hopes and Fears, the same Joys and Sorrows, the same
Concernment every way for him as for our selves, and if possible, greater. Let
him be superlatively bad, that cannot dis-engage and free us from the Duty of
Love we owe him; for it is not his Goodness and Gentleness, but God's Command,
that is the Ground and Reason of the Obligation. Let his own personal Faults
and Vices be never so great, as long as he bears the Image of God in him as a
Man, and represents his Character as a King and Governor, we are to love and
affect him. But if he is very good, if we derive and reap from his Reign, all
that Felicity we can expect from a happy Government and gracious Governor,
then as there will be no Ground for our Fears and Jealousies, for our Murmurs
and Complaints, then as we have no Reason to think him our Enemy, so then
surely we will love him, if for no other Cause, yet because he loves us, and
act as charitably, at least as Publicans and Heathens do. But whether we have
proceeded thus far, as to equal a Publican's Charity, let the many Pasquils and
Lampoons, the repeated Buffoonry and Scurrility, the frequent vilifying and
deriding our Superiors, be a public and self-evidencing Testimony: nay, let
Conscience be but thoroughly examined and sifted, and the Jade once forced to
speak truth for the Government, and there will need no other Witness to give in
Evidence, nor Judge to determine the Case. I know not what Notions some men may
have of Christian Charity, but if it is such, to rake into the Sink of men's
Faults and Vices, and then in a fulsom, rude way, (not to say Unchristian) to
expose them to the public View, may this their Charity be, if they desire it,
a Mark of their Holiness, but otherwise deservedly anathematized by all
sincerely good and sober Christians. St. Paul has given us another account of
Charity, viz. That it suffers long and is kind; that it does not behave it self
unseemly; is not easily provoked; rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in
the truth; bears all things; believes all things; hops all things;
endures all things, 1 Cor. 13.4, 5, 6, 7. And were ours but such, so truly and
altogether Christian, we could not so easily and quickly take up with, and
entertain every Story and backbiting Report against the Government; improve it
by misrepresentation into the grossest Falsehood, and by repetition into Slander
and Defamation. There will be somewhat to find fault with, and complain of, as
long as there are men; the best have their Failings, and no man can say, I am
Pure, I am Clean. It would therefore better become us as Christians and Men,
with good Constantine, to throw our Cloak over all things of this kind, to
cover and conceal them, then with cursed Cham to reveal and disclose the
Nakedness of our Father. It would better become us as Christians, in that
Christ has made it a Law of our Religion. A new commandment I give unto you,
that ye love one another, Joh. 13.34. And as men, in as much as he that
stands may fall; and it may come to our turn to need men's Charity and Mercy,
to pass by and hide our Aberrancies and Transgressions. The loss of ones good
Name or Reputation, by what means soever effected, right or wrong, deservedly
or undeservedly, is a great Detriment and Damage to any man, but almost an
irreparable one, and infinitely greater to a King or Ruler, in that hereby he
is made low and mean, as in the eyes and presence, so in the hearts and
affections of his People. And then as it cannot be the effect of Charity to
injure and wrong any one, but to do good and tender their welfare, so if ours
is truly Christian, we will banish and expel all unjust and unrighteous
Practices out of our Lives and Conversations; and instead of backbiting,
defaming, and speaking ill of, we will, as much as in us lies, and is
consistent with Truth, vindicate, justify and speak well of; however fairly
and heartily represent and interpret their Actions, and instead of aggravating
and aggrandizing, extenuate and lessen their Miscarriages and Mistakes. This as
it is to love all men, so our Governors, and this that Duty we owe them.

2. But then 2 dly, Another part of our Duty, consequent to the Benefits we
receive from their Reign and Government, is Gratitude or Thankfulness. That is,
A grateful sense, an humble and hearty recognition and acknowledgment of all
the Felicities and Blessings we derive from, and enjoy under them. A thing so
very agreeable to our Make and Constitution as Men, to our Nature as reasonable
Creatures, that common Humanity has always suggested and enjoined it, being
that wherein (as Seneca observes) Discors turba consentit, Those who disagree
for the most part in every thing else, do yet agree: And as the generosity of
our Nature does prompt, incline and oblige us to a performance of this so
excellent a Virtue, (being in Cicero's Judgment, Non solum maxima, sed Matter
omnium Virtutum reliquarum, Not only the greatest, but the Mother of all other
Virtues) so certainly Religion does not disannul or break the Bond, or dissolve
and take off that Equity and Justice the God of Nature and of Truth had
implanted in us. No; it rather ties it faster, adding new Reasons and Motives
to the former. St. Paul enjoins and exhorts to Thankfulness; Col. iii.15.
And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which also ye are called
in one body; and be ye thankful. And accordingly reckons Ingratitude or
Unthankfulness amongst the great and pernicious Sins and Vices of the last
Times. For men shall be lovers of their own selves, 2 Timothy iii.2.
covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful.
The truth is, as Ingratitude has by the best men of all Ages and Religions,
been with a just Horror and Indignation regretted and censured as a vile and
abominable thing, and ungrateful men, as the monstrous and preternatural Births
of Mankind, (for, Si ingratum dixeris, omnia dixeris, Speak a man ungrateful,
and speak him any thing) so Gratitude, the humble and acknowledging Temper and
Disposition, has been always deservedly commended and applauded, and the
grateful person esteemed the most worthy and the most wise; the Heathen and
Christian still agreeing in the same Estimate and Judgment as to this. Nor are
we of such debauched Understandings, whatsoever our Practice is, as not readily
to confess the truth hereof. We are right as to the Theory and Assent to the
Premises, but we make wrong Applications and false Conclusions. We acknowledge
that we ought to make Returns one way or other for Kindness and good Deeds done
us, but then we will not believe them to be such, except they come from men of
our own Sect and Party, of our own Humor and Opinion; and therefore let a
Benefit be never so particular in its Designation and Use, never so purposely
intended for us, if it does not bring a Shibboleth along with it, it is a great
odds if it meets with either Thanks or Acknowledgments, at least such as it
merits and deserves. This no doubt is one Reason why so many great good Turns
have fallen to the ground, been so little esteemed and considered of; and why
too many of us prove such a morose, unthankful and froward Generation, to the
great public Benefactor of his Country, our King and Sovereign. We scan his
Actions by our perverse Judgments, and measure his Beneficence by our false
Rules and indirect Lines; and then if this does not comport and agree with
that, and a false Glass deceives us, let Peace and Plenty, Prosperity and
Happiness, be never so much our Portion, any thing shall have the Thanks of it
from some men before he shall; and notwithstanding what the Apostle has said,
He shall not be a minister of God to us for good, Romans 13.4.

But is this such fair Dealing and Christian Justice, as may be expected from
men of such high Pretenses to Purity and Holiness? For by whom, if not by the
Governor, can I be secured of my Life, my Liberty and Property? Is it not his
Office and Business to defend and protect me in all this; and as me, so all
that are under his Charge and Care, his Kingdoms and People? For as for Laws
and inferior Helps of Government, all that they can contribute hereunto is
derivative from him: of which he is principally the Mouth, the Interpreter and
the Judge, and the suspension and execution whereof is his peculiar Prerogative
and Privilege. If then my Good and Happiness, and that of the Nation, is an
Effect of his Vigilance and Care, of his Clemency and Gentleness, and of his
Wisdom and Discretion in managing and conducting the public Affairs and
Intrigues of State, as most certain it is, and nothing can with any truth of
Reason stand in competition with him for it, how very contrary as to Equity and
Justice, so to the Sense of all wise and sober men, and the truth of
Christianity, must my Actings be, if I do not with the Orator gratefully resent
it, Acts xxiv.3.
and accept it at all times and in all places with all thankfulness? If I do
not with Heart, and Tongue and Hand, and all the ways I can, endeavor to make
some proportionable Returns for so many and so excellent Favors and Blessings?
If we will not then reject and deny the Dictates and Injunctions of Nature and
Grace, if we will not run counter to the Practice of the best, the wisest and
most civilized of all Ages, we will take care to express our Gratitude, as to
all that have obliged and done us good, so more especially to him, who in this
respect has far exceeded all, and in this particular also render unto Caesar
his due.

3. But that our Thanks may not appear to be merely Verbal, we are thirdly to
pay him Tribute.

And this is to give him such liberal supplies out of our Fortunes and Estates,
when they shall be required of us, as may fully answer the necessities and
conveniences of Government; as may enable and capacitate Him to Live in that
State and Grandeur, which becomes His Quality and Place, and in that Authority
and Power, both at home and abroad, as may render Him justly formidable to all
domestic and foreign Enemies, and qualify Him to be a fit and effectual
Protector and Preserver, as of His own Rights and Privileges, so of those of
His People and Subjects. And to this Scripture and Reason do jointly oblige,
and with a great deal of equity and justice contend for: It Is positively
enjoined and commanded, Romans 13.7. Render therefore to all their dues; Tribute
to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom. Nor is it but equitable, just,
and reasonable, that we should do this, when from Them it is, that we live a
quiet and peaceable Life in all Godliness and Honesty; and from the cares and
troubles they undergo for us, enjoy a safety and happiness that none but They
can procure and enrich us with.

It Is equitable, if they spend and are spent for us, if their Treasures and
Riches are exhausted for the public good, that they should by us be
re-imburs'd refunded and filled, and we in some sort spend and be spent for
them. And it is reasonable, in that otherwise they cannot be such instruments of
security, peace and happiness, such Ministers of Good to us, as they would be:
For if they are cut short by our avarice or malice, of what is to defray the
public expenses, and by that the safety of the Nation is provided for, how can
this be done and performed by them, when they are not able, and they cannot be
able without a proportionable Allowance?

And as it is equitable and reasonable, so is it just; for they, by their
Office, being to attend continually upon this very thing, that is, to benefit
and do good unto their people; and we for this very cause, paying them tribute,
as the Apostle speaks, Ib. ver. 6.
it is in us but a discharging that debt we owe them, established by Laws Divine
and Humane, when we supply their Necessities, and fill their Exchequers. And
then if these, and Equity, Reason and Justice, are matters of Conscience and
Religion, and sufficient of themselves to counter-ballance and control the
niceties of some men's scruples and doubts, and as Christians we are obliged to
perform what is just and upright, we cannot, without an open renouncing and
disavowing of all this, debar the Supreme Governor as of a Right in, so of a
part of our Possessions, when His, and His Kingdoms welfare and good, call for
and require it of us. Prejudice and Passion, and pretended secrets of State,
are not to be heeded in a stated and ruled case; which is, that if we do know,
or are but probably persuaded, or have been informed by the public Governor,
or his Ministers (who may be reasonably presumed to understand
State-necessities better than we do) that there is a necessity, and a public
supply would be a public benefit, we are to direct our practice by this:
Because the time when, and the quantity how much we are to give, being not
defined by any standing Law, they must be supposed to be left to be determined
by the Needs of the Public, or (which is the same here) the Will, Commands and
Prescriptions of our Superiors, the Judges thereof, and not by the other, which
can never be a firm foundation for a truly tender Conscience to build upon, or
a safe Rule to walk by. And supposing that I am mistaken, and that others have
falsified and imposed upon me, all that I can suffer by it is this: That for
the present I have lessened my Estate, but I have this advantage, I have
thereby secured my Conscience and Obedience: whereas, if what they told and
suggested to me is true, the mischiefs consequent to my not acting as I should,
will be much greater, even a betraying, as much as in me lies, the welfare and
happiness, the strength and security of King and Kingdom, and a manifest
violation and breach of that Duty and Obedience I owe to God and his Vicegerent.

It Is a State-Aphorism very frequent in some men's mouths (you may know the
Trees by their Fruits) that the Head is not to be too big for the Body; their
meaning is, that it is the best policy to keep the Governor necessitous, lest
otherwise He should too much insult and trample upon the Subject. An Opinion
and Practice at once Unreasonable and Unchristian.

1. Unreasonable; in that it throws the State into a real and present danger,
to avoid a future and dreaded one; such as may be more reasonably supposed not
to happen, than the contrary. For when the Governor experimentally finds, that
He has the Hearts and the Purses of His People; as He cannot well require any
more, so in all probability this will rather provoke and stir him up to secure
a lasting happiness unto them, and to mind their good when it is so complicated
with his own, than to endeavor their ruin, or think of flaying them, when He
has so liberally the Fleece. This may with more reason and truth be expected
from a necessitous Prince, who, to supply His wants, is forced to use Arts and
Stratagems to squeeze some full Spunges, that He may not be quite drained and
dried Himself; and to extort that by Power, and in an Arbitrary manner, which
Disloyalty and Undutifulness do rob and deprive Him of. A strong and healthy
Head, in the political sense of it, is always a sure indication and sign of a
strong and healthy Body, in that there is an immediate dependence and
communication between the one and the other: And when it is otherwise in the
natural and proper meaning of it, it is generally an undoubted symptom that both
are disaffected, the Body as well as the Head. So that these men are as much
out in their Physics, as Politics.

2. And as it is Unreasonable, so is it Unchristian. It Is a Law of our
Religion, that we should pay unto Caesar his due of Tribute; and less than what
is sufficient to maintain His Crown and Dignity, cannot be supposed to be His
due: And then if we do not give Him that, but default from, and pinch Him of
it, we act contrary to our Religion and Christianity. We are to do our duty,
and leave the issue and event of things to God: Let Him be never so bad, Preces
and Lachrymae, Prayers and Tears are all that we are to oppose against Him (as
I above informed you) and most certain is it, that Non sunt facienda mala, ut
eveniant bona, We are not to do any unjust and evil thing, in behalf of an
undeniable and real good; but when that we propose to our selves here, is very
uncertain, and yet the sin and iniquity of our actings certain: It Is madness,
it is presumption, it is the height of Impiety to abett and avow such wicked and
irreligious courses and ways.

Add to this, that we have had the woeful experience, how bad a sign of health a
little Head is to the Body Politic or State; how ill it secures the welfare
and good of a Kingdom or People? For when the Royal Martyr had, with too great
Condescentions, too much lessened Himself, did not some of the inferior
Members presently shoot up to a preternatural growth and bigness, and as
quickly draw away that juice and nourishment, by which He should have been
sustained? Was not the Nation soon divided, and in a tottering falling
condition? Were not Liberty and Property lost, and the felicities of Peace
exchanged into a bloody War? This was all the healthiness these Men's Policy
procured us then: I hope the Burned Child will dread the Fire.

Say then, Supposing with them that Ship Money had been a public Nuisance and
illegal, had it not been better to have endured and undergone that, than so
many miseries and calamities that came rolling in upon us like a mighty
torrent? However, it was not as illegal and unjustifiable, as the Vote of
Non-Addresses, as making Laws and Ordinances without a King, as erecting a
High Commission Court, and Arraigning their Sovereign, as cutting off His Head,
and plundering and sequestring whom they would, without any truth of Law and
Justice. But it is always lawful, it is still just and Christian, it is still our
duty, to help and relieve the necessities and distresses of our lawful King and
Governor, even without forms of Law, but never so, to let both King and Kingdom
fall and perish through our fears and jealousies, our covetousness, our pride
and ambition. This then is another duty we owe and are to pay unto them.

4. The Fourth and last is, our Prayers for Them: And whether we consider Them
in Their more private capacity, as Men and Christians, or in their more public
as Governors; the reasonableness and necessity of this part of our duty, will
be very manifest and evident. If as Men and Christians, they generally, and for
the most part, lie more open and exposed to the calamities and miseries
incident to mankind, to the assaults and batteries of the World, the Flesh, and
the Devil, than others whose greater privacy is a rampart and security against
a great many temptations and dangers, their more public state and condition of
Life renders them subject and obnoxious to. They like the tall Cedars and high
Turrets, are sure to meet with every impetuous shock and blast of wind and foul
weather, when others, as lower Trees and Structures, by their being so, escape
their force and severity: So that in this respect, as They want greater
strength and larger supplies of Grace to support and keep Them from falling, so
more prayers than their own, and of these a greater proportion and measure,
answerable to their greater needs, that by a kind of holy violence we may open
the floodgates of Heaven, and derive the Divine Assistance, Protection and
Blessing upon Their Heads and Hearts, Their Lives and Actions. And this is no
more than what our common Christianity suggests, and a piece of Charity we owe
unto the whole Race of Mankind. Let him be Jew, Infidel, or Turk, we are to
pray for him. It is that our Savior enjoins us as to our Enemies; Pray for
them which despitefully use you and persecute you, Mat. 5.44. And it is St.
Paul's Doctrine, I exhort therefore, that first of all supplications, prayers,
intercessions and giving of thanks, be made for all men; for Kings, and all
that are in authority; for this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our
Savior, who will have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the
truth, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3, 4. But if he be a Christian King, one who has
submitted his Scepter to that of Christ, and is partaker of the same Faith and
Hope of Salvation; then as we have new Reasons added to the former, in as much
as we are Members of the same mystical Body, and so to be compassionate,
tender, concerned and careful for one another Good, which is to be expressed
as in other things, so in an intercourse of Prayer one for another; and the
Apostle has made it a necessary part of the Christian Armor; Praying always
with all prayer and supplication in the spirit, Ephesians. vi.18.
and watching thereunto with all perseverance and supplication for all Saints;
so is the Obligation enhans'd, and the Duty the more indispensable. And this
will yet farther appear to be the more so, if we consider them as actually
governing, as those who have so great a People committed to their Charge; and
so wanting a greater and more excellent Spirit and Wisdom, Judgment and
Discretion, Foresight and Prudence, to assist, direct and help them in all the
great Affairs and Transactions of the Public. Now every good and every perfect
gift being from above, Ephesians. i.17
and coming down from the Father of Lights, as St. James tells us; and we are
to ask, ver. 5.
to beg this wisdom and gift of God before we can have it; Chapter v.16
and the effectual fervent prayers of a righteous man availing much, how very
necessary will our Prayers be, that God would give them such a portion of
Wisdom and Understanding, that they may be as Instruments of his Glory, so true
nursing Fathers to his Church and People? In praying for them, we pray for our
selves; the Good and Happiness is ours in the result and consequence. When we
pray for Wisdom and Understanding for our Governors, (as Solomon did for
himself) we in effect pray, that God would be pleased to grant us to lead a
quiet and peaceable Life in all godliness and honesty. When we beg the
Prosperity and Happiness of their Thrones, we petition for our own Welfare:
When we desire him, that they may be men fearing him and hating Covetousness,
we at the same time beseech him, that he will make them a Wall and Buttress, a
Refuge and Strength unto us his People. Because if they are truly wise, happy
and religious, these and many more Blessings will devolve upon us, and be the
Felicity and Good of such a People and Nation. For Wisdom in a Prince will make
him have a tender Regard and Care for the Subject, in that his Welfare depends
on, and is twisted with theirs. His Prosperity and Happiness will make him
liberal and free, and ready to help and assist them; and his Piety effectually
incline and move him to banish all Wickedness, Injustice and Oppression. And if
he does thus act, and this is his Practice and Business, will not his
Prosperity, his Happiness and Good be ours, and so we abundantly recompensed
and rewarded, for our Supplications and Requests to the Father of Lights on his
behalf? But were there no such Good redounding to us, to be expected and hoped
for from our thus acting, yet are we to do and perform it, otherwise Sin and
Iniquity will lie at our Door. We are not boldly to question with God
concerning the Justice, the Wisdom and Equity of the Command, that is no part
of our Province; what concerns us is Obedience, and with that we are to busy
and employ our selves. Suppose then our Governor is as cruel and as wicked a
Tyrant as Maximian was, who cut to pieces the Thaebean Legion, must not we
therefore pray for him? It Is in some men's Divinity and Religion denied, we must
not; and the Reason they give, is, because we are not to pray for one, that we
certainly know will oppress God's Church and People. But the Answer to this,
is, Whether the Word of God does enjoin and command this? If it does not, (as
it cannot well be supposed to command and forbid the same thing) then their
Resolution being without Ground and Warrant, nay contrary to the Word, is
unholy and unchristian, and so not to be followed. That it has no Ground in
Scripture, will appear from its Contrariety thereunto; and that it is contrary
thereunto, will be no less evident, if we consider; that without any Limitation
or Restriction, we are positively commanded to pray for our Enemies, and to
love them, (as I have above showed.) Now if God has commanded us to pray for
them, we cannot be supposed to offend him in doing our Duty; nor can we be
thought to pray against the Church of God, any more then God himself can be
said to be for them and against it, when he permits and suffers them miserably
to tear and distress it: for his permission is no Argument of his approving or
liking what they do, for then he must approve of every Sin, because he permits
it, (which is Blasphemy to assert) no more are our Prayers for them, a praying
for their Sin, i. e. for its Success and Effect, which yet must be supposed, or
else we cannot be said to pray against the Church. Nor is their making Havoc
of God's Church, the necessary Effect and Consequent of his Permission, in that
then his permitting it must be the necessary Cause thereof; and so consequently
not they but he, the Author of it, and of all the Evil and Injustice attending
it. No more are our Prayers the necessary Cause of their acting thus wickedly,
or that the necessary effect of Them; because if they were, they would always
produce the same effect, whether we prayed for Them, our selves, or others,
which is false and contradicted by Experience. That They then are cruel
Oppressors of Gods People, is not from Gods permission or our prayers, for to
both the one and the other, this is extrinsecal and accidental; Neither is
their Dignity, Authority, Riches, Prosperity, or any temporal Good They enjoy,
that may be looked upon as the success of our prayers, the necessary cause
hereof, but Their wicked and evil Hearts. These may indeed be incentives and
motives hereunto, and so may the best things that are, be perverted and abused
to evil; but then this is not the fault of the things but of the men, and so is
it here. Our prayers then being not justly chargeable with this Evil, certainly
nothing of lesser moment (as our prejudice and passion) ought to prevail so far
upon us, as to make us omit so necessary a practice and duty. But whether this,
or somewhat worse, has not had too great a share in the Objection, I shall
leave to these men's Consciences to judge and determine: Only I desire them,
they would be pleased so far to give me leave, as to acquaint and inform them
of this farther additional truth, viz. That the outward calamities and
pressures of the Church being only Temporal Evils, not Moral and Internal ones,
and permitted by God to wise and holy purposes, should our prayers for wicked
Governors so far contribute hereunto, as to enable them to afflict and grieve
the Christian Church as the Roman Caesar's did of old, and the whole of the
Objection was true, as it is indeed false; yet nevertheless, we ought to prefer
and choose the doing of Christ's Commands, before the enjoyment of the greatest
Temporal Emolument and Good, or avoiding the greatest Temporal Calamity and
Evil. And that therefore were our Governor and King the greatest Persecutor
and Tyrant imaginable, we are to pray for Him; did He afflict and vex the
Church of Christ never so much, we are to offer up our Petitions to God for His
Welfare and Good. The Reason is, because whosoever shall break one of these
least Commandments, and shall teachmen so, shall be called the least in the
Kingdom of Heaven; but whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be
called great in the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 5.19.

I have now, according to my proposed method, considered and dispatched the
several particulars of that Subjection and Duty we owe to the Higher Powers,
and so have abundantly showed you what that Subjection and Duty is, and wherein
it does consist. I now come in the third place to consider, who are the Persons
to pay this Subjection; and they are, according to the Apostle, (...), Every
Soul, that is, Every Man, all indiscriminately.

And though this may be sufficiently understood and collected from what I have
above discoursed, yet that I may not be wanting to so good a cause, and in that
it is a Truth so much impugn'd and contradicted by some Men's Doctrines and
Practices, I shall the rather insist upon it, and be the more particular in the
discussion of it. That none then of what Degree, State, Quality, Condition or
Calling soever, can with any Truth and Justice exempt and privilege themselves
from paying this Subjection to the Higher Powers, will be very evident and
apparent to any that shall consider, that it is not in any man's power to alter
or change, abrogate or disanul that Order of Superiority and Inferiority of
Governors and Governed, God has fixed and established in the World. And if it
is undeniably true that it is not, and yet all that are being Parts or Members
of some Society or other, and all Societies consisting of Rulers and Ruled, and
so the whole World, as to its outward Polity, being fitly distributed and
distinguished into these two Ranks or Classes of above and beneath, King and
Subject; it will as certainly follow, that whosoever are not of the first of
these, must be of the second; whosoever are not of the number of those that
Rule, must be of theirs that are Ruled; and if so, then by their place and
station they are to be subject, and to obey, because God has so constituted
and appointed it; making it the Subjects business to be Obedient; the
Governors to Command and Prescribe. And that they are to Obey and to be
dutiful, will yet farther appear, if we consider that none but the Supreme in
every Kingdom or Nation can possess, or be vested with that Eminency and
Dignity, that Authority and Power, that Necessity and Usefulness to the
Public, which are the incommunicable properties of every Governor and
Government; and then if They are not thus eminent, powerful and useful, it is a
contradiction to say, They are Governors, when They want the very Essence and
Being of such; and if they are not Governors, they must be Subjects, and if
Subjects, then to perform the Commands and Injunctions of their Superiors: So
that the whole of the debate between us and the Adversaries, to this Truth, the
Pope of Rome and His Clergy of the one hand, and the Reformed Jesuit or
Kirk-Reformer of the other, will be fitly resolved into this Quaere, Whether
they are Governors or Subjects?

If Governors, and Supreme, we allow and acknowledge the right of Their claim
and exemption; they are indeed not to be subject, but to Rule. But how do they
prove this? Or what convincing and irrefragable Argument can they give us, that
God has said to them, They are Gods, and put the Sword of the Civil Power into
Their Hands? If They only say it, we can as easily and with as good reason
unsay and deny it. As to the Pope, it is confessed He makes great brags of a
Paramount Superiority; that He is Vicar of Christ, and Vice-God, and so has
two Swords committed to Him, Boniface.
the Temporal and the Spiritual. These are His pretensions and boasts, but how
true and how well-grounded, we will consider and examine.

First then, That the Pope is not Vicar of Christ, nor Vice-God, as to the
right of the Temporal Sword (and whether He is so as to the other part of His
claim belongs to another disquisition) will be very manifest and evident, if we
consider that our blessed Lord (Whose Person he pretends to represent, and
Whose Place to supply upon earth) never exercised, or laid claim to any such
Power as a Man, or as Mediator between God and Man: For as 'twas no part of His
Office and Business, so was He more just than to entrench upon and usurp the
Rights of others; and thereforetold the Roman Governor, that (though He were a
King, yet) His Kingdom was not of this world. And accordingly we all along see
Him acting as a Subject: At His Birth, in submitting to Augustus's Decree, for
He could have prevented it if He would; in the progress of His Life, by paying
Tribute unto Caesar; and at His Death, in suffering the Sentence of Pilate to
be Executed upon Him, acknowledging likewise the lawfulness of the Government,
when He told the President, that He could have no power against Him, had it not
been given him from above. John xix.11.
Now for the Pope to pretend to supply the place of Christ, to be His Vicar in
that which He never exercised, but always disclaimed and rejected, is very
absurd and irrational, as well as bold and presumptuous: And therefore
supposing Him to be the Vicar of Christ in other things (which yet is false,
and only a precarious Title at best) yet in this particular, He cannot act, or
be in His stead, because He never acted or was so Himself, that is, a Civil
Governor: So that if he will make good his claim hereunto, he must derive it
from somewhat else than his Vicarship, or else all His power and mightiness
will quickly fall to the ground, and he must, though unwillingly, part with one
of his Swords, whatever becomes of the other.

But as his Vicarship will do him no good, so neither will that whereon he
grounds this claim, his being Successor to St. Peter: For most certain is it,
that he neither, as an Apostle, nor as Bishop of Rome, was ever Master or
Possessor of the Temporal Sword. Nor do we read that He ever desired it, except
it was in that bickering and dispute the Apostles had one with another, which
of them should be the greatest: But they were rebuked by their Lord and Master,
who told them, that the Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them, and
they that exercise Authority upon them, are called Benefactors, but ye shall
not be so: But he that is greatest among you, Luke xxii. ver^ 24, 25, 26.
let him be as the younger; and he that is chief, as he that does serve. But
this was whilst that gross conceit was so rife among the Jews, that their
Messiah was to be a great Temporal Prince, and before they were fully
instructed to the Kingdom of Heaven. After the descent of the Holy Ghost, and
their being led into all truth, we find nothing tending or looking this way;
then no strifes or disputes about greatness, but the necessary and truly
Christian Doctrines of Patience, Humility, Self-denial, Resignation, Submission
and Obedience to God and Man, taught and practiced by them. St. Peter, then
when his Commission was most full and Authentic, and he was endued with power
from on high, not claiming any Earthly Dominion or Lordship, but of the other
side, with his Savior, reserving unto Caesar his Rights, and Preaching and
pressing Submission unto every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, 1 Pet.
ii.13.
whether unto the King as Supreme, or unto those that are sent by Him: I say,
He acting thus, then how comes it to pass that his Successor (who has no more
plenitude and authentickness of Commission than he had) does act so contrary
and repugnant to the doctrine and practice of Christ, and this his truly worthy
Predecessor? What! Are the Truths and Graces of those times grown obsolete and
out of use? And the Faith once delivered to the Saints, antiquated and
out-dated at Rome? Has the Pride and Ambition, the Avarice and Iniquity of the
Man, justled out the Humility and Modesty, the Self-denial and Holiness of the
Bishop? Or, to say truth, are not the Times and the Bishops changed? Do they
not differ as much as white and black, and are they not as opposite as East and
West? Yes certainly they are, for then and a great while after they were truly
pious and devout Christians, good and Loyal Subjects; they Preached and Taught
the Gospel of Christ truly and sincerely; they lived and acted honestly and
conscionably; they Honored all Men; 1 Pet. ii.17.
they Loved the Brotherhood; they Feared God; they Honored their King. But
now, instead of Honor and Love, Reproach and Hatred is the Lot and Portion of
their Fellow Christians and Brethren; instead of fearing God, they trample
under foot, and vilify his Words and Truths; and instead of honoring and
obeying, they despise, reject, disobey and scorn their rightful Lord and
Sovereign. In a word, for a modest Clergyman and Bishop, we have a proud
temporal Prince and Lord; for a true and sincere Disciple of Christ's, one who
by Injustice and Oppression, Usurpations and Encroachments, has changed the
Episcopal Chair into a Regal Throne; the Pastoral Staff, into a Powerful
Scepter; and the Mitre, into a Crown. It Is true, he sits in the House of God no
longer as Bishop and Subject, but as God, as an Imperial Monarch: But the
Question is not, What he is, but what he should be; whether Christ or St. Peter
ever gave him such Authority and Pre-eminence, ever taught and acted so? If
they did not, as has been evinced and showed, his Pretenses and Plea as to it,
must be for ever nulled and evacuated: And therefore if he will not do as as he
should, if he will not obey and be subject, but proceed to domineer and usurp,
this does not prejudge the Truth, this does not falsify the Apostle's
Assertion, and 'twill be always wicked, unjust and unchristian in him so to
act. And if it is so in him, it cannot be otherwise in his Clergy, who have as
little Scripture and Reason to plead in their behalf as he has. For if they
are to be exempted from Subjection, as spiritual Persons, they are no more
spiritual than Christ and his Apostles, and the Bishops and Ministers of the
first 600 years, who yet in all that time never made use of, or pretended to
such a Claim or Right. That Christ and his Apostles did not, is very manifest;
and that their Successors, the Bishops, with the rest of the inferior Clergy
of those Ages, did not, is not less apparent to any that shall consult the
Annals and Records of those Times. They all as acknowledged and confessed, so
paid and performed the Duty of Subjection and Obedience to the supreme
Magistrate and Governor See the Learned Grotius, and Dr. Cave, in the Books
and Places above cited.
. They looked upon and considered themselves as Members of the Commonwealth and
Kingdom where they lived, and so believed and thought it but just and
reasonable, that they should be subject to the Laws of the Government that
protected them in their Rights and Liberties. Nay, they were persuaded of the
necessity of the Obligation and Duty upon a much higher account; that God had
bound it upon their Consciences by a standing, irreversible Law: And so St.
Chrysostom expounds the (...), every Soul, in my Text, i. e. if thou be an
Apostle, an Evangelist, a Prophet, or whatsoever thou art, thou must be
subject; and these things are commanded to all, both Priests and Monks, and not
only to Seculars and Laymen. Widesis Pareum in Respons. ad Dubium primum in
cap. decimum tertium ad Romanos.
And to this agrees that large account we meet with of the Judgment, Piety,
and Practice of the primitive Christians, Clergy and Laity, as to this
particular, in the ancient Apologists and Writers of those best and purest Ages
of the Church. The truth is, a long prosperity and ease from Persecution, had
not so much abused their Understandings, and perverted their Wills, as to have
instilled this Doctrine into their Heads, and made it the practice of their
Lives. They lived too near the Fountain of Christianity in its purity and
unmixedness, to be yet so eathed and mudded, as against Law and Gospel, to set
up for a secular Pomp and Greatness, Domineering and Grandeur of their own.
This was to be the work and iniquity of worser Men and worser Times; one of the
Devil's Masterpieces in the Ages of Antichrist and the Beast; and how very
successful it has been to uphold and support his weakened Power in the
Christian World, the horrid Opinions, Doctrines and Practices of that See and
Church, is but too undeniable aproof and demonstration. And whether this
immoderate Love and Affectation of Worldly Glory and Greatness, and consequent
hereunto, the despising of Dominions, and speaking evil of Dignities, their
refusing and denying to be subject to the Higher Powers, did not prepare the
way for that Judgment mentioned by the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. That God should
send them strong delusion to believe a Lie, I shall leave to others
peremptorily to define and determine. However, this we may affirm, that till
they did believe this Lie, that the Pope was above Kings and Emperors, and so
they not to obey Them but him, there was not the tenth part of those abominable
Heresies and Doctrines that have been since, to the dishonor of Christ and
Christianity, and the disturbance and disquiet of the Christian World. But
whatever was the cause either of this or that, most certain is it, that neither
the one nor the other is true Catholic Christian Doctrine, or true Catholic
Christian Practice: Not Christian Doctrine, because we are to put them ( i. e.
every Soul) in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, and to obey
Magistrates, Titus 3.1. Not Christian Practice, because that is to be subject
to the Higher Powers, and that Clergymen are to be so, is by the Apostles
performing and acting it, rendered undeniably true; especially when it had been
laid down in Thesi for a Christian Doctrine before: And so S. Bernard, though
he lived in corrupt times understood it. For writing to a Clergyman, a Bishop,
He thus speaks; Si omnis and vestra: Quis vos excipit ab Universitate? Si quis
tentat excipere, conatur decipere. If every Soul is to be subject, then you
are: Who has excepted you from this number? He that endeavors to except you,
endeavors to deceive you. Absurd then and wicked is it, to pretend and plead
for exemption as Ministers, when the Apostles of Christ in their Lives and
Doctrines, taught and exemplified the contrary.

And what has been said here in defense of the truth against the Pope and his
Clergy See Dr. Field Of the Church, in His Fifth Book, Chap. 44
does as much impugn all others (whatever they call themselves) that have drank
of the Roman Cisterns, and mudded waters of Tyber. A Popish Priest professed,
and a Popish Minister in Masquerade, are alike pernicious and hurtful to the
Rights of Princes. The one is for doing all without the Governor, the other
for not obeying, and both for not being subject. And if we will believe the
account a worthy Historian Archbishop Spotswood His History of Scotland, Book
6.
gives us, of the actings of the Kirk-Reformers, we shall have a great deal of
reason to believe and confess, that had the Pope been in Scotland in those
days, he could not well have given the Government greater troubles and
disquiets, and more unjustly entrenched upon its Prerogative, than a company of
pert, pragmatical Synod-men did. What they did to Mary Queen of Scots, but
especially to her Son King James (that Wise and Excellent Prince) the Historian
fully informs the Reader. Indeed their actings made such an impression upon
Him, that (as one observes) they made way, and gave occasion for that His new
Aphorism of State, No Bishop, No King. He meaning thereby, I suppose this; that
if any Governor should admit the Disciplinarian way to be practiced in His
Dominions, it laying claim to such a paramount power in Church Government, See
Archbishop Bramhals fair warning of Scotch Discipline.
as to suffer no equal and coordinate separate Authority, much less any to be
Supreme, would so justle, confront and withstand Him in the Exercise and Use of
His Prerogative, so entrench upon his Rights and Privileges, and by its
subtleties, pretenses and insinuations so screw and turn Him, as e're long to
justle screw and turn Him out of His Authority and Power, as a King.

But of the other side, to have the way of Church Government by Bishops, as
Reformed in the Church of England, Established and Set up, would be a ready and
effectual way to secure the Throne, to enjoy the Royal Prerogatives, and to
maintain and defend the Honor and Authority of the King and Government;
because the Church of England being Reformed according to the Primitive
Patterns, has a true filial Respect, Tenderness, Love and Dutifulness for Her
Nursing Father, will do Him all the good Turns She can, but no bad ones;
believes it Her duty to be subject and obedient, and to render, as, unto God,
so, unto Caesar, His due. And for this She is a worthy Example to the Christian
World, being never known to prevaricate, or be defective in this part of Her
Christianity; or to violate and throw down those Bounds and Fences God and
Truth had placed about the Person of Her Governor. And may this be Her Renown
and Honor, Her Piety and Religion, as long as the Sun and Moon endure: May She
always preserve Her Innocence and Loyalty; may She never drink of the dreggy
defilements of the Whore of Babylon, and of the filth of Her spawn; may She
continue still to be, as She is, an impregnable bulwark to Monarchy, and may
there still be the shoot of a King within Her.

We have now beheld all and every part of the Command or Injunction, and so
have gone through and performed the first and greatest part of our Task: What
remains farther to be considered is, Secondly, the Reason and Enforcement of
all this, Why every Soul is to be subject; and that is, because there is no
power but of God.

But before I come to show unto you the force and consequence of the Apostles
Argument and Reason, it will be necessary to evince and demonstrate the truth
of his assertion, viz. That there is no power but of God, i. e. that God is the
Author and Instituter of all Power and Government, because it is a thing
impugn'd and contradicted by a great many (who pretend a great Reverence for
the holy Scriptures, and yet will not believe them when it is against their
Interest) and for that I may more fully conclude against all Sons of Corah, all
seditious, mutinying and rebellious Dathans and Abirams.

As to the truth then of the Position, that there is no power but of God, or,
that the Powers that be, are ordained of God; 'twill be very plain and
apparent, if we consider, that God having made Men by nature sociable Creatures
(...). Ar. Pol. l. 1. c. 2.
that is, by their make and constitution, fitted them to converse with, and do
good one to another, by implanting in them a sense of just and unjust, of good
and evil, (...). ibid.
(...); and it is a communication of these, that constitutes a greater or
lesser Society, a House, a City, or Kingdom, and yet no Society, whether great
or small, being able to subsist without Government, it is but reasonable to
suppose, that God giving unto man naturally, all the preparatives and materials
for Society, did not withhold from him the cement and life of the whole,
Government. Nay, it is absurd, to imagine God to be the Author of man's
sociableness, or of his entering into Society, and yet not to be the Author of
Government; when Government is of the nature of Society, and it is impossible to
conceive the one without the other: You may call them a Flock, or an Herd, of
Men, but not a Society without Government; for that consists (as the
Philosopher observes) in a communication and interchange of good and evil, of
just and unjust, that is, it is the principal business and end of a Society, to
determine and judge of the effects and consequents of these, which it is a
contradiction to say it can do, without Governing; because Governing and
Judging are here reciprocal terms, signifying one and the same thing: So that
either Government must essentially belong unto Society, or else it must cease
to be such, in that without this, good and evil, just and unjust, will be words
and no more, as to any real effects they can produce or have in the Community
as such. And then, if Government is of the essence and nature of Society, it
must undeniably follow, that whosoever constituted and appointed the one, must
also constitute and appoint the other; and that therefore, if God is the Author
of Society, He must be likewise the Author of Government.

2. And that He is so, will be farther evident, if we secondly consider, that
He is the Great Universal Governor of all things; that with an excellent
Knowledge, Care and Inspection, He manages and conducts the whole Created
Nature of Beings, and exerts as much of goodness and mercy in disposing and
ordering all things for the best, as He did at first of Power, in giving them a
Being. And if his good Providence does thus extend it self to the vilest
Insects and creeping things, as to place them in such a condition of Life, as
is most suitable and agreeable to their Nature and Kind; if the lowest and
meanest part of the Creation, does so largely partake of the divine Beneficence
and Goodness, can we with any Reason persuade our selves, that Man whom he has
created after his own Image, the best and chiefest of the visible World, can be
less the Object of his Bounty and Care? Does God take care for Oxen, 1 Cor. ix
9.
for their well and happy Being, as the Apostle urges in another Case? And does
he not for Us, that we may be so too? And then if he does for us, it must
certainly be in a way that may at once secure our Life and Welfare; it must be
so as that we may enjoy our Liberty and Property, and the Goods and Benefits of
our present state and condition. But how could he have done this, but by
instituting and appointing Government; by delegating and setting up some
Persons, with a competent Authority and Power to repress and curb all Outrage
and Violence, Injustice and Oppression, and to defend and protect the Weak and
Impotent? For Wickedness and Injustice were very early in the World, and no
doubt there would have been more Cains, had not God interposed, and by somewhat
of this kind retrenched and controlled the Exorbitancies and Irregularities of
men's Passions and Actings. That he did it by a positive Command, presently
after the Flood, is very evident from Genesis 9.6. Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by
man shall his blood be shed. Which is not improbably understood by Pareus In
respons. ad tertiam Classem Dubiorum in cap. 13. ad Romans page 1054
to be the Institution of Magistracy; and the Reason he gives for it is very
considerable, for that it being a sin in any private man to kill another, and
yet the Man-slayer's blood is to be shed, either it must be shed by the Hand of
the Magistrate, or by none else, except God would take the Executioner's part
upon him, which we do not read he did. However we have this to plead farther in
defense of the probability of the Opinion, that it was authorized by the same
Spirit of God in the after-Ages of the World, and that the Magistrate alone was
with full and evident Commission appointed to be God's Avenger and Minister, to
execute wrath upon them that do Evil. And if it has been so since with divine
Allowance and Establishment, why might it not have been so then? especially
considering that they were men of like Passions with us, of the same corrupted
Nature and Principles, and wanted Boundaries and Fences to keep them from
transgressing as well as we. And then if God so early instituted Magistracy, it
must be long before the Grecian or Roman Records had a Name or Being in the
World; and that therefore the Account they give us of the Original of
Government, may be very rationally supposed to be very imperfect and defective
in comparison of this, and ought to be so esteemed by all wise and considerate
men; when the highest of their Antiquity is but of late date to the Pentateuch,
or five Books of Moses.

3. But supposing this Text does not directly conclude for the so early
Institution of public Magistracy, yet that there was such a thing even then in
the World, will be confessed and acknowledged by all that shall farther,
thirdly, consider with me, that God had by Nature constituted the Father, the
Governor and Overseer of his Offspring and Issue. (...). Arist. Pol. lib. 1.
cap. 1.
And then as it is rational to suppose, that there needed no other Governor but
the Head of the Family to supervise and inspect, the number of People being
then but few, and the Patriarchs of those first Centuries living to a very
great Age; as Adam (the original Stock of Mankind) nine hundred years and
upwards, till after the Birth of Lamech, the Father of Noah; and he having a
just Right of Jurisdiction and Government over all that descended from him, so
may it be as reasonably concluded that he did actually govern them to his
Death, being the Imperial Lord over the whole World. However it is very absurd
and unreasonable to conclude the Negative or contrary from the holy Scripture's
silence herein, when we may as well conclude that Eve never died, because it is
not recorded there. It Is sufficient ground for the truth of our Assertion, that
it is consonant and agreeable to that Order of Superiority and Inferiority God
had by Nature placed and fixed in the World between Parent and Child, and that
Right he had given as such, and is acknowledged by all: For if there has been
this natural Superiority and Inferiority from the beginning, then some by
Nature were to rule and govern, and others by Nature to be subject and obey, or
to be governed; and if so, then it is as certain, that if God established the
one, he must the other, because Superiority here denotes Government, and
Inferiority a being governed. And so agreeable hereunto, Aristotle, as great a
Master of Reason as any of our modern pretenders, deduces the Original of
Government from a House or Family to a Village, (...).
from a Village to a City, (...).
and from a City to a Nation or Kingdom: (...). Ar. Pol. lib. 1. cap. 1, 2.
And so Cities were first governed, and afterward Nations, as He speaks.

And whether this be not a better and truer account of the State of Nature,
than that Mr. Hobbs has obtruded upon the world Leviathan, cap. 13.
I leave to all men to judge, that have but so much reason, as to consider how
they were born, or mankind propagated to the present generation. For if it was
by the way of Father and Son, then there could not be that natural equality, so
as to found and establish a right contrary and inopposition to that of the
Parent (which He pleads for, and makes one part of the foundation of his
opinion) for notwithstanding that the Son has as reasonable a Nature as the
Father, yet that cannot be supposed to be given him in prejudice of Him from
whom he derived it; supposing that our being reasonable Creatures, did give us
a right to the things of the earth: For Self-preservation is a Law of Nature as
well to the Father as Child; and then the Father having so much the odds of the
Son in his minority, would, no doubt, have quickly freed himself from the
danger of such a Competitor, and so mankind, long e're this, have ceased, had
this been the State of Nature.

But I deny that, as Men, or reasonable Creatures, we have a right to all
things, because The earth is the Lords, 1 Cor. 10.26. Luke 10.21.
and the fullness thereof; and It Is God that is the Lord of Heaven and Earth: So
that if we have a right to any thing, the justness of our claim must be founded
upon Gods gift and donation, and not upon our being all equally men or endued
with Reason, for that, as to this, is only a preparative the better to fit and
dispose us to enjoy and understand at once, the bounty and wisdom of our Maker
and Lord; and that therefore though we have all an equality of Nature, yet we
have not all an equality of Right, that being variously dispensed and
distributed according to the good pleasure of the Divine Providence. And then
as to all other things, it is certain that Superiority and Inferiority destroys
Equality; and that the Parent is superior to the Child, is more than evident.

And as little of solidity and firmness is there in that other part of what He
lays to found his opinion on, that there was no coercive Power, for if there is
Natural Superiority, there must naturally be Government, and if Government,
then coercive Power. What He adds of the Nature of Men's Passions and
Experience, argues at most only thus much, that Men will be still inclined to
wickedness and injustice, and that therefore there will be still a necessity of
Government and Laws to keep them within bounds. The foundation then of this
fair Building, thus perishing and coming to naught, the Superstructure it self
must needs fall: For if there was always a just and sufficient power to impede
and obstruct the ill effects of Men's Lusts and Passions, and no Man but the
Protoplast ever having Ius in omnia, a Right to all things, and this too by
gift, as may be seen, Genesis 1.28, 29, 30. afterward the distinctions or
differences of Meum and Tuum, Mine and Thine, increasing and multiplying
according as God did severally dispense and dispose to several men; as there
could be no reason and cause for this, not natural, but unnatural state of
mutual war and violence (for so it is that the Son should kill the Father, and
the Parent the Child) so is it morally impossible that ever there could be such
a state, and morally uncertain that ever there was, except in this Philosophers
brains. And then if there never was such a State, there must be always
Government; because otherwise such a State would necessarily follow and ensue,
as I have already evinced and showed.

4. And if there was always Government, then fourthly, it must be instituted
and ordained of God, and not of the People (as some object) because He alone
has the power of Life and Death; and therefore He only and none else can
impart and communicate such a power unto man. Now that capital punishment, or
punishment by death, is in many cases very requisite and necessary in all
Governments, will be confessed by all that understand any thing: If then the
public Governor is not deputed and authorized hereunto by God, but by the
Community; he will be only a public murderer, notwithstanding the consent and
allowance of the People, in that no man has power of his own life, much less
of that of another, and therefore cannot give that he never had, and yet all
Governments and Governors exercise and use this power. To say they do it by
virtue of their public Ministry, is to say nothing to the purpose, except they
have this from God as the Author and Appointer of it; otherwise they will be as
obnoxious to the vengeance of Divine Justice, as the meanest Subject or most
private Person, because what God has made a standing Law to all, is
irreversibly so, but where He has made the exemption: Now if Magistracy or
Government is of the People, it is certain the public Magistrate has not been
exempted by God; and if not, then what He has said to, and commanded all,
equally concerns them: And therefore, Surely your Blood of your Lives will I
require: at the hand of every Beast will I require it, and at the hand of Man;
at the hand of every Man's Brother, will I require the Life of Man, Genesis 9.5.
They may indeed kill a man with greater solemnity, as by forms of Law and
Political Justice, but naught but Gods Authorizing and Empowering them
hereunto, can acquit them before the Great Tribunal of Heaven: For the Life of
Man is so sacred and excellent a thing, as being the Image of God, that nothing
can be a sufficient reason and cause for its destruction except the Divine
Authority interposes, and there is a Divine Institution annexed to warrant and
justify the proceedings. And this we must suppose and acknowledge, or else all
Governments are Tyrannical, unjust and contrary to the Law of Nature, and all
Governors, wicked Transgressors and Violators of it; God may dispense with his
own Laws, but it is presumption in man to attempt it, a folly and a sin. If then
the Exercise of Magistracy, or at least of this part of the Office, is without
a Divine warrant, sinful; either we must lay Sin at the Magistrates door, or
confess the Truth of the Apostles Assertion, that There is no Power but of God.

To all which, we may add what I have above Noted, Psalm. lxxxii.6 John x.30.
that it is God who has said to Governors, I have said that ye are Gods, and
by His saying has made them so. That St. Paul positively says, Romans xiii.4.
They are Gods Ministers, and His Revengers to execute wrath upon them that do
evil: To which agrees what we read Prove. 8.15. By me Kings Reign, and Princes
Decree Justice. And so Daniel told Nebuchadnezzar, The Most High Rules in the
Kingdom of men, Dan. iv.32.
and gives it to whomsoever He will. It Is true, St. Peter 1 Ep. 2.13. calls
Government the Ordinance of man; but this does no way prejudice our cause, for
so it may be, and yet of Divine Institution and Right; and is with a great deal
of Reason so interpreted by some, who tell us, that it may be a Humane
Ordinance, either Subjective, in respect of the Subject, because the Office is
executed by Man; or Objective, in respect of the Object about which it is
conversant, and that is Humane Society; or lastly, (...) in respect of the end,
in that it is for the good and benefit of men. Now it may be Humane, or of Men,
in all these senses, and yet be ordained of God, or of Divine Original; and so
we are to understand it, or otherwise we shall make the Apostles plainly
contradicting one the other, which no sincere Christian will willingly admit or
hear of.

I must confess that the learned Grotius Lib. 1. cap. 4.. 7. number. 3. de Iure
Belli and Pacis.
interprets it according to the Letter, telling us, that it was an experience
or sense of Infirmity and Weakness to withstand others, Notandum est primo
homines non Dei praecepto sed sponte adductos experimento infirmitatis,
familiarum segregum adversus violentiam in Societatem Civilem coiisse, unde
ortum habet Potestas Civilis, quam ideo humanam Ordinationem Petrus vocat.
or defend themselves, that first joined men in Civil Society, and that Civil
Power had hence its Original and Beginning, and that upon this account St.
Peter calls it an humane Ordinance. But he only says it, and no more, and
therefore all that I shall return, is, that he seems to me to unsay it in the
Chapter immediately preceding this, where he tells us, Rejicienda est eorum
opinio, qui ubique and sine exceptione summam potestatem esse volunt populi.
Cap. 3.. 8. number. 1.
That their Opinion is to be rejected, who every where and without exception
would have the supreme Power to be in the People: which he must understand of
the Original of Power, or else he needed not to have made the Remark, for who
is ignorant of it, or so bold and impudent as to affirm it in the other sense?
And so in the same Section again tell us, Number. 13. Sed nec verum est quod
assumitur omnes Reges a Populo constitui.
That it is not true that all Kings (or Governors) are constituted by the
People. And this too must be understood of the Original of Government, or else
his Instance of such a powerful Paterfamilias, Patriarch, or Father of a
Family, is in vain; for there could never be such a one, (granting his
Supposition) but in the first Ages of the World, before its Policy and
Government was settled: since, as every one is born under a Government, so
thereby secured of his Life and Liberty, and so needs not subject and yield
himself a Vassal for Protection and Defense to any potent Neighbor. Here then
he tells us, That Governors are not of the People, nor constituted by them,
which yet they must be originally, if Government is a humane Ordinance in that
sense he has explained it; for if it is ( hominum salubre Institutum, and
humana Lex) a humane Institution, Law, or Ordinance, then it is not divine, and
if not divine, then all Governments and Governors do owe and are indebted for
their Institution and Original to Men or the People. But that they are not,
this worthy Author has affirmed and endeavored to prove; and therefore though
he seems to be, yet he is not a real Adversary to the present Truth. Indeed he
was a Dutchman, bred up in the Democratical or Popular way, and then it is
possible that Prejudice and Education may sometimes blind the Eyes of a very
wise man.

I have now too given you an Account of the divine Right of Government, and
have endeavored to answer what has been most materially, and with greatest
show of Reason objected; I now proceed to the 2 d. and last thing, and that is,
to show unto you the force and consequence of the Apostle's Argument and Reason.

2. That a great Deference and Respect, Submission and Obedience, is to be
given and paid to every thing of divine Institution, is unanimously
acknowledged by all that assent to the Being of a God, and the Truth of the
holy Scriptures. And indeed very fit and reasonable is it, very just and
necessary, that we should glorify and serve our great Creator and Lord, in all
things that relate and appertain unto him; for he being infinitely superior
unto, and more excellent in Majesty and Power, in Wisdom and Knowledge, in
Justice and Truth, in Mercy and Goodness, then all things besides, as nothing
can with an equality of Right lay claim unto, and exact so sincere and hearty,
so entire and impartial an Obedience to what is prescribed, commanded and
appointed as he can, so naught can be more our Wisdom and Understanding, our
Felicity and Good, then to direct and order our selves according to his Will
and Pleasure; then to perform and be subject to what he has instituted and
ordained. Government then being of him, as to its Original and Institution,
(there being no Power but of God, as St. Paul asserts, and I have proved) does
upon his account challenge and require, enjoin and command our dutiful
Subjection and Submission to it. It is for his Sake and by his Authority that
we are to pay all that Honor, Obedience, Fear, Benevolence, Love, Gratitude,
Tribute and Prayer, I have so largely discoursed of; and except we will
wickedly reject God to be our Lord, openly defy his Majesty and Power,
impudently oppose his Justice and Truth, and ungratefully return all the
blessed Effects of his Mercy and Goodness; nay, except we will utterly abandon
all Considerations of Good and Evil, of Heaven and Hell, and what is to betide
and happen unto us in the final Issue and Result of things, this will be the
Practice and Business of our Lives, and by it shall we endeavor to perfect
Holiness in the sight of God. Besides, from whence is it that they that resist
shall receive to themselves damnation, Romans xiii.2.
but because Disobedience and Rebellion against a lawful Governor, is
Disobedience and Rebellion against God? He esteeming the Sin and Evil acted
against his Deputy and Vicegerent, as acted against himself. And what God told
Samuel, 1 Samuel viii.7.
upon the Israelites Defection or falling off from him; They have not rejected
thee but me, is still the divine Language in such a Case, in behalf of every
Prince and Ruler. Religion does at once found and preserve the Rights of
Governors; renders their Persons sacred and inviolable, and their Office
Majestic and God-like; their Eminency and Dignity, their Authority and Power
being from God; and therefore to rise up against them, to vilify and abuse
their Dignity, to despise and contemn their Authority, is to vilify and
despise him, who has put such Treasure in earthen Vessels, and given such
Power and Excellency unto men. It cannot then be Piety and Religion, but the
Extreme of Impudency and Wickedness, and a great profanation and violation of
the Sacredness of divine Truths, to say and act as some men have taught and
practiced, That Subjects may lawfully bind Kings in Chains, and such Nobles
with links of Iron. They may with as much truth say, They can religiously lay
violent Hands upon God himself, and bring him to condign punishment, (were it
possible) as affirm, they can do this by any Divine Warrant and Law to the
Person of their Governor and King, who immediately Represents the Image and
Character, and Executes the Place and Office of the Great Universal Governor,
the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. For if His Person and Presence is to be
feared and dreaded, to be Honored and Revered, and His Laws and Commands to be
performed and obeyed; so are Theirs in all things wherein They Command for God,
wherein They are Gods, and in Gods stead to us: The subjection we pay unto our
Governors, is a subjection that is Gods, and for God; in obeying Them we obey
Him, whose principally and originally the Authority is. Add to this, that it is
one part of our worshipping and serving Him in Spirit and in Truth, because one
part of His Will and Word: So that for Men to pretend Religion, Holiness and
Conscience in all their ways, and yet not perform this so necessary and
indispensible a part of their Christianity, is to be holy only in imagination
and opinion, and is the Piety of those Dreamers that defile the Flesh, Jude
ver. 8.
despise Dominions, and speak evil of Dignities. For if God is the Lord, and so
His Authority is to be reverenced, and His Will obeyed, and the reverencing His
Authority and obeying His Will is Religion; how can they be truly Religious,
that perform neither the one nor the other? That they do not Reverence His
Authority is manifest, in that they do not obey His Will; and that they do not
obey His Will, is not less evident, because they are not subject to the Higher
Powers; and then if not subject to Them, not subject to God; and if not subject
to Him, then certainly not Holy, not Religious, not Conscientious, except in
pretense and show. Either then we must make Obedience to Governors, a necessary
ingredient of our Christianity, or else evacuate and null Gods Authority as to
us, reject and disown His Commands, and renounce and deny the truth of our
Religion. And this is that the Apostle intends by the reason and enforcement in
my Text, when He tells us, that There is no Power but of God. Let every Soul be
subject unto the Higher Powers, etc.

I have now by the Divine Assistance gone through the whole of my designed
method, and have considered whatsoever the Text suggested as necessary and
useful to be treated of, laying down such Rules as will be, I hope, serviceable
to all that are not over-scrupulously nice, and of too tender a Conscience.

What then now remains is, to Exhort and Beseech all in the Bowels of Jesus
Christ, and as they tender the Glory and Honor of God and Religion, the Safety
and Welfare of the Kingdoms wherein they live, and their own Eternal Good,
Happiness and Peace hereafter, that they no longer propagate and cherish,
encourage and maintain heats and animosities amongst themselves, Faction and
Sedition against the State, and Mutinying and Rebelling against the Person and
Authority of their Lawful King and Governor, but Render unto Caesar the things
that are Caesar's, and be subject unto the Higher Powers. It is a duty as much
Christian as any, because Commanded by Christ himself; and therefore with as
just a right merits and calls for our care and concernment, our dutiful
performance and practice, as any other whatsoever. We may indeed pay a partial
and peacemeal Obedience to God without it, but except in this too we exercise
our selves, endeavoring to keep a good Conscience, as we can never be entirely
Holy, so not such faithful Stewards and diligent Servants, as shall be able to
render their Accounts with joy, and whom the Lord shall bless at his coming:
For if God will accept no Obedience but what is uniform, sincere and entire,
and ours not being such, in that we have omitted this weighty thing of the Law,
this great Commandment; what can we upon good and warrantable grounds expect,
but that in the day of Inquisition and Judgment, the Mean Tekel will be
pronounced against us; and that how exact and circumspect soever we have been
in other things, how very just and righteous, yet that all that Righteousness
shall not be remembered, but in the wilful presumptuous sin that we have sinned,
in the known and avowed trespass that we have trespassed, in that shall we die?
And then could Rebellion and Disobedience confer upon, and Crown us with as
great and flourishing Empires and Kingdoms as the Devil vainly made an offer of
to Christ, even those of the whole World; could we thereby be as Great, as
Honorable, and as Happy as our Hearts could wish; yet how mean, how sad an
Exchange must this prove for the irreparable loss and ruin of Soul and Body in
Hell? What can compensate that unspeakable, and never enough to be lamented,
calamity and misery? May then the just consideration hereof, through Gods
Omnipotent working Grace be so powerfully effectual, to rouse and stir us up,
as to make us consider and see now in this our day, what those things are that
belong unto, and make for our Peace; and so far prevail upon us, as that all
Rebellion and Disobedience may be as great Strangers to our Lives and
Practices, as they are contrary to that pure and undefiled Religion we Profess:
That being a People truly zealous of Good Works, in all things willing and
desirous to Live Honestly and Uprightly, and as becomes the Gospel of Christ,
and diligent and careful in the Great Work of our High and Heavenly Calling; we
may so entirely and sincerely Serve and Obey God, as that at the end of our
Race we may receive the end of our Hopes, the Eternal Salvation and Blessedness
of every one of our Souls. I shall Close all with that of the Apostle, I speak
as to Wise Men, 1 Cor. x.15.
Judge Ye what I say.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
IN the Epistle, Page 2. Line 12. for that Read Your. In the Book, p. 7. l. 19.
r. to no man. p. 174. l. 17. for default r. defalk. p. 228. l. 14. for patterns
r. pattern. p. 263. for Policy r. Polity.


