A Modest Plea FOR INFANTS BAPTISM.

Wherein the Lawfulness of the Baptizing of INFANTS is defended against the
ANTIPAEDOBAPTISTS: And the Infants Need for it, Benefit by it, Capableness of
it, and Right unto it, Is fairly shown from Grounds of Scripture, the Tradition
of the CHURCH, and the Institution of CHRIST: With Answers to Objections.

By W. W. B. D.

Commendaverim Charitati vestrae causam eorum, qu^ pro se loqui non possunt. D.
Aug. Ser. 8. de Verb. Apost. CAMBRIDGE, Printed by John Hayes, Printer to the
University: and are to be sold by Henry Dickinson, Bookseller, 1677.

To the Right worshipful Mr. Robert Cole Alderman of Grantham; And to the
worshipful The Twelve Comburgesses his Brethren; And to all the worthy
Commoners of that ancient Corporation WILLIAM WALKER Wishes all temporal
Prosperity, and eternal Felicity.
Right Worshipful, etc.
THe singular Favors, Which you have showed to me, do merry a grateful
acknowledgement from me. In testimony therefore of my obligations, I dedicate
unto you this Treatise. May it prove, what I design it, a lasting monument of
your generosity, and my gratitude. Through Gods blessing on the conjoined
erdeavours, pious care, and prndent conduct of Magistrate and Ministir, your
Corporation now is, as Jerusalem of old was, as a City that is at unity in it
self. A rare blessing that, at all times, but especially in dividing times. Few
Corporations in England cawboast the like. God continue that happiness to you,
and to yours after you from generation. Thereto if these Papers of mine be in
any measure contributory, as I do most sincercly wish it, so I shall most
heartily rejoice at it; as being one who takes a great pleasure in the
Prosperity of your Corporation, and no less in being serviceable in any manner,
or measure to it. So begging your kind acceptance of my good meaning in this
Dedication, and wishing a perpetuation and inorease of Unity, and Amity, and
all the blessed Consequents thereof among you, I present these Papers to your
favor, and remain

Grantham School Aug. 1. 1676. Your most humble Servant, WILLIAM WALKER.

The Preface to the READER.
OF all Dissenters from the Church of England, none seem to lie under stronger
Prejudices, than the Antipaedobaptists; as having so seemingly fair Pleas to
make, both for Themselves, and against their Opponents, and that both from
Scripture Text, and Ecclesiastic Practice, as few of their fellow Dissenters
can parallel. With the more favor and kindness, in my thoughts, are their
Persons, precisely considered as such, to be treated; and with the more
fairness and clearness ought those Endeavors, which are undertaken for the
removal of their Prejudiees, to be managed. And this may be a sufficient
Account for that Prolixity, which some may think there is, and for that
Plainness, which I have studied there should be, in these ensuing Papers:
especially if I shall add thereto this Consideration, that the Persons lying
under these Prejudices, and whose rescue from under the captivity of Error, is
the wish of all good Christians, are mostly such, as are to be spoke to in
Vulgar language, and Familiar speech, as not having had those advantages of a
learned education, which should make them capable to sound the depths of
profound performances, unravel the windings of intricate discourses, and keep
pace in understanding, with a high tide of big words, and a rolling torrent of
strong lines: in which way to him that speaks they will be but as Barbarians,
and he that speaks shall be but a Barbarian unto them.

Whence by the way I shall take occasion, to admonish those that read Books
only for the elegance of the language, and cannot relish the wholesome food of
so^^^ matter, unless it be served up in the savoury sauce of a piquant Phrase,
and set out with the specious garnish of a florid style, to proceed no further;
as being not likely to find herein that sparkling briskness of Expression, nor
pleasing flavor of Elocution, which suits the Tastes of their delicate palates;
as also to advise others of deeper learning and profounder knowledge, not to
expect from me new discoveries of hitherto unrevealed mysteries, and
freshsprung mines of as yet unravish'd and unrifled notions: whose design in
these Papers is not at all to teach the Learned, but to instruct the Ignorant;
and that in all humility and submission, as being conscious to my self of my
manifold ignorances, and imperfections, and seeing, even what I see, but
through a glass, and that darkly.

And further to prevent any man's sinning against God, by rashly judging or
uncharitably censuring me about the quorations in these Papers, which are many,
and large; I declare that my ends in making them were to give strength, and
credit to the cause I maintain, by showing it espoused by persons of reputation
for learning and judgment in their several ages; and to free my self from the
imputation of novelty, and singularity in any thing maintained by me; and that
I made them so large partly to prevent suspicion of insincerity in my dealings,
and partly to furnish some with apposite testimonies, Who may not have those
conveniences of consulting Authors that I have had.

And let not any one think these quotations needless, because the Antipae do
baptists reject all authority but that of Scripture. For I write not only for
the conviction and conversion of them, but also for the satisfaction and
confirmation of others. Of whom some may have such a value for tradition, as to
be much confirmed by it, others may think it so necessary, as not to be
satisfied without it. And for their sakes according to the advice in Vincent.
Lirinensis, I have been willing to fortify the ^ape igitur magno studio, and
sumkind attentione perquirens a quam pluribus sanctitate, and doctrina
prastantibus viris, quonam modo possim certa quadam, and quasi general ac
regulari via Catbolicae fidei veritatem ab haereticae pravitatis falsitate
discernere, bujusmodi semper responsum ab omnibus fere retuli. Quod five ego,
sive quis alius vellet exurgentium baereticorum frauds deprehendere,
laqueosque vitare, and in fide sana sanus, and integer permanere duplici modo
munire fidem suam Domino ad^uvante deberet. Primo scilicet divine leg is
authoritate, tum deinde Ecclesiae Catholicae traditione. Hic forsitan requirat
aliquis: cum sit perfectus Scripturarum Canon, sibique ad omnia satis, superque
sufficiat, quid opus est ut ei Ecclesiasticae intelligentiae jungatur
autoritas? Quia videlicet scripturam sacram pro ipsa sua altitudine non uno
codemq: sensu universi accipiunt, sed ejusdem eloquia aliter atq: aliter alius,
atque alius interpretatur: ut pene quot homines sunt tot lllinc sententiae erui
posse videantur. Aliter namque illam Novatianus, aliter Photinus, aliter
Sabellius, aliter Donatus exponit, etc. atq idcirco multum necesse est propter
tantos tam varii error is ansractus, ut Propheticae and Apostolice
interpretationis linea secundum Ecclesiastici, and Catholici sensus normam
dirigatur. In ipsa item Catholica Ecclesia magnopere cur andum est, ut id tene
amus quod ubique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus creditum est, hoc est etenim
vere proprieq, Catholicum, etc, Vinc. Lirin. advers. baeres. cap. 1. 2, 3.
cause I maintain, not only with the authority of divine Law; but also with
the tradition of the Catholic Church.

And even the Antipaedobaptists themselves are willing enough to flourish their
writings with humane testimonies, and to plead tradition too, if for them.
Indeed I observe none to be against tradition but those that think it to be
against themselves, or to reject the evidence of humane testimony, who do not
fear to be condemned by it.

And because the judgments or rather fancies of men as to Authors are so
infinitely various, that one esteems that as gold which another despises as
dross; and values as wheat, what another rejects as chaff; therefore I have
endeavored to obviate that variety of judgments with a diversity of Authors:
producing those of the Middle, and Modern ages, as well as those of the
Ancient, and Primitive; Schoolmen as well as Commontators; Historians as well
as Fathers; Civilians as well as Divines; and Polemi^al as well as Didactical
Writers. So that the Readers which do not like of all may please themselves
with what they have most fancy too, leaving the liberty which themselves make
use of, unto others; who as being of different tastes may think their leavings
as good as their takings, and relish that best which they disrelish most.

And because there is no one Prejudice that holds a stronger possession of our
Antipae dobaptists, than that which arises from that bright evidence, which
they have, of the baptizing Adult Persons in all the Ages of the Church, and of
many's deferring either to be baptized Themselves, or to baptize their Infants,
in several Ages of it, and those especially that were nearest to the Primitive
Times; and the removal of that Prejudice may be a fair Introduction to their
depositing of all the rest, therefore I will endeavor, in my entrance, to
remove that. And if I can show that the Delays of Baptism, which they so speak
of, in the Ancient times, were upon other Grounds, and on different Accounts
from those that our Antipaedobaptists allege in the case, then that plea of
theirs from the practice of baptizing Adult Persons, and deferring the Baptism
of Infants, will neither serve their Hypothesis, nor disserve ours.

The Grounds, as I understand, on which our Antipaedobaptist refuse to baptize
their Infants, and defer their baptizing to ripeness of Age, are because, as
they suppose, there is no command in Scripture for it; And because there is no
example in Scripture of it; either of which if there found, they would hold it
lawful; and because they find neither of them there, they hold it unlawful.

Now if it appear that the unlawfulness to baptize Infants, for want of a
Scripture command or Example for it, was none of the Grounds on which the
Ancients did defer their baptizing, and that never any such thing was in the
Primitive Times pretended or pleaded by any, to justify or excuse that delay,
then I hope the case will be clear, that their delays of Baptism on other
Grounds, can asford no protection to the Hypothesis our Antipaedobaptists, who
deny Baptism to Infants, upon the Account of the unlawfulness of it.

That never any such pretense or plea was made by any in the primitive times
(even for five hundred years) against Infants Baptism I rationally presume,
because I see none yet produced by any of the Learned of our
Antipaedobaptists, who have, I believe, searched through, and through, all the
writings of the Fathers, and Primitive Historians, and ransacked every page,
and rifled every passage in them, for some patronage to their Hypothesis. And
as they are quick sighted enough to have espied it, so they would have been
careful enough, if there had been any, to have produced it.

And upon the most curious search, that I have been able to make for it my
self, as far as the circumstances I am under would permit me, I sincerely
profess, I have not been able to find any. What I have found urged, or but
binted at, as a ground or reason for any ones delaying either his own, or any
Infants baptizing, I shall fairly give an account of, and then leave the Reader
to judge, what advantage our pleaders against Infants Baptism upon the account
of the unlawfulness of it can make therefrom; or rather what a miserable
fallacy they put upon themselves and others, whilst they allege the Primitive
Practice of deferring Infants Baptism, in justification of their denying
Baptism to Infants, upon the account of the unlawfulness of it for want of a
Command or Example in Scripture, whereas it was never in the Primitive Times
denied to any Infant upon that account; nor was that ground ever urged or
alleged by any in those days, as a reason, or so much as pretense for their
deferring to baptize their Infants; nor did any ask, as our Antipaedobaptists
now do, What Scripture have you for it? Where did Christ ever command it? or
where did any Apostle practice it?

Now in order to the showing on what Accounts Baptism was in Ancient Times so
often, and so long deferred, I must premise, that some did voluntarily defer
their own baptizing; and some had their Baptism deferred by others; the former
were Adult; the later Infants. And of the Reasons or Occasions of both I will
speak distinctly.

And First, Those that delayed their own baptizing had several Reasons, and
Pretenses for it.

(1.) Some did it out of a fear of sinning after baptism, and so forfeiting the
grace of it, and (...). Gr. Naz. Orat. 40. p. 647. (...). Id. ib. p. 649. Sed
mundus rursus delinquit, quo male comparetur diluvio. it, aque igni destinatur,
sicut and homo qui post baptismum delict a restaurat. Tertull. de Bapt p,259.
ed. Rigalt. (...). Gr. Nyssen, de Baptismo, p. 221. Indeed 'twas very usual in
those times (notwithstanding the Fathers did solemnly and smartly declaim
against it) for persons to defer their being baptized till they were near their
death, out of a kind of Novatian principle, that if they fell into sin after
Baptism, there would be no place for repentance, mistaking that place of the
Apostle, where it is said, that if they who have been once enlightened ((...)
which the Ancients generally understand of Baptism.) sall away, it is impossible
to renew them again unto repentance. Dr. Cave Prim. Christian. par. 1. chapter 10.
page 309.
being certainly damned without ^hope of recovery even by repentance,
especially when they considered the pronenese of their own nature to sin, and
the occasions and temptations to sinning, that they should meet withal in
their converse with the world, as appears from sundry passages in Gregory
Nazian. Greg. Nyssen. and Te^tullian.

This fear, how specious soever the pretense of it be, did to Gregory Nazianz.
seem the fear of a mad man, or a fool; and as the Church of England positively
determines against (...). Greg. Nyss. De Bap. page 221. (...). Gr. Naz. Orat.
40. p. 647. Not every deadly sin willingly committed after Baptism is sin
against the Holy Ghost and unpardonable. Wherefore the grant of repentance is
not to be denied to such as fall into sin after Baptism. Artic. 16. of Chapter of
Engl. (...). Gr. Naz. Orat. 40. p. 647. (...). Id. ib. p. 649. (...), etc. Gr.
Nyssen. de Bapt. 219. (...); D. Basil. Exhort. ad Baptis. Tom. 1. p. 480.
the ground of it, so both he, and Gregory Nyssen show the vanity of it; and
conclude it better to contract, or relapse into some sin, through converse with
the world, than to die unbaptized; and St. Basil, from the experience of
ability to resist sin before Baptism, encourages to deposite the fear of being
overcome by it after baptizing.

(2) Some deferred their baptizing out of the love of the world, and the
pleasures of it, and a loathness to part either with their sins, or their
pleasures, which they thought, upon their Baptizing they must clearly (...).
Greg. Nyss. de Bapt. page 221, 222. (...). D. Basil. Exhort. ad Bapt. p. 482.
(...). Id. ib. page 482. (...). Id. ib. p. 481. Ti (...); (...); (...); (...):
Id. ib. 480. (...). Gr. Naz. Orat. 40. p. 648. (...). Id. ib. p. 450.
renounce, and wholly part withal; so that their Baptism would be to their
disadvantage, in regard they must lose so much pleasure and profit for the
present, as came by their sins, and get nothing the more for it afterward; they
that went last into the vineyard receiving as much as they that went in first:
which Reason is alleged and answered by Greg. Nyssen, St. Basil, and Gr.
Nazianzen.

(3) Some deferred their baptizing out of an unwillingness to take upon them
the yoke of Christ, and submit to the severity of the Gospel (...). D. Bafil.
Exhort. ad Bapt. p. 477.
Rule: which St. Basil intimates and replies unto.

(4) Some deferred their baptizing even till their deathbed, on an opinion
that by that means they should secure their salvation having Heaven immediately
opened unto them, and themselves admitted into the joys of the just. And
because they desired to have it then, they in the (...). Gr. Nyssen. de Bapt.
p. 222. (...). Gr. Nazianz. Orat. 40. p. 652. (...); D. Basil: Exhort. ad Bapt.
p. 482. Quando quis propterea peccat, ut sanctum baptisma in novissima sua
exspir atione suscipiat, for tassis non adipiscitur; Novi multos qui hoc passi
sunt, qui spe baptismatis mulsa peccabant, etc. Gratian. 3. part de
cousecratione, did. 4. fol. 453. Col. 2.
mean time thought, that God in his mercy would accept of the desire of baptism
for their being baptized. The vainness of which hope is disputed against by St.
Basil, Gr. Nyssen and Gr. Naz and the dangerousness of its miscarrying shown by
Gratian.

(5) Some deferred their baptizing out of want of leisure for it (as they
pretended) through multitude of businesses and throng of (...); D. Basil.
Exhort. ad Bapt. p. 479.
employments, whose pretexts and excuses St. Basil does inveigh against with
much earnestness.

(6) Some again deferred it out of supinety and laziness, and a cartless
negligence, as both St. Chrysostom and Greg. Nazianz. (...). D. Chrysostom. Hom. ad
Baptizand. Tom 6. p. 852. Edid. Savil. (...); Gr. Naz. Orat. 40. p. 654.
intimates, in bestowing the title of slothful careless persons on them for it.

(7) Some for the deferring of their baptizing pleaded the insufficienoy of
their knowledge as yet, and thereupon their willingness to continue still (one
year after another) (...); D. Basil. Exhortat. ad Bapt. p. 476, 477. (...). Gr:
Nyssen. de Bap. p. 218.
in the state of Cateohumens; whom St. Basil chides for that pretense; asking
when they will have knowledge enough to become Christians? and letting them
know, that having been so long fed with Milk, it is now time they were weaned,
and fed with stronger meat: and so Greg. Nyssen. also.

(8) Some pleaded inconveniency of the present time, when they were pressed to
be baptized; and put it off till this, that, or the other time. One would be
baptized at Candlemass, (...). Gr. Naz. Or. 40. 654. (...). D. Basil. Exhort ad
Bapt. p. 475, 476.
another at Easter, a third at Whitsontide. Against which pleas St. Basil urges
that man's whole life (and then sure Infancy also) is a feason for baptism, so
that it can never come amiss.

(9) Some would be baptized but in this or that Place, this City, or that
River, as Jerusalem, or Jordan, (where Constantine desired, and designed to be,
and St. Basil was baptized) and so deferred their baptizing till they might
come thither; and to excuse their deferring to go pleaded the length of the
way, and the dangerousness of the journey. In answer to which Gr. Nyssen (...).
Gr. Nyssen. de Bapt. p. 219. Debemus fratres dilectissimi (vobis Catechumenis
loquor) gratiam baptismatis ejus (sc. Christi) omni festinatione suscipere, and
de font Jordanis quem ille benedixit benedictionem consecrationis baurire, ut
in eum gurgitem in quem se illius sanctitas mersit, nostra peccata mergantur.
-- Sed ut eadem font mergamur, non nobis Orientalis petenda est regio, non
fluvius terrae Judaicae. ubi enim nunc Christus, ibl quoque Jordanis est. Eadem
consecratio quae Orientis flumina benedixit, occidentis fluenta sanctificat. --
D. Ambros. Sermon. 41. Tom. 3. page 268. Nulla distinctio est, mari quis an
stagno, flumine an sonte, lacu an alveo diluatur. Nec quicquam refert inter eos
quos Joannes in Jordane, and quos Petrus in Tiberi tinxit, nisi and ille spado,
quem Philippus in vid fortuita aqua tinxit, plus salutis aut minus retulit.
Igitur omnes aquae de pristina originis praerogativa Sacramentum
sanctificationis consequntur, invocato Deo. Tertull. de Bapt. p. 257. Ed.
Rigalt. (...). Gr. Naz. Orat. 40. p. 657. See Dr. Cave Prim. Christianity Part.
1. chap. 10. p. 313.
alleges the Eunuchs standing upon no such circumstances; St. Ambrose and
Tertullian pleads a no preeminence of one river above another in this respect,
every river being a- Jordan where Christ is; and Gr. Nazianzen exhorts to break
through all impediments to obtain Baptism, even to run through fire and water
to it.

(10) Some would be baptized but by such or such a Person, a Bishop, and he a
Metropolitan too, and one of Jerusalem, and one well descended; or, if a
Presbyter, one that is unmarried, and of the Angelick order; and (...). Gr.
Nazianz. Orat 40. p. 656.
so deferred their baptizing upon that pretext; which nice curiosity Gr.
Nazianzen gravely and largely rebukes them for.

(11) Some protracted their Baptism upon exception taken at the mixed company
they were to be baptized with, whereof many were to them unsuitable in quality,
and unequal in dignity, whom Greg. Nazianzen gravely exhorts to an humble
condescension in that particular; and that from the example (...). Gr. Naz.
Orat. 40. page 656, 657.
of Christ, into whom they were baptized, who humbled himself to a far lower
degree then so, for for their sake taking upon him the form of a servant; and
from the no difference that there is amongst Christians considered as
Christians.

(12) Some were apt to put off their baptizing, on pretense of not having their
Relations present, whom they desired to have with them when they were baptized:
whom Greg. Nazianzen quickens to a present acceptance (...). Gr. Naz. Ocat. 40.
p. 655.
of the Grace offered without staying for their friends, for fear of some sad
intervening accident, which should bring those friends to a fellowship with
them in their sorrows, whom they would have had partners with them of their
joys.

(13) Some hung back from being baptized upon the account of the chargeableness
of it, in regard of a Present that was then to be offered; a splendid Robe that
was to be worn; and a Treat that was to be given to the Minister that baptized
them: which considerations Greg. (...), Gr. Naz. Orat. 40. p. 655. Nyssen. de
Bapt. p. 215.
Nazianzen rejects, as too minute and trifling to come in competition with
Baptism, which is of a higher concern than to be omitted on so slight
accounts, assuring them that Themselves would be an acceptable offering unto
Christ, and their good life a pleasing entertainment to himself.

(14) Some checked at Confessing of their sins at their baptizing, and on that
account delayed to be baptized; whom Greg. Nazianzen exhorts not to be trouble
at it, in consideration that it was they way (...), Gr. Naz. Orat. 40. p. 657.
of John's baptizing; that the shame of that in this world, was the way to
escape eternal shame for it in the world to come; and that it was a clear
argument of the truth of their hatred and detestation of sin, thus to triumph
over it, and expose it unto shame.

(15) Some stuck at the Exorcism that ushered in Baptism, and on that account
made no great have to be baptized; which Medicine Greg. Nazianzen wishes by no
means to refuse, as being the touchstone for trial of (...). Gr. Nazianz. Orat.
40. p. 657. Est autem Exorcismus, conscripta verbarum series, in qua is qui
baptizat, diabolum, Denomine adjuratum, ab co, qui baptizatur, excedere ac
procul fugere jubet. Nicetas in Gr. Naz. Orat, 40. p. 1066. See Dr. Cave Prim.
Christianity Part. 1. c. 10. c. 316.
the sincerity of him that comes to Baptism.

(16) Some (as a worthy Author of our own notes) deferred their baptizing in
imitation of the way that was taken with the young Heath^ns converted to
Christianity, who were instructed in the Yet though this abuse of Baptism
prevailed not upon that opinion only (viz. that all their Actual as well as
Original sins were washed away in Baptism, and so had the less to answer for,
if they were baptized toward the later end of their days) but upon the
occasion which was taken of educating and instructing Infidells in the Faith,
for some good time before they were baptized, which custom diverse born of
Christian Parents imitated; yet we find none that the Church wilfully suffered
to die without Baptism, who were descended of true believers, or had been
competently instructed in the Faith of Christ -- Scrivener, Course of Divinity,
page 196.
faith for some while before their baptism, and continued, like them in the
state of Catechumens for some good time before they would be baptized.

(17) Some deferred their baptizing, in imitation of the Example of Christ, and
would not be baptized, till of that age that he was of, when he was baptized,
viz. thirty years old, or thereabouts, (about which Age, whether on that
principle, or for some other reason, or occasion, were baptized, St. Ambrose,
St. Austin, and St. Hierom). Which pretense of theirs Greg. Nazianz. very
largely and solidly refutes; (...), etc. Gr. Naz. Orat. 40. p. 658, 659.
showing that Christ had no need of any baptismal purgation; that he was in no
fear by any danger for want of it; that he had particular reasons for his
forbearance proper to him, and incompetent to them; and that there is no
necessity of copying out all Christ's actions in our imitations, by several
instances.

(18) Some forbore baptism out of a fear of being reproached for Tritheits (the
owners and worshippers of three gods) because they were to be baptized in the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Against which fear
Greg. Nazianzen encourages his Auditors, by proposing himself to be their
Champion in the defense (...). Greg. Naz. Orat. 40. p. 699.
of the Catholic Doctrine of a Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the Divine
Essence; and offering to interpose himself between them and danger in that war;
and, so they might reap the good of it, to receive all the blows that should be
given in that encounter.

(19) Lastly, if I may have leave to conjecture, some forbore being baptized
out of fear of persecution for their Religion. How probably this is conjectured
will appear, when it is considered how difficult, or rather impossible it was
for any in those days, under persecuting Tyrants, to hold or enjoy any place of
power, profit, or honor, either in Court, City, or Army, or even life it self,
that was known to be a Christian; and how ready an expedient it was toward the
holding of such places, and enjoying life and liberties, and avoiding all
persecution upon the score of Christianity, by remaining unbaptized; since they
could not be proved Christians, that were never christened. And now having
shown the Reasons why several above the Age of Infants did themselves delay
their own baptizing, it follows secondly that I show upon what Reasons the
baptizing of children in their Infancy was delayed by others.

Now to this it may be said in General, that it is reasonable to suppose, that
on what accounts the Adult delayed to be baptized themselves, on the same they
delayed the baptizing of their children, (unless where the case was altered by
some particularity of circumstance); and so it came to pass that the baptizing
of many Infants was deserred till they came to riper years.

But there are further more Particular accounts to be given of the delaying of
Infants, more nearly relating unto them.

First, some were as yet Heathens themselves, unconverted to Christianity, when
their children were born: and no marvel if they would not make their children
Christians, who themselves were Heathens. And the same is the case of such as,
though in heart and purpose Christians when their children were born, yet kept
off from being baptized.

(2) Some Infants owed the delays of their baptizing to their Parents
tend^rness and cautiousness, who forbore to baptize them, for fear they shoud
be too weak either to endure the p^esent severities of baptism, especially as
then mostly administered, by a total immersion (and in some places three times)
into the water; or to avoid the after defilements, that would be contracted by
them, when they were baptized, through the imbecility of their nature, and the
power of temptations; whom Greg. Nazianz. checks for womanly weakness, and
littleness of faith; unlike (...). Gr. Naz. Orat. 40. p. 648. Vide Eliae
Cretens. notam in locum. Of the Trine Immersion see Dr. Cav^, Primitive
Christianity, Part. 1. c. 10. P. 322. Also Greg. Notes chapter 39. p. 171. and of
the Ancients Apostol. Canon 49. Dionys. de Eccl. Hierarch. cap. 4. Tertull.
advers. Praxeam. p. 659. Ed. Rig. and de Corona Mil. p. 121. D. Athanas. q. 94.
de Interp. Parab. Script.
therein to Hannah, who dedicated her Samuel unto God before he was born, and
consecrated him to his service as soon as he was weaned; advising to arm and
fortify their Infants against all fears, with that great and good Amulet of
the Trinity, by baptizing them into the Faith, of it.

(3) Some were apt to delay their Infants baptism upon the account of their
being insensible at their baptizing, of what was got or lost, by being or not
being baptized; (perhaps also on a supposition, that the Infants had no
perception of any inward operation, that baptism had upon them; which some,
that were baptized at full years, felt The ancient Christians speak of high
Illuminations wherewithal God pleased then to grace Baptism; I make no
question but they spoke as they felt, and that they talk no^ of a strange
change then wrought which never was -- Dr. Patrick, of Baptism, page 42.
, and St. Cyprian in particular testifies of himself, (l. 2. Ep. 2.) Whom Greg.
Nazianzen nevertheless advises (...). Gr. Naz. Orat. 40. p. 658.
by all means to baptize their Infants, especially in case of urgent danger;
telling them, it were better that their children were sanctified without the
sense, then died without the seal of baptism: arguing for the baptizing of the
Infants of Christians, though insensible of baptism, from the eircumcising of
the Infants of Jews the eighth day, though insensible of circumcision.

(4) Lastly, some might be of the mind of Tertullian, and Gregory Nazianzen
(who in this case have something of singularity in their opinions) and think it
might be more for their childrens Itaque pro cujusque personae condition ac
dispositione, etiam atate, cun^latio baptismi utilior est: pracipue tamen circa
parvalos. -- Ait quidem Dominus, Nolite illas prohibere ad me venire. Veni ant
ergo, dum adolescunt, veniant, dum discunt, dum quo veniant, docentur: siant
Christiani quum Christum nosse potucrint. -- Norint petere salutem, ut petenti
dedisse videaris. Tertull. de Bapt. page 264. Ed. Rigal. (...). Greg. Naz.
Orat. 40. p. 658.
advantage, if they were not baptized till they could be able to answer to,
though they could not fully understand their Catechisms; and in their own names
desire to be baptized, and might upon that account, unless in case of
necessity, defer their Baptism: the contrary whereto will (I hope) be
abundantly manisested in these ensuing Papers.

And these are all the Reasons that, in my little converse with the ancient
Writers, I have found, of anies deferring either their own, or their childrens
Baptizing; amongst all which there is not one, that so much as borders upon any
unlawfulness in Infants Baptism.

And now so many reasons being alleged for the delaying of Baptism; so many
shifts used for the putting it off, in the Primitive Times; and yet the
Lawfulness of its being administered to Infants never once questioned all the
while, the Vlawfulness of it never urged; it is a plain case, that those Times
had no such thoughts of Baptism as these have. For had they thought Infants
baptism unlawful for want of a Scripture command for it, or example of it, when
any had been exhorted to an early baptizing of their children, how easy, and
how unanswerable an answer had been ready at hand? Christ never commanded any
such thing as Infants baptism; the Apostles never practiced any such thing as
the baptizing of Infants; there is neither Precept for it, nor Example of it in
Holy Scripture, and therefore it is unlawful, and we dare not do it. But in
regard there is in all those times not the least appearance of any such
objection made against it, or of any such plea pretended for the deferring of
it, it is plain they thought there was either precept for it, or example of it
in Scripture, or both; or else thought that want of either, or both, did not
make it unlawful, and so did not defer it upon account of the unlawfulness of
it. And so all our Antipaedobaptists great boast of Antiquity, for the
baptizing of only Adult believing Persons, and against the baptizing of
Believers Infant children, affords them but little roast, there is not the
least strength added to their cause thereby, nor weakness brought upon ours.
And I wish those ignorant ones that are deluded with the great noise, and gay
show of it, to take notice hereof, that they be no longer deceived thereby.

And now this grand Prejudice being (as I hope it is) removed, I shall no
longer detain the Reader from the Treatise it self, than to desire him to join
with me in prayer to God, to bless it to the end for which it is designed.

A Prayer.
GRacious Lord God, who are not willing that any should perish, but willest
that all should be saved and come unto the knowledge of the Truth; and have
sent both thy Prophets, and thy Apostles, thy Son, and thy Spirit, to convince
men of Error, and bring them unto the Truth, be pleased graciously to bless
this Treatise, and make it useful unto that end. Dispose the minds of those
ignorant and deceived ones that shall read it unto a readiness to receive the
truth therein held forth in the love of it. Open blind eyes, and soften hard
hearts, that they may discern the Truth when it shall be proposed to them, and
have kindly impressions made by the power of it upon them. Remove from them all
prejudicate opinion and self-conceit, all passionateness and worldly interest,
and every thing that may hinder the operation of thy grace, in the declaration
of thy truth, upon them. And make this Treatise effectually instrumental to the
confirmation of such as stand in the truth, to the satisfaction of th^se that
doubt of it, and to the restoration of such as are fallen from it; that so it
may turn to the glory of thy Name, and the benefit of thy Church, in the
healing of breaches, and saving of souls. Grant this, O God, for the sake of
Jesus Christ, thy Son, and our Savior. Amen.

The Litany.
That it may please thee to give to all thy people increase of grace, to her
^eekly thy word, and to receive it with pure affection, and to bring forth the
fruits of the Spirit;

We beseech thee to hear us, Good Lord.

That it may please thee to bring into the way of truth all such as have erred,
and are deceived;

We beseech thee to hear us, Good Lord.

That it may please thee to strengthen such as do stand, and to comfort and
help the weak hearted, and to raise up them that fall, and finally to beat down
Satan under our feet;

We beseech thee to hear us, Good Lord.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our Father, which art in heaven, etc.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be world without end. Amen.

ERRATA.
Page 3. l. 15. read Infants to make. p. 48. l. 24. especially being ly. p. 51.
l. 12. for him. p. 62. l. 25. Christ's is. p. 75. Sect. 4. marg. l. 4. add
Sedul. p. 83. Sect. 5. marg. l. 3. (...). l. 4. (...). p. 84. marg. l. 21.
(...). p. 93. l. 29. (he. p. 103. l. 5. very grace. p. 108. marg. l. 1. (...).
p. 122. marg. l. 11. (...). l. 22. (...). p. 136. marg. l. 1. vitium and depr^
-- p. 144. l. 20. neglect it. p. 146. marg. l. 2. pertinere. l. 9. (...). p.
146. l. 7. was in our. p. 156. l. 6. as by a means. p. 157. marg. l. 23. (...).
p. 158. marg. l. 4. nativiton. l. 22. per ejus virt -- l. 26. virginem. p 180.
l. 9. baptizing few or no. p. 185. l. 25. done by either -- p. 199. mar. l 8.
Matthew. 28. 19. p. 207. l. 16. old, who. p. 208. l. 9. (...). marg. l. 8.
relinquere. p. 213. l. 9. that will have. p. 237. l. 23. Frisingensis. p. 271.
marg. l. 14. (...). p. 273. l. 14. nor are. p. 310. l. 29. initiation. p. 327.
l. 8. Jaylor's. 399. l. 24. (...). p. 409. l. 22. r. H^terodox. p. 415. m. l.
3. (...) l. 4. (...). l. 12. (...). p. 419. marg. l. 10. tulisse. p. 421. marg.
l. 3. adoleri. p. 423. marg. l. 14. Ac ne

A MODEST PLEA FOR Infants BAPTISM.
CHAP. 1. The Text. The Occasion of the Words. The Doctrine ga^hered from it,
and proved.
LUKE 18. 16. Suffer little Children to come unto me, and forbid them not.
. 1. THese words were spoken by our Savior to his Disciples. The occasion of
them was this. Certain Persons came, and brought their Children also, to Jesus,
desiring that he would touch them, (v. 15.) that is, as St. Matthew relates it,
put his h^nds upon them and pray, (Matthew. 19. 13.) This action of theirs was so
far disliked of by our Saviors Disciples, that they rebuked them, and would
have chid them away. But this carriage of his Disciples toward them our
Savior did very much dislike of. Indeed St. Mark tells us, that (...), he was
much displeased thereat, (Mark 10. 14.) And in that displeasure, when he had
called the Infants unto him, he spoke unto his Disciples these words, Suffer
little children to come unto me, and forbid them not.

. 2. So that the words are an Oblique Rebuke given by our Savior unto his
Disciples, for going about to hinder the coming of little Children unto him:
and a direct command to permit their coming unto him for the future; and that
Command backed with a direct Prohibition, forbidding their ever after hindering
of them to come. And they brought unto him also Infants, that he should touch
them: but when his Disciples saw it, they rebuked them. But Jesus called them
unto him, and said, Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them
not; for of such is the kingdom of God. From whence I gather this Point, That
little children are to be suffered to come unto Christ, and ought not to be
forbidden coming unto him.

. 3. This Doctrine is so near the very words of our Savior, and those recorded
by three Evangelists, and that with so great concord, that in the Original,
there is no difference among them, save in the order of the words, and in the
variation of a Tense (St. Matthew using (...), the Aorist, whereas St. Mark and
St. Luke use (...), the Present Tense, which difference in show is really none
indeed, the Aorist being ordinarily used for the Present Tense) that it will
not be much needful to prove it by any other medium, than what the Text it self
will afford; and that is this. What our Savior commanded should be permitted,
and forbad should be hindered, that ought to be suffered, and ought not to be
forbidden. But our Savior commanded that little children should be permitted
to come, and forbad they should be hindered from coming to him. Therefore little
Children are to be suffered, and ought not to be forbidden to come unto Christ.

. 4. Yet for the opening of the Point three things I shall endeavor to clear:
(1) What we are to understand by the Children that are to be suffered to come
unto Christ. (2) Of what children it was that our Savior gave command that
they should be suffered to come to him. (3) What coming of those children unto
Christ it is, that is to be suffered, and ought not to be hindered.

CHAP. II.
Of the Children that are to be suffered to come to Christ; Infants.

. 1. FOr the First, the little Children, that are to be suffered to come to
Christ; it is evident that they are Infants. Insantem autem accipimus septem
annis minorem: haec enim aetas quicquid videt ignorant. Wesenbecii Parat. in
Pandectas Juris civilis. Digest. lib. 48. Tit. 8.
The Original word (...) used in the Text, being a Diminutive from (...),
properly signifies a child under seven years of age, as Arraignment of
Anabaptism. p. 44. and 232.
Mr. Cragge from Hippocrates and Beza, observes. And indeed it is spoken of our
Savior, at that time when the Wise men came to him, and found him with his
Mother at Bethlehem (Matthew. 2. 11.) (...), they found the young child.

. 2. Again in Mark 10. 16. it is said of these little children, that Jesus took
them up in his arms; which is a clear indication of their being children of a
small age, as well as stature, very infants.

. 3. Lastly, it is expressed in the verse before my Text, that they were
Infants. (...), One Translation renders it babes. And so in 1 Pet. 2. 2. (...),
is new born babes.
And they brought unto him also Infants, or, even Infants, or, very Infants.
Now (...), as Eustathius tells us, is (...), a new born child and brought up at
Nurse. So that of Infants we are to understand it that our Savior spoke, when
he said, Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them not.

CHAP. III.
What Children are to be suffered to come unto Christ.

. 1. FOr the Second, Of what Children it was that our Savior commanded, that
they should be suffered to come to him: it may be a question, whether our
Savior did mean, what he said, only of those particular Infants then brought
to him, but by his Disciples kept back from him; or whether his meaning in
those words were not of an indefinite extent, so as that the concernment
thereof may reach unto our children, as well as unto them. And to that my
Answer is, that (at least as I conceive) our Saviors words were not a
Particular Order of concernment only to the then present Infants, but were of a
concernment so general, as to reach down even unto our Insants also, at this
distance from that time and place.

. 2. For first, Suppose the next day more Infants, or other Infants the same
day, had been brought for the same end, that those were, unto Christ, is it
imaginable, that the Disciples of our Savior, would have again rebuked them
that brought them, and so have stood in need of a new Rebuke from our Savior
for so dealing with them, and a new Command to suffer them to come to him? If
this cannot with any reason be imagined, then it is most clear, that the words
of our Savior were of concernment unto more Infants, than those particular
Ones, at that time brought unto him. And if they concerned any more besides
them, then who can tell how many more besides them they did concern? Yea what
can with any color of reason be said, why the concernment of them should not
be universal?

. 3. But secondly, There is nothing either in the Words of our Savior, or in
the Reason used by our Savior, restraining the concernment thereof unto those
Particular Infants.

. 4. First there is nothing in the Words of our Savior. For they are
Indefinite: and an Indefinite Enunciation it tantamount to an Universal. There
is not an Individuating Particle in the whole Speech to determine the
concernment thereof to these particular Infants. His Words only are, Suffer
little children to come unto me. He does not say, Suffer only these little
children to come unto me. Take the words as they are in the Greek, and they
only are (...), little children, not (...) these little children. In St. Mark.
10. 14. the words are, Suffer the little children: but the Particle the here is
at most but an Emphatical note, intimating that the littleness of children
should be no hindrance to their coming to Christ: but that even the little, the
least of children, should be permitted to come to him as well as elder bigger
persons: It is not an Individuating Pronoun singling out these from all others
to be the only children that should be suffered to come to him. And in the
Liturgy the words have no such Emphasis upon them, being only, Suffer little
children to come unto me, just as here the same Greek words in the Text are
rendered.

. 5. Secondly, there is nothing in the Reason used by our Savior restraining
the concernment of his words to those Particular Infants: his words being, not
(...) of these but (...) of such as these, is the kingdom of Heaven. Such as
th^se, is an expression very far from being restrictive exactly unto these.
Nothing here then restrains the concernment of our Saviors words unto those
Particular Infants: rather here is something that enlarges the concernment
thereof to an Indefinite number of Infants. And that is the Consideration of
our Saviors fetching the Reason for the permission of Childrens coming to him,
not from some consideration, which was of particular concernment to these
Children; but from such an Head as was of general concernment unto all other
Infants as well as these. He says not, Suffer little children to come unto me,
for they are children of my near kindred, special friends, favoureres, or
benefactors, for whom I have a singular respect: but, Suffer little children to
come unto me, for of such is the kingdom of God; q. d. these and all Infants of
their age, are so qualified as they ought to be, who are to be the Subjects of
my kingdom, into which there is no entrance for any, except they be converted
and become as little children, (Matthew. 18. 3.) and therefore suffer them, and,
by a parity of reason, all others too that shall be brought to me, no less than
them, to come unto me.

. 6. Thirdly, there is something in the Context, that clearly shows, that our
Saviors words are more properly of concernment unto other Infants, than to
these. And that is the Point of Time, when our Savior spoke these words: and
that was, after he had called the Infants unto him, and not before. For so it
is evidently in the beginning of the verse, But Jesus (...) having called (i.
e. when, or after that he had called) them (i. e. the Infants themselves, and
not his Disciples, nor those that brought the Infants) he said, etc. It is
(...) in the neuter gender, which agrees with (...) the Infants: not (...) the
mascuculine gender, which it should be if it referred either to (...) the
Disciples, or (...) those that brought the Infants. And therefore Beza renders
the Text, Jesus vero quum puerulos advocasset, dixit, But Jesus, when he had
called the Infants, said, etc. Now to make the concernment of our Saviors
words to be proper to those particular Infants, is to render our Saviors
command perfectly needless. For what need were there of his bidding his
Disciples to suffer those to come to him, that already were at, and with him.
Yea suppose he had only called them, and they were not yet come, who can
imagine, that it were needful to give any further command to his Disciples to
suffer those to come at him, whom he had but just then called unto him? It is
therefore of Infants in general, and not of those particular Infants only that
he spoke.

. 7. Yet Fourthly, Our Saviors speaking these words upon that particular
occasion, does not necessarily restrain the concernment of his words unto those
particular Infants. Acts of justice, and acts of Grace, are of general
concernment, though the occasions of them be particular; unless there be
something in the circumstances of the acts, that may lay a restraint upon their
concernment. And the Apostle has notably taught us to draw general conclusions
from particular expressions, (in Heb. 13. 5, 6.) He has said, I will never
leave thee nor for sake thee. So that we may boldly say, The Lord is my helper.
The promise of not being for saken of the Lord, was a particular one, made upon
a particular occasion, unto a particular person, namely Joshua, (Jos. 1. 5.)
And yet says the Apostle (so general is the concernment of it, that) we may
boldly say, The Lord is my helper. And thus, were the occasion of this Speech
of our Savior never so particular, yet how fairly is this general conclusion
drawn therefrom? Christ gave order, that little children, when they were
brought, should be suffered to come to him, and not be forbidden. Therefore
little children should now, and at all times, be suffered, and should not be
forbidden to come unto Christ: especially since, as there is the same need for
our children, that there was for those children, to come to Christ; so there is
the same mercy in Christ now, to move him to receive our children, that there
was in him then, to move him to receive theirs: and there is no circumstance in
all the action debarring our children of his mercy, and restraining it unto
theirs.

. 8. But it is time I should proceed to speak to the Third, and show what
coming of little children unto Christ it is, that is to be suffered, and ought
not to be hindered.

CHAP. IV.
What coming of little children unto Christ is to be sufferedm and ought not to
be hindered.

. 1. NOw to clear this, we must show that the Phrase of coming unto Christ is
capable of various interpretations.

. 2. And first it notes an approach, or access of any person unto Christ, as
exhibiting himself corporally present in place. Thus those Saducees came to
him, that came to pose him, (Matthew. 22. 23.) And this is the ordinary and
proper signification of the Phrase. And in this sense those Infants spoken of
in the Text, did come to Christ. Their being brought to him, was a coming of
theirs to him. When the Disciples rebuked those that brought them, our Savior
commands that they [the children] should be suffered to come unto him.

. 3. But in this sense, now, our children cannot come unto Christ. Christ is no
where corporally present upon earth, that children may be carried to him, or in
this sense come at him. In Heaven indeed he is corporally present: but thither
children cannot be carried, thither children cannot come. Whither I go ye
cannot com^, says our Savior, (John 13. 23.) i. e. not till after death; nor
then neither, but in spirit, till the resurrection of the dead. For flesh and
blood (unchanged) cannot inherit the kingdom of God, (1 Cor. 15. 20.) So that
the words taken in relation to children now, are not to be understood properly.
And therefore unless we mean not to have our children come at Christ, we must
go seek out some other meaning of the Phrase, and find out some other way by
which they may come to him.

. 4. Secondly, therefore the Phrase may be taken Figuratively. And so sometimes
in notes a becoming, or a being made a Disciple unto Christ. And so, when our
Savior says (Matthew. 11. 28.) Come unto me all ye that labor, his meaning is,
become disciples to me: for so it follows (in ver. 29.) Take my yoke upon you,
and learn of me. Where he offers himself to be a Master to such as should come
to him. And in what other sense than this can we understand that (in John 3.
26.) Behold the same baptizeth, and all men Omnes currunt ad baptismum illius.
Alcu. in Aqui. Au. Cat.
come unto him. That is, Jesus by Baptism receives proselytes, and there is
great recourse unto him for that end, many persons become his Disciples by
receiving his Baptism. And to th^s agrees the Paraphrase of Nonnus upon the
place. (...). Non. in loc.
All the citizens make have desiring to partake of his divine washing, i. e. to
become his Proselytes, to be made his Disciples by Bap^ism. And in accordance
with this sense is the same Phrase interpretable, (John 5. 40.) Ye will not
((...)) come to me, (i. e. become my disciples, believing on me, and being
baptized by me) that ye may have life. And See Dr. Ham. on John 6. 37.
Similitudo sumpta a discipulis quos pater magistro tradit, quique volentes eum
frequentant. Grot. ap. Poli. Synops.
so again (in John 6. 37, 44, 65.) In all which places the phrase of coming
unto Christ, implies a becoming disciples to him, being made his Proselytes.

. 5. So then, to become a Disciple to Christ is in one sense to come to Christ.
And if children may be made Disciples to Christ, then there is a way left,
whereby they also, as well as elder persons, may come to Christ.

. 6. And that they may, is very fairly hinted even in this Text: the words
which our Savior uses to express the coming of these Infants to him by, being
the very words, as is observed, Dr. Hammond.
of which that name is composed, by which such as became Disciples to Christ
were anciently called, viz. Proselytes. His words are, Suffer the little
children (...) (or, as St. Matthew relates them (...)) (...), to come to me, q.
d. to become my Proselytes: for so were they called, that from Gentilism did
((...)) come over unto Judaism before Christ's time: and from either Gentilism
or Judaism came over unto Christianity, in, or after the days of Christ. And by
those words of St. Athanasius, wherein he mentions some other books, besides
the Canonical ones, that were by the Fathers proposed to be read ((...), i. e.)
to those that as yet came to, and were desirous to be catechized, i. e.
instructed or taught the word of piety, or the principles of true religion, a
Proselyte seems to be described. And the word it self ((...) proselyte) we have
indiverse Scriptures. (Matthew. 23. 15.) Ye compass sea and land to make one
Pros^lyte, i. e. to get and gain one Disciple. So Acts 6. 5. and 2. 10. and 13.
43.

. 7. And it is fully confirmed by the Reason, which our Savior gives for this
his Command of suffering the little children to come unto him, and Prohibition
of any man's hindering them from coming, in the latter end of the verse, for of
such is the kingdom of God. Which what other sense can it have than this,
Little children have in them such qualifications; as ought to be in every one,
that belongs to my kingdom, that is, in every Disciple of mine, every Proselyte
unto Christianity: and therefore let even them also, as well as others, come to
me, be made my Disciples, admitted as Proselytes unto, and received as Subjects
into the kingdom of God: it being most reasonable that they should be received
into the kingdom of God, who are such as the kingdom of God consists of. So
then Children may become Disciples of Christ, be made his Proselytes. And if
Childrens being brought to Christ was looked upon by him as their coming to him;
why should we not think that their being brought to him to be his Disciples
will be looked upon by him as their coming to him to be his Disciples? Since him
that comes to him he will in no wise cast out, (John 6. 37.)

. 8. O but, the doubt still remains, which way may our children become, or be
made Disciples to Christ. I answer by being baptized in the Name, and with the
Baptism of Christ. As Baptism was one Ceremony by which before Christ's time
Heathens were made Disciples unto Moses, so Baptism was the only Ceremony by
which, both in and after Christ's time, both Heathens and Jews were made
Disciples unto Christ. And this is evident as in the former part from what was
customary among the Jews: (as we shall see afterward) whence that Baptism, by
which men were admitted Members of the Church of the Jews was called Baptismus
ad Proselytismum, The Baptism of men for Proselytism, or bringing them into
Discipleship: so in the latter part from what is said by our Savior himself
(in Matthew. 28. 19.) Go ye therefore, and (...), disciple ye, or, make Disciples
of all nations, bring in all nations to be my Disciples, baptizing them in the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Where the baptizing
them is expressly laid down as a means of their being made Disciples unto
Christ, or Christians. And accordingly the Persian Interpreters explain
baptizing to be making Christians. Bibl. Polyglot.
Baptize them, say they, that is make them Christians; who what are they else
but Disciples to Christ? And so Tertullian De Bapt. c. 18.
says of little children, siant Christiani, let them be made Christians, for
let them be baptized, as soon as they shall be able to know Christ. As
therefore men were made Disciples to Moses by being baptized into Moses, (John
9. 28. 1 Cor. 10. 2.) so are they made Disciples to Christ by being baptized
into Christ. And therefore making and baptizing Disciples go together, John 4.
1. Jesus made and baptized, that is, (as if the words had been (...)) made by
baptizing more Disciples than John: accordingly as our Savior said to his
Disciples (Matthew. 28. 19.) (...), make Disciples baptizing (i. e. by baptizing)
them.

. 9. And whereas it may be said, that Baptizing is not enough to make a
Disciple without ^eaching, because our Savior joins Teaching to Baptizing,
saying, Go make all nations Disciples baptizing them and teaching them. I
answer, that indeed men are made Disciples both these ways, by baptizing, and
by teaching: and that there must be both these before one can be a complete and
perfect Disciple; but that by either of these ways alone, without the other, a
man may be entered into discipleship, made an initial (if I may so speak) or an
imperfect disciple. And there is no necessity from our Saviors words, that
there must be both, before one can be a Disciple in any measure or degree. For
our Savior does not say conjunctly make disciples baptizing and teaching: but
without any conjunction, baptizing them, teaching them. So that where either of
these is, there a Person may become, or be made a Disciple, though not so
complete and perfect, as where there is both.

. 10. Forasmuch then as to be made a Disciple to Christ is to come to Christ;
and to be baptized with the Baptism of Christ is to be made a Disciple to
Christ; and our Children may be baptized with the Baptism of Christ, here is a
fair and a clear way opened for our children to come to Christ. And since they
cannot any other way but th^s come at him, this way they are to be suffered to
come to him, and ought not to be hindered from so coming: unless we mean to
cross our Saviors command, who, not determining their coming to this, or that
particular way, but leaving it open and free for them to come to him any way
that they may come, expressly gives forth order that little children should be
suffered to come to him, and not be forbidden.

CHAP. V.
The Interpretation of the Text vindicated, and Infants Baptism further proved.

. 1. NOw interpret the words any other way, and I cannot imagine how the
Reason, which our Savior gives, why Children should be suffered to come to
him, (viz. because they are such as the kingdom of God consists of) should
not be impertinent, either to his Command to suffer them to come, or else to
the Occasion of his giving of that Command.

. 2. First, interpret the words of coming to him by way of bodily approach
whilst he was corporally present upon earth: and so indeed those Infants might
and did come to him. But how was their being such as the kingdom of God
consisted of, a Reason of their being suffered so to come? For if there were
any force in that Reason, then by the same Reason, none but such as the Kingdom
of God consisted of should have been suffered to come to Christ. Which as it is
contrary to Practice; for there were suffered to come to Christ such as the
kingdom of God ought not to consist of, viz. such as sought the death and
destruction of Christ: so likewise it is contrary to Reason; for how should
Christ by his preaching have converted such as were not of his kingdom,
considered according to their present state, if they might not have been
suffered to come to him, but must have been forbidden coming? So that of a mere
bodily access unto Christ's corporal presence the words are not interpretable:
such an interpretation crossing our Saviors Reason that he gives for these
words.

. 2. Again, interpret the words of coming to him where he is now corporally
present in heaven: and so, supposing children may come to him, and supposing
them such in some respect, as that Kingdom of God consists of, so the Reason
will have some pertinency to the Command of our Savior to suffer them to come;
such not being to be denied reception into that kingdom of God, as that Kingdom
of God consists of. But then how will our Saviors Command be pertinent to
the present Occasion of his speech? No question being made by his Disciples at
that time about the final estates of children dying in their Infancy; and the
whole matter being that they denied admission of some Infants brought by others
unto Christ to be touched by the Imposition of his hands, and to be prayed over
by him, probably in order to their being made his Proselytes by baptism: at
which denial of theirs he being angry, gave order that the children should be
suffered to come to him, namely for such purpose as those then came, in all
likelihood to be by his Imposition of hands and Prayer consigned over unto
Proselytism, and should not be hindered from coming to him.

. 4. And what were a declaration of childrens capacity for glory, and fitness
to come to Christ, when he should be corporally present in Heaven, if they died
in their infancy, to this matter? especially at a time when Christ was not
corporally present in Heaven, but lived in body here below upon the earth.

. 5. Again a Command so given, as this was, would suppose an ability in those,
to whom it was given, to do contrary unto that Command, namely, to hinder
Children from reception into the Kingdom of God, notwithstanding their greatest
capacity for that kingdom. But that was neither then in the power of his
Disciples, nor now is in the power of any man on earth. Supposing children
dying in their Infancy to belong to the kingdom of glory, it is needless to
command any man to suffer them to come to that kingdom.

. 6. So that neither of a Spiritual access of these children unto Christ, where
he is now corporally present in glory are these words interpretable: such an
interpretation of our Saviors words rendering them impertinent to the occasion
of them. And I hope none will say that our Savior did at any time speak
impertinent words.

. 7. And therefore not being able to imagine any other way by which our
Children may come, and yet may be hindered from coming unto Christ, but that One
way, which has hitherto been insisted on, namely by being made Disciples to
Christ, by being baptized into the Name and Faith of Christ. I conclude that
this way our children ought to be suffered to come to Christ, and ought not to
be hindered from so coming.

. 8. And now, the Point being thus explained, and the Explication thereof thus
vindicated, I appeal to Common Reason, whether or no there be not here that,
which the Antipaedobaptists of these days do with so much insolency demand of
us, viz. a fair and clear Scripture Ground for Infants Baptism. If Children may
come to Christ, and must by the command of Christ be suffered to come to him,
and there be no other way of their coming to him but by Baptism: what can be
more plain, than that in commanding that they should be suffered to come to
him, he commanded that they should be suffered to be baptized, and forbad that
they should be hindered from Baptism.

. 9. And by this time I hope it appears with how good judgment our Church has
appointed this passage of Scripture, (which, as H. D. tells us, was called (of
old) the Scripture Treatise of Baptism, page 177.
Canon for Infants Baptism, and upon which (as he says) much stress has been
laid since to prove the same) to be read in the Congregation at the baptizing
of Infants; namely, as containing in it a fair ground, and a clear proof for
Infants Baptism: which I hope you do by this time see to be no such
scriptureless thing as our Antipaedobaptists do pretend.

. 10. Yet least any man should think this Collection alone to be too weak a
ground to bear that weight we lay upon it, (though by the way I must say, that
a Consequence from Scripture rightly made is a ground good enough to bear any
weight that can be fairly laid upon it, and as valid to all intents and
purposes as if it were express Scripture it self, that being eminently
contained in the Scripture, what ever it be that may be fairly drawn from it:
and that we have no better ground then a Consequence from Scripture to build
other Points of our Christian Faith upon, every way as weighty and material as
Infants Baptism is,) yet, I say, I shall for your better settlement in the
belief of this Catholic truth, confirm it unto you by this one further Reason.

. 11. That by which Children may have Benefit; for which they have Need; of
which they are Capable; and to which they have Right, that they ought to be
suffered to have, and ought not to be denied the having of. But Children may
have Benefit by Baptism; they have Need for Baptism; they are Capable of
Baptism; and they have a Right unto Baptism. Therefore they ought to be
suffered to have it, and they ought not to be denied the having of it.

. 12. That Children ought to be suffered to have, and ought not to be denied
that, whereby they may be Benefited; for which they have Need; of which they
are Capable; and to which they have a Right, I suppose it not needful to prove.
For Charity will give them that Benefit for which they have need: and Justice
will not deny them that Right of which they are Capable. I shall therefore
forthwith proceed to make it out unto you, that Children may have Benefit by
Baptism; have Need for Baptism; are Capable of Baptism; and have a Right unto
Baptism. And these things I shall show you severally and in order, beginning
first with the Benefits that Infants may have by Baptism.

CHAP. VI.
Baptism beneficial unto Children in regard of their early consecration thereby
unto God.

. 1. IT will be found upon search, that Baptism is beneficial unto Children
more ways than one.

. 2. And First, by Baptism they are offered and presented, dedicated and
consecrated unto God. Baptism is a consecration of the Baptized unto God, who
are thereby Sanctified to his service. Hence that of St Paul to the
Corinthians, (1 Cor. 7. 14.) The unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife,
and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband: else were your children
unclean, but now are they holy, i. e. separate from the common unclean
condition of Heathens, and by Baptism admitted into the community and relation,
and state of Christians, who are Saints by calling, as being called to be
Saints, that is Holy Ones, and by their very 1 Cor. 1. 1.
calling consecrated unto God, and obliged by their Naming of the name of
Christ, who is named upon them at their baptizing, to depart from iniquity, (2 Timothy 2. 19.)

. 3. Hence as Beza Nam Baptismo consecramur Deo, quoniam ibi nostra adoptio in
Christo per Spiritum Sanctum Sancitur. Bez. in Match. 28-19. (...), just in
Martyr. Apolog.
of late said, By Baptism we are consecrated unto God, in as much as our
Adoption in Christ is there ratified by the Holy Ghost: so Justine Martyr of
old, going to give an account of the primitive way of introducing persons into
the Church by Baptism begins his relation thus, Now will I set forth after what
manner we did dedicate [or offer up] our selves to God, when we were renewed
through Christ.

. 4. And as our Church in the baptizing of Infants designs a Dedication of
them unto God: so did the Ancient Church too. Whence that Grant that whosoever
is here dedicated unto thee by our Office and Ministry, etc. Office for Infants
Baptism. (...). Greg. Nazian. Orat. 4. de Bapt. Quibus tamen ad Consecrationem
remisionemque Originalis peccati prodest eorum fides a quibus offeruntur D.
Aug. Quinquag. Hom. Sermon. 50.
advice of Gregory Nazianzen; If thou have an Infant, let not iniquity get
time; let it be sanctified in infancy, let it in the tender age be consecrated
by the Spirit. Where certainly it is the Baptismal Sanctification and
Consecration that he speaks of, and by the Spirit he means Christian Baptism:
the Spirit, which is one part of Baptism, as Water is the other (which two our
Savior joins both together John 3. 5. saying, Except a man be born of Water,
and the Spirit, etc. and by both means one thing, viz. Christian Baptism) being
put for the whole: even as Water which is the other part of Baptism is by St.
Paul (Ephesians. 5. 26.) put for the whole, saying, that he might sanctify and
cleanse it by the washing of Water, that is, of Christian Baptism.

. 5. Now for children, even in their Infancy to become by the designation of
their Parents Gods own portion, and to be made Holy unto the Lord, this
certainly cannot but be for the childrens good. For as much as being
appropriated unto God in a nearer relation, they will be respected by him with
a dearer affection.

. 6. When any Thing is offered unto God in sincerity, God kindly accepts of it.
You may see instances in Abels offering the firstlings Genesis 4. 4.
of his flock; Noah's offering of every clean Genesis 8. 20, 21.
beast and fowl; David's 2 Samuel 2. 2 Chronicles. 7. Hagg. 2.
designing; Solomon's building; and the Jews repairing a House to serve God in.
So when any Person is offered and consecrate unto God in integrity of heart,
God usually blesses both the offerer, and offering. You may see instances in
Abraham's offering Genesis 22.
his Son Isaac in sacrifice to God; in Samsons Judge. 16.
being made a Nazarite unto God from his mothers womb; and in Hannahs
consecrating her Son 1 Samuel 1.
Samuel to the Service of God.

. 7. So that for our children to be by us offered, and consecrated unto God and
his service is the way to entitle them to Gods favor, and to derive on them
his blessing. And that is reason enough, were there no more, why we should
baptize them, and by so doing entitle God more nearly to them, entering them
into the Catalogue of his more peculiar possessions, listing them as Tyros into
the number of his soldiers, and enrolling them into his family as his more
immediate servants. Whereupon our Church in her Office for the Baptizing of
Infants, not only gives the baptized Infant a Cross in his forehead, as a
badge and cognizance of his Profession, and Relation; but also prays to God for
him, that he would receive him for his own child by Adoption.

. 8. Not to add, that so early a Consecration of them unto God, and to his
service, so timely a Dedication of them unto piety and holiness, is not without
a great probability of being very influential on them in their future lives, in
the way of a preservative of them from impierty and iniquity: natural
conscience, that light set up in the soul by the Author of Lights, being likely
to suggest unto them, in their first approaches to understanding and reason,
what a shame it will be for them to give themselves unto wickedness, when they
are men, who were dedicated unto holiness, when they were children; to addict
themselves in their Age to the Devil, who in their Infancy were consecrated
unto God. Whence doubtless it was that Greg. Naz. advised the giving to the
(...). Greg. Naz. Orat. 4. de Bapt.
Infant the Trinity (i. e. doubtless, Baptism into the Faith of the Trinity)
that great and good phylactery, or preservative: there being no more likely
means to preserve them from the after debauches of judgment or conversation,
then the sense of a foregoing consecration to Truth and Purity by being
baptized into the Faith of the Holy Trinity, early instilled by a Carachetical
infusion of the due notices of it into a child in his Infancy; whereby he is as
it were prepossessed for God and Goodness, before any possession can be gotten
of him by Satan and wickedness.

CHAP. VII.
Baptism Beneficial unto Children in regard of their being brought thereby into
Covenant with God.

. 1. SEcondly, by Baptism Infants are brought into Covenant with God. Baptism
is to us, as Circumcision was to the Jews, a Ceremony of our initiation or
entrance into Covenant with God. And as then all circumcised ones were, so now
all baptized ones are brought into Covenant with God, by a mutual stipulation
and contract explicitly or implicitly made between them, and God; whereupon
they become Gods, and God becomes Theirs, upon Baptismus significat nunc in
Ecclesia pactum illud, quod primum ab omni Christiano cum Deo initur. Flacci
Illirici Clavis Script. Voc. Baptismus. See Mr. Servieners Course of Divinity.
l. 1. par. 1. cap. 40. page 193. Sparks Brotherly Persuasion to Unity. c. 11.
Mr. Hookers Eccl. Pol. l. 5. 64. Gr. Naz. tells us that Baptism in brief does
import (...). Orat. 40. Jam vero is qui baptizatur, secundae vitae meliorisque
vivendi rationis and instituti pactum cum Deo init, priori and flagitiosae
vitae nuncium remittit -- Nicetas in Orat. 40. Greg. Nazianz.
Covenant-terms, even the terms of the Gospel which is the New Covenant; they
promising God to be His, and he promising them to be Theirs; they to believe,
and obey him, and he to pardon, and save them.

. 2. Hence all along in the Primitive Church, and See Dionys. Ar op. Eccles.
Hierarch. chapter 4. Hocker Eccles. Polit. l. 5.. 63.
so downward we read of stipulations, promises, contracts, covenants made by
the Adult persons that were admitted to baptism: and of no admission of any
such to be baptized without such stipulating, contracting, and covenanting.
(...). D. Basil. l. de Spir. Sancto. c. 12.


. 3. And because of Parvuli allo profitente baptizantur, qui adhuc loqui vel
credere nesciunt, Gratian. 3 par. de Consecr. did. 4. Cum pro parvulis alii
respondent, ut implicatur ^rga eos celebratio sacramenti, valet utique ad eorum
consecrationem, quia ipsi pro se respondere non possunt. Id. ib. Hooker Eccl.
Pol. l. 5. S. 64 p. 338.
the incapacity of Infants to such Covenant in their own persons, Therefore
that they might not for want of one circumstance go without all those mighty
advantages which might amount and accrue to them from their being persons in
Covenant with God, they were by the piety and charity of the Church allowed the
benefit of having others to transact in that affair for them, and make those
stipulations, contracts, and covenants in their names, which themselves could
not make in their own persons. Prositeor me huic puero suasurum cum intelligere
sacra per aetatem poterit, ^ivinis meis institutionibus, ut and nuncium
remittat adversariis, atque ab eis desiciat, and profiteatur exolvatque divina
promissa. So Dionys. Areop. expounds the Undertaking of the Surety for the
Infant. Eccles. Hier. c. 12. See Dr. Sparks Brotherly Persuasion, chapter 11. Quid
enim necesse est sponsores etiam periculo ingeri? Tert. de Bapt.
Which Transactors on their behalf were called Sponsores, Susceptores,
Fidejussores, i. e. Promisers, Undertakers, Sureties, because of their
promising, undertaking, and engaging, that the children should be brought up,
in the knowledge of that Faith, into which they were baptized, and, as much as
in them lay, to the performing of that Covenant, into which they were entered at
their baptism. And of this engaging of Sureties for Infants in this case
Tertullian is a clear witness for his time, whilst, as thinking it better to
defer the baptizing of Infants for a while, he asks what necessity there was of
Sureties being run into hazard upon that account.

And accordingly Vos ante omnia ta^ mulieres quam viros, qui filios in
Baptismate suscepistis mon^o u^ vos cognoscatis fidejussores apud Deum
extitisse pro illis, quos visi estis de sacro font suscipere, etc. Gratian. 3
pars did. 4. Ab hoc igitur qui puerum i^ sancta vita instituturum se esse
pollicetur exigit pontifex, ut ita dicam, abrenunciationum prosessionem
sanctasque professiones- Dion. Areopag. Eccles. Hier. cap. 12. Dr. Sparks
Brotherly Persuasion, c. 1^.
Gratian put all those, whether Women or Men, who had performed the office of
Godfathers and Godmothers to children at their baptizing, in mind, that they
had rendered themselves Sureties unto God for them, whom they had done that
office for. And Dionys. the Areopag. an Author of great Antiquity, if not
altogether so old as the Apostles days, declaring the manner, as well as
ground, of the Churches admitting Infants to Baptism, says that the Priest
requires of the ((...)) surety that promises to bring the child up in holiness
of life, to make the abrenunciation, and professions (usually made at the
admission of Adult Proselytes to baptism); which he makes by saying, Puer
abrenunciat and profitetur, The Child renounces and professes.

. 4. Now if it be, as it cannot but be, a mighty advantage to be one in
Covenant with God; (for so one is entitled to the divine protection, and
benediction,) then must Baptism, by which our children are brought into
Covenant with God, be mighty Beneficial to them. For long before they can be
able to do any thing on their part toward the performance See Hooker Eccl.
Polit. l. 5. S. 64.
of the Covenant, he is doing his part of it toward them, even protecting
Donec voluntatis usum, and facultatem deliberandi renatus quisque recipiat, a
charitate dei separari non potest. Securus interim degit sub protectione and
advocatione Domini Dei sui. D. Bern. Sermon. de Baptismo.
them, and blessing them with such blessings as in respect of their state and
condition they are capable of; and he continues so to do all the while that
they do nothing on their part to the violation and frustration of the Covenant
between them.

Hoc [sc. intelligere] quamdiu non potest valebit Sacramentum ad ejus tutelam
adversus contrarias potestates: and tantum valebit, ut si ante rationis usum ex
hac vita emigraverit, per ipsum Sacramentum commendante Ecclesiae charitate, ab
illa condemnatione, quae per unum hominem intravit in mundum, Christiano
adjutorio liberetur. D. Aug. Ep. 23. ad Bonifacium.

CHAP. VIII.
Baptism beneficial to Children in regard of the Vow they are brought under by
it.

. 1. THirdly, by Baptism Infants are brought under the obligation of a Vow.
That vow is the vow of renouncing the Devil and all his works; of believing in
God; and serving him.

. 2. This profession and abrenunciation is altogether Professio and
abrenunciatio in baptismo adultorum prorsus necessaria est. Melanst. Consil.
Theol. part. 2. p. 327. Tum eum jubet tertio Satanam, ut ita dicam, insufflare,
and praeterea quae defectionis and abrenunciationis sunt, profiteri: eique ter
abrenunciationis solennibus verbis propositis cum toties illud conceptis verbis
pronunciavit, ipsum orientem transfert. Dionys. Hier. Eccles. c. 4. Aquam
adituri, ibidem, sed and aliquanto prius in Ecclesia sub Antistitis manu
contestamur nos renunciare diabolo and pompae and Angelis ejus. Tertull. de
Coron. Mil. c. 3. Cum aquam ingressi Christianam fidem profitemur, renunciasse
nos diabolo, and pompae, and Angelis ejus ore nostro contestamur, etc. Tert. de
Spect. c. 4. Primum interrogetur Paganus si abrenunciat diabolo, omnibus
pompis, and omnibus damnosis ejus operibus atque fallaciis cunctis, ut respuat
primum errorem, and sic appropinquet ad veritatem. Gratian. 3 part. did. 4.
Communia vota sunt ea, quae in baptismo promisimus, scilicet, ut non
peccaremus, and diabolo and operibus ejus abrenunciemus. D. Bern. de Modo been
Vivendi, Sermon. 62.
necessary in the baptism of Adult Persons, as Melancthon tells us. And it has
been of Ancient and General use in the Church, as is apparent by the
testimonies given to it by Dionysius Areop. Tertullian, and many others.

. 3. And this profession and abrenunciation, Infants, because they cannot make
it in their own Persons, are by the Church allowed to make by others in their
names. Hence the young Catechumen is taught to say, that his Godfathers and
Godmothers did promise and vow three things in his name, First that he should
renounce the Devil and all his works, etc. And that Infants, though unable
either to repent or believe, are baptized because they promise them both by
their sureties. And this has been an Usage of long standing in the Church: to
be sure it is as old as, if not older than Dionysius's time, as I showed before.
It Is mentioned by Gratian, who says of little Ones, that they are rightly
called believers, who after a manner do confess the faith by the words of them
that bear them; and by their words also do renounce Parvuli fideles recte
vocantur, qui fidem per verba gestantium quodammodo consitentur: and per
corundom verba diabolo and mundo abrenunciant. Gratian. de Baptismo did. 4.
cap. 7.
the Devil and the world.

. 4. And the profession and abrenunciation so made by others in the name of
Infants is by the Church looked on, and accepted of, as if made by the Infants
themselves in their own persons. This Child, (says our Church to the Sureties
after the baptizing of the Infant) has promised by you his sureties, to
renounce the Devil and all his works, to believe in God, and to serve him; --
and, it is your parts and duties to see that this Infant be taught, so soon as
he shall be able to learn, what a solemn vow, promise and profession he has
here made by you. And so it has been looked upon anciently. Whence the
profession and abrenunciation made by the Surety Eccl. Hierar. c. 12.
in the name of the Infant, is by Dionys. Areop. interpreted, as made by the
Infant himself, Puer abrenunciat and profitetur, says he, The Child renounces
and professes. And so Nicolaus de Orbellis says, When the Surety in the person
of the little one answers I believe, the sense is as if the little one had
said, I am here ready to receive the Sacraments of the faith (i. e. I suppose,
to take upon me the obligations Cum patrinus respondet Credo, in persona
parvuli, sensus est quod sacramenta fidei prasto sum recipere, and quum veniam
ad adultam aetatem, actu credendo fidei consentiam. Nic. de Orb. 4. Sent. did.
6. qu. 6.
to believe) and when I shall attain to ripeness of age I will by an actual
belief consent unto the faith.

. 5. And as it is looked upon as made by them, so also as obligatory unto them.
Hence to the Question. Do thou not think that thou art bound to believe and
to do as thy Godfathers and Godmothers have promised for thee? the Catechumen
is taught to answer, yes verily, and by Gods help so I will. And in the office
of Confirmation, the before baptized Infants being grown up to more maturity,
and coming to renew the solemn promise and vow that was made in their name at
their baptism, and to ratify and confirm it in their own persons, do
acknowledge themselves bound to believe, and to do all those things which their
Godfathers and Godmothers then undertook for them.

. 6. And well may a Promise and Vow of that Religious nature with the Baptismal
one be looked upon as obligatory; being made under such solemn Fidem Deo
dedimus in Baptismo, quod quandoque Patres nonnulli sponsionem, juramentum,
promissionem, cautionem, chirographum, professionem, contestationem,
ejerationem, votum nominaverunt. Lorin. in Ecclesiasten. c. 5. v. 3.
and awful circumstances, to the Church, to God, before Saints, before Angels,
with the sacred address of Public prayers, supplications, intercessions, and
thanksgivings, upon proposal of high temporal, and eternal advantages, that any
person of ingenuity, who had any sense of honor in him, coming to understand
what circumstances he stood in, would be ashamed ever to turn renegado to so
sacred a Profession, and blush to renounce so solemn an Abrenunciation: which
till it be done, and done with a suitable solemnity to that of the first
transaction, I humbly conceive the Obligees mere silence in the case is to be
presumed upon as his consent, and his non-contradiction to be taken for an
Interpretative confirmation.

. 7. And though the Baptized Infant be under no Scriptural injunction in the
case, yet there are many weighty considerations, whereby he is obliged, as soon
as he comes to understanding, to take upon himself, stand to, and make good in
his own person that Promise and Vow made for him and in his name by his
Sureties at his baptizing.

. 8. As first, that he do not disparage the Church his Spiritual Mothers
Wisdom, who has contrived this way for bringing him within the number of its
Members; and making him a partaker of its Privileges.

. 9. Secondly, that he be not refractary to the Churches Authority, who
declares him bound to perform this Vow, and expects, and requires from him the
performance of it.

. 10. Thirdly, that he may show himself grateful to the Church for her Charity
in admitting him into the enjoyment of the so many advantageous Privileges of
a Churchmember upon the engagement of others for him, when he could not engage
for himself, nor understand what was for his own good.

. 11. Fourthly, that he show not himself ungrateful to his Sureties in
slighting that so great and important a kindness of theirs to him, as it was in
it self, and ought by him (and all baptized Infants) ever to be esteemed, to
transact so highly concerning an affair for him, and out of a mere intuition of
good to come to him thereby, without the least prospect of advantage from it to
themselves, more then the hope of a reward from God for a charitable work to
man, to engage themselves both to God and Man on his behalf.

. 12. Fifthly, that he do not unworthily expose his Sureties to danger on any
account before God or the Church, with whom they dealt, contracted, and
undertook; and to whom they are Pledges for his Fidelity, and Sureties for his
Good Behavior; which what, or how great it is, is not my concern here to
enquire: but some, it seems, Tertullian thought there was, when in
consideration Quid enim necesse est Sponsores etiam periculo ingeri? Tertul. de
Bapt.
thereof he was willing, rather that the baptizing of the Infants should for a
while be deferred, than they thereunto unnecessarily exposed.

. 13. Sixthly, that he do not ungraciously grieve his Parents by a dissolute
throwing off so advantageous an engagement as their pious care and tender
respect to his present and eternal welfare had made them sollicitous to bring
him under.

. 14. Seventhly, because to do otherwise would argue him to be a person (malae
indolis in Tertullians phrase) of an ill nature, of a wicked disposition: for
none but persons of evil nature and untoward disposition would be so
ungracious, as to disannul such a Vow, and violate such an Obligation. The
foreseen possibility whereof made Tertullian Quia possunt proventu malae
indolis falli. Tert. ut supra.
hang a little the other way from the baptizing of Infants, so early as whilst
they should need Sureties, for fear of their Sureties being deceived and
endangered by their defection or praevarication.

. 15. Eigthly, that by performing the Vow made for him, he may be qualified to
receive the Benefit whereto the performance of that Vow does entitle him: which
is so great, that it is at once his happiness to have made it by others, and
his interest to perform it by Licet autem nullus per votum alterius obligetur:
ca tamen quae sunt de necessitate potest patrinus pro parvulo promittere, and
sic ipsum obligare, cooperante ad hoc bono quod parvulus recipit per patrinum.
Nic. de Orb. 4 Sent. did. 7. qu. 8.
himself. And though no adult person can be obliged by the vow of another, yet
(as we are told by that acute Schoolman Nicolaus de Orbellis) those things
which are of necessity the Godfather may promise for the Infant, and so oblige
him, through the cooperation thereunto of that Good which the Infant receives
by his Godfather; just as the Guardian has power in the Infancy See Hooker
Eccles. Polit. l. ^5. S. 64. page 339.
of his Pupil to make contracts for him, to which contracts, if made for his
advantage, he is obliged to stand; as none can say, but the Baptismal contract
made by the Surety for the Infant, is highly advantageous to him. And Sicut
parvulus potest consequi salutem ex fide aliena per Sacramentum Baptismi: sic
congruum est ut possit obligari ad ea quae sunt fidei obligatione aliena. Haec
autem fit per Anadochum i. e. patrinum: cui proponuntur rudimenta fidei: and
obligatio observandi quae sunt fidei: quae ex persona pueri respondet,
profitetur, and ipsum puerum licet ignorantem and non consentieutem obligat. Et
hoc quidem fieri potest in his quae sunt de necessitate vitae, and per quae
conditio parvuli melioratur, and ad quae generaliter omnes tenentur. Sicut
etiam tutor pupilli potest obligare pupillum in his quae sunt necessaria ad
conservationem temporalium secundum leges humanas: multo magis patrinus quasi
tutor spiritualis obligare potest parvulum in his quae sunt necessaria ad vitam
spiritualem aeternam. Secus tamen in his quae non sunt necessitatis, sed
supererogationis, sicut ingressus religionis and peregrinationis. Ad haec enim
parents parvulos obligare non possunt. Nunc autem credere, and quae fidei sunt
observare, necessaria sunt ad vitam spiritualem, ad quae omnes tenentur, qui
voluerint salvari, etiamsi ex voto non obligarentur. Ideo ad haec potest
parvulus ignorans and non consentiens obligari per alium: quia per hanc
obligationem conditio pueri non fit deterior, sed melior. Haec est sententia
Alex. and Tho. Gabr. Bicl in l. 4. Sentent. did. 6. q. 3. l. E. Obligatur
autem Tutor pupillo -- and hunc vicissim aliis in solidum obligat. Wesenbecii
Oeconomia Codic. l. 5. p. 529.
the same is the judgment of Gabriel Biel also.

. 16. Ninthly, because without performance of the Vow there will be no
receiving Parvulus autem qui baptizatur, si ad annos rationales veniens non
crediderit, nec ab illicitis abstinuerit, nihil ei prodest, quod parvulus
accepit, Gratian, de Baptismo d^st 4.
of the blessing; he forfeiting all the advantages of a Covenant, that performs
not the condition of the Covenant. So that he is obliged to the performance of
this Covenant, though not by a Law, yet by that which has the force of a Law,
even Necessity, not of the Precept, but of the Means, there being no other way
of obtaining the end without it. For as he that believes, and is baptized,
shall be saved: so he that believes not, whether baptized or unbaptized, shall
be damned. Mark 16. 16. So that some Obligation there lies on the little one
baptized in his Infancy, to make good, when he comes to years of discretion,
that Vow, which was by his Sureties made for him in his name at his baptizing.

. 17. Now how readily well tutour'd children do set about the performance of
this Vow, Deinde ubi adoleverint, eo ad s^rium Dei colendi studium non
mediocriter stimulantur, a quo in filios solenni adoptionis symbolo accepti
fuerint, antequam per atatem eum agnoscere Patrem possent. Calv. Instit. l. 4.
cap. 16. S. 9.
when once they come to the use of Reason, and are made acquainted with it, and
their obligations to it, daily experience shows us; whereas were they let
alone, and left at liberty, unengaged to the undertaking of it, they would not,
a great many of them at least, especially as the world goes now, be so easily
and so willingly drawn to undertake it. It would not be much less labor to
bring the child of a Christian, than of a Heathen to be baptized. And there
would need as many, and as earnest exhortations unto Baptism to be made now by
our Ministers, as we read to have been formerly made by the Fathers.

. 18. For a child then to be so early as in its Infancy, when it was incapable
of all regret or reluctance, entered into so happy an engagement as the
Baptismal Vow is, is sure, to speak modestly in the case, no unbeneficial thing
to him. He is bound to liberty; entered into a service which is perfect freedom;
engaged to an easy, rational, honorable observance, which shall be rewarded
with an infinite, eternal, glorious recompense: only obliged to be holy, that
he may be happy; vowed to be Gods, that God may be his.

CHAP. IX.
Baptism beneficial to Children in regard of the care that by others is taken
of them upon it.

. 1. FOurthly, by Baptism Infants are brought under the care of others for
their instruction in the Faith of Christ, and education in the Fear of God.

. 2. What would man be, if left to himself? to be of any, or no religion as
himself listed; and if of any, to be of this or that religion, a Christian or a
Heathen, a Jew or a Turk, as himself should think good. It Is hard to say where
he would pitch, what would he be at in such a case; especially by the pravity
of a corrupt nature inclined, as well as by the subtlety of a cunning Devil
tempted, and by the witchery of an alluring world enticed to that which is
worst.

. 3. Happy therefore is he, who, whilst the infancy of his years denies him as
well discretion Non nihil rursum emolumenti pueri e suo Baptismo capiunt, quod
in corpus Ecclesiae insiti, aliis membris sunt aliquanto commendatiores.
Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 16. S. 9.
to direct, as power to dispose of himself, has other persons, whom age and
experience have taught wisdom, to direct and dispose of him; so that he is not
left to the wild ramblings of his own un-or illguided fancy, but he is set
into, and steered in a right course, by the prudent conduct of others stayed
and well governed judgment, piously educated in the nurture and admonition of
the Lord, and solidly instructed in the true Faith, and right Worship of Jesus
Christ.

. 4 And the more of such pious Tutors, and prudent Governors, and judicious
Overseers as there are to care for him, the greater happiness it still is to
him. For there is the better ground of hope, that he shall be afforded toward
his future happiness, the present advantages of a religious and virtuous
education. And being trained up in the way that he should go, when he is young;
it may well be hoped that when he as old, he will not depart from it, Prove. 22.
6.

. 5. And as the prospect of this was (as we are informed from the Author of the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy) one principal ground of the primitive Churches
admission of Infants unto Baptism, upon the undertaking of Sureties for them,
to whose care and managery for information and instruction in faith and manners
she did from thenceforth commit them: Aiunt enim, id quod verum est, pueros, si
in sancto instituto ac lege instituantur, ad sancta^ animi constitutionem
perventuros esse, ab omni errore solutos ac liberos, and sine ullo impuro vitae
periculo. Hoc cum ^n mentom venisset divinis nostris praceptoribus placuit
admitti pueros hoc sancto modo, ut naturales pueri, qui introfertur, parents,
tradant filium alicui little qui initiati sunt, bono pucrorum in divinis r^bus
informatori: ac deinceps ei puer operam det, ut divino patri, sponsorique
salutis. Dionys. Areop. Eccles. Hier. c. 12.
so the Venetians a wise people in other things, show not the least of their
wisdom in this, that they confine not themselves to the number of three or four
Godfathers and Godmothers, as with us, but have more, many more, even as many
as they list; insomuch that sometimes (as my Author Lewis Lewkenor observations
on the Venetian Commonwealth, out of Francisco ^ansovini.
informs me) there have been an hundred and fifty at the Christening of the
Child together in the Church.

. 6. Herein then is a great Benefit that Infants have by being baptized in
their Infancy, that they have thereby the care of several persons engaged for
their instruction, and education; not only their Fathers and Mothers, by Nature
and Divine Imposition; but also their Godfathers and Godmothers, by Charity and
Ecclesiastic injunction: who when they do their duty to a child, it is rare if
there be not in some measure a performance of their engagement to him when a
man. And if there might be instances of the ineffectualness of this care in
some few; yet is it reason all should be brought under that care; since it is
effective and beneficial in many, and it cannot be beforehand told, to what one
it will not finally prove to be effective and beneficial.

. 7. And if ever there was need of Godfathers and Godmothers in the world to be
Sureties for childrens pious, and virtuous education (unless I take my measures
wrong, and judge amiss of the face of affairs) there is need of them now upon
that account; and need of as many as (if not more than) there ever were: whilst
our children are like to live in days, which whether they shall be Hal^yonian
days of peace and tranquillity, or boystrous days of trouble and persecution,
is a secret to us: but, to be sure, perilous times, times wherein it will 2 Timothy 3. 1.
be a hard thing for a man, much more for a child, to keep upright, and walk
with an even foot, without being warped and swayed aside from the ways of Truth
and Godliness, one way or other; either corrupted in his Faith by the false
persuasions of erroneous Believers, or debaucht in his manners by the evil
conversations of vicious Livers. Which consideration I leave to be thought on
by those that are wise.

CHAP. X.
Baptism beneficial unto Children in regard of their being thereby united unto
Christ.

. 1. FIfthly, by Baptism Infants are made members of Christ; united to him as
members of his body. Hence the little baptized Catechumen is by our Church
taught to say, that therein he was made a member of Christ. Christ is to be
considered two ways, Personally, so as he is one in himself, and Mystically, so
as he is one with his Church, that Body whereof himself is the Head. In this
latter sense Infants are by Baptism made Members of Christ, that is, they are
admitted into Fellowship with him, as members [little parts] of his mystical
Body, the Church.

. 2. This benefit Men have by Baptism. For as many of you as have been baptized
into Christ, This was the listing, espousing, Covenanting, Ingrafting,
implanting Ordinance; Believers being expressly said hereby to be planted into
Christ, Gal. 3. 27. and baptized into Christ, Romans 6. 3. And which baptizing
and planting into Christ is no other but an orderly entering into the Visible
Church or Body of Christ. H. D. Postscript to Treat. of Bapt. p. 44.
have put on Christ, Gal. 3. 27. What is it to be baptized into Christ? Why
sure to be made partakers of Christian baptism. And what is it to put on
Christ? why sure to become united unto Christ, to be joined to the Lord, (as a
man becomes united with, and joined to that which he put on) to become a member
of Christ. Whence Primasius thus glosseth this Text, Toti ejus membra per
baptismi sanctificationem essecti, being whooly made members of him by the
sanctification of Baptism. And St. Chrysostom describing a Baptized person,
Omnis ^rgo homo Dei indatus Christum, fuge omnia quae sunt incentiva carnalium
libidi number. Non solum autem haec baptizatis dissero, and praedico, sed etiam
baptizandis praecipio. D. Chrysostom. Hom. de Militia Christiana. Ad hoc datur
baptismus ut aliquis per ipsum regeneratus incorporetur Christo, factus membrum
ipsius, Aquin. 3. q. 68. a. 1.
does it by the Periphrasis of a man of God, that has put on Christ. Avoid
(says he) O man of God, who have put on Christ, all the incentives of carnal
lusts. Who he means by that Periphrasis appears by what follows. And these
things I do not only discourse and preach to them that already are baptized,
but enjoin them that are to be baptized. Accordingly Aquinas says, To this end
is baptism given, that a man being regenerated thereby he may be incorporated
into Christ, being made a member of him. Because they are members of him that
are baptized, says St. August. Quia membra ejus sant, qui baptiz antur. D.
Aug. S^rm. 119. de Temp.
For by one Spirit (as St. Paul says) are we all baptized into one body,
whether we be Jews or Gentiles, bond or free, 1 Cor. 12. 13. One b^^y. What
body's that? Why, the mystical body of Christ, the Church. Baptized into that.
What Is that? why sure, entered or ingraffed into it, made members of it by
Baptism: the Spirit as the principal Agent using Baptism as his Instrument for
that end. Hence says (...) Occumen in 1 Cor. 12. 13.
Occumenius on the place, we are made one (that is, one body) by one spirit,
and the same laver, or washing; that is, by Baptism. By the Spirit as the
principal efficient of, by Baptism as the instrumental Agent in, that Union.

Hence is Baptism by St. August. called, Ecclesiae ja^ua, and porta gratiae,
and primus introit us D. Aug. de Cate. chizand. rudib. l. 2. c. 1.
sanctorum ad aeternam 'Dei and Ecclesiae consuetudinem, the gate of the
Church, and the door of grace, and the first entrance of Saints to an eternal
Society with God and the Church. So St. Bernard calls it Sacramentum
initiationis and intrantium Christianismum investituram, the Sacrament of
Initiation, and the Investiture of such as enter into Christianity. And by the
Council of Florence it is called Primum omnium Sacramentorum locum tenet
baptismus, quod vitae spivitualis janua est ^ per ipsum enim membra Christi, ac
de corpore efficimur Ecclesiae. Council Flor. apud Caranz. sol. 391.
the gate of spiritual life, in as much as by it we are made members of Christ,
and to be of the body of the Church. And hence very significantly Baptisteries
or Fonts are said to have been placed at first without, but after within the
Church, near the (...) or Porch of the Church, to signify undoubtedly the
Sacrament there celebrated, namely Baptism, to be a Rite of initiation, or
entrance into the Church, as it were that door, by which they that are baptized
are let in, and have admittance unto the privileges of Christians, which is to
be Members of Christ.

3. This benefit, I say, Men have by Baptism. And why not Infants? whom the
Scripture no where shuts this door of grace against; whom it no where excludes
from this benefit by it. In consideration whereof St. Aug. proceeds to say of
the Baptism of Infants, that it is of efficacy, and does avail Ad hoc valet
baptismus, ut baptizati Christo incorporentur. D. Aug. l. 1. de Bapt. Parvul.
Haec gratia baptizatos quoque parvulos suo inserit corpori. D. Aug. l. 1. de
Pecc. Merit. and Remiss. c. 9. Pueri, sicut adulti, in Baptismo efficiuntur
membra Christi, Aquin. 3. q. 69. a. 6. Hac de causa insantulos baptizamus -- ut
ejus membra sint omnes -- D. Chrysostom. Hom. ad Neophytos.
to their incorporation into Christ. And again, that This grace does ingraft
and put in even the little ones that are baptized into his body. So Aquinas,
Children, as well as Adult persons, are made members of Christ in Baptism. And
for this cause, says St. Chrysostom, do we baptize Infants, that they may be
members of him, that is, of Christ.

. 4. And the reason is the same for the one and for the other. Because it is
not several Baptisms, but one and the same Baptism, that is administered unto
the one, and unto the other. For there is but one Baptism for all. One, as well
as the other, Men and Children, all that are baptized, are baptized into Jesus
Christ, as the Apostle expresses it, Romans 6. 3.

. 5. Now this being so, what can be more visible, than that Baptism is hugely
beneficial to Infants. For being by Baptism made Members of Christ they have
union with him, as the Members have with the Head: and by that Union much
benefit is derived to them.

. 6. For first there is great honor comes to them thereby. The Members partake
of the honor of the Head. To be the Members of such a Head, as is Head over
all things (Ephesians. 1. 22.) the Head of all principality and power (Coloss. 2.
10.) what an honor must this needs be to them? Like the precious ointment upon
the head that ran down upon the beard, even Aarons beard, that went down to the
skirts of his garments, so the honourableness of Christ the Head has a
descending influence on his in^erior members, so as to render them also in some
measure and degree honorable.

By virtue of the Union of Christ's natural body with God, there is a great
honor comes to that his body: so by virtue of the Union of the mystical body
of Christ with Christ its Head, there is a great deal of honor coming also to
that body of his. His natural body is not the mere body of a man, but the body
of God; so his mystical body is not a mere humane body, but the body of Christ.
(2 Cor. 12. 27.) As it is with an imp or scion that is taken off from any stock
of a meaner kind, and ingrassed, or inoculated into a nobler stock, and
partakes with the stock into which it is ingrassed of its honorable
appellation: so it is with Christians; though by nature they be wild olive
trees, yet being by Baptism ingrafted into Christ the good olive tree, made
members of his body, they do partake with Christ in some degree of that honor
which is given unto him. They have his name called upon them by others (Acts
11. 26.) He himself is not ashamed to call them brethren, (Heb. 2. 2. 11.) Not
the least Infant Christian, but is a Brother, a Branch, a Member of Christ: and
so is honorable in its Relation to him, and has an honorable respect due
unto it upon account of the Union that it has with him.

. 7. But secondly they do not only receive honor by Christ, but also influence
from Christ, by virtue of their Union with him. The Head has an influence upon
the whole body, and every member of it. Sense and motion is by the animal
spirits communicated to the whole body and every member of it from the head: so
has Christ an influence upon his whole body and every the least member of it.
From him by his spiritual grace is communicated to his body, and every the
least member of it, suitable to the manner and measure of its receptivity, a
principle of sense of God and Goodness, and of motion to attain the enjoyment
of the one by the practice of the other: which, though for a while it give
forth no indications of its presence in them, yet will in due time exert its
proper efficacy; and in the mean time it lies at the heart, like the sap at the
root, predisposing it unto a future fructification. Of his fullness (says St.
John) we have all received, and grace for grace, (John 1. 16.) There is a
fullness of grace in Christ for, and an influence of grace from Christ to, all
that are in him. Of his fullness we all receive. By partaking of the root we
participate of the fatness of the olive tree, (Romans 11. 17.) There goes virtue
from him to all that are his. Not the least member of him but has an influence
of grace from him. There is from him an emanation of quickening efficacy to the
smallest Infant member in him: being united to him, it partakes with him
according to its condition and capacity; and that seminal grace communicated by
him to the Infant at the instant of its beginning to be one in and with him,
will in time bring forth its fruit; unless stifled, ere it bud, by the
luxuriant rankness of vicious dispositions, too thickly growing in a depraved
nature, and too early ripened by a corrupting education.

. 8. Thirdly, they are interessed in the care of Christ for them. The head
cares for all the body, and for every member of it: so does Christ the head of
his Church, take care for his whole Church, and for every the least person of
it. And if ye observe it, the first instance of Christ's care for his Church in
his charge to St. Peter, was for his Lambs, his little members, that could
least care for themselves; and then follows his care for his sheep. He first
says, Feed my lambs: and then after, Feed my sheep, John 21. 15, 16, 17. After
whose example St. John his bosom disciple begins his Epistle with little
children; and then goes on to fathers and young men, 1 John 2. 12, 13.

. 9. And sure it is worth something, and that no small matter neither, to have
such a one as Christ taking care for our Infants; and taking such a care for
them, as a head takes care for the members of that body that is united to it.
Oh how they are continually in his eye, and in his heart! what tender regard he
has to them! what melting affections for them! How kind he was to little
children, and how careful of them whilst on earth is set forth with an
illustrious splendor, here in the Text, and Context. He called them to him, he
commanded access for them, he rebuked those, (though the darlings of his
affections his disciples) that would have kept them from him; and because he
had them much in his heart, he took them near to it, in his arms; he gave them
the Imposition of his hands, and the Benediction of his mouth, would have both
hand, tongue and all, concerned, and be active too, in the promoting of their
spiritual interest. And can we think, he, that had so much kindness for them on
earth, has no care for them now in heaven? Did he throw off all respect to
them, when he removed hence from them? Did he lose the affectionateness of his
humanity by the glorification of it? Is he less good, for being more great? If
nothing of this, not the least apex of it may be imagined, we may then be
secure of his care for our children. And if to be under the care of so
discerning an eye, so wise a head, so strong a hand, so tender a heart, as
Jesus Christ is, be a felicity, as most undoubtedly it is, and that a great
one, considering the infinite advantages consequent thereunto for protection,
preservation, provision, improvement of natural faculties, endowment with
spiritual abilities, initiation in grace, and consummation in glory, then the
beneficialness of Baptism to Infants, who are thereby brought under all this
care, is beyond dispute: and there is reason enough in that, if there were
nothing else to move us to it, to baptize our Infants. If we would have Christ
to have this care for them, it should then be our care to baptize them.

. 10. Fourthly, they are interested in the care of the Church for them. They
that are united to the Head, are united to the Body. They that are united to
Christ, are united also to the Church. Communion with the Church follows Union
with Christ. And as it were to intimate this, we are sometimes said to be
baptized into the head, and sometimes into the body; sometimes into Christ, and
sometimes into the Church: for as much as all comes to one; because Christ and
his Church, the Head and the Body are all one; and he that is united to, and
has communion with either, is united to, and has communion with the other.

. 11. Hence our Church in her office of Baptism declares the baptized Infant to
be grafted into the body of Christ's Church; and gives thanks to God for
incorporating him into his holy Church; as she had prayed before that he might
be received into the Ark of Christ's Church.

. 12. And as the Head takes care for all the members; so the members also take
care one for another, (1 Cor. 12. 25.) they rejoice, and suffer one with
another, and have the same ca^e one for another, and they most especially are
cared for by the rest, who are in least capacity to take any care for
themselves.

. 13. Now as to the case in hand, great truly is the care of our Church for her
little members, her baptized Infants. She cares for their maintenance, cares
for their inheritance, cares for their education, cares for their instruction,
that they may be virtuously brought up to lead a godly and a Christian life; in
order whereunto she not only gives both so grave an admonition to the Sureties
for children at their baptizing, to remember that it is their parts and duties
to see that the Infants be taught, so so^n as they shall be able to learn, what
a solemn vow, promise, and profession they had there made by them, and so
strict a charge to call upon them to hear Sermons, and provide that they may
learn the Creed, the Lords Prayer, the Ten Commandments, and all other things,
which a Christian ought to know and believe to his souls health, and be
virtuously brought up, that the Sureties sometimes are apt to think there is
too much of this care taken by the Church, because so much is laid upon them;
and they are ready to be at Tertullians question, Quid necesse est sponsores
periculo ingeri? and ask, what necessity is there for the Godfathers being so
deeply charged? but also lays severe injunction upon the Curates of every
Parish diligently upon every Sunday and Holy day to instruct the children sent
to them in a Catechism That most excellent Catechism in the Liturgy Dr.
Hammond, of Idolat.. 67. En vero and Catechismum: brevem quidem illum, sed in
cujus brevitate nihil desideres. B. Andrews in his Opera Posth. p. 86.
of her providing for that purpose, and that a most excellent one for that use,
short indeed in it self, yet wanting in nothing necessary or fit to be known
for instruction to salvation; and that under the heaviest penalties that are in
her power to inflict, a sharp reproof for the first offense, Suspension for the
second, and excommunication for the third: and under the like penalties takes
care that Parents shall send their children, servants, and apprentices, to the
Church at the times appointed, and that they also do then come thither, to be
instructed in that Catechism; and by such instruction fitted and prepared for
Confirmation, at which time they are with their own mouth and consent openly
before the Church to ratify and confirm what their Godfathers and Godmothers
promised for them in their Baptism: which excellent course were it regularly
and conscientiously on all hands observed, the Primitive Discipline would
return again into the Church, and there would not be occasion for such outcries
of the Antipaedo baptists against Infants Baptism.

. 14. Now if to have not only the Natural Parents of a child, but Godfathers
and Godmothers also, who are a kind of spiritual Parents, Fathers and Mothers
in God, to it; nor them only, but the Ministers also of the Parish; nor him
only, but the whole Parish also; nor that only, but the Bishop See Dr. Jackson,
Tom. 3. l. 10. c. 50.. 6.
of the Diocese, and even the whole Church engaged, and that not by mere
nature, or charity, but by office and duty, to a respective care for it, be not
for the benefit of it, I would be taught what is. And being so, it is a further
instance of the beneficialness of Baptism unto Infants, and still a stronger
inducement to us to bring our Infants unto Baptism.

. 15. Yet fifthly, by virtue of this Union of Infants with Christ and his
Church his Body by their being baptized thereinto, they are interested in all
the Intercessions of Christ for his Church, and in all the Supplications of the
Church unto God. Whether Christ pray to his Father for his Church, or the
Church pray to God for her self, Infants that cannot pray for themselves, are
prayed for thereby. Christ excludes not baptized Infants from the benefit of
his Intercessions: for he intercedes for his Body, and they are members of it.
Nor does the Church exclude them from the benefit of her Supplications: for she
prays for all her Members, Publica est nobis and communis oration: and quando
oramus, non pro uno, sed pro populo toto oramus, quia totus populus unum suraus
D Cyprian. de Orat. Dom. Unusquisque cret Dominum non pro se tantum, sed and
pro omnibus sratribue, sicut Dominus Jesus orare nos docuit, ubi non singulis
privatam precem mandavit, sed communi and concordi prece orare pro omnibus
jussit. D. Cyprian. l. 4. Ep. 4.
and they are some of them. Not a Christian in the world that says Our Father,
but prays at the same time for every baptized Brother.

. 16. Now this sure must needs be a Benefit to them to be prayed, and so prayed
for. O the potency, I had almost said the omnipotency of prayer! what can it
not do with? what can it Mane ergo and ora dilecta, multum enim oration potest,
D. Chrysostom. de Poenitentia. Hom. 9. Preces, quae cum rectae sint inessicaces
esse non possunt. Boeth. de Cons. Phil. l 5. pros. 6. Inter omnia quae humana
fragilitas faccre potest unde placcre Deo valeat, plerunque valet oration, si
cum pura conscientia and cordis humilitate siat. Hugo de S. Vi^ore Allegor. l.
10. c. 4.
not obtain from God? St. James tells us, (...), it avails, prevails, can do
much, and that whilst it is but the single prayer (...) of a (that is, one)
righteous man, Jam. 5. 16. With that key Elias shut and opened heaven, first
against, and then for rain, Jam. 5. 17, 18. This we are sure of from Sacred
History. And, if Ecclesiastic History may be credited, by Prayer Greg. B. of
Neocaesaria Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 7. c. 24. ex Intepret. Rusfini.
turned a Pool of water into dry ground, and removed a mountain to make a
plain. By prayer James B. of Nisibis Histor. Tripartit. l. 5. c. 45.
overcame a power of armed men; and, what is more, Aaron and Phine as
encountered and conquered even an angry God, Numb. 16. Psalm. 105. Whereupon St.
Hierom Quod autem dicit, and non obsistas mihi, illud ostendit, quod preces
sanctorum Dei irae possunt resistere. D. Hieron. in Jerem. 7. 16.
, observes, that the prayers of Saints are able to withstand the wrath of God.
And St. Ambrose Qui recte vivunt juxta Evangolium facile poterunt impetrare
quae postulant, D. Ambros. in 1 Thessalonians. 5. 25.
concludes that they that lead a right Gospel-life, may easily have, what they
will ask. Which is but St. John in other words, who says, Whatsoever we ask,
we receive of him, because we keep his commandments, and do those things that
are pleasing in his sight, 1 John 3. 22.

. 17. And if it be thus powerful, when single; what is it, when social? when
there is a pious conspiracy of fervent prayers from consenting hearts and
concurring tongues, all at once making as it were assault upon the Almighty,
with the holy violence of a strong importunity to extort a petition from him.
He loves to be thus wrestled with, and worsted, if I may so say. It Is an
acceptable force that this way is put upon him: and he is not able, The Prince
and People of Niniveh (says Mr. Hooker) assembling themselves as a main army
of Supplicants, it was not in the power of God to withstand them. I speak no
otherwise concerning the force of public Prayer in the Church of God, then
before me Tertullian has done. Apol. 1. 39. We come by troops to the place of
Assembly, that being banded as it were together, we may be supplicants enough
to besiege God with our prayers. These forces are unto him acceptable. Eccl.
Pot. l. 5.. 24.
because not willing to deny any thing that is thus sought of him. Our Savior
says (Matthew. 18. 19.) If two of you shall agree on earth as touching any thing
that they shall ask, it shall be done for them, of my Father which is in heaven.
Hereupon St. Ignatius (...) as! Ign. Ep. ad 1 phes.
argues, If the prayer of one or two be of so great preval^ncy, how much more
will the prayer of the Bishop and the whole Church be prevalent! St Augustine
Impossible est ut multorum preces non exaudiantur. D. Aug. Ser. 44. ad Fr. in
Eremo.
, and St. Ambrose Multi enim minimi dum congregantur unanimes siunt magni, and
multorum preces impossible est ut non impetrent. D. Ambros. in Romans 15. 30.
and after them Aquinas Pro justis est orandum triplici ratione. Primo quidem
quia multorum preces facile exaudiuntur: unde super illud, Romans 15. Adjuveritis
me in orationibus vestris, dicit Gloss. Been rogat Apostolus minores pro se
orare, Multi enim minimi dum congregantur unanimes siunt magni: and multorum
preces impossible est quod non impetrent, illud scilicet, quod est
impecrabile. Aquin. 22 dae. q. 83. a. 7. ad tertium. Vid. D. Cyprian. de Simpl.
Praelat.
, conclude it impossible that such prayers should fail of audience, and
acceptance, and not obtain what they petition for, provided they do but
petition for what is possible to be obtained.

. 18. And no marvel the social prayers of unanimously consenting, and fervently
competitioning Supplicants should be so powerful with God, when they have one
among them, and concurring in the petition with them, whom God always hears,
even the Son of his own love, the Lord Jesus Christ, the head of his Church,
which he is always with, and always will be, even unto the end of the world,
and even where two or three of them are gathered together in his name. And
indeed his presence with them himself assigns for the reason of their
prevalency with his Father, (Matthew 18. 20.) Again I say unto you, that if two
of you shall agree on earth, as touching any thing that they shall ask, it
shall be done for them of my Father which is heaven. For where two or three are
gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them. The prevalency
of the Churches prayers is from the concurrency of Christ's petitioning with
them, when they pray.

. 19. Now hereupon it follows, that it cannot but be a mighty benefit to
Christians, each to have the prayers of other, and all the prayers of the
Church for them all. And hence are our desires both of one another private
prayers, and also of the Churches public prayers, especially upon any
extraordinary emergency. And if we, who can pray for our selves, do think the
prayers of others beneficial to us, as we do think them, or else we should not
desire them, how can we then but think they are beneficial to our children? who
have the more need of the prayers of others, as they are the less able to pray
for themselves; and for whom the prayers of others are by so much the more
likely to be effectual, as they do the less to hinder their effectualness.

. 20. Prayer then being so powerful a deriver of all manner of blessings on the
parties prayed for; and Baptism being the means of bringing our children within
the Communion of so many and such prayers; we cannot but think Baptism highly
beneficial to them; even to that measure and degree, as upon that one account
alone, if there were no other besides, to be induced to baptize our children.

CHAP. XI.
Baptism beneficial unto children, in regard of their being made thereby the
children of God.

. 1. SIxthly, by Baptism Infants are made children of God. This sense our
Church has of it. Hence immediately after the Baptizing of the Infant it
renders thanks to the heavenly Father, for that it has pleased him to receive
that Infant for his own child by Ad^ption. And in her Catechism teaches the
little Catechumen to say, that in his Baptism he was made the child of God.

. 2. The Apostle St. Paul speaking to the Galatians, whom he had declared to be
the Sons of God, (Gal. 3. 26.) says unto them, At many of you as have ((...),
whosoever ye are, whether men or children, for as he names neither, so he
excepts not either that have) been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ
(ver. 27.) And he says it as a Reason of what was said before, even of their
Sonship. Ye are all the children of God by Faith in Jesus Christ, For as many
of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. His reasoning
seems to lie thus. They that put on Christ, that is receive Christ, they are
the children of God. Those that are baptized into Christ, they put on Christ,
and do receive him. Therefore they that are baptized into Christ are the
children of God.

. 3. It is Faith indeed that qualifies for Baptism. The Adult is qualified by
his own Faith; (...) D. Basil. de Spir. Sancto, c. 12. Tom. (...). (...). Just.
Mart. Resp. ad Orthod. q. 56.
Infants by the Faith of those that bring them to, and undertake for them at
their baptizing. They are vouchsafed the good things that come by baptism
through the faith of those that bring them to be baptized, says the Author of
the Answers to the Orthodox in Just. Martyr, speaking of Infants. And upon the
account of their faith, were the Infants anciently admitted to baptism, and
baptized as Believers Non quod vel ipsi quando baptizantur fide careant, sine
qua impossible est vel ipsos placere Deo: sed salvantur and ipsi per fidem non
tamen suam, sed alienam. Dignum nempe est, and ad dei spectat dignitatem, ut
quibus fidem aetas denegat propiam gratia prodesse conced at alienam, etc. D.
Bern. Ep. 77. ad Hug. de S. Victore. Absit ut ego dicam non credentes infantes.
Jam superius disputavi. Credit in altero, quia peccavit in altero: dicitur
credit, and valet; and inter fideles baptizatos computatur, etc. D. Aug. Sermon.
14. de Verb. Apost.
. But as many as, whether upon the account of their own, or others faith, are
baptized into Christ, whether they be men or children, they are (...) the sons
of God.

. 4. And this sense the Ancients had of this thing, namely the efficacy of
baptism for the regenerating of the baptized and putting them into the state of
children of God. Hence Dionys. Areop. calls the Font, wherein persons De Eccl.
Hier.
were baptized (...) Exhort. ad Bapt.
(...) the mother of Adoption; and calls our baptism Orate patrem baptismate
nostrum.
(...) a birth of, or from God; as D. Ambros. in 1 Cor. 6. 11. Illic omnibus
peccatis depositis abluitur credens, justificatur domini nomine, and per
spiritum Dei nostri Deo filius adoptatur. Id. Ad cujus [sc. divini operis]
potentiam referendum est, quod dum homo exterior abluitur, mutatur interior,
and fit nova creatura de veteri, vasa irae in vasa misericordiae transferuntur,
and in corpus Christi convertitur caro peccati. De impiis justi, de captivis
liberi, de filiis hominum fiunt filii Dei. Ep. 84. l. 10.
St. Basil also calls it (...) baptism of Adoption, and (...) the grace of
Adoption. Sedulius exhorts to pray unto God under the notion of our Father by
Baptism. There (says St. Ambrose speaking of baptism) the believer is washed,
all his sins being laid aside, he is justified in the name of the Lord, and by
the Spirit of our God he is adopted to be a Son unto God. And again to the
power of that divine work (says he) it is to be referred, that whilst the
outward man is washed, the inward man is changed, and made a new creature of an
old, vessels of wrath are translated into vessels of mercy, and a body of sin
converted into into the body of Christ. Of wicked they are made righteous, of
captives they are made free, and of sons of men they are made the Sons of God.

. 5. St. Cyprian says it was foretold of God by his Prophet Isaiah (c. 43. v.
18, 19, 20, 21.) that among the Gentiles in places Praenunciavit illic per
Prophetam Deus, quod apud Gentes in locis, quae inaquosa prius fuissent,
flumina postmodum redundarent, and electum Deigenus, id est per regenerationem
baptismi filios Dei factos adaequarent. D. Cypr. l. 2. Ep. 3.
where before there was no water, rivers should abound and wter the elect
generation of God, that is, (says he) those who by Baptismal regeneration are
made the children of God. And to this sense some of the Ancients interpret the
forecited Text, (Gal. 3. 26, 27.) In his confirmation he shows (says
Theophylact) how we are the Sons of God, namely by (...). Theoph. in Gal. 3. 27.
baptism. And so Primasius, having put on the Son of God, and being wholly made
members of him by the sanctification of Baptism Filium Dei induti, and toti
(...) membra per baptismi sanctificationem effectis, filii Dei fi^is necesse
est. Primas. in Gal. 3. 26.
ye must needs be the Sons of God.

. 6. This being then one effect of Baptism, that by it those that are baptized
become the children of God; and it being as able to effect this in children as
in men, as producing its effects not by any natural (...). D. Basil. 81. 5. c.
15 See Dr. Jackson. Tom. 3. l. 10. c. 50. Sect. 4.
efficiency, but by a supernatural efficacy, which can take place in children
also, and not in men only; and children being no way debarred from having this
effect wrought on them thereby, as being no where exempted therefrom by the
Author of this Holy Institution, we do, and may well hence conclude that our
children are by Baptism put into a state of Adoption Hac de causa and ^am
infantulos baptizamus, ut non sint coinquinati peccato, ut eis addatur
san^litas, justitia, adoptio. D. Chrysostom. Hom. a^ Neophytos.
of children unto God.

. 7. Now this being so, an ordinary understanding will be able to conceive how
beneficial baptism must needs be unto Infants in this respect. For it interests
them in the fatherly love of God to them, and care for them. God loves them,
and cares for them, and loves and cares for them as for his children, as for
his sons.

. 8. Now of this love and care of God, to, and for them, the effects cannot but
be many and good, as well in what he at present bestows on them, as in what for
future he provides for them. Let what will, or can, come at, or of earthly
friends or parents, Baptized Infants can never be wholly either friendless or
fatherless. When they have neither Father, nor Friend on earth, they have still
both a Friend and Father in heaven: Such a Friend and such a Father, as knows
their needs, and will not suffer them to be too much under wants; such a Friend
and such a Father, as looks after them, whilst they are not able to look after
themselves, ^ay nor him neither; such a Friend and such a Father, as lays up in
them an early stock of Grace, and lays up for them an eternal stock of Glory.

. 9. O the happiness of being an Adopted Son to God! It Is a Relation big with
felicities: both the Indies in one for richness and sweetness. It Is an honor
beyond that of being of the blood of Nobles, the kindred of Princes, the sons
of Kings, the heirs of Emperors. It Is a Magazine of stores for all manenr of
provisions for this and for a better life; for earth, and for heaven. It Is a
Tower of strength for safety and protection from the power, and malice of foes;
from harm, danger, and fear of enemies. It Is a breast of Consolation under all
adverse providence, sweetning every the bitterest cup, and sharpest stroke;
turning our gall into honey, and filling our wounds with balsome. It Is a
fountain of pleasure perpetually emptying it self into our bosoms in streams of
the most soul ravishing delights and contentments. It Is heaven in Epitome,
beatitude in quintessence; an interest in, and an earnest of an eternal
inheritance.

. 10. Baptism then putting the Baptized into this state of Adoption of Sons to
God, which appellation belongs to no unbaptized Person, and giving them also
the spirit of Adoption, whereby they are enabled to (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 1. de
Poenit.
call God Father; this consideration, even alone and of it self, were
sufficient to move any man, whose heart were not made all of rock, but had
some, though the least regard to the good of his child, to baptize it, that so
he might thereby both bring it into so glorious a relation, and entitle it unto
so precious advantages. And yet there is more.

CHAP. XII.
Baptism beneficial unto children in regard of their being made thereby Heirs
of Heaven.

. 1. FOr Seventhly, Infants are by Baptism made Heirs of the kingdom of heaven.
And this follows upon the former. For Heirship follows Sonship. Gods sons are
all Heirs. So the Apostle reasons it, Romans 8. 17. and Gal. 4. 7. If sons, then
heirs, heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ. By the means that we become
sons, we become heirs. Infants therefore being made sons by Baptism, are by
Baptism also made heirs. But heirs of what? why, of a kingdom, and even of that
kingdom whereof Christ is an inheritor: for the sons of God are (...), coheirs
with Christ, heirs to the same kingdom, whereof he is an inheritor, and that is
the kingdom of heaven. And accordingly St. Paul says, According to his mercy
he saved us by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost,
which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior, that being
justified by his grace we should be made heirs according to the hope of eternal
life, Tit. 3. 5, 6, 7.

. 2. This Instrumental efficiency toward the giving of entrance and admission
into the kingdom of heaven, the Fathers do in the general ascribe unto Baptism.
St. Basil says it is that whereby we are (...). D. Basil. exhort. ad Bapt.
carried to heaven, and entertained into that kingdom. Greg. Nazianz. says it
is that chariot (...). Greg. Naz. Or. 40.
or vehicle, whereby we are carried unto God. St. Aug. says, when a man goes
forth from baptizing then the Quando homo de baptismo egreditur tune and ^anua
coelestis aperitur. D Aug Sermon. 29. de Temp. Felix sacramentum aquae nostrae,
qua abluti delictis pristinae caecitatis in vitam aeternam liberamur, ^ert, de
Bapt. c. 1.
of our water, whereby being washed from the delinquencies of our former
blindness, we are freed unto eternal life. And by Greg. Nazianz. it is called
(...) Greg. Naz. Orat. 40.
gate of the kingdom of heaven is opened to him. Tertullian calls it the happy
Sacrament the key of the kingdom of heaven. So that it not only sends Aqua
baptismatis baptizatos ad regnum coeleste mittit, Greg. in Evang. hom. 17.
the Baptized to, but lets them into that kingdom.

. 3. And from a well-grounded confidence hereof undoubtedly it is, that our
Church not only prays for the Infant to be baptized, Office of Publ. Bapt. of
Infants.
that he may come to the land of everlasting life, and to the eternal kingdom
which God has promised; and be made an heir of everlasting salvation, and an
inheritor of Gods everlasting kingdom; but also gives assurance to the Sureties
for the Infant, upon the word and promise of our Savior, that he will give
unto him the blessing of eternal life, and make him partaker of his everlasting
kingdom, even the kingdom of heaven.

. 4. And in this her sense she agrees with the sentiment of the Ancient Church.
For St. Chrysostom says, For this cause do we baptize Hac de causa infantulos
baptizamus ut eis addatur, sanctitas, justitia, adoptio, haereditas. D.
Chrysostom. Hom. ad Neoph. (...). D. Athan. q. ad Antioch. 114. Tom. 2. p. 377.
Infants that there may be added unto them holiness, righteousness, adoption,
and an inheritance. And Athanasius grounding his inference on two
Scripture-Texts, the one the words of our Savior in my Text, Suffer little
children to come unto me, for of such is the kingdom of heaven, the other the
words of St. Paul, but now are your children holy, says, That the baptized
Infants of Believers do as undefiled and believing enter into the kingdom of
heaven.

. 5. Yea so highly conducing unto an entrance into heaven both for Infants and
others was (...). D. Chrysostom. Hom. 1. de Poenit. Quum vero praescribitur nemim
sine (...) Baptismo competere salutem ex illa maxim pronunciatione Domini qui
ait, Nisi natus ex aqua quis erit, non habet vitam, suboriuntur scrupulosi,
etc. Tertull. de Bapt. Lex enim tingendi imposita est, and forma praescripta,
Ite inquit, docete nationes tingentes eas in nomine patris, and filii, and
spiritus sancti. Huic legi collata definitio illa, Nisi quis renatus fuerit ex
aqua and spiritu, non intrabit in regnum coelorum, obstrinxit fidem ad baptismi
necessitatem. Itaque omnes exinde credentes tingebantur. Id. ib. Nisi enim quis
renatus fuerit ex aqua and Spiritu Sancto non potest introire in regnum Dei.
Utique nullum excipit, non infantem, non aliqua praeventum necessitate. D.
Ambros. de Abrah. Patriarcha, l. 2. c. 11. Sine baptismo mortuos periisse non
dubium est. Id. de Voc. Gent. l. 2. c. 8. (...). Greg. Nyssen, de Bapt.
Baptism anciently thought, that it was the opinion of some, that there was no
entrance for either in thither without that; and this opinion of theirs was
grounded on our Saviors saying, that Except a man be born of water and of the
Spirit he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.

. 6. And even our own most modest and moderate Church cannot Beloved, ye hear
in this Gospel the express words of our Savior Chirst, that Except a man be
born of water -- whereby ye may perceive the great necessity of this Sacrament,
where it may be had, Office of Bapt. of those of riper years.
but upon the same ground conclude some, and that a great necessity of Baptism
in order to entrance into the kingdom of God.

. 7. And truly though, Whitaker Praelection de Eccles. Cathol. qu. 1. c. 4, 5.
D. Bernard Ep. 77. ad Hugon. de Sancto Victore.
with Dr. Whitaker, and others, I do believe, that the mere want of baptism,
where it cannot be had, is not absolutely exclusive of all unbaptized ones out
of heaven, but only the contempt of it, where it may be had; yet two things may
be observed from that Text (of John 3. 5.) which carry it high for a necessity
of Infants baptism, at least so far as to be an excuse for those, who gathered
therefrom an absolute necessity of it.

. 8. The first is this, That the kingdom of God here, in the notion of it
includes, not only Gods spiritual kingdom on earth, or the visible Church
(which is all that the Anabaptists will have it to signify; and upon this
design, because they would by this distinction avoid the force of the Argument
hence for Infants Baptism, for whose salvation they conclude it not necessary,
that they be made members of the visible Church, as having devoted them all,
without exception of any, to be eternally saved, if dying in infancy, though
dying unbaptized) but it does also in the notion of it include Gods eternal
kingdom in heaven. Because the kingdom here that a man cannot enter into except
he be born of water and of the spirit, is the same kingdom that (in ver. 3.) a
man cannot see except he be born again. Now it is not true of Gods kingdom on
earth, that a man cannot see it, except he be born again of water and of the
spirit, that is, baptized: for it is therefore called the visible Church,
because it is a Church that may be seen, And seen it may be of such as desire
to come to it, and join with it, before they be of it: for how else shall they
desire to come to it? Seen also it is, and may be, of such as are of it; and
even of those that do oppose, and fight against it. But of the kingdom of God
in heaven it is most true, that except a man be born of water and of the spirit
he cannot see that. Therefore that kingdom which a man cannot enter into except
he be born of water, and of the spirit does in the notion of it include the
kingdom of God in Heaven.

. 9. And if the Kingdom of God here (in John 3. 3. 5.) be the same with that
which is called (in Matthew. 19. 14.) the kingdom of heaven; which again St. Luke
(in my Text) renders by that very same expression in St. John, the kingdom of
God, then we shall find the Anabaptists, when it is for their turn,
interpreting it of Gods kingdom in heaven. For that very Text do they allege
to prove that Confess. of Faith, Art. 10.
not any Infant dying in Infancy before the Commission of actual sin, shall
suffer eternal punishment in hell for Adams sin: for of such (as they please to
speak) belongs the kingdom of God. And if it must be interpreted there (in John
3. 5.) of the visible Church, then it must be here also, in Luke 18. 16. and
Matthew. 19. 14. And so then children will be such as belong to the Church
Catholic, as members of it, of whom it is: and then why should they not be
admitted into it, that belong unto it?

. 10. And if any thing be objected against this, because it is not said, of
these, but of such as these, is the kingdom of God; the same will be objected
against their coming into the kingdom of glory, which they entitle them to,
(from Matthew. 19. 14.) because it is not there said, of these, but of such as
these is the kingdom of heaven. And so it will follow, even by their own way of
arguing, either that such as they, men resembling them in humility and
innocence shall enter into the kingdom of glory, but not they: or that, if the
such as they, hinder not but that they may enter into heaven, then the such as
they cannot hinder, but that they may enter into the Church.

. 11. The second thing to be observed from this Text is this, That our Savior
in his expression of himself, uses such a word as can no way be restrained
from reaching even unto Infants, and even unto the least of them; He says not
(...) nor (...), except a man, that is, a man of years and understanding be
born again (for so those words may be capable of being rendered; and even the
latter of them, which is of the more extensive signification is so to be
interpreted in 1 Cor. 11. 28. where the subjectum recipiens, or person that is
to receive the Lords Supper is spoken of, Let a man, that is a man of years and
understanding examine himself, etc) but he says here, (...), except one, any
one, be it who it will be, man, woman, or child, be born again, that is
baptized, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.

. 12. Heaven then being the region of light, the paradise of pleasure, the
habitation of joy, the mansion of peace, the seat of bliss, the rest of the
Saints, the country of Angels, the court of God, a kingdom of glory, an
inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not away, where our
solaces shall be pure, our happiness complete, and our life eternal: and
Baptism being so highly conducible, if not absolutely necessary, to an entrance
into heaven, the ready way for our selves, and the only way that we know for
our Infants, to get admission into that city of our God, and joy of our Lord;
it necessarily follows, that Baptism must be highly beneficial to our Infants;
and that we, if not upon the account of sin in them, with the Orthodox
Christians, yet at least for entrance into the kingdom of heaven, with the
Heterodox Pelagians Parvulos etiam negant secundum Adam carnaliter natos
contagium mortis antiquae prima nativitate contrahere. Sic enim eos sine ullo
peccati originalis vinculo asserunt nasci, ut prorsus non sit quod eis oporteat
secunda nativitate dimitti: sed eos propterea baptizari. ut regeneratione
adoptati admittantur ad regnum Dei, de bono in melius translati, non ista
renovatione ab aliquo malo obligationis veteris absoluti, etc. D. Aug. de
Haeres. c. 88.
, should be moved to baptize them.

CHAP. XIII.
Baptism beneficial unto Children in regard of their being thereby made
partakers of Grace.

. 1. YEt eighthly, to show the Beneficialness of Baptism to Infants, Baptism is
a means of Grace to them: an instrument of conveying unto them, and making them
partakers of the Grace of God; that is, so far, and in such manner, and
measure, as they are capable of it.

. 2. To signify Baptism to be a means of Grace, Grace is one of the Names by
which Baptism is called in the Writings of the Fathers. Whether out of a
certain strange kind of joy (says Gr Na.) (...), Gr. Naz. Orat. 40. (...) --
Id. ib. -- (...), Gr. Nyssen. de Baptismo.
or whether in consideration of the manifold benefits of it, we give it many
names, we call it Gift, Grace, Baptism, Unction, Illumination, etc.

. 3. Now that Infants are in some degree and measure capapable, if not also
sensible, of (...). Just. Mart. Resp. ad Orthod. 13.
Gods grace and of divine impressions by the Holy Ghost, sure none doubts, that
reads of John Baptists being filled with the Holy Ghost (that sure, signifies
some Gifts and Graces of the Holy Ghost) from his Mothers womb, Luke 1. 15.
(...). Just. Mart. Resp. ad Orthod. 13.
nay of his (...) leapings for joy in the womb of his Mother, Luke 1. 44. which
sure could come from nothing but some divine impression made on his soul by the
Holy Ghost, wherewith his Mother being at that time filled, it may well be
thought he was not wholly empty, especially after so sensible an indication of
it. Nor surely does any doubt, that what effect and operation Baptism has upon
elder persons, it has also upon Infants according to their measure of
capacity: inasmuch as they do not any thing to hinder its operation upon them:
and there is nothing said, that deprives them of the benefit of its operation.

. 4. To the point in hand then. There is a twofold Grace of Gods imparted, and
communicated in Baptism: first, there is the Grace of Justification; and
secondly, there is the Grace of Sanctification. The Grace of Justification is
Gods remitting to us the guilt of our sins. The Grace of Sanctification is Gods
cleansing us from the corruption and pollution of our Natures and Persons, and
enabling us to do acts of Righteousness and Holiness.

. 5. Now for the first of these, the Grace of Justification, that that is
communicated in Baptism, is evident from the speech of Ananias unto Paul (Acts
22. 16.) bidding him, arise and be baptized, and wash away his sins, calling on
the name of the Lord. And from Peter's exhorting the Jews (Acts 2. 38.) to be
baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, i. e. that they
might thereby obtain the forgiveness of their sins.

. 6. Then for the second the Grace of Sanctification, that that also is
communicated in Baptism is evident from that of the Apostle (in Tit. 3. 4, 5.)
After the kindness of God our Savior toward man appeared, not by works of
righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by
the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, i. e. by the Grace
of Sanctification, which is a work of the Holy Ghost, usually begun in Baptism,
and constantly wrought by it, in some measure in the party baptized, at least
so far as amounts to the putting into him the first principle of it, whereby he
is in time, and by degrees brought to a newness of condition, actually
regenerated into a new creature.

. 7. Hence Peter unto the convert Jews (Acts 2.) promises upon their Baptism
the gift of the Holy Ghost (v. 38.) Repent, and be baptized every one of you in
the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the
gift of the Holy Ghost. For the promise is made to you, and to your children,
etc. The promise. What promise? Why, the Promise of the gift of (that implies
sure, if any thing more, yet however sanctification by) the Holy Ghost. By what
means? why, by Baptism: for it is expressly said, Be baptized, and ye shall
receive.

. 8. In 1 Cor. 6. 11. we have both these Graces together set down as the
Consequents of Baptismal washing. And such were some of you; but ye are washed
(the means in Baptism that laver of regeneration) but ye are sanctified, but ye
are justified in the name of of Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. As if
he had said, ye are now new creatures, other men than formerly ye were: for ye
have been baptized, and in your baptism have had conferred upon you both the
Grace of Justification, by the Name of the Lord Jesus; and the Grace of
Sanctification, by the spirit of our God.

. 9. And perhaps the same is intimated in that of the Apostle to the Ephesians.
Husbands love your wives, even as Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for
it, that he might sanctific and cleanse it with the washing of water by the
word, that he might present it unto himself a glorious Church, not having spot
or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish,
(Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27.) Here cleansing may note Justification: that Grace being
expressed by that very word (1 John 1. 7.) where the blood of Jesus Christ is
said to cleanse, that is to justify us from all sin. And then the Church of
Christ, which consists of Persons of all sorts and ages, small and great, old
and young that have been baptized into Jesus Christ, will have both
Justification and Sanctification communicated and conveyed to it by the washing
of water with the word, that is by Baptism, the water whereof is sanctified to
that use by the word of God. And that will make it a glorious Church indeed, to
be both justified, not having spot or wrinkle upon it or any such thing; and to
be sanctified, being holy and without blemish.

. 10. And this sense of the thing our present Church has: whilst in her office
of Public Baptism she prays for the Infant to be baptized, that he may receive
remission of his sins, and be sanctified by the Holy Ghost; and in her
Catechism she teaches the Baptized Catechumen, that hereby, that is, by
Baptism, we are made children of grace, that is gracious children, acceptable
to, and accepted of by God; accepted by the grace of Justification, and made
acceptable by the grace of Sanctification.

. 11. And this sense of it the Primitive Church of Christ also had. First, as
to the Grace of Justification. Hence the Nicene Fathers in their Creed (...).
acknowledge one Baptism for the remission of sins. The Council of Florence
says Hujus Sacramenti effectus est remissio omnis culpae originalis and
actualis, Council. Flor.
, The effect of this Sacrament of Baptism is the remission of all sin, whether
Original or Actual. St. Cyprian says Omnes, qui ad divinum munus and
patrimonium baptismi sanctificatione perveniunt, hominem illic veterem gratia
lavacri salutaris exponunt, and innovati spiritu sancto a sordibus contagionis
antiquae iterata nativitate purgantur, D. Cyprian. de Habitu Virgin.
Considerantes ac scientes, quod templa Dei sint membra nostra ab omni faece
contagionis antiquae lavacri vitalis sanctificatione purgata, Id. ib. Unde
genitalis auxilio superioris aevi labe detersa in expiatum pectus ac purum
desuper se lumen infudit, D. Cypr. l. 2. Ep. 2. In aquae baptismo percipitur
peccatorum remissio. D. Cyprian. Praef. ad l. de Exhor. Mart. In aquae baptismo
percipitur peccatorum remissio, D. Cyprian. Praef. ad lib. de Exhort. Martyr.
, Our members are the temples of God, being purged by the sanctification of the
vital laver from the dregs of the old contagion. St. August. says In Baptismo
omnia debita, i. e. peccata prorsus dimittuatur nobis. D. Aug. 135 sermon. de
Temp. Ecce venturi estis ad fontem sanctum, diluemini in baptismo salutari
lavacro regenerationis. Renovabimini, eritis sine ullo peccato; ascendentes de
illo lavacro, omnia quae vos peccata persequebantur, ibi delebuntur, D. Aug.
Sermon. 119. de Temp. Baptizati sunt, deletisque omnibus peccatis ex hac vita
emigrarunt, D. Aug. lib. 13. de Civ. Dei, c. 7. -- Ut hortandi sint homines
tunc se potius interimere, cum lavacro sanctae regenerationis abluti
universorum remissionem acceperint peccatorum. Tunc enim tempus est cavendi
omnia futura peccata, cum omnia sint deleta praeterita, D. Aug. de Civ. Dei, l.
1. c. 27.
In Baptism all debts, that is sins, are forgiven us. St. Hierom Quod [sc.
baptisma] sicut priora peccata dimittit, sic in futurum servare non potest,
nisi baptizati omni custodia servaverint cor suum, D. Hieron. contra Haeres.
Jovin. c. 33. Omnia scorta, and publicae colluvionis sordes, impietas in De^m,
parricidium in parents, incestus, atque extraordinariae voluptates utriusque
sexus mutata natura Christi font purgantur, D. Hieron. Ep. 50. ad Oceanum.
Omnia nobis in baptismate condonata sunt crimina -- Id. ib.
says, that Baptism does remit the former sins, though for the future it
cannot save, unless the baptized do with all diligence keep their hearts.
Tertullian Felix Sacramentum a quae nostrae qua abluti delictis pristinae
caecitatis in vitam aeternam liberamur, Tertull. de Bapt. -- deleta morte per
ablutionem delictorum, Id. ib. -- baptismi carnalis actus, quod in aqua
mergimur, spiritalis effectus, quod delictis liberamur, Id. ib.
calls Baptism that happy Sacrament of water, wherein being washed from the
faults of our former blindness we are delivered into eternal life. St.
Chrysostom (...), Chrysostom. Hom. 40. in Genes. Vel potius quod omnia remiserit per
lavacrum regenerationis, Id. Enar. in Psalm 7. Hinc ostenditur dogma magnum quod
perfect purgantur a peccatis, qui baptizantur, Id. Hom. 40. in Acts 1. 19.
calls Baptism a Circumcision not made with hands, wherein no labor is
undergone, but the burdens of sins are laid down, and there is found
forgiveness of all the sins, which have been committed in the whole time of our
life. St. Bernard Quae est gratia, unde per baptismum investimur? Utique
purgatio delictorum, D. Bern. Sermon. 1. in Coen. Domini.
asks, what is the Grace wherewith we are invested in Baptism? and answers,
that it is the purging, (that is the pardoning) of our sins. Athanasius (...).
D. Athan. Apolog. 2, pro Christian. (...), Id. Dict. and Interpret. Parab.
Script. q. 94. (...) [sc. (...). Id. Respons. ad Orthod. q. 44.
says, one end of Baptism is, that in [or by] the water we may obtain the
remission of former sins. Greg. Nazianz. (...). Gr. Nazian. Orat. 40. (...).
Id. ib.
says, that this Laver has the virtue to blot out sins. St. Ambrose says
Illic enim omnibus peccatis depositis abluitur credens, justificatur domini
nomine, and per spiritum Dei nostri Deo filius adoptatur. D. Ambros. 1 Cor. 6.
11.
, that there (i. e. in baptism) the Believer is washed, all his sins being put
away, he is justified in the Name of the Lord, and adopted a Son to God by the
Spirit of our God. And (...), etc. D. Basil. Exhort. ad Baptism.
St. Basil, (to name no more) says, it is to captives redemption, remission of
debts, etc. And these may suffice to report the Churches sense as to the matter
of Justification, which stands in the remission of sins: though others also
Beatos existimat, qui absque labor peccatorum remissionem acceperunt, quod
sola baptismatis gratia largiri potest, Theodoret. in Psalm. 50. Pollicetur
peccatorum veniam, quae per sanctum baptism^ mortalibus datur. -- Theod l. 7.
de Sacrificiis. Non reddit parentum peccata in filios, quia cum ab originali
culpa per baptismum liberamur, jam non parentum culpas, sed quas ipsi
committimus habemus, D. Greg. Mag. Expos. Moral. l. 15. c. 31, in 21 cap. Job.
Sciendum est autem eos, qui post lavacrum in peccata incidunt, eos esse qui
castigantur. Quae enim prius facta sunt dimittuntur, Quae autem postea fiunt
expurgantur, Clemen. Alexandr. Stromatum, l. 4. Justificamur enim pe^ Sanctum
baptismum; mortem Christi annunciantes, and simul resurrectionem ejus
confitentes, Cyril. Alexan^. Apolog. ad Theodes. Ad peccati namque ablutionem
sufficit salutare, and sacrum lavacrum, abstergitque superiorum delictorum
maculam, Cyril. Alex. l. 1. in Isai. cap. 1.
do attest the same.

. 12. Then as to the Grace of Sanctification, whereby we are purged from the
corruptions of our nature, and endued with inward holiness, let St. Chrysostom
(...), etc. D. Chrysostom. Hom. 40. in Genesis Divinae autem gratiae lavacrum non
corporis, sed animae maculam fordesque mundare consuevit, D. Chrysostom. ad
Baptizandos.
speak, and he will tell you, that the grace of Baptism heals without pain,
brings us good things without number, and fills us with the grace of the Holy
Ghost. And that the Laver of divine grace uses to cleanse not the spot and
filthiness of the body but of the soul. St. Cyprian Per Baptismum Spiritus
Sanctus accipitur, D. Cyprian. l. 2. ep. 3.
says, By baptism is received the Holy Ghost; i. e. in the gifts and graces of
it: a thing frequently happening certainly in visible effects, and undoubtedly
in invisible graces, to persons baptized by the Apostles. Tertullian Igitur
omnes aquae de pristina originis praerogativa Sacramentum sanctificationis
consequuntur invocato Deo. Supervenit enim statim spiritus de coelis, and aquis
superest sanctificans eas de semetipso; and ita sanctificatae vim sanctificandi
combibunt, Tertull de Baptismo.
says, that the waters of baptism being sanctified by the Holy Ghost do
conceive a sanctifick virtue. Primasius Filium Dei induti, and toti ejus membra
per Baptismi sanctificationem effecti, filii Dei sitis necesse est, Primes. in
Gal. 3. 27.
says, Having put on the Son of God, and being wholly made members of him by
the sanctification of Baptism, ye must needs be the sons of God. And Greg.
Nazianz. calls Baptism (...), Gr. Naz. Orat. 40. (...), etc. Greg. Naz. ib.
(...) the purgation of the soul; and the waters of Baptism he calls (...)
lustral or cleansing waters, saying that they were more cleansing than hyssop,
than the blood under the Law, or the ashes of an heifer.

. 13. Baptism then being a means of making the baptized partakers of so
excellent Graces of God, as the Justification of their Persons, and the
Sanctification of their Natures, and so putting them out of a state of wrath
and damnnation, into a state of grace and salvation, must needs be concluded to
be highly beneficial to those that partake of it. What thing indeed in all the
world can in the least come in competition for worth and excellency, for
advantageousness and beneneficialness, with either of these two divine Graces?
Who that understood what the Guilt of sin is, and what the Punishment of
damnation is, would not give the world, if it were his, to be acquitted from
that guilt, whereby he should he obliged unto that punishment? And who that
understood the just worth of internal holiness, or the true value of eternal
happiness, would not think all the Jewels in the world, though all the pebles
and sands in the world were jewels, too mean a price for such a purchase as
that grace, that should entitle unto that glory?

. 14. And that being so, what an inducement is here (O what inducement can be
greater? what persuasion more forcible? what argument more strong? what
obligation more powerful?) to draw us to the baptizing of our Infants? what
can we do better for them? what can we do so good for them? as to get them
justified? as to get them sanctified? and to get them baptized? that they may
both be justified, and sanctified.

CHAP. XIV.
Baptism beneficial unto Children in regard that by it they are consigned unto
a Resurrection.

. 1. BUt Ninthly, every Grace it self does not carry immediately and fully into
Prime enim resurrectio, de^ine regnum. Tertull a ^v. Marcion. l. 5. 1 Cor. 15.
50.
Glory. There must be a rising before a reigning. Flesh and blood, in the
condition it is here in, corruptible and mortal, cannot inherit the kingdom of
God. There must therefore intervene a Resurrection from death, before there can
be had a full Admission into life.

. 2. Now Baptism consignes the Baptized, and that whether Men, or Infants, (for
there is no distinction, no exception made in this point of, or against,
either, or other) unto a Resurrection; and that so effectually, that at present
they are made capable, and hereafter, if they forfeit not the grace of their
Baptism, they shall be partakers of it.

. 3. And in the sense and hope of this, our Church prays for the new baptized
Infant, that as he is made Publ. Baptism of Infants.
partaker of the death of Christ, he may also be partaker of his resurrection,
so that finally with the residue of Gods holy Church he may be an inheritour of
Gods everlasting kingdom.

. 4. And the same sense of it the Ancient Church also had. This is sufficiently
evident from Si autem quidam baptizantur pro mortuis; videbimus an ratione;
certe illa praesumptione hoc cos instituisse contendit, qua al^i etiam carni,
ut vicarium baptisma, profuturum existimarent ad spem resurrectionis; quae nisi
corporalis non alias fic baptismati obligaretur. Quid and ipsos baptizari, ait,
si non quae baptizantur corpora resurgunt? Tert. de Resurrect. car. nis.
the practice of those men (whom St. Paul speaks of, in 1 Cor. 15. 29.) who
were baptized for the dead. For that practice of theirs argues thus much, that
they thought that vicarious baptism (as Tertullian calls it) of theirs for the
dead would be of advantage to the dead in order to their rising again. And that
thought must be grounded on an opinion, that those bodies that were baptized,
should be raised. Now this Ground the Apostle goes not about in the least to
confute; but argues from their practice grounded on it to prove a resurrection:
and to them does it unanswerably. For if they thought their being baptized for
others did conduce to the rising of those others, they must needs much more
think that they that were baptized for themselves must be raised: now neither
they that had been baptized by proxy, nor they that were baptized in their own
persons, could possibly rise, if there were no resurrection. So that their
Practice was a confirmation of the Apostles Doctrine.

. 5. Now this effect Baptism has on the Baptized, by making them partakers of
the Resurrection of Christ. In respect whereof we are said by the Apostle to be
risen with him in Baptism (Coloss. 2. 12.) whence Baptism is called by St.
Basil (...), D. Basil. Exhort. ad Bapt.
a power to the resurrection, and by Theodoret (...).
, a participation of the Lords resurrection. And well it may, inasmuch as by it
we are made partakers of the Lords death. Whence we are said, (in the same
place) to be buried with him in Baptism; and (Romans 6. 3.) to be baptized into
his death. And if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death,
we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection, (Romans 6. 5.) In
contemplation whereof Greg. Nazianz. (...). Gr. Naz. Orat. 40. An ignoratis,
quod quicunque in Christum tincti sumus, in mortem ejus tincti sumus:
consepulti ^rgo illi sumus per baptismum in mortem, ut quemadmodum surrexit
Christus a mortuis, ita and nos in novitate vita incedamus. Ac ne de ista
tantum vita dictum putes, quae ex fide per baptisma in novitate vivenda est,
providentissime adstruit: Si enim complantati fuerimus simulacro mortis
Christi, ita and resurrectionis crimus, Per^simulacrum enim morimur in
baptismate, sed per veritatem resurgimus in carne, ^icut and Christus, Tertull.
de Resurrect. Carnis Edit Rigalt. p. 415. We receive hereby a promise of
resurrection unto life: though we by going into the water profess that we are
willing to take up the cross and die for Christ's sake; yet on Gods part this
action of going into and coming out of the water again, did signify that he
would bring such persons to live again. See this and much more in Dr. Patrick's
Discourse of Baptism, page 32, 33, etc.
elegantly cries out, Let us then be buried together with Christ by baptism,
that we may be also raised up with him; let us descend with him, that we may be
also exalted with him; let us ascend with him, that we may also be glorified
with him. And from this Sacramental conformity of ours to Christ by baptism in
his death, Tertullian argues a real conformity that we shall have with Christ
in our flesh in his resurrection.

. 6. Resurrection then, which is the hope of the living, and the comfort of the
dying Christian, Et tamen non utique carni defendimus Dei regnum, sed
resurrectionem substantiae suae, quasi januam regni per quam aditur, Tertull.
Advers. Marcion. l. 5.
being, as Tertullian calls it, janua regni, that gate of the kingdom that lets
us into the actuality of enjoyment of all those invisible and incomprehensible,
immortal, and immarcessible glories, which are laid up, and kept for us in
heaven: and Baptism being that Ordinance of God, whereby he consignes men unto
a Resurrection; whereby they have a title given to it, and are put into a
capacity for it, and a certainty of it, so they shall infallibly obtain it, if
they do not through the default of their own Infidelity or Apostasy fall from
the grace of it, we cannot but think it highly beneficial to our children to be
partakers of it. And that consideration of the Beneficialness of it even in
that respect to them, should be a motive of weight and force with us, to
persuade us to procure it for them.

CHAP. XV.
Baptism beneficial unto Children, in regard they are saved by it.

. 1. TEnthly and lastly, by Baptism Infants are saved.

. 2. Salvation is such a thing, that whatsoever does effect that, or is but in
any measure conducible to the effecting of that, must needs be acknowledged
beneficial to them that are saved. Besides God the great Savior of all men,
there are several things to which a saving efficacy is ascribed: as Faith, the
Word of Faith, the Ministers of the Word, Prayer, and amongst the rest Baptism.
Whence are we Christians? It Is a question that St. Basil asks. To which, says
he, (...), (...). Basil. de Spir. Sancto, c. 10.
any body will answer through faith. But how are we saved? Why, by being
regenerated through the grace conferred in baptism; or (as his words are well
enough capable of being rendered) through grace by Baptism.

. 3. Now this salvifick efficacy of Baptism not for men, but infants also,
might easily be inferred from the foregoing particulars: in as much as
salvation consists but in the obtaining, and enjoying that mercy, Grace, and
Glory, which Baptism qualifies them for, consigns, and intitles them to; and
which they, upon due perseverance in the grace thereof, shall be made partakers
of.

. 4. But there is a nearer way to be taken than such a repetition of
particulars. Our Church says, It is certain by Gods word, that Children which
are baptized, dying before they commit actual sin are undoubtedly saved.
Children dying before the commission of actual sin are capable of no other
means of salvation but Baptism, and, that which is joined with it, Prayer.
Therefore by Baptism with the Prayer of Faith they are saved.

. 5. But is this certain by the word of God? Yes surely, by good argument drawn
from it. For baptisin being the application of the blood of Christ to the party
baptized for the taking away of that sin whereof he stands charged; and Infants
being chargeable with no sin but that sin of the world, which is taken away by
the blood of the lamb of God applied to them in baptism; it must follow, that
being freed from that, they must be saved.

. 6. But we will go to Scripture-Text it self for proof. Our Savior has said,
(Mark. 16. 16.) He that believes, and is baptized shall be saved. Here we have
salvation promised upon two performances; the one by us, the other upon us:
that by us is Faith; that upon us is Baptism. Now as he that has both these,
is certainly saved: so no doubt at all of his salvation, that has but either
of these, so it be not his fault that he has not the other. And if our
baptized Infants have not the one, which is Faith, yet they have the other,
which is Baptism.

. 7. Put case one believe, and be in no possibility of being baptized, who
doubts now of his salvation? even just so, in case one be baptized, and be in
no capacity to believe, there cannot reasonably be any doubt made of his being
saved.

. 8. Our Savior wrought many salvations for their bodies, who by themselves
had made no application to him in a way of prayer or faith, upon the faith and
prayer of others. And what doubt but he is as ready to work salvation for the
souls of our Infants, though in no capacity of applying themselves to him by
prayer or faith, even upon the faith and prayer of those that bring them to
baptism? Had Christ mercy only for bodies? Or has he not it much more for
souls? Or has he mercy only for the souls of men? and not also for the souls
of Infants? And who ever restrained the efficacy of Faith and Prayer in the use
of Means to bodily salvation, that it cannot prevail also for the saving of
souls? theirs especially who as they can do nothing of themselves to advance
it, so they do nothing of themselves to hinder it. All possible proper means
then being used for their salvation, which is their baptizing with the prayer
of faith, there is no reason to doubt of their being saved. And therefore our
Church having, after the recital of the Gospel appointed on that occasion,
which contains this order of Christ's to suffer the little Children to come
Doubt yo not therefore, but earnestly believe, that he will likewise favorably
receive this present Infant, that he will embrace him with the arms of his
mercy, that he will give unto him the blessing of eternal life, and make him
partaker of his everlasting kingdom, Pub. Bap. of Infants.
unto him, descanted a while on the good will of our Savior to those children,
proceeds from thence to exhort the bringers of the Infant unto Baptism, not to
doubt of the salvation of it.

. 9. But further, as our Savior said, He that believes, and is baptized shall
be saved, so one of our Saviors Apostles said of him, that according to his
mercy he saved us by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy
Ghost, (Tit. 3. 5.) that is by Christian Baptism, which consists of those two
parts, the washing of Regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost. The
words are a Merismus, a Rhetorical Figure of Speech, wherein instead of any
Totum or whole thing, is set an enumeration of its parts. As when for the
world, which God in the beginning did create, it is said, In the beginning God
created the heaven and the earth, Genesis 1. 1. As the heaven and the earth, the
two constituent integral parts of the world are put for the world there: so
here the washing of regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost the two
constituent integral parts of Christian Baptism, are put for Baptism. Just as
when our Savior (John 3. 5.) said to Nicodemus, Except a man be born of water
and of the spirit he cannot enter into the kingdom of God, by naming the two
constituent integral parts of Baptism water and the spirit, he meant Christian
Baptism, which consists of those two parts, without which in the ordinary way
of salvation, as far as that is revealed unto us, and without tying God in
extraordinary cases unto ordinary means, there is no entrance into the kingdom
of God.

. 10. And another of his Apostles does positively and expressly say that Baptism
does now save us, (1 Pet. 3. 21.) Not that it has any Physical virtue in it
self in the way of a Natural Cause to effect our Salvation, but that it has a
saving efficacy for such end communicated unto it by God the Ordainer of it,
who works the effect of it by the Cooperation of his Spirit with it, and that
it does exert its efficacy, and has that effect, upon all such, as do not
frustrate the grace of God bestowed on them, and wrought in them, in, and by
it: which certainly our Children before the Commission of wilful actual sin do
not do. And what is said more than so, of Faith, or the Word, or Prayer, or any
other Grace or Means, which we call saving?

. 11. Nor let any here tell me, that the Apostle does expressly deny this
efficacy to that part of Baptism, which is the only part which Infants are
capable of, namely the putting away the filth of the flesh, or the external
washing with water.

. 12. For first, (not in the least to allow the external washing to be the only
part of Baptism, which Infants are capable of; for who can tell in what manner
the Holy Spirit can, or in what measures he does insinuate himself, and
communicate his grace, and exert his efficacies in very Infants? or who can
deny any thing of all this to them!) the Apostle was a Jew; and wrote this
Epistle to the Jews; and his meaning plainly is this, to deny (if he do deny
any thing) the saving efficacy of that Baptism he speaks of, to any legal
Jewish (...), Just. Mart. Diolog. cum Tryph. p. 231. Edit. Paris. 1615. (...),
etc. D. Chrysostom. ad Illuminand. p. 854. l. 4. Tom. 6. Edit. Eton. (...). Naz.
Orat. 40.
Baptism, all the efficacy whereof was the putting away the filth of the flesh,
a ceremonial purgation from legal pollution, and to ascibe it unto the
Evangelical Christian Baptism; which, from its being usually administered upon
such Inquiry and Answer, as was made by, or exacted of, such as in those days
offered themselves unto Baptism, who had no inducement to bring them to it, but
the prompting of a good conscience, persecution for it being the only visible
consequences of it, the Apostle elegantly calls (by a word that signifies both
Inquiring and Answering) (...), the Inquiry or (...). Greg. Naz. Orat. 40. p.
638. Dehinc ter mergitamur, amplius aliquid respondentes, etc. Tertull. de
Corona Mil. p. 121. Edit. Rig. Quae ideo dicitur interrogatio, quod sicut in
contractibus emens aut comparans sibi aliquid commodi certa ratione ac formulis
interrogat emptorem, ac stipulatur ab eo quaerendo, An hoc aut illud mihi
vendis ac tradis, and hac condition ac precio, etc. cui contra venditor
respondens affirmat: sic igitur etiam in Baptismo, cum Deus interrogando
stipulatur ac obligat nos nostramque fidem and obedientiam, tum vicissim nos
stipulando per fidem obligamus ejus paternum favorem ac gratiam. Flac. Illirici
Clavis. v. Baptismus. This form of interrogation seems to have been very
ancient in the Church, and the Apostle justly thought to refer to it when he
styles Baptism the answer of a good Conscience toward God, etc. Dr. Cave
Primit. Christian, part. 1. chapter 10. p. 315.
Answer of a good conscience toward God: or the good consciences Question or
Answer unto God.

. 13. Secondly however, if what he says were to be understood of the external
washing with water in Baptism, yet his meaning is not to deny that saving
efficacy he speaks of to that, but not to appropriate it unto that only; but to
communicate it with that, whatever it be that he calls (...) whether Inquiry,
or Answer of a good conscience toward God. When our Savior said, My doctrine
is not mine, but his that sent me; John 7. 16.
his meaning was not to say, that his doctrine was not his at all, but not h^s
alone, but his Fathers also which sent him. So when he said, He that believes
on me, believes not on me, but on him that sent me, John 12. 44. his meaning
was not to deny that he that believed on him, did not believe on him: but to
affirm, that he that did believe on him, did not believe on him only, but also
on him that sent him. So the Apostles meaning here is not to deny, that the
putting away the filth of the flesh does save us (viz. in its order, degree,
and measure) but that not that only, or alone does save us; but that, together
with the Answer of a good conscience toward God made by, or for the Baptized.

. 14. And now after all this, what need I, or what can I add more, that may set
forth the Beneficialness of Baptism to those that are Baptized, whether Infants
or Others. What greater benefit than Salvation? What more beneficial than that
that saves? If then to baptize our children be a means to save our children
(and indeed that with our faith and prayer be all the means we can use in order
to their saving) how should not the consideration hereof, if we desire (as how
can we but desire?) they should be saved, move us to baptize them? Yea, how
shall we free our selves from the accusation of great uncharitableness, that I
say not injustice, toward the offspring of our own bowels, if we may have, and
do despise, or neglect the procuring for them this so beficial a means of their
salvation?

And thus I have dispatched the first Branch of my Argument: and have shown you,
that Infants may have Benefit by Baptism, and what is the Benefit that they may
have by it.

CHAP. XVI.
Childrens Need of Baptism in regard of its efficacy to take off the Guilt of
Sin.

. 1. I Now go on to the Second, the Need which Children have for Baptism. And
in the showing of that I will begin with that, which Children have with them at
their beginning, and is derived to them from their beginning, and that is, as
it is usually called, Original Sin. And if it do appear, that Children are born
infected with that Epidemical Malady of Original Sin; and that Baptism is a
Means (the only ordinary Instrumental Means) by which they may be healed of
that Malady, then certainly it will not by any reasonable man be denied, that
Infants do stand in need of Baptism: unless happily it can be supposed, what yet
is utterly unsupposeable, that one that is sick of a disease, whereof he will
die without cure, has no need of that Physic which is the only remedy by
which he may be cured. We will first see what virtue there is in this Physic
for the healing of that Malady; and then see how Children are infected with
that Malady, that is to be healed with this Physic.

. 2. Now for the first what healing virtue there is in Baptism, by the
Institution of its Ordainer, for the taking away of sin and In Sacramentis
novae legis, quae derivantur a Christo gratia causatur instrumentaliter quidem
per ipsa sacramenta, sed principaliter per virtutem Spiritus Sancti in
Sacramentis operantis, Aquin. 12dae. q. 112. 1. Sacramenta ex sui institutione
habent quod conferant gratiam, Aquin. 3. q. 66. 2. Conclus. Baptismus autem ab
ipso Christo virtutem habet justificandi, Id. ib. 1. m.
guilt, I will give you an account of it, both from the Scriptures, and from
the Fathers.

. 3. I begin with the Scriptures. And the first I take notice of to this
purpose is that exhortation of St. Peter to the converted Jews, (Acts 2. 38.)
where he speaks unto them to repent and be baptized every one of them in the
name of Jesus Christ for the remission (that is, the forgiveness) of sins. From
whence it is clear, that Baptism is a Sacrament, whereby Christ bestows and
conveyeth remission of sins to those that are baptized. For else, why should he
exhort them to be baptized for that end? Why should he exhort them to be
baptized for remission of sins, if remission of sins were not given in and by
Baptism?

. 4. And of so known an efficacy to this purpose was Baptism in the Apostles
days, that Ananias (Acts 22. 16.) hastens Saul upon his conversion to be
baptized for this end. And now (says he) why tarriest thou? Arise and be
baptized, and wash away thy sins calling on the name of the Lord. Be baptized
and wash away thy sins, that is, in order to the cleansing thee from thy sins
use the means which God has ordained for that end, be baptized.

. 5. And hence sure it is, and as having an apprehension, not to say
experience, which every body must needs know St. Paul had of the virtue and
efficacy of Baptismal washing toward this cleansing, that chosen vessel tells
us (Ephesians. 5. 25, 26.) that Christ gave himself for the Church, that he might
sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word. By cleansing
the grace of Justification is understood (1 John 2. 7.) where the blood of
Jesus is said to cleanse us from all sin, that is, to justify us, to purchase
for us, and procure to us the pardon of our sins. And so unquestionably it here
signifies: especially being set in contradistinction to sanctification; and
more so in the Original than in the Translation, which is, not, that he might
sanctify and cleanse it: but that he might sanctifi it, having cleansed it:
that is, that having forgiven its sins by the grace of justification, he might
render it holy by the grace of sanctification, the one as well as the other
being applied, conveyed, or communicated to it (...) by the washing of water
with the word, that is by Baptism, Mundatum lavacro, hoc est baptismate.
Theophylact. Oecumen.
the washing here spoken of. Now this, the cleansing, that is the remitting or
taking off the guilt of sin from the Church being here by the Apostle ascribed
unto Baptism, and that as the Instrument used by Christ for that end, who is
therefore said to cleanse the Church by that washing, it is evident that by
Baptism, as by an Instrument ordained and used by Christ for that end, the
Grace of justification is conveyed and communicated to the party baptized. Thus
the Scriptures of God say.

. 6. And thus say the Fathers of the Church also. St. Chrysostom. says Divinae
autem gratiae lavacrum non corporis, sed animae maculam, sordesque ^mundare
consuevit. D. Chrysostom. Hom. ad Baptizandos.
, It is the use of the Laver of the divine grace to cleanse the spots and filth
not of the body, but of the soul. And that they are perfectly purged from sins,
who are baptized. Theophylact says (...), etc. Theophyl. in John 5. 4.
, that though the water of baptism (...). Chr. Hom. 40. in Act.
be simply water, yet when the grace of the Holy Ghost comes thereto, through
calling upon God, it looses the diseases of the soul. And these we know are
sins and corruptions. St. Cyprian, speaking of his own baptism Scis ipse
profecto and mecum pariter recognoscis, quid detraxerit nobis, quidve
contulerit, mors ista criminum, vita virtutum, D. Cyprian, l. 2. Ep. 2.
, calls it that death of sins, and life of virtues. Baptism is the Death of
sins by the Grace of Justification, and the Life of virtues by the Grace of
Sanctification. We are washed, says Lavamur igitur in Baptismo, quia deletur
chirographum damnationis nostrae, and gratia haec nobis confertur ne nobis jam
concupiscentia noceat, si tamen a consensu abstineamus. D. Bern. Sermon. 1. in
Coen. Dom.
St. Bernard, in Baptism, because therein the handwriting of our damnation is
blotted out, [that is, our sin is pardoned,] and this grace is given us not to
be hurt of concupiscence unless we consent unto it. St. Augustine Quam causam si
voluerimus admittere, eo usque progressu proveniet, ut hortandi sint homines,
tum potius se interimere, cum lavacro sanctae regenerationis abluti universorum
remissionem acceperint peccatorum. D. Aug. de Civ. Dei, l. 1. c. 27. Quod
utique si fecissent [sc. ut Christum negarent] etiam hoc eis in illo lavacro
dimitteretur, quod timore mortis negaverint Christum; in quo lavacro etiam
illis facinus tam immane dimissum est, qui occiderant Christum, Id. ib. l. 13.
c. 7.
tells us, that if that be admitted, which some contend for, that it were ones
advantage to kill himself to prevent his falling into sin through pleasure or
grief, it would come to this, that men were to be exhorted, then above all
other times to kill themselves, when being washed in the laver of holy
regeneration they had received remission of all sins. In which laver he says,
that sin, even that great sin of killing Christ himself was remitted. Hence
Juvencus calls the waters of Baptism Pergite and ablutos homines purgantibus
undis Nomine sub sancto Patris, Natique lavate, etc. Javenc.
purging waters: and Lactantius Cum primum caepit adolescere, tinctus est [sc.
Christus] a Johanne Propheta in Jordane flumine, ut lavacro spiritali peccata,
non sua, quae utique nulla habebat, sed carnis, quam gerebat, aboleret: ut
quemadmodum Judaeos suscepta circumcisione, sic etiam Gentes baptismo, id est
purifici roris perfusione salvaret. Lactant. Instit. l. 4. c. 15.
calls the act of baptizing the pouring on of the purifying dew; which by the
way is a good instance of baptizing by way of persusion or pouring on of water,
so early as within three hundred years of Christ's time.

. 7. These instances, not to tire you with more sayings, either of the same, or
other Fathers to this purpose, are enough to secure you of the Catholickness of
this Doctrine, which being found in, and founded on the Scriptures, has been
generally held by all Orthodox Writers. And therefore, having shown you, what
efficacy there is in Baptism for the taking away of sin from the Baptized. I
shall now proceed to show, that Infants are under the guilt of sin.

. 8. Only by the way let me observe, that the Scriptures and Fathers, which I
have alleged, do not speak restrictively, either as to the sins remitted in
baptism, but so as extending the remitting efficacy thereof unto all sin,
Original, as well as Actual: or as to the Persons whose sins are in baptism
remitted, but so as comprehending all Persons, to whomsoever sin may be
imputed, whether Men or Infants.

CHAP. XVII.
Childrens Need of Baptism in regard of their being under the guilt of sin.

. 1. NOw as to the Point of Infants being under the guilt of sin, this also, as
the former, I shall show, first from the Scriptures, and then from the Fathers.

. 2. The Scriptures that speak to the Point are many. Amongst them that of St.
Paul (Romans 5. 12.) is very notable. By one man sin entered into the world, and
death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. The
one man here mentioned is the Father of all mankind, Adam. The World into which
sin entered by this one man is mankind: so then, if Infants be any part of
mankind, any of the natural descendents from Adam, then by Adam has Omnes enim
unus fuerunt, D. Aug. 7 Sermon. de Verb. Apost. Ecce primus homo totam massam
damnabilem facit, Id. ib.
sin entered on, and passed through even to them: they through the imputation of
his fault are concerned in his guilt, as having all been in him, when he
sinned. Again, ver. 14. it is said, Death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over
them that had not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression, that is,
(who can it be else but?) Infants, who die, not upon the account of any actual
sin of their own, but upon the account of Adams first sin. Again, ver. 15.
Through the offense of one many be dead. Many? (...), the many, i. e. even all.
Again, by the offense of one, i. e. Adam, judgment, i. e. a sentence, came upon
all men, and so on Infants, to condemnation. Again, ver. 19. By one man's
disobedience many [(...), the many, i. e. even all] were made sinners: and so
Infants, being no way excepted, are included; the sin of their first father
being by imputation made theirs, and they accounted of as having sinned in him.

. 3. And unless all had sinned in Adam, what account of it can be given that
all should die in Adam? 1 Cor. 15. 22. If Infants partake not in Adams fault,
why should they partake in Adams Quod si nullum esset [sc. primi peccati
originale contagium] profecto nulli malo parvuli obstricti nihil mali vel in
corpore vel in anima sub tanta justi. Dei potestate paterentur. D. Aug. Cont.
Julian. Pelag. l 3. c. 5.
punishment? Why should they have paid unto them the wages of sin, who were no
way concerned in the work of sin?

. 4. And if all Infants be not conceived in sin, how then came David to be so
conceived? was it only his particular mishap to be born under the guilt of his
forefathers sin? Or rather is it not the common condition of all mere men that
are born into the world?

. 5. That which is born of the flesh is flesh, John 3. 6. that is, such flesh
as that is that it was born of; sinful flesh of flesh that is sinful; as that
was of which we were all born: it being in his own likeness, not in the
likeness Fatendum est primos quidem homines ita fuisse institutos, ut si non
peccavissent, nullum mortis experirentur genus: sed eosdem primos parents ita
fuisse morte mulctatos, ut etiam quicquid eorum stirpe esset exortum, eadem
poena teneretur obnoxium. Non enim aliud ex eis, quam quod ipsi fuerant
nasceretur: pro magnitudine quippe culpae illius naturam damnatio mutavit in
pejus: ut quod poenaliter praecessit in peccantibus hominibus primis etiam
naturaliter sequeretur in nascentibus c^teris. -- Quod est autem parens homo,
hoc est proles homo. -- Et quod homo factus est, non cum crearetur, sed cum
peccaret, and puniretur, hoc genuit, quantum quidem attinet ad peccati and
mortis originem, etc. D. Aug. de Civ. Dei, l. 13. c. 3.
of God, that our first father begot us; in his own likeness as vitiated and
defiled by his transgression; not in Gods likeness, the spotless purity, and
unstained integrity of his first creation.

. 6. And if there be not one, that can bring a clean thing out of an unclean,
(Job 14. 4.) how then can man be justified with God? or how can he be clean,
that is born of a woman? Job 25. 4.

. 7. So then we must conclude with that of the Apostle (Romans 3. 13) that all
have sinned [all, young and old; Fathers and Children; Adam and his Posterity;
He in himself, his Posterity in him; he actually, they Originally, nay and
actually too, if living till capable of adding sin unto sin, actual to
original] and so are come short of the glory of God, not only of that glory to
which God had ordained us, the glory of happiness, but also of that glory in
which he did create us, the glory of holiness.

. 8. And thus you see, that, (as the Apostle says, Gal. 3. 22.) the Scripture
has concluded all under sin, Infants themselves not excepted; who dying before
the commission of actual sin, would have had no need Nam quis (...) dicere, non
esse Christum Infantum salvatorem, nec redemptorem? Unde autem salvos facit, si
nulla in cis est originalis aegritudo peccati? D. Aug. de pecc. merit. and
remiss. l. 1. c. 23. Quid necessarium habuit Infans Christum, si non aegrotat?
D. Aug. Sermon. 10. de Verb. Apost.
of Christ to save them, were they not under the guilt of so much sin as might
condemn them.

. 9. Thus speak the Scriptures to the Point: let us now again see what the
Fathers say to it.

. 10. Primasius says, Cum peccato concipimur, cum peccato nascimur, Primas. in
Heb. 4. 15.
With sin we are conceived, and with sin we are born. St. Ambrose says (and
cites Psalm. 51. 5. to prove it) Omnes homines sub peccato nascimur, quorum ipse
ortus in vitio est, D. Amb. de Poenit. l. 1. c. 11.
that all men are born in sin, and our very birth is in fault. Chrysologus
says, Per peccatum primi hominis natura lethale vulnus accepi^, and caepit
esse origo mortis, quae erat initium vitae, Petr. Chrysolog. Sermon. 143.
Nature got a deadly wound by the sin of the first man, and that began to be
the original of death, which was the beginning of life. St. Cyprian says
Prohiberi [a baptismo] non debet infans, qui recons natus nil peccavit, nisi
quod secundum Adam carnaliter natus, contagium mortis antiquae prima nativitate
contraxit, D. Cyprian. l. 3. Ep. 8.
, The Infant ought not to be denied baptism who being new born, has no way
sinned, but that it has contracted the contagion of the old death by its first
birth, that is, is guilty of Original sin. St. Gregory says Quia a statu^
rectitudinis primus homo peccando corruit, peccati poenam ad filios misit, D.
Greg. in Psalm. 51. 5. Peccatum quippe originale a parentibus trahimus, and nisi
per gratiam baptismatis solvamur, etiam parentum peccata portamus, quia unum
adhuc cum illis sumus. -- ex originali peccato anima polluitur prolis, D. Greg.
Expos. in c. 21 Job. l. 15. c 31.
, Because the first man fell by sinning from his state of Integrity, he derived
the punishment of his sin upon his children. St. Bernard says Dixi saepius
vobis, nec mente excidere debet, quoniam in casu primi hominis cecidimus omnes,
etc. D. Bern. Sermon. in Coen. Dom. de Bapt. and de Sacram. Altar. and de Ablut.
Pedum. A planta pedis usque ad verticem, non erat in nobis sanitas: erraveramus
ab utero: in utero damnati antequa^ nati, quia de peccato and in peccato
concepti, D. Bern. Sermon. 2. in die Pentecostes.
, In the fall of the first man we all fell, and thereupon were damned ere born,
because conceived of and in sin. St. Augustine Nos certe causam, cur sub diabolo
sit qui nascitur, donec renascatur in Christo, peccati ex origin dicimus esse
contagium, D. Aug. contr. Julian. Pelag. l. 3. c. 5.
says, Why he that is born should be under the power of the Devil, till he be
new born in Christ (i. e. baptized) the cause, we say, is the contagion of sin
by his birth, that is Original sin. Tertullian Ita omnis anima co usque in Adam
censetur donec in Christo renascatur; tamdiu immunda, quamdiu recenseatur.
Peccatrix autem quia immunda recipiens ignominiam ex carnis societate, Tertull.
de Anima, c. 39.
reckons every soul to be so long in Adam, as till it be enrolled in Christ;
and so long defiled, as it is unenrolled; contracting the sully of sin from its
society with the flesh. Athanasius says (...), D. Athan. cont. Arianos, Orat.
10.
, when Adam transgressed, his transgression passed unto all men. Origin
Sciebant enim illi, quibus mysteriorum secreta commissa sunt divinorum quia
essent in omnibus genuinae sordes peccati, quae per aquam and spiritum ablui
deberent, Origin. l. 5. in Romans and Hom. 14. in Luc.
speaks of it as a thing known to those, whom the secrets of the divine
Mysteries were committed to, that there are in all the genuine pollutions of
sin, which ought to be washed away by water and the spirit; and himself
affirms, that there is none clean from pollution, no, if he be but of a days
age. Gratian Firmissime tene, and nullatenus dubites omnem hominem, qui per
concubitum viri and mulicris concipitur, cum originali peccato nasci impietati
subditum, mortique subjectum, etc. Gratian. de Consecrat. Distinct. 4.
bids believe it firmly, and doubt not in the least of it, that whosoever is
conceived by the concumbency of man and woman, is born with Original sin, etc.
Yea, Vincentius Lirinensis asks Quis ante prodigiosum discipulum e^us
Coelestium reatu praevaritationis Adae omne genus humanum negavit astrictum?
Vinc. Lirinens. advers. Hares. c. 34.
, who ever before Caelestius the prodigious Disciple of Pelagius denied, that
all mankind was bound under the guilt of Adams transgression?

. 11. And if all mankind be bound under it, then Infants sure, no small part of
mankind, are not free from it. No, not they, nor any else are free, in the
judgment of the Fathers, but all guilty, Jesus Christ alone excepted: whom God
sent, not in sinful Solus per omnia ex natis de foemina Sanctus Dominus Jesus,
qui terrenae contagia corruptelae immaculati partus novitate non senserit, and
coelesti majestate depulerit. D. Ambros. Com. in 2 Luc. Profect^o peccatum
etiam major fecisset [sc. Christus] si parvulus habuisset. Nam propterea nullus
est hominum praeter ipsum, qui peccatum non fecerit, grandioris aetatis
accessu: quia nullus est hominum praeter ipsum, qui peccatum non habuerit
infantilis aetatis exortu. D. Aug. contr. Julian. Pelag. l. 5. c. 9. Sine quo
generalis velamine confusionis nemo filiorum hominum intravit in hanc vitam,
uno sane excepto qui ingreditur sine macula. Emanuel is est. D. Bern. super
Cantic. Sermon. 78. Solus enim Deus sine peccato, and solus homo sine peccato
Christus, quia and Deus Christus, Tertull. de Anima.
flesh, but only in the likeness of it, Romans 8. 3. and who thence is called
(...) the thing born holy, holy in its very birth, Luke 1. 35.

. 12. Children then having so great a Malady upon them as Original sin is; and
Baptism being that Remedy, yea the only ordinary one by which they may be
freed For if there be no Salvation for Infants in the ordinary way of the
Church, but by Baptism, and this appear in Scripture, as it does, then out of
all doubt the consequence is most evident out of that Scripture That Infants
are to be baptized, that their Salvation may be certain. For they which cannot
help themselves, must not be left only to extraordinary Helps, of which we
have no assurance, and for which we have no warrant at all in Scripture, while
we in the mean time neglect the ordinary way, and means commanded by Christ. A.
B. Laud. Confer.. 15. Number. 4.
from this Malady; how can it then be, but that Children must have need of
Baptism?

. 13. And truly with the Ancient Christians this consideration was of very
great weight and force. Upon this account to be sure, what ever they did upon
other accounts, they baptized their Infants. Why, says Critobolus the Pelagian
are Infants baptized? St. Hierom Quare infantuli baptizantur? Ut eis peccata in
baptismate dimittantur, D. Hier. Ep. 17. Tract. 2. par. 1.
answers, that their sins may be remitted unto them in Baptism. So Origin Per
baptismum nativitatis sordes deponuntur, propterea baptizantur and parvuli,
Orig. Hom. 14. in Levit.
, By baptism the filth of our birth is taken away, therefore are even Children
also baptized. And says St. Chrysostom Praedicat Ecclesia Catholica ubique
diffasa debere parvulos baptizari propter Originale peccatum, D. Chrysostom. Hom
de Adam and Eva.
, It is a thing which the whole Catholic Church every where diffused does
preach, namely that Infants ought to be baptized because of Original Sin. But
what stand I upon the testimony of single Doctors, when we have it from a
Council, that upon the account of that Rule of Faith, as the Fathers in the
Milevitane Council Item placuit ut quicunque parvulos recentes ab uteris matrum
baptizandos negat, aut dicii in remissionem quidem peccatorum eos baptizari,
sed nihil ex Adam trahere originalis peccati, quod regenerationis lavaero
expietur, unde sit consequens ut in cis forma baptismatis in remissionem
peccatorum non vera sed falsa intelligatur, anathema sit; quoniam non aliter
intelligendum est, quod ait Apostolus, Per unum hominem peccatum intravit in
mundum, and per peccatum mors, and ita in omnes homines pertransit, in quo
omnes peccaverunt: nisi quemadmodum Ecclesia Cathelica ubique diffusa semper
intellexit. Propter hanc enim regulam fidei, etiam parvuli, qui nihil
peccatorum in semetipsis adhuc committore potuerunt, ideo in peccatorum
remissionem veraciter baptizantur, ut in cis regeneratione mundetur, quod
generatione traxerunt, Council. Milevitan. Canon. 2. apud Caranz.
call that Text of the Apostles (Romans 5. 12.) By one man sin entered into the
world, etc. understood, as they say the Catholic Church of Christ every where
diffused did always understand it, of Original sin, are Infants, which could as
yet commit no sin of themselves, truly baptized into the remission of sins,
that that may be cleansed in them by Regeneration, which they have drawn upon
themselves by Generation. And therefore St. Augustine says Non est superfluus
baptismus parvuloram, ut qui per generationem illi condemnationi obligati sunt,
per regenerationem ab eadem liberentur. D. Aug. Ep. 89.
, The baptism of Infants is not superfluous [and then sure there is some need
of it] that they who by generation are obliged to that condemnation, which came
by Adam, may by Regeneration be freed from the same.

. 14. Unless then we will say with the Pelagian Heretics, that children have
not in them the Malady of sin; or will contradict our Savior, and say, that
the sick have no need of a Physician, that is of a remedy for their malady; or
will not allow Baptism to avail toward remission of Sin, contrary to the
Scripture and the Fathers, I say, unless we will run upon some or all of these
absurdities, we must needs grant, that Infants have need of being baptized, and
so ought, upon the account of that need, to be admitted unto Baptism.

CHAP. XVIII.
Childrens need of Baptism further shown from the consideration of the evil
nature, and evil consequents of Original Sin.

. 1. ANd truly he that rightly understands the nature of the Malady, will never
dispute the need of a Remedy. Why? what is the matter? What so great evil is
there in Original sin, or comes by it to those in whom it is, that there should
be such need of baptizing our children to disengage them from it? What? why let
our Church speak to this in her Ninth Article, and she will tell you, that it
is the fault, and the corruption Vitium est depravatio naturae cujus^ibet
hominis ex Adamo naturaliter propagati, Art. 9.
of the nature of every man that naturally is engendered of the offspring of Adam.

. 2. So then, by her doctrine, there is a fault chargeable on, and a corruption
diffused in, every one, till he be freed therefrom by Baptism: every natural
descendent from Adam is guilty of a fault, even of that first fault, whereby
man fell from his innocence and happiness (from the happiness of his innocence)
and so is liable to the curse of God; and he is also depraved and corrupted in
his nature, vitiated with irrectitude and deficiency in the very principles of
his composition.

. 3. Now by this means, as our Church says, it comes to pass that man is far
gone from original righteousness; far departed from Ab originali justitia
longissime distet. ib.
that righteousness, which he was created in, when his mind, and will, and
affections, and actions were all agreeable to the will of God; also that he is
inclined unto evil even of his own nature; Ad malum natura sua propendoat, ib.
prone and forward to it even by the genuine bent and proper sway of his own
natural inclination; and also, that his flesh is ever lusting against the
spirit, refusing, resisting, Caro semper adversus spiritum concupiscat. ib.
and rebelling against the suggestions, motions, and dictates of it.

4. Now the Consequent hereof is, that in every person born into the world i^
deserves In unoquoque nascentium iram Dei atque damnationem meretur, ib.
Gods wrath and indignation; exposing every man to the curse of God, and
rendering him liable unto Firmissime tene non solum homines ratione utentes,
verum etiaem parvulos, qui -- sine Sacramento baptismi -- de hoc seculo
transeunt, sempiterno igne paniendos: quia (...) peccatum propriae actionis
nullum habent, originalis tamen peccati damnationem carnali conceptione ex
nativitate traxerunt Gratian. de Consecrat. did. 4.
eternal damnation.

. 5. And well may this be, when (First) the Guilt of this fault is such as to
oblige all men to death. Death (says the Apostle) passed upon all men, for
that all have sinned, (Romans 5 12.) viz. in Adam, in whom all were at his
sinning. Whence we are even by nature children of wrath; (Ephesians. 2. 3.) under a
judgment (or sentence) unto condemnation, (Romans 5. 18.) as being made sinners
by our first fathers disobedience, (Romans 5. 19.)

. 6. And secondly, when the corruption of our Nature, the evil consequent of
that first sin is such, that it is a law in our members warring against the law
of our mind, and bringing us into captivity (...)
to that law of sin which is in our members, (Romans 7. 23.) So that when we
(...), adjacet. Hier.
would do good, evil is present with us, (at hand as it were, ready for us, to
be done by us) Romans 7. 21. and every imagination of the thoughts of our hearts
is only evil continually; according to that representation which is given of
man's depraved disposition, by him that the best knew what was in man, Genesis 6.
5. And when the mind is carnal, and so inimicitious as Romans 8. 6, 7, 8.
to be even enmity against God, to such a height and degree, that it neither
is, nor can be brought to be subject to the law of God, then they that are in
the flesh cannot please God; and then no marvel if that carnality of their mind
be in the consequent of it death to them. That any man is tempted so far as to
be an actor in evil, and (...), Jam. 1. 14.
every man is so, it is from his being drawn away (even haled out) of his own
lust, the innate corruption of his carnal affection; and however if not
violently forced, yet at least cunningly enticed, and allured away, with some
bewitching bait presented to him with all the best advantages, and under the
most winning circumstances by it. Now when once the teeming womb of lust has
(...), ib. v. ^5.
conceived, and is become impregnated, it will not be long ere it bring forth,
and make it self the mother of sin: and that, the right daughter of such a
mother, presently becomes bigbellied too, and brings forth death, James 1. 14,
15.

. 7. Now what can any man stand more in need to be freed from, than such a
Guilt upon his Person, as obliges him unto death? than such a Corruption of
his Nature, as inclines him unto all those evils that deserve and bring upon
him damnation?

. 8. If Children were not under that Guilt, or had not in them this Corruption,
then indeed in these respects Baptism were not needful for them. But for as
much as every age, (as Omnis aetas peccato obnoxia, ideo omnis aetas Sacramento
idonea, D. Amb. de Abrah. Patr. l. 2. c. 11.
St. Ambrose says) is obnoxious to sin, inclinable to the commission, and
liable to the punishment of it, therefore it is that (...), D. Basil. Exhort.
ad Bapt.
every age (infancy and all) is proper for, and has this Sacrament administered
to it. Yea, and it has a need of it: (for there is a need to be baptized, as
there was a need to be circumcized; else why did John the Baptist say to
Christ, that he had need to be baptized of him) and a need to be baptized, is
more than a fitness for, or a capableness of baptism. Yea, for as much as there
is no time of man's life free from fault, as the same St. Ambrose says, there
being deficiencies in our Nullum tempus vitae culpa vacuum, ergo nullum tempus
vacuum debet esse tutclae. Id. ib.
compleatest performances, irregularities in our most regular actings, aversion
from God in our first movings, therefore no time of our life ought to be
without that guard from sin and temptation, which is by this Sacrament
communicated in the grace of it to the party baptized. Hence that of Greg.
Nazianz. If thou have an Infant, let not iniquity get time [nor (...), Gr.
Nazianz. Orat. 40. Ideo vivus oportet etiam infans baptizetur, ne obsit animae
societas carnis peccati, quae participata fit ut nihil possit anima infantis
secundum Spiritum sapere. D. Aug. de Genes. ad Lit. l. 10 c. 14. A quo
[Sacramento, sc. Baptismo] nisi adjutus etiam juvenis carnalem concupiscentiam
non domabit, Id. ib. Hoc [sc. intelligere] quandi^ non potest, valebit
Sacramentum ad ejus tutelam adversus contrarias potestates. D. Aug. Ep. 23.
Bonifacio.
strength by that] let it be sanctified in its intancy, let it in its tender
age be consecrated to [or by] the spirit. And that of St. Aug. Therefore ought
the lively infant to be baptized, lest the fellowship of sinful flesh be a
prejudice to the soul of the Infant, hindering it from favoring any thing
according to the Spirit. And, that, without the help of that Sacrament carnal
concupiscence will be too strong to be tamed by him in his youth. And that,
till he come to understanding, the Sacrament, (that is the power and strength
of the Grace communicated by it) will be able to defend it against the contrary
powers.

. 9. What a cruelty then is it, considering these things, in those Parents
toward the fruit of their own bodies, that suffer their little children to
live in a sinful, and die in a damnable estate, not doing what in them lies,
and God has put into their power to free them from the guilt of that sin, and
deliver them from the power of that corruption, that they were born with. Is
not the damnation of their Persons a thing to be feared? Is not the corruption
of their Natures a thing to be lamented? Is not a rescue from the one, and a
remedy against the other, a thing to be desired? O how can they find in their
hearts to let them live under the tyranny of a rampant corruption, and let them
die under an obligation to an eternal damnation! Surely if they had not lost
even humanity in the midst of their boasts of high Christianity, they would
have compassion for their tender ones, and let them have that relief against
their Guilt, and that remedy against their Corruption, which God, who sees
their need, in his pity to them, has ordained and provided for them.

CHAP. XIX.
Childrens Baptism not to be neglected upon Presumption that God can or will
save them without their being baptized.

. 1. TO talk of what God in his extraordinary grace can (and it may be hoped
will) do for Infants dying unbaptized is a vain story. For though God can do
all he wills, yet it follows not that he will do all We hold the same Necessity
of Baptism, that the Fathers held, which is via ordinaria: yet non altigando
gratiam Dei ad media, no more than the Schoolmen do. B. Andrews Answ. to Perron.
he can. And though he has not tied himself to means, yet he has tied us. And
though to expect the end, when we have desired, and sought the means, but
cannot have it, may be an act of hope, yet when we may have the means, and do
despise it, or neglect, still to hope the end cannot but be an act of
presumption.

. 2. And it may be that God, having in his word declared the guilt that lies
upon all, has said nothing as to the case of Infants dying unbaptized, on
purpose the more strongly to oblige parents Non autem latet quantum cordibus
fidelium desidiae gigneretur, si in baptizandis parvulis nihil de cujusquam
negligentiae, nihil de ipsorum esset mortalitate metuendum, D. Ambr. de Voc.
Gent. l. 2. c. 8.
to baptize their children for the taking off that guilt from them; since their
own reason will tell them, that in a case of doubtfulness it is wisdom to take
the surer side (as the baptizing of them in this case must needs be) not
knowing by what sudden providence they may be taken away unbaptized, if the
baptizing of them be neglected.

. 3. And be it that God in his extraordinary grace may save them, which yet is
more then any can positively say (and there have been some, and they no mean
ones, that have thought the contrary; and however, that if they did escape the
torments of the damned, yet they did not partake of the enjoyments of the
blessed) yet sure it is safer, and much more prudent, to take a way that is
revealed for their salvation, Nisi enim quis natus fuerit ex aqua and spiritu
sancto non potest introire in regnum Dei. Utique nullum excipit, non infantem,
non aliqua praeventum (...) necessitate, D. Ambr. de Abrah. Patriarch. l. 2. c.
11. Neque credi fas est eos qui regenerationis non adepti sunt Sacramentum ad
ullum beatorum pertineri consortium, D. Ambr. de Vocat. Gent. l. 2. c. 8. Sane
infantes quia hanc prohibente aetate non possunt habere fidem, hoc est cordis
ad Deum conversionem, consequenter nec salutem, si absque baptismi perceptione
moriuntur, D. Bern. Ep. 77. ad Hug. de S. Victore. (...) [i. e. non baptizatos
infantes] (...) -- Gr. Nazianz. Orat. 40. (...). Just. Mart. Qu. and Resp. ad
Orthod. q. 56. (...). D. Athanas. q. 1. 4. ad Antiochum.
than to venture their salvation on an unrevealed way; and whilst we neglect
the ordinary means, to expect the^r being saved by extraordinary grace.

. 4. Did I say neglect the means? I doubt I should rather have said contemn the
means. For how in this case to distinguish between the neglect and the contempt
passes my understanding: especially when I find the use of it both in word and
writing looked upon as ridiculous, and accordingly derided and contemned by
neglecters of it; who may very well go to hell for their contempt of the means,
though their children suffer nothing for the want of it: God being more
merciful to their children than themselves are, and not suffering the children
to perish through their parents neglect. Which yet methinks, they should have
little hope of, when they remember, how in the time of Circumcision the
parallel to baptism, the manchild was to suffer excision, cutting off from his
people, that is from the Church of God, and that as being a breaker of Gods
Covenant, who was not at eight days old circumcised, Genesis 17. 14. who yet might
be as little guilty of his Parents fault in neglecting to circumcise him, as
ours can be of any neglect of ours to baptize them. For what could a Jews child
do at eight days old toward his own circumcision, more than the child of a
Christian can at the same age do toward his baptism? I suppose the severity
then threatened to the child, was designed chiefly to oblige the parent. And
doubtless it would have been a great punishment to the parent to have his child
through his neglect cut off from the communion with the Church, and from the
means of grace, and from the hope of glory, if not forthwith from life it self:
and no less would it be to us to have our children undone for ever through our
neglect. O how must it not needs make our own hell the more hot, to find our
unbaptized children there, if through our neglect of the means ordained by God
to preserve them from thence, they should go thither? as, who is infallibly
ascertained that they shall not?

. 5. And however it may prove at last, that our children be saved, though they
die unbaptized, yet since we have no assurance of that, but rather some reason
to fear the contrary, we shall be guilty of their undoing and damning, though
they be saved, since as to what was to our selves, we let them be undone and
damned.

. 6. I will evidence this by a parallel case. There is said to be a thing
called an Ecstasy or Trance, into which people do often fall, sometimes
involuntarily, and sometimes at their own will; whereof Bodinus Bodin. Theatrum
Naturae, lib. 4.
gives several instances. Now all the time that one is in an Ecstasy he seems
to be no other but dead, no sense, no motion either of pulse or heart being
perceivable in him. Whereupon some have been carried forth to burial as dead,
who yet were not indeed dead, but in an ecstasy, and have revived at, or after
their burial; and one instance hereof is given in that famous Scholar Joha^nes
Duns Scotus, who was buried in an ecstasy, and revived after burial, though
killed after his reviving by his struggling in his coffin for life. Now whilst
one is in an Ecstasy he is not sensible of any woundings, burnings, or
tearings, so that some of those things, that would at other times take away
life, do not kill, such as drowning or hanging. An instance of the latter
whereof happened not many years ago at Oxford, in a Maid recovered to life
after hanging, and some other A particular account whereof was given in a
Narrative set forth at that time.
violences used to her for her dispatch after her cutting down. Now put case a
man is in danger of death by hanging or drowning, and I may, if I will preserve
him from either; (in which case that act of charity becomes my duty) if I do
not my duty to preserve him, I shall be guilty of destroying him, even though
it please God in that instant (as I have read it has happened in both these
cases) to cast him into an Ecstasy, and preserve him. He might have been hanged
or drowned to death for me, who would do nothing, when I might have done
something (and ought to have done any thing, that reasonably I could) to have
saved him; and so I am guilty even of his death, that did not die: just as
Esther should have been of the Jews destruction, had she not done what she
could to preserve them, though they had not been destroyed, but enlargement and
deliverance had arisen to them from another place, (Esther 4. 14.) And just so,
it being in our power to use a means for the preserving of our children from
damnation, if we neglect it, we shall be guilty of their damning, though they
be not damned. Because though it were Gods mercy they should be saved, yet
damned they might have been, and damned they had been for all us, who would
make no use of the means ordained by God for their salvation.

. 7. And by this time I hope it sufficiently appears, that as upon the account
of the Benefits coming to children by Baptism there is Reason for their
baptizing, so upon account of the Danger they are in by Original Sin, and the
evil Consequents of it, from which they are wholly, or in a great measure
rescued by Baptism, there is Need to baptize them.

CHAP. XX.
Childrens Need of Baptism shown from Six other Considerations.

. 1. ANd yet there are other accounts, which I shall name, and not much more
than name, upon which Infants have need to be baptized.

. 2. And first, considering that there are Benefits derived to us, and
descending upon us from Christ our Head by virtue of our Union with him as
Members of him, which we, and our children have need of, and we cannot hope
otherwise to obtain either for our selves or for our children than by Baptism,
Baptism seems to be in this respect a thing which both we and our children have
a very great need of.

. 3. To instance but in his Influences upon, Care over, and Intercession for
his Members. How shall we partake of those Influences of Grace, which flow from
Christ to all his Members by virtue of their Union with him, if we be not
united to him? How shall we come to be any thing bettered by the care of Christ
over his Members, if we have no fellowship with him as Members of him? How
shall we be concerned in Christ's Intercessions for his Body, if we be not
incorporated into it as members of it?

. 4. What need then our Children have of Membership with Christ in order to
their partaking of those Benefits that are derived from him to his Members;
that need have they of being baptized into Christ, that by their Baptism they
may be made the Members of Christ.

. 5. Again, our children being by nature born in sin, and consequently children
of wrath, -- In my Baptism, wherein I was made the child of God -- Cat. of Chapter
of Eng. -- Being by nature born in sin, and the children of wrath, we are
hereby made the children of grace. Ib.
how can it but be needful that by some means they should be made children of
grace? That by Baptism our children are made children of grace, and children of
God, our Church has told us. But how they shall become children either of God,
or Grace, otherwise than by Baptism, we are not told. If any thing, the quite
(...). Chrysostom. Hom. 1. de Poenitentia.
contrary. The name of Son is given to none but such as are baptized, if St.
Chrysostom say true. What need then our Infants have to become Sons of God,
that need have they to be baptized, that they may become his Sons.

. 6. Further Heirship follows Sonship. Whereby then we are made Sons, thereby
we are -- Baptism whereby I was made an inheritor of the kingdom of heaven.
Church Catechism. (...) Just. Martyr. Resp. ad Orthodox. 44.
made Heirs. That as our Church has taught, and I have proved, is done by
Baptism. Whereupon it follows, that if we will be Heirs, we must be Sons, and
if we will be Sons, we must be baptized. No baptism then, no Son of God, and
then no Heir of his. Whereupon (...) Chrysostom. Hom. 1. de Poenit. Qui ad divinum
munus and patrimonium baptismi sanctificatione porveniunt -- D. Cyprian de Hab.
Virgin.
St. Chrysostom. says, that before baptism there is no receiving of patrimony,
nor getting of inheritance. What need then our Infants have of getting an
inheritance from God, that need have they to be baptized, that they may become
his heirs.

. 7 Yet again, Baptism is the door of entrance into Gods kingdom. Whence St.
August. Quando homo de baptismo egreditur tunc ei janua regni coelestis
aperitur. D. Aug. Sermon. 29. de Temp. Ex aqua and spiritu sancto oportet ut
nascatur [homo] propter regnum Dei. D. Aug. 12. Tract. in Evang. Johannis.
says, when a man goes forth from baptizing, then the gate of heavens kingdom
is opened to him. And, that man must be born of water and the Holy Ghost for
the kingdom of God. And this is grounded on what our Savior says, (John 3.
5.) Except a man be born of water and the Spirit, that is, be baptized, he
cannot inherit the kingdom of God. Whence Obstrinxit sidem ad baptismi
necessitatem. Tertull. de Baptismo. Scripsit Augustine. duos libros de
infantibus baptizandis contra haresin vestram, per quam vultis asserere
baptizari infantes, non in remissionem peccatorum, sed in regnum coelorum. D.
Hieron. Dialog. 3. advers. Pelagianos. Forasmuch as all men are conceived and
born in sin, and that our Savior Christ says, None can enter into the kingdom
of God, except, etc. Chapter of Engl. Publ. Bapt. of Infants. So Bapt. of those of
riper years. That Baptism is necessary to the salvation of Infants (in the
ordinary way of the Church, without binding God to the use and means of that
Sacrament, to which he has bound us) is express in St. John 3. Except a man be
born again of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.
So, no Baptism, no Entrance. Nor can Infants creep in any other ordinary way.
And this is the received Opinion of all the Ancient Church of Christ. A. B.
Laud. Confer. Sect. 15. Number. 4.
Tertullian inferred a necessity of baptism to all believers. And others have
extended that necessity unto Infants; to whom the Pelagians themselves have
allowed it, though not upon the account of Original Sin, yet for entrance into
the kingdom of heaven: whereas our Church takes in both those considerations,
as the Catholic Church ever did, in her admission of them unto Baptism, and
grounds their baptizing upon both, strengthened with Christ's command here in
the Text to suffer little children to come unto him. So that no baptism, no
entrance, even for Infants, into the kingdom of heaven; that is none according
to the ordinary way, whatever there may be extraordinarily. What need then our
Infants have of entering into the kingdom of God, that need they have of being
baptized, that they may have entrance into that kingdom.

. 8. Fifthly, by baptism we are saved, (1 Pet. 3. 21.) But by what Baptism? Not
any Jewish Baptism, which was only the putting away of the filth of the flesh;
But the Christian Baptism, which washes away the filth of the Spirit, to the
enabling of the baptized with a good conscience to seek after God. Now this for
the saving efficacy of it is compared to the Ark of Noah. By the one, as by a
means ordained of God for that end a few were saved from among the rest of
mankind that perished for sin: and by the other, as a means of Gods ordaining
for that end, a few are saved from amongst the rest of the Sons of men that
perish in sin. And as, we are sure, none then were saved without In aqua
nascimur, nec aliter quam in aqua permanendo salvi sumus. Tert. de Bapt. See
Aquin. 3. q. 68. a. 1.
the Ark; so are none now, that we are sure of, saved without Baptism. As then
none were, so none, that we know of, now are saved, but by water. What need
then Infants have to be saved, that need they have of baptism for their
salvation.

. 9. Lastly, Grace is necessary unto Glory. For without holiness no man shall
see the Lord, Heb. 12. 14. Holiness is the operation of the Spirit of God, who
sanctifies all the elect people Catechism.
of God, as our Church teaches us. The spirit of holiness is by Baptism
communicated unto Infants in order to their regeneration; for baptism is a
birth not of water only, but of the spirit too, John 3. 5. Whence our Church
prays that God would give his holy spirit to the Infant to be baptized that he
may be born again, and gives thanks to God for the Infant that is baptized,
that it has pleased him to regenerate that Infant with his holy Spirit. Office
of Publ. Bapt. of Infants. (...) Marc. Eremita. (...) D. Athanas. in illud
Evang. Quicunque dixerit. (...) -- D. Basil. Exhort. ad Baptism. Omnes quidem,
qui ad divinum munus and patrimonium baptismi sanctificatione perveniunt,
hominem illie veterem gratia lavacri salutar is exponunt, and innovati spiritu
sancto a sordibus contagionis antiquae, itcrata nativitate purgantur. Sed
nativitatis it^ratae vobis major sanctitas and veritas competit, quibus
desideria jam-carnis and corporis nulla sunt. D. Cyprian de Habitu Virg. Per
batisma enim Spiritus sanctus accipitur -- D. Cyprian, l. 2. cp. 3. Sed
postquam undae genitalis auxilio superioris aevi labe detersa, in expiatum
pectus ac purum desuper se lumen infudit, post quam caelitus spiritu buusto in
novum me hominem nativitatis secunda reparavit, mirum in modum protinus
confirmare se dubia, patere clausa, lucere renebrosa, etc. D. Cyprian, l. 2.
ep. 2. Quippe qui ne vim quidem aspiciendi sacra habeat ab ortu a Deo, sive
baptismo, qui lucis and principium est and praebotor. Dionys. Areop. Eccles.
Hierarch. c. 12. (...). Chry. ad Demet. de compunct. cordis Hom. Ed. Savil. Tom
6. page 148. Cum ergo innovamur baptismi lavacro, per virtutem ab originis
nostrae peccatis atque autoribus separamur -- D. Hilar, in Math. Can. 10. Omni
homini renascenti aqua baptismatis instar est uteri virginalis, eodem spiritu
sancto replente fontem, qui replevit and virignem -- D. Leo Sermon. 4. in Nativ.
Domini. Ardoris vero spiritum dicimus, gratiam in Sacro sancto Baptismo, non
absque spiritu nobis ingeneratam. Baptizati aeutem and loti sumus, non aqua
nuda, sed nec cinere vituli emundati sumus, ad sclam carnis purificationem,
quemadm. B. Paulus, sed spiritu sancto, and igne divino ac intelligibli, qui
sordes vitiositatis in nobis deterit and absumit, and peccati inquinationem
liquat and excoquit. D. Cyril. Alexand. l. 1. in Isa. c. 9.
Whereupon Baptism is an effectual means of grace, as that must needs be,
whereby is communicated the Spirit of grace, who where he is, is a principle of
new life, infusing holy habits, and gracious dispositions, enabling to crucify
affections, to mortify lusts, and to put forth acts of righteousness, and
holiness. What need then our Infants have of Grace, that they may have Glory,
that need they have of Baptism, that they may have grace.

. 10. And now these things considered, (not to add any thing more to the same
purpose from other considerations; as either of the care that is taken for
baptized Infants, not only by those particular persons that bring them, but by
the Church also that receives them to baptism, and by God himself, to whom the
Church does by that action offer and consecrate them; or of that early Vow to,
and Covenant with God to be his, which to their mighty advantage they are
thereby brought into) it appears plainly enough that the baptizing of Infants
is so far from being a superfluous Non est superfluus baptismus parvulorum, ut
qui per generationem illi condemnationi obligati sunt, per regenerationem ab
eadem liberentur. D. Aug. Ep. 89. Consuetudo matris Ecclesiae in baptizandis
parvulis nequaquam spernenda est, nec ullo modo superslua deputanda. D. Aug. l.
10. de Genes. ad Literam, c. 23. Dic mihi obsecro te, parvulis baptizatis
Christus aliquid prodest, an nibil prodest? Necesse est ut dicat prodesse.
Premitur mole matris Ec clesiae. D. Aug. de Verb. Apost. Sermon. 14. Primo igitur
modo necessitatis [sc. sine quo non potest haberi finis] sunt tria sacramenta
necessaria: due quidem personae singulari, baptismus quidem simpliciter; and
absolute -- Aquin. Sum. 3. q. 65. ar. 4. Manifestum est quod omnes ad baptismum
tenontur, and sine eo non potest esse salus hominibus. Id. ib. q. 68. ar. 1.
Quibus [sc. infantibus] propterea est Christi gratia necessaria, ut in Christo
vivisicentur, qui in Adam mortui sunt: ut quia inquinati sunt generatione,
purgentur regeneratione. D. Aug. de Verb. Apostol. Sermon. 7.
needless, useless thing, as the Antipaedobaptiss, contrary to the judgment of
the Catholic Church, do contend it to be, that it is, if not absolutely
necessary, yet highly expedient, useful to and needful for them: and therefore
with little justice, and less charity is it by any detained from them.

And thus I have dispatched the Second branch of my Argument for Infants
baptism. Wherein I have shown you, both that Infants have need for Baptism, and
in what respects they have need for it.

CHAP. XXI.
Children not incapable of Baptism in regard of their bodily weakness, to
receive, come to, or desire Baptism.

. 1. I Now go on to the Third, which is Infants Capableness of baptism. Now a
man may be in need of a thing, whereof yet in some respect he is incapable. But
it is not so with Infants as to Baptism. As they have need for it, so are they
also capable of it.

. 2. If they were incapable of it, it must be in regard of something either in
Themselves, or in the Thing, or in the Law of God, that might hinder them. But
in no one of these respects are they incapable, as I shall show in every
particular severally.

. 3. And first there is nothing in the Infants themselves to render them
incapable of Baptism.

. 4, It is true they are many times very weak of Body. Yet are they never so
weak, but that they may be baptized. Nothing is there for them to suffer in
Baptism, but what experience shows they may well enough endure.

. 5. They may, if healthful and strong, be well enough dipped into water (as
the And then naming it after them (if they shall certify him that the child
may well endure it) he shall dip it in the water -- Office of Pub. Bapt. of
Infants. Si quis Episcopus, aut Presbyter, non trinam mersionem unius mysterii
celebret, sed semel mergat in baptismate, quod dari videtur in Domini morte,
damnetur. Canon. Apostolorum, 49. In aqua mergimur. Tertull. de Bapt. Nam nec
semel, sed ter, ad singula nomina in personas singulas tinguimur. Tertull.
advers. Praxeam. -- Debinc ter mergitamur. Tertull. de Corona Militis. Ter
quidem illum demergit [Hierarcha] atque in tribus ejus de mersionibus
emersionibusque trium divinae beatitudinis personarum nomina appellat and
invocat. Dionys. Areop. Eccles. Hierarch. (...). D. Athanas. q 94. de
Interpret. Parab. Scriptur. Quamvis tutius sit baptiz are per modum
immersionis, quia hoc habet communior usus, potest tamen fieri baptismus per
modum aspersionis, etc. Aquin. 3. q. 66. a. 7.
Church appoints) without any hurt or danger to them; but that the softness of
this delicate age, makes us so full of vain fear, that we dare not venture the
trial of that, which in former ages was the more common practice, and as
adjudged the safer too, though it were to do it thrice.

. 6. And if they be weak and sickly, so as not to be able to endure dipping
either thrice or once, (which, to avoid offense, I could wish more practiced
where there is no just necessity to decline it) yet however they may have some
water poured on them (as the But if they certify, that the child is weak, it
shall suffice to pour water upon it -- Offic. of Publ. Bapt. of Infants.
Church in that case allows) as was anciently done on persons converted in
their sickness, and baptized in their beds, and no hurt at all come to them
thereby. And so they are not incapable of Baptism in that respect.

. 7. Yea, if any thing, their weakness should rather conduce to the hastening
of their Baptism: lest they be, as sometimes they are prevented by death. What
(says Greg. Nazianz.) will you say concerning children, (...). Gr. Naz. Otat.
40.
that neither know the loss, nor are sensible of the grace of baptism? shall we
also baptize them? Yes, by all means, in case of urgent danger. It is better
they should be sanctified, (that is, baptized) when they have no sense of it,
than that they should die unsealed and uninitiated. And so Aquinas, If they be
children that are to be baptized, their baptizing must not be Si pueri sint
baptizandi non est differendum baptisma. Primo quidem, quia non expectatur in
eis major instructio, aut etiam plenior conversio. Secundo propter periculum
mortis, quia non potest eis alio remedio subveniri, nisi per sacramentum
baptismi. Aquin. q. 68. c. 3. Quarto, ut parvull si infirmari contingat,
eodem^die, quo na^i sunt, baptizentur. Council. Gerund. Cant. 4to. D. Cyprian,
l. 3. ep. 8.
deferred. And of two reasons that he brings the danger of death is one:
because the Sacrament of baptism is the only remedy provided for their help.
It was decreed by the Council of G^runda, that Infants in case of weakness,
should be baptized the same day that they were born. And whereas Fidus a
Presbyter was of opinion, that Infants were not to be baptized the second, nor
third day after their birth, nor indeed till the eighth day, because till that
day they were not anciently circumcised, St. Cyprian shows him, that not
himself only, but a whole Council assembled together with him were of a far
other mind, judging that baptism was not to be denied to any of the sons of
men, and so not to any Infant, how young soever, but that they were to be
admitted to it as soon as born.

. 8. Again, it is true, Infants cannot of themselves come to baptism. Why but
yet they may be brought to it by others. Rather than that shall keep them away,
St. Aug. tells us, our Mother the Church will lend Accommodat illis matter
Ecclesia aliorum pedes, ut veniant D. Aug. Sermon. 10. de Verbis Aposteli.
them other men's feet to come withal. And such is the mercy of our Savior,
that he looks upon them as coming to him, that are but brought to him by
others. Suffer (says he) the little children to come unto me. And yet they
came to him no other way, but even as our Infants may come, that is by being
brought to him. So long then as Infants may be brought to be baptized, so long
they have a way of coming unto Baptism: and so they are not incapable of it in
that respect neither.

. 9. It is true again, that they can neither seek after, nor desire their own
baptism; a thing anciently expected from, and performed by adult Persons. But
yet they can receive it, when, upon others desire, and seeking of it for them,
it is administered to them. And so they are not, for that, incapable of it.
There is nothing said in all the Scripture, that I know of, by which the
inability of a subject to seek after, or desire, that, or any other mercy,
renders him incapable of receiving it. Yea, it is part of the Gospels grace,
that God therein is found of those that seek him not; that Christ, unsought
(...). D. Chrysostom. in Heb. 2. 16. Hom. 5.
to for it, came, and sought, and found, and saved that which was lost,
pursuing after and taking hold on man's nature, when it was fast and far flying
away from him toward its own perdition.

. 10. When our Savior enlarg^d his Apostles Comm^ssion to the taking into
Discipleship, not the nation of the Jews only, but all the nations of the
world, he did not put it into this form, stand ye here still, and be ready to
admit into discipleship all of all nations that shall come to you, and seek to
you for baptism; but go ye, and disciple all nations, baptizing them (q. d.)
Depart ye hence into and amongst the Heathen nations of the world, and make
them disciples by baptizing them, admitting so many of them unto baptism, as
shall accept that favor, and not refuse that grace, to be thereby made my
disciples.

. 11. The children here in the Text that came, that is, were brought unto
Christ, desired nothing at all of him in their own names. It were strange
indeed that Infants, such as they were, should have any requests to make to
him. And their not desiring of a mercy was no hindrance to their receiving of
one. They came to him for entrance into the kingdom of God by baptism: as we
gather from what he alleges as a reason why he would have them suffered to
come to him. And he prepares them for such entrance, Dr. Hammond Quaere of the
Bapt. of Infants Sect. 22. and De Confirmat. c. 2. S. 5.
by vouchsasing them the Ceremonies leading on unto baptizing; he laid his
hands upon them and blessed them: whereupon in all probability followed his
Disciples baptizing of them.

. 12. And if such infirmities and impediments were real hindrances unto mercy
stood in need of, how many of those that our Savior in the Gospel had mercy
on, and healed, had gone without their Cure? Then persons See Gilberti Voctii
Theolog. Polit. part. ^. l. 2. Tract. 2. cap. 2. qu. 6.
born deaf, and dumb, or fools, though the children of parents in Covenant,
should never be baptized, because they could never understand it, never speak
for it, never desire it: which I think no sober Christian will say.

CHAP. XXII.
Children not incapable of Baptism in regard of their having sin in them, and
yet not repenting of it.

. 1. FUrther, it is true, that they have Sin in them. But that is so far from
being any real hindrance to their baptizing, that it should rather be a motive
to it, as indeed it is a reason for it; namely, that they may have their sin
remitted by it. Baptism being a Sacrament especially ordained for the
Sacramentum ad hoc specialiter in^^^tutum, ut per ipsum peccatorum sordes
mundentur. Aquin. 3. q 68. a. 4. c.
cleansing away of the filth of sin, as Aquinas says, and is further confirmed
both by Peter's exhorting the Jews to be baptized for the remission of sins,
Acts 2. 38. and Ananias exhorting Saul to be baptized and wash away his sins,
Acts 22. 16.

. 2. Sin indeed in persons resolved not to forsake their sins, but to persist
in sinning, may be an hindrance: but not in those that are not so resolved. And
of Peccatoribus voluntatem peccandi, and in p^ccato perseverandi propositum
habentibus baptismus minime conferendus est. Aquin. Sum. 3. q. 68. a. 4. 2.
Infants it cannot be said that they are so.

. 3. And if the forepast sins, many and great sins, of men's own acting be no
hinderance to their baptizing, as we see by the Persons baptized in the
Scripture, of whom some had been Idolatrous Heathens, others Christ-killing
Jews, etc. much less can that one sin, under the guilt whereof Infants do lie,
not acted personally by them, but judicially imputed to them, hinder them from
Baptism, as St. Cyprian reasons the case in Porro autem si etiam gravissimis
delictoribus and in Deum multum ante peccantibus, cum postca crediderint,
remissio peccatorum datur, and a baptismo, atque gratia nemo probibe^ur: quanto
magis probiberi non debet infans, qui recens natus nil peccavit, nisi quod
secundum Adam carnaliter natus contagium antiquae mortis prima nativitate
contraxit? Qui ad remissam peccatorum accipiendam hoc ipso facilius accedit,
quod illi remittuntur, non propria, sed aliena peccata. D. Cyprian, l. 3. Ep. 8.
their behalf. And so neither in this respect are Infants incapable of Baptism.

. Yea, but they do not repent them of their sin, Nor is it required of them
that they should. The Scripture no where has enjoined them repentance in order
unto baptism; nor alleged their inability to repent as a bar to their
admission thereunto.

. 5. Indeed we have Scriptures where grown men are exhorted to both together,
to repent and be baptized; and where signs of repentance were showed by such as
received baptism, Acts 2. 38. Matthew. 3. 6. But still the Persons both exhorted
unto, and showing repentance, were of age both to commit actual sins needing
repentance, and to act that repentance that was needful for their baptizing.
But what is this to the case of Infants, who as they are not guilty of actual
sin, so they are in no ability for repentance. Where there is no general rule,
an argument from particulars is no farther argumentative, than to particulars
under the same circumstances: which cannot be betwixt men and Infants, so as
that what is enjoined to, or performed by the one, must be necessarily required
of, and performed by the other. And so some men's being exhorted unto Repentance
and Baptism both at once, and other men's confessing their sins (as a token of
their Repentance) when they were baptized, is no argument, that therefore all
Infants must do so too, or else not be baptized: and so no Infants baptized,
because none can so do. The case, it is plain is not the same. And so whatever
want of Repentance, or Non-profession of it may do to hinder Men from being
baptized, it can do nothing to render Infants incapable of Baptism. Who as they
have the guilt of sin brought upon them by another disobedience, without their
knowledge, so they have that guilt taken off from them by the obedience of
another, without their repentance: which pardon is not only signed and sealed,
but exhibited also, and given to them in and by Baptism.

. 6. And as to the Church, it is true indeed that of Adult sinners it requires
a Personal Profession of Repentance before it admit them to Baptism. But for
Infants that have not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression, it
admits them to Baptism without any such Personal Profession. So there be but a
Promise made of it for the future against the time that it shall be necessary,
by Sureties for the Infants in the Infants names, as the Scripture does not
require so much, so the Church does not stand upon more. And so Infants Ab hac
poenitenti^ cum baptizantur soli parvuli sunt immunes. Nondum enim uti possunt
libero arbitrio: quibus tamen ad consecrationom remissionem que originalis
peccati prodest cotum fides, a quibus offeruntur: ut quascunque maculas
d^lictorum per alios ex qui^^s sunt nati contraxerunt, aliarum (...)
incerrogatione ac responsione purgentur. T Aug. Quiaquag Homil. Sermon. 50.
are not incapable of Baptism in this respect neither.

CHAP. XXIII.
Children not incapable of Baptism in regard of their not Believing.

. 1. YEa but, still it is objected that Infants do not believe, and therefore
they ought not to be baptized.

. 2. To this Objection if St. Augustine were to answer, he would deny the
Antecedent, and say that Infants do believe; and so would St. Bernard too. But
how? Not by any Sed absit ut ego dicam non credentes Infantes. Jam superius
disputavi: credit in altero, quia peccavit in al^ero: dicitur credit, and
valet, and inter fideles bapti zatos computatur, etc. Credunt infantes. Unde
credum? quomodo credunt? Fide pa^entum etc. D. Aug. Sermon 14. de Verb. Apost.
Accommodat illis Matter Ecclesia allorum pedes, ut veniant; aliorum cor, ut
credant. Id. ib. Sermon. 10. Non quod vel ipsi [sc. Infantes] quando baptizantur,
fide omnino careant, sine qua impossible est vel ipsos placere Deo: sed
salvantur per fidem, non tamen suam, sed alienam. Dignum nempe est, and ad Dei
spectat dignitatem, ut quibus fidem aet^s denegat propriam, gratia prodesse
concedat alienam. Nec enim omnipotentis justitia propriam putal ab his
exigendam fidem, quos novit propriam nullam habere culpam. Porro aliena opus
est fide, cum sine sorde non nas^antur aliena. D. Bern. Ep. 77. Nemo mihi
dicat, quia non habet [infans] sidem: cui matter [Ecclesia] impertit suam. Magna
est Ecclesia sides. Id. Sermon. 66 super Cant. In Ecclesia salvateris, per alios
parvuli credunt, sicut ex aliis, quae in baptismo remlttuntur peccata
traxerunt. Gratian. 3 part. de Conseerat. did. 4.
faith in themselves, but by the faith of others, their Parents, or the Church.
Nor would they think it any more absurd, to say that they believe through the
Faith of another, than it is to say that they have sinned through the sin of
another, or that they are made righteous through the obedience of another.

. 3. But though the Faith of the Parents, or Sureties, who are Believers, may
be enough, and is to qualify Infants for an admission into Church Membership
by Baptism: yet because I think it not enough to speak them Believers
antecedently to Baptism, however they be reckoned in the number of the
Faithful, after they be baptized; and that their immediate Parents says shall
no more be imputed unto them, and reckoned theirs, than their sins, as not
having been by Almighty God made Trustees in this behalf for their Children, as
Adam was for his; therefore I shall not stand upon this.

. 4. Some others would answer that Infants have Faith in themselves, and that
in the act. And truly as the Scripture no where denies this expressly, See
Alting. Problem. Theolog. part. 1. Probl. 22. Becan. Manual. Controver. l. 2.
c. 2. Phil. Melancthon. Consil. Theolog. part. 1. page 255. Hooker Eccl. Pol.
l. 5. Sect. 64.
so it also affords an instance of little ones ((...)) very little ones that
are said to have believed, Mat. 18. 6. and that by one who knew their hearts,
and could not be deceived in them, even our Savior himself.

. 5. Other some again would answer, that Infants have Faith in themselves,
though not in the Act, yet in the Habit, or rather the seed and principle of it.

. 6. And truly that as God is able to infuse, so the soul of an Infant is
capable to receive divine impressions and illuminations, I think is a truth
none will question. And if any should, the filling of John Baptist with the
Holy Ghost from his Mothers womb, and his leaping for joy, at the approach of
his Savior, in his Mothers womb, (Luke 1. 15, 44.) would put it out of doubt.
Now this being so, who can tell but that the Infants of believers may through
the grace of Sicut ergo ille, in quo omnes vivificabuntur, praeterquam quod se
ad ^ustitiam exemplum omnibus praebuit, dat etiam sui spiritus occultissimam
fidclibus gratiam, quam latenter infundit and parvulis, sic -- D. August. l. 1.
de Peccat. Merit. and Remiss. c. 9.
God obtained for them by the prayers, not only of their Paren's in
particular, but of the Church in general, have a principle of Faith inspired
into them by the secret operation of that invisible Spirit of grace, who works
how, and where, and when, and how far himself pleases. And where it is so in
any one, who dares deny that person sufficiently qualified in point of Faith
for Baptism? Can any man forbid water that these should not be baptized, which
have received the Holy Ghost, as well as w^? Acts 10. 47. And of what Infant of
any one Believer can any man say that it is not so with him? And if there be
never an Infant of any one believer of whom it can be absolutely affirmed that
he is in respect of a divinely infused inwardly working principle of Faith
utterly unqualified for Baptism, then why should any one be denied Baptism, of
whom it cannot be said, but that he is in some degree and measure qualified for
it?

. 7. But being under no necessity for the supporting of the cause I maintain,
to assert these grounds, I shall no further insist thereon: but to the
Objection against Infants capableness of baptism founded in their want of
Faith, give my Answer, that their not believing is no hindrance to their
baptizing.

. 8. It is no hindrance to their salvation, even in the judgment of our
Anabaptists, who declare it as one Article of their Faith, That all children
dying in Infancy (that is before they can act faith in their own persons, and
be believers qualified for baptism according to their account) having not
actually transgressed against the Law of God in their own persons are only
subject to the first death, and that not any one of them dying in that estate
shall suffer for Adams sin eternal punishment in hell, which is the second
death. It is no hindrance then to their salvation in their judgment, that they
believe not. And why then should it be a hindrance to their Baptism? Is more
required to their baptism, than to their salvation? to the means, than to the
end?

. 9. But to make short work, where, or by whom is faith required of Infants in
their own persons to render them capable of baptism? What one Text is there in
all the Bible that says either in particular, that Infants shall not be
baptized, because they believe not; or in general that no persons whatsoever
(whether capable or incapable of believing) shall be baptized, but those that
believe? Let the Adversaries of Infants baptism produce the place, and the
controversy, I believe, will quickly be ended. We, all Paedobaptists, will
readily yield all that shall of right be fit to be yielded to it, or unto them
from it. But if the Scripture say no such thing either in words, or in sense,
then for ought that as yet appears our Infants will be capable of Baptism,
though they do not believe.

. 10. Why, but does not our Savior say, (in Mark 16. 16.) He that believes,
and is baptized, shall be saved: but he that believes not shall be damned?

. 11. Yes. And what then? must not therefore our Infants be baptized because
they do not believe? or not till they believe? No such matter. What is here
said that makes believing a condition necessarily antecedent unto Baptism? It
is neither said negatively, he that believes not shall not be baptized, nor so
much as affirmatively, he that believes shall be baptized. But believing, and
being baptized are made conditions, not the one of the other, but both of being
saved. And now, in the name of God, what is here, that can possibly exclude
Infants from baptizing, for want of believing?

. 12. Yea, but believing is set before baptizing. He does not say, he that is
baptized and believes, but he that believes and is baptized, shall be saved.
And what then? Why then believing must go before baptizing; and none must be
baptized, but those that first believe.

. 13. To this I answer, that if the order of things must universally answer to
that order of words, wherein the Scripture sets them down, then Repentance,
which is a Fruit of Quomodo aget poenitentiam homo, qui necdum credit? D.
Hieron. advers. Lucifer.
Faith, must go before Faith, whose Fruit it is: because our Savior set
repenting before believing, saying first repent ye, and then believe the
Gospel, (Mark 1. 15.) Then the outward baptism of water must always go before
the inward baptism of the spirit, because our Savior said, Except a man be
born (first) of water and (then) of the spirit, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God, John 3. 5. Whereas the contrary hereto fell out in the family
and company of Cornelius, Acts 10. 44. which drew from Peter that question in
ver. 47. Can any man forbid water that these should not be baptized, who have
received the Holy Ghost as well as we? Then the Ruler (in Luke 18. 22.) must
have given nothing to the poor, till he had sold all he had, because our
Savior says, (first) set all that thou have, and (then) distribute to the
poor.

. 14. But to show the weakness of this way of Arguing, it may be proved by this
same Argument, and from the same Text, that Infants ought to be baptized. (And
then let them judge what strength there is in this way of Arguing.) For as our
Savior sets believing before baptizing; so he sets baptizing before being
saved. And if none must be baptized, but he that believes, because believing is
set first; then none must be saved, but he that is baptized, because baptizing
is set first. And then what better argument can be made for Infants baptism?
They must be baptized if we will have them saved: because they cannot be saved
without being baptized: for baptizing goes before saving. And yet from the same
Text, and by the same way of a guing, it may be proved, contrary to what the
Anabaptists say of the Universal salvation of all Infants dying before the
commission of actual sin, that no Infants are saved but those that believe,
because believing is set before being saved; and not only so, but whereas it
is not said, he that believes not shall not be baptized, it is said, he that
believes not shall be damned.

. 15. And this may suffice to show tho absurdity of this way of arguing to the
order of things from the ordering of the words.

. 16. As to the thing it self, I think it will be granted them, that in Persons
capable of believing or disbelieving the Gospel, faith, or at least a
profession of it, is to go before baptizing.

. 17. This we gather from the Apostles baptizing no adult persons that we read
of, without some evidence given of their believing.

. 18. Thus it was with the Converts in Acts 2. 41. with the Samaritans, Acts 8.
12. with the Eunuch, Acts 8. 37. with Cornelius and his family, Act. 10. 44.
with Lydia and the Gaoser, Acts 16. 14, and 33. with Crispus, and his house,
Acts 18. 8. And is to be supposed it was so with others, of whose believing
before their baptizing we read not, as of Gaius and Stephanas, 1 Cor. 1. 14,
16. And this at this day is, and ever has been, the way of the Churches
dealing with adult persons.

. 19. But the Argument will not hold from Men to Children. It follows not that
because men that are capable of believing or disbelieving the Gospel are not
baptized except they make profession of faith; that therefore Infants who are
neither capable of believing nor disbelieving must profess faith, or not be
baptized. Faith being required of the one, but not of the other.

. 20. When the Apostle commanded the Thessalonians, that if any would not work,
neither should he eat, (2 Thessalonians. 3. 10.) did he mean the Infants should not
eat, that could not work? It Is plain he required working only of those, that
were able to work, not of those that were unable. So in the case in hand, it is
apparent that Believing is only required of men able to understand and
believe, not of Infants neither able to believe nor understand. For by the
words immediately foregoing, preach the Gospel to every creature, it is most
evident, that it is of such persons only as the Gospel may be believed or
disbelieved by, upon the preaching of it to them, that it is said, He that
believes, and is baptized shall be saved: but he that believes not shall be
damned: not of such persons, as the Gospel cannot rationally be preached to, in
order to the bringing them to believe by the preaching of it, in regard of
their incapacity to understand it, and inability to believe or disbelieve it.
And so Infants are utterly unconcerned in this Text. And as from it we plead
nothing for them, so from it can nothing rationally be pleaded against them.

. 21. I have read that Men must be converted, and become as little Matthew. 18. 2.
children, (I suppose for humility and innocence,) that they may enter into the
kingdom of God. But I have not read that little children must be converted and
become as Men (for understanding or Faith) before they can have entrance in
Gods kingdom. A profession of faith by persons of understand^ng in the names of
the Infants is required by the Church: and upon that profession it baptizes
them. But that understanding and faith which is required in Adult persons as
praevious to their baptism, is not by the Church required in Infants as
necessa^y to their baptizing. Nor can it be proved that ever it was by Christ,
or any Apostle of his, exacted of them; as it cannot be proved, that ever
Christ, or any Apostle of his, ordered the delay of their baptizing till it
might be in them.

. 22. And lastly, if Infants baptism be an Apostolical Tradition, that is a
thing delivered down to the Church to be practiced in it by the Apostles, and
Apostolical Persons, and as practiced also by themselves, as there is better
ground to believe it, than there is evidence against it, then the thing is out
of question. They would never have baptized themselves, nor taught others to
baptize, such as wanted faith, because incapable of believing, if mere want of
faith, notwithstanding such incapacity to believe, did render them incapable of
baptizing. And if not believing did not in the Apostles Age and the Ages
succeeding it make Infants incapable of Baptism: then can it not make them so
in ours: there being no more reason for the one, than for the other.

. 23. And so here is nothing in the Infants themselves that renders them
incapable of being baptized.

CHAP. XXIV.
Children not incapable of being baptized in regard of any thing required of
them, or to be done to them in Baptism.

. 1. SEcondly, There is nothing in Baptism required of, or to be done unto
Infants, which hinders them from it, or renders them incapable of it.

.2. Not the Thing signifying, Water, with the application of it by way of
Immersion or Assusion. They may be dipped into water in case of strength; or
they may have water poured on them, in case of weakness.

. 3. Not the Thing signified, The Blood of Christ, and the Grace of the Spirit.
For what can hinder why they may not be sprinkled from the guilt of the sin of
their Birth by the blood of Christ in the Grace of Justification? Cannot the
blood of Christ satisfy for that guilt that lies upon Infants? Or cannot God
apply the satisfaction made by the blood of Christ unto Infants? And what can
hinder why they may not be cleansed from the corruption of their nature by the
Power of the Spirit in the Grace of Sanctification? Cannot the Holy Spirit
mortify those dispositions unto evil, which Parvulis datur gratia operans and
cooperans per baptismum, sicut adultis: sed parvulis in munere non in usu. G.
Biel in 4 l. Sent. did. 4.
are in Infants? Or can he not infuse dispositions to goodness, into Infants?
Is not the spirit of grace able to inoperate the grace of the spirit in
Infants? Is not he able to give them a temper of heart capable to receive his
Infusions? Is not he able to make Infusions of grace into their hearts suitable
to their temper? No incapableness of Baptism then in Infants on these accounts.

. 4. Again, may not children as well as elder persons, be taken into Union with
Christ? May not they be incorporated into him? What? no lambs in his flock, but
all old sheep? No little members in his body, but all great ones? No babes in
Christ, but all strong men? Cannot the water do the same for them? Cannot the
spirit do the same in them, to unite them unto Christ, that is done by it
either for elder persons toward their Union with him? Surely the application
of the Water of Baptism to their Bodies, does as well signify and declare; and
the infusion of the Spirit of Christ into their souls, does as well operate,
and effect, their Union with him, as the Union of elder persons. For what
should hinder? No incapableness then of Baptism in Infants on this account
neither.

. 5. Again, look upon Baptism as the Door of entrance into the kingdom of
Heaven, and so far are they from being incapable of that, that they are made a
kind of standard to the capacity of others for it. For our Savior not only
says, that of such [as infants] is the kingdom of heaven, (Matthew. 19. 14.)
which implies that they themselves are qualified for it, and have all things
required in them for entrance into it: but also he says (Matthew. 18. 3.) Except
ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the
kingdom of heaven: which again implies, that Infants are duly qualified for an
entrance into the kingdom of heaven (for why else must others be converted, and
become as they are, that they may enter into it?) and not only so, but that
none shall have entrance into it, but those that are so qualified for it as
they are. And why they that are qualified for entrance into Heaven, should be
unqualified for that which gives entrance into it, I see not. Is more required
to Baptism, than to salvation? If not, then no uncapableness as yet appears in
Infants for Baptizing.

. 6. Further, Look upon Baptism as the Note and Badge of a Christian, and
little children are as capable of wearing that as elder persons. They have
witnesses of their baptizing as well as others. They are received into the same
Militia of the Lord Jesus, and have the same press-mark (if I may so say) that
others have for his service. They have his name named upon them, and have their
names enrolled with the rest that are called by his name. And no incapacity is
there in them for any thing of this; and so none in these respects for Baptism.

. 7. Lastly, look upon Baptism as the Seal of a Covenant entered into betwixt
them and God, and they are not incapable of it in that respect neither. If they
be not incapable of the Covenant, then sure they are not incapable of the seal
of the Covenant. He that has not denied them the greater thing, is it
imaginable he should deny them the less? As the Apostle from Gods having given
Christ for us argues to his giving all things else to us; (Romans 8. 32.) so
surely may we argue in this case, that if God have not made our children
incapable of his Covenant, then he has not made them incapable of the Seal of
it. Why man then should be more severe to poor harmless babes, than God is, I
cannot see; nor why man should withold from them what God has not denied to
them.

. 8. But perhaps it will be said, that they are incapable of entering into the
Covenant: and therefore incapable of receiving the Seal of it.

. 9. Incapable of entering into the Covenant? Now God forbid. But why so?
Because they can neither set any Seal to it; nor engage themselves by any
promise to it; nor do so much as understand any thing of it, especially at the
years, or rather days, that they are now usually baptized at.

. 10. But none of these hinders their entering into Covenant with God.

. 11. First not their inability to seal. For Contracts are not always sealed by
both parties at the same time. We see it ordinarily in contracts made not only
by Princes at greater distances of place, but by private persons at lesser
distance. The contract is nevertheless interpretatively entered by both, at the
sealing of the first, and continues firm and binding to the first all the while
till the second have sealed also, he in the mean time acting nothing to the
frustrating of it; and there is no new sealing required from the first at the
sealing of the second. Be it then that Infants cannot personally set their seal
to the Covenant at their Baptizing, nor till their Consirming, may not God
therefore set his seal to it in the mean time? May not God take them into
Covenant with him, and make his promise to them, and set his seal to that
promise, and bind himself to them for the present, because they cannot back
again do the like at present to him, but must stay either till they can do that
(and some will never be able to do it) or else there must be no Covenant
betwixt them? sure no man of reason will say so. O, what a blessing it is to
have God to have given his Covenant to our children, and to have solemnly
sealed it, and to be acting pursuant to it for the good of our children in the
mean time till they can personally seal to their own part themselves! And O,
what a cruelty would it be to shut the door against so great a blessing to our
children! And yet they do what can be expected from persons of their condition;
they come, and are present at the sealing, and if they do not seal to God, yet
they are sealed to, and also are sealed by God. And O the felicity of being one
whom God has sealed for his, or has sealed himself to be his.

. 12. And yet their very coming to, and receiving the seal, in the charitable
construction of the Almighty a sealing of theirs. He that takes their being
brought to him for a coming of theirs to him, why may we not think he accepts
of their receiving of his Seal as a counter sealing of theirs.

. 13. And besides, what cannot be done by them, is as much in this as in any
other the like case, done by others for them: and so there is no incapacity in
them on this account.

. 14. Secondly, their inability to stipulate for themselves hinders not.

. 15. It is true, they cannot explicitly in their own persons make that
profession that is required Why then are Infants baptized, etc. Because they
promise them both by their Sureties: which when they come to age, themselves
are bound to perform. Chapter Catechism. See Dr. Stillingfleets Vindic. of A. B. of
Cant. p. ^07.
of Adult persons. And as true it is, that such a personal explicit profession
is no where required of Infants. But what they cannot do of themselves they
may, I hope, do by others. And done it they have: and that doing of it is, and
has been allowed of by the Church for many ages, even from the very beginning
for ought I know that any man has to say against it.

. 16. And this contracting by others, is but what is ordinary in the affairs of
mankind. The Tutors of Infants do it: whether appointed by the Sea above, chapter
8. Sect. 15.
Wills of Parents, or assigned by order of Law, And pity it were that for want
of an Authentical Trustee to transact for them, they should miss of those
advantages which by any beneficial contract might accrue unto them. And as
their own interest will lead them to espouse and own those contracts that are
made for their advantage; so if a A Parent may contract with God on his child's
behalf, no otherwise then a Guardian does in the behalf of a Minor, or one
under age, which he cannot afterward retract when he is out of his Pupillage
without injustice, and being liable to the Law, if the contract be judged to be
to his behoof and benefit. Dr. Patricks Discourse concerning Baptism, page 46.
See the place and context both before and after.
Parent may contract with God on his child's behalf, as a Guardian does in the
behalf of a Minor; he will be bound in justice to espouse the contract, it
being for his advantage. Yea, I am told the Law will compel them, to make good
even those also that prove to be for their disadvantage, provided the contracts
were made (bona fide) and no fraudulent dealing were used by the Contractors in
the making of them.

. 17. Now to the making good of the Baptismal Contract made for Infants by
their Sureties, the Infants are doubly obliged. First by the infinite
advantages that come to them by it: which, unless they be fools or mad, they
will hasten all that ever they can, as soon as they know it, further to assure
unto themselves by a personal engaging in it. Secondly, by the forfeiture of
all benefits by it (besides many other obligations before mentioned) upon their
disavowing and disclaiming of it.

. 18. No profession then being required from themselves, and a sufficient one
being made for them by others, they are not incapable of entering into Covenant
with God on this account neither.

. 19. And thirdly, that their want of understanding renders them not incapable
of entering into Covenant with God is evident by one instance beyondexception,
in Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11, 12. Ye stand this day all of you before the Lord your God,
your Captains of your tribes, your Eld^rs and your officers, with all the men
of Israel, your little ones, your wives, and thy stranger that is in thy camp,
from the h^wer of thy wood unto the drawer of thy water, That thou should
enter into Covenant with the Lord thy God, and into his Oath, which the Lord
thy God makes with thee this day. See! even the little ones, as well as Elders
and Officers were capable of entering, and did actually enter into Covenant with
God, and into the Oath of God; their want of years and understanding to know
the condition of the Covenant and Oath which they entered into, or to make
profession of entering into it, not at all withstanding. So that want of years
and un^erstanding cannot render children incapable of entering into Gods
Covenant. And then much less can it render them incapable of receiving the sign
or seal of his Covenant.

. 20. And however that it cannot, is evident, because the Jewish Infant was
capable, as of the Covenant it self, as we have seen before, so of Circumcision
the sign and seal of the Covenant, which to receive at eight days old he was
bound upon pain of excision. He that is eight days old shall be circumcised
among you, every man-child in your generations. And the uncircumcised man-child
whose flesh of h^ foreskin is not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from
his people, he has broken my Covenant, Deuteronomy. 17. 12. What he was so bound to
receive, surely he was capable of. Now why the child of a Christian should be
less capable of receiving one seal of a Covenant, than the child of a Jew was
of another, I am yet to learn.

. 21. And so there is nothing in Baptism it self rendering Infants incapable of
being baptized.

CHAP. XXV.
Children not incapable of Baptism by any Text of Scripture that forbids it,
either directly, or by consequence.

. 1. ADmit Infants never so capable of Baptism in all other respects, yet if
the Scripture do forbid it, then it becomes unlawful for them to have it, and
they upon that account become incapable of it.

. 2. Thirdly therefore and lastly I affirm, that upon the diligentest search,
that I was ever able to make, I could never find any Scripture that forbad it.
Search the Scripture from end to end, and not one Text appears, wherein it is
forbidden. As the Antipaedobaptists call but for one Scripture that commands
it, and upon that say, they will yield to it: so on the other hand the
Paedobaptists call for a Scripture that forbids it, and upon that say, they
will not contend for it. But there is none, no not one: it would else have been
shown ere this, being so much, and so long, called for.

. 3. Yea, though there be never a Scripture that expressly, and in terms forbids
it, yet if there be but one, wherein by direct and evident consequence it is
forbidden, (though our adversaries will yield nothing to all the many
Scriptures, from whence we do by good consequence deduce it, because we produce
not a Text, that does in express terms command it) let it be shown, and we
shall pay all due respect unto it: the Contest will instantly be given over by
us, who seek not victory without truth, but truth, whether with, or without
victory; we shall believe the baptizing of our Infants unlawful, and upon the
account of its unlawfulness, believe them incapable of it.

. 4. But if there be no such Text in all the Scripture, as does so much as by
consequence forbid the baptizing of Infants, we must then beg to be excused, if
we hold the baptizing of them lawful, and upon the account of that lawfulness,
think them not incapable of it.

. 5. For if sin be a transgression of the law, as St. John defines it, (1 John
3. 4.) and where there is no law, there is no transgression, as St. Paul
determines it, (Romans 4. 15.) then can it be no sin, either to Infants to be
baptized, or to others to baptize Infants, because no law is by either For
therefore any thing is unlawful, because it transgresses a law. W. Penn. Eng.
Present Interest, p. 24.
transgressed; there being none, that either forbids them to be baptized It is
an evidence that Infants are not to be excluded from Baptism, because there is
no divine Law, which does prohibit their admission into the Church by it. Dr.
Stilling fleet. Irenic. p. 7.
, or forbids others to baptize them; therefore their baptism is lawful, and
they upon the account of its lawfulness are capable of it.

. 6. And put case we should grant, that there were no Text in Scripture whereon
to ground it, yet would it not follow thence, that it were unlawful. For the
mere uncommandedness of a thing does not infer the unlawfulness of it: a thing
is not therefore unlawful, only because it is not commanded. To make a thing
necessary indeed, there must be a law for it; and to make a thing unlawful,
there must be a law against it. But to make a thing only lawful, it is not
necessary there be any law for it, it is sufficient that there be no law
against it. If then we cannot prove it necessary, because the Antipaedobaptists
say we have no law for it, they cannot prove it unlawful, because we are sure
they have no law against it. It remains therefore that it be lawful; and that
our children, upon the account of the lawfulness of it, be capable of it.

. 7. Why but our Savior sets Teaching before Baptizing (Matthew. 28. 19.) saying
to his Disciples, when he commissionated them to be his Apostles to all the
nations of the world, for the gathering of a Church out of it, Go ye therefore,
and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Well, and what then? Why then, says the
Antipaedobaptist, none must be baptized before he be taught, and so taught as
that they do learn. And this because Infants are incapable of, therefore they
are incapable of baptism.

. 8. This Argument of theirs is like that former, which they drew from our
Saviors setting believing before baptizing; which how weak it was I hope I
need not so soon remember you. And granting all they can fairly pretend to from
this Text, it will not hence follow, that Infants are incapable of Baptism: as
I shall hope to make appear upon a due and through consideration of the words.

. 9. Our Savior here enlarges his Disciples Commission to go and preach, and
make Disciples, not in one nation only, as formerly: but in all nations;
teaching and baptizing them (suppose we read the words so) Well: what can this
mean other, than that those of the nations, that were capable of teaching,
should be taught and baptized: not excluding from baptizing, those that for the
present were only capable of so much discipulation (if I may so speak) as was
performed by baptizing, but as yet were not capable of any teaching. And what
makes this against Infants Baptism? There is not an exclusive Particle in the
whole Text.

. 10. But to proceed, this we will grant, that if the order of Teaching and
Baptizing See Dr. Stillingflcets Vindic. A. B. of Cant. p. 107.
be considered in their reference to the conversion of all nations, or any one
whole particular nation unconverted, teaching is to go before baptizing. But
this is not from the naked consideration of the setting of the words, Teaching,
and Baptizing; as if the order of the words were inviolably to be observed in
the order of things (and if any have so thought and argued, I cannot in that
excuse them from a shortness of discourse) but it is from the otherwise
unpracticableness of the things Non enim potest fieri ut corpus baptismi
recipiat Sacramentum, nisi ante anima fidei sus^eperit veritatem. D. Hieron. in
Matthew. 28. 29.
themselves. For as no Adult person will be brought to be baptized before he be
taught what baptism means, and why he should be baptized: so the Church will
admit no Infants to baptism, but those that are the children of baptized
persons, or at least are undertaken for by such as are baptized. Suppose our
Savior had set baptizing before teaching (as he might, had he pleased) and
said, Go ye therefore and baptize all nations in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them what I have commanded they should
know and do; who would have scrupled to begin his work with teaching,
notwithstanding the order of the words? as imagining that none that understood
themselves, would ever be baptized before they were taught. It is therefore not
from the order of the words, but from the orderliness of the things, which
cannot otherwise be effected, but in this way and order, that this course is,
and must, in such case, be taken. Now if so, then the whole force of the
Antipaed obaptists argument from the mere consideration of the order of these
words (teaching set before Baptizing) which yet is all they have in this point
to urge from them, is utterly vanished.

. 11. But when once some in a nation have been taught, and have received the
faith, and have been baptized into it, then it follows not, that the same
course must necessarily still be taken with every si^le person in it, that was
proper for, and was taken with the whole of it: but that all that any way, and
in any degree, are capable of baptism, may respectively according to their
capacity be admitted to it, though they be wanting in some thing, which others
of greater capacity have, and is requisite in them, to make them capable of it.
And to argue from what is requisite in Men before the conversion of a nation,
to what is requisite in children after the nation is converted is fallacious.
For it does not follow, Thus it was with the Adult Men of the nation before any
of it were converted: therefore thus it must be with the Infant Children of the
Nation after the conversion of their Fathers: more being required of Men, than
of Children; of Men that can receive, or reject the Gospel, than of Children
that can neither reject it, nor receive it. Men are not to be admitted to
baptism, but upon those accounts, in respect whereof they are to be qualified
for it. Children are to be admitted to baptism upon those accounts in respect
whereof they are qualified for it; and not to be rejected upon those accounts
in respect whereof they are not qualified for it: unless it had been positively
and particularly required of them that they should be so qualified, or not be
baptized. Why should any require from Infants so much as is required of Men to
qualify them for baptism, when the Scripture has not required of them so
much? Why should any make Infants entrance into the kingdom of Heaven, straiter
than God himself has made it? Why should any keep them out, whom God has a
mind to let in? Why should any keep them from coming to Christ, whom Christ
has commanded should be suffered to come unto him?

. 12. Our Savior says, Go teach all nations baptizing them: but he does not
say, Baptize none of those nations before they be taught. Some must be first
taught, that all may be baptized; not none baptized but those that are first
taught. He says, teach all nations baptizing them: but he does not say,
whether the teaching, or the baptizing shall be first. No, he determines
neither to be first or second, but according as their discretion should think
fit. He says not so much as Teach and Baptize, but only Teach baptizing. Which
therefore enforces neither to be first, but according as the nature of the
things may require, and the condition of the persons admit. Suppose he had
said, Go ye therefore and convert all nations preaching to them my Gospel: who
would ever have imagined it to have been his command, that the Apostles should
first convert the nations, and then preach the Gospel to them? and that because
the words were so set (converting before preaching) therefore none were to be
preached to, but those that were first converted? St. B^sil gives the Text this
gloss, he commanded Ta (...). D. Basil. adv. Eu^omium, l. 5.
the Gentiles that had believed, and had been taught, to be baptized in the
name of the Trinity. Can any man from the order of the words here (believed set
before taught) gather hence that St. Basil thought persons were first to
believe and then to be taught, or that none were to be taught but they that
first believed? It is unimaginable. And if this way of arguing be most
fallacious and absurd, as it is, then such is that of the Antipaedobaptists;
(whereto this is exactly parallel, and every way the same) when they argue from
the order of the words to the order of the things. But what will they say to
Gregory Nazianzene, who inverts the order of our Saviors words, and sets
Baptizing before Teaching: Greg. Nazianz. Orat. 40. p. 670, 677.
(...). Had this Father understood of any force in the order of our Saviors
words to signify the order of the things, he would not have inverted it: or
had he intended any such force in the order of his own words, that is, had he
intended by setting teaching after baptizing, to express such teaching as was
to come after baptizing; he would then have put the word (...) not only after
(...) but after the whole sentence (...). There cannot be any force therefore
in arguing from the order of the words to the order of the things: and yet in
this argument of twisted hairs does the great strength of these our Samsons lie.

. 13. Yet further, if this Argument have any force in it, then it is clearly
for us, and against them. For you plainly read here in the 19 th verse the word
Baptizing. And the first word of the 20 th verse following is Teaching. So then
if the things, must go according to the order of the words, then Baptizing must
go before Teaching. And so this Text is so far from making against Infants
baptism, that it makes clearly for it, even by the Antipaedobaptists own way of
arguing.

. 14. By which way of arguing, if allowed for good, it were easy to prove that
John the Baptist did first baptize his Disciples before he taught them; because
(in Mark 1. 4.) his baptizing is set before his preaching. For so it is expressly
there said, John did baptize in the wilderness, and preach the baptism of
repentance for the remission of sins. See, first he baptized, and then he
preached; and so by his example, especially according to their way of arguing,
men may at least, if yet they ought not to be baptized, before they be taught.

. 15. And so, whereas it is said, that those that John did baptize, were such
as confessed their sins, yet it may be said, that his baptizing (at least
according to their way of arguing) went before their confessing. For so it
follows (in ver. 5th) There went out unto him all the land of Judea, and they
of Jurusalem, and were all baptized of him in the river of Jordan confessing
their sins. See ^ first ye have his Baptizing, and after, their confessing.
Which that it was really the Holy Baptists order of proceeding, though it be
not concluded from the order of the words, yet may seem probable from what was
the custom of the Jews, as the learned in their customs say, namely, See Dr
Lightfoots Horae Hebraicae, page 41.
to admit men unto Proselytism or Discipleship by Baptizing them. Either way
our business is done. For if he did not baptize them before he had preached to
them, and they had confessed to him; then the Argument from the order of the
words to the order of the things is not good. But if he did baptize them before
his preaching and their confessing, then here is a Scripture instance of
Baptizing before Teaching and confessing, which justifies our practice, and
gives an utter overthrow to the whole Hypothesis of the Antipaedobaptists in
this matter.

. 16. And as for the word Teaching, which goes before Baptizing (in the 19 th
verse) several very learned Persons They mistranslate the words: for Christ
says not, Go teach all nations -- for his words are (...), etc. Go make
Disciples among all nations.
do affirm, that it is not so properly there rendered Teaching. The word that
properly signifies Teaching comes after baptizing (in the 20 th verse) and is
(...) from (...) to teach, whence (...) doctrine or teaching, and (...) a
Doctor or Teacher. But the word Dr. Featly, Dippers dipped, page 40. The Phrase
which is there used in the original, is a singular one, not duly expressed by
our English Teach. It is (...) make Disciples, or receive into Discipleship all
nations -- Dr. Hammond Quaere of the Baptizing of Infants, page 196 See his
Defense also, p. 46. (...), i. e Discipulos facite. Introducite per Baptismum
ut doceantur. Dr. Lightfoot, Horae Hebraicae, p 323. (...), Discipulate, aut
discipulos reddite, Vatablus. Discipulate, i. e. discipulos reddite, Lucas
Brugensis. (...), non est docere, sed discipulum facere, Wendelin Thcolog. l.
1. c. 22. Explic. These. 11. Teach them, that is, make them my Disciples, etc.
Mr. Perkins, cited by H. D. page 4. Edit. 1. (...). Locutio est Hebraica: nam
(...) est (...) discipulus: unde formant verbum (...) facere discipulum and
(...) sicri discipulum Thus Cameron declares the propriety of the word, though
he is not of opinion that it is used in that propriety here, but says
simpliciter (...); docere; and so makes a Tautology in the words, which yet he
endeavors afterward to salve by a distinction; but in vain.
that (in the 19th Baptizing, and is rendered teaching, is another word, namely
(...), which coming from (...) a disciple (as that from (...) to learn)
according to its variety of construction signifies to be a Disciple to another,
or to make another a Disciple.

. 17. With a Dative case of the Person it signifies to be a Disciple to
another. Plutarch in the life of Isocrates speaking of Theopompus and Ephorus's
being Isocratess's Scholars, so expresses it, (...), etc. But Disciple or
Scholar unto him was The pompus, and Ephorus. St. Matthew expresses Joseph's
being a Disciple to Jesus by the same Phrase, Matthew. 27. 57. -- There came a
rich man of Arimathea, named Joseph, who also himself (...) was Jesus disciple,
i. e. Disciple or Scholar to Jesus. So Justin M^rtyr in his second Apology
speaks of some of sixty, and seventy years old, (...) from their infancy, or
ever since they were children, had been disciples to Christ. Yea, and in the
forenamed place of Plutarch, without any Dative case expressed, but absolutely
set, it signifies to be a Disciple. And I, says he, will teach you my whole
art, (...), if you will be my Scholar, or will learn.

. 18. But with an Accusative Case of the Person it is used to signify to make
another a Disciple. So Justin Martyr speaking of the Gentiles, which before the
coming of Christ, were like an unbroken colt, that had never born either saddle
or yok^, says, that when Christ was come Discipulos suos ablegavit, and per
ipsos eas in disciplinam suam recepit. The Lat. Translat. of Justin.
(...); he sent by his Disciples, and Discipled them, or made them Disciples.
And according to this import of the verb active (...) with an Accusative Case
to enter one into Discipleship, the Passive verb (...) with an Accusative Case,
and the Preposition (...) does signify to be entered into Discipleship, to be
taken in to be, or to become Disciples. Hence Justin Martyr speaks of Dialog.
cum Tryphone Judaeo Seions indies adhuc nonnullos disciplinam suscipere in
nomen Christi sui and viam seductionis relonquere, Latin. Translat.
Gods deferring his judgment now as of old he did in the days of Elias, (...),
as knowing that daily some were entered into discipl^ship to the name of his
Christ, (i. e. became Christians) and for sook the way of error. With a Dative
case also put without a Preposition St. Basil uses the word, (...) to become a
disciple to the Lord. But we need not Basil. de Bapt. l. 1.
seek so far an instance of this interpretation of the word, when the elegant
Evangelist in his History of the Acts of the Apostles (cap. 14. vtr. 21.) has
given us one; And when (says he there) they had preached the Gospel to that
city, (...), and had made a good many Disciples, they returned again to Lystra
--. Our Translation I very well know renders it, had taught many: but that
(with humblest reverence to the Translators) I conceive not to be so right a
rendering of it. For that sure, teaching, was expressed before in the word
preaching. For what is that (...) to preach the Gospel, but to publish,
declare, and teach it? And if the word be so rendered, the sense will amount to
thus much; and when they had taught that city the Gospel, and had taught many;
which is a mere tautology. The meaning then plainly is, that after they had
taught the word of the Gospel to that city in their preaching, and by that had
prevailed with a good many of them to undertake the profession of the Gospel
and become Disc^ples unto Christ, they accordingly made Disciples of them by
baptizing them, and perhap, nay probably, some more besides the very persons
taught, even the children, and servants of those that had been taught, as was
usual before with those that became proselytes to the Jews religion. And so
our Saviors word here (in Matthew. 28. 19.) is to be rendered as if he had said,
ye have formerly made disciples only of Jews, now enlarge your pains to the
making disciples of Heathens also, and those of all the nations of the world;
make even all heathens disciples. That must be all of them which should in any
measure be capable of being made Disciples. And such, it is known by the rules
and practices of the Jews, amongst whom our Savior lived, and to whose customs
and practices he very much conformed, were not only men of years, and
understanding, but their children also upon the undertaking of others for them.
And so by our Saviors order the Apostles were to make disciples not only of
the grown men of the Heathens, if they should offer themselves to discipleship,
but also their little children too, if they would bring them also to be
disciples to him. And disciples to Christ they might be, by being brought by
their parents to Christ's School, and entered into the relation of his Scholars,
though they neither knew their Master as yet, any more than any of ours, whom
we put to a strange School, do at first know their Master, whom they never saw
before; or whom we put to a Master, whom they have never seen at all, by
agreeing first with him for their teaching, and so entering them into the number
of his Scholars, and then, after, sending them to be taught; nor knew any thing
of that which they were to learn of him, any more then any of our children,
that are put to a first, or a strange Master, do know what he will learn them,
till he have set them a lesson; whose Disciples or Scholars yet they are in
respect of their relation to him, though as yet they have learnt nothing from
him. Or as he becomes a Member of a College, and a Pupil to a Tutor, who goes
not personally up to the University, but has his name only sent up, and entered
in there, as a Pupil to that Tutor, and a Member of that College.

. 19. Yea, it is the observation of a Person very learned in the manners and
customs of the Jews, that among them, as among us, and all Nations, men are not
therefore taught, that they may be made Disciples, but are therefore made
disciples that they may be taught. An instance whereof he cites out of Bal
Schabb. fol. 31. 1. which is of a certain Heathen, that came to Hillel the
great, saying unto him, Make me a Proselyte, that you may Proselytum me fac, ut
me doceas. Dr. Lightfoot, Horae Hebr. on Matthew. 28. 19.
teach me.

. 20. And yet a little further to manifest the impropriety of rendering the Verb
(...) here in this place by Teach, first let it be considered, how improperly
it is followed first by the Participle (...), and then by the Participle (...).

. 21. First, (...) how improperly is that rendered, Teach baptizing? What must
that mean? Teach by baptizing? But how shall they be taught by baptizing, who
have not first been taught what baptizing means? Or must it mean teach and
baptize? Then it must also, when we come to (...), be rendered, teach and teach.
Must it be teach when ye baptize? That Is the best of it. But then also it must
be, when ye come to (...), teach when ye teach. How improper is every way! But
(...), (...) make Disciples baptizing them, teaching them, or by baptizing
them, and by teaching them; what can be more proper? baptizing and teaching
being the two things by which men are made Disciples.

. 22. Secondly, let it be considered, that if (...) must signify teaching,
then there will be a needless Tautology committed in so few words. Go ye
therefore and teach all nations -- and teaching them. One might have served,
and the first is perfectly needless. But not so, but highly important if it be
rendered, dis ipulate, or make Disciples.

. 23. It Is frivolous to make a distinction between the Verbs, and their
significations, as if the first sign fied to teach the faith, and the second to
teach manners; the Verbs having no such distinct imports in their
significations. They that have such a distinct use of the words ought to show
that use in Authors. Till then it must go but for a novel device of their own.
And that it is no better may appear from (...). Ac Edoctus Evangelium regni
continud fidem in cordis penetralibus concepit D. Basil. Exhort. ad Baptism.
Tom. 1. p. 483.
that of St. Basil, where (...) is used for the teaching before baptism, and
particularly the baptism of the Eunuch by Philip, and comprehends all the
teaching he is read to have had. Yea, and in this place of St. Matthew what
ever can be implied in the first Verb, is expressed in what follows in the
second Verb, which reaches to all things whatsoever Christ had commanded them.
Unless any will say that (...) imports the teaching of somewhat that Christ
never commanded his Apostles, something that neither concerns faith nor
manners: for these were the things that Christ commanded his Disciples to act
themselves, and to teach others the acting of.

. 24. So again, to make such a distinction between the Verbs, as if (...) must
signify, teach those that are not Disciples to make them so; and (...) must
signify teach them that are Disciples after they are made so, is also
frivolous. For put (...) and (...) together so signifying, and so
distinguished: and what will they amount to? why thus much. Teach those, that
are not Disciples to make them so teaching (or, by teaching) these that are
Disciples after they are made so. How uncouth, if intelligible, a construction
is this! and how unpracticable the thing in it self, when understood! How
should a single Apostle traveling all alone into a strange place teach those
that had never heard of the Gospel by his teaching those that had received it?
or must he carry Disciples always along with him to, and set up School in every
strange nation, that Heathens hearing him teach Christians, might by such
hearing become Christians also? How is this imaginable to have been the meaning
of our Savior? How impracticable in the Apostles first onsets on the Heathen
nations to make them become Christians? When Churches were settled, then indeed
something of this might be (though none sure ever thought that to be the design
of our Savior in his commission) but how this could be before any Church were
either settled, or so much as begun to be gathered, (and there must be a first
beginning to gather before there could be a Church) is past imagination. And
besides the Histories of those times show the course was otherwise. But now
(...) make disciples of Heathens, or make Heathens disciples, teaching (or by
teaching) them to observe all things that I have commanded you; how clear is
the interpretation! how genu^ne the sense! how practicable the thing in all
times and places! how agreeable to the design in his commission! how nothing
else but the very mind of Christ in his word!

. 25. In a word, admit the word that comes here before baptizing were the same
with that, which does come after it, namely, (...) teach, or did here properly
signify teaching, as it does not; how easily may it hence be gathered, That
baptism may be either before, or after teaching, according to the condition of
the Person to be baptized; after it in those that are capable to be first
taught; before it in those that are not as yet capable of teaching: after it to
men, before it to children.

. 26. And in confirmation hereof it might be said, that this has been the very
way of the Church of christ in all the ages of it, first to teach men, and then
to baptize them: but first to baptize Children, and after teach them: letting
them at present have that means of grace, which at present they are capable of,
and affording them afterward what rema^ned, as soon as they should become
capable of it.

. 27. But having no authority to change any word in the Text of our Savior,
nor reason to be over liberal in my concessions, I abide by what was said
before, having added this ex abundan i, more then was needful, to show the
weak^ess of the Antipaedobaptists way of arguing, even upon the utmost
advantage they can desire to be given them.

. 28. And by this time I hope it appears, that there is nothing in the word of
God which renders Infants incapable of being baptized.

. 29. And if so, then we have enough, though we had no more, for Infants
baptism. For Baptism being that, by which our children may have so much good as
we have shown they may have, in the first branch of our Argument; and being
that, whereof they have so much need, as we have shown they have, in the second
branch of it; with what either charity or justice can they be denied it? being
they are so capable of it, as we have now shown them to be in the handling of
this third branch. Sure children are not the only persons in the world that may
neither have acts of justice nor charity shown toward them? And what should
hinder us from doing for them this good, for which they have so much need?
Neither is the pains so great, nor the trouble so much, nor the charge so
heavy, but we may afford it them. What will we do for them, that will not do so
little as this comes to, to baptize them? Are we not free and at liberty to do
it, if we will? Is there any restraint laid upon us from doing it by the Law
either of God, or Man? If neither spoke for it, as indeed both do, yet to be
sure neither speaks against it, and so we may do it, if we will. And what can
be pretended against doing so much good, where we see there is so much need?

. 30. Do it then, Brethren, for your Children, because it is so much for their
good. Do it, because that of that good they have so much need. And do it,
because it is an act both of Justice, and Charity, which they are as capable of
receiving, as you at liberty for performing. Never stand hunting for Scripture
for it, so long as there is no Scripture against it: but reckon it your duty to
bring them to Christ, whom Christ has permitted to come unto him, and whose
coming to him Christ has forbidden any man to hinder, saying, Suffer little
children to come unto me, and forbid them not.

. 31. And more then this I need not say to move any reasonable man to the doing
of it.

. 32. And yet above and beyond all this, I shall show you in the fourth and
last place a Right that Children have unto Baptism, and then it cannot but be a
wrong to hinder them from being baptized. A Right, I say, our Children have
unto Baptism; and that upon a threefold account; the Constitution of this
Church; the Custom of the Catholic Church; and the Institution of Christ; as I
shall show in order.

CHAP. XXVI.
Our Childrens Right to Baptism by the Constitution of this Church, and Custom
of the Catholic Church.

. 1. I Begin with our Childrens right to ^aptism by the first, the Constitution
of this present particular Church.

. 2. And as that has told us in her 27th Article of her Doctrine, That the
Baptism Baptismus parvulorum omnino in Ecclesid retinendus est, ut qui cum
Christi institutione optime congraut. Artic. Relig. 27.
of young children is in any wi^e to be retained in the Church, as most
agreeable with the institution of Christ: so it has provided in her Liturgy a
double Office for the Baptizing of Infants, the one fitted for Public
Solemnity, the other adapted to Private Necessity; and has ordered the Curates
of every Parish to be often admonishing the people, that they defer not the
baptizing of their children longer than the first or second Sunday next after
their B^rth, or other Holy day falling between; unless upon reasonable cause,
which must be great too, and to be approved by the Curate. What the Church then
not only allows, and permits them to have, but ordains and appoints their
having of, that by the Constitution of the Church they have a Right unto; and
they cannot, without injustice to them, be deprived of it; unless perhaps any
shall think it no injury to wrong them of any spritual advantage, whereas it is
a great one to rob them of any temporal one, when as contrarily, if the one be
a robbery, the other is a sacrilege.

. 3. But because the present Church is a Party, and will not be allowed to be a
Judge by her Opposers, therefore I will proceed to show a second Right that
children have unto Baptism, and that is by Prescription from the Custom and
Practice of the Catholic Church of Christ. And sure they that will not be
Members of our Particular Church, will yet be willing to be Members of Christ's
Catholic Church. And if so they be, then sure they will not oppose, nor
gainsay, but submit unto, and be regulated by, the Custom and Practice of it;
unless they mean to become guilty of Schism, in separating from that Church,
whereof they pretend themselves to be Members.

. 4. Now as to Church custom and practice, it is in that, as in other customs
and practices. It has the obligation of a Law. Common usage, we say, is common
Law in England. So it is in civil Customs, and so too in Ecclesiastical. Where
Authority from the Scripture fails, there the Custom of Ubi Authoritas deficit,
ibi Consuetudo ma^orum pro lege tenenda est. D. Aug. ad Casulan. In rebus de
quibus nihil certi statuit Scriptura divina, m^s populi Dei, vel instituta
majorum pro lege tenenda, D. Aug. Ep. 86. Consuet ido autem etiam in civilibus
rebus pro lege suscipitur, cum deficit lex: nec differt, Scriptura an ratione
consistat, quando and legem ratio commendet. Tert. de Coron. Mil. In iis quae
Scriptura, nec jubet, nec prohibet, illud est sequendum, quod consuetudo
roboravit -- Id. Ib. Exigis ubi scriptum sit in actibus Apostolorum; etiamsi
Scripturae auctoritas non subesset, totius Orbis in hac part consensus instar
praecepti obtinet. Nam and multa alia quae per traditionem in Ecclesiis
observantur auctoritatem sibi scriptaelegis usurparunt, veluti in lavacro ter
mergitare caput, etc. D. Hieron. advers. Luciferan. Quis -- quis Catholici
dogmatis and moris sensum, divinitus per loca and tempora omnia dispensatum
contemserit, non hominem contemnit, sed Deum. Vincent. Lilinens.
the Church is to be held as a Law. So St. Augustine says; and so have others
of the Ancients both thought and said. Whence that conclusion of the Council of
Nice, that (...) the ancient usages should continue in force. And if so, then
Infants will have a Right to Baptism, as good as any ever had to any thing on
this account.

. 5. And that it should be so, namely, that the Custom and Practice of the
Church should have the force of a Law, either to justify a Church Practice, or
to give Right unto a Church Privilege, will be no wonder sure to him that
considers that the Apostle both has made the Custom of the Church a Rule for
Church Members to walk by, (1 Cor. 14. 40.) in saying, Let all things be done
decently, and in order. (For by Decency there he means agreeableness to the
custom of the Church, which, as our Learned Paraphrast says, is the rule of
decency:) and has also himself made use of Church custom as an argument for
the refutation of such as should contend for the decency of women's public
praying, that is, being present at, and joining in the ivine service, with
their heads uncovered, 1 Cor. 11. 16. But if any man seem to be contentious, we
have no such customs, nor the Churches of God. Which words of his we may sitly
use to Opposers of Infants Baptism. They contend for the deferring of the
Baptizing of Infants, even of all Infants, though they be the children of
believing Parents, till they be grown men; and hold it unlawful for any to be
baptized before. But that is a novel opinion, and practice of their own. We
have no such either opinion or custom, nor the Churches of God.

. 6. And the stronger still will Infants Right unto Baptism from the Custom of
the Church be (which Custom yet must needs be granted to have a great force,
when an Apostle, that could impose by an Authority Divine, would argue from a
Custom of the Church) if it shall appear that this Custom of the Church has
been grounded upon Apostolical Tradition, or Practice: especially being the
Apostle has given express order to stand fast to, and hold the Apostolical
Traditions, whether by word or by writing, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15. and to mark them
which walked so, as they had the Apostles for an example, Phil. 3. 17. I will
therefore first show, that the Practice of this Particular Church to baptize
Infants has been the Practice of the Catholic Church: and then proceed to show
that Practice of the Church to have been grounded on the Tradition of the
Apostles, and put fair to show it to have been the Practice of the Apostles
also.

CHAP. XXVII.
The Catholic Churches Custom to Baptize Infants.

. 1. NOw to show that it has been the Custom and Practice of the Universal
Church of Christ to baptize Infants, as it will be useful unto you, and also
delightful, because you will see that what we hold and do in this case, is no
other but what has been held and done in and by the Catholic Church in all
the ages of it, ever since that first wherein the Apostles lived: so it shall
neither be irksome nor unpleasing to my self, because I shall hope thereby to
contribute something toward the conviction and satisfaction of those that are
doubters, and dissatisfied in the point. Wherein my progress shall be
retrogressive, beginning below, and carrying my Catalogue upwards; to the
Primitive Times from the Present; whereas other usually begin above, and bring
it downward to the Present from the Primitive: it being not material which way
it is done, but suiting better with my design to have it done this way.

. 2. And for this present Seventeenth Century now current, we need no other but
our own eyes to be our witnesses of the daily Practice to baptize Infants, both
in our Church at home, and other Churches abroad, as well Protestant as Popish.

. 3. And as little need almost have we to seek for witnesses in the Century
next foregoing, there being many no doubt yet living, who were baptized Infants
themselves within the compass of that Century, if they do not also remember the
baptisms of others. However at home our Articles of Religion first agreed on in
the reign of Q. Elizabeth, Anno 1562, declaring that Infants baptism is in any
wise to be retained in the Church as most agreeable to the Institution of
Christ; and our Liturgy compiled before in the reign of K. Edward the Sixth,
Anno 1549, wherein is contained the office for the public baptizing of Insants
is to us a sufficient evidence for it, without seeking further. To which for
neighborhood sake, we may add the Confession of the Faith of Scotland, in the
year 1582, wherein they confess and acknowledge that baptism appertains as
well to the Infants of the Faithful, as unto them that be of full age and
discretion.

. 4. And for the Churches abroad their Confessions show their belief and
practice in this case. The Council of Trent in the fifth and seventh Session of
it (Anno 1546, and Anno 1547) Si quis parvulos recentes ab utcris matrum
baptizandos negat -- Antthema sit. Council. Trident. Sess. 5. apud Caranzam. Si
quis dixerit par vulos, co quod actum credend^ non habent, susccpto baptismo
inter fideles ^omputandos non esse -- Anathema sit. Id. ib. Sess. 7. con. 13.
anathematizes those that either say that children ought not to be baptized; or
that being baptized they ought not to be reckoned amongst believers; or that it
is better wholly to let their baptizing alone, than that, not believing by any
proper act of their own, they should be baptized upon the account of the faith
of the Church. And that gives sufficient evidence for the Church of Rome.

. 5. Then for the Protestant Churches, the Harmony of the Confessions of
Helvetia, Bohemia, Printed at Cambridge 1586.
Belgia, Auspurge, Saxony, Wittemberg, We condemn the Anabaptists who deny that
young Infants born of faithful parents are to be baptized. For according to the
doctrine of the Gospel, Theirs is the kingdom of God. And they are in the
Covenant of God. And why then should not the sign of the Covenant be given to
them? The latter Confession of H^lvetia. In which holy Font we do therefore dip
our Infants, because that it is not lawful for us to reject them from the
company of the people of God, which are born of us -- Former Confess. of
H^lvetia. -- Young children also who are reckoned in the number of Gods people
in like sort are by this Ministry to be benefited toward the attaining of
salvation, that they likewise may be consecrated, and dedicated to Christ,
according to his commandment, when he says, Suffer ye the little ones -- For
these causes do our Ministers without any doubt, and boldly baptize children --
Bohemie. -- Seeing that God does together with the Parents account their
posterity also to be of the Church, we assirm that Infants being born of holy
Parents, are by the Authority of Christ to be baptized. French Confess. -- We
by the same reason do believe that they [Infants] ought to be baptized, and
sealed with the sign of the Covenant, for the which in times past the Infants
amongst the Israelites were circumcised, that is by reason of the same promises
made unto our Infants, that were made unto others. Confess. of Belgia. They
teach that young Infants are to be baptized. -- They condemn the Anabaptists,
which allow not the baptism of Infants -- Confess. of Auspurge. We also baptize
Infants, because it is most certain, that the promise of grace does pertain
also to Infants. -- Confess. of Saxony. We acknowledge that Baptism is to be
ministered as well to Infants, as to those that are grown to full age. Confess.
of Wittemberge. Seeing that Baptism is a Sacrament of that Covenant, which God
has made with those that be his, promising that he will be their God, and the
God of their seed -- therefore our Preachers do teach, that it is to be given
to Infants also -- Confess. of sweveland.
Sweveland, with the French Confession, all unanimously declaring for Infants
baptism, though some on one ground, and some on another, evidently enough shows
what was believed and practiced by those parts of the Church in that age.

. 6. To these I shall add the Confession of the Churches of the Valleys of
Piemont assembled in Angrogne (Anno 1532) in the 17 Artic. whereof they say, --
we have but two Sacramental Signs left us by Jesus Christ; the one is Baptism,
the other is the Eucharist, which we receive, to show that our Sir Sam. Morland
History of Piemont. p. 41.
perseverance in the Faith is such, as we promised when we were baptized being
little children. Also a Confession presented to Ladislaus K. of Bohemia (Anno
1508) by his Subjects, falsely called Waldenses; and after to Ferdinand Id. ib.
page 53.
K. of Bohemia, (Anno 1535) in the 12 Artic. whereof, They likewise teach, that
children are to be baptized unto salvation, and to be consecrated to Christ,
according to his Word, Suffer little children, etc. And whereas the Waldenses
are charged to have rejected the baptism of little Infants, they in their Book
entitled the Luthers Forerunners, l. 1. c. 4. p. 10. and 15. of part 1.
spiritual Almanac, sol. 45. quit themselves (as my Author faith) from this
imputation as follows. The time and place of those that are to be baptized is
not ordained, but the charity and edification of the Church and Congregation
must serve for a rule therein, etc. And therefore they to whom the children
were nearest allied brought their Infants to be baptized, as their parents, or
any other whom God had made charitable in that kind. Again, in the Book of the
Doctrine of the Waldenses and Albingenses (chapter 3.) Id. ib. part 3. page 43.
their judgment and Practice is thus delivered, And for this cause it is that
we present our children to Baptism; which they ought to do, to whom the
children are nearest, as their parents, and they to whom God has given this
charity. It is confessed that they did in process of time grow to deser the
baptizing of their Infants for some while: but that was not from any opinion of
the unlawfulness Id. ib. part 1. page 15.
of Infants Baptism: but partly because their own Ministers were many times
abroad employed in the service of their Churches; and partly out of detestation
of some humane inventions held by them to be pollutions added to that Sacrament
as administered by the Priests of the Church of Rome, by whom for some certain
hundreds of years they had been constraind to suffer their children to be
baptized.

. 7. So that it is needless to appeal for further evidence to the Conference at
Mompelgu^t; Anno 1529.
or the Articles of Smalkald, Anno 1536.
or book of Concord; Anno 1580.
much less to the testimonies of single persons, though men of note and
eminence in their generation, such as Luther, Melancthon, Calvin, Zan^hy, or
any other of the many writers on this Subject in that Age. Who were by so much
the more moved to write on this Subject in regard of an Opposition then made to
Infants Baptism by the Anabaptists, who as Melancthon says were then
Melancthon loc. Comm. de Bapt.
nuper nati, newly come up, whereas before there was great quietness in the
Church about that Point.

. 8. Yet, to show that Infants Baptism was not the practice of the more Western
parts of Europe only, but of the Eastern too, and of those that followed the
Greek Church, as well as those that followed the Latin, I will give two or
three evidences of th^s practice among the Russians, Ruthens, and Moscovians.

. 9. In an Epistle written to David Chytraeus (dated 8 Kal. Aug. Anno M. D.
LXXVI.) De Russorum, Moscovitarum and Tartarorum Religione, page 240.
the Author relating the manner of baptizing among the Russians, says the
Priest uses to pour a whole gallon of water upon the Infant. Alexander Gaguin
says of Ib. page 232.
the Ruthens, that they baptize their Infants by immersion. These receiving the
Faith about the year 942, and retaining it firmly ever since, are an Instance
of Infants Baptism, not for this Century only, but for all the time from their
first conversion. And the same is testified of them by Johannes Sacranus, Canon
of Cracow, Ib. page 193.
who writing his Book in the year 1500, is a witness in this case as well for
the foregoing, as present Century. And Johannes Faber writing to Ferdinand King
of Ib. page 176.
the Romans Anno 1525) concerning the Moscovites, who, as themselves say,
received their religion from St. Andrew, and are very firm to what they have
once received, says that they baptize their Infants by a threefold immersion,
if he be strong, else by pouring on of water. Now this Relation, if true, and
why it may not be so I cannot tell, speaks not only for the Century, the
Relator writ in, but for time before; how much it is uncertain, but for ought I
know, for all the time since their first conversion, which reaches up to the
very Apostles days.

. 10. And to show that Infants baptism was not the practice only of Europe but
of other parts of the world, and so hint at (that which some other better read
in History may be able sully to make out) a Catholickness of it in respect of
C^un^ries professing Christianity as well as Times, I will give you a brief
taste from Mr. Brerewoods Enquiries, how it was about this Century, and God
knows how many Centuries before, whether from the beginning or no, in this
Point with the Eastern and Southern parts of the world where Christianity is
professed. And to begin with the Christians of St. Thomas so called, as being
supposed to Chap. 20.
have been by his preaching converted to the Christian Religion, inhabiting in
India in great numbers about Coulan, and Cranganor, Maliapur, where St. Thomas
is supposed to lie buried and Negapatan. These baptize their Infants, though
not indeed till they be forty days old, except in danger of death. Next the
Jacobites are a sort of Christians who inhabit in Chap. 21.
Syria, Cyprus, Mesopotamia, B^bylon, Pal^stine, and under other titles are
said to be spread abroad in forty kingdoms. And these all baptize their
Infants, signing them first with the sign of the Cross, which they imprint into
their face or arm with a burning iron. Then the Co^hti or Christians in Egypt,
where Religion was planted Chap. 22.
in the Apostles days, these baptize their children, though not before the
fortieth day, ^o not in case of death. The Hab^stine Christians inhabiting the
Chap. 23.
midland of Africa do also baptize their Infants: but their Males not till
forty days after their birth, and their Females not till eighty, except in
peril of death. The Armenian Christians are spread in Chap. 24.
multitudes over the Turkish Empire, but chiefly in the Armenia's the Greater
and Lesser, and in Cilicia. And these also baptize their Infants. Lastly, the
Maronites are a sort of Christians inhabiting Chap. 25.
Aleppo, Damascus, Tripoli of Syria, Cyprus, and mount Libanus. And these too
baptize their Infants, but their Males not till forty days after their birth,
and their Females not till eighty days after it. So that from all the Quarters
of the world where Christianity is professed witnesses come for Infants baptism.

. 11. But not more fruitful was this Century for Testifiers to this Truth, then
some of the foregoing are barren; not from the rarity of the practice, or
opinion of men against it, but from the scarcity of Writers in those Ages,
whose works are extant, and from the little or no opposition made to it. Yet in
the barrenest and darkest of Ages, we shall find a sufficiency of light and
evidence, to carry up this Practice through them to the Primitive Times.

. 12. In the middle of the Fifteenth Age (about Anno 1452) we find Nicolaus de
Orbellis giving his testimony to this Truth. Yist. 4. 4 Libri Sent. qu. 5.
For to the question whether the effects of baptism be alike in all, he answers
by way of Distinction; say^ng that the Baptized are either Infants or Adult:
and that if the Comparison be of an Infant with the Adult, the effect is
unequal, the advantage on the Adults side. And upon the question, whether the
Infants of Infidels may be baptized against the Ib. qu. 7.
wills of their parents, he determines that though a private person may not
compel in that case, yet a Prince may. And also he gives reasons why the
Infants to be baptized Ib. qu. 8.
should be Catechized, though they be not able to apprehend any instruction,
which is a sufficient indication both of his opinion and of the Churches
Practice in that age. As for the Catechizing he speaks of, that none trip at
that, it is nothing but the asking and answering to the questions solemnly used
in bapti in by the Godfathers. For he tells ye what the Godfather means, when
in the Person of the Infant he answers, I believe. And the Reasons for this he
draws partly from the Church, partly from the Godfathers, and partly from the
Infants.

. 13. Toward the latter end of this Century, about the year 1487 flourished
Gabriel Biel; and he as the Author newly mentioned, Omnes parvulirite baptiza^i
rem and Sacramentum sus cipiunt: sed Sacramentum tantum qui ficte, and sine
side and contritione accedunt. Gabriel Biel, in 1 Sentent. d. 4.
discoursing of the different effects of baptism in persons of different age
and disposition, concludes thus. All Infants rightly baptized receive the thing
and the Sacrament: but those (he means adult ones) that come feignedly, and
without faith and contrition receive only the Sacrament. 'Twere lost time to
stand upon it hence to prove his being for Infants Baptism.

. 14. But before either him, or De Orbellis, flourished Thomas Waldensis, who
died Anno 1430. And says he, who ever we be that are baptized into Quicunque
baptizati sumus in Christo Jesu, in morte ipsius baptizati sumus. Ergo and
parvuli qui baptizantur in Christo, quoniam in morte ipsius baptizati sunt,
peccato moriuntur. Tho. Walden de Sacram. Tom. 2. q. 101. Fol. 104. Col. 2.
Quod parvuli ad baptismum delati si praeveniantur morte peribunt. Id. ib. q.
99. Fol. 101. Col. 3.
Jesus Christ are baptized into his death. Therefore even the Infants that are
baptized into Christ, because they are baptized into his death, do die to sin.
The same Author holds that Infants brought to baptism yet dying before they be
baptized, do perish.

. 15. Yea, and even in the beginning of it, (about Anno 1401) flourished
Nicolaus Gorranus. And he delivers his sense as to this matter in the words of
Beda, and the Ordinary Gloss, Treating on Mark 7. 29. Vade, exiit daemonium, Go
thy way, the devil is gone out of thy daughter, he says, And as says Beda,
hence we have an example, that, as that daughter was healed by the faith of her
Mother, as the Centurions servant (Matthew. 8.) by the faith of his Master, so
are Infants by the faith of their Parents. Whence says the Gloss, Here we have
an example of the Catechizing and baptizing of Infants: because by the Faith
and Confession of the Parents in baptism, little ones who are neither able to
understand nor act any thing either of good or evil, are freed from the devil.
The Catechizing here, it is plain, is no other but that we have newly spoke of.
And by the way if Walafridus Strabo were the Collector of the Ordinary Gloss,
as Isaackson from Trithemius and Trifingensis affirms, then it is apparent,
that, how much soever his Authority is pretended against Infants Baptism,
either he was not against it, or if he were, he was against himself; Which
further appears from what Mr. Obed Wills in his Answer to Infant Bapt.
Asserted, c. 7. page 24.
Henry Danvers shows, namely, that declaring his own opinion upon the matter,
he says, that it was a sign of the growth of Religion (after a diligent
search) to take up the practice of Infant Baptism; and amongst other
Testimonies cites the Fathers in general for it, in opposition to the
prolonging of Austins Baptism, till he was Adult: And concludes at last thus --
Wise Christians bapt^zed their Infants, being not as some heretical persons,
opposing the Grace of God, and contend that Infants are not to be baptized. So
that by the way here we have gleaned up a witness for the Ninth Century before
we come at it; even Wal^fridus S^rabo, the man so much cried up by our
Antipaedo baptists for a propugner of their opinion, and an impugner of Infants
Baptism.

. 16. We will now step on to the Fourteenth Century. And in the very first year
of it (Anno 1300) appears Cum secundum Scripturam and sidem parvuli trahant
originale [peccatum] ad ejus dele^ionem, quia necessaria est ad salutem, sunt
baptizandi [par vuli]: quia tempore legis Evangelicae baptismus institutus est
in remedium contra illam culpam. -- Ad illud argumentum Qui non crediderit,
condemnabitur. Respon. Quod potest intelligi de adultis, per illud quod
pr^eccdit Qui crediderit and baptizatus fuerit. Vel potest dici, quod qui non
crediaerit noc actu nec habitu condemnabitur -- Par euli au^em etsi non possune
habere actum credendi, possunt tamen habere habitum Joh. Duns Scot. in l. 4.
Sententiar. Did. 4 qu. 1.
Johannes Duns Scotus a witness for Infants Baptism. And says he, whereas
according to Scripture and Faith Infants bring along with them original sin,
for the blotting out thereof, because that is necessary unto salvation, are
Infants to be baptized, because in the time of Gospel baptism is instituted as
a remedy against that guilt. And to the Argument from Mark 16. 16. Qui non
crediderit -- He that believes not shall be damned, he answers, that may be
understood of adult ones, in as much as there goes before it, Qui crediaerit --
He that believes and is baptized. Or it may be said, He that believes neither
in act nor in habit shall be condemned -- But Infants, though they cannot have
the act of believing, yet they may have the habit of says.

. 17. Go we now on to the Thirteenth Century. And here we have Bonaventure
(about Anno 1260) giving witness to the baptizing of Hoc quotidie contingit in
pueris qui baptizantur, qui se ante annos diseretionis moriantur, in altcrius
side gratiam suscipiunt, qua per meri^um Christi salvantur. Bonaventura de Vita
Chrsti, c. 23.
Infants in this Age. For speaking of believing by the Faith of others, he
says, This is a thing which falls out daily in the children that are baptized,
who if they die before they arrive at years of discretion, do by the faith of
another receive that grace, whereby they are saved through the merit of Christ.

. 18. Here also we have Aquinas (about Anno 1255) giving a full and clear
witness. For unto the Sed contra est, quod Dionys. dicit ult. cap. Eccl.
Hierar^h. Divini nostri duces scilicet Apostoli probaverunt insantes recipi ad
baptismum Aquin. Sum. 3. q. 68. Artic. 9. Pucri baptizandi sunt, cum sint
originali peccato obnoxii, and ut a pueritia enutriti in religione Christiana
firmius in ea perseverent. Id. ib. Conclus. Ipse autem Dominus dicit, Joh. 3.
Quod nisi quis -- Vnde necessarium fuit pueros baptizari, etc. Id. ib. Corp.
Artic.
question, whether Infants are to be baptized, he answers assirmatively, that
they are. And his opinion he grounds on the Authority of Dionys. Areop.
affirming that the Apostles did allow of it, that Infants should be admitted
unto baptism. Which he also confirms from the Need they have of it by reason of
their obnoxiousness to original sin; from, the Necessity there is of it in
order to their obtaining of salvation, because of Christ's having said, Nisi
quis renatus fuerit -- That except a man be born of Water and of the spirit he
cannot enter into the kingdom of God; and lastly from the Convenience of it in
order to their being brought up to, and persevering in the Christian Faith.

. 19. In this Century Pope Greg. the Ninth, who was elected about Anno 1227,
and died Anno 1241, declares, that the Sacrament Sacramenium baptismi utiliter
confertur parvulis; licet non credant, nec intelligant, etc. Greg. 9. Decret.
l. 3. Tit. 41. De Baptismo and ejus effectu, cap. 3. fol. 296, 297.
of Baptism is usefully given to Infants, though they be defective both in
faith, and understanding. He also both answers objections against Infants
Baptism, and lays down grounds for it. Circumcision is one; and Except a man be
born again, etc. is another.

. 20. In the same Century (about Anno 1251) the Centuriators of Magdeburg quote
a Synodal Constitution, written by the Bishop of Nemans, wherein it is ordained,
that in case of such danger of death, that Et in libro Synodali ab Episcopo
Nemansensi conscripto dicitur: Praecipimus itaque utinfans quam cito natus
fueris, si pe^iculum sibi mortis ammineat, ita quod Presbytero nequeat
praesentari a circumstantibus masculis baptizetur, etc. Cent. 13. c. 6. Col.
594.
the new born babe cannot be presented to a Priest, he shall be baptized by any
Man that is present, and if no man be present, then by any woman present, and
at last by the Father or Mother, if there be no body else to baptize it.

. 21. They cite also for this Age Ecclesia orat pro parvulis baptizaxis, non
quia dubium sit ipsos salvari sed ut innua^ur quod boc non habent ex suis
meritis vel natura, sed de sola gratia. Hug. in Psalm. 27.
Hugo saying, That the Church prays for the baptized Infants, not as doubting
of their salvation, but as intimating that they have not this from their own
either merits or nature, but from grace only.

. 22. As also Guli^lmus Pucris verd propter periculum onortis est statim
dandus: nec est disserendus, quia ^ton potest ^is aliter subveniri. Gulielmus.
De Tempore baptizandi. Sed tertius est baptismus fluminis five aquae, quo
sid^les quotidie and pucri baptizantur and regenerantur. Id. de Baptismo and
ejus partibus, cap. 2. Quandoque datur per immersionem, ita quod totus puer
immergitur in aqua. Quandoque etiam datur per aspersionem, quando puer
aspergitur. and super eum aqua infunditur. Id. de ritu baptizandi, cap.
saying, That by reason of danger of death baptism is instantly to be
administered to children, and not to be deferred, because there is no other way
of affording them help. Which same Author speaking of the three sorts of
Baptism, viz. that of the Spirit, that of Blood, and that of Water, says of
this last. That is it, wherewith daily Believers and Infants are baptized and
regenerated. As also speaking of the several ways of baptizing, he says,
sometimes the whole child is dipped in water, and sometimes water is sprinkled
upon him.

. 23. And the Synod of Colonia Statuimus ut ills qui baptizat, dicat haec
verba, Petre, etc. Item Saccrdos ^andem formans doceat mares and foeminas
observare; cum in necessitate baptizant infantes, etiam parents si alii
defuerint. Synod. Colon. sub Rudolpho, Cont. 13. c. 9. Col. 944.
under the Emperor Rudolphus orders the Priest both in what form he shall
baptize himself, and teach others, whether Men or Women, or Parents themselves
for want of others, to baptize Infants in case of necessity.

. 24. Ascend we now one step higher unto the Twelfth Century. And here we find
Peter Lombard the Master of the Sentences a Witness for Paedobaptism. All
little ones Sacramenium and rem simul suscipiunt omnes parvuli, qui in baptismo
ab originali mundantur peccato. Namque quod omnibus in baptismo remittitur
peccatum per baptismum August. evidenter dicit, In Enchirid. c. 43. P. Lombard,
l. 4. did. 4. (Anno 1145.)
(says he) receive at once both the Sacrament and the thing, who are cleansed
in baptism from Original Sin. And to countenance his assertion he cites St.
Augustine as speaking to this purpose. And again (in his 8 Book on Chapter 13. of
Revel. as he is quoted by Mr. Wills, p. 144.) All that are baptized (says he)
whether little ones or great ones, receive in their foreheads the sign of the
Cross. Little ones then as well as great ones were in his time baptized.

. 25. Here also we have Gratian (about Anno 1140) telling us, That Infants may
be baptized upon the Aliorum side and professione parvuli baptizentur. Gratian.
De Consecrat. did. 4. Parvulis in baptismate offerentium prodest sides. Id.
ib. Aliorum fides in baptismate parvulos salvat. Id. ib. Praeter baptisma
Christi parvulis nulla salus promittitur. Id. ib.
account of the Faith and Profession of others. That the Faith of those that
bring Infants to baptism is profitable to them. That the faith of others saves
Infants in Baptism. That but by the Baptism of Christ no salvation is promised
to Infants. And by these and other like passages, which he quotes from August.
Isidor. Leo, etc. he shows both his own opinion o^ Infants Baptism; and the
Practice of the Age he lived in to be for it.

. 26. Here comes in also Petrus Cluniacensis (about Anno 1130). And says he by
way of question; The Infants of the Jews are Salvantur parvuli Judaeorum
Sacramento Circumcisionis: and non salvabuntur parvali Christianorum Sacramento
baptismatis? Petr. Cluniac. l. 1. contra Petrobrusianos, Ep. 2. Unde quia non
potuit u^bra corpore, fig^ra veritate aliquo pa^io excellentior apparere,
necessario vos op^riet consiteri Christianorum parvulos salvari baptismate: cum
fateamini Judaeorum parvulos salvari Circumcisione, Id. ib.
saved by the Sacrament of Circumeision: and shall not the Infants of
Christians be saved by the Sacrament of Baptism? And again, Because the shadow
could not by any means appear more excellent than the body, nor the figure than
the truth; ye must needs confess that the Infants of Christians are saved by
Baptism, when ye confess that the Infants of the Jews were saved by
Circumcision.

. 27. Higher up in this Century (about Anno 1120) flourished St. Bernard: and
his very complaining Irrident nos, quia baptizamus infantes, etc. D. Bern.
super Caat. Sermon. 66. Col. 996. k. etc.
of some men's scoffing at the baptizing of Infants, without adding what he
pleads on their behalf, is a sufficient evidence of his opinion, and the
Churches practice in that Age.

. 28. After all which it is needless to tell you from the Centuriators of
Magdeburg. how Tyrius (l. 22. c. 7.) makes mention of Centuriat. Magd. Cent.
12. cap. 6. Col. 872. lin. 53. etc.
the baptizing of Infants; or how An^onius (l. 5. c. 57.) relates Lewis King of
France's causing his new born Son Philip to be presently baptized; or how the
baptizing of El^nor and Joan the little daughters of the Queen of England
presently after their birth, is to be read in the C^ntinuator of Sigebert.

. 29. From hence let us take another step upwards into the Eleventh Century.
And in that Age the Centuriators tell us they baptized Cent. 11. cap. 6. Col.
260.
Infants, even presently after their birth, if weak. And then instance, from
Schatnaburgensis, in the Emperesses Son baptized within three days after his
birth by reason of his weakness, and the fear of his death; as also in a Son of
the Queen of Moguntia who was baptized presently after his birth, and died
presently after his baptism, and was buried at Hartisburg. And to the baptizing
of Infants St. Anshelm About An. 1086. Hinc ostendimur mortui esse peccato,
quia in Christ morte baptizati sumus: profecto and parvuli qui baptizantur in
Christo, peccato meriuntur. qui in morte ipsius baptizantur. D. Anshelm in 6.
ad Romans Nec par^uli de quibuslibet sanctis justisque procreati originalis
peccati reatu absoluuntur, nisi in Christo fuerint baptizali. Id. in cap. 7.
Iae ad Corinth. -- Per sidem scilicet and confessionem parentum in baptism^
liberantur a^iabolo parvuli, qui necdum per se capere, vel ali quid b^ni mali
possunt facere. Id. in 15 cap. Matthew.
in that Age gives testimony, saying that even the little ones truly who are
baptized into Christ do die unto sin, because they are baptized into his death.

. 30. Hence advance we to the Tenth Century, And in that the Centuriators also
tell us Cent. 10. c. 10. Col. 292, 293, 294, 295.
they baptized Infants. And they instance from Bonsinius in St^phen the Son of
Geysa Duke of Hungary, who had Theodatus Prince of Apulia for his Godfather,
whom the Infant afterward called Tata, which signifies Father. Also (from
Helmoldus) they tell us of the Emperor Othos being Godfather to a little Son of
Herold King of Denmark at his baptizing; and from Vincentius, of a bastard got
by Edgar King of England on a Nun, and baptized an Infant, though not till the
seven years penance imposed by Dunstan on his Father were ended. And of Infants
being held in the right arms at their anointing after Baptism. And to the
baptizing of Parvulos baptizandos Smaragdus docet: Sinite parvulos venire ad
me, talium est enim regnum coelorum. Hanc enim sanctam, puram and innocentem
infantiam per baptismi gratiam casta matter gignit Ecclesia. Smarag. in Ep. Pet.
c. 2. ap. Centuriat. cent. 10. c. 4. Col. 188. Hoc verbum fidei tantum valet in
Ecclesia, ut per ipsum credentem, offerentem, benedicentem, tingentem, etiam
tantillum mundet infantem, quamvis nondum valentem cord credere ad justitiam,
and ore confiteri ad salutem. Id. ibid. Col. 187.
Infants Smaragdus (about Anno 990) gave witness, grounding his opinion (as
they tell us) on our Saviors words in my Text, Suffer little children to come
unto me, for of such is the kingdom of God; and saying further, that this holy,
pure, and innocent infancy is begot by the chaste Mother the Church through the
grace of Baptism.

. 31. From the Tenth ascend we to the Ninth Century. And here we have Hincmarus
Bishop of Rheims severely rebuking another Cen. 9. c 4. Col 40. Hincmarus
Archiepiscopus Rhemenfis Scribit. Anno 860. Alsted. Theol. Polem.
Hincmarus Bishop of Laudum to whom he was Uncle for denying baptism to
Infants. The account on which he denied it (that Cent. 9. cap. 4. Col. 443.
none stumble at that) was not any opinion of the unlawfulness of Infants
Baptism. But as the Centuriators tell us he did it ob suas privatas injurias,
stirred up thereto by his private injuries, for which he excommunicated all the
Priests of his Church; and interdicted them the saying of Masses, baptizing of
Infants, absolving all Penitents, and burying the dead. For which he was
condemned in a Synod Cent. 9. c. 9. Col. 443.
at Acciniacum called by Carolus Calvus (Anno 870) and forced under his own
hand to promise obedience to his Sovereign and Metropolitan. After which by the
Synod of Trecas Ib. Col. 447.
called by Pope John the the Ninth under Carolus Crassus he was restored (Anno
878). However the Bishop of Rheims resented the other Interdicts, it seems he
most highly resented the interdiction of Baptism to Infants, pleading for it
from Scriptures both of the Old and New Testament, and in particular this Text
of mine, Suffer little children to come unto me: and then expostulates with his
Cousin, saying, And do you hinder little ones to be offered unto the Lord? Ait
illis Sinite parvulos venire ad me, and ne prohibi critis eos. Et tu prohibes
offeri domino parvulos? Cent. 9. c. 4. Col. 140.
And then tells him how from the time of the Nicene Council he had never any
where heard of such a thing done: and that he ought to have been afraid to do
that alone, which never any Christian had dared to do. And then he backs the
practice of baptizing Infants with the Authorities of Pope Siricius, the
African Council, St. Leo, and St. Gregory.

. 32. In the same Century flourished Haymo Bishop of Halberstad Anno 850.
Alsted. Theol. Polem. Parculi in baptismate mundantur. Ilaymo super 5. ad Romans
ap. Cent. 9. c. 4. Col. 143.
Cousin to Bid, and Scholar to Alcuinus. And he expressly says, that little
children are cleansed in Baptism.

. 33. Somewhat before him (Anno 830) flourished Rabanus Maurus, first Abbot of
Fulda, Alsted. Theol. Polem.
and then Bishop of Ments, a man of such learning, that as Alsted says,
neither had Italy any like him, nor Germany any equal to him. And this so
learned a man gives testimony in this Age for Infants baptism, saying, Plainly
no man ought to doubt, but that in Baptism, before the Infant rise from Sic
plane nemo du^ bitare debet, quod in alveo baptismi. priusquam Infans (...)
font surgat, Spiritus Sanctus in cum qui nascitur adveniat, etsi non videatur,
-- Raban. de Sacram. Euchar. c. 10. apud Centur. 9. c. 4. Col. 144.
the Font, the Holy Spirit comes into him that is born, though his coming be
invisible.

. 34. In this Century (about Anno. 850) flourished also Walafridus Strabo.
really a witness for Infants Baptism, how much soever he be appealed unto as a
witness against it. His testimony I have before produced in the Fifteenth
Century: and therefore shall not here repeat it: but shall conclude this
Century with what I find of this matter in Sir Roger Twisdens Historical
Vindication of the Church of England; namely, that whereas it had been formerly
ordained by the Laws of Ina, that children should be baptized within 30 days
after birth, and some Priests were negligent performers of that duty, therefore
by the Laws of Ed. and Guthrun, it was ordained, That such Guthrun about Anno
880.
as were not prepared, or denied the baptizing of them should be punished.

. 35. From the Ninth let us now step up to the Eighth Century. And in this Age
the Centuriators quote Carolus Magnus for a Cent. 8. c. 4. Col. 219.
witness to Infants Baptism. And with honor may such an Emperor be quoted, as
Plosc. Histor. p. 231.
was esteemed Imperii sui fortissimus and doctissimus, the learnedest Scholar
as well as stoutest Soldier in his Empire. And says he, we hold one baptism,
which is to be celebrated in the same Baptisma unum icnemus, quod iisdem
Sacramenti verbic in infantibus, quibus etiam in majoribus est celebrandum.
Carol. Mag. l. 3. de Imaginib. cap. 1. Cent. 8. c. 6. Col. 347. Apud
Christianos fidelium quotidie baptizantur filii. Daniel Ep. ad Bonif. Gratia
fidei renatos in font baptismatis etiam parvulos, atque ipsa parvula aetate
desunctos superna ad gaudia perducit. Beda, l. 4. in Cantic. Canticor. ap.
Cent. 8. c. 4. Col. 218. l. 40, etc.
words of the Sacrament at the baptizing of Infants as of elder persons.

. 36. In this Age also they quote an Epistle of one Daniel to Boniface, wherein
that Author says, That among the Christians the children of the Faithful are
baptized every day.

. 37. Also from Bid (l. 4. in Cantic. Canticor.) they quote this saying of
his, That the Grace of Faith does bring to the joys of Heaven even the little
children that are born again in the baptismal Font, and that die in their very
infancy.

. 38. From Regino they tell us how the Saxons coming to Lippa, were baptized by
Saxones ad Lippam venientes, una cum uxoribus and parvxlis catervatim in nomine
Trinitatis baptizantur. Regino, l. 2. ap. Cent. 8. c. 6. Col. 344. l. 19, etc.
troops together with their wives and little children in the name of the
Trinity.

. 39. Lastly, they tell us that baptized Infants were carried home from their
baptizing by their own mothers. And instance in Maria the Empress Baptizati
infantes a suis matribus demum reportabantur. Sic Maria Augusta, Uxor Leonis,
una cum baptizato filio suo in aulam ex templo redit, and in itinere paupcribus
munera projicit. Diaconus, l. 21. Rer. Roman. ap. Cent. 8. c. 6. Col. 34. l. 46.
wife of Leo, who returned from the Temple to the Court with her baptized Son,
and by the way as she went bestowed largesses on the poor.

. 40. These are sufficient evidences for Infants Baptism in this Century.

. 41. Pass we on to Century the Seventh, and in that Age also we have evidences
of Infants Baptism. For the Centuriators tell us that in the Eighth Council of
Toledo, and in the Sixth Council of Constantinople, there is mention made of
the baptizing of Infants; and among other things there are these expressions to
that purpose, we baptize Infants even before they be capable of reason.
Infantes etiam nondum rationis capaces baptizamus. Et, Parvulo agrotanti nullo
modo baptismus denegetur: si quis neglexcrit ejus morientis animam, ille pro ea
reddet Deo rationem. Council. Tolet. and Constantinop. ap. Cent. 7. c. 6. Col.
146. Exceptis his qui propter aetatem loqui nondum possunt. 1. l. ib. Lin. 38.
And, by no means let baptism be denied to a sick little one: if any shall
neglect the soul of him dying, he shall give an account for the same unto God.
They tell us also that in that Council of Constantinople, it was ordained that
none should receive either Chrysin or Baptism, till he could say without Book
the Creed and the Lords Prayer, except such as by reason of age were not able
to speak.

. 42. Before both these Councils, it was decreed (according to the
determination of Greg. 1.) by the Fourth Council of Toledo (Anno 681) that
whether an Infant were dipped in Council. 4 Toletan. Can. 5. Caranz. fol. 235.
baptism thrice or once, he should be accounted baptized; the third appearing
of the Infant from under the water being expressive of the Resurrection after
three days, and significative of the Trinity; and the single immersion giving
an intimation of the Unity of Substance in the Trinity of Persons.

. 43. They tell us of Priests killed in the temple together with Infants at
baptism, from Sabellicus. Foro Popilii quoq^ in templo trucidat^ leguntur
Sacerdotes cum infantibus inter baptizandum. Sabellicus Enneadis octavae, l. 6.
page 180. apud Cent. 7. c. 6. Col. 145.


. 44. And as Pope Leo granted that in case of necessity baptism might be
administered on Leo Pap^ tamen concessit necessitate urgente, omni die
baptizari, ut refert Hareman Schedel, atate sexia, page 176. Sic quadragesima
post partum, quosdam infantes baptizatos legimus, ut Dagoberti filium in
Galliis. Regino, l. 10. Quinquagessima vero Heduini filiam, quae nata fuit, in
die Paschatis, and baptizata in die Pentecostes, Beda l. 2. c. 9. ap. Cent. 7.
c. 6. Col. 145.
any day, so they tell us of Infants which they had read were baptized on the
fortieth day after their birth; and instance in the Son of Dagobert in France;
and to that from Beda mention a Daughter of Heduins born on Easter day, and
baptized on Whit sunday.

. 45. And as Heribert was Godfather to Dagoberts Son at his baptism; so was
King Lotharius. Idem [sc. Rex Lotharius] and Meroveum, Regis Theoderici filium,
infantem de baptismo suscepit. Nauclerus generatione, 21. Heribertus Dagoberei
filium. Regino, lib. 1. Magdeb. Cent. 7. c. 6. Col. 147.
Godfather to Meroveus Son of King Theoderic baptized an Infant.

. 46. And now supposing enough said for this Age, I shall close it up with the
Law of Ina before mentioned, whom I take to have flourished Leg. Inae, c. 2. p.
1. cited by Sr Roger Twisden, Vindic. of Chapter of Engl. p. 97. from Jorvalens. c.
2. Col. 761.
in this Century (about Anno 689), which was, That children should be baptized
within 30 days after birth.

. 47. A scend we now to the Sixth Century. And in the end of this appears as a
witness for Infants Baptism, Pope Greg. 1. who was chosen Pope Anno 590, and
died Anno 604. and so, as several more who have lived within the compass of two
Centuries, may pass as a witness for both. And he, as the Centuriators tell us,
witnesses that it is free to baptize Infants the same hour they are born in
case of danger of death. He also forbids Item liberum esse infantes mox in ipsa
hora, si est periculum mortis baptizare, Gregorius testatur, l 12. Epist. 10.
apud Magd. Cent. 6. c. 6. Col. 367. l. 21. Presbyteri baptizatos infantes
signare bis in front Chrysmate non praesumant. Id. l. 3. c. 9.
Priests to presume to sign baptized Infants twice in their foreheads with
Chrysm.

. 48. In the second Synod of Matiscon (Anno 599) it being observed, that
Christians Decernimus ut extra tempora decreta baptismi nullus filios suos
baptizet, nisi infirmitas nimia, vel dies extremus compulerit filios suos
baptismum suscipere. Conc. Matisc. c. 3. Omnes omnino (...) die quadragesimo
cum infantibus suis ad Ecclesiam observare praecipimus ut impositionem manus,
etc. Synod. Matisconensis, ap. Magdeb. Cent. 6. c. 9. Col. 613.
did not observe the solemn set day for baptizing of their children, but
baptized them at other times, so that there were scarce found above two or
three to be baptized at Easter, that custom was prohibited, unless in case of
extreme infirmity, and necessity, and an order was given for the attendance of
all with their Infants at the Church on the solemn festival to receive their
imposition of hands, Chrysm and Baptism.

. 49. The Second Council of Braccarum (Anno 580) ordered the Bishops to
signify throughout their Churches, that if they that Placuit, ut unusquisque
Episcopus per Ecclesias suas hoc praecipiat, ut hi qui infantes suas ad
baptismum offerunt, si quid voluntare pro suo offerunt voto, suscipiatur ab
eis, etc. Council. Bracarense, Can 7. ap. Magd. Cent. 9. Col. 354. and Caranz.
fol. 250.
brought their Infants to baptism pleased to offer any thing voluntarily, it
should be accepted, but that nothing should be extorted from those whose
poverty rendered them unable to make any offering; lest thereby they should be
discouraged from bringing their children unto baptism, and they dying
unbaptized their loss should be required at their hands through whose violence
this was occasioned. This Synod placed by Alsted in the year above mentioned,
is placed by the Magdeburgenses in the seventh Century (Anno 610); and so if it
witness not for this Century, it will for that. And the Council of Vivense
ordained the very same, as H. D. informs us from Vossius de Bapt. p. 179.

. 50. Isidor Hispalensis whose time is placed by Alsted, about Anno (596) is of
this judgment touching Infants dying without baptism, That for Original Sin
alone newly born Infants do suffer pains Pro solo peccato originis luune in
inferno nuper nati infantuli poenas, si renovati per lavacrum non fuerint.
Proinde pro hac causa nuper natus damnatur infans, si non regeneratur, quia
originis noxitate perimitur. Isidor. de sum. bono. cap. 23. apud Magd. Cent. 7.
c. 4. Col. 98. Mag. Cent. 6. c. 6. Col. 331.
in hell if they be not renewed by baptism. What his judgment was as to the
baptizing of Infants is not to be questioned, when this was his judgment of
those that died unbaptized. He is quoted by the Magdeb. for the Seventh
Century; but placed by Alsted in the Sixth: and so will serve for the one or
the other. The Centuriators tell us that some having in the time of Gregory
made some change in the dippings of Infants, Isidore notes that Gregory did
earnestly reprove them for not dipping them but once, or else thrice.

. 51. Justinus the Emperor, who reigned about Anno 570, Ordained (as H. D.
tells us) concerning the children, which in regard of Treat of Bapt. 2 Edit. p.
112.
their years cannot receive Divine Doctrine, that they shall without delay be
made worthy or partakers of Baptism. And Justinian the Emperor who reigned
about Anno 530, Ordained, That children should be admitted to Baptism,
Justinian. Novel. Institut. 44. ap. 11. Danvers Tree at. of Bapt. p. 112. Edit.
2.
and that those that were come to their full growth, should be taught before
they were baptized.

. 52. Johannes Maxentius a Monek and Priest of Antioch, (Anno 520) thus writes,
in the Confession of his Faith: Therefore do we believe that little children
newly born are Propterea and recentes ab utero parvulos, non tantum ut
adoptionem mereantur filiorum, aut propter regnum Coelerum (sicut Pelagii, and
Caelestii sive Theodori Mansuestini disciputi, etc.) sed and in remissionem
peccatorum eos credimus baptizari, ne pereant in aeternum, Maxent. ap. Magdeb.
Cent. 6. c. 6. Col. 227. l. 4, etc.
baptized not only that they may obtain the adoption of sons, or for the
kingdom of Heaven (like the Disciples of Pelagius, and Coelestius) but for
remission of sins also, that they may not perish for ever.

. 53. The Council of Gerunda (about Anno 517, or 520 as some) decreed, That
little children Ut parvuli, si infirmari contingat, codem die quo nati sunt,
baptizentur. Council. Gerund. Can. 4. ap. Caranz. fol. 179.
in case of weakness should be baptized the same day that they were born.

. 54. Not to be endless in testimonies, the Magdeburgenses tell us from Adon,
and Gaguin, how Androvera wife of Chilperic was forced upon a surprise to be
both Witness and Adon in Comment. 4 aetatis, and Gaguinus, l. 2. narrant,
Androveram Chilperici uxorem infidiis circumventam, ipsam natae suae filiolae
baptizandae testem and commatrem extitisse. Cent. 6. cap. 6. Col. 332. lin. 28,
etc.
Godmother at the baptism of her own little daughter. And thus much for this
Age.

. 55. Go we on to the Fifth Century. And here we meet with plenty of evidences
of Infants Baptism.

. 56. The Council of Milevis (Anno 418) in the time of Pope Innocent, and the
Emperor Arcadius (as the Centuriators tell us) Item placuit, ut quicunque
parvulos recentes ab uteris matrum baptizandos negat: aut dicit in remissionem
quidem peccatorum eos baptizari, sed nihil ex Adam trabere Originalis peccati
quod regenerationis lavacro expictur: unde sit consequens ut in cic forma
baptismatis, in remissionem peccatorum non vera, sed falsa intelligatur,
anathema sit. Quoniam non aliter intelligendum est quod Apostolus ait: Per unum
hominem peccatum intravit in mundum, and per peccatum mors, and ita in omnes
homines portransiit, in quo omnes peccaverunt: nisi quemadmodum Ecclesia
Catholica ubique diffusa semper intellexit. Propter hanc regulam fidei, etiam
parvuli, qui nihil peccatorum in semetipsis committere potuerunt, ideo in
peccatorum remissionem veraciter baptizantur, ut in cis regeneratione mundetur,
quod generatione traxerunt. Synod. Milevitana ap. Magdeb. Cent. 5. c. 9. Col.
835. Caranza fol. 123.
decreed, an Anathema to him that should deny baptism to new born Infants. The
ground of their decree they make to be Original Sins being drawn from Adam by
all, and death by sin, and that according to that sense, which the Catholic
Church diffused every where, ever had of that saying of St. Paul's, By one man
sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men;
for that all had sinned. For which rule of Faith even little ones (say they)
which in themselves were incapable as yet of committing of any sin, are
therefore baptized into the remission of sins, that what they have drawn upon
them by generation, may be cleansed in them by regeneration.

. 57. In like manner say the Fathers in the Fifth Council of Carthage in the
same Century, whosoever denies that Infants are by the baptism of Christ freed
from perdition, and Quicunque negat parvulos per baptismum Christi a perditione
liberari, and salutem percipere sempiternam anathema sit. Council Carthag. 5.
ap. Magdeb. Cent. 5. c. 9. Col. 825.
receive life eternal, let him be Anathema. And in this Council St. Augustine
was President, as at the Former he was present, a Bishop in it.

. 58. Pope Innocent the First confirmed the Decree of the Milevitan Council
from Illud vero quod eos vestra fraternitas asscrit praedicare, parvulos
aternae vitae proemiis etiam sine baptismatic gratia posse donari, persatuum
est. -- verum ut superfluorum hominum prava doctrina celeri veritatis possit
ratione discindi, proclamat hoc Dominus in Evangelio dicens, Sinite infantes,
and nolite eos prohibere a me: talium enim est reguum Coelorum. Innocent. Romans
pontif. patrib. Council. Milev. apud Magdeb. cent. 5. c. 9. col. 844, 845.
our Saviors saying, Suffer little children to come unto me, etc. and says,
that their opinion, who held that children might obtain eternal life without
being baptized, was a very foolish one. This Pope died Anno 417.

. 59. Theodoret, who flourished about Anno 430, asks, if this were the only
effect of baptism, Si enim hic solus esset baptismi effectus, cur pueros
baptizamus, qui peccatum nondum gustarunt? Theodoret. 2 Tom. Divin. Decret.
Epit. l. 5. page 407.
why do we baptize Infants, who have not as yet tasted of sin? Why do we
baptize them? is a clear proof of their baptizing them.

. 60. Pope Leo advanced to the Papacy, about the year 440 was for having the
solemn times for baptizing observed, yet so as Non interdicta licentia, qua in
baptismo tribuendo quolibet tempore periclitantibus subvenitur. -- Ut in mortis
periculo in obsidionis discrimine, in persecutionis angustiis, in timore
naufragii, nullo tempore, hoc vere salutis singular remedium cui quam
denegemus. Leo. Ep. Devret. 4. cap. 6. page 15, 16.
not to interdict the liberty granted of baptizing those that were in danger of
death at any time; for at no time to any such would he have baptism dedenied.

. 61. Isidore the Pelusiot, about the year 410, in consideration of the Angel
coming to kill Moses because of the child's not being Isid. l. 1. Ep. 125. ap.
Dr. Ham. Def. of Inf. Bapt. c. 1. p. 4.
circumcised, concludes (...), Let us make have to baptize our children.

. 62. Paulinus flourished about the year 420, and he Poetically describing the
effects of baptism on the baptized Infant, says, Then Inde parens sacro ducens
de font Sacerdos, Infantes niveos corpore, cord, habitu.
the Priest brings the Infants out of the Font white as Snow, in body, in
heart, in habit.

. 63. I will conclude this Century with St. Augustine, who lived in the
beginning of it, and in the latter end of that next before it, and so may
witness for both, as also may St. Hier. and St. Chrysostom. whom some reckon in the
one, and some in the other century, I suppose because they lived in part of
both. And this Father is so copious in his testimonies that it is hard to know
where to begin, or when to make an end of enumerating them: but I will be
sparing.

. 64. In his fourteenth Sermon. de Verb. Apost. he says, Let no man doubt but
that Infants are to be baptized, when it is not doubted of Baptizandos esse
parvulos nemo dubitet, quando nec illi hinc dubitant. qui ex altera part
aliqua contradicunt. Sed nos dicimus eos aliter salutem and vitam aeternam non
habituros nisi baptizentur in Christo: illi autem dicunt non propter salutem,
non propter vitam aeternam: sed propter regnum Coelorum. D. Aug.
even by those that in some respect speak against it. He means the Pelagians,
who would not allow, that Infants should be baptized for Salvation, as having
done nothing that deserved damnation, but yet allowed it for entrance into the
kingdom of Heaven. Which riddle of theirs was a novelty never heard of in the
Church before, as he there says. Indeed it had been a dangerous thing in St.
Augustines Sermon. 14. de Verb. Apostoli. Timetis dicere, non baptizentur, ne non
solum facies vestrae sputis oblinerentur virorum, verum ctiam capita sandaliis
muliercularum committigarentur. D. Aug. contr. Julian. Pelag. l. 3. c. 5.
Infantes autem propterea baptizantur, cum sint innocents, ut anima rulis nata
in corpo^e signum habeat mortis evictae ne possit ab ea teneri. D. Aug. Quaest.
ex Nov. Test. Tom. 4. q. 56. Ideo vivus oportet etiam insans baptizetur, ne
obsit animae societas carnis peccati, etc. D. Aug. l. 10. de Genes. ad literam,
c. 24. Tom. 3. fol. 138. A. Ideo non est supersluus baptismus parvulorum, ut
qui per generationem illi condemnationi obligati sunt, per generationem illi
condemnationi liberentur. D. Aug. Hilario Ep. 89. fol. 78. B. C. Tom. 2. Nam
propter illas cupiditates, cum quibus nati sumus baptizantur infantes, ut
solvantur a reatu propaginis malae quam habuerunt. D. Aug. Sermon. 45. de Temp.
Vide eund. l. 4. contra Donatistas. c. 24. fol. 88. Tom. 7. and Bonifac. Ep.
23. Tom. 2. fol. 18. K. and Enchirid. c. 42. Vide and Magdeburg. Cent. 4 Col.
658. l. 10. and Col. 655. lin. 6. and Cent. 5. c. 4. Col. 375.
time for any one to have denied Infants baptism for fear of having the men
spit in his face, and the women beat their sandals about his ears.

. 65. And now being so near let us step up from St. Augustine, to his
Contemporaries in the Fourth Century, St. Hierom, St. Ambrose, St. Chrysostom,
etc.

. 66. St. Hierome (to begin with him) being asked, why Infants Critob. Dic
quaeso. and me omni liberae quaestione, quare infantuli baptizantur? Attic. Ve
eis peccata in baptismate dimittantur. D. Hieron. l. 3. contra Pelag. Nisi
forte existimas Christianorum filtos, si baptisma non receperint, ipsos tanium
reos esse peccati, and non etiam scelus referri ad cos qui dare noluerint,
maxim illo tempore quo contradicere non poterant, qui accepturi crant, sicut e
regione salus insantum majorum lucrum est. D. Hieron. Ep. ad Laetam. Baptisma
unum tenemus: quod iisdem sacramenti verbis in infantibus quibus etiam in
ma^oribus asserimus esse celebrandum. D. Hieron. Exposit. Fideiad Damasum. Ep.
42.
were baptized, answers, that their sins might be forgiven them. He was born
Anno 332, and died Anno 420.

. 67. St. Ambrose (about the year 374) on that saying of our Savior, Except a
man be born again of water and of the Holy Nisi enim quis renatus fucrit ex
aqua and Spiritu Sancto non potest introire in regnum Dei. Vtique nullum
excipit, non infantem, non aliqua praeventum necessitate. D. Ambr. de Abr.
Patriarch. l. 2. c. 11. Hinc evacaatio baptismatis parvulorum, qui sola
adoptione donari, nullo autem reatu dicerentur absolvi. D. Ambr. l. 10. Ep. 84.
page 217.
Spirit, he cannot enter i^to the kingdom of God, observes that our Savior
therein makes no exception of any, not the Infant, not him that is prevented by
any necessity. And speaking of some, that made Adams sin no otherwise hurtful
to posterity, than by the example of it, he presses them with this absurdity
that would follow thereon, that hereby the baptism of Infants would be
evacuated, who could only be said to have adoption given them, but not to have
any guilt forgiven them. Likewise on Luke (as Dr. Hammond notes) by Jordans
being driven back, he says are Per quae in primordio naturae suae qui
baptizati fuerint parvuli a malitia resormantier. D. Ambr. in Luke ap. Dr. Ham.
Def p. 103. Non autem latet quantum cordibus fidelium d^fidiae gigneretur, si
in baptizandis parvulis, nihil de oujusquam negligentia, nihil de ipsorum esset
mortalitate metuendum. D. Ambros. de Vocat. Gent. l. 2. c. 8. cujus titulus
est, Quare tanta multitudo non regeneratorum infantium a perpetua alienetur
Salute. Tom. 2. p. 32. 33. Nolite ergo a Christo arcere infantes, quia and ipsi
pro Christi nomine subiere martyrium. Talium est enim regnum Coelorum. Vocat
eos Dominus. and tu prohibes? De ipsis enim ait Dominus, Sinite eos venire ad
me. D. Ambros. De Virginib. l. 3. Tom. 1. page 93. Nec frustra scriptum est,
Nemo mundus a sorde, nec infans cujus unius diei vita est super terram. Et.
Quis inquit, poterit facere mundum de immundo conceptum semine? Non tu qui
solus es? Propter quod ficut nunc in Ecclesia manet constitutio salvatoris
dicentis, Nisi quis renatus fuerit ex aqua and Spiritu Sancto, non intrabit in
regnum Coelorum ^ itae sacratissime era^ in lege praecautum, ut natus puer nisi
die circumcideretur octavo exterminaretur anima ejus de populo suo nullum in
haereditate Israel habitura consortium. D. Ambros. l. 10. ep. 84. ad Demetriad.
Virg. Vide and Magdeb. Cent. 4. Cap. 5. Col. 239. lin. 7, etc.
signified the mysteries of baptism, by which the little ones that are
baptized, are reformed from their malignity to the first state of their nature.
Yea, that St. Ambrose affirms Paedobaptism to be a constitution of our Savior,
is affirmed by A. B. Laud. Conf. Sect. 15. p. 55.

. 68. The Third Council of Carthage about the year 397, decreed that nothing
should Non est aliquid ab his exigendum qui infantes suos ad baptizandum
adducunt. Caranza. fol. 99. Nam de infantibus baptizandit, qui necdum baptizati
nascuntur, quoties necessitas exegerit. Regula Ecclesiastica per beatum
Siricium prolata demonstrat dicens. Ita infantibus, qui non lum loqui potuerunt
per aetatem, vel his quibus in qualibet necessitate opxs fuccit, sacri unda
baptismatis omni volumus celeritate succurri, n^ ad nostram perniciem ^cndat
animarum, ^i negato defiderantibus font salutis, exiens unusquisque de seculo,
and regnum perdat and vitam. Hincmar. apud Magd. Cent. 9. c. 4. Col. 140. lin.
34, etc.
be exacted from those that brought their Infants to be baptized.

. 69. Siricius Pope of Rome, who died Anno 388, is by Hincmarus produced as an
Author for Infants Baptism: as saying that he would have baptism administered
with all speed to Infants, who as yet are not able to speak for want of age, as
also to those that are in any necessity, to prevent (and it is worth marking
what he says in this case) its tending to the destruction of our souls, if any
through our denial of baptism to them depart unbaptized, and lose at once both
kingdom and life.

. 70. St. Chrysostom (who died Anno 407) says, For this cause (namely because
of the so (...). D. Chrysostom. Hom. ad Neophytos apud St. Augustine. l. 1. contra
Julianum Pelagianum, cap. 2.
many benefits as there are by baptism) do we baptize little children, though
they have not sins; that is, not any actual sins of their own, as St. Augustine
shows his meaning to have been from the right rendering of the words, against
the Pelagians, who misrendred them, as Dr. Hammond shows. Def. of Infants Bapt.
page 103. Where as the words of St. Ch^ys^stom declare the practice of the
thing, so St. Augustine's interpretation clears the meaning of his words.
Again, in his fortieth Homily on G^nesis speaking of Baptism, as of the
Christian Circumcision (...). D. Chrysostom. Hom. 40. in Genes. Tom. 1. Edit.
Savil. p. 328. l. 4, etc.
he says it has no determinate time, but it is lawful both in the first age,
and in the middle, and in old age it self, to receive this Circumcision made
without hands. Where (...), as Dr. Hammond notes, signifies childhood, as being
applied to the time of circumcision, which was on the eighth day; and given
then, as the Father notes, for two reasons; (...). D. Chrysostom. Hom. 39. in Genes.
Edit. Savit. Tom. 1. p. 222. lin. 10, etc. Ideo ergo praedicat Ecclesia
Catholica ubique diffusa debere parvulos baptizari propter originale peccatum,
quia filios procreare ex praecepto Dei venit, cupiditas vero quae facit silios
procreare ex poena peccati venit, etc. D. Chrysostom. Hom. de Adam. and Eva. Tom.
1. Col. 447. B. Illud etiam quod circa baptizandos in universo mundo sancta
Ecclesia, sive sint parvuli, sive juvenes, uniformiter agit, non ocioso
contemplemur intuitu. Id. ib. Col. 448. Adducit quispiam infantem adhuc ubera
sugentem, ut baptizetur, and statim Sacerdos exigit infirma aetate pacta
conventa, and assensiones, etc. Id. in Psalm. 14.
one because then the trouble of circumcising was the easilier born, the other
to signify, that what was done, did nothing conduce to the soul, but was only
for a sign. For what could ((...) the same with (...) forgoing) an Infant of
eight days old reap of advantage to his soul by things which he had neither
knowledge nor sense of.

. 71. Gregory Nazianzen flourished about the year of Christ 370, and died in
the year Magdeb. Cent. 10. c. 10. col. 97. and ib. c. 6. col. 416. and ib. c.
4. col. 238.
389. And he having in his Oration on Baptism gone through all the ages of man,
showing that it belongs (...) --
to every age and sort of life, comes at length to Infancy; and then touching
that delivers his mind (...). Greg. Nazianz. Orat. 40. (...). Id. ib.
thus, Thou have an Infant, let not iniquity get time, let it be sanctified in
infancy; let it in the tender age be consecrated, etc. Where by sanctifying he
means baptizing. Vid. sup. c. 6. Sect. 4. And again, says he, what will you
say concerning those that are yet children, and neither know the loss, nor any
sensible of the grace of baptism, shall we also baptize them? Yes by all means,
if any danger press; it is better they should be sanctified when they have no
sense of it, than that they should die unsealed, and uninitiated. See Dr.
Hammond urging this, and other passages of this Author. Def. of Inf. Bapt. page
101, 102. And as for this Authors willingness that Infants should stay till
they be about three years old before they be baptized, (which the
Magdeburgenses tell us is to be accounted a singular opinion of his own,) that
nothing prejudices ours, or profits the Antipaedobaptistical Cause; as Dr
Hammond shows; loc. sup. cit. For at three years old they are still Infants,
and if they have attained to speech, yet have not attained to reason, at least
not to that measure of it, thought necessary by the Antipaedobaptists to
qualify for Baptism.

. 72. In this Age also, about the year 326, flourished St. Athanasius. And to
the question concerning the final estates of Infants dying (...) D. Athanas. q.
114. ad Antiochum. (...). Id. q. 94. de Dict^ and Interpret. Parabol. S. Script.
unbaptized, he answers, that in as much as the Lord says, Suffer little
children to come unto me, for of such is the kingdom of heaven; and in as much
as the Apostle says, now are your children holy, it is manifest that the
baptized Infants of believers do enter as unspotted and faithful into the
kingdom of heaven; But that their unbaptized Infants, as also the Infants of
heathens, have not entrance into that kingdom, as neither on the other side do
they go into punishment, having not committed actual sin. And as in this
passage he declares his own belief as to the final estates of Infants dying,
whether baptized, or unbaptized; so in another he intimates the practice of
this age to be to baptize Infants, and by that particular way of Immersion,
whilst he declares the signification of that Immersion to have respect to the
death and resurrection of Christ, after three days. For whereas says he, we
thrice dip the Insant in the water, and bring him up again, this signifies
Christ's death, and resurrection after three days. This Fathers Authority is
referred to by the Magdeburgenses also Cent. 4. c. 6. Col. 416.

And let this suffice for the Fourth Century.

. 73. Ascend we now up to the Third Century. And about the middle of that (Anno
248) was St. Cyprian made Bishop of Carthage; and ten years after (as Dr.
Hammond notes) he suffered martyrdom. He in the year 257 sat in Council with
66 Bishops. In that Council was debated a question proposed by Fidus. The
question was, not whether Infants might be baptized at all; (that was no
question then, that I see) but whether they might be baptized the Quantum vero
ad causam infantium pertinet quos dixisti intra secundum vel tertium diem quo
nati sunt constitutos baptizari non oportere, and considerandam legem esse
circumcisionis antiquae, ut intra octavum dient eum qui natus est baptizandum
and sanctificandum non putares, long aliud in concilio nostro omnibus visum
est. In hoc enim quod tu puta^as faciendum esse nemo consensit, sed universi
potius ^udicavimus, nulli hominum nato misericordiam Dei and gratiam dene
gandam. D. Cypr. Ep. ad Fidum, l. 3. Ep. 8. Porro autem si etiam gravissimis
delictoribus and in Deum multum ante peccantibus cum postea crediderint,
remissa peccatorum datur, and a baptismo atque gratia nemo prohibetur, quanto
magis prohiberi non debet infans. qui recens natus nil peccavit nisi quod
secundum Adam carnaliur natus contagium mortis antiquae prima nativitate
contraxit? Qui ad remissam peccatorum accipiendam hoc ipso facilius accedit,
quod illi non propria remittuntur peccata, sed aliena. Et ideo frater
charissime haec fuit in concilio nostra sententia, a baptismo atque a gratia
Dei (qyi omnibus misericors, and benignus and pius est) neminem per nos debere
prohiberi. Quod cum circa universos observandum sit, atque retinendum, tum
magis circa infantes ipsos and rec^ns natos observandum putamus, qui hoc ipso
de open nostra ac de divina misericordla plus merentur, quod in primo statim
nativitatis suae ortu plorantes ac flentes, nihil aliud faciunt, quam
deprecantur. Id. ib. This is referred to by the Magd^b. Cent. 3. c. 4. col. 49,
etc. 6. col. 125. and ib. c. 9. col. 205.
second, or third day after birth; or whether, as in circumcision, so in
baptism, the eighth day were not to be expected. To this Question St. Cyprian
in his Epistle to Fidus returns in Answer the judgment of the Council upon the
Case. So that, by the way, his Testimony is not a single witness, but the
Testimony of a Council, and that of above threescore Bishops in conjunction
with him. And what is their judgment? We all resolved upon the case, that the
mercy and grace of God (and consequently that means of Grace, which was under
debate, namely baptism) was not to be denied to any child of men. And, if says
he, no man be hindered from Baptism, and Grace (i. e. from the Grace of Baptism)
how much more ought not an Infant to be forbidden. And again this was our
determination in Council, that no man ought by us to be kept back from baptism
and the grace of God, which being to be observed and held about all, much more
do we think it ought to be so about Infants and new born children. This, and
more to the purpose, speaks the Father in that Epistle.

. 74. In the same Century, but somewhat before Cyprian, flourished Origin, who
dyed (Anno 254). And he has several passages in him to our present purpose.
Little ones (says he in his 14 th Homily on Luke) a^e baptized Parvuli
baptizantur in remissionem peccatorum. Quorum peccatorum vel quo tempore
p^ccaverunt? aut qu^modo potest ullalavaeri in parvulis ratio subsistere, nisi
juxta illum sensum de quo paulo ante diximus: Null^s mundus a sorde, nec si
unius diei quidem fuerit vita ejus super terram. Et, quia per baptismi
sacramentum nativitatis sordes deponuntur, propterea baptizantur and parvuli.
Nisi enim quis renatus, etc. Orig. Hom. 14. in Luc.
into the remission of sins. Again, how can any account of baptizing little
ones hold, but according to what was said a little before, None is clean from
pollution, no not if he but of a day old. And again, By the Sacrament of
baptism the defilements of our nativity are put away; therefore are even the
little ones baptized. So in his 8th Homil. on Levit. Let it be considered what
the cause is, when the baptism of the Church is given for the remission of
sins, that baptism should according to the observation (or custom) of Addi his
etiam illud potest, ut requiratur quid causae sit, cum baptisma Ecclesiae in
remissionem peccatorum detur, secundum Ecclesiae observantiam etiam parvulis
baptismum dari: cum utique si nihil esset in parvulis quod ad remissionem
deberet and indulgentiam pertinere, gratia baptismi superflua videretur. D.
Origin. Homil. 8. in Levit.
the Church be given to little ones. See chapter 28.. 4. His Authority is referred
to by the Magd. Cent. 3. c. 4. Col. 57.

. 75. In this Age may the Author of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy going under
the name of Dionysius the Arcopagite be conveniently placed. And here Dr.
Hammond places him; though the Magdeburgenses put him into the fourth Century,
as others into the first. And says he, when it came into the mind of our
divine Guides what influence Hoc cum in mentem venisset divinis nostris
praeceptoribus placuit admitti pueros hoc sancto modo, ut naturales pueri qui
introfertur parents, tradant filium alicui ^orum, qui initiati sunt, bono
puerorum in divi nis rebus informatori: ac deinceps puer ei operam det ut
divino patri sponsorique sanctae salutis. D. Areop. Eccles. Hier. cap. ult.
Notandum est quid dicat pater hic de baptizandis infantibus. Max. Scholin l. B.
Dion. de Eccl. Hierarch.
a pious education would be likely to have on children toward a holy
conversation, they ordered that Children should be admitted, namely to baptism
after this holy manner, etc. He had a little before propounded and answered
this question, why children as yet unable to understand divine things should be
made partakers of the sacred birth from God. By that sacred birth, as is
evident in the thing it self, is meant Baptism; and that it is so, we are
further instructed by Maximus his Scholiast on that place. Here says he is to
be noted what the Father says touching the baptizing of Infants.

. 76. And about the same Age it is also supposed was the Author of the
Constitutions going under the name of Clemens Romanus; whose Authority what it
is I do not (...).Clem. Romans Constit. l. 6. c. 15.
well know: but that it is full for the baptizing of Infants the following
words do make it appear. Baptize (says he) your Infants and bring them up in
the nurture and admonition of the Lord.

. 77. And let these Witnesses suffice for the Third Age. Step we now up into
the Second Century, that which immediately succeeds the Age wherein the
Apostles lived. And here the Centuriators Centur. 2. cap. 4. Col. 48.
tell us, that it is no where read that Infants in this Age were excluded from
Baptism; yea rather that Origin affirms the Church to have received from the
Apostles a tradition to baptize even Infants. But if this satisfy not I will
endeavor to find out witness even for this Age also.

. 78. And Tertullian, who lived in the latter end of this and in the beginning
of the following Century, and so may at once speak for both; though he be
produced as a witness against it, yet even his witness against it is an
evidence for it. For whiles he pleads for a delay of baptism, especially that
Itaque pro cujusque personae condition ac dispositione, etiam cunctatio
batismi utilior est: praecipue tamen circa parvulos. Tertull. de Bapt. Quid
festinat innocens aetas ad remissionem peccaterum? Id. ib.
of little ones, he tacitly declares that Infants then were baptized, though
sooner then he thought convenient. And when by way of reproof he says, (Quid
festinat, etc.) Why does that innocent age make have to the remission of sins
(that is unto baptism, wherein sins were remitted)? he plainly confesses that
that age did (festinare) make have thereto. What need else was there of his
question? what reason for his reproof? And even in saying that the delay of
baptism is (utilior) more profitable, he tacitly implies that the hastening of
it is (utilis) not without its profit. And can we think but that he was really
for the baptizing of the Infants of Christians, Adco nulla ferme nativitas
munda est, utique Ethuicorum. Hinc enim and Apostolus ex sanctisicato alierutro
sexu sanctos procreari, tam ex seminis praerogativa, quam ex institutionis
disciplina. Caeterum, inquit, immundi nascerentur, quasi designates tamen
sanctitati ac per hoc etiam saluti, intelligi volens filelium filios; ut hujus
spei pignore matrimoniis, quae retinenda censuerat, patro^inaretur. Alioq^in
meminerat Dominicae definitionis, Nisi quis nascetur ex aqua and spiritu, non
ibit in regnum Dei, id est, non erit san^lus. Ita omnis anima cousque in Adam
censetur, donec in Christo recenseatur: tamdiu immunda quamdiu recenseatur.
Tert. de Anima. c. 39. Quum vero praescribitur nemini sine baptismo competere
salutem, ex illa maxim pronunciatione Domini, qui ait, Nisi natus ex aqua quis
erit, non habet vitam -- Tertul. de Bapt. p. 261. Edit. Rigalt. Lex enim
tinguendi imposita est, and forma praes^ripta, Ite, inquit, docete nationes,
tinguentes cas in nomen Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti. Huic legi
collata definitio illa. Nisi quis renatus fuerit ex aqua and spiritu, non
intra^it in regnum Coelorum, obstrinxit fidem ad baptismi necessitatem. Itaque
omnes exinde credentes tinguebantur. Tert. ib. page 262.
what ever he thought as to the Infants of Heathens, who says they are
designed to holiness and by this to salvation? But how are they designed to
holiness? why by Baptism sure enough. For says he, Except one be born of
water, and of the Spirit, he shall not enter into the kingdom of God; that is,
says he, he shall not be holy; every sold being to be reckoned in Adam till
it be enrolled into Christ, and so long unclean, as it is unenrolled; in which
his meaning I conceive is, that one is in that state of nature wherein he first
was born, till he be baptized into Christ, and a child of wrath through the
uncleanness of his natural birth, till he be made a child of grace by baptismal
regeneration. Can we think but he was for the baptizing of Infants who says it
is praescribed, that none is capable of salvation, without baptism, especially
being the Lord has positively said, Except a man be born of water, he has not
life; and who, from a comparison of this Definition of our Saviors with that
Law which he gave for the discipling of nations by baptizing them, gathers a
necessity of baptism to salvation, upon the account of which necessity
believers were baptized. And if they were baptized themselves and upon the
account of a necessity of baptism unto salvation, then surely they would have
so much charity for their children as to baptize them, and not leave them in a
state of perdition. It is plain therefore that he was rather for than against
Infants Baptism.

. 79. And as he was for the baptizing of Infants, so was also Irenaeus, in the
same Age, but before him, one that had been an Auditor of Polycarp Bishop of
Smyrna, and is by St. Hierom looked on as a man of the Apostolical times, and so
a most competent witness, as Dr. Hammond argues, of the Apostolical Def. of
Inf. Bapt. c. 4.. 2. page 96.
doctrine and practice, especially being as Tertullian says a most accurate
searcher of all doctrines, and one that sealed his belief with his blood, being
martyred at Lions in the year 197. And what says he? Why he says, that Christ
came to save all by himself, all, Omnes enim venit per semetipsum salvare,
omnes inquam qui per eum renascuntur in Deum, infantes and parvulos, and
pucros, and juvenes, and seniores. D. Irenaei advers. Haeres. l. 2. c. 39. p.
192. See Dr Haem. Bapt. of Inf. Sect. 40.
I say, who are born again unto God by him, Infants, and little ones, and
children, and young men, and elder men. Here it is plain that Infants, and
little ones, and children are in the number of those that are born again unto
God through Christ. Now that by being born again un^o God is meant by being
baptized I suppose none doubts that has read, and understands (as the Catholic
Church has ever understood) that of our Savior (John 3. 5.) Except a man Quod
verbum Christi ad Nicodemum intendie aquam sensibilent, is a position of Thom.
Waldens. de Sacramentis. Tom. 2. q. 102. fol. 104. col. 2.
be born again of water, and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of
God; or is acquainted with the Scripture notion of (...) regeneration, the
laver whereof is Baptism.

. 80. In the same Age flourished Hyginus Bishop of Rome, and about the same
time being martyred (Anno Dom. 144). And he, as Platina affirms out of the
ancient Records, Voluit unum saltem Patrimum, unamque Matrimam baptismo
interesse: sic enim eos appellant, qui infantes tenent dum baptizantur. Platina
in Vita Hygini.
appointed that there should be at least one Godfather and one Godmother
present at Baptism. Now who he meant by Godfather and Godmother Platina informs
us, while he tells us that so they call those that hold Infants when they are
baptized. Godfathers and Godmothers appointed to be at the baptizing of Infants
supposes Infants baptized.

. 81. Lastly, Justin Martyr, or who ever wrote that Ancient piece, entitled,
Quaest. and Respons. ad Orth^dox. stating the difference (...). S. Just.
Martyr. Quaest. and Resp. ad Orth. 56. page 424. Edit. Paris. 1615.
between Infants dying baptized, and unbaptized, says it is this, that the
baptized obtain the good things that come by baptism, but the unbaptized obtain
them not. A proof this clear and full as can be desired, of the baptizing of
Insants in that Age, the age wherein that Author lived, the very next to that
of the Apostles, if Justin Martyr were that Author. To which it is not now
needful I should add any thing, unless I should add what follows in the same
Author touching the Baptized Infants, namely, that they are vouchsafed the
advantages of baptism through the faith of those that bring them to be baptized.

. 82. And thus I have shown you, that it has been the Custom and Practice of
the Universal Church of Christ in all the Ages thereof, from the present to the
Primitive Times, even up to that very Age wherein the Apostles lived, to
baptize Infants.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Infants Baptism a Tradition Apostolical.

. 1. I Am now to examine how this could come to be practice of the Universal
Church. And truly it can be no other but the Authority of the Apostles
Tradition, or Practice in their own Age. The Apostles some way by word or
writing, taught Vniversa Ecclesia, quae Apostolicam proxime secuta est,
infantes baptizavit. Igitur dubium non est, quinmota Scripturae authoritate,
and praxi Apostolica hoc secerit. Wendelin. Thelog. Christ. l. 1. cap. 13.
Explic. These. 11.
others so to do, or did so themselves, and so made themselves an example for
others to do the like, or both; or else it is not imaginable how such a
practice should not only be received so generally into the Church, and so
early too, but continue also in it through all Ages, down from their time to
our own, without interruption. I will therefore speak of both. And first of
Tradition.

. 2. Tradition notes the delivery of a thing to be received into our belief or
practice. See Dr. Ham. Bapt of Inf. Sect. 99, 100.
That, where it is genuine and Apostolical, is of mighty moment in religious
concerns. And that, if any, is truly such, which has been received and owned
for such by the Church in all the Ages of it, from the primitive to the present
times, either openly in profession, or tacitly in practice.

. 3. To this is referred the Sanctification of the Lords day. To this is
referred the admission of Women to the Lords Table. To this is referred the
Canon of Scripture. And to this is referred the Baptizing of Infants.

. 4. Let no man whisper you in the ear (says St. Augustine) with any other
doctrines. Quid de parvulis pueris, si ex Adam aegroti? Nam and ipsi portantur
ad Ecclesiam -- Nemo ergo vobis susurret doctrinas alienas. Hoc Ecclesia semper
habuit, semper tenuit, hoc a ma, orum fide percipit: bu^ usq^^ in sin^m
perse^^renter ^^^^dit. D. Aug. Sermon. 10. de V^^v. Apost.
This the Church has always had, has always held; this from the Faith of our
Fore elders it has received, and this it keeps perseveringly unto the end. And
for as much as the Universal Church does maintain it, being always held in the
Church, and not brought into it by any Councils decree Quod uni^^rs^z t^n^t
^^^l^sia, noc Conciliis institutum, sed semper retentam est, non nisi
A^^boritate dpo^l^lica traditum re^issime credi^^r. D. Aug. de Bapt. ^o^tra
Donat. l. 4. c. 24.
therefore it is most rightly behaved in St. Augustines judgment to be
delivered by Authority Apostolical; Co ^su^tu^o ^amcn matris Ecclesiae in
bapti^^an (...) parvulis n^quaq ^amspernenda c^t, ni que ull^ m^d^ superslu^
dep it in^^, ner omnino cred^^da, nis^ ^^^stolica esse traditiv. D Aug. l. 10.
de Genes. al Literan, c. 2^. This reading isasser^ed and vindicated by Dr.
S^illing fl^^^. Vindic. of A. B. of Cant. part. 1. c. 4. p. 108.
nor says he is it to be believed, to be any other but an Apostolical
Tradition; which, it seems, it was so apparent then to be, that the P^la(...)s
themselves upon that account did yield that Infants were to be baptized, though
they would not yield it upon the account of any original sin in them: because
(says he) they cannot go against the Authority of the Universal Church del
vered Parvulos baptizandos esse con^^dant, quia contra authoritarem universae
Ecclesiae proculdubio per Dominum and Apostolos traditam venire non possunt. D.
Aug. l. 1. de pecc. merit. and remiss.
without doubt by the Lord and his Apostles. And accordingly Origin testifies,
that the Church did receive from the Apostles Ecclesia ab Apostolis traditionem
susccpit etiam parvulis baptismum dare. Origin. l. 5. in ^p. ad Roman.
a Tradition for the baptizing of Infants. And so when the Author of the
Ecclesiastic Hierarchy reports Infants Baptism to have been brought down to
his Time from ancient Tradition Hoc quoque de hac re dicimus quod divini nostri
ponrisices a veteribus acceptum [(...)] nobis tradiderunt. Aiunt cnim, id quod
ctiam verum est, pucros si ^n sancto instituto ac lege instituan ^ur, ad
sanctam animi constitutionem perventuros esse, ab omni errore solutos ac
liberos and sine ullo impurae vitae peri^^lo. Hoc cum in mentem venisse^
divinis nostris praeccptoribus [(...)] placuit [(...)] admitti pueros hoc
sancto modo, Dionys. Areopag. l. de Eccles. Hierarch. cap. ult.
, and says, that when it came into the mind of our divine Guides, that
children being brought up in a holy law would lead their life in holiness, it
pleased them that Infants should be admitted to it after that holy manner there
by him described, Maximus his Scholiast interprets those Divine Guides to be
the Apostles. And so Ph. Meloncthon Baptismum infantium constat a veteribus
Scriptoribus Ecclesiae probari. Nam Origines and Augustinus scribunt ab
Apostolis receprum esse. Melancthon. Council. Theolog. part. 1. p. 59.
names both Origin and Augustine, as avouchers hereof. And whereas the
Antipaedobaptists in Mr. Calvin's time made the simple believe, that for many
years together after the resurrection of Christ Infants Baptism was unknown, in
that says he, they telled a most soul lie, for as much as there is no so
ancient writer as does not of a certainty refer the original thereof unto the
Apostles Quod autem apud simplicem vulgum disseminant, longam annorum seriem
post Christi resurrectionem praeteriisse, quibus incognitus erat
paedobaptismus; in co faedissime men^iuntur: siquidcm nullus est scriptor tam
verustus, qui non cjus origin^m ad Apostolorum scculum pro certo reserat.
Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 16. Sect. 8.
Age.

. 5. So that I shall no further labor by the Testimony of Ecclesiastical
Writers to prove the Tradition to have been Apostolical: but rather go on to
make it evident to you from the Testimony of the Sacred Scriptures that it was
the Practice of the Apostles (a thing done by some, or all of them) to baptize
Infants. Not that I can produce any Text, which expressly says they did so;
(that must not be expected from me out of these writings which we have of the
Apostles; one such expres testimony would end the strise on all hands) but that
I shall name some Scripture Texts, from which it may very probably at least be
gathered, if it cannot be demonstratively concluded, that they did baptize
Infants. And yet by the way, me^hmks even a probable Intimation of any
Apostolic Practice from the Scriptu^e, backed with so full and positive an
Affirmation of it by the Catholic Church as has been produced, should be
enough to sway the judgment, and carry the Assent of any modest nquirer
thereinto; next to, if not as good as a Demonstrative Argument.

CHAP. XXIX.
Infants Baptism an Apost^lical Practice.

. 1. Now for Practive: We read in the Scripture of several h^ush Ids baptized
at once; as Lydia and her household, Acts 16. 15. and the Jailer and his
household, ib. 33. and the household of Stephanas, 1 Cor. 1. 16. and all these by
St. Paul. And it is not to be doubted, but the other Apostles walked in the
same steps with him, and did as he did, receiving unto Proselytism whole
households by baptizing them. And no marvel if they did sometimes baptize whole
households, who were commis^ionated to baptize all nations.

. 2. Now though it be not expressed there were any Infants in those, or any of
those houses: yet first it is very strange there should be none in any of them:
as if the grace of God had delighted to take place and dwell chiefly in barren
families, who should be in least probability of propagating it to posterity, at
a time when its propagation seems to have been the design of all the persons in
the Trinity: and secondly, if there we^e any, it is certain, that being not
excepted, they were baptized. Which probability, though the Antipa dobaptists,
who cannot deny it, do yet think they sufficiently con^ute, by laughing at it,
is not so altogether improbable, nor will be found so to be, when it shall
appear, that it was the manner of the Jews to baptize the Infants of the
Proselyte Converts, as well as themselves; and that the Christian Baptism
founded therein made no variation therefrom in that particular. Of which more
anon.

. 3. But to come to that which I chiefly purpose to insist on St. Paul tells
the Corinthians See Dr. H^mmond of Inf. Bapt. Sec. 31. to Sec. 39. and Defense
of Inf. Baptism, page 101. and page 58. to page 66.
(1 Cor. 7. 14.) that the unbeli^ving husband had be^n sanctisied by the nife,
and the unbelieving wife by the husband: and that otherwise their children had
been unclean, whereas now, says he, they are holy. Now this Text rightly
rendered, and understood, is a full evidence for Insants Baptism by the very
Apostles themselves, or those whom they themselves appointed to baptize, which
comes all to one. The word, which in the English we render is sanctified, is,
if rightly rendered has been sanctisied. So the Tense of the Verb (...), being
the Praeterperfect Tense, clearly shows it to signify. And the sense of (...)
has been sanctified, is, has been baptized; sanctification the effect of
baptism being put for the act of baptizing by a Metonymie of the effect.

. 4. And from this use of the word by the Apostle here in this place I presume
it is, that it is so ordinary with Ecclesiastical Writers to express baptizing
by a word that signifies to sanctify: whose so expressing it is a confirmation
of this way of understanding it. Thus Greg. Nazianzene speaking of children in
some danger of death, (...). Gr. Naz. Orat 40. p. 658. Edit. Paris. (...) Id.
ib. (...) Id. ib. page 648. Timeat ne post agnitionem Dei, ^ujus signaculo jam
praenotatus est, si non dignus agnitione percepta inveniatur, indignus etiam
sanctificationis munere judicetur. D. Chrysostom. Homil. de Militia Christiana.
F^lium ^^i induti and toti^ us membra p^^ baptismi sandis^^ationem effecti,
Fitii Dei sitis nece^le est. Primas. in Gal. 3. 23. Vt intra (...) diem eam qui
natus est, ba^^ andum and san lisicanlam non put (...), long aliud in ^^^^ili,
nostro omni'us ^isum est. D. Cypr. l. 3. cp. 8. Baptismum repeti Ecclesiasticae
regul^e prohibent, and semel sanctificatis nulla deinceps manus it^rum
consecrans praesumit accedere. D. Cypr. S^rm. de ^^lat. ped. Baptiz^^i and
sanctificari in Ecclesia Catholica vero and unico Ecclesia Catholica vero and
unico Ecclesiae baptisms oporteat D. Cypr. l. 1. ^p 6. Johannes Baptista non
tam peccata dimisit, quam baptisma poenitentiae fecit in peccatorum remisionem,
id est in suturam remissionem quae est post ex Christ sanctificatione
subsecuta. Vt enim ante pracursor domini ipse, sit and baptisma ejus praevium
domini baptismatis fuit. D. Hieron. advers. Luciferian. Igiur omnes aquae de
pristina originis prarogativa Sacramentum Sanctificationis consequuntur
invocato Deo. Super^enit enim statim Spiritus de C^elis, and aquis superest
sanctificans de sen^tips^ and ita sanctificata vim sanctifi^^^^^ combibunt.
Tertull. de Baptismo. Denique apud Auguitinum duodecimo ejusdem. libri capite
(abi Paulinum illud expen^it, 1 Cor. 7. Sanitaficatus est ^ir insidetis in
uxore, and sanctificata est malier insidelis in sratre, alioqui filii vestii
immundi essent, none autem sancti funt) magnus haec commentatur antistes. Aut
sic est accipiendum, que madmodum and nos alibi, and Pelagius, cum candem ad
Corinthios epistolam tractaret, exposuit, quod exempla jam praecesserant and
virorum quos ux^res, and foeminarum quas mariti lucrisecerant Christo, and
parvulorum, ad quos facienlos Christimos voluntas Christiana etiam unius
parentis evicerat. Voss. Hist. Pelag. l. 1. c. 4. S. 3. p. 14.
though he were not over hasty for their baptizing, yet says, it is better they
should be sanctified [that is baptized] when they have no sense of it, than
that they should die unsealed and uninitiated. And for others, where there was
no danger, he advises their stay from being baptized for about three years, and
then advises ((...)) to sanctify them souls and bodies by that great Sacrament
of consummation. Again, if thou have an Infant, let not iniquity get time
((...)) let it be sanct^fied, that is, baptized in Infancy, let it in its
tender age be consecrated by [or to] the Spirit. St. Chrysostom tells the
Candidate of Baptism, that if he be not found walking worthy of that profession
which he made, when he was consigned unto Baptism, he may well be afraid of
being judged unworthy even of the gift of Sanctification, that is of being
baptized. Hence Primasius speaks of being made members of Christ by the
sanctification of Baptism. So when St. Cyprian speaks of the new born Infants
being to be baptized and sanctified, that is (by the Figure Hendiadys)
sanctified by Baptism. So again says he the rules of the Church do sorbid
baptism to be repeated: and to them that have once been sanctified, that is
baptized, no hand presumes to come to consecrate them over again. So St. Herom
says John Baptist preached the Baptism of repentance for the remission of
sins, that is, that remission which afterward followed upon the Sanctification,
that is the baptism of Christ. Where what he means by Sanctification is plain
by what follows a little after. For says he, as John Bapt was himself the
forerunner of Christ, so was his Baptism the leader on unto the Baptism of
Christ. Hence Tertullians saying of Infants, that if either of their parents
were sanctified, that is, were a baptized Christian, the Infants were holy;
namely, so far as to be capable of baptism (as the children of Parents that
were both mere Heathens were not) Candidates of holiness, that is of baptismal
Sanctification, such as were in the next capacity for baptism, and as it were
stood for it. And hence his calling Baptism Sacramentum sanctificat on^^, the
Sacrament of sanctification.

. 5. And this notion of the word may, for ought I see, be admitted in 1 Cor. 1.
2. Unto the Church of God, which is at Conin^h, to them that are sanctified, as
we read it, but according to the Original (...), to them that have been
sanctified in Christ Jesus, that, say I, may be baptized into Christ Jesus,
being separated from the community of the polluted world, and received into the
communion of the called Saints, that Church of Christ, which he so loved, as to
give himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it by the washing of
water by the word.

. 6. And this notion of sanctisying for Baptism may come from the Jews using
the word (...) (which signifies to sanctify) for Dr. Hammond Infant. Bapt.. 35.
washing. Whence the High Priests washing his hands and feet ten times on the
expiation day are called his ten sanctifications.

. 7. Well now supposing that the word ((...) and sanctifico) which we render to
sanctify, does sometimes signify to baptize, and particularly in this place
has that signification (there being no other so commodious a rendering of it
here as that, nor any that will not be exposed to more objections than that;
especially theirs, who interpret the Holiness of Children in this Text of
Confut. of Ins. Bapt. by Tho. Lamb. p. 32. See Mr. Stevens Precept for the
baptizing of Infants, p. 5.
their legitimacy, and their uncleanness of Bastardy, as if all children were
illegitimate and Bastards, that were born of Parents whereof one at least were
not a Christian) I say supposing the word ((...) and sanctifico) here to have
the signification of Baptizing, as we have showed it elsewhere to have that
signification, it will easily follow from hence that Infants were baptized in
the Apostles days. For the reasoning of the Apostle is this. The unbelieving
husband has been sanctified, that is, brought to be a believer and to be
baptized, by, that is through the means, the instruction and conversation of
the believing wif^ dw^lling together with him, gaining him to the Faith through
her persuasion and good conversation. And the same has also been found to be
effected upon the unbelieving wife by the dwelling of the believing husband
together with her. In confideration whereof he had advised the believing
husbands still dwelling with his unbelieving wife, and wife with husband, ver.
12, 13. Upon this experience a hope has been grounded that your ch^ldren
though now they be not actually believers, yet shall be brought to be believers
by the means of their living in the same Families with you that are bel^evers,
and by being instructed by you in the Christian Faith as soon as they shall be
capable of understanding it. And upon this hope they have been made holy by a
Visible sanctification (as Aquinas has it) that Aquin. Sum. 3. q. 68. Ar. 2.
is baptized, or sanctified by baptism, separated by that Sacrament from the
common unclean condition of Heathens, and taken into the Communion of Saints,
Persons holy by design, relation, and vocation. And else, but for this hope
they had not been sanctified, nor made holy by baptism: even as the children of
Heathens are not baptized, nor so made Holy, because there is not the same
reason for their coming hereafter to be Christians, that there is for yours:
who therefore now upon this hope are in that sense Holy. Let that hope
therefore move the believing husband to continue with his unbelieving wife, and
the believing wife to continue with her unbelieving husband, which has moved
us to baptize the children of those of you, whereof either Parent is a
Christian, even the hope that those that now actually are not believers, shall
hereafter be brough^ actually to believe through the instruction and
conversation of the believers with whom they coinhabit and converse.

. 8. Well now, Children, as it appears by this Text, were made holy in the
Apostles See Dr. Ham. Def. of Inf. Bapt. chapter 3.. 1. p. ^2, etc
Times Those children were Infants, who alone are capable of being baptized
capable of being baptized by the benefit of their Parents Faith. The Hol^ness
of those children imported their being baptized. That Baptism was administered
by none but the Apostles or Persons ordained and appointed by the Apostles for
that work. Hence it follows, that Infants were baptized, as in the Age, so by
the Hands, or by the Appointment, of the Apostles themselves. Than which
nothing needs be required further for the justifying of Infants Baptism.

. 9. And now it having appeared to be the Custom and Practice of the Universal
Church of Christ to baptize Infants; and that Custom and Practice being
grounded on the Tradition, and derived from the Practice of the Apostles
themselves; it follows that Infants have as good a Right unto Baptism by
Prescription from thence, as any person can have to any thing else by that
Title, which yet in many cases is as good as any other.

. 10. And now, for Gods sake, tell me why Infants should now be denied that
which they have always had? why should they now be forbidden coming to Christ,
who in all the Ages of the Church, even up to that wherein the Apostles lived
have had free access unto Christ, and have been suffered to come to him, and
that by Baptism? Why should we be less careful of our childrens concerns than
in all former ages others have been? why should not we be as vigilant to
preserve their Rights, and this especially, as others before us? We need not
doubt their Title nor question their Right, having so good a Prescription for
it. Either Prescription can give no good Right to any thing, which yet we see
it does in many: or else children having sixteen hundred years prescription to
plead for it, have a good Right unto Baptism.

. 11. And yet is not that all the Right the little Children have unto Baptism.
For I shall now proceed to show you a Third Right, that they have unto it: and
that is by the Institution of Christ himself.

CHAP. XXX.
Childrens Right to Baptism by the Institution of Christ.

. 1. ANd truly if it can appear that Infants Baptism does come within the
Institution of Christ, and that Christ in his instituting of Baptism to be a
Sacrament of the Gospel did either include Infants in it, or not exclude them
by it, I cannot see what any sober modest inquirer can further want for his
satisfaction in this point. Unto that therefore I shall immediately hasten my
discourse.

. 2. And if any man think that the Institution of Baptism is set down in Matthew.
28. 19. or Mark 16. 15. and from the circumstances of those Texts define the
Subject of Baptism, as if those only were to be baptized, that are such as
those were that are there expressly mentioned, namely persons capable of hearing
and learning, believing and disbelieving the Gospel preached to them, and so
exclude Infants from baptizing, because incapable of these things, I shall
humbly assume the boldness to believe that to be a mistake, and to affirm that
Baptism was by our Savior instituted, that is o^dained, appointed and made a
Ceremony of admission of Proselytes into his Church long before.

. 3. The Particular time indeed when he did institute it cannot be affirmed
with so great c^rtainty. Aquinas ground^ng in St. Augus^^nes Sum. 3. q. 66 a.
^. Ex quo Christus aquis immergitur, ex co omniam pec^nta a luit aqua. D. Aug.
ib.
saying, that from the time of Christ's being dipped in water, water did wash
away the sins of all, is of opinion that Baptism was instituted a Sacrament by
Christ, when himself was baptized, though the necessity of using of it was not
enjoined till after his passion and resurrection. But Nc^l. de Orbell: says,
Baptismus fuit a Christo in ^it^tus ante p^^onem ipsius: cum ante lilam
dis^ipuli baptizarent baptismo Christi, Joh. 3. Quan vi^ hora pracisa
institu^i^nis non have atur ex Evangelio, non enim fuit institutus quando
Christus baptizatus est a Johanne, tamen Christus tune de dicavit q^am tanquam
materiam l. doneam bapt^smoex taitu suae mundissima carnis. Nic. de Orbell.
list. 3. 4 Sent. q. 3. de Baptismo, fol. 7, 8. Bapti^mi Insinuatio fuit Facto,
quan lo fait Christus baptizatus insinuans no^esse baptizandos. Verbo, quando
Nicedemo dicit, Joh. 3. Nisi quis renatus fuerit. Guiller vorrilong. sup. l. 4.
Sent. de p. 3. a^t. 3.
that he did not then institute it, but only did by the touch of his most ^ure
flesh dedicate water as a fit matter for, baptism. Nor will Cluitlerm.
^orrilong, allow that act to be the institution of baptism, but only an
insinuation by Deed that we should be baptized; a^ his saying to Nicodemus,
Joh. 3. Except a man be born again, etc. was an Insi^uation of it by Word. And
Mr. Calvin In co jam plusquam pu^riliter labintur qu^d primam Baptismi
institutionem inde derivant, quem ab exordio praedicationis suae Apostolis
Christus administrandum man^averat. Calvin. Inst. l. 4. c. 16. S. 27.
says, Christ commanded his Apostles to administer it form the very beginning
of his own preaching: and that it is a great piece of childishness to fetch the
Institution of baptism from those Texts. And truly, though the precise hour of
its institution be not infallibly to be declared from the Gospel, yet from the
Gospel it is most evident that it was instituted by Christ before his
resurrection or passion: and then those words in Matthew. 28, and Mark 16, cannot
be its institution. And that of John 4. 1. will put it out of doubt, where long
before our Saviors Resurrection or ^eath even while John Baptist was yet
alive, we read of our Saviors making and baptizing disciples, that is
receiving disciples by Baptism. Which Ceremony yet he himself did not, after
the taking in of his Apostles to be his Disciples administer by himself but by
his Disciples. Now certainly they did it, not of themselves, but by his
Institution; which is nothing else but his prescribing and appointing the use
of it to that end whereto it was to be used. Whence it is said of those whom
his Disciples baptized, that he baptized them: that being reckoned as done by
him, that was done by his appointment. Now if it were practiced by the
Disciples of our Savior, and by his appointment in his life, then could not
those words in Matthew. and Mark, be the Institution of it, which were not spoken
by him till after his death. But that must be the time, when ever it was when
our Savior instructed, empowred and appointed his Disciples to baptize, and
the words what ever they were whereby he did instruct, empower, and appoint
them to do it, must be the words of Institution. And accordingly the learned
Gabriel Biel decides the Case, saying that Baptism was not instituted
Institutus est ergo baptismus prius, quando baptizandi officium discipulis
commissum fuerat: licet quan ^o and ubi determinate ex Scriptura non sit
certum. Gab. Biel.
when Christ was baptized; nor in that saying of his to Nicodemus, Except a man
be born again; nor in the last of Matihew, when he commanded his Disciples to
Go teach all Nations, etc. nor in 4 lib. Sent. did. 3. qu. unica.
in the last of Mark, when he said, He that believes and is baptized; nor on
the Cross, when out of his side came blood and water; nor when he sent his
disciples by two and two preach: but before, when the office of baptizing was
committed to his Disciples, though when and where that was done, is not
determinately certain out of the Scripture. And so those Texts can be of no
force in the world against Infants Baptism, so Sed propugnaculum omnium
munitisimum in ipsa Baptismi institutione se habere gloriantur, quam ex capite
Matthaei ultimo petunt, etc. Calvin. Inst. l. 4. c. 16. S. 27. Inexpugnabilis
baec ratio, qua tantopere considunt. Id. ib. S. 28.
as to gather thence, that by the Institution of our Savior Infants are
excluded from Baptism. And then one of the Antipaedobaptists strongest supports
of their Error is fallen to the ground.

. 4. Well but what were those words then? I answer, they were a Confirming of
that Commission, which the Disc^ples of our Savior Baptismi Confirmatio fuit,
facto, quando non solum sanguis sed aqua exivit de latere ejus. Verbo, quando
post resurrectionem misit eos dicens, Decete^omnes gentes baptizames eos, etc.
Guillerm. Vorrilong. sup. l. 4. Sent. did. 3. art. 3. fol. 123. b. col. 1.
Caterum Apostoles non jam ad sol^s J^^^os mictit s^d ad om^^^ gen^^. Theophyl.
in loc.
had formerly received, and an Enlarging of it to a giving of them power to
become his Apostles, Legates, or Ambassadors to foreign Nations; so as that,
whereas in his life they were only to go to the people of the Jews (Matthew. 10.
5, 6.) after his death they were to go unto the Gentiles, even into all the
world, to preach the Gospel to the whole creation, and make Disciples of all
nations.

. 5. But where then is the Institutioin of Baptism set down? and in what form
of words was it instituted? I said before, it was no where particularly set
down in Scripture when the Institution of Baptism was. Nor is it, that I can
meet Institutio autem baptismi fuit (1) Fac^o, quan do Christus venit in in
Ju^^am, Joh. 3. and baptiza^^^. (2) Verbo, quando misit disci^^los pradicare,
and ut cre^itur baptizare, Luc. 10. Guiller Vorrilong. in 4. l. S^nt. did. 3.
art. 3. fol. 123.
with, how ever Guillerm. Vorrilong say it was instituted by Deed, when Christ
came into Judea and baptized, Joh. 3. By Word when Christ sent his Disciples to
preach, and as it is believed to baptize, Luke 10. in which latter he is
contradicted by Gabriel Biel. And in what Form of words it was instituted is
more than I, or, I think, any man living can tell. The Scriptu^e is not, nor
was ever meant to be a complete Register of all either the words or actings of
Christ: how absurdly soever some will not allow of any thing as said, or done
by him, but what is expressly written there, how credibly soever it may be
otherwise shown to have ^een said or done by him. And if the Form of words
whereby our Savior did institute Baptism be no more^k own then the Time of its
institution, then can there no Argument be drawn from thence, whereby Infants
can be excluded from Baptism.

. 6. But how then shall we know what the Institution of Christ was, and so
judge by that, what Persons are to be baptized? I answer, very well: and by the
consideration of two things. The first is, what was in use among the lews
before our Saviors time. The second is, what has been the use among Christians
since the time of our Savior. And if we find the o^e agreeing with the other,
and answering to it as face answers to face in water, then there can be no
other judged, but that as the one did agree with the other, so our Savior did
ordain it should be; appointing that what was in use before should be still in
use as it was, save where he did improve or alter any thing therein. Now
whether we look at what was in use among the Jews before our Saviors time, or
what has been in use among Christians since h^s time, we shall find all making
for Infants Baptism.

. 7. And by the way you are to understand, that our Savior, when he put an end
to the Mosaical Observances, did not wholly evacuate, and make null, all that
was in use and practice among the Jews, and introduce a perfectly new platform
of his own, wholly other, in all both the Substance and circumstances of it,
from what was before: but did take much of what he found ready to his hand
among them, that was useful to him, and did continue it still in his Church,
only accommodating and fitting it to his own purpose, and improving and
heightning it in the uses and advantages of it to his Disciples. This the
Learned show by instances Dr. Hammond Quaere of the Baptizing of Infants,. 5.
in sundry particulars. And thus particularly it was in the institution of
Baptism. That before the time of our Savior, even from ancient days, had been
in use among the Jews as one Ceremony among others of the initation of
Disciples into the Covenant of God; as the most Authentic Records of the
Jewish Antiquities do testisie. And that our Savior, leaving off the other two
which were in use together with it, namely Circumcision and Sacr^fice, did
continue and ordain should be the sole and single Ceremony of Initiation or
Admittance of Disciples into his Church. And here by the way I cannot let pass,
without a remark, the mercifulness of our Savior toward mankind, in the
continuation of this, and dismission of the other two; in that whereas
Sacrifice was chargeable, and Circumcision was painful, he was pleased to lay
down them, and continue only Baptism, which was neither charge nor pain.

. 8. Now it is most certain that before our Saviors time those that became
Proselytes to the Jewish Church, were admitted into it by three things,
Circumcision, Sacrifice, and Baptism; which last was so necessary, that though
one were circumcized, yet if he were not also baptized, he was not a true
Proselyte, but a Gentile still. Whence, (as the Learned Dr. Light foot informs)
it is said, and said as a known Axiom by the Gemara Non est quis Proselytus
usque dum circumcidatur and baptizetur. Dr. Lightfoot Hor^ Habraicae, l. 42.
Babylonica (Jevamoth, fol. 46. 2.) That till a man were both circumcized and
baptized he was no Proselyte. I say, a Man, because for a woman baptism was
sufficient to ma^e her a Proselyte without circumcision, as the same Gemara
shows (Jeva^^h fol. 45. 2.)

. 9. Now I being a Statute Law upon record among the Jews (Numb. 15. 15.) that
one ^^dma^ce should be both for them, and for t^^ manger (the P^oselyte) that
so journed with them; and that as they were, so should the stranger he before
the lord; and that one ^aw, and one Manner, as for Moral Duties, so for Rites
and Ceremonies, should be both for the native Jews and Proselyees that
sojourned among them; nothing can be more evident than this, that what is
recorded to have been their u^e with the Proselytes, was the^r u^e also with,
and among themselves; and that they did to themselves Dr. Hamm^n^ Defense of
Inf. Bapt. p. 10, 11, 24, 25. By three things (say the Hebrew Doctors) did
Israel enter into the Covenant, by Circumcision and Baptism and Sacrifice. --
And so in all ages when an Ethnic is willing to enter into the Covenant and
gather himself under the wings of the Majesty of God, and take upon him the
yoke of the Law; he must be circumcised and baptized and bring a Sacrifice. And
if it be a woman, she must be baptized and bring a Sacrifice; as it is written
[Numb. 15. 15.] as ye are so shall the stranger be. How are ye? by circumcision
and baptism, and bringing of a Sacrifice: so likewise the stranger throughout
all generations, by Circumcision and Baptism, and bringing of a Sacrifice.
Ainsworth on Genesis 17. 12. page 68.
and theirs, what they did to the Proselytes and their Children: insomuch that
their way of argu^ng to what was necessary to be done to the P^oselyte
proceeded from what was done among themselves, and that because the Law of God
was, that as it was with them, so it should be with the stranger.

. 10. Now this is most certain, as being upon record in the Gemara Babylonica,
one, besides others, of their most Authentic writings, Dr. Hammond Bapt. of
Inf.. 15. and Def. of Inf. Bapt. Sec. 3. Dr. Lightfoot Horae Hebraicae, page
42. 43.
that, when any of Heathens became Jews, not only the Proselytes themselves,
but also their Infant Children, if they had any, were baptized. They baptize
the little or young stranger or Proselyte, says the Gemana. Again, If together
with a Proselyte his sons and daughters be made Proselytes, which none were
without being baptized, what their father does for them, turns to their good.
Indeed (as R. Josph said,) when they grew up they might, if they pleased,
renounce what was done. Where the Gloss says, This is to be understood De
parvulis, of little ones that were made Proselytes together with their Fathers.
And so again Maimonides, They baptize the Infant or little stranger upon the
knowledge or understanding of the house of Judgment, or the Congregation. And
again (says he) If an Israelite take or find a Heathen Infant, and baptize him
in the name of a Proselyte, Ecce ille est Proselytus, lo, he is become a
Proselyte. So R. Hezekiah says, Behold one finds an Infant cast out, and
baptized him in the name of a servant, do thou also circumcise him in the name
of a servant: but if he baptize him in the name of a freeman, do thou also
circumcise him in the name of a freeman. (Hierosol. Jevamoth, fol. 8. 4.)
Infants then were baptized among the Jews before our Saviors time, admitted
into Covenant with God, and into Communion with his Church by Baptism.

. 11. And that it was so with Infants after our Saviors time I have (I hope)
sufficiently made it appear by what I have already said in this discourse,
showing by abundant authorities and instances that it has been the Practice of
the Catholic Church of Christ in all the Ages of it to baptize Infants; and
that Practice founded in the Tradition and derived from the Practice of the
Apostles, sufficiently, though somewhat obscurely, attested by the holy
Scriptures.

. 12. Now where we find what was before, and what was after our Saviors time
in this matter answering exactly each to other, save where an alteration is
expressly made, what other can any rational man judge than this, that as it was
before our Saviors time, and as it was still continued after his time, so our
Savior in his time did institute and appoint, ordain and decree, that unto all
future time it should be. And it is impossible any better account than this
should be given of any Institution of our Saviors that is not particularly
recorded in Scripture; as this of Infants Baptism, neither is, nor was
necessary Nam cum Paedobaptismus in Ecclesia Judaica in admissione
Proselytorum, ita suit notus, us^tatus and frequens, ^^ n^hil fere notius,
usitatius, and frequentius (1) Non opus erat ut aliqu^ pracepto rob^rar^tur
[cum Baptismus jam in Sacramentum evaderet ^ van elicu^^]. Nam Christus
Baptismum in manus suis atque (...) Evangelicum suscepit, qualem in(...) hoc
sol^m dito, quod ad digniorem finem atque largiorem usum promoveret. Novit
satis gens universa parvulos solitos baptizari: illud praecepto opus non
habuit, quod communi usu semper invaluerat. Si prodiret ^am edictum regale in
haec verba, Recipiat se unusquisque die Dominico ad publicum conventum in
Ecclesia, insaniet certe ille qui^unque olim hinc argueret, non celebrandas
esse die Dominico in publicis conventibus preces, conciones, psalmodias, co
quod nulla in edicto de iis mentio. Nam cavit edictum de celebratione deel
Dominicae in publicis conventibus in genere, de particularibus autem divini
cultus speciebus ibidem celebrandis non opus erat, ut esset mentio, cum istae
ante datum edictum, and cum daretur, semper and ubique notae essent, and in usu
assiduo. Ipsissimo hoc modo res st habuit cum Baptismo; Christus eum instituit
in Sacramentum Evangelicum, quo in professionem Evangelii omnes admitterentur,
ut olim in Pros^lytismum ad religionem Judaicam. Particularia ^o spectantia,
modus scilicet baptizandi, atas baptizanda, sexus baptizandus, etc. regula and
definitione opus non habuerunt: eo quod haec vel lippis and tonsoribus satis
nota erant ex communi usu. (2) E contra ergo plana and aperta prohibitione opus
erat, ut insantes and parvuli non baptizarentur. si eos baptizandos nollet
servator. Nam cum per omnia secula praecedentia usitatissimum esset, ut
baptizarentur parvuli, si adoleri istam consuetudinem vellet Christus, aperte
prohibuisset. Silentium ergo ejus and Scripturae hac in ^e Paedobaptismum
firmat and propagat in omnia secula. Dr. Lightfoot Horae Hebraicae in Matthew. 3.
6. page 44, 45.
to be, being already so well known by the former practice of it; as the
Learned Dr. Lightfoot excellently argues.

. 13. And now what can any mortal man, that has not addicted himself a slave
to prejudice, judge any other but this, that in as much as our Savior made no
alteration in this particular in the Jewish Baptism, therefore Infants are by
his Institution to be baptized. And, that in all those passages of Scripture,
which speak of admitting any to be disciples to Christ, or of any's being
admitted by baptism to be his Disciples, there, if Infants be not by some
Circumstance necessarily excluded, they are in the design and by the
Institution of our Savior to be included.

. 14. As, for instance: when our Savior enlarging his Disciples former
Commission, says to them, Go and make Disciples of all nations baptizing them,
who, that remembers but what persons were admitted to be made Disciples before
our Saviors time, namely Infants as well as others; and considers but withal
that since his time also Infants as well as others were in the first Ages of
the Church, and ever since admitted to Discipleship by Baptism, who I say, that
but remembers and considers this, can judge any other, but that our Savior did
in his design extend his words to all those that he did not exclude, even to
Infants also as well as to others; and that his Disciples did also accordingly
so understand him; and baptize Infants; and deliver Infants Baptism down as a
thing to be for ever retained in the Church even by his Institution: of which
their so doing there can no other probable account or reason be given.

. 15. Put case, whereas of three things formerly in use for the admitting of
Disciples, viz. Circumcision, Sacrifice, and Baptism, our Savior did lay aside
the two former, Circumcision and Sacrifice, and did continue only the later,
namely Baptism; (put case I say) he had continued Circumcision to be the only
Ceremony to be used in his Church for the admitting of Disciples, and had laid
aside Sacrifice and Baptism; and in stead of saying, Go ye therefore, and make
Disciples of all nations, baptizing them, etc. had said, Go ye therefore, and
make Diseiples of all nations, circumcising them, etc. who that remembered that
Infants as well as others See Dr. Stillingfleets Vindicat. of the A. B. of
Cant. p. 107.
had usually in that case been circumcised, would ever have interpreted his
words to the excluding of Infants from Circumcision, or ever have once
imagined, or phansied any other, but that children should now, and henceforth,
as well as formerly, be circumcised. Even so now our Savior having
discontinued Circumcision and Sacrifice, and continued Baptism alone, to be the
Sacrament of the Initiation of Disciples into his Church, who, that remembers
that it was the use before our Saviors time to admit Infants into the Church
by Baptism, can imagine any other, but that his mind was that they should still
be so admitted; or but rationally fancy, that in saying, make disciples of
all nations baptizing them he meant to exclude Infants from Baptism. If Infants
should have come in, had he said Circumcising them, as undoubtedly they would
(who would ever once have disputed it, or made any question of it?) then they
ought to come in now that he has said, Baptizing them. For the case is equal
on both sides, one as well as the other being a Ceremony of admission of
Disciples to Proselytism before his saying those words; and there being as much
reason for the one as for the other, the very same for both. Which one
consideration, if reason might take place, were enough to end the controversy,
and carry the Cause for Infants Baptism.

. 16. And thus again, when in the present Text our Savior says, Suffer little
Children to come unto me, and forbid them not, in as much as the coming he
there speaks of is a coming to be his Proselytes, a becoming his Disciples, (as
appears by what he adds as a reason why Adduxerunt ergo aliqui e credentibus
infantes suos, ut peculiari recognitione Christus eos in discipulatum suum
cooptaret, ac pro suis sua consignaret be nedictione. Dr. Lightfoot in Matthew.
19. 13. Horae Hebraicae, page 221.
they should be suffered to come to him, viz. because of such is the kingdom of
God, which intimates that their coming to him was for entrance into that
kingdom, and to be made members of his Church) and his command to suffer them
to come to him was to suffer them to have entrance into Gods kingdom, so to
come to him as Proselytes of his kingdom, to become members of his Church, it
is most evident that he appoints they should have all things permitted to them,
and that performed for them, which was necessary to their so coming to him, and
was usually done to such as so came, became Proselytes to, and entered into Gods
kingdom; and that was to baptize them: for he that commands the end, does even
without naming them command the means. His word (M^tth. 28. 19.) is (...) make
them Disciples baptizing them, i. e. admit them to Discipleship by the Ceremony
of Baptism; let them come to me into my Church by Baptism, that door of their
Admission, that Sacrament of their Initiation thereinto.

. 17. And in that it is not said that our Savior did baptize them, but only
took them up into his arms, and laid his hands upon them and blessed them, it
will not hence follow that he did neither baptize them, nor appoint, nor allow
of their baptizing. For to argue that he did not do, nor appoint, nor allow of
this or that, because it is not said, that he did do, or appoint, or allow of
it, is not good: there is no consequence at all in it. For he might allow of,
appoint, and do, more than is written: that which is written of his sayings and
doings being exceedingly short of comprehending and reporting all he said and
did: which were so many, that St. John that modest Disciple, is fain to use an
Hyperhole to set out the numerousness of them, saying that, if they should be
written every one, he supposed that even the world it self could not contain
the Books that should be written, J^ha 21. 25.

. 18. Who doubts but Jesus primo ad te mpus baptizavit, non quoslibet, sed suos
discipulos propria manu, quo facto commisit e is baptizandi officium, and ipse
vacabat doctrinae. Dionys. Carchus. in Joh. 4.
that the Tnel^e Discipl^s of our Savior were baptized by him? Dionysius
Carthusianus affirms it, that he baptized them, and with his own hand. And yet
as Tertullian (de Baptismo) says, tinctos non invenimus, we do not find their
baptizing in Scripture; it is no where expressed that he did baptize them, or
any of them. As therefore it does not prove that his Disciples were not
baptized, because it is not written, that he did baptize them; so it does not
prove, that he did not baptize these Infants, because his baptizing of them is
not written.

. 19. Again, who doubts but that our Savior himself was circumcised? And yet
it is no where expressed in Scripture that he was circumcised. It is said
indeed, that when eight days were accomplished for the circumcising of the
Child, his name was called Jesus, Luke 2. 21. But it is not said, that upon the
eighth day, when it was come, he was circumcised. As therefore it does not
prove that our Savior was not circumcised, because his being circumcised is
not written: so does it not prove that these Infants were not baptized, because
it is not written that they were baptized by him.

. 20. Lastly, who doubts, but that our Savior did at his last Supper
communicate with his Disciples, eat the bread, and drink the cup with them? And
yet it is no where written that he did so. It is said indeed, that he blessed
the bread, and brake it, and gave it to his Disciples, and said to them, Take,
cat. But it is not said that he himself did eat it. I^ is said, that he
likewise gave the cup to them, and said, Drink ye all of it. But it is not
said, that he drunk of it himself. (And his saying, Matthew. 26. 29. that he
would not thenceforth drink of the fruit of the Vine, does but give reason to
suppose it, and is no affirmation of it). As therefore it does not prove that
our Savior did not communicate with his Disciples, because it is not expressed
in Scripture that he did it: so it does not prove, that he did not baptize
these Infants, because it is not written that he did baptize them.

. 21. Rather, the very great favors that he is written to have showed these
Infants, as to take their part against his own D^sciples, even so far as for
their sakes to rebuke them; to call the Infants to him; to take them up i^to
his arms; to lay his hands upon them, and bless them, should argue that he did
vouchsafe them all the favors that they came to him for more than is
expressed. And it is evident, that the baptizing of them was one, in as much as
Baptism is as it were the door of entrance into that kingdom, into which they
came to him for entrance, and into which he commanded they should, when they
came or were brought, be admitted, in saying, Suffer the little children to
come unto me, and forbid them not. And would he deny them that one, that had
vouchsafed to them all the rest?

. 22. And if he did not baptize them himself, that is no wonder. For he did not
constantly baptize himself all that he admitted to be his Disciples. Though
from John Baptists saying, I have need to be baptized of thee, I may suppose
that he did baptize some; and if no more, yet at least his Twelve disciples, by
whose hands, after that he had baptized them, he did baptize others. Whence it
is said, (John 4. 2.) that Jesus himself baptized not, but his Disciples.
Though he made Disciples, which imports his admitting men to be Disciples, and
receiving them to proselytism by the Ceremony thereof, which was Baptism
(whence he is as well said to have baptized, as to have made more disciples
than John, i. e. to have made by baptizing) yet the particular act of baptizing
them, was a thing, which he did most usually, if if not constantly, transact by
the hands of his Disciples. And by their hands he might baptize these Infants,
though he did not use his own hands to that work.

. 23. And besides what has been said upon other accounts to show the
probability of it, his vouchsafing to them Imposition of hands, that Ceremony,
which that renowned Champion of the Church of England Dr. Hammond says, in the
ancient Church was preparatory Quaere of the Baptizing of Infants, Sect. 22.
Explanataque eidem divina vita, and ut ita dicam conversatione, ex eo praeterea
quaerit, number ita instituat vivere: cum promisit, manum ^jus capiti admovet^t
signoque edito Sacerdotibus imperat, ut viri atque sponsoris nomina
perseribant, etc. Dionys. Areop. Hierarch. lib. c. 4.
and antecedent to Baptism, is a strong argument for, if not a clear evidence
of, his admitting them to Baptism. What can be thought but that he did
vouchsafe them that, who did admit them unto all foregoing that, and that was
preparatory unto that? What other can be imagined, but that he gave them over
to his Disciples to be baptized with their hands, who had vouchsafed them the
Imposition of his own hands? For though it be not said he baptized them, yet it
is said he did that, that was the next to it, and the utmost that he can be
conceived to have done to any, whom he did not baptize himself, but gave over
to his Disciples to baptize; he laid his hands upon them, and blessed them; and
by those actions did as it were consign them unto baptism, mark them for, and
deliver them up to his Disciples to baptize: and that according to the former,
and then present manner of receiving even Infants as well as elder persons unto
Proselytism by Baptism.

. 24. And thus, when we read of a whole City, as Samaria, or a Family, as the
Jaylors, and Crispuses, and Stephanas's, baptized, though none be expressed to
be baptized, but those that believed, yet what other can be thought, but that
even the children also of those Believers, if they had any in their town or
family, were baptized? Since it was agreeable with the Jewish Baptism, (wherein
our Saviors was founded, and from which in that particular it is never said in
the least to have differed) to receive to Proselytism by Baptism the Infants of
those that were converted, and baptized, as well as the Converts themselves.
And if in so many whole Families as are reported in Scripture to have been
baptized, there was never a child, which yet cannot be sa^d, and it is hard to
believe, yet sure in Samaria, a great City, there were some. And why any that
were converted and baptized themselves, should not desire baptism for their
children as well as for themselves, since their children were by the
Institution of Christ as capable of it as themselves were, is not easy to say.
And on the contrary, that those that were converted, did desire the baptism of
all theirs as well as of themselves, is most evident, because we read of the
baptizing of whole Houses consequent to the conversion of the single Master, or
Mistress of those Houses: for instance, the Jailer, and Lydias, Acts 16.

. 25. And touching this latter, the house of Lydia it may not be amiss to make
one observation before we pass, namely that, though it be said that the
household of Lydia was baptized, yet it is not said, that they or any of them,
beside Lydia her self believed, professed, or ever so much as once heard the
Gospel preached to them. Now hereupon I would ask our Adversaries, whether we
may receive any thing as a Divine Truth, that is not written in the Divine
Word, or we may not?

. 26. It is their interest to say we may not: that being the main, if not the
whole, of all the strength they have against our Plea for Infants Baptism, that
it is not said in the Scriptures that Infants should be baptized, or were
baptized, whence they weakly infer that Infants Baptism is not either in the
Doctrine or Practice of it to be received. Now if in pursuance of their
Interest they shall say we may not: then I shall infer from the same ground,
that it is not to be received as a Divine Truth that the Household of Ly^ia d^d
ever believe, profess, or hear the Gospel preached to them before they were
baptized, because no such thing is written of them. And so here will be a
Scripture Example of Persons baptized, without any either belief, or
profession, or knowledge, or so much as hearing of the Gospel; their believing,
professing, knowing, or hearing of it, being not to be received as a Divine
Truth, because it is not written in the Divine Word. And then a Persons not
believing, professing, or knowing the Gospel will be no hindrance to his
baptizing. And so our Infants cannot be denied baptism upon that account. Why
man not our Infants be baptized, though they neither believe, nor profess, nor
know the Gospel, upon the undertaking of believers for them, as well as the
House of Lydias was: who, for any thing that appears in Scripture to the
contrary, nei her believed, nor professed, nor had any the least knowledge of
the Gospel before they were baptized, but, as it may be supposed, were admitted
to baptism through the Mistress of the Familie's undertaking for them, and
becoming a Godmother as it were unto them.

. 27. If, to avoid the sorce of this Inference, they say we may receive
something as a Divine Truth, which is not written in the Divine Word, then I
infer on the other side, that it can be no hindrance to our receiving Infants
Baptism as a Divine Truth, that it is not written in the Scripture. For if we
may receive it as a Divine Truth, that the Family of Lydia had both heard, and
did believe, and at least make a profession to believe the Gospel, before they
were baptized, (and if they did not, then let the Antipaedobaptists tell us, if
they can, upon what account or ground they were baptized) though no one
syllable of all this be written of them in the Divine Word, then may we as well
receive it as a Divine Truth, either that there were Infants among those
baptized ones, or that the Apostles did baptize other Infants, though their
baptizing be as much passed over in silence, and unmentioned, as the hearing,
believing or professing of Lydias Family before they were baptized, here is:
especially being there are such other positive grounds, as we have shown,
whereupon to receive it.

. 28. And here I must profess my self too short sighted to be able to foresee
what shift our Adversaries can find out, to evade and avoid the force of this
Dilemma; by which their whole way of arguing against us a non scripto, from our
having, as they pretend, no Scripture for what we profess and practice in this
case, seems to be broken and overthrown.

. 29. And by this time hope it is evident to every one, that, not only by the
Constitution of this particular Church, but also by Prescription from the
Custom and Practice of the Catholic and Primitive Church, and also by the
Institution of Christ himself our Infants have a Right to be baptized. And if
so, then they cannot, without injury, and injustice to them, not to say also
disobedience to the Order of this present and particular Church, Separation
from the practice of the Catholic and Primitive Church, disagreement with the
institution of Christ, and resistance to the Command of Christ, be denied
Baptism. For what else can it be, to hinder those from coming to him, whom he
has commanded to be suffered to come?

. 30. And so I have dispatched the Fourth and last Branch of my Argument for
Infants Baptism; and have said all I intended to say by way of Confirmation of
the Point. What remains to be said will be matter of Use and Application.

CHAP. XXXI.
Infants Baptism Lawful, though there were neither Command for it, nor Example
of it.

. 1. BY what I have said in the former part of this Discourse, I hope I have
sufficiently evidenced the Lawfulness at least of Infants Baptism; I will now
go on to consider and answer Objections against it; and that will still be a
further confirmation of it; and that being but obtained, the Need they have of
it, and the Benefit they may have by it, will be sufficient inducements to
their baptizing, though they had no positive Right unto Baptism.

. 2. The Antipaedo baptists main ground, on which they build their Opinion of
the Unlawfulness of Infants Baptism, taken in its full strength lies thus. That
which no one Text in all the Scriptures either commands, or gives example of,
that it Unlawful. But in all the Scripture there is no one Text, that either
commands, or gives an example of Infants Baptism, Therefore it is Unlawful.

. 3. In contradiction to this ground. and to show the falseness of it, I thus
argue against the first part of it. If nothing be lawful to be practiced, but
what some Text of Scripture does command or give example of, then nothing will
be lawful to be believed, but what some Text of Scripture does affirm. For it
is as necessary that we should have a Scripture Affirmation for what we
believe, as a Scripture Command or Example for what we practice. And this I
think no Antipaedo baptist will deny. And if so, then many things that we now
believe and practice, and shall become Heretics and Schismatics, if we do not
believe and practice them, shall become unlawful to us, because there is in
all the Scriptures no one Text that affirms the one, or commands or gives
example of the other: as I shall show in both particulars.

. 4. And first in matters of Faith. First, that the Son, as God, is equal to
the Father: this we believe, and I hope the Antipaedobaptists do not disbelieve
it. And yet there is no one Scripture that does expressly affirm it. So, that as
Man, he was circumcised: this we believe, and our Antipaedobaptists do not
deny, and yet (as we have already noted) there is no one Scripture that does
expressly affirm it.

. 5. Again, that the Holy Ghost is God: this we believe, and I would hope our
Antipaedobaptists did believe it too. And yet there is no one Scripture that
does expressly affirm it. Also that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father
and the Son: this we believe; and our Antipaedobaptists do not, that I know,
deny it. And yet there is no one Text of Scripture that does expressly affirm it.

. 6. Thirdly, that the Three Persons in the Trinity, the Father, the Son, and
the Holy (...); D. Basil. de Spir. Sancto, cap. 27. p. 213.
Ghost are but One God; this we believe; and our Antipaedobaptists have not,
that I know of, declared themselves to deny it. And yet there is no one
Scripture that does expressly affirm it.

. 7. Fourthly, even but this, to add no more, that it is the duty of Children
to love their Parents; this we believe, and sure the Anabaptists will not deny
it. And yet where is there one Text in all the Scripture that does expressly
affirm it.

. 8. Now if we do, and may believe these things, and ought to believe them,
having sufficient ground for our belief of them; even good Consequence drawn
from some one or more Texts of Scripture compared together, though no one Text
of Scripture does singly, and alone in terms affirm them: then may we as well
practice some things, which no one Text of Scripture does expressly command, or
exemplify, so long as we can deduce that practice from any one, or more Texts
of Scripture compared together. And the contrary Doctrine, which is the
Antipadobaptists ground for the Unlawfulness of Infants baptism, is erroneous
and absurd.

. 9. Again, in matters of Practice, That Women as well as Men ought to receive
the Si quid valerent id genus argumenta mulieres pariter Coena Domini
interdicendae essent, quas Apostolorum seculo ad came fuisse admissas non
legimus. Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 16. S. 8.
Sacrament of the Supper of the Lord: this we believe, and practice; and the
Antipaedobapt^sts too. And yet there is no one Text of Scripture, that any more
expressly commands or exemplifies that, than Infants baptism is commanded or
exemplified.

. 10. So that the weekly Lords day is to be sanctified, or kept holy; this we
believe and practice, and the Antipaedobaptists too. And yet there is no one
Text of Scripture that commands it. Nor is there in the Scripture any example
of its sanctification, but what may agree to any other besides it. It may
indeed be shown, that some where they did meet on that day, and perform holy
duties: but it may also be shown that other where they did meet and perform
holy duties on other days: and if one conclude for the one, then will the other
conclude for the other: and so we shall either have all holy days, or none: and
then not that, for any either command that enjoins it, or example that infersit.

. 11. So that Men or Women may be baptized either naked or clothed we believe,
and the Church has practiced. And the Anabaptists, I suppose, do believe and
have practiced both ways. And yet there is no one Text of Scripture that
commands baptizing either way: neither is there an example of any persons being
either way baptized extant in Scripture. Of the going of some into the water,
of their being baptized therewith, we find mention: but of their going into it,
or being baptized with it, naked or clothed, there is nothing mentioned. So
that let the Antipaedobaptist say, which way men and women should be baptized,
whether naked or clothed, yet still here will be a circumstance at least in
practice allowed, and used by them as well as by our selves, without any
Scripture Command for it, (...) D. Bas. de Sp. San^to. c. 27.
or Example of it. So that men may be dipped, either once, or thrice, at their
baptizing, we believe, and it has in the Church been practiced both ways. But
what Scripture command or example have we to determine that circumstance either
way?

. 12. Now if both we, and the Antipaedobaptists, do rightly believe, and
lawfully practice, what we believe of, and practice in, these things, without
any Scripture command, or example, to enjoin, or direct us; then their
assertion of the Unlawfulness of what is neither commanded, nor exemplified in
Scripture is erroneous, and full of absurdity. Which yet I shall further make
to appear upon other accounts.

. 13. I think any rational man will grant, that there is no more necessity of
having a Divine Command for every thing we take up into our practice, then
there is of having a Divine Countermand for the laying down of any thing
practiced by a Command Divine. Yea of the two there is more reason we should
have an express command from God to leave off what himself had once commanded,
than there is to have a command for the beginning of a practice never commanded
by him. For that which he never expressed any command for, may yet be agreeable
to his secret will, and so not only lawful, but acceptable to him. And this
may be shown in sundry cases; and particularly in the Jews ordaining and
keeping the Feasts of Dedication, and of Purim. But the leaving off to do what
God has once commanded, cannot but be against his revealed will, and so
neither acceptable to him, nor lawful: unless there be good and competent
ground for the What may be a sufficient ground in this case, See Dr. Stilling
fleets Irenic. part. 1. c. 1. S. 3. p. 12, 13.
leaving it off, and a sufficient evidence of the ceasing of that obligation to
it, which was once by virtue of a Divine command upon it. If then there may be
any thing shown, which was once expressly commanded by God, and practiced in
obedience to that command, whose practice is now left off; and by the
Anabaptists themselves, without any express command to the contrary, and yet
lawfully, then it will follow, and convincingly. I hope, that there may be
something practiced by us, which yet never was in Scripture expressly commanded
us: and so Infants Baptism may be lawful enough, though never expressly in
Scripture commanded. Now I instance in the Sanctification of the seventh day,
and in the Circumcision of Infants at eight days old: both expressly commanded,
both accordingly practiced; and both now left off to be observed, and yet
without any express command for the disobserving of either. I speak all this
while of things sacred, and not merely civil or natural. And say an express
command, because I find nothing else will satisfy. Else enough has long
enough, and often enough been offered to show the lawfulness of Infants
Baptism. Which if nothing else had been offered, is sufficiently proved by this
Argument following, which they are as far from being ignorant of, as they are
from being able to answer.

. 14. That which is no sin cannot be unlawful. Infants Baptism is no sin:
Therefore it is not unlawful. That Infants baptism is no sin either to the
Baptizer, or Baptized is plain, because it is no transgression of any Law. For
that which is no transgression of a Law is no sin. Infants Baptism is no
trangression of any Law. Therefore it is no sin. That that can be no sin, which
is no transgression of any Law is most evident, not only because St. John has
positively defined sin to be the transgression of a law, (1 John 3. 4.) but
also because St. Paul has concluded negatively, that where no Law is, there is
no transgression, (Romans 4. 15.) And these men that conclude Infants baptism
unlawful, which must needs signify its being sinful, I wonder how, or whence
they come to know it, and conclude it. Sure they do not know more than St. Paul
did. And his Rule to know sin by, and so what is lawful, and what unlawful,
was the Law. For (says he) by the Law is the knowledge of sin, (Romans 3. 20.)
And, I had not known sin, but by the Law: for I had not known lust, i. e. had
not known it to be a sin, except the Law had said, Thou shall not covet, (Romans
7. 7.) So then Infants Baptism being no transgression of any law; because there
is no law against it; for there can be no transgression of a law which is not;
it must follow that it can be no sin, and so cannot be unlawful.

. 15. The Scripture, I say, being laid down to be the Rule of Lawful and
Unlawful in sacred Things; as that which the Scripture commands is not only
lawful but necessary, and that which the Scripture forbids, is not only
unnecessary, but also sin^full: so that which the Scripture neither commands
nor forbids, is neither necessary, nor yet sinful: but of a middle nature
betwixt both; and that is Lawful. So that though the Scripture had never spoke
word, either in particular or in general, of Infants baptism, yet it must have
been granted lawful, and could not have been concluded unlawful: because
neither in particular, nor in general has the Scripture spoke any one word or
title against the baptizing of Infants.

CHAP. XXXII.
Infants Baptism no Addition to the Word of God. The Scriptures objected on
that account considered and cleared.

. 1. YEa but, argues the Antipaedobaptist, Nothing is lawful that is not
commanded in Scripture. Infants Baptism is not commanded in Scripture.
Therefore it is unlawful. But why is nothing lawful that is not commanded in
Scripture? Because the doing of any uncommanded thing is an Adding to the word;
and all additions to the word are forbidden by the Word: and so unlawful. Now
the Scriptures that forbid all additions to the word are many, Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
Deuteronomy. 12. 32. Prove. 30. 6. Isa. 1. 12.

. 2. But what if not every doing of an uncommanded thing be an adding to the
word? Or what if the baptizing of an Infant (suppose it never so much
uncommanded) be no such addition to the word, as is forbidden? Why then Infants
Baptism, for all its supposed uncommandedness, may be no sin. And so the whole
force of the Argument falls to the ground. But because the best trial hereof
will be a particular view of the Scriptures objected on this account, I will
therefore instantly address my self to the consideration of them; and from that
view I shall hope to find, as that not all doing of a thing beside the word, is
an addition to the word, so that Infants baptism is none of those culpable
additions to the Word, which are forbidden by it.

. 3. And the first is that in Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Ye shall not add unto the word which
I command you, neither shall you diminish ought from it, that you may k^ep the
Commandments of the Lord your God, which I command.

. 4. To this I answer first that the Adding here forbidden cannot possibly be
so understood, as to make it unlawful to do any thing, even appertaining to
the worship of God, which is not expressly commanded. in the word of God. And
that will be enough to overthrow their ground, and secure Infants Baptism from
the guilt of unlawfulness. For it is evident that the word here commanded to
Israel, to which they were not to add, and from which they were not to
diminish, are the Statutes, and the judgments, which Moses taught them to do
(ver. 1.) namely, in this Book of Deuteronomy, and the several chapters and
verses of it: and however in the whole book of the Mosaical Law. Now it is most
certain, that those Statutes and judgments, as they lie dispersed in the whole
book of Moses Law, do reach unto all sorts of duties of common life, toward
our selves, and toward our brethren, as well as of worship toward God. If
then all doing any uncommanded thing be an adding to the word, and that adding
to it which is here forbidden by it, then all other uncommanded actions, as
well as uncommanded acts of worship and service toward God, must hereby be
forbidden, and so be unlawful: and we must no more do any action of common
life, than any act of worship and service toward God, but what is expressly
commanded in the word, for fear of incurring the guilt of adding to the word,
and doing that which is unlawful. And then there will be Absurdities enough
following hereupon, as has upon Mr. Hooker Eccl. Polity. Dr. Hammond
Will Worship. etc.
several accounts, and occasions, been shown by sundry of our Divines. But if
the Prohibition of adding to the word here, be not, for the absurdities
consequent thereunto, to be extended unto the actions of common life, then it
is not to be extended to the actions of religious service. For the same
addition that is not to be made to the one, is not to be made to the other: and
the same diminution that is not to be made from the one is not to be made from
the other. There being no distinction in this case made betwixt the one and the
other, it must be applied to both or to neither. And either there shall no
uncommanded actions of common life be lawful, or else some actions of religion
may be lawful, though not commanded, and the doing of them no addition to the
word. And if so, then Infants Baptism may be lawful enough, notwithstanding
any thing that here is said to the contrary, and not be found any addition to
the word.

. 5. Secondly, I answer, that, this way of Interpreting this Text, so as to
render all uncommanded either civil or sacred actions unlawful being
overthrown, there are other commodious rendrings of the Text, which may fully
speak the sense of it, and yet render Infants Baptism not unlawful.

. 6. One is that of Hugo Grotius, who says, To diminish is not to do that
which is bidden. Diminuere est non facere quod jubetur; addere, aliter quam est
jussum facere. Grot. in loc.
To add is to do otherwise than it is bidden. To do what otherwise? Why that
sure which is forbidden. His word is not (aliud) another thing, as if the doing
of any other thing, than what was bidden, were in his sense that adding to the
word which is forbidden: but it is (aliter) otherwise, clearly showing his
sense of the Adding here forbidden to be the doing of what was bidden,
otherwise than it was bidden to be done. Now what is this to Infants Baptism?
How can our doing of it be a doing otherwise than is commanded, and so an
adding, in his sense to the word, if in the word there be nothing at all
commanded that concerns it. And if it be not all commanded, how is it possible
we should do it otherwise than it is commanded, and so be guilty of adding to
the word, in his sense, by the doing of it?

. 7. Another is that of Dr. Hammond, who makes the paying of an Uniform
Obedience to God by Defense of Superstition, page 15. 16.
the Jews according to the Law of Moses to be the mean^ng of the not adding nor
diminishing mentioned in this Text. Now what is this, you shall fulfill all my
commandments, and not disobey any of them, either by doing what I forbid, or by
leaving undone what I command, or by doing any thing that I have commanded
otherwise than I have commanded otherwise than I have commanded it, to the
business of Infants Baptism? What one either Affirmative or Negative Law of God
touching his worship and service given to the Jews by Mos^s, is violated and
disobeyed thereby? And if none, then for any thing yet here said, it must
remain lawful.

. 8. A third is that of theirs, with whom I agree, that interpret the not
adding here forbidden of not adding any thing to the word of God as the word of
God which was never spoken by God. The word Add is explained by the word
Diminish. To dimin^sh any thing from the word of God is properly to rob God of
any part of it. This is done two ways. First, by wholly destroying it, as if it
had never been spoken at all, And this is a thing that they were gu^lty of,
whoever they were, by whom any book, or part of any book of Gods word has been
lost, if ever any were, as is to be suspected: some things being spoken of as
written, which are not to be found amongst the writings that are extant.
Secondly, it is done by diminishing the Authority of it, reckoning that for
merely Humane, which is Divine. This is a thing which we are wrongfully charged
by the Papists to be guilty of, because we own not the Apocryphal Books as the
divinely inspired word of God, but as the writings of uninspired men. But they
are justly guilty of it, that look upon the Scripture as a dead letter, and
Caspar Swenckfeldius docuit vocale verbum tanquam literam ocsidentem
rejiaiendum esse: solo spiritu nos contentos esse debere. Alsted. Prolegom.
Theolo. Polem. Sensum literalem aiunt [Weigeliani] esse umbram, sonum
Antichristianum, sapientiae expertem, spiritu vacuum, fundamentum arenosum,
saluti noxium, ambiguum in verbis, imperfectum in doctrina, mortuum and
inefficacem in litera, ineptum ad consolationem. Wendelin. Theolog. Christian.
Epist. Dedicator.
a useless thing, to be laid by as out of date now in the times of the effusion
of greater light. This is the Doctrine of the Swenckfeldians, and Weigelians,
and espoused I doubt by too many of our English Enthusiasts.

. 9. And accordingly to Add to the word of God is to foist in and obtrude words
upon God, pretending them to be delivered and spoken by him, though he never
spoke them, nor gave any man order to speak them from him. And this is done two
ways. First, by adding words to the word of God. This he should be guilty of
that should put any words into the Bible more than Originally were there; or
should put into the Translation of the Bible more then is in the words or sense
of the Original. And this they are guilty of, that affirm any thing to be
spoken by God, which he never spoke. And this, Nicholas Stock, and John of
Leiden Ringleaders amongst the Dr. Fea^ley Dippers dipped, p. 225. etc.
Germane Anabaptists formerly have been charged with. And I could wish none of
our English Enthus^sts were chargeable with it. Secondly, it is done by giving
a divine authority to words not spoken by a divine inspiration. This we accuse
the Papists to be guilty of in making the Apocryphal Books of equal Authority
with the Canonical. Which yet cannot be proved to have been written by a Divine
Inspiration; nor to have been given by God as a Law of Faith but only written
by Men as a Direction for Life.

. 10. If then for the Baptizing of Infants we pretend no word of Gods not
spoken by him; if into his word we have put no words of our own, or any man's
else, nor have given to any thing not written by him an equal Authority with
his word, then we are not, we cannot be guilty of that Adding to the word of
God which here is prohibited. None sure is so weak as to think the baptizing of
a child to be the adding of words to the word of God.

. 11. And what has been said of this Text will serve in answer to other Texts
of the same import. Such as (Deuteronomy. 12. 32.) where it is said, What thing soever
I command you, observe to do it, thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from
it. What thing soever, that is, as the Septuagint render it, (...), every word
that I enjoin you, every word of command that I give you, that shall you be
careful to observe; to that shall you pay an uniform obedience, forbearing to
do the things that I forbid, and doing the things, whatsoever they be, that I
command; and to my words ye shall add no words of your own; ye shall put into
my Law no commands that I never gave you, you shall not take from my Law any of
the commands that I have given you; ye shall not change the Rule I have set
down for you ^o walk by, either in whole or in part, by imposing on your selves
either more severe or more easy performances than I have required from you,
instead of those that I have required: but ye shall do fully that which I have
commanded, and ye shall do it faithfully as I have commanded it.

. 12. And this is agreeable to those Texts, where this uniform observance of
the then settled rule is more explicately set down. As (in Deuteronomy. 5. 32.) ye
shall observe to do therefore as the Lord has commanded you, you shall not
turn aside to the right hand or to the left. And (Deuteronomy. 28. 14.) Thou shall not
go aside from any of the words, which I command thee this day to the right hand
or to the left, to go after other gods to serve them. And (Joshua 1. 7.) Be
thou strong, and very courageous, that thou may observe to do according to
all the Law, which Moses my servant commanded thee, turn not from it to the
right hand, or to the left.

. 13. Now what is this to Infants Baptism, supposing it utterly uncommanded?
How is the baptizing of an Infant, a not doing as the Lord has commanded? or a
going aside from any of his words? or a turning from them to the right hand or
the left? What one word of our own, or anies else, have we added to his to
bring it in? what one word of his have we left out, that else might have given
a stop to our doing of it? what one word of his have we changed to make the
easier way for its introduction, or continuation? what one thing required by
him have we turned from, and let alone unperformed, that we might do that in
the stead of it? yea, on the contrary, how does not our doing of it hold
proportion with his word, and so can be no violation of his word? In short,
when it can be made appear that the baptizing of Infants, is the putting of
words into Moses's Law, then we shall, and till then we shall not yield, that
it is that adding to the word of God, which God by Moses in this Text for bad.

. 14. Such again is that saying of Agur, Prove. 30. 6. Add thou not unto his
words lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a lia^. What can this mean other,
than that no man ought to add any of his own, or others words to the word of
God, as if God had spoken them, whereas he never spoke word of them? This
whosoever he be that does, he must needs be found a liar, when God comes to
reprove him. But what reproof can he be liable to for adding to his words, that
has added nothing to them? Or how can he be found a liar upon the account of
adding to Gods words, who does not affirm, God ever said one word more than he
has said?

. 15. And now what is this Text, or any thing that can be inferred from it, to
our pleading for Infants baptism? Have we for the introducing or defending that
practice, inserted into the word of God any words of our own, pretending them
to be his words? Let the book be searched, and the words produced, and let the
shame of such adding light upon the doers of it. But if we do no such thing, if
we have added no one word concerning this to Gods Words, then can this Text
make nothing at all against us, who have done nothing of that which is
forbidden by it?

. 16. Indeed from such words of God as are expressed in Scripture, we draw such
Consequences as naturally flow from them being rightly interpreted. But this is
no adding to the words of God. This is but what we are enabled to by the
example of our Savior and his Apostles: who prove things not expressed in
Scripture by Consequences deduced from Scripture: and by such proving justify
a rational collection from the word to be no culpable addition to the word,
which is the thing that this Text forbids.

. 17. Yea but, do we not find the Jews severely reproved again and again for
performing uncommanded acts of worship, of which, says God, I commanded them
not, neither came it into my heart, or mind, Jer. 7. 31. and 19. 5. and 32. 35?
Yes verily. And what then? Why then uncommanded acts of worship and service are
unlawful. And so Infants Baptism will upon that account also be unlawful, as
being an uncommanded thing.

. 18. So the Anabaptists indeed reasons from these Texts: but without any
reason, yea against all reason. For the acts spoken of in those Texts as not
commanded, are acts of devotion to, and worship of false gods, building high
p^aces to Baal, and causing their sons and daughters to pass through the fire
to Molech. Now in the name of God, does this follow? Israel were rep^oved for
performing uncommanded acts of devotion and Idolatrous worship to false gods?
therefore it is unlawful for Christians to perform uncommanded acts of
devotion, and religious worship to the true God? Or, because it was unlawful
for them to cause their sons and daughters to pass through the fire to Molech,
therefore it must be unlawful for us to cause our sons and daughters to pass
through the water to Jesus Christ? May not we baptize our Infants, and so
consecrate them unto God? because they may not burn their Infants, and so
sacrifice them to the Devil? What an absurd? What a wild, and irrational
consequence is this?

. 19. But let us a while consider the expression, which I commanded them not,
nor speak it, neither came it into my heart, or mind. What is this but a
Meiosis, intimating in a milder expression a severer interdiction? which I
commanded not, that is, which I have most strictly forbidden, as abhorring it,
and abominating it in my heart. And were not these things forbidden strictly
enough, both in general in the first and second Commandment of the Decalogue,
and particularly in Levit. 18. 21. where it is expressly said, Thou shall not
let any of thy s^ed pass through the fire to Molech, neither shall thou profane
the name of thy God. And again, Levit. 20. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. where stoning to
death by the people of the land, and that without mercy, is threatened against
the offender in this kind. See! these uncommanded things, as they are called
here, were things elsewhere most strictly prohibited, most severely interdicted.

. 20. Again it is said in the Third Commandment, The Lord will not hold him
guiltless that takes his name in vain. Is that all, that the Lord will not
look on him that takes his name in vain as altogether an innocent man? Is it
not, that the Lord will most severly punish him? What else is meant in Ezekiel 17.
18, 19. Jerem. 7. 9, with 12, 14, 15. Zech. 5. 2, 3, 4. Malach. 3. 5. Hosea 4.
2. Jerem 23. 10. So his not commanding here is his forbidding. The not coming
into his heart, is his hating such abomination, as it is called, Jerem. 32. 35.

. 21. Now what is this to Infants Baptism? Where has God any where forbidden
it, that the doing of it should be such an abomination to God? From this manner
of Gods expressing himself, I commanded not, touching things most severly
forbidden, hated, and abhorred by God, how does any argument arise, how is any
reasoning framed to the rendering of that unlawful to man, as abominable unto
God, which God is so far from having ever any where forbidden, or expressed any
detestation against, that he is supposed never to have said the least word
about it?

. 22. Yea, what if this be spoken in the way of aggravation of their fault in
proceeding to such unnatural cruelties toward their children in the worship of
false gods, as were never by the true God required of them? As if God Almighty
had said, Your idolatrous wickedness is so much the greater, in that ye do
these things to serve your false gods, which, for the cruelty, and
unnaturalness of them, I who am the true God, never commanded you to perform to
me; it never so much as once came into my heart or mind to require any such
thing of you to my self, still this will no way be applicable unto Infants
Baptism, which can in no respect be paralleled unto these most inhumane acts of
the most devilish worship.

. 23. No more can that of Isa. 1. 12. (a place often enough thrown in our dish
about this business) Who has required this at your hands? For the fault there
reproved was not the performing of Offerontium nequitla, been olens thymiams in
abominationem convertit. D. Chrysostom. Hom. 27. in Genesis There are several accounts
upon which God in Scripture is said to disregard and not to approve or accept
of Sacrifices, which yet were of his own institution. 1. In respect of the
Hypocrisy of the offerers: That people being grown formal and corrupt trusted
in Sacrifices, and the work wrought in them, and said by them they should be
justified. God expressing his indignation against such Sacrificers, rejects the
things themselves wherein they trusted, that is in reference to them that used
them. This is the intention of the Holy Ghost. Isa. 1. 12, 13. Dr. Owen Confut.
of Biddle Catech. chapter 22. p. 472. (...) D. Chrysostom. 1 Orat. adv. Judaeos.
an uncommanded action: the thing it self, to come and appear before God, and
that no less than thrice a year, being most particularly commanded, Exodus 23.
17. and Exodus 34. 23. But it was the performing of a commanded action with such
hypocrisy as they did it with; it was their being hypocrites in their hearts
even whilst they were before the eyes of God. Their hearts were not with him,
even whilst they were performing exterior acts of worship and service to him.
Now in such case the most commanded acts of worship are hateful to God; not as
acts of worship, but as acts of such worshippers. This may be seen in the
Context from 12 to 21. and so again Isa. 66. 3, 4. Prove. 21. 27. and Prove. 28.
9.

. 24. Now this can no way be applicable to the prejudice of Infants Baptism:
unless our Antipaedobaptists will say, that our coming to appear before God
with our Infants to offer and consecrate them unto him in baptism is all
Hypocrisy; and that as often as we tread the courts of God to that end we come
but to play the Hypocrites with him. Which yet I hope they will not unjustly,
and I am sure they cannot justly charge us with all. What we do in this, we do
it simply and sincerely, walking according to our light, and acting according
to our conscience, without hypocrisy.

. 25. But put case we do allow them their own sense of all those Texts, which
they bring to prove the unlawfulness of any thing that is not commanded in the
word of God (viz. Deuteronomy. 4. 2. and 12. 32. Prove. 30. 6, etc.) yet still it will
not follow, that those Texts which were given under, and as a rule for the
Legal Dispensation, and reached to all the most minute parts and circumstances
of Gods worship, which were every one under the penalty of a curse to be
punctually observed, are now in force under, and as rules for the Economy of
the Gospel. For that will be to bring back again, and make necessary all the
former legal administrations; because there must be no Diminutions from Gods
Word. For by what Texts of Scripture are forbidden all Additions to the word of
God, by the same Texts are forbidden all Diminutions from his Word. And if we
must do nothing more than has been commanded, because we must not add; then we
must do nothing less, because we must not diminish. And so we must fall again
to Circumcision, and all the outdated services of the Law, and in plain terms,
turn Jews.

. 26. If it be said, that the not doing of things now, that were commanded
then, is no Diminution, because there has been a disannulling of the
Commandment going before (Heb. 7. 18); then I answer that for the same reason
the doing of things now, that were not commanded then, is no addition. And
those Texts must be in force both ways, or neither way; reaching unto all
Diminutions, or else not extending unto all Additions. Besides, if the
Commandment be dis^nnulled, then it is no Commandment. And how there should
either from, or to, a no Commandment be made any diminution, or addition, is
not so very easy to understand. How can any thing be done either more or less
than is commanded, when there is no command? And a command disannulled is
annihilated as to all existency of being a command: and is now none.

. 27. If it be replied that the equity of those Texts remains still. And that
therefore as nothing was to be done in the time of the Law, but what was
written in the Book of the Law: so nothing is to be done in the time of the
Gospel, but what is written in the Book of the Gospel. I answer, No. Thus far
the equity of them remains, that what is commanded in the Gospel, be done as it
is commanded: and what is forbidden, be forborne. But it does not reach to the
making of every thing unlawful to be done, which is not particularly
prescribed in the Gospel. Because there is a great dispa^ity between the Legal
and Evangelical Dispensation in this case.

. 28. In the Legal Economy particular order was given for all the
circumstantial as well as substantial parts of Gods service. But in the
Economy of the Gospel no such particular Order has been given. And so the case
is not equal. And therefore the Argument from the one to the other, from a
completely settled administration to an administration not completely settled, is
not good.

. 29. Find us in the Gospel so complete a Platform not only for all
Substantials, but also for all Circumstantials, as was under the Law, and we
shall not think fit, upon the account of the equity that is pleaded from those
Texts, to add any thing thereto. But till then, we shall neither think it unfit
for the Governors of the Church, to whom Christ has Act. 1. 8. and 15. 28. 1
Cor. 14. 26, 40. 2 Cor. 12. 19. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. Tit. 1. 5.
left the power of ordering Church affairs, to order such things as are
unordered by the Gospel, nor for those that are under government to be
conformable unto their Orders, and consequently to baptize Infants though the^r
baptizing had not by the Gospel been ordered.

. 30. And by this time I hope it appears, that, even their own sense of these
Texts supposed, which yet I do not grant, that whole way of reasoning of
theirs, from the prohibitions of additions to the commands under the Law, to
the not doing of any uncommanded thing under the Gospel, is inconsequent, and
of no force against Infants Baptism.

. 31. Yea but, say they still, there is as full and clear a Text against adding
to the word of God in the Gospel, as there was any under the Law. Is there so?
I pray, where? Why in Revel. 22. 18. If any man shall add unto these things,
God shall add unto him the plagues, that are written in this Book. Well, what
of this? Why then Infants Baptism being not written in the Gospel, is an
addition to the Gospel, and so unlawful.

. 32. Not so. For the adding here spoken of has reference only to this one
Book of the Revelation, and not to the Gospel, as that is one entire volume,
containing all the Books of the New Testament. For they were not put altogether
into one Book till some years after the death of the Author of the Revelation:
it being long ere sundry of the Books now in the Canon were received into it.
Yea, there be that affirm the Gospel of this Evangelist Eusebius. Hist. l. 6. cap
22. It is certain that he was banished into Patmos where he wrote his
Revelation and after his Return to Ephesus his three Epistles and Gospel. which
was published by Gaius his host and Deacon. Bp. Prideaux Introduct. to Histor.
p. 60. According to Bucholcer in his Chronology (page 635.) he was banished
Anno Christi 96 to Patmos, where he writ his Revelation: Anno Christi 98 he
returned from banishment to Ephesus where in Anno 99 he wrote his Gospel: for
which he quotes Hierom-Cum publico edicto edito jussisse^ omnes Christianos,
and maxim praedicatores Evangelii pelli in exilium, profugere Joannes coactus
est in Pathmon insulam ubi dicitur Apocalypsin scripsisse, si modo illius author
est hic Joannes -- Tandem trucidato Domitiano permissa est Christianis libertas
redeundi, itaque reversus est Joannes ad Ecclesiam suam Ephesinam, and
tranquillitatem nactus scripsit contra Ebionitas, Marcionem, and Cherintum
[Cerinthum] haereticos Evangelium suum -- Herman. Bonnus. Farrag Exemplor. fol.
7. See also Isaacksons Chronology; and Hutcheson upon John, page 1. The same
may be further confirmed from several other Chronologies, as that of Regino
Prumiensis; Hermannus Contractus; Marianus Scotus; the Compilatlo Chronologica
published by Joannes Pistorius; the Pantheon of Gotsridus Viterbiensis; and
W^rner Role^inks Fasciculus Temporum; also from Spondanus's Epitome of
Baronius, Anno Christ. 97, and 99.
to have been written after his Revelation. And therefore what is here said
could have reference to it self only, and not to the other Books which were
written by others, or to be written by himself.

. 33. And however that the reference of it is only unto it self, is evident by
what goes before, and after, in this, and the following verse. For I testify,
says the Author of this Book, unto every man that he^reth the words of the
Prophecy of this Bo^k, If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add
unto him the plagues that are writt^n in this Book This Book. What Book? Why
that, sure enough, that himself was then a writing; the Book of the Revelation
containing those Prophesies, which God was pleased to impart unto him, and
appoint him to write in a book, Rev. 1. 11. Which book, even whilst he was a
writing of it, he frequently makes reference unto: as where he mentions the
Words of this Prophecy, and the things which are written therein, Rev. 1. 3.
and the sayings of the prophecy of this book; and the sayings of this book;
and the words of the proph^sie of this book; and the words of the book of this
prophecy, Rev. 22. 7, 9, 10, 18, 19. All, expressions intimating the book he
spoke of, to be that book which himself was then writing, containing the
prophesies and predictions of the things that were to come, and the most of
them in a short time, whence the sayings of the prophecy of this book were not
to be sealed, the time being at hand, Rev. 22. 10.

34. Now let our Antipaedobaptists here have his own sense of Adding; let it
import the doing of something not commanded. And what will then follow? Why,
that nothing is lawful to be done now in the time of the Gospel, but that
which is contained in this Book, the Book of the Revelation But that, he will
tell you, cannot be. For so we shall have no Baptism at all: because none is
commanded in the Revelation.

. 35. What then is the Adding here spoken against? Plainly this, and no more,
the putting of some word or words to this Book. This is evident by that which
is not to be taken away. For contraries la^d together do illustrate each the
other. Now that, the taking away, is meant of any of the words (...) Si quis
abstulerit de Verbis libri, Versio interlinearis si quis diminuerit de verbis
-- Verse. Vulg. and Syriac. Si quis detraxerit ex verbis Prophetiae quae
continentur in hoc libro. Verse. Arab.
of it. For so it is in ver. 19. If any man shall take away from the words of
the book of this Prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of
life, etc. What, I pray, can be taken away from the words of a book, but words
or some part of the words? So that in accordance here with the adding here
forbidden is the putting of any word or words to the words of this book, more,
or other, then were at first set down in it, by the Author of it; whose design
is to prevent any Hoc propter insalsatores dixit Gor^an. in loc. cx Beda.
man's corrupting of his book by addition or diminution, by putting any word to
it, or taking any word from it.

. 36. And this was a caution but necessary for those times, when Heretics
began to corrupt the Apostolical writings with their Innuit futuros in Ecclesia
Hareticos qui Scripturas sa^ras adulterarent, atque ad eas cor. rumpendas, and
in ^uos errores detorquendas quaedam adjicerent, quaedam ^^iam mutilarent. Id
quod de Marcione testatur multis in locis Tertullianus: Et in primis quod plura
deleret in sacris literis ad suas haerereses astruendas docet, l. de carne
Christi. cap. 2. His opinor consiliis tot originalia instrumenta Christi delere
Marcion conatus est. Vnde eundem Marcionem Tertullian, lib. adv. eum 1 cap. 1.
Murem Ponticum appellat Evangelium corrodentem. Quod vero Marcion de suo
quaedam Scripturis adjiceret, docet idem lib. de carne Christi, c. 7. Non
recipio inquit, quod extra Scripturam, de tuo infers. Quod de Marcione docet
Tertull. in multis aliis Hareticis ostendi posset quos uti diximus hoc loco
notavit Apostolus. Blas. Vieg. in Apocalypse. cap. 22. Sect ult. p. 893. Adjuro
te, qui transcribis librum istum, per Dominum Jesum Christum, and per glo^iosum
ejus adventum. etc.
own interpolations. And of Marcions so dealing with the Sacred Scriptures,
both by taking away from them, and adding to them, Tertullian is a witness, who
from his gnawing away of the Gospel calls him the Pontick Mouse. And Blasius
Viegas tells us the like may be shown of many other Heretics. In reference to
which evil dealing of Corrupters with Authors, Irenaeus imitation of our
Author, at the end of one of his own books, adjures the Transcriber of it, by
the Lord Jesus Christ, and his glorious coming to judge both quick and dead, to
compare his copy with the Original, and most diligently to amend it by the
exemplar from whence he had transcribed it.

. 37. Now who is so weak as not to see how nothing at all this makes against
Infants baptism? and how remote it is from proving every thing unlawful that
is not commanded? A child is able to distinguish betwixt a Font and a Standish;
water and ink; an Infant and a Bible; pouring water upon the one, and putting
words into the other; and how no connection there is between the one and the
other; so that from the prohibition of the one to the unlawfulness of the other
no Argument can be drawn.

. 38. And if the want of a Command cannot render Infants baptism unlawful;
then much less can the want of an Example: unless we were under some command
not to act without a precedent, nor to proceed further than we have example.
But that as we have not, so I do not hear it pretended as yet. And therefore
though I think we may in some cases, (I will not say in all) argue positively
from an example, and say, this I lawfully may do, because I find it done, yet I
do not think we must in all cases argue negatively from a no example, and say,
this I may not lawfully do, because I find no example of its doing. So that if
there were not the least intimation of any such thing done in the Scripture,
nor any thing whereby we might conjecture the doing of any such thing, the
contrary whereto has abundantly been shown in this discourse, yet were not that
any Argument at all from whence to conclude Infants Baptism unlawful.

. ^9. And now having shown the no unlawfulness of ^nfants baptism, though there
were in all the Scripture no either command to enjoin it, or example to just
^fie it, I might here set up my rest.

. 40. Nevertheless, as being willing to give the fullest satisfaction that can
be needed, I shall yet ex abundanti further speak touching that often urged,
but never proved assertion, that our Savior gave no precept for the baptizing
of Infants, and that the Apostles of our ^aviour never baptized any; both which
yet might be, though nothing were said of either; and the Scriptures supposed
silence in the case is no proof, either that he did not command, or they not
practice any such thing. I will speak of both severally.

CHAP. XXXIII.
The Scriptures silence no proof of our Saviors not commanding the baptizing
of Infants.

. 1. ANd first, it does not follow that our Savior gave no precept for the
baptizing of Infants, because no such precept is particularly (as our
Adversaries suppose) expressed in the Scripture. For our Savior spoke many
things to his Disciples concerning the kingdom of God, both before his Passion,
and also after his Resurrection, which are not written in the Scriptures. And
who can say, but that among those many unwritten sayings of his there might be
an express precept for Infants baptism? And if there were one, it is never the
less binding for its not being written. It is Gods speaking, not man's writing
that makes his word Authentic, and his command obliging. If no Apostle, nor
Evngelist had ever set pen to paper to tell us by writing, what our Savior did
command, sure his commands had been as obliging, though unwritten, as they are
now after their writing. And if any command of his did escape writing, as well
might be, the Evangelists neither resolving every one severally, nor agreeing
all jointly, to set down in writing all his commands, as writing at several
times, and in several places, and upon several occasions, and without any
command (that appea^s) from God to set down universally all his sayings, and
make one Codex, as it were, of all his Laws; I say, if any of his commands did
escape writing, See Dr. Hammonds Quaere of Resolving of Controversies.
it does notwithstanding bind those, to whom it is, though by any other way
than writing, credibly made known, as much as if it had been written. So that
if it may credibly appear, that our Savior did give any precept for the
baptizing of Infants, then will Infants baptism be to be received and practiced
upon a higher account, than that of the mere lawfulness of it, as being though
not commanded, yet not forbidden in the Scriptures.

. 2. And truly, to pass by S. Ambrose his affirming that Infants Baptism was a
Constitution And they all agree with St. Ambrose l. 10. ep. 84. ad Demetriadem
Virginem, who expressly affirms it. Paedobaptismum esse Constitutionem
Salvatoris. And it proves it out of St. Joh. 3. 5. A. B. Laud Confer. S. 15.
page 55. in margin.
of our Saviors, that such a Precept was given by him, the very practice of
the Church to baptize Infants (as we have shown it to be,) does make it
credible. For it is not easily imaginable how such a practice should come up so
early, and so universally into the Primitive Church, if the Church had not
received it from the Apostles as a command of Christ's to baptize Infants.

. 3. Who that understood it to have been our Saviors command to teach all
nations to observe all things whatsoever he had commarded them, (Matthew. 28. 19,
20.) and observed the Apostles teaching, by word or practice, the baptizing of
Infants, could judge any other, but that the Baptism of Infants was one of
those things, which he had commanded them to teach all nations to observe?
Though I have also shown, that even our Saviors silence in the case, not
excluding Infants from that, which it had been the use of the Church before his
time to administer to them, when he did institute Baptism to be the Ceremony of
admitting into Discipleship to him, is a sufficient indication of his mind,
that it was his will they should be admitted; especially when it is remembered
and considered, that the same use that was before his Institution, was
continued still after it: which makes it evident, that he made no alteration in
it.

. 4. Not to add, that this very Text of mine was anciently looked upon as a
ground, and even as a command of our Saviors, for Infants Baptism. And
therefore St. Augustine having exhorted the Pelagian to Quare contradicis?
quare novie disputationibus antiquam fidei regulam frengere conaris? Quid est
enim quod dicis? Parvuli non babent omnino vet originale peccatum? Quid est
enim quod dicis, nisi ut non accedant ad Jesum? Sed tihi clama^ Jesus, Sinite
pueros venire ad me. D. Aug, Sermon. 8. de Verb. Apost.
baptize his Infant, expostulates with him for contradicting, and going abour
with new disputes to break the old Rule of Faith; namely in the point of the
baptizing of Infants upon the account of Original Sin in them. For whereto,
says he, tends your saying, that children have no, not so much as original
sin; but to this, that they might not come to Jesus? that is to be baptized,
that being the thing which he before had pressed him to. But (says he) Jesus
cries to thee (that sure is as much as if he had commanded) Suffer the little
children to come unto me, that is to be baptized: as is evident by the design
of the Father in that place.

. 5. And accordingly Tertullian, who lived within two hundred years of our
Saviors birth, De Baptismo, page 264. Edit. Rigalt.
thinking this Text to oppose his Opinion, which was for the delaying of the
Baptism of Infants for a while, yet not as unlawful, but as more profitable,
as he phansied, propounds this Text as an Objection against his. Opinion, and
labors to answer it. Which shows however that even so early as his time, this
Text was looked upon as a Precept for Infants Baptism.

. 6. And what says he to it? Why by way of Concession he says, Our Lord does
indeed say, Do not hinder them from coming to me. And what then? Why then let
them come when they are grown up to ripeness of years. Yea, but if they must
stay so long before they be baptized, they will not be little ones when they
come to baptism; and so will not be concerned in this Text, which speaks of the
coming not of Adult persons, but of young children unto Christ. He says not,
Suffer those that are Adult, but Suffer little children to come unto me. And
his saying, Suffer little children to come unto me, imports his mind to have
them come, and his readiness to receive them at their coming to him, even when,
and whilst they are little children. And what man of judgment, would ever have
interpreted our Saviors saying, Suffer the little children to come unto me and
forbid them not, at a time when little children were brought to him, and
hindered, for being brought to him so little, as if he had by so saying meant,
Suffer these, which now are little children, to come to me hereafter, when they
shall be men? that is, as much as to say, Suffer them not to come to me now:
which is to command the very same thing which at the very same time he rebuked
his Disciples for going about to do; and contrary to his present acting, who
even then turned them not away from him, but took them up into his arms, and
laid his hands upon them, and blessed them. A gloss this, that contradicts, and
corrupts the Text.

. 7. Again, says he, Veniant dum discunt, etc. Let them come when they have
learned, and are taught whither to come. But those, whose coming to Christ
occasioned this speech, and according to whose then present condition the
speech is to be understood, were not such, nor so taught, not such as had
learned, or could be taught how to come to Christ: but were Infants brought to
him by others by reason of their inability to come to him of This passage of
Tertullian because it is much stood upon, see further spoken to, und more fully
answered by B. Gauden Eccles. Anglic. Suspiria, l. 3. c. 13. p. 299. And by Mr.
Wills Infant Baptism Asserted, Par. 2. chap. 7.
themselves: and of them then, and of such as they then were are his words now
to be understood, and accordingly have been understood in all the ages of the
Church: to be sure as early as Tertullians time: else why did he dispute
against it?

. 8. But if there were neither this, nor any other Text, that was, or looked
like, a Precept for Infants Baptism, in the whole Bible, yet there might have
been one given, though none were written. And what probability there is of it
that one was given, if none of those Texts that are written were by the
practice of the Church interpreted to be such, I have now shown.

CHAP. XXXIV.
The Scriptures silence no proof of the Apostles baptizing no Infa^ts.

. 1. SEcondly, as it follows not, that our Savior gave no express precept for
Infants baptism, because none is written, that is, none is written so expressly
as to be acknowledged for such by the Antipaedobaptists, though my Text, as I
have shown you, is so express as to have been taken for such in St. Augustines
time, and in Tertullians time, fourteen hundred, and fifteen hundred years ago,
and for ought I know, or any man living can prove to the contrary, from the
beginning: so it does not follow, that the Apostles did baptize no Infants,
because it is not expressly written in the Scriptures, that they did baptize
any; though I have shown you from the Scripture a very pregnant proof of such
practice even by the Apostles themselves in their own times, did not prejudice
so blind the eyes of our Adversaries that they will not see it. For they might
baptize Infants, though it were not expressed in their extant writings that
they did so.

. 2. A^e all things written in the Scriptures, that all the Twelve Apostles did
in all places, where they came, and preached, gathered, and settled Churches?
Yea, how little is there written of what was done by any of them? And how many
are there of them, of whom there is nothing written at all; neither what they
did, nor whither they went, nor what became of them? Did they nothing of whose
doings nothing is written? who are at least one half of the whole number of the
Apostles. And if they did any thing, as sure enough they would be doing, they
might as well do that, baptize Infants, as any thing else, for any thing, that
is written, And where we find Infants Baptism in a Church planted by an
Apostle, as in Mus^ovia, Christianized by St. Andrew, or in India by St.
Thomas. Why may we not think that planted there by that Apostle, as well as
other Christian Customs or Constitutions, though in the Scripture there be a
deep silence as to the whole Story. And there is as good proof, that they did
not any thing else, of all those things which our Savior commanded them, as
that they did not that: because no more is written of any thing else that they
did, than of that, which is just nothing at all.

. 3. And they of whose doings any thing is written, did they no more, than just
what was written? Were they so exact in keeping, and publishing Diaries of all
their actions? Not a word said? not a deed done, but what was book'd down? How
many persons do you read of that were baptized by Paul in all that time that he
continued preaching the Gospel, and planting the Church of Christ at Rome? And
do ye think none were baptized by him, or at his command all the while? Can
there be a Church founded, and formed up without baptism? And if any were
baptized, where is it written in Scripture, who, what, or how many they were?
Again, do ye think the Saints at Rome did never commemorate the death of Christ
in the celebration of the Eucharist? If yea, what mention is there of it in
Scripture? In what book, chapter, verse is it to be read? No doubt both the one
and the other Sacrament was by Paul's instructing and ordering received there:
and yet is the Scripture profoundly silent as to any such thing. And who now
will be so silly as from the Scriptures silence to draw a negative conclusion,
and say no such thing was done there, because the Scripture says nothing of the
doing of it. The like may be said of other Apostles, and the Churches planted
by them.

. 4. Unless therefore that which is written were a perfect register of all that
was done by all, and every one of the Apostles, as it is not of the doings of
either all, or one half, or any one of them, it cannot be proved, that no one
of them did any thing, or appointed any thing to be done, (for instance to
baptize Infants) because it is not extant in those few scanty memoires, and
intimations rather than relations, of some actions of some few of them, written
for the most part occasionally, which are come to our hands, that any one of
them d^d it. They might therefore do it, though their doing of it be not
expressly written in the Scriptures.

. 5. And that they did it, or however so far delivered their mind concerning
it, that done it was, and upon the account of their authority is most credible.
Because the Practice thereof is, and has been, looked on in all the Ages of the
Church, succeeding that, wherein they lived, as a Tradition of theirs. And that
Tradition from them is as credibly avouched to us, as their writing those
several Fpistles and Gospels, which we receive for their writings, and look
upon as the word of God. And we may as well receive the one upon that Tradition
as the other, and with as good reason reject the one as the other. We have the
Testimony of the Church for the one, and we have but the Testimony of the
Church for the other. And if we may believe the Church, when it tells us the
Apostles wr^ those Books, why may we not as well believe it, when it tells us
the Apostles ordered that thing? And if it be of no credit in the latter, let
our adversaries consider whether they do not by so saying, derogate from, and
destroy all its credit in the former. And so the matter is at last come to
this, that either we must have no new Testament Scriptures, or else we must
have Infants baptism. The new Testament, and this Sacrament of it, must for
ought I see, ever stand and fall together: both standing upon one bottom,
Catholic Tradition, which must bear up both, or neither; not being able to
support the one, if it cannot support the other also.

. 6. I will not say but that some few (one or two, for many hundreds of years)
may have thought it not necessary to be administered so soon as in the prime of
Infancy, unless in case of death. But their not thinking it necessary then, is
a suffic^ent evidence of their opinion of its lawfulness at other times. For
what is not lawful at other times, cannot be necessary even then.

. 7. And what ever reason we find any of the Ancients had to think it fitter to
defer it, I am of opinion we shall never find the unlawfulness of it to have
been any of their reasons. Tertullian thought the deferring of it Quid enim
necesse est Sponsores etiam periculo ingeri? quia and ipsi per mortalitatem
destituere promissiones suas possunt, and proventu malae indolis falli. Tert.
de Bapt.
was more profitable; but not the doing of it unlawful; to be sure he does not
say so. And what is his reason against the necessity of it? That the Godfathers
might not be brought into danger of failing in their undertaking, by their own
mortality, or the Infants untowardness. The deferring of it might then be
prudential, but that makes not the doing of it unlawful. And if he thought it
prudential to defer it, others as judicious as he have thought it no less
prudence to hasten it. And so his opinion in that case signifies nothing as to
our present concern.

. 8. Perhaps some might think it prudence to defer it, to avoid the exposing of
so sacred an administration to the jeers of profane scoffers. Dionysius the
Areopagite mentions Eccl. Hier. c. 12.
some such in his days, as jeered at the Sureties being interrogated and
answering in the Infants name. And no doubt there are now such in our days as
think that practice ridiculous enough. But still be it as ridiculous as any has
imagined it, that renders it not unlawful. And if every thing must be laid by
that any will think ridiculous, we shall have little left, either of our
Worship or Doctrine. When some heard of the Resurrection they mocked (Acts 17.
32.) But, as wise and pious persons will not be jeered out of a practice that
is solemn and serious and of weighty concern by the raillery of a few
aieny-brain'd phantasticks, so it is beside the question in hand; and if any
have thought fit to defer it on that account, that is no argument of the
unlawfulness of it.

. 9. Some perhaps imagining the Contract made by the Persons themselves, though
never so young, but three or four years old, so they could but answer
themselves to what was to be required of them in order to their baptizing,
would afterward be accounted by themselves the more obligatory, and have
stronger impressions upon them than if made by others, have thought it fitter
to defer it for a while. I dispute not the prudentiality of the consideration:
but only say that the prudency, be it never so great, of its deferring longer,
can infer no unlawfulness on its doing sooner. And it seems to me, that there
are more weighty considerations inclining to, and pressing for the hastening of
it, than that, or any I have yet met with for the deferring, because the
generality have this way showed themselves inclined by baptizing their children
whilst Infants.

. 10. And since we have so many weighty considerations moving to hasten it,
being we are assured by a late learned Father of our B. Gawden Eccles. Angl.
Suspir. p. 299.
Church, that there is not any one of the Ancients that does deny its
lawfulness, I see no reason why any suggestions or pretenses of inconveniency,
unnecessariness, or novelness in that practice by an inconsiderable number of
persons either of elder or later times, should sway us against the vogue of the
Catholic Church, to deposite a Consti^ution in which we see there is so much
convenience, for which we see there is so great necessity, of which we see
there is so great antiquity; antiquity reaching up, both unto, and also into,
the Apostles Age as being delivered unto the Church by them.

CHAP. XXXV.
The Argument from the sixth Article of our Church answered.

. 1. YEa, but is it not the express Doctrine of our Church that Holy Scripture
contains all things necessary to salvation? Yes. And what then? Is Infants
Baptism therefore unlawful? No such matter. It follows not. I hope there are
more things lawful, than what are either necessary to salvation, or are
contained in holy Scripture.

. 2. But what then follows! Why this. That, supposing Infants baptism were
neither read in Scripture, nor could be proved thereby, it were not to be
believed as an Article of the Faith, nor were the belief of it to be thought
necessary to salvation. But sure a thing is not therefore unlawful, because it
is not to be received as an Article of the Faith; or because its belief is not
necessary to salvation. And so this Article, even on that supposition, fights
not with the lawfulness of Infants Baptism.

. 3. But we deny the supposition, and say that Infants Baptism is contained in
the Holy Nullum dari potest dogma ad salutem obtinendam cognitu necessarium,
quod in Scriptura non contineatur express e vel implicit, and analogi^e, ita
u^ per consequentiam legitimam inde elici possit. Wendelin Theolog. Proleg. c.
3 These. 7. Cum dico perspicue intelligo vel in se, vel per se: vel in suis
principiis and per aliud. Hier. Zanch. de Sacra Script. q. S. prop. 1. page
194. Etsi enim non extet expressum praeceptum hac de re (sc. de baptizan. ^is
infantibus fidelium liberis) colligitur tamen perspicue ex suis principiis, hoc
est, ex causis propter quas conferendus sit alicui baptismus, etc. Id. ib. page
195.
Scriptures, in that manner as other things are, that are not expressed in it,
but yet may be deduced from it, namely eminently though not formally,
implicitly though not expressly; so as all Points of Faith are contained in the
Creed, that are not expressed in it: or as all Duties are contained in the
Decalogue, or all Petitions are contained in the Lords Prayer, that are not
particularly and formally expressed therein.

. 4. And that it may be proved thereby, I hope this Discourse has already
given a sufficient evidence. And before I conclude, I will yet add one further
proof of it: and that such an one as though some think not conclusive of the
Point, yet that acute Divine as well as Heroic prelate, A. B. Laud, thought to
be a direct proof, and near an expression in Scripture it self. It Is Acts 2.
38, 39. Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in
the Name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the
gift of the Holy Ghost. For the promise is unto you, and to your children, etc.
But how does this prove Infants Baptism? Why, let that learned Man tell you in
his own words. For when St. Peter had ended that great Sermon of his, Acts 2.
he applies two comforts unto them, ver. 38. Amend your lives, and be baptized,
and you shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. And then ver. 39. he infers,
For the Promise is made to you, and to your children. The Promise; what
Promise? What? why the Promise of Sanctification by the Holy Ghost. By what
means? Why, by Baptism. For it is expressly, Be baptized, and ye shall receive.
And as expressly, This promise is made to you, and to your children. And
therefore A. C. may find it, if he will, That the Baptism of Infants may be
directly concluded out of Scripture.

. 5. But Infants are not named here. True; Yet Children are. But those children
might be men. Yes, and they might be Infants also. I conceive the word is
exclusive of neither, but inclusive of both. Unless any will say that the
Infants were no children; or that the promise that was made to the children as
well as persons of the then present hearers, was made only to such of their
children as were men and not Infants; which is easilier said, than proved. For
the Apostle says to your children; that is all of them; not only some of them;
all of them being capable of the thing prom^sed, and none of them being
exempted from the benefit of the promise. And where God has enlarged the
bounds, why should man enclose the Common? where God has made a restriction?
Where God has been kind, why should Man become cruel, and shut out Infants from
the benefits of a promise, when God has opened a door wide enough to let them
in to it?

. 6. It is true, the word Children is not always to be understood of Infants,
but sometimes of Men: and as true it is that it is not always to be understood
of Men, but sometimes of Infants: and as true again it is that sometimes it
includes both. For when the children of Israel went into the midst of the sea
upon the dry ground, (Exodus 14. 22.) Were those children all men? Had they no
Infants among them? Did they leave them any where behind them? I think it will
not be said. In as much then as no distinction is here made, it includes the
Infant as well as Men children of Is^ael. And the rather because where God
would have it to signify Men exclusively as to children, himself makes a
restriction. As in Exodus 12. 37. And the children of Israel journeyed from
Ramesis to Succoth, about six hundred thousand on foot, that were men, beside
children. No distinction then being made of the children into Men children, and
Infant children, it is by Analogy of Scripture, as well as Judgment of Reason
to be understood of both. And if it be to be understood of both, then what
right the men had to Baptism by this Text, the Infants had the same, and were
to be baptized for the remission of sins, and reception of the Holy Ghost as
well as they. And admit, we say, you, and your children, does intend the then
present Jews, and their posterity; yet sure none can think the Apostle meant
that the promise did belong to their posterity only, and not to their present
children also. For why should it belong to those that after should be their
children, and not to those that then were? Why should these be skipt over and
the other taken in? And would not their after children be once in a state of
infancy as well as their present? Would they not be children before they could
be men? And at what period of their age must their right to the pomise first
commence? When must they begin to be receptive of the Holy Ghost? Here Is no
restriction or limitation made as to times, any more then as to persons; to
show that both then, and afterward, to all that were, or should be their
children, as soon as ever, and as long as ever any should be in that relation,
the promise did belong.

. 7. Again, admit we interpret the children as meaning only such of their
children, whether then or after, as were in that capacity that the persons then
present with the Apostles, and to whom St. Peter spoke, were: still the
business will be done, and effectually. For St. Peter spoke to that whole
multitude that was come together upon the noise of what was happened unto the
Apostles. And to them he said, be baptized every one of you. So then every one
of the then present multitude was capable of baptism. Now is it imaginable that
so great, and so confused a multitude coming together on a sudden accident,
could consist all of persons qualified for age and understanding in principles
of Christianity, according to the Antipaedobaptistical measures of capability
to receive baptism? What? were they all Adult persons? no children? no infants,
at least of three, four, five, or six years old, among them? We may make an
estimate of the matter by what we daily see amongst our selves on like
occasions. Where is it possible to find a Fair, or Market, or other solemn
convention of any remark in which some of age under the Antipaedobaptists
standard of capacity for baptizing shall not be immixed? especially if that
convention be sudden, and tumultuary, as this was, when a whole Town flocks
together, as when a fire happens, or any sray is fought, or game is played, or
show is seen. What running is there on such occasions of mothers, and servants
after their children, to secure them from the injuries of the multitude, and
save them from being trodden under foot? And we can imagine nothing less then a
miracle in it if this assembly were not such. And if such it were, then what
would we have more than an exhortation of the Prince of the Apostles with the
concurrence of all his Coapostles to such a multitude to be baptized every one
of them? What is this less than a Precept for Infants baptism, And though none
of them were sucklings, yet if any of them were Infants (and infancy is a state
of some latitude) though able to run about and play, yet unable rationally to
profess repentance toward God, and Confession of Faith setforth by
Anabaptists, Anno 1660. page 6.
faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, the case is all one as to the difference
between us and the Antipaedobaptists, and Infants baptism will hence be
established.

. 8. Yea, but these words are spoken to persons capable of repenting. And they
only are bidden to be baptized, who are capable of so doing.

. 9. I answer, First it is plain the words were spoken to a confused multitude;
and it cannot be proved that there were none in it but such as were so capable;
no demonstration can be made of it, that there were no Infants mixed with it.
And therefore when the Apostle says to that multitude, be baptized every one of
you, it cannot be proved that he had those only of them to be baptized, which
were capable of repenting.

. 10. Secondly, the words were spoken of Persons capable of receiving the Holy
Ghost: but their children were capable of that: and therefore of baptism the
means to make them partakers thereof. And sure their inability to repent, could
not render them incapable, unless they had been persons that (...) Greg. Naz.
Orat. 40. p. 658. Edit. Paris.
needed repentance, and of whom it had been required that they should repent.
It Is hardheartedness sure, and that to a high degree, for want of that duty
which they have not need nor ability to perform, to deprive them of that
benefit which they have need of, and capability to receive; to deny them the
means of being made partakers of the Holy Ghost, who as they do not act
repentance, so they need not to repent: and need not to repent because they act
no sin.

. 11. Thirdly, the Reason inducing the Jews to be baptized, is applied to their
children as well as to themselves; which were needless, if their children were
not capable of baptizing, as well as themselves. Be baptized every one of you.
Why? For the promise is made to you and to your children. No need of mentioning
the childrens right to the Promise, if that did not give them a right to the
Means. The Argument as applied to the Parents lies thus. If the promise belong
to you, then the means. But the former does belong to you. Therefore the
latter. And therefore be baptized, which is the means, that you may receive the
Holy Ghost, which is the Promise. And lies it not just so as applied to their
Children? If the promise belong to your Children, then the means also belongs
to them. But the Promise belongs to them; for it is made to them as well as
unto you. Therefore the means also belongs to them. And therefore let your
children have the means, that they may not want the grace, let them be baptized
that they may receive the Holy Ghost.

. 12. Again, that which he would have them baptized for, namely remission of
sins, is sufficiently I hope proved to be needful for children as well as
parents. And where there is the same need, why should we not think he designed
the same help? When he bad the Parents be baptized for the remission of sins,
can it be thought his meaning was that the children should rather go without
remission, than have baptism? as if he had some compassion indeed for the
parents, but none for the children.

. 13. But if he meant their child^en as well as themselves should be baptized,
why did he not say, Be baptized both you and your children, but only be
baptized your selves, without any mention of their children. I answer, It was
needless so to say, because as one that well understood the Genius of that
people, he knew that they would look upon their children as heirs of the
promise, as well as themselves, and so to be as capable of, and to have as good
right to the means, that would make them partahers of the promise, as
themselves; and because he intended particularly to urge that reason for their
baptizing, which would be as appliable to their children as to themselves, and
which they accordingly, observing the custom He that would see this Text
further opened and urged, may consult Mr. Nathaniel Stephen's Precept for the
Baptism of Infants.
of their nation to circumcise, and baptize the children as well as parents,
would apply unto them.

. 14. And thus I have shown the Practice of this Church to baptize Infants not
to be inconsistent with that Article of the Church which is urged against it.
And I hope I have sufficiently answered the Antipaedo baptists Arguments
against the Lawfulness of Infants baptism, and defended it against them.

CHAP. XXXVI.
A Reply to an Answer made by H. D. to the Objection from the no express
Command or Example in Scripture of Women's receiving the Lords Supper; referring
to Chap. 31. Sect. 9.

Obj. THe Objection (says H: D:) that is usually brought under this Head, is,
That there is no express Command or Example for Women's receiving the Lords
Supper; yet who doubts of a good ground from consequential Scripture for their
so doing.

Answ. In answer whereto, you will find there is both Example and Command for the
Practice, viz.

1. From Example, Acts 1. 14. where we read, that Mary and other women were
gathered together, and that these women together with the rest of the
Disciples, were altogether in one place, and continued steadfastly in the
Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and breaking of Bread and Prayers, chap. 2.
42, 44. It being expressly said, That all that believed were together.

2. It appears from Command, 1 Cor. 11. 28. Let a man examine himself, and so
let him eat: The Greek word signifies a Man or a Woman; the word is (...), a
word of the Common Gender, as appears, 1 Timothy 2. 4, 5. There is one Mediator
betwixt God and Man, and Woman; there is the same word used, Gal. 3. 2. There
is neither Male nor Female, but ye are all one in Christ. Let but as good proof
appear (from Command and Example) for Infants Baptism, and it shall suffice.
Thus far H. D. Edit. 2. p. 95, 96.

Having my self with others, made this Objection, and finding nothing replied
by Mr. Wills to this Answer made thereto, I think it convenient to take away
the force thereof by the ensuing Reply.

And first I say, that the Allegation that Mary and other Women were gathered
together, Acts 1. 14, will not prove that there is express example for women's
receiving the Lords Supper. For though the Apostles continuing with one accord
in prayer and supplication with the women, and Mary the Mother of Jesus be
mentioned there, yet is no mention there made of their continuing, or so much
as being with them at the Sacrament of the Supper of the Lord. Nor is it there,
or any where, expressly said, that these women together with the rest of the
Disciples were altogether in one place, and continued steadfastly in the
Apostles Doctrine, and Fellowship, and breaking of Bread, and Prayers.

It is said indeed, Acts 1. 15. That in those days Peter stood up in the midst
of the Disciples. But how does it appear, that any Women were among them at
that Assembly? They are not mentioned. And the word (...) Disciples, does not
necessarily by the force of its literal import imply them. For that is the
proper word for male or he-disciples; there are two other words (...) and (...)
for female or she-disciples; and if the she-disciples had been intended, why
was not one of the words proper for them used to include them? But further the
Apostles address is expressly to men, and not to women. His words are not so
much as (...), which might be thought to take in the women, but (...) men (in a
word whose literal import excludes women) and brethren. So that unless by Men
and Brethren must be meant (and expressly too, or else all is nothing) women and
sisters here will be no room for the women here.

Again in Acts 2. 1. They that were all-with one accord in one place, are
mentioned (...) word of the masculine gender, (...). So in ver. 2. (...). So in
ver. 3. (...). So in ver. 4. (...) and (...) again. So in ver. 7. (...). So in
ver. 13. (...). So in ver. 15. (...) again. So in ver. 37. (...), all
expressions necessarily implying men, but not necessarily implying women, if
not necessarily excluding them.

And who was it that continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, and
Fellowship, and breaking of Bread, and Prayer, chapter 2. 42. the women? It is not
so expressed. But (...) expressly the Males that gladly received his word, which
(...) continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, etc. To whom before their
conversion the Apostle addresses his speech as to Men, and not Women; (...),
that is his word, ver. 29. Men and Brethren. And to, and of whom after their
conversion he still speaks as to persons of the male sex, as far as we can
guess by the gender of his words. Ver. 38. Peter said unto them (...); and
again (...) every one of you, i. e. in the literal import, every male of you.

Nor does it prove it, that it is said, chapter 2. 44. That all that believed wore
together. For still they are persons of the male sex, that there expressly are
spoken of, if (...) (...), words all of the masculine gender denote any such
thing: of which gender still are all the words that denote their persons to the
end of the Chapter; (...); and (...), ver. 46. (...) and (...), v. 47.

I might add that its being said, that all that believed were together, does
not prove, that the whole multitude of believers men and women were always all
together, never asunder, but all, in all places, and at all times, and in all
actions, still together. (...) will not enforce that.

I might add also, that it is not demonstrable, that the breaking of bread here
is infallibly meant of the Holy Sacrament, for some understand it otherwise,
though it is ordinarily so understood. And then where is all the force of the
Argument from Example gone? Nothing here said by H. D. has proved it.

And much of the same rate is the proof for Command, from 1 Cor. 11. 28 Let a
man examine himself, and so let him eat. Here, says H. D. the Greek word
signifies a man or woman, the word is (...) a word of the common gender, as
appears 1 Timothy 2. 4, 5. There is one Mediator betwixt God and Man and Woman.

To which I Reply; Admitting the word (...) to be, as he says, of the common
gender, and that whilst it continues undetermined to either sex by any
distinguishing note, it may be allowed to comprehend both sexes in it (as in 1 Timothy 2. 5. where we have (...), without any article of either masculine or
feminine gender to confine it to either sex, and exclude the other) yet where
it is determined by distinguishing notes to either sex, how does it follow that
the excluded sex is necessarily implied under that note that excludes it? The
nature of common words being such, that before their determination by any
masculine or feminine adjective, they are applicable to either sex, but after
their determination to either, they are no longer common to both. Had it been
said to be of the doubtful gender, something might have been inferred from
that. But as the word is not of that gender, so H. D. expressly says it is of
the common gender. Now look but into 1 Cor. 11. 28, and it is most evidently
apparent that the signification of the common word (...) is determined to the
male sex by the very next word that follows it, viz. (...) himself, which is of
the masculine gender, and not of the feminine, and in propriety of speaking
denotes the male and not the female sex. So that that Text which is only
express for men's receiving the Sacrament, can be no express command for women's
receiving it also.

And whereas he says, there is the same word used in Gal. 3. 28. First it
signifies nothing, if it were there, unless it were so used as expressly under a
determination of sex by gender to intend a sex excluded by such determination.
But secondly, it is not true that it is there: for there is no such word used
in that Text: but to take in both the sexes there are two words each distinctly
belonging to its several sex, (...), the first for male, and the second for
female. And so that Text is nothing to the purpose.

And now having showed that there is no proof from either the Example or
Command produced by H. D. from Scripture, for women's admission to the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, I may conclude, that the proof for Infants Baptism is as
good as for women's Communion, and wish it might (as H. D. says it shall)
suffice.

CHAP. XXXVII.
The Conclusion of this Discourse with a Reprehension, Caution, and
Exhortation.

. 1. THe remaining part of this Discourse, wherein I will not be long, shall be
spent in a threefold address by way of Reprehension, Caution, and Exhortation:
Reprehension of such as baptize not their Infants; Caution against the
seductions of Antipaedobaptists; and Exhortation to the baptizing of Infants.

. 2. And first, if it be so that little children are to be suffered to come to
Christ, and ought not to be hindered from coming to him, then do they deserve a
sharp rebuke, that will not suffer them to come, but hinder their coming. Has
Christ's so much tenderness of heart toward your Infants hardened your own
hearts against them? What a cruelty is this to them, to debar them from, and
deprive them of, that Remedy for their native Infirmity, which the Physician of
souls has provided for them! Do ye love to see them wallowing in the blood of
their nativity, unwashed therefrom in the Laver of Regeneration? Is natures
filth so amiable in the eye of any pretending to be Christian? What a
presumptuousness is this in you to let them live, and venture their dying, in a
damnable estate, And if they be not damned, they have more to thank the mercy
of their God, then the care of their Parents; they might have been damned for
all you, you resolved to venture both theirs, and your own damnation too,
rather than have them baptized, though you knew baptism to be the means, the
only ordinary means there is, whereby they might be saved. What shall I call
it in you? pride? or perverseness? that you so contumaciously and
contumeliously oppose and confront your private novel conceit, to the judgment
and practice of Christ's whole Catholic Church. Yea, what is it?
cross-grainedness or rebelliousness against the Lord Christ himself, to have no
regard to his word, no respect to his reason, but opposing your resolution
against his reason, and your will against his word, to hinder little children
from coming to him, and forbid their coming, though he has said, Suffer the
little children to come unto me, and forbid them not.

. 3. Secondly, are little children to be suffered to come to Christ? and ought
they not to be forbidden coming to him? then, my Brethren, beware of giving ear
to the contrary Infusions of Antipaedobaptistical Seducers. O let no man
whisper into you any doctrine, that contradicts the Command of Christ,
disagrees with the Institution of Christ, and crosses the practice of the
Universal Church of Christ. O consider not what they say now, but what Christ
so long ago has said, and let his word be of more prevalency with you, than
the words of any heretical Seducer. O regard not what they do now, but what the
Church of Christ has ever done, and let her judgment be of more power with
you, than the Opinion of any Schismatical Separatist. O think not that an
upstart generation of men not heard of in the world till many hundreds of years
after Christianity had been planted and settled in the world, are the only men
in the world that have the privilege of discerning the truth. But stand ye in
the ways and see, and ask for the old paths, where ^s the good way, and walk
therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls, Jer. 6. 16.

. 4. Lastly, are little Children to be suffered to come to Christ? and ought
not their coming to be forbidden? Suffer then, I beseech you, Brethren, a word
of Exhortation. Be persuaded to bring, and suffer your little children to come
to Christ. Do ye not see Christ calling little children to him? And how can ye
then forbear bringing them unto him? Do ye not hear him pronouncing them such
as the kingdom of Heaven consists of? and how can ye then any longer forbear
entering them into his kingdom? Do ye not observe him commanding that little
children be suffered to come to him? And how can ye then have the hearts to
hinder them from coming to him? O suffer little children to go to their
Savior, who has his arms wide open to receive them! O forbid not Infants
coming to Jesus, who has his hands stretched out to bless them! O bring your
children, O carry your Infants to Christ, who for their salvation did himself
become an Infant, and pass through the state of Childhood. Suffer them to be
made partakers of his grace by being baptized with water, who, that they might
be made partakers of his glory, was baptized with blood. Consider the Benefit
your children may have by Baptism, and let that move you to have them baptized.
Consider the Need your Children have of Baptism, and let that excite you to
their baptizing. Consider your Childrens Capableness for Baptism, and let that
persuade you to baptize them. What shall I say more? Consider your Childrens
Right to Baptism, and let that prevail with you not to suffer them to go
unbaptized. Shall the Constitution of this particular Church be of no force to
move you? Shall the Practice of the Catholic Church have no power to work with
you? Shall the Tradition of the Apostles of Christ be of no moment to induce
you? Yea, shall the Institution of Christ himself have no prevalency in it to
persuade you? To conclude, if not out of sense of your childrens misery, yet
out of conscience of your own duty; if not, that you may save your Children,
yet that you may not damn Denique terrere nos summopere debet damnatio illa
vindicem fore Dcum, siquis foederis symbolo filium insignire conte^^at: quod co
contemptu oblata gratia resp^atur and quasi ejuretur. Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c.
16. S. 9.
your selves; if not out of regard to the Authority of the Church, yet out of
obedience to the command of Christ; be so just to the fruit of your own bodies,
be so charitable to the issue of your own bowels, as to suffer your little
Children to come unto Christ, and forbid them not.

(...). Luc. 2. 14. A Postscript.
TAking notice of some attempts made by H. D. to take away the strength of the
Argument from Ecclesiastic Tradition, and Catholic Practice, by decrying the
Persons of four or five of the earliest Witnesses we have thereof as erroneous,
or their Writings as spurious and supposititious, I think fit here to speak
something in vindication of them, which I could not so conveniently insert into
and interweave with that part of my Discourse, where their Testimonies were
appealed unto.

And first in general, I cannot but think it very unreasonable, that Persons
and Writings generally received for Genuine and Orthodox in those things,
wherein they did anciently agree with the Catholic Church, should, for the
upholding of any modern Party in their differences from the Catholic Church,
be thrown by, as erroneous and Heteredox Persons, and as Fabulous, and
Fictitious Writings. For if to say such an Author was Erroneous in his judgment
or practice, and held or did some things, which any now, through prejudice and
prepossession, rather than any just reason, not knowing the true ground and
genuine original thereof, shall call erroneous or superstitious, or that he was
a Factor for Antichrist, and that the mystery of iniquity did work strongly in
him, though a Confessor of, though a Martyr for Christ, be enough to blow away
his Credit, and blast his Reputation, and take away all Authority from his
Testimony in any case of Difference, which a private Person or Party has with
the Catholic Church about matters of Doctrine, Worship, or Discipline; if to
say any Writing of any Father or Ecclesiastic Author is supposititious or
corrupted in any point of present difference, without demonstrable proof that
it is so in it self, or was so esteemed and accounted in the Church, before the
arising of that difference, be enough to take away the Credit of all testimony
given by that writing, What Authors, what Writings shall we have left
unquestioned to appeal unto for testimony to the Truth, and support of
Religion? For how many must be laid by, or shrewdly purged by the Papists for
being in their sense guilty of Heresy? How many by the Protestants for
suspicion of Popery? How many by those who are for Episcopacy, as favoring
Presbytery and the pretended Discipline? How many by the Presbyterians and
Independents as for asserting Episcopacy and the Hierarchy? How many by the
Anabaptists for proving Infants Baptism? How many by the Quakers for
vindicating the Scriptures and Tradition? How many by the Socinians for holding
the Deity of Christ, and the Holy Ghost, and their Unity with the Father. And
how many by the Orthodox Christians for countenancing Socinianism or
Enthusiasm? How many by the Calvinists for being Arminian? and how many by the
Arminians for being Calvinistical? Where shall we have a Father left? where
shall we have a Writing left? where shall we have a Council left, that must not
upon the differences of some or other of the Parties, be cashired, and laid by
as an unfaithful, and an unsufficient witness in the case? and then what shall
we have left to vindicate our Religion and Faith against Jews, Turks, and
Pagans withal? who will credit that Religion which is professed by such
erroneous and superstitious Persons? who will believe that Faith, that is
delivered and taught in such forged and corrupted writings? who will receive
any writings for the word of God, upon the testimony of such fallacious and
deceitful men? Thus shall the whole concerns of Christianity be sacrificed to
the interest of a Party. O tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets
of Ashkelon, lest both the daughters of the circumcised rejoice, and the
daughters of the ^ncircumcised too triumph.

Secondly in particular, if the Author of the Ecclesiastic Hierarchy were
pretended by us to be that Dionysius the Areopagite, that lived in the Apostles
days, much of what is alleged might perhaps really lie against him. But when
his time is laid much lower, even about the third Century, there will be no
reason for such hideous outcry of horrid cheat, as is made against him. For it
being questioned (as Dr. Hammond informs us Dr. Hammond Quare of the Bapt. of
Infants,. 43.
) about the year 420, whether these were the Genuine Works of that Dionysius,
and Theodorus Presbyter alleging the Arguments on both sides, it must needs
follow that he must be an Author before that time, and in all probability some
considerable time before that. Whence Dr. Hammond not only says of him
himself Dr. Hammond de Confirmatione, c. 2.. 10. p. 60.
, that he is not to be contemned in the opinion of other Doctors, though
Dalleus relish him not, as being near upon equal with Damasus, but also tells
us Dr. Hammond Quaere of Infan^s Bapt.. 43.
what Mr. Casaubons opinion was of him, namely that he was Scriptor
antiquissimus and elegantissimus, a very ancient and most elegant writer. And
it does not follow that his writing was false and forged because questioned.
For then some books of Holy Scripture will come under suspicion, whose
Authentickness was for some time doubted of, if yet they pass for current with
all.

For what Hyginus (who died a Martyr about the year 158) says, Dr. Hammond
tells us it is affirmed by Platina out of the ancient Dr. Ham. of Inf. Bap..
42. 43.
Records. And though the words alleged from the Author of the Constitutions
were not written in the Apostles times by Clemens Romanus, yet he says there
is sufficient reason to assure us that they were very ancient; and the
Testimony of a Person of his Learning, Judgment, and Integrity is very
considerable with unbias'd persons.

Then for the Responses ascribed to Justin Martyr, if they should not be his,
yet being acknowledgedly a very ancient piece they are nevertheless a
considerable testimony for the Antiquity of Infants Baptism. And a suspicion of
their Interpolation cannot take away their Authority, unless it could be
proved, that they were interpolated in this part, or a suspicion of it had been
started before this controversy. And it is observed, that even in Justin
Martyrs Dialogue with Trypho the Jew, there is a passage that has a favorable
aspect on Infants Baptism. Where, says he (...). Just. Mart. Dial. cum Tryph.
page 261. D. C.
And we, who through him are come unto God, have not received that circumcision
which is according to flesh, but that spiritual, which Enoch, and the like
kept. But we received it by Baptism through the mercy of God, in as much as we
had been born sinners, and it is free for all in like manner to receive it.
Here the reason alleged for Men's obtaining from God that spiritual
Circumcision by Baptism, namely because we had been born in sin, is as truly
alledgable on the behalf of Infants. And how can it be thought, but that he
that understood, there was the same reason for childrens baptizing as for men's,
should be of opinion that children were to be baptized as well as men. And when
he extends the liberty of receiving it unto all, why should he be thought not
to extend it unto Infants? Especially when as well the external motive of Gods
compassion, the misery of man's being born in sin, as the internal Mover of God
unto compassion, even his mercy to men so born, is extended unto Infants as
well as Men.

And when he says, (...) Justin Martyr Dialog. cum Tryph. page 260. B. C.
Moreover the precept of Circumcision commanding to circumcise Infants on the
eighth day, was a type of the true circumcision, wherewith we were circumcised
from our error and naughtiness, by him that rose from the dead, has he not a
kind aspect on Infants baptism; Fairly intimating (by expressing the time of
Circumcision the eighth day) that our Circumcision, which is baptism, should
agree with that which typified it, so far at least as to be susceptible by
Infants even of eight days old; younger than which Fidus the Presbyter, because
of that law of circumcision, thought they ought not to be baptized, though
Cyprian showed him, that himself, and a whole Council Cypian, lib. 3. Ep. 8.
were of another mind, even that they might be baptized sooner. And that he had
so is the more probable in regard Greg. Naziarzene (...). Gr. Naz. Orat. 40. p.
658. A. B.
gives the Circumcision of the Jewish Infants on the eighth day for a reason
why the Infants of Christians should in case of danger be baptized even so
early, as whilst they are insensible of either the want or having of grace, by
the want, or having of baptism.

To proceed to Origin; if he were as perhaps he was not, so very Heretical and
desperately Erroneous in his own judgment as is pretended, yet this does not
follow, that he must be also insincere, and mendacious in his report of the
Churches Practice. Is it impossible for a man that is erroneous in something,
to speak true in any thing? If so, the truth it self will have few witnesses to
it, but be well near left to stand and fall by its self. Had Origin been of no
Authority in the Church, sure St. Hierome would never have appealed to his
judgment, in the case of so high a concern, as whether the Hebrew Books of the
Bible had been falsified by the Jews or no, saying Quod si aliquis dixeris.
Hebraos libros postea a Judaeis esse falsatos, audiat Originem, quid in octavo
volumine explanationum Esaiae huic respondeat quaestiunculae: quod nunquam
Dominus and Apostoli, qui caetcra crimina arguunt in Scribis and Pharisais, de
hoc crimine, quod erat maximum reticuissent. D. Hier. l. 3. Comment. in Esaiam,
cap. 6. Tom. 4. Col. 55.
if any man doubt of that, Audiat Originem, let him hear Origin, etc. --

But we have not Origens Original of his Commentaries on the Ep. to the Romans,
but Ruffinus's Translation. No matter, so the Translation be right. But
Ruffinus added, and altered at his pleasure, so that if Erasmus say true, you
know not when you read Origin, and when Ruffinus. Then it cannot be known, but
that what we read in him touching Infants Baptism is his own. And being taken
so to be by all not concerned to oppose it, it ought to pass for his, unless
the contrary could be proved. And suppose it were not his, but Ruffinus's; yet
still is that a good evidence for the Age he lived in; and that was pretty
early up toward the Apostles Times, being confessedly in the Fourth Century.
But Ruffinus was a very bad man. Perhaps not all out so bad, as his bitter
adversary St. Hierom makes him. And may not a bad men speak truth? Had he
spoken untruth in this case, why was not his falsehood detected in the times he
lived in? why did not Hierom amongst all the rest of his accusations charge
this upon him? that he made Origin say, (l. 5. in Romans c. 6.) that the Church
received from the Apostles a tradition to give baptism even to Infants, when as
Origin said no such thing? It Is plain he had nothing to say, because he said
nothing, who had will enough to incline him, and passion enough to provoke him,
to say all he could. Yea, who sometimes quarrels with Ruffinus Cum haec ita se
habeant, quae insania est, paucis de Filio and Spiritie Sancto commutatis quae
apertam blasphemiam praeferebant; caetera ita ut f^ripta sunt protuliste in
medium, and impia voce laudasse, cum utique and illa and ista de uno impietatis
font processerint? D. Hieron. ad Avitum. Tom. 2. Col. 218. A. B. Paucisque
testimoniis de Filio Dei, and Spiritu Sancto commutatis, quae sciebas
di^plicitura Romany, caetera usque ad finem integra dimisisti: hoc idem
faciens in Apologia quasi Pamphili, quod and in Origenis (...) translatione
fecisti. D. Hieron. l. 1. Apolog. adv. Ruffinum. Tom. 2. Col. 296. B.
for his overmuch fidelity in translating some of Eusebius and Origens works,
and changing only some few things concerning the Son, and the Holy Ghost,
likely to grate upon Roman ears, and letting the rest go entire, and publishing
them so as they were written. Besides what should move Ruffinus to falsify
Origin in this place? How came he concerned to make any such Interpolation?
what advantage to himself, or any party, could he intend herein? But what if,
after all this, that piece of Origin on Romans were translated by St. Hierom
himself, and this be owned by him in his Epistle to Heraclius, prefixed before
the Commentary? why then all the dust about Ruffinus his corrupting of Origin
in this particular vanishes into smoke, and we have St. Hieroms Authority as
Dr. Dr. Hammond Inf. Bapt.. 42. Cum igitur constet Anabaptistas agi sanatico
spiritu, non moveat nos little autoritas, ut discedamus a communi consen^is
veteris Ecclesiae de baptizandis infantibus. Nam vetustissimi S^riptores
Ecclesiasti^i probant baptismum infantium. Otigenes enim in 6 cap. ad Romans sic
scribit, Itaque Ec clesia ab Apostolis traditionem accepit etiam parvulis dare
baptismum. Sciebant enim illi quibus secreta divinorum mysteriorum commissa
sunt, quod essent in omnibus genuinae sordes p^ccati quae per aquam and
spiritum abolere deberent. Haec sunt Origenis verba, in quibus utrumque
testatur, and baptizari infantes, and consequi eos per baptismum remissionem
peccati originalis, hoc est, reconciliari eos Deo. Melancth. Loc. Com. de
Baptismo.
Hammond says to secure us that these are Origens words. And that Origens
words they are Melancthon does expressly say. And lastly, why Origin should be
so much as suspected to be corrupted in this Place, unless in some other of his
writings he had declared himself to the contrary, which I see not pretended, is
no easy thing to say; and the suggestion of it is nothing else but a miserable
shift of persons enslaved to an Hypothesis, and resolved to say any thing, how
irrational and groundless soever, for the maintaining of it. And though this
place were laid by, as likewise that of his in Levit. yet whilst his 14 Homil.
on Luke of unquestioned Authority shall be extant, there will be a witness of
Origens to be produced for Infants Baptism.

Lastly for Cyprian; his not urging it as an Apostolical Tradition or Precept
does not prove it was none. However his delivering his Judgment for Infants
baptism is a sure evidence, that he thought neither Scripture precept, nor
Apostles practice, nor Church Tradition was against it. And it cannot be
thought a private opinion, which was so early concluded in a Council of no
fewer than 66 Bishops. And though H. D. meets with no such Council, nor can
tell where it was held, yet St. Augustine doubtless was satisfied concerning
the truth of it (and St. Hierom too) or else he would never have appealed to
its Authority in the case. Nor does St. Cyprians mentioning it to be defined in
a Council prove it no Apostolical Tradition, because it was delivered for an
Apostolical tradition before that Council Nor was it properly Infants Baptism
that was defined in that Council, but whether Infants might be baptized before
the eighth day. Whether the grounds upon which that Councils Conclusion was
grounded, wear weak and frivolous, as they are confidently enough said to be,
is not now under my consideration (though to wiser persons than I they may, for
ought I know, seem strong and weighty), but whether they did so conclude or no,
which so good a witness as St. Cyprian is sufficient to prove. Nor do I find it
so much contradicted by his great Master Tertullian, whom he so much
reverenced, who disputed Inf. Bapt. Par. 2. chap. 7.
indeed against the hastening, but not against the lawfulness of Infants
baptism, to which disputation I have given an Answe in part, and Mr. Wills more
fully. And therefore I shall rather believe St. Cyprian himself declaring
himself to be for Infants Baptism, then Baronius, if he assert, or suggest,
that he was against it.

And if other things have been fathered on Cyprian, yet till that Epistle of
his to Fidus be demonstrated to be spurious, which, H. D. does not tell us is
yet done, no not by Daille himself, I shall presume it is his own. And well
may, having it owned for his by two so early and eminent Authors as St.
Augustine, and St. Hierom; Beatus quidem Cyprianus non aliquod decrecum condens
novum, sed Ecclesiae fidem firmissimam servans, ad corrigendum cos, qui
putabant ante o^tavum diem nativitatis non esse parvulum baptizandum, non
carnem sed animam dixit esse perdendam, and mox natum rite baptizari posse, cum
suis quibusdam cocpiscopis censuit. D. Aug. Ep. 28, ad Hieron. Tom. 2. Col.
108. B.
the former of which in his Epistle to Hierom appeals to it; Ac me putes
haeretico sensu hoc intelligere, beatus Martyr Cyprianus, cujus te in
Scripturarum testimoniis digerendis amulum gloriaris, in Epistola quam scribit
ad Episcopum Fidum de Infantibus haptizandis haec memorat. Porro autem si etiam
gravissimis delictoribus, etc. D. Hieron. l. 3. adv. Pelag. Tom. 2. Col. 47. C.
the latter in his third book against the Pelagians, not only does that, but
transcribes a considerable part of it.

Nor shall I ever the unwillinger receive from him a Catholic Verity, for his
having held other, I will not say, (with H. D.) corrupt and Antichristian
Tenants, (which I should tremble to say, or think of so pious a person and
eminent a Martyr) but private opinions (as Tertullians, and Gr. Nazianzens for
the delay of Infants Baptism are said to have been); which, if no worse than
that of the Churches being founded upon Peter, and that sprinkling might serve
in stead of baptizing (in both which I can assure the Reader he has good
company) may prove not to deserve so heavy a censure, nor he for them to be
adjudged a Notable Factor for Antichrist, and one in whom the mystery of
iniquity did strongly work, which is a character strangely inconsistent with
that estimate that by the Catholic Church has been made of him, both in the
times he lived in, and in those that succeeded; as may appear by what Gr.
Nazianzen says in his Oration of him; and what Baronius and others record
concerning him, in memory of whose pious life, and glorious death Temples were
built, an Altar erected, and a Festival observed.

And this with men of Reason and Modesty may suffice to have been said in
Vindication of those Primitive Witnesses, and their Testimonies. He that is not
satisfied herewith may find more for his satisfaction in Mr. Wills of Inf.
Bapt: Part. 2. chapter 3. p. 125, etc.

One thing more I shall beg the favor of saying, and then conclude the Readers
trouble; and that is, that I have not urged all the Arguments that are, or
might be, insisted on in this dispute: so that if all I have said on these
grounds should chance to signify nothing, yet still is the cause neither
desperate, nor deplorable; there being behind Reserves of other Auxiliary
forces for its succor and support. But why then did I not insist on them?
Partly because I thought what I have said to be enough, and was loath to be
troublesome with more: and partly because those Arguments have already Mr.
Baxter, Stephens. Sydenham, Geree, Wills, etc.
been managed by other Writers with great diligence and dexterity: so that it
seemed needless for me to concern my self in them. As for those I have used,
they are the same mostly that were used by Dr. Tailor, and Dr. Hammond; which
because I thought very good, yet as delivered by them, not so well adapted to
vulgar capacities, by reason of the too much abstruseness of the language of
the one, and too much floridness of the style of the other, as to do that good
on ignorant souls, which they intended, therefore I have sent them abroad
again, in a vulgar dress, and country habit, accommodated for language and
style, as near as I could, and the matter would bear, to mean capacities, so as
to be intelligible by the ignoranter sort, (who have most need of instruction,
as being most liable to temptation, and whose information, conviction, and
satisfaction I have chiefly, and even almost solely, aimed at in these Papers)
yet Adding withal some things of my own, and somewhat Improving what was
theirs. And if I have at any time exalted my Pen, it has been merely for the
refreshment of some Readers, who would else have been tired with too long a
continuation of one strain, and that too but the dull hum of a Country drone:
and for that, if it be criminous, I beg, and hope the Readers pardon.

Et jam defessus lampada trado.

FINIS.
A Table of the Contents.
CHAP. 1. THe Text. The occusion of the words. The doctrine gathered from it,
and proved. Page 1 Chap. 2. Of the children that are to be suffered to come to
Christ; Infants. 4 Chap. 3. What children are to be suffered to come unto
Christ. 5 Chap. 4. What coming of little children unto Christ is to be
suffered. 12 Chap. 5. The interpretation of the Text vindicated. 20 Chap. 6.
Baptism beneficial unto children, in regard of their early consecration there
by unto God. 26 Chap. 7. Baptism beneficial unto children, in regard of their
being brought thereby into Covenant with God. 32 Chap. 8. Baptism beneficial
unto children, in regard of the Vow they are brought under by it. 37 Chap. 9.
Baptism beneficial unto children, in regard of the care that by others is taken
of them upon it. page 48 Chap. 10. Baptism beneficial unto children, in regard
of their being thereby united unto Christ. 53 Chap. 11. Baptism beneficial unto
children, in regard of their being made thereby the children of God. 73 Chap.
12. Baptism beneficial unto children, in regard of their being made thereby
Heirs of Heaven. 80 Chap. 13. Baptism beneficial unto children, in regard of
their being thereby made partakers of grace. 90 Chap. 14. Baptism beneficial
unto children, in regard that by it they are consigned unto a resurrection. 103
Chap. 15. Baptism beneficial unto children, in regard they are saved by it. 108
Chap. 16. Childrens need of baptism, in r^gard of its efficacy to take off the
guilt of original sin. 118 Chap. 17. Childrens need of baptism, in regard of
their being under the guilt of sin. 125 Chap. 18. Childrens need of baptism
further shown from the consideration of the evil nature, and evil consequents
of original sin. 136 Chap. 19. Childrens baptism not to be neglected upon
presumption that God can or will save them without their being baptized. page
144 Chap. 20. Childrens need of baptism shown from six other considerations.
151 Chap. 21. Children not incapable of baptism, in regard of their bodily
weakness. 161 Chap. 22. Children not incapable of baptism, in regard of their
having sin in them. 168 Chap. 23. Children not incapable of baptism, in regard
of their not believing. 172 Chap. 24. Children not incapable of being baptized,
in regard of any thing required of them in baptism. 184 Chap. 25. Children not
incapable of baptism by any text of Scripture that forbids it, either directly,
or by consequence. 194 Chap. 26. Childrens Right to baptism by the constitution
of this Church, and custom of the Catholic Church. 219 Chap. 27. The Catholic
Churches custom to baptize Infants. 224 Chap. 28. Infants baptism a Tradition
Apostolical. 287 Chap. 29. Infants baptism an Apostolical Practice. 292 Chap.
30. Childrens right to baptism by the Institution of Christ. 303 Chap. 31.
Infants baptism lawful, though there were neither Command for it, nor Example
of it. page 331 Chap. 32. Infants baptism no addition to the Word of God. The
Scriptures objected on that account considered and cleared. 340 Chap. 33. The
Scriptures silence no proof of our Saviors not commanding the baptizing of
Infants. 368 Chap. 34. The Scriptures silence no proof of the Apostles
baptizing no Infants. 375 Chap. 35. The Argument from the sixth Article of our
Church answered. 384 Chap. 36. A Reply to an Answer made by H. D. to the
Objection from the no express Command or Example in Scripture of Women's
receiving the Lords Supper; referring to Chap. 31. Sect. 9. 396 Chap. 37. The
Conclusion of this Discourse with a Reprehension, Caution, and Exhortation. 403
A Postscript. 409
The END.

