CLAVSTRVM REGALE RESERATVM or, The Kings Concealment at Trent, published by
A. W.
engraved title page border depicting the escape of King Charles II from
Parliamentary troops, and his hiding place at Trent. In vmbra alarm tuarum
sperabo donec transeat iniquitas LONDON, Printed for Will Not at the Queens
Arms in the Pell:Mell. 1667.

P. Williamson fecit


TO THE QUEEN'S Most Excellent MAJESTY.
THis little Book having obtained liberty, after a long Imprisonment, to walk
abroad, prostrates it self at Your Majesty's feet for patronage and protection.
In it Your Majesty may behold GOD's wonderful Mercy and Providence, in keeping
and preserving our Gracious Sovereign from the hands of His Enemies, when they
so pleased themselves with the hopes of seizing His Sacred Person after the
Battle of Worcester, As they had invented and prepared new ways to afflict His
Majesty, such as till then never entered into the hearts of the worst of Tyrants
before them. But it pleased God to frustrate the hopes and designs of the Kings
Adversaries, and to restore His Majesty to His Fathers Throne: Which that He
may long enjoy with Your Majesty, in Health, Peace and Happiness, Is, and shall
be the prayers of

Your Majesty's Most obedient, and most Faithful Servant, ANNE WYNDHAM.

Claustrum Regale Reseratum: OR, The KING'S Concealment AT TRENT.
HOw that after the Battle of Worcester, His Sacred Majesty most wonderfully
escaped the hands of his blood-thirsty Enemies, and (under a Disguise, in the
company of Mrs Jane Lane) safely arrived at Abbots-Leigh in Somersetshire, (the
seat of Sir George Norton, lying near to the City of Bristol) has been fully
published unto the World. His Majesty's Journey from thence to the house of
Colonel Francis Wyndham at Trent in the same County, his Stay there, his
Endeavor (though frustrate) to get over into France, his Return to Trent, his
final Departure thence in order to his happy Transportation, are the subject of
this present Relation. A Story, in which the Constellations of Providence are
so refulgent, that their light is sufficient to confute all the Atheists of the
world, and to enforce all persons (whose faculties are not pertinaciously
depraved) to acknowledge a watchful Eye of GOD from above, looking upon all
Actions of Men here below, making even the most wicked subservient to his just
and glorious designs. And indeed, whatsoever the Ancients fabled of Gyges's
Ring, by which he could render himself Invisible, or the Poets fancied of their
Gods, who usually carried their chief Favorites in the Clouds, and by drawing
those aerial Curtains, did so conceal them, that they were heard and seen of
none, whilst they both heard and saw others, is here most certainly verified.
For, the Almighty so closely covered the King with the wing of his Protection,
and so clouded the Understanding of his cruel Enemies, that the most piercing
Eye of Malice could not see, nor the most Barbarously-bloody Hand offer
Violence to his Sacred Person: God smiting his pursuers (as once he did the
Sodomites) with blindness, who with as much eagerness sought to sacrifice the
Lords Anointed to their fury, as the other did to prostitute the Angels to
their lust.

But before the several Particulars of this Story are laid open, two Questions
(easily foreseen) which will be readily asked by every Reader, call for an
Answer. The one is, Why this Relation so much expected, so much longed for, has
been kept up all this while from public view? And the other, How it comes to
pass, that now it takes the liberty to walk abroad? Concerning the first, it
must be known, that a Narrative of these Passages was (by especial command from
his Majesty) written by the Colonels own hand, immediately after the Kings
return into England; which (being presented to his Majesty) was laid up in his
Royal Cabinet, there to rest for some time, it being the Kings pleasure (for
reasons best known to his Sacred self) that it should not then be published.

And as his Majesty's command to keep it private, is a satisfactory answer to
the first; so, his license now obtained that it might travel abroad, may
sufficiently resolve the second question. But besides this, many prevalent
reasons there are, which plead for a publication; the chief of which are
briefly these. That the implacable Enemies of this Crown may be for ever
silenced and ashamed; who having neither Law, nor Religion to patronize their
unjust undertakings, construed a bare Permission, to be a Divine Approbation of
their Actions; and (taking the Almighty to be such a one as themselves)
blasphemously entitled God to be the Author of all their wickedness. But the
arm of God stretched out from heaven to the rescue of the King, cutting off the
clue of their Success, even then when they thought they had spun up their
thread, has not left them so much as an apron of fig leaves to cover the
nakedness of their most shameful proceedings.

The next is, That the Truth of his Majesty's Escape (being minced by some,
mistaken by others, and not fully set forth by any) might appear in its native
beauty and splendour: That as every dust of gold is gold, and every ray of light
is light; so every jot and title of Truth being Truth, not one grain of the
treasure, nor one beam of the luster of this Story might be lost or clouded; it
being so rare, so excellent, that aged Time out of all the Archives of
Antiquity can hardly produce a Parallel. Singularly admirable indeed it is, if
we consider the Circumstances and Actors. The Colonel (who chiefly designed,
and moved in this great Affair) could not have had the freedom to have served
his Majesty, had he not been a Prisoner; his very Confinement giving him both a
liberty, and protection to act. For, coming home from Weymouth upon his Parole,
he had the opportunity to travel freely and safely, without fear of being
stopped, and taken up: And being newly removed from Sherborne to Trent, the
jealous eye of Somersetshire Potentates had scarce then found him out, whose
malevolent Aspect afterward seldom suffered him to live at home, and too too
often furnished his house with very unwelcom guests. Others, who contributed
their assistance, were persons of both sexes, and of very different conditions
and qualities: And although their endeavors often proved successless, though
they received discouragements on one hand, were terrified with threats on the
other; That a seal of silence should be imprinted upon the lips of Women, who
are become proverbial for their garrulity; That faithfulness and constancy
should guard the hearts of Servants, who are usually corrupted with rewards or
affrighted with punishments; That neither Hope nor Fear (most powerful
passions, heightened by Capital animadversions proclaimed against All that
should conceal, and large Remunerations promised to such as should discover the
King) could work nothing upon any single person, so as to remove him or her
from their respective duty, but that all should so harmoniously concenter, both
in the Design, and also afterward keep themselves so long close shut up under
the lock of secrecy, that nothing could be discovered by the most exquisite art
and cunning, till the blessed Restoration of his Majesty to his glorious
Throne, so filled their hearts with joy, that it broke open the door of their
lips, and let their tongue loose to tell this Miracle to the amazed World,
would (were not the Persons yet alive, and the Story fresh in memory) rarifie
it into a Romance.

The reproaches and scandals, by which some envious persons have sought to
diminish and vilify the faithful services, which the Colonel out of the
integrity of his soul performed unto his Majesty, shall not here be mentioned:
Because by taking up dirt to bespatter him, they defile their own hands, and
the gun they level at his Reputation, recoils to the wounding of their own.

These things thus premised, by way of Introduction, open the Gate, through
which you may enter, and in the ensuing Pages (as in several Tables) take a
full view of the Particulars.

The Disguise his Majesty put on, secured him from the Cruelty of his Enemies;
but could not altogether hide him from the prying eyes of his dutiful Subjects.
For in the time of his stay at Leigh, one John Pope (then Butler to Sir George
Norton, but formerly a Soldier for the King in the West) through all those
clouds espied the most Illustrious Person of the King. With him his Majesty
(after he saw himself discovered) was pleased familiarly to discourse; And
speaking of the great Sufferings of very many of his Friends in the Western
parts, (most whereof were well known to Pope) his Majesty enquired if he knew
Colonel Francis Wyndham, who (in the time of the late Wars) was Governor of
Dunster-Castle? Very well, Sir, answered Pope. The King then demanding what was
become of him? Pope replies, That the Colonel had married Mrs Anne Gerard, one
of the daughters and heiresses of Thomas Gerard Esquire; late of Trent in
Somersetshire, and that he had newly brought thither his Mother (the Lady
Wyndham) his Wife and family, and that he believed the Colonel intended there
to reside and live. His Majesty having received this intelligence concerning
the Colonel, together with an exact information of the situation of Trent,
sought an opportunity to speak with Mrs Lane, (from whom, the better to conceal
himself, he then kept at a distance) and by means of Mr Lassels (who
accompanied the King in this journey) obteining his desire, his Majesty with
much contentment imparted to Mrs Lane what Pope had informed him concerning
Colonel Wyndham, and his habitation; telling her withal, That if she could
bring him thither, he should not much doubt of his safety.

In this very point of time comes the Lord Henry Wilmot (since Earl of
Rochester) from Dirham in Gloucestershire (the seat of John Winter Esquire; a
person of known loyalty and integrity) to Leigh. My Lord had attended his
Majesty in his passage Westward, and on Friday morning (September the 13.) met
accidentally Captain Thomas Abington of Dowdswell in the County of Gloucester,
at Pinbury Park; and being known by the Captain, (who had served under his
Lordship in the Wars) was that night by him conducted to Mr Winter's, from whom
his Lordship (as he has often since acknowledged) received great Civilities.
Mrs Lane presently reveals to the Lord Wilmot the Kings resolution to remove to
Trent: whereupon my Lord demanded of Henry Rogers (Mr Winter's servant, and his
Lordships guide from Dirham to Leigh) whether he knew Trent? He answered, That
Colonel Wyndham and his Master had married two Sisters, and that he had often
waited on his Master thither. These things so happily concurring, his Majesty
commanded the Lord Wilmot to haste to Trent, and to ascertain the Colonel of
his speedy Approach.

His Lordship took leave, and continuing Rogers for his guide, with one Robert
Swan, arrived at Trent the sixteenth of September. Rogers was sent in forthwith
to the Colonel to acquaint him, that a Gentleman a friend of his, desired the
favor of him, that he would please to step forth and speak with him. The
Colonel enquiring of Rogers, whether he knew the Gentleman or his business?
answered, No, he understood nothing at all, but only that he was called by the
name of Mr. Morton. Then without further discourse the Colonel came forth, and
found the Gentleman walking near the Stable; whom as soon as he approached,
(although it was somewhat dark) he saluted by the Title of My Lord Wilmot. His
Lordship seemed to wonder that he should be known, but it was nothing strange,
considering the Colonels former acquaintance with him, being one of the first
that engaged under his Command, in his late Majesty's service: Besides, his
Lordship was not in the least altered, except a Hawk on his fist, and a Lure by
his side might pass for a Disguise. This Confidence of his Lordship really
begat admiration in the Colonel, calling to mind the great danger he was in,
and whose Harbinger he was; For he advertised the Colonel, that the King
himself was on his way to Trent, intending that very night to lodge at
Castle-Cary (a Town six miles thence) hoping by Gods assistance, to be with him
about ten of the clock next morning.

At this joyful news the Colonel was transported, (there having run a report,
that his Majesty was slain in the Fight at Worcester) and giving God thanks for
his wonderful mercy, he assured his Lordship, That for his Majesty's
preservation he would value neither his life, family nor fortune, and would
never injure his Majesty's confidence of him; Not doubting, but that God who
had led his Majesty through the midst of such inexpressible dangers, would
deliver him from all those barbarous threats, and bloody intentions of his
Enemies. With these and such like expressions, the Colonel brought the Lord
Wilmot into his parlour, where he received an exact account of his Majesty's
condition, and present affairs.

Next morning, the Colonel found it necessary to acquaint the Lady Wyndham his
mother, and also his own Lady, with the particulars the Lord Wilmot had
overnight imparted to him, concerning the King. The relation he gave them, did
not (through the weakness of their sex) bring upon them any womanish passion,
but surprised with joy, they most cheerfully resolve (without the least show of
fear) to hazard all, for the safety of the King. And so (begging Gods blessing
upon their future endeavors) they contrive how his Majesty might be brought
into the house, without any suspicion to their family, consisting of above
twenty persons. Among them therefore, Mrs Julian Coningsby (the Lady Wyndham's
Niece) Elianor Withers, Joan Halsenoth, and Henry Peter's (whose loy alty to the
King, and fidelity to themselves, they had sufficiently experienced) are made
privy to their design. Next they consider what Chambers are fittest for his
Majesty's reception. Four are made choice of; amongst which, the Lady Wyndham's
was counted most convenient for the daytime, where the servants might wait
with most freedom upon his Majesty. Then a safe place is provided to retreat
unto, in case of search, or imminent danger: And lastly, Employments are
designed to remove all others out of the way at the instant of his Majesty's
arrival. All which after a while, answered their desires, even beyond their
expectation.

Between nine and ten the next morning, the Colonel and his Lady walking
toward the fields adjoining to the house, espied the King riding before Mrs
Lane, and Mr Lassels in their company. As Soon as his Majesty came near the
Colonel, He called to him, Frank, Frank (...) how do thou do? By which
gracious pleasance the Colonel perceived, that though his Majesty's habit and
countenance were much changed, yet his Heroic spirit was the same, and his
mind immutable. The Colonel (to avoid the jealous eyes of some neighbors)
instantly conveyed the King and Mrs Lane into the Lady Wyndham's Chamber, where
the passions of Joy and Sorrow did a while combat in them, who beheld his
Sacred Person: For what loyal Eye could look upon so Glorious a Prince thus
eclypsed, and not pay unto him the homage of tears? But the consideration of
his Majesty's safety, the gracious words of his own mouth confuting the sad
reports of his untimely death, together with the hope of his future
preservation, soon dried them up. In all short time the Colonel brought the Lord
Wilmot to the King, and then the Ladies withdrew into the Parlour, having first
agreed to call Mrs Lane Cousin, and to entertain her with the same familiarity
as if she had been their near Relation. That day she stayed at Trent, and the
next morning early Mr Lassels and she departed.

His Majesty, after he had refreshed himself, commanded the Colonel in the
presence of the Lord Wilmot, to propose, What way he thought most probable for
his Escape into France; for thither he desired with all speed to be
transported. The Colonel (the King giving him this opportunity) entertained and
encouraged his Majesty with this remarkable passage of Sir Thomas Wyndham (his
Father) Who, not long before his death [in the Year 1636] called unto him his
five Sons, (having not seen them together in some years before) and discoursed
unto us [said he] of the long Peace and Prosperity this Kingdom had enjoyed
under its Three last Glorious Monarchs: Of the the many Miseries and Calamities
which lay sore upon our Ancestors, by the several Invasions and Conquests of
Foreign Nations, and likewise by Intestine Insurrections and Rebellions. And
notwithstanding the strange mutations and Changes in England, He showed, how it
pleased God in love to our Nation to preserve an undoubted Succession of Kings,
to sit in the Regal Throne. He mentioned the healing Conjunction of the two
Houses of York and Lancaster, and the blessed Union of the two Crowns of
England and Scotland, stopping up those fountains of Blood, which by National
feuds and quarrels kept open, had like to have drowned the whole Island. He
said, he feared the beautiful garment of Peace would shortly be torn in pieces
through the Neglect of Magistrates, the general Corruption of manners, and the
prevalence of a Puritanical faction, which (if not prevented) would undermine
the very pillars of Government. My sons! We have hitherto seen serene and quiet
Times: but now prepare your selves for cloudy and troublesome. I command you to
honor and obey our Gracious Sovereign, and in all times to adhere to the
Crown; and though the Crown should hang upon a Bush, I charge you forsake it
not. These words being spoken with much earnestness, both in gesture and manner
extraordinary, he arose from his chair, and left us in a deep consultation what
the meaning should be of -- The Crown hanging upon a Bush. These words, Sir,
(said the Colonel) made so firm an impression in all our breasts, that the many
afflictions of these sad Times cannot raze out their undelible characters.
Certainly these are the days which my Father pointed out in that Expression:
And I doubt not, God has brought me through so many dangers, that I might show
my self both a dutiful Son, and a loyal Subject, in faithfully endeavoring to
serve your Sacred Majesty, in this your greatest Distress.

After this Rehearsal, the Colonel (in obedience to his Majesty's command) told
the King, That Sir John Strangways (who had given many testimonies of his
loyalty, having two Sons, both of them Colonels for his Royal Father) lived but
four miles from Trent; That he was a person of great fortune and interest in
Dorsetshire, and therefore he supposed that either Sir John, or his Sons, might
be serviceable to his Majesty's occasions. The King, in prosecution of this
proposal, commanded the Colonel to wait on them; and accordingly the next
morning he went over to Melbury; the place where Sir John dwelt. No sooner was
he come thither, but he met with Colonel Giles Strangways, and after usual
salutations, they walked into the Park adjoining to the house, where Colonel
Wyndham imparted the reason and end of his present Visit. Colonel Strangways
his answer was, That he was infinitely grieved, because he was not able to
serve his Majesty in procuring a Vessel according to expectation; That he knew
not any one Master of a Ship, or so much as one Mariner that he could trust:
All that were formerly of his acquaintance in Weymouth, being for their loyalty
banished, and gone beyond the sea; and in Pool and Lime he was a mere stranger,
having not one Confident in either. A hundred pounds in Gold he delivered to
Colonel Wyndham, to present to the King; which at his return, by command was
deposited in the hands of the Lord Wilmot, for his Majesty's use.

About this time the Forces under Cromwell were retreated from Worcester into
the several Quarters of the Country; some of which coming to Trent, proclaimed
the Overthrow of the Kings Army, and the Death of the King, giving out that he
was certainly killed; And one of them affirmed that he saw him dead, and that
he was buried among the rest of the slain, no injury being offered to his body,
because he was a Valiant Soldier, and a Gallant man. This welcome News so
tickled the Sectaries, that they could not hold from expressing their joy by
making Bonfires, firing of Guns, Drinking, and other jollities: And for a close
of all, to the Church they must, and there ring the Kings knell. These rude
Extravagancies moved not his Majesty at all, but only (as if he were more
troubled for their madness, than his own misfortune) to this most Christian and
compassionate Expression, Alas poor people!

Now though the King valued not the menaces of his proud Enemies, being
confident they could do him no hurt; yet he neglected not to try the
faithfulness of his Friends to convey him out of their reach. Thus the former
design proving unsuccessful, and all hope of Transfretation that way being laid
aside, the Colonel acquainted his Majesty, that one Captain William Ellesden of
Lime (formerly well known unto him) with his Brother John Ellesden, (by means
of Colonel Bullen Reymes of Wadden in Dorsetshine) had conveyed over into
France, Sir John Berkley (now Lord Berkley) in a time of danger. To this
Captain therefore his Majesty sends the Colonel, who lodging at his house in
Lime, took an opportunity to tell him, That the Lord Wilmot had made his escape
from Worcester; that he lay privately near to him; and that his Lordship had
earnestly solicited him to use his utmost endeavors to secure him from the
hands of the pursuers. To this purpose he was come to town, and assured the
Captain, if he would join in this affair, his courtesy should never be
forgotten. The Captain very cordially embraced the motion, and went with the
Colonel to Charmouth (a little place near Lime) where at an Inn, he brought to
him a Tenant of his, one Stephen Limbry, assuring the Colonel that he was a
right honest man, and a perfect Royalist. With this Limbry Colonel Wyndham
treated under the name of Captain Norris, and agreed with him to transport
himself and three or four friends into France. The conditions of their
Agreement were; That before the two and twentieth day of that instant
September, Limbry should bring his Vessel into Charmouth-Road, and on the said
two and twentieth, in the night should receive the Colonel and his company into
his Longboat from the Beach near Charmouth, from thence carry them to his
Ship, and so land them safe in France. This the Colonel conjured Limbry to
perform with all secrecy, because all the Passengers were of the Royal party,
and intended to be shipped without leave, to avoid such Oaths and Engagements,
which otherwise would be forced upon them: And therefore Privacie in this
transaction would free him from Danger, and themselves from Trouble, the true
cause why they so earnestly thirsted (for some time) to leave their native
Country. Limbry's Salary was Sixty pounds, which the Captain engaged to pay at
his return from France, upon sight of a Certificate under the Passengers hands
of their landing there. To the performance of these Covenants, Limbry with many
vows and protestations obliging himself, the Colonel with much satisfaction,
and speed came back to his Majesty and the Lord Wilmot to Trent, who at the
narration of these passages expressed no small contentment.

The business being thus far successfully laid, the King consults how it might
be prudentially managed, that so there might be no miscarriage in the
prosecution. Necessary it was that his Majesty and all his Attendants (contrary
to the use of Travelers) should sit up all the night in the Inn at Charmouth;
that they ought to have the command of the house, to go in and out at pleasure,
the Tide not serving till twelve at night. To remove therefore all suspicion
and Inconveniences, this Expedient was found out.

Henry Peter's (Colonel Wyndham's servant) was sent to Charmouth Inn, who
inviting the Hostess to drink a glass of wine, told her, That he served a very
gallant Master, who had long most affectionately loved a Lady in Devon, and had
the happiness to be well beloved by her; and though her Equal in birth and
fortune, yet so unequal was his fate, that by no means could he obtain her
Friends consent: And therefore it was agreed between them, that he should carry
her thence, and marry her among his own Allies. And for this purpose his Master
had sent him to desire her to keep the best Chambers for him, intending to be
at her house upon the two and twentieth day of that month in the evening;
where he resolved not to lodge, but only to refresh himself and friends, and so
travel on either that night, or very early next morning. With this Love-story
(thus contrived and acted) together with a Present delivered by Peter's from his
Master, the Hostess was so well pleased, that she promised him, her house and
servants should be at his Masters command. All which she very justly performed.

When the day appointed for his Majesty's journey to Charmouth was come, he was
pleased to ride before Mrs Julian Coningsby (the Lady Wyndham's Niece) as
formerly before Mrs Lane: The Colonel was his Majesty's Guide, whilst the Lord
Wilmot with Peter's kept at a convenient distance, that they might not seem to
be all of one company.

In this manner traveling, they were timely met by Captain Elesden, and by him
conducted to a private house of his Brothers among the hills near Charmouth.
There his Majesty was pleased to discover himself to the Captain, and to give
him a piece of foreign Gold, in which in his solitary hours he made a hole to
put a ribbin in. Many like pieces his Majesty vouchsafed the Colonel and his
Lady, to be kept as Records of his Majesty's favor, and of their own fidelity
to his most Sacred Person in the day of his greatest Trial. All which they have
most thankfully treasured up as the chiefest Jewels of their Family.

This Royal Company from thence came to the Inn at Charmouth, a little after
night; where Captain Elesden solemnly engaging to see the Master of the ship
ready, (the wind blowing then fair for France) took leave of his Majesty. About
an hour after came Limbry to the Inn, and assured the Colonel all things were
prepared, and that about midnight his Longboat should wait at the place
appointed. The set hour drawing nigh, the Colonel with Peter's went to the
Seaside (leaving his Majesty and the Lord Wilmot in a posture to come away
upon call) where they remained all night expecting; but seeing no Longboat,
neither hearing any message from the master of the ship, at the break of day
the Colonel returns to the Inn, and beseeches the King and the Lord Wilmot to
haste from thence. His Majesty was entreated; but the Lord Wilmot was desirous
to stay behind a little, promising to follow the King to Bridport, where his
Majesty intended to make a halt for him.

When the King was gone, the Lord Wilmot sent Peter's into Lime, to demand of
Captain Elesden the reason why Limbry broke his promise, and forfeited his
word? He seemed much surprised with this message, and said, He knew no reason,
except it being Fair-day, the Seamen were drunk in taking their Farewell; and
withal advised his Lordship to be gone, because his stay there could not be
safe. But since that, Limbry himself has given this account under his own
hand: --

That according to an Agreement made at Charmouth, September the 19. 1651.
betwixt himself and one Captain Norris, (since known to be Colonel Francis
Wyndham) he put forth his Ship beyond the Cobs-mouth into Charmouth-rode, where
his servants on the 22. of the same month were all ready in her, waiting his
coming; That he going to his house about ten that night, for linen to carry
with him, was unexpectedly locked into a chamber by his Wife, to whom he had a
little before revealed his intended Voyage with some Passengers into France,
for whose Transportation, at his return, he was to receive a considerable sum
of money from Captain Elesden.

This woman (it seems) was frighted into a panick fear by that dreadful
Proclamation (of the tenth of September) set out by the Men of Westminister,
and published that day at Lime. In this, a heavy Penalty was thundered out
against all that should conceal the King, or any of his party who were at
Worcester Fight; and a Reward of a Thousand pounds promised to any that should
betray him. She, apprehending the Persons her husband engaged to carry over to
be Royalists, resolved to secure him from danger, by making him a Prisoner in
his own chamber. All the persuasions he used for his liberty, were in vain: For
the more he entreated, the more her violent passion increased, breaking forth
into such clamors and lamentations, that he feared if he should any longer
contend, both himself and the Gentlemen he promised to transport, would be cast
away in this storm, without ever going to Sea.

Thus a Design in a business of the highest nature, carried on with industry
and prudence, even to the very last, still promising full hope of a happy
production, by one man's single whisper (the bane of Action) proved abortive.
For no doubt, had Limbry kept his counsel, he had gained the honor of
Conveying over his Majesty; of whose Noble Courage and Virtue, God was pleased
to make yet farther trial, as the sequel will inform.

The King passing on upon London Road from Charmouth, met many travelers,
among whom was one of his Fathers servants, well known both to his Majesty and
the Colonel; who were very well pleased that he was not guilty of so much
Civility, as to give either of them the complement of a Salutation. As they
drew near to Bridport, the Colonel riding a little before, and entering the
town, perceived it full of Soldiers: whereupon stopping his horse till the King
came up, he inreated his Majesty to keep on, and by no means to put himself
into the mouth of them, who gaped greedily after his destruction. Nevertheless,
the King having engaged to the Lord Wilmot to expect him there, (without the
least apprehension of danger) rode into the George, and alighting in the Court,
was forced to stay there, and in the Stable, near half an hour, before the
Colonel could procure a Chamber. All this while his bloody Enemies were his
only Companions, with whom he discoursed freely without fear, and learned from
them their intended Voyage for Jersey and Guernsey, and their Design upon those
Islands. Here may you see the Pursuers overtaken, and the bitterest of Enemies
friendly discoursing with Him, whose utter Ruin they accounted would complete
their Happiness. He that sat in Heaven certainly laughed them to scorn, and by
the interposition of his mighty Arm eclypsed their glory, and by his admirable
Wisdom reproved and confuted their malice against the King, and their
blasphemies against Heaven.

No sooner had the King withdrawn himself from this dangerous Company into a
Chamber (with much difficulty obtained) but Mrs Coningsby espied Peter's riding
into the Inn. He (being beckned up) acquainted his Majesty, that the Lord
Wilmot humbly petitioned him to make haste out of that place, and to overtake
him slowly passing on the road, and waiting his Majesty's coming. Presently
upon the dismission of Peter's, the King having taken some small repast, not far
from the Town joined in company again with the Lord Wilmot, and discoursing of
the several Adventures of that hopeful, and (as it fell out) most perilous
Journey, concluded that London-Road was very unsafe, and therefore resolved to
follow the next Turning which might probably lead toward Yeavill or Sherborn,
neither of which is computed to be above two miles distant from Trent.
Providence (the best of Guides) directed these Strangers (for so they were all
to those parts) to a way, which after many hours travel brought them into a
Village, in which was a small Inn for entertainment. This entered these masqued
Travelers, to enquire where they were. And to this purpose calling for some
Beer, the Host of the house (one Rice Jones) came forth, and informed them that
the place was called Broadwinsor. The Colonel knew the Innkeeper and his wife
to be very honest, loyal persons, and that for their fidelity to the King and
his party, they had (according to their condition) undergone their share of
troubles. The King understanding the affection of the people, resolves to lodge
in the house that night, it being already somewhat dark, and his Majesty and
Company sufficiently wearied with their former nights watching, and that days
travel. The Colonel (while the horses were put up) desired Mr. Jones to show
him the most private rooms; the reason he gave was, Because his Brother-in-law
Colonel Reymes (whom the Lord Wilmot personated) had been a long time
imprisoned, as well as himself; That they had lately obtained their Paroles,
and to be seen together so far from their homes, might create new jealousies,
and so consequently crush them with new troubles. The good Host upon this
brought them up into the highest chambers, where Privateness recompensed the
meanness of the Accommodation, and the pleasantness of the Host (a merry
fellow) allayed and mitigated the weariness of the Guests. Now the face of
things began to smile, which all the day and night preceding looked so louring
and ill-favored. But this short Calm was on a sudden interrupted by a violent
Storm. For in comes the Constable with almost Forty Soldiers to be billeted
that very night in the Inn: All the lower Receptacles were thronged up with
this unexpected Company; so that the King was in a manner besieged, there being
no passage from above, but through those suspected Guards. Thus every place
brought forth its troubles, and every period of time disclosed fresh dangers!
Shortly after the Soldiers had taken up their Quarters, a Woman in their
company fell in labor in the Kitchen. The pangs she endured, made the
Inhabitants of that place very ill at ease, fearing lest the whole Parish
should become the reputed Father, and be enforced to keep the Child. To avoid
this charge, the chiefest of the Parish post to the Inn, between whom and the
Soldiers arose a very hot conflict concerning provision to be made for the
mother and the infant. This dispute continued till such time as (according to
orders) they were to march to the Seaside. This quarrelsom Gossipping was a
most seasonable diversion, exercising the minds of those troublesome Fellows,
who otherwise were likely to have proved too too inquisitive after the Guests
in the house; the sad consequences of which, every loyal heart trembles to
think on.

Surely we cannot, except we wilfully shut our own eyes) but clearly see, and
with all reverence and thankfulness adore the Divine Goodness for his Majesty's
signal Deliverances in this Voyage. Especially if looking back upon Charmouth,
we consider the dangers that threatened him, occasioned by the Lord Wilmot's
short stay there, after the Kings departure. For one Hamnet a Smith, being
called to shoe his Lordships horse, said, He well knew by the fashion of the
shoes, that they were never set in the West, but in the North. The Hostler (a
bird of the same feather) hearing this, began to tell what Company had been
there, how they sat up, and kept their horses sadled all the night; and from
hence they conclude, That either the King, or some Great Persons had certainly
been at the Inn. The Hostler (whose heart was soured against the King) runs
presently to one Westley (of the same leaven) then Minister of Charmouth, to
inform him of these Passages, and to ask counsel what was to be done. This
Westley was at his Morning Exercise, and being something long-winded, [And by
the way it may be observed, that long Prayers proceeding from a Traitorous
heart, once did good, but by accident onely] the Hostler, unwilling to lose his
reward at the Gentleman's taking horse, returns without doing his errand. As
soon as my Lord was mounted and gone, Hamnet tells Westley of the discourse
between himself and the Hostler. Away comes Westley upon full speed to the
Inn, and (almost out of breath) asks the woman of the house, what Guests she
had entertained that night? She said, They were all strangers to her, she knew
them not. I tell you then (said he) one of them was the King. Then hastily
turning away from her, he and Hamnet ran to Mr. Butler of Commer (then Justice
of Peace) to have him dispatch abroad his Warrants to raise the Country for the
apprehending of the King, and those persons the last night with him at
Charmouth. But he spends his mouth in vain, a deaf ear is turned upon him, no
Warrant would be issued forth. This check given to his zeal so vexed him, that
it had like to have caused a suffocation, had not Captain Massey (as errant a
Hotspur as himself) given it vent, by raising a Party and pursuing the King
upon London-Road. But God preserved his Majesty by diverting him to
Broadwindsor, whilst Massey and his hot-mettled company outran their Prey as
far as Dorchester. And indeed, the report of the Kings being at Charmouth, was
grown so common, that the Soldiers (lying in those parts) searched the houses
of several Gentlemen, who were accounted Royalists, thinking to surprise him.
Amongst which, Pilesdon (the house of Sir Hugh Wyndham Uncle to Colonel Francis
Wyndham) was twice rifled. They took the old Baronet, his Lady, Daughters, and
whole Family, and set a Guard upon them in the Hall, whilst they examine every
corner, not sparing either Trunk or Box. Then taking a particular view of their
Prisoners, they seize a lovely young Lady, saying, she was the King disguised
in women's apparel. At length being convinced of their gross and rude mistake,
they desisted from offering any farther violence to that Family. And here it is
much to be observed, that the same day the King went from Charmouth, Captain
Elesden came to Pilesdon, and enquired of Sir Hugh and his Lady for the King
and Colonel, confidently affirming that they must needs be there.

His Majesty having with an evenness of spirit gotten through this rough
passage, safely anchored at Broadwindsor: Where at length enjoying some rest,
he commands the Colonel to give his opinion what course was to be taken, as the
face of affairs then looked. The Colonel (seeing Forces drawn every where upon
that shore) thought it very hazardous to attempt any thing more in Dorsetshire;
and therefore humbly besought his Majesty, that he would be pleased to retreat
to Trent: He hoped his Majesty was already satisfied in the fidelity of his
servants; and that he doubted not, his Majesty might lie securely in that
Creek, till it was fair weather, and a good season to put forth to Sea. He
humbly advised, that Peter's might conduct the Lord Wilmot to Mr Huit's house at
the Kings-Arms in Sarum, where he and many of his friends had been sheltered in
the time of troubles. That Peter's (being at Sarum) should by a private token
bring his Lordship to Mr John Coventry (his Kinsman) a Person Noble, Wise, and
Loyal, with whom he had kept Intelligence in order to the Kings service, ever
since his Majesty had set foot in Scotland; That he was assured Mr Coventry
would think himself highly honored to correspond in this matchless employment,
The King's Preservation. He desired the Lord Wilmot to be confident of lying
concealed; And likewise to treat with Mr Coventry, and by Peter's to return his
Majesty an account how he found that Gentleman affected toward this service.

This counsel being well relished and approved, 'twas resolved, That between
Sarum and Trent (lying 30 miles distant and better) an Intercourse should be
kept by trusty messengers, and a secret way of writing, to avoid danger in case
of interception. All things being thus concluded, the King left his jovial Host
at Broadwindsor, and returned with the Colonel and Mrs Coningsby to Trent. The
Lord Wilmot with Peter's went that night to Sherborn, and the next morning was
waited on by Swan (who attended his Lordship to the Colonels) and that day got
into Sarum; where he soon saluted Mr Coventry, in all things fully answering
his Lordships expectation: And (the 25. of September) Peter's was sent back with
this joyful message from the Lord Wilmot to his Majesty, That he doubted not
(by Mr Coventry's assistance, and those recommended by him) to be able in some
short time to effect his desires.

Whilst his Sacred Majesty enjoys his peace at Trent, and the Lord Wilmot (with
those other Worthies) is busied at Sarum to procure its continuation, It cannot
be impertinent to mention a Circumstance or two, which inserted in the midst of
the web and texture of this Story would have looked unhandsom, but added as a
fringe may prove ornamental.

Upon the Sunday morning after the King came to Trent, a Tailor of the Parish
informed the Colonel, That the Zealots [which swarmed in that place] discoursed
overnight, that Persons of Quality were hid in his house, and that they
intended to search and seize them; and therefore he desired the Colonel (if any
such there were) to convey them thence, to avoid surprisal. The Colonel
(rewarding the good man for his care and kindness toward himself and family)
told him, That his Kinsman (meaning the L. Wilmot) was not private, but public
in his house, (for so his Lordship pleased to be) and that he believed he would
show himself in the Church at the time of Prayers. When the honest fellow was
gone, the Colonel acquaints the King what had passed between himself and the
Tailor, and withal besought his Majesty to persuade the Lord Wilmot to
accompany him to Church, thinking by this means not only to lessen the
jealousy, but also to gain the good opinion of some of the Fanatics, who
would be apt to believe, that the Colonel was rather brought to Church by my
Lord, then his Lordship by the Colonel, who seldom came to that Place, since
Faction and Rebellion had justled out, and kept possession against Peace and
Religion. He alleged moreover, that he sat in an I Will distinct from the body
of the Congregation, so that the Parishioners could not take a full view of any
of his company. These reasons, joined with his Majesty's command, prevailed
with his Lordship; and (though he thought it a bold adventure, yet) it not only
allayed the fury, but also took out the very sting of those wasps; insomuch
that they who the last night talked of nothing but searching, began now to say,
that Cromwell's late success against the King, had made the Colonel a Convert.

All being now quiet about home, the Colonels Lady (under a pretense of a
Visit) goes over to Sherborn to hear what news there was abroad of the King.
And toward evening, at her return, a Troop of horse clapped privately into the
town. This silent way of entering their Quarters, in so triumphant a time, gave
a strong alarm to this careful Lady, whose thoughts were much troubled
concerning her Royal Guest. A stop she made to hearken out what brought them
thither, and whither they were bound: But not one grain of Intelligence could
be procured by the most industrious enquiry. When she came home, she gave his
Majesty an account of many stories, which like flying clouds were blown about
by the breath of the people, striving to cover her trouble with the vail of
cheerfulness. But this the King perceiving to be rather forced then free, as at
other times, was earnest to know the cause of her discomposure. And to satisfy
his Majesty's importunity, she gave him a full relation of the Troop at
Sherborn: At which his Majesty laughed most heartily, as if he had not been in
the least concerned. Yet upon a serious debate of the matter, the Colonel and
his Lady supplicated the King to take a view of his Privy chamber, into which
he was persuaded to enter, but came presently forth again, much pleased, that
upon the least approach of danger, he could thither retreat with an assurance
of security. All that night the Colonel kept strict watch in his house, and was
the more vigilant, because he understood from Sherborn, that the Troop intended
not to quarter there, but only to refresh themselves and march. And accordingly
(not so much as looking toward Trent) about two of the clock next morning,
they removed toward the Seacoast. This fear being over, the King rested all
the time of his stay at Trent, without so much as the apprehension of a
disturbance.

The strangeness of which will be much increased by the addition of what a
Captain who served under Cromwell at Worcester, reported to two Divines of
undoubted veracity, long before the King's blessed Restoration: That he was
followed and troubled with Dreams for three nights together, That the King was
hid at Trent near Sherborn, in a house nigh to which stood a Grove or patch of
trees, and that thither he should go and find him. This suggestion thus
reiterated, was a powerful spur to prick him forwards: But the hand which held
the reins and kept him back, was irresistible.

Now the hands of his Majesty's enemies were not only restrained from doing him
evil, but the hands of his friends were strengthened to do him good. In order
to which, Colonel Eward Phelips of Montacute in the County of Somerset, came
from Sarum to his Majesty (September. 28.) with this intelligence, That his
brother Colonel Robert Phelips was employed to Southampton to procure a Vessel,
of whose transaction his Majesty should receive a speedy account.

In the mean time, Captain Thomas Littleton (a Neighbor of Colonel Wyndham)
was dispatched up into Hampshire, where by the aid of Mr. Standish he dealt
with the Master of a Ship, who undertook to carry off the Lord Wilmot and his
company, upon the condition his Lordship would follow his direction. But the
hope of Colonel Phelips his good success at Hampton dashed this enterprise, and
the Captain was remanded to Trent, and to make no progress till farther order.

Upon the first of October, Mr. John Sellick (Chaplain to Mr. Coventry) brought
a Letter to his Majesty. In answer to which the King wrote back, That he
desired all diligence might be used in providing a Vessel; and if it should
prove difficult at Hampton, trial should be made farther: That they should be
ascertained of a Ship before they sent to remove him, that so he might run no
more hazards then what of necessity he must meet with in his passage from Trent
to the place of his Transportation.

October the fifth, Colonel Phelips came from the Lord Wilmot and Mr. Coventry
to his Majesty with this assurance, That all things were ready; And that he had
informed himself with the most private ways, that so he might with greater
probability of safety guide his Majesty to the Seaside. As Soon as the King
heard this message, He resolved upon his Journey. Colonel Wyndham earnestly
petitions his Majesty, that he might wait on him to the shore: But his Majesty
gave no grant, saying, It was no way necessary, and might prove very
inconvenient. Upon the renewing his request, the King commanded the contrary,
but sweetened his denial with this promise, That if he were put to any distress,
he would again retreat to Trent.

About ten next morning (October the sixth) his Majesty took leave of the old
Lady Wyndham, the Colonels Lady and Family; not omitting the meanest of them
that served him. But to the good old Lady he vouchsafed more then an ordinary
respect, who accounted it her highest honor, that she had three Sons and one
Grandchild slain in the defense of the Father, and that she her self in her old
age had been instrumental in the protection of the Son, Both Kings of England.

Thus his Sacred Majesty, taking Mrs Juliana Coningsby behind him, attended by
Colonel Robert Phelips, and Peter's, bade Farewell to Trent, the Ark in which God
shut him up, when the Floods of Rebellion had covered the face of his
Dominions. Here he rested Nineteen days, to give his faithful Servants time to
work his deliverance: And the Almighty crowned their endeavors with success,
that his Majesty might live to appear as Glorious in his Actions, as Courageous
in his Sufferings.

FINIS.

