A DISCOURSE, Prepared for the Ears of some ROMANISTS (At a general Quarter
Sessions, in the North, When they were Summoned to take the Oaths.) By Sr.
Christopher Wyvill Baronet, One of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace in those
Parts: And now proffered to the Eyes of them all

YORK. Printed by Stephen Bulkley, and are to be sold by Richard Lambart
Bookseller, 1679.

Imprimatur,

Robert Field.
Aug. 29. 1679.
A DISCOURSE, Prepared for the Eears of some ROMANISTS, etc.
I Am not only sorry and troubled, but afflicted, to see so many Persons
standing there, who (could they but quit themselves of one or two needless
scruples, pardon me Gentlemen, if I use that term) were fit to sit here and
manage the Affairs of the Country.

Realy, I would not wish any of you (upon the mere account either of your
purses or Persons) to turn your backs of one Fundamental Doctrine, that
appears such, upon a serious and impartial inquiry; but even in consideration
of those your temporal concerns, you may have just occasion, to review your
Notions, and after due search easily find.

1. That that sort of Supremacy which the Laws require, on the behalf of our
Kings, does no way violate, or invade the Priestly Function.

2. That that sort of Supremacy, which the Pope now clayms, was utterly
unknown to the Primitive Church; and is neither consistent with, nor at all
becoming the Priestly Function.

3. That this sort of Supremacy has stragled, in the world, to the cost of
many Crowned-heads, and the destruction of numberless Christian People.

4. That this sort of Supremacy was (first) founded in blood, and so fostered
ever since; having been formerly, and formally (in direct, plain words)
declared against, both by a Council, and a Pope.

5. That the chief and most celebrated Authors, in the Romish Church have writ
in defense of their exorbitant supremacy, after such a manner, as does rended
it rational, yea necessary (especially it being compared with their former
known actings, and the posture of this day) to keep on foot the old, and
perhaps to make new Laws, in prejudice of Recusants.

1. That we may discover the truth, or falsehood of this Proposition, it will
be requisite to know distinctly, What the challinges of the King are. What he
absolutely and freely disowns.


He expects then to be Custos uriusque Tabulae; this was no more then all the
Kings of Judah exercised; and those of them that were most zealously active in
the purging the Temple, in the preserving, or restoring the true worship of
God, (as Josiah) we find most commended, most Celebrated in holy Writ: we find
too, (to Note that by the way) they still called to the Law, the written Law,
and to the Testimonies, making them their Rule. 2. Chorn. 17th. Iehosophat 29
Hezekiah 34. Josiah, he expects further, that all the Members of the Church
within his Dominions, should be subject to his Courts; and Clergymen, as well
others, (in case of notorious Crimes) tryable there. He expects to nominate,
appoint, and call to any spiritual preferments, what persons he please, without
the interposition of any Foreign power, or Potentate: this is no more then
every Patron of a Parish Church looks at, as his own right. The whole of this
is no more, then Elutherius, Bishop of Rome, declared to be in Lucius King of
Britain, when he sent to him to desire, not his leave, but advice, in the
Resetling a Christian Church; for the Gospel had been both Preached and owned
here before; and without any help from Rome; tho, at that time sadly overrun
again with Paganism.

But now negatively, Let us see what the King pretends not to; Not the
conferring of Orders; not Administration of Sacraments; not to Preach the Word;
not (of himself) to define Articles of Faith; and herein, both the preamble of
the Statute, and the Injunctions which were afterward purposely framed, (to
satisfy such as seemed to mistake the point) are so plain, that it is a wonder
how a considering man, can have any religious fear or scruple about it. These
together, are such an innocent kind of Supremacy, so just and so frequently
exercised by Christian Emperors, and Kings of England, (even all that had any
thing of Judgment, spirit, or good fortune) as certainly none that has looked
at all into History only, will deny his Prince.

2. Doubtless if our Blessed Lord had meant, That this prodigious sort of
Supremacy (joined with a never failing Infallibility) should ever have been
the main Article of our Faith, he would not have answered his inquisitive
Disciples so unsatisfactorily, as he he did; Mark 9.34, 35. ver. nor would he
have left the world without a clear direction, in a matter of so vast
concernment (to all it is future Generations) Now that he did not so, is
evident, since St. Paul when he sadly foretold the Church, How, after his
departure, grievous Wolves should enter in; and amongst them, many should arise
speaking perverse things; advises them not, to make their addresses to any one
that should (then) happen to be Bishop of Rome; but commends them to the word
of Gods grace, to be built up thereby: as we read Acts. 20.29, 30, 31, 32. A
shrewd sign, that the Apostle did not understand Tu es Petrus in the Popish
sense; nor in that other place, which has a minatorie exhortation to Rome (as
well as to other Gentile Churches) least she also might be cut off, Romans
11.18, 19, 20, 21. ver.

What think you, Would all the Eastern Bishops have stood out so vigorously,
and so long (in that controversy about the celebration of Easter) if it had
ever been received as a standing rule, That your Universal Monarch, in the
West, was Gods Plenepotentiarie, in all Causes Ecclesiastical. Would the third
Council of Carthage (wherein St. Augustine was present) have past a Decree,
That none should be styled Head, or Prince of Priests? Would the great Gregory
(even when he sat in the Pontifical Chair) have pronounced such a pretender
the forerunner of Antichrist. Even St. Peter (from whom you seek to derive it)
demonstrates, That he neither had, nor desired any such Lordship, or
Superiority, 1 Peter 5.2, 3.

Would Heirome have said, Pari omnes, inter se Authoritate fuisse Apostolos?
Would Ambrose have slipped so, as to have writ, Non habent haereditatem Petri,
qui fidem Petri non habent? Would B^sil have assigned to Alexandria, and
Antioch, a better title to the succession of Peter? Would he, and so many other
old Fathers, have blamed, chid, derided; nay, even contemned the Bishop of
Romes pride, if all the world had been obliged to be led by the Nose, what way
he should please?

3.4. It is in vain then to seek after the sort of Supremacy, now contended
for during the first six hundred years; But I shall presently lead you it is
rise: And that leaning upon the Authorities of such Authors, as you will not
refuse to call your own; Know then, That not half an Age after Gregory was
gone off this stage: A certain Man that went by the name of Boniface had a mind
to be Paramount in the Church, and there (luckily) fell out to be at the same
time, a Person of great Power, who longed to be Emperor; these two, struck a
bargain; Mauritius (the rightful Master of them both) together with his whole
family, cruelly was murdered: Ph^cas got the Scepter; and Boniface was by him
constituted Universal Bishop: From hence, all men must date the Original of
this fatal Supremacy; Fatal, I say, because it has been so fruitful, and
teeming in slaughters, Rebellions, (you must bear with the term, since matter
of Fact, in almost every Age bears testimony thereof) and Massacres. It was
indeed a fine cast of this new Office, which Anno 747. was given to Chilpric
(the last of the First Royal house in France) by the then Pope Zachary; poor
Chilpric was an unactive, easy Creature, and therefore must be sent into a
Monastery (where you may suppose, he lived not long after.) But Pepin was a
brave Young blade, and Zachary stood need of such an one: he presently
absolves him from his sworn Allegiance, and mounts him up to the Throne. But
tush! this was nothing to the Freaks; the subsequent Holinesses played all the
Empire, (nay well-nigh) all Europe over, by pulling, yea kicking off Crowns
(Anno 1080, Gregory the 7th. by arming Subjects (yes sonns) against their
Princes (Anno 1110. Paschal second.) The two last Henry's of Paris felt the
weight of the two Swords, which the Pope clayms as his own, though they fell
but by two sorry knives in the hands of two wretches, but both Disciples of the
Jesuits; And all to make room for this Monstrous Supremacy; at the cost, not
only of Albigences, Waldenses, Hussites, (and such as they will call Heretics)
but even of their own Children, who mistook that Stepdame of Rome for their
true Mother.

It Is true, St. Ambrose (pretty, early when the Discipline of the Primitive
Church was yet in it is right state and just vigor) did stave off the hands of
the Emperor, from touching the sacred Elements, when he found them polluted
with it innocent blood. But, I beseech you consider (for this very particular
may serve to rectify your judgments.)

1. What he was. 2. How far he proceeded.
He was Bishop of Millaine, a Place always reckoned in the Territories of
Italy; not Bishop of Rome: nor acting by any Authority derived from thence.

He went no farther then the Episcopal Power would bear him out: He kept him
from the Holy Communion; but he did not Dethrone Him: He did not Absolve His
Subjects from their Allegiance: He did not give away His Dominions, to any that
could catch them.

That these things were Acted in the face of the Sun, Plaetina, Baronius,
Guiccardin de Serres, with I know not how many more, are uncontrollable
Witnesses. Let honest Matthew Paris (the Monk of Saint Albans) tell you, How
common it was for every Priest, Prelate, or Friar, transalpinare, to hite away
to Rome, and bring back with them an Interdict, (or not unfrequentedly, an
Excommunication) against the King, and whole Kingdom of England. But let him
tell you too, How often the Legate (a later) and other Domineering, Extorting
Agents from that proud See, have been kept on the further side of the Dike, and
not suffered transfretare, unless upon such Terms, as our Governors would
admit of, and prescribe, notwithstanding all the power they pretended, or
produced from his holiness.

5. As to this last Charge (wherein much of the present occasion seems to lie)
Whether your Church in her Head, in her Members, in her Decretalls, in her
Canon Law, in some of her approved Councills, have not made such Declarations
as must warn (nay compel) all Princes and States, to make defensive Laws
against such Encroachments? Do but (I beseech you) peruse what the present
Right Reverend Bishop of Lincoln has both heartily, and charitably, offered
you: I shall content my self with instancing in a few; Let the Language of
Clement the eights Brevis (when Queen Elizabeth had (now) one foot in the
Grave) be first heard; He strictly (therein) Forbids all his Catholics to
suffer any to succeed (how near soever in Blood, or Right) unless such as
should preingage to become a Vassal to this Romish Church. And (to see the luck
of a thing) these Breves were directed to the hand of one Henry Garnet; who,
not long after, was found to have, more then a finger, in the Powder Plot: With
one Arm he would have kept King James from; with the other, he would have blown
Him out of His three Kingdoms.

Next, be pleased to consult Bellermine (who was made, in his time, and I think
esteemed so ever since, but a little lower then the very Pope.) Ask him, How we
can be assured that his Catholics will prove good Subjects? His answer is
legible (Lib. 1. de Clericis) They stand not bound to the Laws of any Prince
coactively; but directively only? Ask him further, What if they will not be
directed, but tread those Laws under their feet? Yet (says he, with the same
front, and truth) they may by no means receive punishment, by any secular
Magistrate, nor at all be brought before His Trybunal.

But what if they should chance (and what has been may be) to be found engaged
in Treason? The words of Zimanca (in his Aphorisms, de Confessione) are
positive, A Clerks Rebellion is not Treason; for he is not Subject to the King:
This is pretty well for the Clergy, the Notion being extended (as they intend
it) to all their several Orders of Monks and Friars. But what say they to the
Laity? Take the sum of the whole matter from Creswell, who, in pure love (no
doubt) to his Countrymen, gives this Foreign Advice; It is an undoubted point
of Faith (says he) that any Christian Prince whatsoever, if he have manifestly
swarved from the Catholic Faith, and would draw others to do so, falls
immediately from His Power, and Dignity; and that, even before the Pope have
given Sentence, His Subjects may, and ought, if they have power, to remove Him:
(Andr'. Philopat'. page 109. Edit. 1592.)

It were no hard task, here to rake together, more then a good many of such
Dictates as these, from men of this stamp, whose Works have been Licensed,
Approved, Printed, reprinted, and generally sold through all Popish Countries
without contradiction; and in this case, it may well be said, Qui malum non
prohibet, cum prohibere potest, perpetrat. It Is true, Mariana's shameful Book,
was once at a Crittical season (for fear of a worse clap) censured at Paris;
but it was never so at Rome: And I do verily doubt the common Doctrine of the
Jesuits (with their Adhaerents) will be found, that the strongest Knots, of
Promises, Oaths, or Vows, made for fidelity to temporal Princes, may be cut
asunder by their spiritual Alexander, who (unjustly) would usurp both the
Swords; and (perhaps) is sorry he has not more Worlds to conquer.

Suffer me now, for a Conclusion, and to abate a little the surprise you may be
in, at the severities, at present, exercised toward you, (though the late
Proclamations, as well as the Statutes, must needs quit us from any blame in
that behalf) to remind you of one or two things, in which I have proof, more
then abundant; and of which, some (yet living) can give testimony. It Is
confessed, some of you gave signal, and very brave Assistances to Our late
Sovereign Charles the First, in those unhappy Wars, (upon what Account, or
Motive, let it be decided at the last day;) but, that the whole Body of
Romanists, could have been content to have sat down under a very Bramble, in
stead of the true Oak, was manifest from the Addresses pretended to come from
them all; wherein the Catholic Gentleman (in a Book Published presently after
Anno 1652. or thereabout, with a great many Arguments for his favor) tells
Oliver, They had generally taken, and punctually kept the Engagement:

(In that Page, toward the latter end; which, in that I have, is marked 41.
but should be 127.)

Next, it would make one admire, how (after the good services Mr. Huddleston,
the honest Pendrills etc. had done His present Majesty) the Irish, of the same
Communion, and Creed, could be persuaded to lay aside, their own commendable
purposes. The Natives of that Kingdom were (most of them) upon the account of
the bloody Insurrection, Anno 1641. under the Call, and subject to grievous
paenalties at His Majesty's Restoration: But He, according to His Princely
clemency, required them, only to let Him have new Tests of their future
Loyalty, under the Obligation of those Oaths, you now stick at: He was pleased
to allow them (since they seemed willing to the thing, but only were
dissatisfied in certain expressions, and those Forms were not Established in
Ireland) after Consultation with their own Priests, to offer Him, what might be
Equivalent thereto: They did so, and after some time, showed it to the King: He
was willing to accept it, according to that Draught: But one of the Popes best
be-trusts, then at Bruxells, hastens (in that nick of time) to School them
better; and they neither durst (it seems) nor would proceed further in that
business: And what use then) can a through Paced Roman Catholic make of his
own Conscience? if, after such means, being arrived at settlement, he must yet
throw away all, and implicitly give up his Faith, to the most imperiously
Politic Dictates, of an old (perhaps) doting mortal-man.

And, now Sirs, methinks I hear you say, what I have heard some of you say
often (and I verily think sincerely.)

1. That you are wholly ignorant (which is, in this case, the best sort of
innocence) of any Design against His Majesty's Person, or Government.

2. That, if the Pope himself should Invade this Land, and War against the
King, you would fight under the Royal Banner, and endeavor to cut His throat
as soon as any man's.

3. That it is a sad thing, if a few hare-brain'd fellows have embarked in a
desperate Action, the whole Communion (though innocent) should be involved in
the suffering part.

As to the two first, I can say little, but this: If I were a Papist (and durst
consider the true state of things, and the wild Expectation of the Roman See
in these matters) I should not know, how to make my due Obedience to my
Sovereign, and my necessary submission to the Pope's commands, lodge in one
Breast? And for the last, I do concur with you. It Is, indeed, a very sad
thing; but (Gentlemen) if you will not do it your selves, Who can distinguish
you? What I have now said, I have said with clear intentions, with an ardent
desire to serve you; and after a long dilligent Search (to which no man living
could be more Engaged then my self.) If any of you desire a farther Discussion
of things here briefly touched (either in order to clearer satisfaction, or
with a Design of Opposition) they shall at any Opportunity command it, from

Yours, C. W.


