APTISON DIDA,

THE DOCTRINE OF BAPTISMS: OR, A DISCOURSE OF Dipping and Sprinkling; Wherein
is showed the Lawfulness of other Ways of Baptization, besides that of a TOTAL
IMMERSION; AND Objections against it Answered.

By WILLIAM WALKER, B. D. sometimes of Trinity College Cambridge.

In Sacramentis salutaribus necessitate cogente, and Deo indulgentiam suam
largiente, totum credentibus conferunt Divina compendia. D. Cyprian. l. 4. Ep.
7.

Let us draw near with a true Heart, in full assurance of Faith, having our
Hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our Bodies washed with pure
Water, Heb. 10.23.

Imprimatur, Guil. Jane, Feb. 22. 1677.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Pawlet, at the Sign of the Bible in Chancery Lane,
near Fleetstreet, 1678.

TO THE Most Reverend Father in GOD WILLIAM SANCROFT By Divine Providence LORD
ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY, Primate of all England and Metropolitan, WILLIAM
WALKER RECTOR of COLSTERWORTH Wishes all the Happiness of this Present, and of
the Future State.
MY LORD,
HOw great a Happiness it is to this weather-beaten Church to have a Person of
so great Abilities, and known Integrity, advanced to that high Honor and Trust
of being its Prime Steersman in these unsteady and tempestuous Times, is easier
by much for me to conceive, than to declare. Nevertheless I do humbly assume
the boldness to express the deep sense I have of it, and the high joy I have
conceived for it, by dedicating unto Your Graces Name the ensuing Treatise: in
which I defend that Church, whereof You are constituted the Supreme
Ecclesiastical Minister, against such a sort of Adversaries, as strike not only
at its Wealth and Grandeur, but even at its very Life and Being, and most
especially in their management of that particular Controversy, which is the
Subject of these following Papers, whereby, whilst they go about to unchristen
our Persons, they endeavor to unchurch our Church: for how that can be a true
Christian Church, in which there is neither Magistrate, nor Minister, nor
People, that have been baptized with a true Christian Baptism, (and none have
been so, in the opinion of the Anabaptists, that have not been totally dipped)
I am yet to learn. And I humbly beg, that Your Grace will vouchsafe Your
Patronage to this particular Treatise, because of the weighty importance of
this Controversy, and of the indispensable necessity of making good this Post
against the insulting Adversary, and of clearing all difficulties about it,
that so the unsettled Consciences of well-meaning men, who modestly doubt, or
are unfactiously dissatisfied therein, and, as they soberly seek, so would
gladly find, whereon they might safely, as well as finally settle, may at
length have solid ground, whereon to build a clear satisfaction to themselves,
that they are already in a state of true Christianity, and live in a truly
Christian Community, and have no necessity in order thereunto, of turning
Anabaptists, and being baptized over again; that so every stone of Offense, and
Stumbling Block of doubt being removed out of the way, the Dissenters from the
Church of England on this account, may cheerfully and conscientiously return to
union with it; which as it is my hearts wish, and souls desire, so is it my
principal aim, and main design in these Papers: or else may be known to all the
World to continue perversely and unconscionably in their separation from it;
which God, in his infinite mercy to this Church, and Them, forbid. And now, as
knowing that Your Graces concerns are both too many, and too weighty, to be
diverted, or interrupted, with other men's little, and yet long impertinencies,
I wish Your Grace much joy of, and the Church a long enjoyment of You in, that
Honor, whereunto his Majesty, to the great content of all his People, has so
worthily advanced You; and in all dutiful affection remain

MY LORD, Colsterworth near Grantham, May 1. 1678. Your Graces most Humble and
most devoted Servant, WILLIAM WALKER.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Courteous READER,
IN the midst of Trouble by the death of my dear Wife, Sickness of my self, and
Dissolution of my Family and School, by the Small pox, about the beginning of
the Year 1677. came to me one Mr. Pan with a Challenge to a public Disputation
with one Mr. Grantham, a Ringleader, it seems, of the Sect of the Baptists, as
they are pleased now to call themselves, whom elder times used to call
Anabaptists. This challenge I refused to accept of. That Refusal was Trumpeted
up and down among their Party, and by them among others, to the disparagement
both of my Person, and of the Cause I maintain. With the Refusal, I sent the
Reasons of it also, which they have not been so ingenuous as equally to
disperse; I will therefore beg the Readers Favor, that I may acquaint him
therewith; which done, I shall leave both him and all the world, to judge as
they please of me and it. And this Publication of my Reasons I make by the
advice of my Prudent Friends; and I do it partly to give a stop to the
boastings of that Party, and prevent prejudice to my Cause on that account, and
partly to allay that Pruriency of mind to disputation, which may be in some, by
showing them Reasons why they should decline Disputes, unless when they are as
well Authorized to it, as Enabled for it. And but for this I could very
contentedly have sat down under all my disparagements, being abundantly
satisfied with that Approbation of my Refusal, which I found it to have, in the
judgment of Wise men. The Reasons were these that follow, all in Substance, and
much in Words.

First, I alleged my want of a Memory necessary for such a Purpose. He, I
said, that was to manage a Public Disputation, needed to be a man of a great
Memory, able, not only to repeat Syllogisms, but also to quote Chapter and
Verse of Scripture, and Book and Section of other Authors, to remember the
Occasions and Scopes of Discourses incident, with their Contexts, Antecedents,
and Consequents. But I was so far from all this, that if any thing should be
quoted against me out of mine own Book, I could hardly be able to gainsay it,
till I had seen, and read the place. And therefore as being utterly unfit in
that respect for any such undertaking, I refused it.

Secondly, I said, He, that was to engage in a Public Dispute, ought to be a
Person of great boldness and confidence. And it is true; for else, though
otherwise sufficiently learned and eloquent, he shall by some insolences in
the words or carriage of a bold and confident Antagonist (or perhaps of some of
the Company) be dashed out of countenance, if not quite baffled, and silenced;
however he shall be troubled, and disturbed, if not utterly confounded, in his
own reasonings; he shall lose many advantages by what he could speak, for want
of confidence to speak them; and his Cause too shall suffer for his sake, in
the opinion of at least one half of his Hearers, who will conclude the timidity
of his Person to be the product of his own sense of the weakness of his Cause.
But I (as I said) was a man of so much Modesty and diffidence, that if I did
but appear in any greater Audience, I was ordinarily struck with such a
Consternation, that I was hardly able to deliver any thing I had to say, unless
I had my Notes before me to read, or cast my eye upon at pleasure. And having
been all my life long used to privacy, and retirement, and never drawn forth
into any such public contrast, I could not think I could be able to keep
courage and countenance, and manage my undertaking with that boldness and
confidence, which was necessary on such occasion, and in the presence of so
vast a multitude, as would have been gathered together to hear us. And if my
Memory was bad of it self, that Fear would have made it worse. And even the
conscience of a bad Memory was enough, even of it self, to diffuse a diffidence
into me, had I been otherwise endued with a better stock of Confidence, than I
dare boast my self to have. And so, as utterly unfit on that account also to
maintain a Public Disputation, I declined it.

Thirdly, I alleged my self utterly unqualified for such an undertaking, if
not by reason of Sorrow of Mind, yet on account of Infirmity of Body. He, I
said, that was to manage a Public Dispute ought to be a man of a strong Body,
and sound Lungs, able to speak long, and loud, that the Auditors might
understand what was said, and especially since the humor now was to give the
Cause, not according to the Soundness of the Reason, but according to the
Loudness of the Voice of the Disputant. But I was a man far from this, being at
present but in a recovering condition from two distempers, just got down out of
my Chamber, not as yet got abroad, and at best subject to Infirmities enough,
to procure me, from any man of Reason or Pity, a Writ of Ease from such an
endangering Engagement. Should I have appointed a day for Dispute, I could not
be sure I should be able to hold it, going many times well to bed, and being
arrested ere the morning with the Stone or the Gout. And what interpretation
would have been made upon a faileur on such occasion, though the reason had
been never so just; and how much it must have been turned to the disparagement
not of my Person only, but of my Cause too, let the Reader judge. And supposing
it, that I had stood sound in these respects, yet that I should be able with a
Cough of the Lungs, and a broken Vein, to speak so loud as to be heard by half
the Company, and so long as till his Eight Questions were disputed thorough, is
not imaginable. And if nothing else, yet that necessary care that I ought to
have of my own preservation, for the sake of my children, new made Orphans by
the death of their Mother, had reason enough in it to dissuade me from being so
prodigal of my Life or Health, as, without greater Reason, and more Necessity
for it, than any I yet saw, to throw away, or expose either unto hazard, in a
brabling contest; and on that account also I would not admit of it.

Fourthly, supposing nothing of all this had been, yet the business it self, I
said, was of a mighty concernment, not my private quarrel, but the Churches
Cause; and that considering my own manifold deficiencies, I could not think my
self Champion enough for such an Engagement. And therefore as being unwilling
either that so great a weight should lie on so weak a shoulder, or that the
Churches Cause should suffer by my insufficiency to maintain it, I would not
dispute. It was excepted, I might take in others to my assistance, and so
engage with an equal number on the other side. To this I replied, that I knew
what I had to say my self; but what another might say I could not tell. And
therefore being unwilling to hazard so great a concern on such an uncertainty,
I would not engage, no not with the assistance of any other, in a Public
Dispute. I added also that a plurality of Disputants was many times a hindrance
in the disputation; whilst one by an unseasonable interposition prevented
another of, or put him by, his Argument, or disturbed and confounded him in his
Arguing. I said further that I had written what I had to say in the Cause, and
Mr. Grantham, if he pleased, might answer that; and then it might by others be
judged on which side the greatest probability of truth did lie. It was again
excepted, that I might as well dispute, as write. But I answered, Nay; for
besides my Personal indispositions rendering me unqualified for Disputation,
when I wrote I could at my best leisure consider what I did, and by the help of
Books or Notes recover, at one time or other, what was slipped out of my memory;
also I could offer what I had written to the Eyes of learned Persons, and have
their judgments thereon: but could not do so in an Oral Disputation. It was
lastly urged that my Refusal to dispute would reflect upon me. But thereto I
answered, that I would rather choose to suffer in my Credit for my Refusing to
dispute, than that the Church should suffer in her Cause by my ill disputing.

Fifthly, Supposing my self never so able to dispute, yet still I alleged,
that I had no warrantable Call to engage in such a Public Disputation. Had the
King, or the Bishop, or any of my Superiors commanded me to it, I must have
obeyed, and would have done my best in it, not doubting but that God that gave
me the Call, would also afford me his Assistance. But having no warrantable
Call thereto, I would not unwarrantably engage therein. It was excepted, that I
might easily obtain leave of the Bishop, if I would desire it. But I answered,
that being neither personally fit for it, nor at all ambitious of it, I would
not in the least seek after it.

Sixthly, I alleged that I had seldom known any great good that came to the
Church by Public Disputations. For the Disputants honor and credit lying at
stake, Victory was more often aimed at than Truth. And in order to the
obtaining of that, all advantages were by each Antagonist against his Adversary
narrowly watched and caught at; all arts and strategems made use of to elude and
evade Arguments (especially when they were likely to prove sharp and pinching;)
and particularly that notorious one of endeavoring by perverse and intricating
arguings, and cross and involved answerings, if not also by some exasperating
words, or disobliging actions, to put the Antagonist besides his Reason, by
putting him into Passion: so that seldom any Argument was driven to the head,
or the Conference came to any good issue: but the Dispute mostly ended in
impertinent squable and endless contradiction, to no advantage toward the
establishment of the truth, or edification of the Hearers: and therefore, were
I never so able, I should be most unwilling, to engage in such a fruitless
adventure.

Besides, I asked, to whose Vmpirage we should stand, if we disputed, as
believing it vain to dispute without an Umpire. It was answered the Company
should be Judges. I replied, that I was least of all satisfied with that: in
regard the Hearers, which would be sure to be of different Parties, usually
judged as they were affected, and ran away, after all, with several stories of
what was said and done; and placed the Crown of Victory on the head of their
own Combatant; the consequent whereof was the filling of the Country with
confused noises, and news of their triumphs, not at all tending to the good of
the Church, but to the further unsetling of People in their minds and
judgments, and to the disposing of them so much the more to Schism and Faction.
And upon this account also, had I been never so able, I was unwilling to
dispute. I added also, that neither I, nor any Minister of the Church of
England could engage with any of their Party in a Public Dispute, but upon
mighty disadvantage. For we, though never so ignorant, must be looked upon as
great Scholars, and they, though never so learned, must be looked upon as
ignorant Men. And then what comes of it? If we get the better of them, it is no
disparagement to their Persons, nor disadvantage to their Cause: because we are
supposed to carry the day, not by the goodness of our Cause, but by the
greatness of our Learning, or however by our cunning and sophistry in
disputing. And, a great piece of matter will it be said to be, for such learned
University Scholars, to be too hard for such unlearned Country Men. But if they
get the better of us, or be but able, though by mere wrangle, to hold us up,
then a Song of Triumph is sung, then both our Persons, and our Cause suffers
disparagement thereby, but theirs is superlatively magnified by all the Parties
and Favorers of their Sect. And that Victory shall be solely imputed to the
strength of their Cause, which was only owed to the weakness of their
Adversary. And therefore to give them no such matter for Triumph over the Cause
I maintained, I would not so disadvantagiously engage in the Dispute whereto I
was challenged.

And now having declared the Grounds of my Refusal of that Dispute, I leave my
Self to the Censure of all, whether I did as became me, in refusing it, or not.

Notwithstanding I declared to Mr. Pan then, that as I had formerly held
private Conferences with several Persons of their way, naming some unto him, so
if either Himself then, or at any other time after, or Mr. Grantham, or any
other of his Party whatsoever, without excepting any, would come singly, and
one to one hold discourse with me, in a modest way, and a peaceable manner, in
order to the satisfaction of his private doubts, he might freely come when he
would; I would refuse none.

But as that was then refused by Mr. Pan, saying, he came not upon that design,
so neither He, nor any other of their Party has ever been with me since upon
any such occasion. And since I find so ill use made of what passed betwixt him
and me then, I have cause to think it a mercy, that I have been troubled with
no more of them; and for the future shall so think it. I mean the bold
Disputers of the Faction, and not any modest doubters of that way.

Having for my own, and others satisfaction made many researches into this
difficult Point, and having at length settled upon, as I then thought, and still
hope they will prove to be, solid grounds of satisfaction, and finding this to
be one of the Questions, whereabout Mr. Grantham challenged me to dispute, and
remembering what I had heard of his Abilities that way, I began with more
earnestness of desire, and firmness of resolution, to pursue my design. So that
if I have done the Church any service in this Treatise, that Challenge of Mr.
Granthams is in a good measure to have the thanks for it: Perhaps else it had
longer been in doing. And now, having through God's assistance brought it to an
end, I have published it for the Common good; hoping it may in some measure be
useful to inform the ignorant, resolve the doubtful, and silence at least, if
not satisfy Gainsayers.

I need not, to invite you to the Reading of it, make any long harangue about
the weight and importance of the subject of it, or its concernment to your
self. It Is in short, no more, nor other, than this, whether you have been truly
baptized, and so may go on with a satisfied conscience to reckon your self to
be a Christian, or whether your former Baptism, if not by a total immersion,
were not a mere nullity, and you consequently of necessity to be by a new
baptism, and that too by a total Dipping, initiated into a state of
Christianity. If I have contributed any thing to your satisfaction in this so
highly, and so nearly concerning an Inquiry, bless God that made me
Instrumental thereunto. If I come short of my aim therein, then pray to God to
put it into the hearts of those that guide the Helm of Church affairs, to press
some other more able Person for that service. And the rather should both you
and I desire this, lest, if we cannot prove our Baptism true, we be not able to
prove our Christianity good; and if we cannot make good our Christianity, it be
not hard for us to prove, either that there is such a thing as a Ministry in
the Church, or such a thing as a Church in the Land, unless in the Community of
Anabaptists. For a Church consisting of Magistrates, and Ministers, and People,
which are all unbaptized Persons, (as all are by the Anabaptists so accounted,
who were not, when baptized, totally dipped) is such a Riddle, as may not very
easily be resolved. Let the wise in heart consider this.

I have said enough, if not too much, by way of Preface; and therefore I will
not detain you any longer with a discourse of my Phrase, Style, and Manner of
handling of this Subject, Only note, that sometimes I use sprinkling, as a
generical word, comprehending all the ways of baptizing different from Dipping.
but leave that to the judgment of your own candor and ingenuity, hoping that
what is given you with the right hand, you will not take with the left.
Farewell.

A PRAYER.
O Lord God, who have given me power, and will, leisure and opportunity, to
begin, go on with, and finish this Treatise, I bless Thee for all the gracious
furtherances, and favorable assistances vouchsafed unto me therein. And I do
most humbly, and most earnestly beg of Thee to bless it to the Ends whereunto I
have designed it, which are the Advancement of thy Glory, and the promoting of
the Peace of this Church, by the Satisfaction of Doubters, and the Conviction
of Opposers. Put, I beseech Thee, into the hearts of all that shall read it, a
readiness to receive the Truth in Love. And second the reading of it with such
Light and Evidence from thy Word and Spirit, that the Truths herein delivered
may be convincingly discovered. If to Thy Foundation, which is ever Truth, I
have through Ignorance, Inadvertency, or Misapprehension, added any thing that
is Erroneous, O let that Error be made to appear, that no Other may be deceived
thereby, though I have been so. And when that Error comes to be justly
condemned; O let thy Servant be mercifully pardoned. Grant this for Jesus
Christ's sake. Amen.

The Author has lately put forth a Defense of the Baptizing of Infants,
called, A Modest Plea for Infants Baptism.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THE Text. Several ways of Baptizing. The Grounds of all, the same.
Page 1 CHAP. II. Several Acceptions of (...), and how it is taken here. p. 3
CHAP. III. (...), how rendered by Divines and Grammarians. p. 6 CHAP. IV. Of the
Primitive Verb (...); that it does not signify only to dip. p. 13 CHAP. V.
That (...) does not always signify only to dip. p. 20 CHAP. VI. Of (...), that
it does not always import a total immersion. p. 35 CHAP. VII. Of the Hebrew
(...), and the Syriac (...): and that they do not universally signify a total
immersion. p. 54 CHAP. VIII. (...), not restrained to a total immersion amongst
Christians, by the practice of the Jews. p. 59 CHAP. IX. The agreeableness of
baptizing by aspersion or affusion unto the Nature of Baptism. p. 64 CHAP. X.
Other ways of baptizing besides that of a total immersion used in the Church,
in all, or most Ages and Places of it p. 74 CHAP. XI. Answers to Authorities
produced to the contrary, by Mr. Danvers, from diverse Grammarians, Divines and
other Writers p. 158 CHAP. XII. Answers to Authorities produced by Mr. Danvers
from Commentators, etc. p. 195 CHAP. XIII. Answers to more Authorities produced
by Mr. Danvers, from Historians, Casuists, and other Polemical, as well as
Didactical Writers p. 219 CHAP. XIV. The Churches Grounds for admitting of
Sprinkling, in General p. 258 CHAP. XV. The Churches particular Inducements to
admit of Sprinkling p. 265 CHAP. XVI. The Institution of Christ not violated by
Sprinkling, and the agreeableness of That; with the primary design of Baptism
further manifested p. 276 CHAP. XVII. A Conclusion by way of Paraenesis to the
Dippers p. 292
ERRATA.
PAge 9. Line 17. read -- sing by washing. p. 12. marg. l. 3. r. urget. p. 13.
m. l. 6. r. tingo. p. 34. l. 27. r. (...). p. 41. l. 29 dele not. ib. l. 36. r.
do understand. p. 67. m. l. 4. r. Christus. ib. l. 35. r. Juvenc. p. 77. m. l.
3. r. baptizare. p. 86. m. l. 15. r. Where by. p. 93. m. l 7, 8. r. seipsam. p.
103. m. l. 4. r. totum. ib. l. 10, 11. r. consequuntur. p. 105. l. 29. r. away
sins. p. 117. m. l. 6. r. Neophyt. p. 121. l. 11. r. of, the. p. 126. l. 33 r.
of any. p. 163. l. 8. r. it, like. p. 231. l. 2. r. that their. p. 237. m. l.
7. r. ergo. p. 248. l. 14. r. so when. p. 262. l. 10. r. then. ib. l. 27. r.
about to confute. p. 273. m. l. penult. r. nudi. p 275. m. l. 7. for Id. r.
Voss. p. 284. m. l. 18. for sacram, r. suorum. p. 295. m. l. 1. r. Nam. p. 297.
m. l. 23. r. admisisse.

(...), THE DOCTRINE of BAPTISMS: OR, A DISCOVRSE OF Dipping and Sprinkling,
etc.
CHAP. I. The Text. Several ways of Baptizing. The Grounds of all, the same.
Matthew. 28.19. Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations, baptizing them --


. 1. Baptizantes.] Non hic instituit baptismum, lique^ enim ex capite Joan. 4.
discipulos Christi jam ante Baptizasse, quod non puto quisquam absque Christi
dicet factum esse praecepto, multo minus alium illic and alium hic esse
baptismum, Musc. in Matthew. 28.19. Vid. P. Lombard. l. 4. Did. 3. part. 2. and
Mod. Plea for Inf. Bapt. c. 30. Sect. 2.
THese were the words of our ever Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ to his
Apostles. The time when he spoke them, was some while after his Resurrection,
and but a very little before his Ascension. And so they are not his first
Institution of his Baptism, which was administered by his Apostles, and
therefore instituted by himself, before his Passion. But they are an
Enlargement of that Commission, which he had formerly given to his Apostles, to
preach to the Jews, and baptize them, to an authorizing of them to preach to
the Gentiles also, and to baptize them; and perhaps with some, Improvement of
it in point of Form, End, or Use: whence some as well formerly as lately, have
been apt to think them the first Institution of Baptism, especially as
Christian.

. 2. That by his Apostles preaching and baptizing, in pursuance of their
Commission, both Jews and Gentiles were at first brought to be, and were made
Disciples unto Christ, I think is a thing on all hands concluded; as also what
is meant by Preaching.

. 3. But what is meant by Baptizing, or after what manner Baptism was, and is
to be administered, is not so well agreed upon.

. 4. Some are of opinion that it was, and ought to be performed by a total
Immersion, or Dipping of the whole Person into the Water; that this is the only
lawful, and effectual way of baptizing, and consequently of absolute Necessity;
and that all other ways are not only unlawful, but perfect nullities.

. 5. But the opinion of others is, that it was, and may be performed otherwise
than so; viz. either by Dipping of some Principal part of the Person (as the
Head or Face, Aliter pectus credentis abluitur, aliter men's hominis per fidei
merita mundatur, D. Cypr. l. 4. Ep. 7.
etc.) into the water; or else by Pouring or Sprinkling of water upon some
Principal part of him; that though Immersion be a lawful and an effectual way
of baptizing, yet it is not the only lawful and effectual way of doing it, nor
absolutely necessary; but that the other usual ways of baptizing are lawful
also as well as it, and the baptism administered by them, to all intents and
purposes as valid and effectual, as if performed by it.

. 6. Immersion, or Dipping, stands on three grounds, viz. the Signification of
the word (...); the Agreeableness of Dipping with the Nature of Baptism; and
the Practice of the Church to Dip when she baptized. Now if it can be shown,
that the other usual ways of baptizing are neither repugnant to the
Signification of that word; nor to the Nature of the thing; nor to the Practice
of the Church, but are agreeable unto all: then, I hope, it will appear, that
they standing on the same grounds with Dipping, are also lawful as well as
Dipping; and that baptism by dipping is not so necessary, as to nullify the
other ways of baptizing, or render them unlawful: And the declaring of this is
the design of these Papers: and that declaration will be a competent exposition
of our Saviors meaning in this his Commission, given to his Apostles to make
all Nations Disciples, (...), baptizing them.

CHAP. II. Several acceptions of (...), and how it is taken here.
. 1. THe Method of this Discourse, as it is already laid down, obliges me to
begin with the consideration of the Verb (...), whose Participle (...) is here
made use of by our Savior. And as it stands in this Text it may deserve an
enquiry in what acception, whether Proper or Tropical, it is to be taken: for
be the proper acception of it what it will, if it be not here taken in that
proper acception, no argument can hence be drawn to infer a necessity of
dipping.

2. That the word (...), i. e. to baptize, is not always used in Scripture
according to its literal import, but sometimes in a Tropical sense, is I think
out of question. But if any doubt the truth of this point, it is easily
demonstrated; and an instance or two may suffice to do it.

. 3. And that it is used sometimes in a Metaphorical sense is apparent by what
the Author of the Acts of the Apostles reports our Savior, after his
Resurrection, to have promised to his Disciples, namely, that whereas John had
baptized with water, they should be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days
after, Act. 1.5. Where when our Savior says, ye shall be baptized with the
Holy Ghost, no man that is right in his wits, will say he used the word baptize
in its proper sense, but only in a Metaphorical one; as intimating thereby that
within a short space they should be endued with the Holy Ghost, whose effusion
on them in a larger measure, might seem to be a kind of baptism, the graces of
it falling upon them, as the dew fell upon the Israelites, when they were
baptized in the Cloud, 1 Cor. 10.2.

. 4. So when in Luke 15.20. our Savior says of himself, I have a baptism to
be baptized with, and how am I straightened till it be accomplished! he cannot be
understood to speak of baptism in its proper notion. For with a proper baptism
he had already long before been baptized by John in Jordan. His meaning then in
so saying, was nothing else, but to express by a Metaphorical word, that
grievous afflictions, those heavy sufferings of the Cross, Sanguinis inquit
proprii tinctione prius habeo perfundi. Bed. in Luc. Evang. c. 12. v. 50.
were shortly to be endured by him, whereby he should be as it were
overwhelmed, as a man is with waters, when he is baptized by dipping, or rather
be bedewed all over with drops of blood through his scourging, or at his bloody
sweating, as a man is bedewed with water; that is baptized by Sprinkling.

. 5. But the word is not used in a Metaphorical sense only, but also in a
Metonymical. And so one is said in Scripture to be baptized, who is imbued
with, or instructed in the Doctrine of any Master, who initiates his Disciples
with the Ceremony of Baptism. Hence Paul (Act. 19.3.) asks some Disciples found
by him at Ephesus, who had said, that they had not so much as heard, whether
there were any Holy Ghost, into what they had been baptized, whereto they
answered, into John's baptism. The sense of which words is, as if the Apostle
had asked, with what Doctrine they had been instructed, and they had answered,
that they had been instructed in that doctrine, which John taught. Whence, as
it follows ( ver. 4.) Paul said, John verily baptized with the Baptism of
repentance, saying unto the people, that they should believe on him, which
should come after him, that is, on Christ Jesus. Which is, as if it had been
said, that John had instructed the people in the doctrine of repentance, and of
faith in Christ, who was to come after him. In this sense S. Mark (c. 1. v. 4.)
reports how John did baptize in the wilderness, and preach the baptism of
repentance for the remission of sins, that is, instruct the people, who were to
be baptized, in the doctrine of repentance. And in the same manner is Apollos
by S. Luke reported ( Acts 18.25.) to have diligently taught the things of the
Lord, knowing only the baptism of John, that is, being only instructed with
that doctrine concerning Christ, wherewith John Baptist did imbue and season
his Disciples.

. 6. And there are that earnestly contend, Vid. Christian. Beckman. Exercitat.
Theolog. 17. p. 257, etc.
that the word (...) in this Text, is to be taken, not in the proper, but in
this Metonymical sense. And assuredly there is no mention here (as there is in
other places where the word is properly taken) of water, wherewith the Nations
were to be baptized, but only of the Faith wherein they were to be instructed.
He says not (...), baptizing them in, or into water, but (...) in, or into the
name of the Trinity.

. 7. But in regard that way of interpreting would bring in a needless
Tautologie into this so short a Precept of our Saviors, Go make all Nations
disciples, teaching them, and teaching them, (and still worse, if (...) were to
be rendered teach, viz. teach, teaching, and teaching;) in regard I find not
(...) any where else in Scripture joined with (...) or any the like word in the
sense of teaching; in regard that the Apostles of Christ did baptize with
water, and there is extant in Scripture no other precept of Christ's touching
baptizing therewith, whereon to found that practice, but this; and in regard
the whole Catholic Church of Christ has ever baptized with water, and has
interpreted this Text of such baptizing, I will not for the gaining of any
advantage to my Hypothesis by any sinister interpretation, recede from the
Ecclesiastical way of interpreting, but shall freely grant, that the word (...)
is to be understood here in its proper notion; and yet hope nevertheless to
evince, that there is no necessity from thence of so interpreting the word of a
total immersion, as to exclude all other ways of baptizing, as unlawful and
null. And to that I will next address my self.

CHAP. III. (...), how rendered by Divines and Grammarians.
. 1. AND as it is confessed and acknowledged by some, and those good Authors,
that (...) does signify that special way of applying water to a person, or
thing, whereby he, or it, is immerged, totally dipped, or put under water; so
it is declared and affirmed by others, both Divines and Grammarians, and those
of good note, and well skilled in the language of the Greeks, that the word
(...), besides its special way of signifying to dip, does signify also a more
general way of applying water to a person or thing, whereby he, or it, is
sprinkled, rinsed, or any way washed; so as that a thing or person may be said
(...), which is any way washed, though not totally immerged, dipped, or put under
water.

. 2. To begin with Divines. Etsi enim mergendi ritum veteri Ecclesiae
observatum fuisse constat: tamen verbum (...) non solum mergi sed etiam quavis
alia ratione tingi aut lavari, abluive significat. Joh. Piscat. Com. Loc. de
Baptismo Aphoris. 1. page 157, 158. Baptismus unde dicitur? (...), quod est
mergere. tingere, madefacere, and a consequenti lavare: a quo (...) quod est
immergo, intingo, abluo, Bucan. loc. 47. 1. page 605. Verbum autem hoc tam
significat tingere, and simpliciter lavare, quam immergere. Hier. Zanch. l. 1.
de cultu dei externo c. 16. Tom. 4. col. 493. (...) graecis aqua mergere,
lavare, abluere, and ut Tertul. solet vertere, tinguere significat. Maldonat.
in Matthew. 28.19. Notandum est quod Baptizare in Graeco tantum valet, quantum
lavare in Latino, unde Judith descendebat in vallem Bethuliae and baptizabat
sese. Bonaventur. in l. 4. sent. did. 3. art. 1. qu. 1. Rof. Neque verbum
Graecum (...) tantum significat mergi: sed quoquo modo tingi. Pet. Martyr. in
Romans 10. fol. 141. d. Baptizare Graecum verbum est, significat autem tingere,
vel immergere. Fer. in Matthew. 28. p. 603. (...) non immergere tantum
significat, sed and tingere, Dr. Whitaker, Praelect. de Sacram. Baptismi qu. 1.
c. 2. p. 217. Baptizo enim in Graeco, idem est quod lavo in Latino. Vnde de
Judith, c. 12. scribitur, Descendebat in vallem Bethuliae, and baptizabat sese,
i. e. lavabat, Guil. Vorrilong. in lib. 4. sent. did. 3. edit. Venet. An. 1502.
Learned Piscator speaks fully to the point, saying that the Verb (...)
signifies, not only to be dipped, but also any other way to be tinged, washed,
or rinsed. The like speaks Bucanus, saying, that (...) is ( i. e. signifies) to
dip in, to intinge, to wash. And just so says Zanchy, this word (...) does as
well signify to die, and simply to wash, as to immerge, or dip in. And
accordingly Maldonat says, that with the Greeks (...) signifies to dip, to
wash, to wash often, and as Tertullian uses to turn it, to tinge, wet, or die.
Bonaventure says, that Baptizo in Greek signifies as much as lavo in Latin.
Whence (says he) Judith went down into the vallie of Bethulia, and baptizabat
se, i. e. and washed her self, according to his intent, else his instance is no
proof, Judith 12.7. And though it be (...) in the greek, yet Jun. and Trem.
render it, not as the vulgar Latin, baptizabat se, she baptized, or dipped her
self, but abluebat se, i. e. (as Tindal translates it also) she washed her
self. And the greek not being (...), but (...), though the vulgar Latin render
it in font, and Tindal in the well, yet it cannot signify that she dipped her
self, or was dipped by any other into the Fountain (the Greek Preposition (...)
with a Genitive case not admitting that Construction, so far as I can find;
nay, (...) Joh. 2.1. is not into the Sea, nor in the Sea; but at the Sea, that
is by the Sea, ad mare, as Hierom and Beza render it; juxta, as Dr. Busbie,
beside, or nigh to it; and again (...) is super mare, Matt. 14.25. so (...) ib.
v. 26. so (...) super aquas, ib. v. 28, 29.) but that she washed herself ad
fontem, as Jun. and Trem. render it, at or by the fountain. Peter Martyr says
that the Verb (...) does not signify only to dip, but any way to tinge, and
wet, or die. Ferus says, baptizare is a Greek word, signifying to tinge, or to
immerge. So again Dr. Whitaker says, (...) signifies not only to immerge, but
also to tinge. William Vorrilong says, Baptizo in Greek is the same that lavo
is in Latin, proving what he says, as Bonaventure before had done, from what
is said of Judith, c. 12.

(...), mergo, immergo, item abluo, lavo, Scap. (...) intingo, mergo, lavo.
Hinc (...), idem, Schrev. Robertson. (...) immergo, abluo, baptizo, Pasor.
(...) mergo seu immergo. (...), abluo, lavo Steph. Ducta autem est Vox
Baptisnius a (...) tingo, ac (...) immergo. Porro ter Metalepsin significat
abluo, lavo. Flac. Illyric. clav. Scripturae. (...) proprie notat mergere: sed
quia fere aliquid mergi ac tingi solet, ut lavetur, ac abluatur, hic pro lavare
usurpatur. Voff. in These. ap. Leigh. Cri. Sac. (...) est mergo, tingo, lavo,
Martin. (...), mergo, immergo, tingo, intingo, madefacio, lavo, abluo, purgo,
mundo, baptizo, Suidas.
. 3. I go on to Grammarians. And John Scapula (an Author never the worse for
being common, but rather so much the better) gives to this Verb, as the special
signification to dip, so the general also to wash. Nor do his Abbreviators
Schrevelius and Robertson say otherwise: but having given to (...) (whence is
derived (...)) both the special signification of dipping, and the general of
washing, they say of (...), that it signifies the same. Pasor, who writes
particularly of the words of the New Testament, walks in the same steps with
the former, giving to this Verb, not only the special signification of dipping,
but the general also of washing. And if these seem little Authors, then
Henricus Stephanus, a man every way great, and particularly for the goodness as
well as bigness of his Thesaurus, says the same that they do: first giving to
(...) the special import of dipping or immerging, and then the general of
cleansing or washing. To these we may add Flacius Illyricus, giving to the word
the same significations that they do. And Mr. Leigh, who says the word
Baptize, signifies such a kind of washing as is by plunging, yet it is taken
more largely for any kind of washing, rinsing or cleansing, by washing even
where there is no dipping at all: quoting for it, Dr. Featly, and Vossius. Yet
we may add further Martinius, who says, (...) signifies to die, and to wash:
and also Suidas, who gives it not only the particular significations of
dipping, and dying, but also the general of wetting, washing, purging and
cleansing.

. 4. Now if there be any weight in these Authors words, when they affirm that
the word (...) does signify in general to wash (and why may we not as well
believe them saying so, as others when they say it signifies in particular to
dip?) then the Party that is any way washed in Baptism, may be truly said to be
baptized, though he be not dipped. And so, as far as their Authority is able to
carry it out, the Point is proved therefrom.

. 5. And yet, before I leave them, give me leave to make one Remark upon their
different renderings of the word. I find nine Latin words used to express the
import of it, viz. mergo, immergo, tingo, intingo, lavo, abluo, madefacio,
purgo, mundo, besides one made of it self, baptizo. Are all these words
perfectly Synonymous, exactly and adequately signifying the same thing? or are
they not? If the former, why so many of them used, not only scatteringly by all
severally, but even together, by one singly, viz. Suidas? If the latter (which
will appear to be true by a consultation both with Authors and Lexicographers)
then they all do not signify a total immersion. And that is the thing that does
our business. For if (...) signify any thing less than a total immersion, or
any thing else but that, then a Baptism may be, where one is not totally
immersed.

. 6. I will not now stand upon it to examine the exact differences of all these
words one from another: but shall only take notice of tingo, or as some read
it, of tinguo; because Martinius, having said of (...), that in Christianity it
signifies a religious and Christian action, says also, that when the Latins
express the force of it, viz. as so used, they put the word tingere for it:
which is apparent by instances both from Tertullian, and St. Cyprian, Nam nec
semel, sed ter, ad singula nomina in singulas personas tinguimur. Tert. adv.
Praxeam. Lex enim tinguendi imposita est, and forma praescripta. Id. de Bapt.
p. 262. Non baptizabat, quia non ipse tingebat. D. Aug. Tract. 15. in Evang.
Joh. Tom. 9. Col. 132. B. Qui in errorem seductus est, and foris tinctus. D.
Cyprian, l. 1. Ep. 12. Adulterae aquae contagione tinctus. D. Cypr. ad Jubaian.
Dr. Whitak. Prael. de Sacram. Bapt. q. 1. c. 2. p. 216. Tinctione contenti,
quam sufficere putarunt, immersionem non desiderabant. Id. ib. (...) non
immergere tantum significat, sed and tingere. Id. ib. 217.
and St. Augustine too. Now if tingo be not a term convertible with immergo,
then there will be a baptizing, without a total dipping. And that those cannot
be terms convertible, betwixt which there is not an identity of signification,
nor those the same betwixt which there is any difference of acception, is
evident to common reason. Now that there is a difference between tingo and
immergo, I shall appeal to that so famous a Professor in his time, viz. Dr.
Whitaker, who in saying, that of old the Adult, who were baptized, were not
lightly tincti aut aspersi, but immersi, makes a clear difference betwixt
tinction (whatever that means) and immersion: so as that the one was not the
other. Which yet he more clearly delivers in saying, that, though so it had
been, as he had said before, yet there had been another custom in some places,
and among some persons, where contenting themselves with tinction, which they
thought sufficient, they desired not immersion. And again (...) signifies not
only to immerge or dip into, but also to tinge or wet. If then tingo, as
Martinius says, do express the force of (...) in the Christian use of it, and
tingo, as Dr. Whitaker intimates, be not the same with immergo; then where
there may be said to be a tinction, there may be said to be a Baptization,
though there be not a total immersion.

. 7. Ter vero infans vel immergitur, vel tingitur aqua baptismatis. Can.
Council. Provinc. Colon. sub Herm. celebrati, 1536. Habere institutorem suum
Christum Baptismum omnes norunt, and habet tamen aliquam administratio ejus
diversitatem. Nonnullis enim in Ecclesiis Baptismus per immersionem solus est
in usu; aliis per aspersionem levemque tinctionem -- Dr. Rich. Holdsworth
Lectio. 22. p. 687. Vtcunque enim tinctionis and mersionis, sive trinae sive
unius, differentia non sit de essentia Institutionis Baptismi, at -- Id. ib.
See also the Testim. of Ferus, Sect. 2. and of Bid, c. 2. S. 4.
And according to this distinction made by the Doctor betwixt these Verbs, in
the Canon of the Provincial Council of Colen, held in the Year of Christ, 1536.
under Herman Archbishop thereof, it is said, The Infant is thrice either
immerged, or tinged with the Water of Baptism; that is, it is either dipped
into, sprinkled (or some other way than by immersion wetted) with the baptismal
water. So also the no less pious than learned Dr. Holdsworth says, in some
Churches, the baptism by dipping is in use only, in others that by sprinkling,
and a light tinging: and admits the difference of tinction and mersion, whether
once or thrice, not to be of the essence of the Institution of Baptism. So that
Dr. Whitaker is not alone in this distinction, neither the first, nor the last
that used it.

. 8. And in further Confirmation still of what that Doctor says of the
different use of tingo from immergo, which yet it also sometimes signifies, it
may not be amiss to give an instance or two of such use of it. Such is that of
Martial, Ep. l. 2. Frange toros, pete vina, rosas cape, tingere nardo. For Men
do not use to dip their Heads in Spikenard, but to pour, or rather have it
poured on their Heads. Whence we read in Hor. Epod. 13. Achaemenia perfunde
nardo. Quis multa gracilis te puer in rosa Perfusus liquidis unget odoribus?
Hor. Od. 1.5.
And an instance we have of it in the Gospel, Mark 14.3. where a Woman having
an Alabaster Box of Ointment of Spikenard poured it on our Savior's Head. And
such is that of Cicero, l. 3. de Not. Deor. where he tells of Deianira's giving
to Hercules tunicam sanguine Centauri tinctam, i. e. a Coat, Nec enim Herculi
nocere Deianira voluit, cum ei tunicam sanguine tinctam dedit. Cic. 3. de N.
Deor.

Vide Stephani Lexic. Historicum ex Edit. Nicol. Lloydii, in Voc. Deianira, and
Nessus. Illita Nessaeo misi tibi texta veneno. Ovid. Ep. 9. ver. 163.


not all dipped into, but tinged, wetted, smeared, and consequently dyed with
the blood of the Centaur; that must be (because it could be no otherwise) but
as it ran from his Wound, which Hercules gave him when he shot at him. And
accordingly the learned Lexicographer calls it vestem sanguine perfusam, and
vestem sanguine imbutam, and vestem sanguine infectam. And so by Seneca it is
called Tabe Nessaea illita palla; and by Ovid. Illita Nessaeo texta veneno. By
all, a wetting, imbuing, infecting is intended, by none a total immersion.

. 9. Nay, even the compound Verb intingo, we find used in the Translation of
the Syriac Version of Dan. 4.25, 32. to express a wetting with the dew of
Heaven, Rore coeli intingeris. Te rore coeli intingendum. Intinctio est quum
aliquid rem humidam contingit vel ex part. vel totam. Pag^in. voc. (...).
Treb, Poll. Promptuarium. V^c. Intinge.
which cannot be by a total dipping into it. Yea and Pagnin from Kimchi tells
us, that Intinction is when any thing touches a thing that is moist, either in
part, or in whole. And when Quintilian (as Trebellius quotes him) says of one
that was writing, that he did calamum intingere, dip in his Penn, sure his
meaning was not, that he dipped in all his Penn into the Ink, but only the nib of
it. Now by this more strong confirmation of the difference between immergo and
tingo is the conclusion still the more strongly confirmed, viz. that there may
be a baptizing without a total dipping; and even where there is but a wetting,
whether by affusion, or aspersion.

CHAP. IV. Of the Primitive Verb (...); that it does not signify only to dip.
. 1. BUT that I may not seem to erect so weighty a superstructure on such a
slender foundation, as the names and credits of a few Grammarians or Divines, I
will proceed toward the consideration of the word it self. And to make my
consideration of it the more complete and full, I will not only view it in its
self, but in the word (...), from whence it is derived, and in the word (...),
which is derived from it.

. 2. And to begin at the Fountain head, the Primitive Verb (...); of this Verb
it is apparent by Lexicographers, and other Authors, that it does not always
signify total immersion or dipping, but sometimes something less than so, and
even in a manner, all washing. Thence in Scapula we have (...) rendered, not
only by mergo, immergo, to dip, but also by lavo to wash. The same we have
again in Schrevelius. Explic. Catech. pars 2. q. 69.

(...) autem non tantum immergo, sed and aspergo significat. Keck. Syst. Theol.
l. 3. c. 8. p. 452.


And accordingly Zech. Vrsinus says (...) is derived from (...) mergo, tingo,
abluo, aspergo, to dip, die, wash, sprinkle. And so Keckerman says, that (...)
signifies not only to dip, but also to sprinkle.

. 3. But, waving their Authorities, we may judge of the import of the simple
Verb (...), by the use of its compound (...). Our Savior says, ( Matthew.
26.23.) He that dippeth his hand with me in the dish, the same shall betray me.
The original, for he that dippeth, is (...). That is the Participle of the Verb
(...). It is not imaginable, that any of our Savior's Disciples, as mean
Persons as they were, should be so ill bred, as at Table, and in his Presence
too, to dip his whole hand in the Dish. It cannot be thought any of them would
do more than (it were scarce good breeding to do so much as) with a finger or
two and a thumb to take some part out of it. And yet of him, that did put but
some little part of his hand, or rather fingers into the dish, our Savior
says, (...), he that dippeth his hand. A clear instance, this, that the
compound Verb (...) does not necessarily enforce a total immersion of that
thing whereto it is applied. And can we think there is more in the simple Verb,
than in the compound, and so compounded as this is, with the Preposition (...)
signifying into? This were against all analogy of speaking. It may therefore
hence be concluded, that the Verb (...) may be applied to a thing, which yet is
not totally immersed into that, wherein it is said to be dipped.

. 4. So that I shall not stand upon what is ordered in Levit. 14. for the
cleansing of a Leper, and his House, namely to take two birds alive, and first
to kill one of them, and then to dip the live bird with cedar wood, scarlet,
and hyssop in the blood of the bird that was killed. The word used here by the
LXX. for dip is (...). And yet it is not imaginable, how one whole live bird,
with other things, should be wholly immersed into the blood of another of but
the same bigness with it.

. 5. Perhaps it may be answered that the dipping was not into the blood alone,
but mixed with running water contained within that earthen Vessel in which the
Bird was commanded to be killed.

. 6. I reply, this is not written. O, but it is probable. Yes: but so it is
probable also, though not written, that Infants in the Primitive times were
baptized, and that both they, and other weak persons, unable to abide a total
dipping, were baptized by but a partial mersation into, or by a lighter
conspersion with water. Let them yield to what is probable, or not contend for
what is but probable. If we must stand strictly to what is written, then a
living bird must be dipped in the blood of a killed bird: that could not be but
by a smearing of it with it, or a partial mersation into it. And so (...) will
signify somewhat less than to dip all over. If we must not stand strictly to
what is written, then let them not exact from us a Scripture expressly saying
that Infants were baptized; or that any were any otherwise baptized than by
being wholly dipped. But this by the by.

. 7. Favorinus, who glosses (...) by (...) (as Suidas also does) they rinse or
swill, as when one washes nets or clothes (which sure would be but an odd
manner of dipping, if used in baptizing) yet gives an instance of an use of the
word, which cannot agree to this sense. It Is this, (...), which does not
signify thy lips have been dipped, that is, swilled and rinsed in, or plunged
into the blood of roses; but, have been died or colored with it, that is, are
of a rosy color, as red as roses. So that (...) here signifies not to dip,
but to die. And though some things are dipped to be died; yet, dipping and
dying are not terms convertible; not all things, that are dyed, are dipped: And
to go no farther for an instance than the painting Females cheeks, I believe
many of them are dyed with a delicate, fresh, rosy complexion, which yet are
never dipped, when they are so died; they are not dipped into the complexion,
but the complexion laid on them.

. 8. But if any think to come off from this instance with saying, the speech is
but Metaphorical (though even so there must be a resemblance between the things
compared, or else there can be no Metaphor) yet there is an instance of this
use of the word in the Septuagint, which cannot be so evaded, nor any other way
that I can foresee. It is said of Nebuchadnezzar (Dan. 4.33.) that he was
driven from men, and did eat grass as oxen, and his body was wet with the dew
of heaven. So we, and so Tindal renders it. Now there the word for was wet is
(...). But that cannot possibly signify, that he was dipped into the dew of
heaven, any more than what he could be by lying down upon the dewie grass,
which no man will call an immersion; none will say of a man that lies him so
down, that he dips himself into the dew, or is dipped into it, but that he wets
himself, or is wetted with it. Or if any should, yet still will that Notion
very well agree at least with their way of baptizing, who dip, though but
lightly, the Face in water, when they baptize. Nor, that I know, will (...),
bear any such construction. If dipping into the dew had been meant, it would in
all probability have been, (...), or, Vid. Septuag. Levit. 4.6. Number. 19.18. 1 Samuel 14.27. Deuteronomy. 33.24. Ruth 2.14. Psalm. 68.23. 2 King. 8.15.
(...), not (...). I find not (...) used for (...). Nor does any Version, that
I can meet withal, so render it. Montanus's Interlin. Version is de rore
coelorum corpus ejus tingebatur; and so the Syriac, and de rore coeli tinctus
est, i. e. His body was wet, or he was wetted by, or with the dew of heaven.
And the Vulgar Latin Bible agreeing with the Particular Latin Translation of
the Septuagint, renders it, rore [de rore] coeli corpus ejus infectum erat, his
body was died, or stained with the dew of heaven. And the Arabic of all,
methinks, most properly, perfusum fuit, that is, was all to sprinkled, or
wetted, or all to shed upon with dew. No dipping then in the case. And yet the
word is (...) from (...) to dip, which clearly shows that word to signify
something other, more than, and besides dipping; even a wetting, and such a
wetting as one is wetted withal by the falling of dew upon him, (which none, I
think, will say is improperly expressed by sprinkling;) and so to be very
agreeable with that wetting in Baptism, which is done by sprinkling the party
Baptized.

. 9. In Rev. 19.13. I meet with (...). This, Ours and Tindals Translation
render a Vesture dipped in blood. Under correction, I conceive it ought to have
been rendered, not dipped in, but dyed with blood.

. 10. For first the Construction of the words so requires it. Had it been said
(...), I should not at all have disputed it, nor much if it had been (...),
because of such construction I find some example, though yet (...) with a
Dative Case sometimes signifies no more than a Dative Case without (...), and
does so sometimes, when it has (...) set with it, as we shall see afterward.
But of this Verb's signifying to dip into, with a mere Dative Case without
(...), I find no example, and therefore I conclude that (...) here does not
signify that, into which the Vesture was dipped, but wherewith it was died:
and that dying, not dipping is the import of the Verb in this place, and the
construction is like that of the Septuagint, Genesis 37.31. (...), whereby was
designed nothing more but their staining or besmearing of the Coat with blood,
much after the manner as Nessus did the Coat which he gave to Deianira; or like
that newly mentioned from Favorinus, (...), a place far enough from importing
any thing of an immersion.

. 11. Secondly, besides the construction of the words, the nature of the thing
is against its interpretation by dipping. Garments dipped in blood? to what end?
for what use? who wears any such? Dipped in Scarlet, or dipped in Purple, they are
for Kings, and Emperors, and persons of greatest eminency for place, and
honor; but in blood, for no bodies wearing that I know of. But Garments died
with blood are as ordinary as battles. Isai. 9.5. And not only the Conquereds,
but the Conquerors. A memorable instance whereof is that of Leopoldus Duke of
Austria, who fought so long at the taking of Ptolemais, till his Coat Armor
was all died in blood save his Belt (as one says) or rather (as another has
it) the place covered with his Belt. Cambd. Rem. p. 299. Fuller Holy War. l. 3.
c. 8.
In memory whereof that Family has ever since born for their Arms a Fesse
Argent in a Field Gules. And in allusion to such staining of Garments with the
blood of slain enemies sprinkled upon them as befalls conquering Warriers in
their battles, is this place interpreted of our Savior, whose garment is by
way of Prophecy said to be stained with blood, Tunc Christus hac specie se
visendum praebebit indutum eruento sago and toto redundante sanguinc hostium.
Brightman in Apocal. 19.13. Vest aspersa, sc. Saracenorum ab eo occisorum,
Lyra in loc.

Hosts ibidem comprehensi tanta sunt occisione prostrati, ut in porticu
Solomonis sanguis occisorum usque ad nostrorum equorum genua perveniret, Gotfr.
Viterb. Chron. part. 17.

Quod tempus videtur Isaias spectare, inquiens, Quis est hic? etc. Optimo jure
Christus aspersus tunc conspicietur cruore caeforum immicorum, Bright. in Apoc.
19.13.

Edom ru^icundum, Bozra vero vindemiam significat. -- Ergo venire ab Edom est
rubco vestitu incedere, and venire tinctis vestib^s de Bozra, est habere
vestimenta mus^o respersa, Tor^ular calcavi, i. e. uvas in torculari: and
quidem in furore, hoc est magno cum impetu and solus. Atque hinc vestes hostium
sanguine respersas gero. Nec enim secus illos compressi, atque ii qui mustum
expressuri uvas conculcant, Scultet. in loc.


to signify (according to Mr. Brightman) the great slaughter he should make of
his enemies; and (according to Lyranus) of the Saracens in particular; of whom
so infinite a number was slain at the taking of Jerusalem, that (as Gotfridus
Viterbiensis tells us) in Solomon's Porch the blood of the slain was up to the
knees of the horses. And the time of the so great execution done by Christ on
his enemies, the Prophet Isaiah (as Mr. Brightman notes) seems to have an eye
upon in his Prophecy, chapter 63. v. 1, 2, 3. (which is set in the Margin of our
Text to signify some reference that the one place has to the other) Who is
this that comes from Edom, with died garments from Bozra? this that is
glorious in his apparel: traveling in the greatness of his strength? I that
speak in righteousness, mighty to save. Wherefore art thou red in thine
apparel, and thy garments like him that treads in the wine-fat? I have trodden
the wine press alone, and of the people there was none with me: for I will
tread them in mine anger, and trample them in my fury, and their blood shall be
sprinkled upon my garments, and I will stain all my raiment. But whether the
reference of this Prophecy be to that Victory of the Christians over the
Heathens, or rather (as Scultetus thinks, who entitles his Sermon on, this Text
and the Context, Triumphus Dei habitu cruentato ex acie redeuntis) to the
return of the Jews from the Babylonish Captivity, to encourage them whereunto
against the dreaded power of their enemies, the Prophet represents God their
Leader, under the type of a Warrior triumphing over his enemies, and trampling
them under his feet, as in the time of Vintage one treads and tramples grapes
in the Wine Press, and staining his Garments with the sprinklings of their
blood, after the manner as their garments are died and stained that tread
Wine-presses, still there is nothing of dipping in the case, but only of dying;
and of such dying as is done by sprinkling.

12. And therefore Thirdly, all Interpreters, that I as yet have met withal,
except the two forenamed Translations, render (...) by words importing dying,
or sprinkling. Ar. Montan. has for it vestimentum tinctum sanguine, a vesture
died with blood; and to the same sense Beza has Vest tincta sanguine, and so
the Arabic Version too. The Vulg. Lat. has vest aspersa sanguine, a vesture
sprinkled with blood; and so the Aethiopic Version also. The Syriac has Vest
conspersa sanguine, a vesture all to besprinkled with blood. All import such a
dying as was done, not by dipping, but by sprinkling. And so here is a clear
instance of this Verb's being used, where nothing of immersion was intended.

. 13. And of its being used to signify less than a total dipping, I shall add
one instance beyond exception, from that Collection of Sentences containing the
Primitives of the Greek Tongue formerly done, and now added to Schrevelius's
and Robertson's Lexicons, in whose 19th. Chapter, I find this sentence, (...)*
He indeed dippeth a bottle, but it never goes under the moist water: If it go
not under the water, there is then no total immersion: and yet that dipping
which it has is expressed by (...). A plain proof that (...) does not always
signify a total dipping. And so (...) has something else besides a total
immersion in (...) the root of it.

CHAP. V. That (...) does not always signify only to dip.
. 1. FRom (...) the Primitive, I proceed to (...), derived from it. In Luke
11.37, 38. a Pharisee, by whom our Savior had been invited to dinner, is said
to have marvelled, when he saw him sit down to meat, and had not first washed.
The Greek word here rendered washed is (...), the very same word by which our
Savior's baptism is expressed ( Mark 1.9.) where it is said (...), he was
baptized of John in Jordan. A plain instance this, that by the word (...) is
not always to be understood a total immersion of that whereto it is applied:
and that a person may be said (...), to be baptized it, who yet is not totally
dipped, but only (whether by mersation, or affusion) in part washed. And
accordingly Beza, in his rendering of the Text, makes the Pharisees wonder at
our Savior to be, not that, (as the Vulg. Lat. renders, non baptizatus esset)
he had not been dipped, but that non ablutus esset, he had not been washed, or
as we render it, had not washed.

. 2. But perhaps the custom of the Jews (and however among the Pharisees) was
before dinner to wash themselves by a total immersion, or dipping of
themselves. And that our Savior had not done so, was the Pharisees wonder. And
then the word here will signify a total immersion. Not so, whatever some may
think, or say in the case. Neither the Vulgar Jews, nor the nicer Pharisees had
any such custom. They washed their hands indeed before meat by dipping them
into the hand-wrist, Vid Pocock Porta Mosis, Not. in c. 9. p. 396, 397, 398.
or by holding them up, that the water poured on them might run down to the
handwrist: and that was all that was done, even by the Pharisees, before the
eating of a common dinner. And for that, as dipping the hands, or pouring water
on them, had made our Savior fit enough, so dipping of his whole body, had he
done it, had not made him more fit. Not then our Saviors not dipping his whole
body, but his not washing his hands at all, neither by mersation, nor affusion,
was the Pharisees wonder. And accordingly Grotius says (...) here is as much
as (...), he had washed his hands. And so Beza says, that here it means the
same that (...) and (...) does, whereof the one signifies in general to wash,
the other in particular to wash the hands. And so still, (...) will not
necessarily always signify a total immersion, but some times in a more general
way, a washing; and he may be said (...), whose hands only are washed, and that
whether by putting them into the water, or by pouring water upon them. And if
upon the hands but being washed, and that either by mersation or affusion, a
Man may be said Baptizari, to be baptized, then as well may he be said to be
so, when (as it is now the use in baptizing) his but head or face is dipped
into the water, or has water poured upon it.

. 3. And yet is not this the only instance that is produced in this case. There
is another (in Mark 7.2, 3, 4.) proposed and urged by learned Persons. I will
represent it in its due strengths, and advantages, and so leave it to be
considered of by such as are concerned in this debate. The words are, And when
they saw some of his Disciples eat bread with defiled (that is to say with
unwashen) hands, they found fault. For the Pharisees and all the Jews, except
they wash their hands often, eat not, holding the tradition of the Elders. And
when they come from the market, except they wash, they eat not. The eating here
spoken of is to be understood of common food: for it is said they eat not, that
is not at all, not so much as ordinary and common food, except they wash. And
the speech here is not only of the superstitious Pharisees, but of the
generality of the People, all the Jews: and sure they did not all, and always
feed on sacred viands. Now what is here said of their washing before that food?
This, that they eat it not, except they wash their hands (...), that, I
conceive, is, (somewhat otherwise than it is ordinarily rendered) up to the
hand-wrist, or joining of the hand to the arm. And this if they did, either by
affusion of water upon their hands, so held that the water might run down so
far, or else by immersing them so far into the water, this was all was required
of them to render them sufficiently clean for eating of an ordinary meal. And
there was no such thing required of them, or used by them, as wholly to immerse
themselves in water, in order to the fitting of themselves for the eating of
such a meal. And what pollution had made them unfit for such a meal without a
total dipping of themselves, had made them unfit for any more sacred meal that
day until the evening. And yet this washing, which was but of the hands, and
might be indifferently performed either way, by affusion or immersion, is
applied unto the persons, and spoken of them in the verb (...); for so run the
words in Ver. 4. And when they come from the Market, (...), (or as Hen. Steph.
has it in his Concord. Grac. (...)) if they wash not, or be not washed; for the
same Verb, in the same Voice, and in the same Tense, is applied unto St. Paul
(Act. 22.16.) Passively, and ought to be so; as appears by comparing it with
Act. 9.18. and so it is to the Israelites, 1 Cor. 10.2. And though Beza be
positive for that Verb's signifying primarily and properly mergo to dip, and
but consequentially lavo to wash, yet here he renders it, not according to the
primary and special signification of the Verb, nisi mersati sint, unless they
be dipped, but according to the secondary and general import of it, nisi loti
fuerint, except they be washed: and so Pasor also. So that of whom it may be
said, that he is in any part (for instance in his hands) washed, whether by
affusion, or mersation (and especially, if the latter be used) of him it may be
said that he is (...), baptizatus (as the Vulg. Latin here renders the word)
baptized. And so our Infants not being totally immersed, but only in part
washed, whether by dipping or sprinkling, hinders not, but that, when that
sacred action is performed upon them, they may be said (...) to be baptized.

. 4. It may be answered, that (...) here refers not to the whole Persons of the
Jews, as if always, when they came from the market, they did (...), that is
wholly immerse themselves, but to their Hands only: and that the meaning is,
that whereas if the Jews kept at home, and did not go to the Market, they
needed only to wash their hands by Affusion of water, but if they did go from
home, and to the market, then they were to wash their hands by Immersion, as
if, as it is said before, (...), except they wash their hands, namely by
affusion, so it had been said here, (...), except they wash their hands, by
immersion; the word (...), hands being to be understood in the latter Text, as
it is expressed in the former: and so from the word's being here applied to no
more but a part, which was wholly immersed, no argument can be drawn to prove,
that the whole may be said to be immersed, when the immersion is but of a part;
and that so the Infants being dipped but in part, cannot be called their
Baptism, much less the sprinkling or pouring of a little water on them.

. 5. But to this it may be replied, that the washing here must be understood
according to the S. Matt. 15.2. (...), etc.
Tradition of the Elders: but there was no such Tradition of the Elders, as
that all that came from the Market should either immerse themselves, or but so
much as their hands, wholly, before they eat bread. That they should wash
before eating was the Tradition: but the manner how they should wash, whether
by affusion, or immersion, was left at liberty, so they did it either way,
(...), up to the wrist. And though, because the defilements of their hands were
like to be greater in the Market, than at home, therefore the nicer sort of
them, especially the Pharisees, did rather choose to wash by immersion, than by
affusion, as looking upon that as the higher degree of purification; yet they
did not all; and few always washed that way. Nor were they obliged to it by any
Tradition of the Elders. And ye may observe, that holding the Tradition of the
Elders, is set with (...), not with (...). And yet they are the same Persons,
which are spoken of, when (...) is used, that are spoken of, when (...) is
used, the Pharisees and all the Jews. So that the washing implied in (...),
must be such as was used, not only by the Pharisees, but all the Jews too, and
that as holding the Tradition of the Elders: which (as has been said) was no
more than to wash their hands up to the wrist; and for the performance of which
so much water as was contained in a measure called by them Rebiit, (which held
about the quantity of an Egg and a half) was enough. So that it is plain that
(...) designs as well those that washed by affusion, as by mersation. And if it
did not so, then John the son of Goodgodah, (who always used to dip his hands)
and those few others, that chose to eat even common meat with that care of
pollution, which they were to eat holy meat withal, had not observed the
Tradition of the Elders, but must have by the others been condemned (like the
Disciples here) for eating (...), with defiled, because (...) with unwashed
hands, though they had not eaten (...) with undipped hands, but had used
baptization before their eating. And so then there is no necessity of
interpreting (...) always of the strict singular way of immersion, but it may
be used, when yet the washing is performed by but an affusion: and so our
Infants and others may be said to be baptized, though not totally immersed, or
but sprinkled.

. 6. And for the setting of (...) after (...), that designs only thus much,
that whereas those that had washed in the morning for all day, keeping
themselves pure from defilement by polluting actions and occasions, needed not
to wash any more before meat, they that went to the market, because of the
almost impossibility that there was to avoid defilements there, were at their
comeing home to repeat their washing before they did eat, though they had
washed before: which washing was by no Tradition of necessity to be by
immersion, but might be performed by affusion, as was said before. And thus
much for this instance.

. 7. I pass to another, Cui ritui [sc. adspersioni] quoque favet baptismus in
nube and mari, de quo Paulus 1 Cor. 10. agit. Walaeus, Synops. Pur. Theolog.
Disp. 44. These. 19. p. 606.
viz. 1 Cor. 10.1, 2. Where the Apostle be-speaking his Jewish Brethren says,
all our Fathers were under the cloud, and all passed thorough the sea, and were
all baptized into Moses, in the cloud, and in the Sea. A baptizing we have
here, that is plain; for they were all baptized, (and doubly too for fear of
failing) in the cloud and in the Sea. But how were they baptized in the Sea?
(to begin with that first) by being all totally immersed into it? by being
dipped all over head and ears into the water of it? That must be, if baptized
according to the notion our Anabaptists have of Baptism. But, no such matter.
For, it is said, Exodus 14.21, 22. the Lord caused the Sea to go back by a strong
East wind all that night, Vid. Christian. Beckman. Exercit. Theolog. 17. p. 251.
and made the sea dry land, and the waters were divided: and the children of
Israel went into the midst of the Sea upon the dry ground, and the waters were
a wall unto them on their right hand, and on their left. So then, no immersion
of them into the Sea: no one of them had so much as a foot dipped into the
water of it. And yet a baptism in the sea: they were all baptized, and baptized
in it. There may then be a baptizing without a total, yea or a partial
immersion of the party into that thing, wherein he is said to be baptized. And
so (...) will not necessarily always signify either a total, or a partial
immersion.

. 8. But if not dipped into the Sea, when baptized in it; much less were they
dipped into the cloud, when baptized in that. Men walking on dry ground, and
yet dipped into a cloud? who discerns not the incongruity of it? Had they been
dropped from heaven to earth, much of that might have been by the way. But as,
and where, they they were, it could not be. And yet they were baptized in the
cloud. Plain again then it is, that there may be a baptism, without a total, or
partial immersion of the party baptized into that wherein he is said to be
baptized; and consequently (...) will not always necessarily signify
immersion. And so our Infants, or others are, (and may be said to be) truly
baptized, though they are no more dipped into the waters, than the Israelites
were into the clouds or into the Sea, when they were baptized in both.

. 9. Maris illius aquis capitibus ipsis transcuntium altius extantibus, obruti
ac sepulti quodammodo poterant videri, and emergere, ac resurgere denuo cum ad
litua objectum evasissent -- Pluvia ergo copiosa cum perfunderetur populus ille
universus, sicut subter nubem extitisse omnes, ita nube baptizari omnes,
commode satis perhibentur, Gataker. Advers. c. 4. p. 30.
But how were they baptized in the cloud, and in the Sea? Why, by being bedewed
with the sprinklings of the cloud whilst they walked thorough the Sea. And
since Cyril of Alexand. Non enim fieri aliter poterat, ut maculae animis
peccantium aspersa aspergerctur, nisi sancto baptismo, cujus figaram nubem esse
statuimus. D. Cyril. Alex. in Hesa. l. 2. c. 19. Tom. 1. col. 296.
resolves the cloud to be a figure of baptism, who can tell but that the two
ways of baptizing, viz. of dipping and sprinkling, might be typified by the two
ways of baptizing in the cloud, and in the sea? the way of sprinkling by the
bedewings of the cloud, falling in drops upon them; and the way of dipping by
their going so into the Sea, as that, to such as were on land, they might seem
covered with it. For it is expressly said, ver. 6. (...), these things were our
examples, or figures, literally types, representations made then in that
Church, of things that should be now in our Church.

. 10. But be that as it will; the Apostle says, the Israelites were all
baptized in the cloud, and in the sea: and yet none of them were dipped in
either. No necessity then of an immersion to make a baptism; or that (...) must
always signify to dip.

. 11. And if an immersion were necessary to make a baptism, how shall we
understand it, that the Apostles of our Savior were baptized with the Holy
Ghost, as our Savior promised they should be? Act. 1.5. Nay and with fire too,
as St. John Baptist foretold ( Matthew. 3 11. and Luke 3.16,) and was fulfilled (
Acts 2.3, 4) What analogy is there between the descent of the Holy Ghost upon
the Apostles and Baptism, if Baptism must signify nothing but a total
immersion? Sure the Apostles were not dipped, nor plunged into the Holy Ghost,
that they might be said to be baptized with it. No such thing is said of them.
But they were filled with the Holy Ghost. Yes, but that holds no proportion
with baptizing men by immersion into water. If the water be any thing the
fuller for the persons baptized, so it is: but the person baptized are not
filled with the water; they are put into the water, not the water into them. No
resemblance then betwixt baptizing by immersion, and the descent of the Holy
Ghost on the Apostles, that they from that should be said to be baptized with
it.

. 12. How then may they be said to be baptized with it? Or what resemblance is
there betwixt that descent and any other way of baptizing, that from thence
they may be said to be baptized with it? Ab altera vero notionc, qua (...)
abluere significat, transfertur ad Donationem Spiritus Sancti; nempe quoniam
hic, ut animam imbuat and abluat, aquae instar, in eam effunditur: prout
loquitur SS. Joel 2.28. and exinde S. Petrus, Act. 2.17. item S. Paulus, Tit.
3.6. servavit nos per Lavacr^m Regenerationis, and Renovationem Spiritus sancti
quem effudit in nos copiose, Voss. de Bapt. Disp. 1. p. 344.
There is a great resemblance between baptizing by aspersion or effusion of
water on the parties baptized, and the descending of the Holy Ghost. For as the
water, that is sprinkled, or poured on the parties baptized, falls usually from
above upon them: so did the Holy Ghost fall from above on the Apostles. And
accordingly this coming of his from above upon them is called effusion, Act.
2.33. where S. Peter speaking to the multitude concerning this action, says,
Christ, being by the right hand of God exalted, and having received of the
Father the promise of the Holy Ghost, ((...), effudit) has shed forth, poured
out this which ye now see and hear. And this according to a prophecy long
spoken before by the Prophet Joel, and recited newly ( in ver. 16, 17.) which
was, that it should come to pass in the last days, that God would pour out his
spirit upon all flesh. Nor is it only called an effusion, but also a falling of
it upon them. For when St. Peter reported to the Brethren in Judaea, what had
befallen Cornelius and his company at Caesarea, and particularly the Holy
Ghosts being communicated unto those Gentiles, as well as to themselves who
were Jews, (which communication is also called a pouring out of the gift of the
Holy Ghost upon them, Acts 15.45.) he says that as he began to speak to them,
the Holy Ghost ((...)) fell on them, as it had done on themselves at the
beginning, Acts 11.15. Now what can more fitly answer to this, than baptizing
by way of effusion, or pouring out of water on the baptized, whether out of the
hand, or other vessel? So that there must be no resemblance betwixt the Holy
Ghost falling on the Apostles and Baptism, (and then why is his falling on them
called a baptizing of them?) or else a baptism may be without an immersion.

. 13. And the like to what is said of their being baptized with the Holy Ghost,
may be said of their being baptized with fire. The fire wherewith they were
baptized came from above, and sat upon them: they were neither dipped into any
fire below them, nor sat in it. So clear an evidence this, in my poor thoughts,
that there needs nothing more to evince it, that the verb (...), (especially as
it self is baptized, and taken in from being a Heathen to become a Christian
word) may signify to baptize, as well where there is but an effusion or an
affusion of water on the party baptized, as where there is an immersion of him
into the water.

. 14. And yet the word, even in its Heathen use, does not always signify a
total immersion of that Person or Thing, whereto it is applied. For a Person
first, (...). Porphyr. de Styge, p. 282. cited by Mr. Whitbie in his (...), p.
40.

See Sydenham's Christian Exercitation on Ins. Baptism. chapter 15. p. 132.


we have an instance in Porphyrie, who tells us of a river in India, into and
through which if an innocent person went, he was taken but up to the knees; but
if an offender went into it, by that time he had gone a little way, (...), he
is baptized up to the head. Here we have such an immersion as denominates a
Person (...) baptized; and yet is that immersion, not total, but only partial,
(...), up to, but not over the head. Then for a Thing: This (as Mr. Sydenham
observes) appears from that delivered by the Oracle, (...). Where if (...)
signify to plunge or put wholly under water, as it does, then (...) must
signify less, as it also does; no more than is competible to a blown bladder,
or bag, or bottle of leather, whose swimming in the top of the water cannot be
called an immersion (at least not total) into it. And yet to signify such a
kind of scarce partial mersation is (...) here used. Baptize or wash him, utris
instar as a bottle in the water, but do not drown him, or utterly plunge him;
so Mr. Sydenham englishes it.

. 15. And accordingly in St. Chrysostom, Nam mergi and aquam subire, and hinc
remeare, descensus ad inferos symbolum est, and hinc reversionis: so one
renders it. Baptizari enim, and demergi, deinde remeare and emergere est
symbolum seu signum descensus ad inferos, and ex eo ascensus. So another. But
still with both (...) is less than (...); with neither, aquam subire, or
demergi, to be totally immersed.
to express a total submersion we find (...) added to (...) (says he) (...).
Where if (...) did import a total submersion under the water, it had been
needless to have added (...), a Verb signifying the very same thing to it. And
therefore in reason, as (...) signifies a total submersion, so (...) should
signify at most but a partial mersation in this place.

. 16. And that (...) does signify a total immersion, is plain by that of S.
Athanasius, where he uses that word to signify the whole of what was done in
baptism by way of immersion. (...), etc. For our thrice dipping of the Infant
into the water, and bringing him out again, signifies the Death of Christ, and
his Resurrection after three Days. qu. 94. de Interpr. Parab. Script.

. 17. If any should think to evade the force of this argument by making such a
distinction, as if (...) did signify to put the person wholly under the water,
and (...) to sink him, so put, further down unto the bottom. I must return,
first that it cannot be proved, that ever there was any such custom in
baptizing. Secondly for Infants, so great was the danger of their drowning by
that means, that they would never do it. And thirdly that, for elder Persons,
they were already at the bottom of the water before their baptism with the
lower parts of their body, and wanted nothing, but the putting of their heads,
or upper parts of their body under it by the Priest also. And so it remains
that (...) there does not signify a total submersion under the water.

. 18. But it is argued from the signification of (...) a compounded derivative
from (...), that (...) signifies to be totally dipped; because a Cork swimming
in the water is by Pindar, and a Ship floating on the Sea is by Plutarch called
(...), which yet they could not be, if less than a total immersion were
signified by (...).

. 19. To which I answer first, that though it might be unanswerably proved, by
this, or any other Medium, that (...) did in Heathen Authors signify nothing
less than a total immersion, yet it will not follow that it must in Christian
Authors, (whether the Scriptures, or other Writers) be always interpreted in
exactness according to that signification. For the significations of words are
to be widened, or straightened, according to the dimensions of the things they are
to signify. And nothing is more ordinary than to find words familiar in
Christianity (both in the Scriptures and Christian Authors) used in a sense
somewhat remote from the signification of the same words in their Primitive use
among Heathens. Sacramentum an Ecclesiastical Latin word, and (...) a
Scriptural Greek word may serve for instances.

. 20. The first signified at first a Caution put into the hands of the Pontifie
by Parties going to Law, whereby they were obliged to make good their Plea, or
lose their money. Afterward it was made use of to signify a soldiers Oath,
whereby he was obliged to be true to his General. If then it must signify
still the same in the Christian Church, that it did in the Heathen Roman State,
and nothing more, nor any thing less than that, we shall have much ado to make
the word fit the things that are called by it. For then all that are baptized,
or receive the Lords Supper, must be persons going to Law, or Soldiers, and
they must put in money, and swear when they receive Baptism, or the Lords
Supper. But what money is put in by either? what Oath is taken by either, on
either account? From the Title of Sacrament given to those Ceremonies we argue
an obligation equivalent to a Caution, or Oath, lying in the Receivers: but how
to make it good from the Scriptures, or the nature of the Sacraments, that
there is any such obligation in a real and literal sense lying on the party as
that word in its Heathen institution and use originally signified, is not so
very clear.

. 21. (...), Hesych.
The second signified at first literally an Assembly of the people of Athens
called together to consider and debate of the concerns of that Republic. But
in the Scriptural use of it, sometimes it signifies only that company of
Professors of the Christian Faith, which belong to one Romans 16.5. 1 Cor. 16.19.
Col. 14.15. Philem. 2.
Family, with such as are admitted to join with them in the worship of God.
Sometimes it signifies a collection of all the several Congregations of
Christians that are in one Act. 8.1. and 13.1. and 18.22. and 20.17. 2 Thessalonians.
1.1. Col. 4.16. Rev 3.14. and 2.8, 12, 18. and 3.1, 7.
great City. Sometimes a Collection of all Christians dispersed throughout the
Matthew. 16.18. 1 Cor. 12.28. Gal. 1.13. Ephesians. 1.22. Phil. 3.6. Col. 1.18. Heb.
12.23.
whole world. But all these, and more notions, in which the Scriptures use that
word, are far remote from that Heathenish import of it. And the same may be
said of other words, viz. (...), so of (...), etc. which all have other
significations in the Scriptures, than they are found to have amongst Heathen
Authors. And we shall make mad work in the Church, and with the Scriptures too,
if we shall go about to lop and prune, to frame and square the things signified
by them in the Church, and in the Scriptures, to what they signify in Pagan
writers.

. 22. And thus, though (...) might signify originally to dip all over amongst
the Heathens, yet being taken in by the Christians to signify that Ceremony of
washing with water, whereby members were admitted into actual Communion with
the Church of Christ, it is, in their speakings and writings, to be understood
in such a latitude, as may extend to all manner of admissions of any by that
Ceremony into the Church, however differing in circumstances of acting, which
have been used and allowed of in it. And for as much as it may undeniably be
made good, that persons have anciently, as well as of late, had their baptismal
admission into the Church by other ways than a total dipping into water, and
the Church has never by any Ecclesiastic censure expressed her disallowance
of those ways, therefore the word (...) is to be extended to the signifying of
every usual and allowed way of admission by that Ceremony into the Church,
though not by a total dipping. Inasmuch as the design of the Church is one and
the same in every way, whatever it be, of administering baptism, whether by a
total immersion, or partial mersation, and whether by affusion, or aspersion,
viz. to signify that the blood of Christ has that virtue to cleanse the Soul
from the guilt of sin; and the grace of the Spirit that virtue to cleanse it
from the filth of sin, which water has to cleanse the body from its pollutions
and defilements; and that the party baptized, if no obstacle be put in on his
part, is really cleansed from the spots and stains of his soul, when
application is made of that cleansing water to his body; and so both fitted
for, and actually received into, Communion with the Holy Catholic Church,
which is the body of Christ, and consequently into union with Christ himself,
who is the Head of that Church.

. 23. Secondly, I answer, that (...) being declared (as has been showed) to
signify not only an immersion or dipping, but also a tinction or wetting,
though a Ship, or a Cork floting on the water, may be said to be (...) in the
first sense, yet it cannot be said of it, that it is (...) in the second sense.
For wetted, and tinged, and dipped (if ye will) it is in part, even as the
soals of the Priests feet were in Jordan, though it be not plunged or immersed
all over. And though in some respect it be said to be (...), being not dipped
all over, yet in some respect it cannot be said so to be, as being dipped in
part. And so our Infants cannot be truly said to be (...), not baptized at all,
though they be not wholly immersed at their baptism; since they are in part
baptized, viz. tinged, or wetted, whether by a partial mersation or dipping of
them into water, or by an affusion or sprinkling of water upon them.

. 24. But as I noted before, if by these or any other instances, it might be
invincibly proved, that (...) did in the Heathen Notion of it signify strictly
a total immersion, and no instance or evidence could be given of its ever
signifying any other thing among them, yet unless it could be as invincibly
proved, that no Ecclesiastical word did ever signify any thing other in the
Scriptures, than just what it signified in Heathen Authors, which is impossible
to be made good, no Argument can be drawn from the Heathenish import of the
word to prescribe to the Christian use of it. Now that less than a total
immersion has in the judgment of the Catholic Church been accounted a
Baptism, (which could not have been, if by that word it had designed nothing
less than a total immersion,) is as clear as the Sun, from its practice to
baptize other ways, which will be showed in the process of this Discourse.
According to Christ's institution, the Scripture, where it is plain, should
guide the Church. And the Church, where there is doubt or difficulty, should
expound the Scripture. A. B. Laud, Ep. Ded. to K. Chapter I.
And to the Interpretation of Scriptural words referring unto Practice, I know
not how we may be more surely guided, than by the judgment of the Catholic
Church, declared in the genuine Records, and confirmed by undoubted Instances
of the Practice of it.

CHAP. VI. Of (...), that it does not always import a total immersion.
. 1. WE have viewed (...) in it self, as well as in (...), the root from whence
it is derived: let us now view it in (...), the branch that is derived from it.

. 2. And if we consult Lexicographers about it, they tell us that besides the
particular signification it has in the Church, to note the Sacrament of
Baptism, it signifies also more generally a washing, as well as specially a
dipping. Thence Schrevelius and Pasor render it by lotio, a washing; and the
former has nothing else but that for it. By Scapula it is rendered, mersio,
ilotio, ablutio, ipso immergendi, item lavandi seu abluendi actus; dipping,
washing, cleansing, the act it self of dipping, washing, or cleansing.
Stephanus renders (...) and (...) by mersio, lotio, ablutio, dipping, washing,
cleansing, understanding thereby the act it self of dipping, and also of
washing or cleansing. Mr. Leigh in his Critic. Sacr. from Danaeus (Isag.
Christ. l. 5. de Sacram. c. 21.) tells us, that though (...) be derived from
(...) signifying to immerse, and more especially into water, yet because those
that come out of the water do appear washed, and white, and clean, therefore
(...) is commonly put in Scripture, pro lotione and mundatione, for washing and
cleansing. And Alsted says the same in his Lexic. Theolog. almost to a word,
c. 12. p. 310, 311. Coulon in his Lexic. Homeric. having rendered (...) by
mergo, tingo, abluo, says, thence is derived (...) and (...), which he there
defines to be a Sacred mystery of the entrance into Christianity administered in
the Church mersione, ablutione, and aspersione seu tinctione, by dipping,
washing, sprinkling, or wetting. Flacius Illyricus in his Clavis Scripturae
says, that Baptismus proprie intinctionem significat, properly signifies
intinction, a word used by Tertullian, and that by a Metalepsis it has the
signification of ablution, and lotion. And that that word does not signify
always a total dipping in order unto dying; but a wetting without such a
dipping, is not improbable, in regard that (as was noted before) what we read
(in Dan. 4.25.) prophesied of Nebuchadnezzar, viz. that they should wet him
with the dew of Heaven, cannot mean, that he should be all immersed, or plunged
into it, but that he should be all over wetted with the falling, or sprinkling
of it upon him. And yet the Syriac Verse. reads that place, rore coeli
intingeris, as Arias Montan. rore coeli infunderis, i. e. thou shall be wetted
with, or thou shall have poured upon thee, the dew of Heaven. And this may
clear Martinius, when he renders (...) to be mersio, immersio, seu intinctio,
to mean, not the same thing by intinctio, that he meant by immersio, but to
have intended, as by the first a partial, and by the second a total dipping, so
by the third a wetting, whether by a dipping total or partial, or whether by
any other way.

. 3. Thus say the Lexicographers. And if there be reason to believe them that
are skilful in their own Art; then so many Masters of words speaking of a word
within the sphere of their own consideration, and saying that (...), besides
the special import of immersion, has also the general signification of lotion,
and ablution, we may with reason believe it so to signify; and so not be
necessitated by virtue of its proper signification always to understand it of a
total immersion.

. 4. And this consideration undoubtedly, besides what other they might have,
was that which swayed so much both with Interpreters, and Expositors, and
Didactical Divines so to understand, and render the word.

. 5. Thence says Pareus, Baptismus Graecis quaevis est lotio seu ablutio, sive
immersione, sive aspersione fiat. Par. in Heb. 9.10.
Baptismus with the Greeks imports any washing or cleansing, whether it be done
by dipping, or sprinkling. Piscator interprets the word (...) in Heb. 9.10. by
ablutionibus, washings (as our English Version renders it:) and so does Beza
too; and Guilliandus upon the place. And the like does Gagnaeius, adding this
for a reason (as Guilliandus also does) because if they had touched any unclean
thing, statim ablui illos oportebat, they ought presently to be washed. So
Erasmus, Illyricus, Pagnin; so the Tigurine, Arabic, and Aethiopic Versions; so
Estius, Menochius, Ribera, and others noted by Mr. Pool in his Synopsis on this
place.

. 6. Baptismus est externum aquae lavacrum a Christo mandatum, etc. Ursin.
Explic. Catech. q. 69. Baptismus secundum Etymi sui rationem communiter
significat qu^mvis ablutionem, etc. Trelcat. Institut. l. 2. c. de Baptismo, p.
187. Baptismi vox immersionem and aspersionem significat, etc. Wolleb. Christ.
Theolog. l. 1. c 23. can. 1. page 120. Bucan. loc. com. 47. page 605.

Baptismus dicitur intinctio id est ablutio corporis exterior facta sub forma
verborum praescripta. P. Lomb. 4. Sent. did. 3. pars 1. Baptismus est lotio
sive ablutio in aqua. Nic. de Orbel. 4. Sent. d. 4. qu. 1. de Baptismo. (...)
autem Graecis etiam tinctio, and intinctio (quod Latin dicitur) explicatur.
Isidorus, l. 6. Etymolog. cap. de officiis, and saepe Tertullianus in lib. de
Baptismo, and contra Marcionem. Sed and ipse Magister Sententiarum, l. 4. did.
3. c. 1. Item and lotio dicitur, and ablutio, non solum immersio. Vnde illud
Juvenal. Sat. 2. de Sacerdotibus Eleusinae Cereris, Cecropiam soliti Baptae
lassare Cotytto. Ergo non soli baptizantur, qui toti aquis merguntur, aut
immerguntur, ut iste, (sc. Bellarminus) putat, and scipsum infra, c. 26.
refutat; sed and qui aqua solum tinguntur, ex vera Baptismi significatione.
Can. de Trina Consecr. did. 4. Danae. Responsio ad Bellarm. Tom. de Sacram. c.
1. page 311, 312. Baptismus, si etymon vocis spectemus, immersionem significat,
atque etiam aspersionem, quo scusu usurpatur, Mar. 7 4. and a consequenti
ablutionem, etc. Tilenus de Baptismo Disput. 1. These. 2. p. 883. Baptismus in
genere, vel mersionem significat, vel ablutionem aut perfusionem. Id. Theolog.
Systema. Disp. 37. Th s. 1. p. 1077.

Baptismus est Sacramentum N. T. quo aquae perfusione, in nomine Patrii, Filli
and S.S. facta significatur and obsignatur fidelibus beneficium purgationis a
peccato per filium Dei, and regenerationis ad vitam aeternam. Keckerman,
System. Theolog. l. 3. c. 8. p. 451. See the Author, where is much more and
very substantial and pertinent. Signum rituale seu Ceremoniale in hoc
Sacramento est baptizatio seu lotio in nomine Patris, Filii, and Spiritus
sancti, sicut Christus express mandavit, Matthew. 28. and Marc. 16. Vnde and
lavacrum aquae in verbo, Ephesians. 5.26. Et lavacrum regenerationis, Tit. 3.5. and
depositio sordium corporis ab Apostolo Petro per Metonymiam effecti dicitur, 1
Pet. 2.29. An vero una, an trina mersione sit baptizandum, indifferens semper
judicatum fuit in Ecclesia Christiana, quemadmodum etiam an immersione, an vero
aspersione utendum, cum expressum illius mandatum nullum extet; and exempla
adspersionis, non minus quam immersionis in Scripturis possint deprebendi, etc.
Anton. Walaeus Synopsis pur. Thelog. Disp 44. These. 18, 19. p. 605. Et ita
baptismus loquendo secundum vim vocabuli, nihil dicit nisi lotionem: limitatur
tamen in proposito ad signandum unum de 7. Sacramentis novae legis, Guil.
Vorrilong in l. 4. Sent. did. 3.


Thence Vrsin renders (...) and (...), as well by ablutio a washing, as by
mersio a dipping; and in his definition of baptism makes lavacrum a washing to
be the Genus of it. Trelcatius says, Baptismus, according to the Etymology of
it, signifies commonly quamvis ablutionem, any ablution or cleansing, which is
made by water, but especially the Legal, and Judaical lustrations and
purgations. Wollebius says, the word Baptism signifies dipping and sprinkling,
and from the consequent thereto, ablution or cleansing by washing. Bucanus
says that by (...) and (...) is signified immersion, intinction, and from the
consequent thereto ablution. And that the word Baptismus is taken properly in
Scripture pro simplici ablutione, simply for washing, whether Levitical, or
Pharisaical. Pet. Lombard explains the intinction in baptism by ablution. So
Nicol. de Orbellis says, Baptism is a washing or ablution in water. Lambert.
Danaeus renders (...) by tinction, and intinction. Yet adds, that it signifies
also lotion, and ablution, and not only immersion: and that not only are they
baptized, who are dipped wholly into water, but they also, that are tinged or
wetted with water. Tilenus says, if we regard the etymology of the word
Baptismus, it signifies dipping, and also sprinkling, etc. Keckerman defines
Baptism by Perfusion. And Walaeus says it has always been held indifferent in
the Church whether dipping or sprinkling were used, etc.

. 7. What weight now there is in the word of these Writers, who were men of
eminency in the Church for their learning, that we have to persuade, or
satisfy us, that (...) does not necessarily always import a total immersion,
but is used more generally to signify any kind of washing, even though by
perfusion, or aspersion.

. 8. If it be enquired, what might move these learned Persons to think the word
capable of this Interpretation, it is easy to suppose them drawn so to think,
by some application of the word to such things, as were either not capable of a
total mersation, or were not used, at least in their times, to be necessarily
wholly immersed, whenever washed. And one place, wherein the word is by them
reputed so to be used, is Mark 7.4. where, among the Traditions received by the
Jews from the Elders, the Evangelist reckons (...), which we English not the
Baptisms, nor the dippings, but (by the more general word) the washing or
washings) of cups, and pots, and brazen vessels, and of tables. And so again in
ver. 8. we find (...), the washing (or washings) of pots and cups. And as we
render it washing (as Tindal also does) so accordingly the most Interpreters
render it by lotiones, that is, washings. So Montan. Pagnin. Beza, Piscator,
the Syriac and other Versions. Quae vox ad sequentiae aepplicata non semper
tinctionem aut immersionem, sed interdum lotionem tantum, vel etiam aspersionem
denotat, ut notat Maimon. praecipue poculum benedictionis. Lightfoot. Vid.
Pool. Synops. in loc.
And the learned Dr. Lightfoot says, that the word applied to the things
following does not always denote dipping or plunging in, but sometimes washing
only, or even an aspersion or sprinkling.

. 9. And first for their cups and pots, it is not necessary, that we always
understand their washing to be by a total immersion. Who being bidden to rinse,
or wash a pot or cup, presently chops the whole pot or cup into the water, and
thinks it not washed unless it be totally immersed? what? leaves he no part of
it out? not so much as ear, start, or handle? not that part of it by which he
holds it? And what if the pot or cup be to be rinsed or washed at a pump, or
cock? where is the total immersion of it then? When Thetis dipped her son in the
lake of Lethe, For not to have been dipped in Lethe Lake

Could save the son of Thetis from to dic, etc. Spencer.


to render him invulnerable, who can say but he was dipped in Lethe? and yet that
part still remained undipped, whereby she held him, and where afterward
Alexander wounded him. His dipping was not a total immersion. No more was it
necessary so to be in the washing, and even mersation of these things. If they
were any more than rinsed, yet hardly were they totally immersed. And to render
it probable, we read that the cup of blessing was but to be dipped on the
outside, the inside rinsed. Pocock, Porta Mos. p. 404.
But if it must have been totally immersed, then inside and outside and all
must have been washed together, and that by mersation. And would they observe
more strictness in the daily washings of every Pot and Cup, as often as need was,
than of that cup of blessing, which they employed as a Sacred Utensil in their
giving of thanks to God after meat, and for whose washing they had a particular
Tradition? He must be very sanguine, that can believe any such thing. And
however that their cleansing of their Cups and Platters was but partial, and
did not extend to the whole, as it must have been had their washing been by a
total immersion, seems apparent by our Saviors allusion to that custom of
theirs (in Matthew. 23.25.) where he tells them of their cleansing (...), the
outside of the cup and platter.

. 10. And what? would nothing less than immersion, and that a total one, serve
for the washing of their brazen vessels, and those not all small ones: but so
big, Pocock, Porta Mos. p. 406.
some of them, that they held water, for the cleansing of other vessels by
water poured out thence; nay, and the vessels themselves too, fitted for that
purpose by the wideness of their mouths?

. 11. And must the Tables too, (or beds rather) be cleansed by mersation? and
nothing less than a total immersion be sufficient for their cleansing? How
difficult if at all practicable, is this, to dip whole tables, (or what is
worse, whole beds) not untaken in pieces, and wholly into the water? And how
troublesome, and chargeable too, to be always taking them in pieces in order to
be dipped, as often as they might hap to be defiled? and that (so many ways were
there of their defilement) might happen to be very often.

. 12. And suppose we render it dipping, or by washing to understand such a
washing as was performed by dipping: what? will nothing less than a total
immersion of every thing serve to name it dipped? must there be a total
immersion, or else no dipping? The Priest, when a Sin-offering was to be
offered ( Lev. 4.6.17.) was to dip his finger in the blood of the Bullock and
sprinkle it. Could nothing serve here for the performance of his duty, but the
dipping of his whole finger into the blood? must it all in? no part remain
undipped? It is not so said. It might truly be said, he dipped his finger into
it, if some part of his finger were but dipped therein; if he did but take some
of the blood with his finger to sprinkle, as it is after in the same chapter
said he should do, ver. 25, 30, 34.
to put upon the horns of the altar.

. 13. But to make this more plain; It is said in Lev. 14. that for the
cleansing of a Leper, the Priest should take some of a log of oil, and pour it
into the palm of his own left hand, and should dip his right finger in the oil,
that was in his left hand, and should sprinkle of the oil with his finger seven
times. I would fain know how a man should hold in the palm of his hand (for so
is the word, and not the hollow of his fist) so much oil as should be
sufficient to dip all his whole finger (in the sense that our Anabaptists do
understand dipping) in it. The improbability, or rather impossibility of which
the LXX. discerning render the Text, (...), He shall (not dip his finger into,
but) die, or wet his finger with the oil; that is the dipping, and all the
dipping they understood in this place. And yet if that could not be, still his
finger might be said to be dipped in it, though it were not all at once
immersed into it, or though some part of it, after all, remained undipped. So
then these washings here, suppose we grant them to be performed by mersation,
might intend something less than a total immersion: and then still no necessity
of interpreting the word (...) in that sense.

. 14. Another is Heb. 9.10. where the Apostle enumerating the several sorts of
external ordinances, besides Gifts and Sacrifices, which were imposed on the
People of the Jews during that Levitical Economy, that they were to be
exercised under, until the time of reformation, mentions among them (...),
diverse washings. Now unless those washings here intended were all immersions,
and total ones too, it cannot be avoided, but that (...), the only word here
used to comprehend all those diverse washings, is capable of signifying other
ways of washing, than by a total immersion: and so cannot by the force of its
signification compel us always to understand baptism to mean a total immersion,
and to conclude that washing, which is not by such immersion, to be no baptism.

. 15. Now that these baptisms were not all immersions, may appear from the
consideration of several Persons, and Things, appointed to be washed. There
were three sorts of Persons amongst the Israelites that were to be washed: the
Priests, the Levites, and the People after any pollution contracted upon them.
Now if we consult the bare words of truth, we shall find, upon examination, all
these sorts of Persons washed, and yet not necessarily always by immersion of
their whole body, at least as far as appears by Text of Scripture, unglossed by
Rabbinical Traditions, and unsensed with Anabaptistical Interpretations.

. 16. First the Priests, of all other, as being the most holy, one would think
should have been dipped, if that in the esteem of God were a higher degree of
sanctification, than other ways of washing, and especially at their
consecration to holy Orders. And yet no such thing appears of them. Their
Consecration is appointed in Exodus 29. Of the order whereof, as God gives it
unto Moses, part was their washing. That is prescribed in the fourth Verse. But
now? By dipping! Not a word of that there. How then? Hear, what God says. And
Aaron and his Sons shall thou bring unto the Door of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, and thou shall wash them with water. (...), lavabis eos; LXX.
T^rg. O^kel. Samarit. Lava. Arab. Ablue, Syriac. cum laveris, vulg. lat.
Mark, it is said, thou shall wash them; not, (...) est lavare and mundare
quidpiam a sordibus, Lamb. Danae. Isagog. de Sacrament. c. 21. part. 4. page
497.

(...) Lavit, see Buxtorf.


thou shall dip them. Nor does the Original word there used (which is (...))
signify any such thing, but only, as Pagnin tells us, abluere a sordibus
corporis, to cleanse from the filths of the body by washing; and so Danaeus
too. And accordingly when Moses did execute this command ( Levit. 8.6.) the
word used to express their washing is the same word still. When the Hebrews
would express a dipping, they have another word for that, viz. (...), which
they use in that case. And the not using of that word here, is intimation fair
enough, that it was not the washing mostly signified by that word, that was
here intended. Here Is one Baptism or washing then, and yet not necessarily to
be understood of dipping.

. 17. From the Priests let us go on to the Levites, and see after what manner
they were to be washed, at their consecration to their office. That we have set
down in Number. 8.5, 6, 7. And the Lord spoke unto Moses saying, Take the Levites
from among the Children of Israel, and cleanse them. And thus shall thou do
unto them to cleanse them: sprinkle water of purifying upon them, and let them
shave all their flesh, and let them wash their clothes, and so make themselves
clean. See! not a word here of dipping them in order to their purification, nor
any other way of washing prescribed, but that of sprinkling. Thus shall thou do
unto them to cleanse them, sprinkle water of purifying upon them. And if it
were not sufficiently apparent from hence, that sprinkling, and that of water,
was used for cleansing, that of Ezekiel. 36.25. would make it appear; where by way
of promise of what God would do for Israel in after times, he says, Then will
I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean. Here Is another Baptism,
or washing: yet not by dipping, but even plainly by sprinkling.

. 18. From the Levites pass we on unto the People: and for their purification,
after pollution, is prescribed washing. Maimonid. in Mikvaoth. c. 1. vid.
Lightfoot, Hor. Heb. in Matthew. 6.3. page 47.

Ainsworth on Levit. 15.5, 11.


But how? by dipping? so indeed if the Anabaptists will give us leave to
believe them, the Jewish Traditions say, and that of the whole body, hair and
all, and all at one dip, and that so strictly, that if but the tip of the
little finger miss dipping, he that is dipped is still in his uncleanness. But
does the Text say any such thing? No such matter. And they that strictly hold
us to Text, must press no more than Text upon us. They must claim no benefit by
Tradition to themselves, that will not allow the benefit of it unto others. Let
them but allow us that, and we shall have our Infants baptized presently. And
let it be by dipping, with all my heart, so no unlawfulness be affixed on the
doing it otherwise.

. 19. In Levit. 14. we have the cleansing of a Leper prescribed. And how is he
to be cleansed? By dipping? That is not said. How then? Even by sprinkling. For
so it is said in Ver. 7. And he (i. e. the Priest) shall sprinkle upon him that
is to be cleansed from the Leprosy seven times, and shall pronounce him clean:
Sprinkling then again appears to be a way of washing, and that for cleansing:
for after the Priest had so washed him by sprinkling, he was to pronounce him
clean. But it is said (v. 8.) that he shall wash himself in water that he may
be clean; and again (ver. 9.) he shall wash his flesh in water, and he shall be
clean. True, in order to his coming into the Camp, and after that into his
Tent. But still that washing is not said should be by dipping. The original
word is here also (...) not (...), (...) lavit, eluit, abluit aqua corpus,
faciem, manus, pedes, vestes. Leigh. Crit. Sacr.
and signifies only in general to wash, and not specifically to dip, or totally
immerse, as we have noted before. And as the LXX. here render it by (...), he
shall wash; so lavo and abluo, general words to wash or cleanse with washing,
are the only Latin expressions whereby the sentiments of other Interpreters,
Et lavabitur aqua, Vulg. Lat. Targum On^el. Lavabitur in aqua, Transl. Lat.
Septuag. Se autem lavabit in aquis, Text. Heb. Samarit. and abluet se aqua,
Syriac. and lavabit sese, Arab.
of what Language soever, are conveyed to us.

. 20. In Levit. 15. is prescribed the cleansing of Men and Women in their
Issues; and of Persons defiled by touch of them. That cleansing among other
rites is to be made, not necessarily by immersion (there is no dipping
mentioned in the case) but by ablution, by such a washing as is termed bathing.
He shall bath himself in water: so it is said, v. 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 21, 22, 27.
He shall bath his flesh in running water, v. 13. Now bathing surely does not
necessarily import in its signification a total immersion: Men do not use
always to plunge themselves over head and ears into their Bath: a going into
the water, and a partial mersation of some part of their bodies, with an
application of water to other parts of them with their hands, and a frication
added thereto, I think, takes in the whole of what is necessary to, or usual in
bathing. (...). 2 Samuel 11.2. (...) -- (...), Susan. v. 17.
Nor can I discern any thing more to have been done, either by Bathsheba, or
Susanna, to themselves, in that washing of themselves, which is vulgarly called
bathing. In aquis se lavabit, Pagn. Interlin. lavabitur aqua, LXX. Transl. lat.
aquis, Targ. Onk. in aquis, Samarit. lavet se aqua, Arab. totus aqua, Vulg.
Lat. Vid. Bib. Polyglot.
And the Hebrew word, the same we have noted before, signifies no such thing
strictly and specifically; nor is so rendered by any Interpreter that I yet
meet with: (...) in Greek, and lavo in Latin, (and what comes of it) being all
the words that the Oriental Versions are rendered by. So then no necessity of
dipping in this case neither.

. 21. In Deuteronomy. 21. when uncertain murder was committed, the Elders of the City
next adjoining are appointed to wash their hands over a beheaded heifer, v. 6.
Here Is washing of the hands appointed, but no dipping. The Original word here
also is (...) not (...); and so does not enforce to interpret it of immersion.
And as (...), which does not signify to dip, is the word the LXX use to render
it by, so lavabunt, and laverint, which do not signify it neither (I mean
strictly and specifically) are the words whereby the Oriental Versions of that
place are interpreted unto us. So here is another washing, yet not by a total
immersion.

. 22. In Exodus 30.18, 19, 20. Moses is appointed to make a laver of brass to
wash withal, and to put water therein, for Aaron and his sons to wash thereat:
and they are accordingly appointed, upon pain of death, to wash when they went
into the tabernacle. But still not a word of immersion spoken of all this
while. The word for washing here too is (...), whose import we have often
enough declared to be for ablution, not for immersion. And besides though Moses
be appointed, when he had placed the laver, to put water therein, they are not
appointed to put their hands and feet into it, and wash therein, but to wash
them thereat. Fistulas multas habebat, per quas emittebatur aquae. Pool Synops.
in loc.
And for convenience thereof Mr. Pool tells us from Munster and Fagius, that it
had many spouts or pipes, whereby water was let out for their use. And
according to this appointment it is said in Exodus 40.43, 31. that Moses did set
the laver between the Tent of the Congregation and the altar, and put water
there to wash withal. And that Moses and Aaron and his sons washed their hands
and feet thereat, (not therein.) The original word for washing is here still
the same: and lavo the only Latin word that I meet with, whereby the Oriental
Versions of it are rendered.

. 23. In Levit. 6.27. The Garment, (...) lavare, lavacro candidare. Pagnin.
(...) lavit, purgavit, abluit, eluit pannum vel vestem, ut albescat Leigh.
Crit. Sacr. Generale est (...) i. e. candidum facere. Danaeus, Isag. part. 4.
l. 5. c. 21. p. 497. (...) lavit, abluit. Buxtorf.
whereon the blood of the Sin-offering was sprinkled, is appointed to be
washed. And in Lev. 13.6. the garment of him, who had a white scab arising in
his flesh, suspected to be the Leprosy, but judged by the Priest not to be
that, is appointed to be washed. And in Lev. 14.8, 9. he who was to be cleansed
from the Leprosy was appointed to wash his garments. And again in Levit. 15.6,
7, 8, 10, etc. persons having a running issue, or defiled by the touch of such
persons, are appointed to wash their clothes. But still this washing is not
expressed by (...), which signifies to dip, but by (...), which only in general
signifies to wash, or whiten with washing, not strictly to immerse or dip.

. 24. And suppose the way of washing of clothes were by a total mersation (as I
am apt to think it was, though the Hebrew word do not necessarily enforce so
much, because (...) is the word used by the LXX. to express their way of
washing) yet still that makes against a total immersion of the persons, at
least according to the observation of the great St. Athanasius. D. Athanas.
Dict. and Interpret. Parab. S. Scripturae, Tom. 2. p. 426.
For he speaking of the legal Baptism has these words: (...), i. e. every
unclean person washed, (or was washed) with water, but he plunged his garments.
So then the washing of the person was not the same with the washing of the
garments. And then if the washing of the garments was by a plunging or total
immersion of them into the water, then the washing of the person was not so.
And so we have here a diversity of baptisms confirmed, and yet one of them not
by a total immersion.

. 25. To conclude this enumeration of particulars appointed to be washed. In
Exodus 29.17. we read that the inwards and legs of the ^am, Sacrificed at the
Consecration of the Priest, were appointed to be washed. And the like we read
appointed to be done to the inwards and legs of the burnt-offering brought by
any of the people, whether it were of the herd, or of the flock, Levit: 1.9,
13. And this we find done by Aaron, when he offered up the burnt-offering for
himself, Levit. 9.14. But still it is only (...) that is used to signify this
washing, and not (...)* that washing is not appointed to be strictly by
dipping, but only in such a way as might serve for cleansing, which might be by
dipping, or other washing or rinsing; whereof our own kitchins, if we should
look into them, might daily afford us visible instances: no doubt being but
that many Joints of our meat are sufficiently washed and cleansed by pouring
water on them, or rubbing them with water, which yet are never in formal manner
wholly immersed.

. 26. And thus I have shown variety of washings under the law, and yet none of
them necessarily, by virtue of the signification of the words whereby they are
prescribed, implying dipping, exclusively as to all other ways of washing.
Perhaps it might be a task, not easily performed, to show where any person, or
thing, that was to be cleansed, was appointed to be dipped for the cleansing of
it. For the cleansing of other things, we read of things appointed to be
dipped, as the Priests finger in oil, Lev. 4.6, 17. (which yet I have shown not
to signify a total immersion, though (...) be the original of it;) a living
bird, cedar wood, scarlet and hyssop in the blood of a bird slain over running
water (which also I have spoke to before, showing the impossibility of proving
thence a total immersion by him that strictly stands to Scripture text:) hyssop
in the water of Separation for the purifying of the unclean, Numb. 19.18. (and
yet even here reason will not suggest to a man a total immersion of that hyssop
into the water, but that so much of it was left undipped, as was held by the
hand of him that was to sprinkle the water with it, unless we suppose he dipped
his hand too into the water: but that was to exceed the order prescribed, which
was to dip the hyssop, not his hand into it:) but of things appointed to be
dipped for their own purification, as my own memory suggests to me no instance,
so perhaps it may not be very easy for another, upon the sudden, to give an
example.

27. And now lay all these things together, and how little a share will
immersions, especially total ones, have in our Apostles (...), washings? how
much more agreeably to the nature of the things is that word there rendered
washings? and how invincible an instance is that Text, of the word's signifying
not always, and only a total imersion, but of its signifying other ways of
washing, whether by a partial mersation, affusion, or conspersion, and so a
fair evidence of the truth of a Christian baptism, without the strictness of an
Anabaptistical dipping.

. 28. And yet for further strength, though we admit some, nay several of the
washings here understood to have been total immersions, (as I am willing so far
to credit the Hebrew Doctors, as to apprehend the cleansing of men and women in
their issues, Lev. 15. might have been by a total dipping of them) yet still,
unless they were all such, and there was no diversity in any from them, the
case will be all one: For (...) will still be to be understood of those
washings that were no immersions, as well as of those that were. And that there
was a diversity betwixt them, and that they were not all the same sort of
washing, for instance, total immersions, is sufficiently intimated in the
Epithet here added thereto by the Apostle, (...) diverse. If the washings were
diverse, then they were not all the same, and then not all total immersions,
suppose some were such, but some partial mersations, some affusions, some
sprinklings: which again proves the thing in question, that that may be a true
baptism, which yet is not a total immersion.

. 29. It may be said that diverse, does not signify always a difference in
species or sort, but in number: as appears, 2 Chronicles. 21.4. 2 Chronicles. 30.11. Mark
8.3. Act. 19.9. But I answer, that though that be true of the English word
diverse, which is so used in those four Texts: yet it is not so of the Greek
word here, (...), which is not the word for diverse in any of those Texts, but
(...), some, as in Mark 8. and Act. 19. or (...), men, as in 2 Chronicles. 30. or
nothing expressed, as in 2 Chronicles. 21. as there are other words for it in other
Texts of Scripture, viz. (...), etc. as he that pleases upon examination may
find, but not that. That word (...) is never used in the Greek, either of the
New Testament or Old, but where a diversity of kind or sort is intimated. In
the New Testament I find it but once used, besides this Text, viz. Romans 12.6.
where we have (...) differing gifts: but that must needs be in kind or sort,
unless prophecy, ministry, teaching, exhortation, be gifts all of a kind or
sort. In the Old Testament I find it thrice, but every where signifying variety
of sort or kind. As for instance, Lev. 19.19. Thou shall not sow thy field with
mingled seed, [(...)] that is [ diverso semine, as the Vulg. Lat.] feeds of
several sorts or kinds. And if it be not clear enough in it self, it may
receive Light from the foregoing clause of the same Verse, and where we have
the word diverse too, (though (...) be not in the Greek there) but fully to our
purpose. Thou shall not let thy cattle gender with a diverse kind [alterius
generis, of another kind or sort, according to the Vulg. Lat.] So that the
field was no more to be sowed ( immixtionibus, as Pagnin renders it) with mixed
seeds, than cattle to be bred from promiscuous mixtures of beasts of diverse
kinds. So again, Deuteronomy. 22.9. the same precept is renewed, and (...) is the
Greek of the Septuagints Version of that Text, Thou shall not sow thy Vineyard
with diverse seeds, that is [ mixturis as Pagnin.] with mixtures of seeds,
seeds of diverse sorts, or kinds mingled together. Lastly in Dan. 7.7. after
the fight of one beast like a Lion, and another like a Bear, and a third like a
Leopard, appeared a fourth diverse from all the beasts that were before it,
that is, differing in sort or kind, as much from all them, as they one from
another: and here the word for diverse is (...) in the Septuagint [dissimilis
ab omni bestia, Transl. Lat. of LXX. variam a cunctis, Pagnin. diversa ab
omnibus belluis, Arab. Syriac.] According then to the use of (...) in the
Scriptures, it must import a diversity of kind or sort in the things whereto it
is applied; and then by (...), in the Text, must be meant washings of several
sorts or kinds, and then not all of one sort or kind, suppose total immersion
were one; then partial mersation, affusion, or aspersion must come within the
compass of that word's signification; and then there may be a baptism without a
total immersion.

. 30. After this I may add, perhaps not inconveniently, that whereas St.
Athanasius, (or he whoever that Ancient Author was, Dict. and Interpret. Parab.
Script. Tom. 2. p. 426.
who is mistaken for St. Athanasius,) reckons up eight several baptisms; the
first of the flood; the Second that of Moses in the Sea; the Third the legal
baptism of the Jews after uncleanness; the Fourth that of St. John Baptist; the
Fifth that of Jesus; the Sixth of Tears (as when one washes his bed, as David
did his every night, with Tears) the Seventh of Martyrdom, the Eighth of
eternal fire, several of these are not immersions; and particularly not the
first, for Noah and his family were not dipped into the flood ( rained upon
they were, and so the resemblance of their baptizing is made in baptizing by
affusing or sprinkling, if ye will;) nor the Second, as I have shown before;
nor the Third universally, as I have also shown, and himself does intimate,
whilst he expresses the reason for the Jews having that baptism, by saying
that every unclean person (...) was washed; nor the Sixth, for that cannot be
by dipping the bed in tears, but by dropping tears upon the bed, and is more
properly a baptism by sprinkling, than by dipping; and even the Fourth, however
the Fifth will abide a dispute. There may then be a baptizing, where there is
no immersing, at least according to St. Athanasius; or that Ancient Writer. But
not in this Author alone; but in other of the Ancients we read of a Baptism of
Blood and Tears; I know says Greg. Naz. of a Fourth Baptism, (...), Gr. Naz.
Orat. 39. Tom. 1. page 634. Edit. Morell.

(...), D. Athan. Resp. ad qu. 72. ad Antioch. Tom. 2. p. 360. edit. Sonnii and
Morellii.

(...), D. Basil. Hom. de 40. Martyr. Tom. 1. p. 533. edit. Morellii.


that by Martyrdom and Blood, wherewith Christ himself was Baptized; and I know
of a Fifth yet, that of Tears: And, (says the Author of the Responses to
Antiochus, attributed to St. Athanasius) God has granted unto man Three
purging Baptisms, that of Water, that of the Testimony of ones own Blood, and
the Third, that of Tears: so St. Basil tells us of a Martyr that was Baptized
into Christ in his own Blood.

. 31. Neither then from what is said of (...), nor of (...), nor of (...), (
root, body, nor branch) does it appear, that the Baptismal washing is
necessarily, by the force of (...), to be by a total immersion: nor is our
Savior, when he said (...), to be understood, as if he had said, make all
Nations disciples by dipping them, but by washing them; i. e. in such manner as
the time, place, and person may admit, whether by immersion, affusion, or
conspersion.

CHAP. VII. Of the Hebrew (...), and the Syriac (...): and that they do not
universally signify a total immersion.
. 1. BUT perhaps it will be said, that our Savior did not deliver his mind in
Greek. In what Language then? In Hebrew, or Syriac, doubtless: but in whether
it is hard to say. But what then? what? why then, though (...), either in its
own native import, or in the Hellenistical use of it, might signify not always
a total immersion, but sometimes something less than that, even an affusion or
aspersion of water, yet it is not to be taken here, so as to signify any thing
less than that word did, wherein our Savior delivered his mind: and if that
signified only a total immersion, then (...), what ever it may signify in it
self, ought with us to signify nothing less than so.

. 2. To this I answer first, that it being not certainly known in what Language
our Savior spoke, when he gave the order for baptizing, the Language, that he
spoke in, ought not to be urged in this case, so as to prescribe to the use of
the word, that we have his mind delivered in unto us. Tell us exactly the
particular word that he spoke, and what was the exact signification of that
word, and, unless we can show a reason for a dispensation, we will do what that
word requires of us.

. 3. Secondly the Holy Spirit, which excited St. Matthew to write his Gospel,
and assisted him in the writing of it, knew his mind, and suggested to his
Evangelist such a word, as was expressive of his mind: and what that word does
import, that we take to be his mind, That passage in Tilenus, Alioqui
Apostolis, Syrorum idiomate, quo videlicet Christus usus fuerat, utendum
fuisset, (Disp. 1. de Bapt. These. 17.) shows he thought that Syriac was the
Language our Savior spoke.
and the very thing designed by his word, in what Language soever he spoke,
whether Hebrew, or Syriac. And so, for as much as (...), the word dictated by
the Spirit, as we suppose, to the Evangelist, admits of a latitude, at least in
Sacred Authors, if not in profane also, so as to signify other ways of
baptizing, than by a total immersion, therefore we are to understand, that the
word he delivered his mind in, were it Hebrew or Syriac, was also of the same
import. And so we are where we were still.

. 4. But suppose he spoke Hebrew, or Syriac, What are the words he must be
supposed to have spoken in this case? It will be said, if Hebrew, (...) Tabal,
if Syriac, (...) Amad. Dr. Pocock, Porta Mosis, page 393.
Here is but supposition all this while, and no proof: unless those Languages
afforded no other words to express washing, and particularly that kind of
washing, which was used as the ceremony for initiation of Disciples under the
Discipline of a Master. And so, let those words signify what they will, there
can no demonstrative Argument be framed from them against us, and we may
baptize our children still, as we do, for all them.

. 5. Yet suppose we join issues, and take it for granted, that the one, or the
other, of these words, was the word that our Savior delivered his mind in, and
that proportionably to the import of that word we are to understand the word
(...), used by the Evangelist, whereby to express his mind, will it thence
follow that (...) must signify a total immersion? I hope not. If they do not
necessarily signify so much, then cannot (...) be affirmed to have so much
necessarily imported in its signification.

. 6. But how shall we know the just import of these words? Undoubtedly by
consulting Authors, or Lexicographers, skilful in those Languages. If that may
be stood to, all is well yet. For the Learned Dr. Pocock proves, that though
the word (...) (which signifies (...)) do import a further degree of purgation,
than what is implied in (...), or (...) (which signifies to wash the hands) yet
it does not necessarily import the mersation or dipping of the whole body. --
Nec tamen totius corporis mersationem necessario indigitare. Dr. Pocock, ibid:
(...) tinxit, intinxit, mersit, immersit, tingendi, aut abluendi gratia
demersit: ita lavit, ut res non mundetur, sed tantum attingat humorem, vel
tota, vel ex part: baptizavit, Schindler.
And learned Schindler, as he allows this Verb the strict signification of
immersion, dipping in, or plunging for ablutions sake, so he stints not its
signification to that, but allows it to signify in a greater latitude, so to
wash, not as that a thing may be cleansed, but only touch the moisture either
in whole, or in part. And so Mr. Leigh, in his Critica Sacra.

. 7. And as this has already been made appear, by the instance of the Priests
right finger dipped in the Oil contained in the palm of his left hand: so it
will appear by further instances of the same, interpreted according to what
reason could direct as fit to be done in those cases, or is actually done in
the like. In Exodus 12.22. order is given by Moses to the Elders of Israel, at
the institution of the Passover, first to kill a Lamb, and then to take a
bunch of Hyssop, and dip it in the blood of it, and strike the Lintel, and the
two side-Posts therewith. Now what Man of reason would ever think any more
intended by Moses, but that he that took the Hyssop, as he held one end of the
bunch in his hand, so he should dip the other end of it into the blood? Which
of us being to act the same thing, and having no further directions than they
appear to have had, would do any more than so? And who would not think the
order exactly fulfilled in so doing? Who would ever dream of a necessity of
immersing the whole bunch into the blood? or fancy it was not dipped at all,
because not all dipped? Let us consult our reasons, and think like Men, and we
cannot imagine any more than a partial mersation of the bunch into the blood (
viz. the bushie end of it) to have been intended by Moses, or practiced by
Israel. And then here will be one instance of this word's signifying less than
a total dipping of that, which yet is said to be dipped.

. 8. And, the more to confirm it, we may note, (and it is observable) that the
Greek Interpreters of this place, though they use (...) in the case, yet they
do not say, (...), dipping it into the blood, but (...), dying or smearing it
with the blood, (which is a further instance, that (...) also does not
necessarily signify always a total immersion, (at least, not in the judgment
of those Writers) but sometimes somewhat less, even as here, a dying or
besmearing.) And accordingly the Vulg. Lat. does not render it intingite, or
immergite in sanguinem, immerse, or dip it into the blood, but tingite
sanguine, die, or besmear it with blood.

. 9. But if this instance be not clear enough and full enough (as to any
reasonable and modest Inquirer it may seem to be) there is another that
probably is. In Genesis 37. we have the story of Joseph's being sold to the
Ishmaelites by his Brethren. Part of that story is their contriving how to
blind their Father, and make him believe his Son was torn in pieces by some
evil Beast. In order unto that they kill a Kid, and besmear the Coat with the
blood thereof. We cannot imagine that the Coat was bebloodied all over, as it
must have been, if it had been totally immersed into blood. Nor would the
crafty Brethren do so with it: for their fraud could not possibly, had they so
done, have escaped discovery by their prudent Father. So much of it therefore
only was besmeared with blood, as might make it look like the Coat of one slain
by a wild Beast, which would here be bloody, and there be without any tincture
of blood, as the issues from the wounds should disperse the tinctures, and not
be bloody all over, like a Vesture dipped in blood. No total immersion then of
Joseph's Coat into the blood of the Kid, (if the blood of it saved at best
advantage could be so much, as that the coat of a person so old, as Joseph then
was, might be totally immersed into it:) there was but a besmearing of it, at
most, by a partial mersation only into it. And accordingly the Septuagint
render it by (...), not they dipped, but inquinarunt; they besmeared it. And
yet (...) (tinxerunt, intinxerunt) formed from (...) is the original word,
whereby the Author describes that action of Joseph's brethren. So then the case
seems clear, that (...) the word to which (...) answers in its signification,
does not necessarily import a total immersion; and therefore (...) does not so
neither.

. 10. And what is said of the Hebrew (...) as to the comprehensiveness of its
signification, the same is also said by the learned Schindler of the Syriac
(...), which answers both to the Hebrew (...) and to the Greek (...), Sir.
(...) amad, baptizatus, in aquam immersus, tinctus, lotus fuit. ab Hebr. (...)
stetit. stabant enim qui baptizabantur, Schindler. The son of Azalkefat in the
Arab. Gospels uses the word (...) Amada to baptize; which also bears the
same sense in the Syriac, and is often mentioned by the Patriarch Severus in
his (...) or Order of Baptizing the Saints. The reason in both Dialects is the
same, for that the word Amada is by the Syrians and Arabians derived from the
Hebrew word Amad, which signifies to stand up. J. G. on Sir Tho. Ridleys View
of the Civil Law, p. 176.
namely that it signifies not only strictly in aquam immersus fuit, he was dipped
into water, but also more generally tinctus, and lotus fuit, he was died, and
washed. So that whether our Savior spoke Hebrew, or Syriac, the case is all
one, the latter being of as great a latitude as the former.

. 11. And by this time, I hope, it sufficiently appears, that to baptize,
though not by a total immersion, is not repugnant to the signification of (...)
(our Saviors word in Matthew. 28.19.) but comprehended within the compass of it:
and thence it will follow, that such baptizing as is not contrary to the word
of Christ, is not contrary to the will of Christ, but is consonant to his mind,
and consistent with his will; and so a true, lawful, and sufficient baptism,
though but by a partial mersation, an affusion, or aspersion. And the showing
of this was the first branch of my undertaking.

CHAP. VIII. (...) not restrained to a total immersion amongst Christians by
the practice of it among the Jews.
. 1. AND yet before I proceed to the Second, I meet with a Rub, which it may be
convenient to remove out of the way. For it may be said, that though (...) may
signify in that latitude, that we contend for; yet the custom of that Time
and Place, when and where our Savior spoke, was to baptize by way of a total
immersion: and therefore his word ought to be understood with such restriction
as is proper for that place and time; and so particularly of a total dipping.

. 2. But to this (not to dispute the custom of that time and place) I answer,
First, (...) autem de qua hic (viz. Matthew. 28.18.) agitur, non significat illud
(...) Dei, quod omnipotentiam vocamus, sed imperium regium, and autoritatem
constituendi Ecclesiam per ministerium Apostolorum, de quo munere regio vide
Psalm. 99, and 98. Item Matthew. c. 11. and Joh. 13. Tostan. Praelection. in
Matthew. p. 383.
that our Lord Jesus Christ is in this concern to be considered as a
Legislator, endued with power from him that sent him, both to reform old Laws,
and change old customs, and to give new laws, and institute new customs: which
power he asserts in the very next immediately foregoing words, saying, All
power is given unto me in heaven and in earth. And as acting by that power he
gives this Commission of baptizing to his Apostles, saying, Go ye therefore,
and teach all Nations baptizing them. Whereupon it follows, that the
Institutions, Laws, and Customs, appointed and ordained in, or brought into the
Church by Christ, or those commissionated and empowered for that end by him,
are not to be confined to, nor measured by, what was before, especially, if not
infallibly of a divine institution, as the total immersion of Proselytes, (or
even of Natives) whether for admission into discipleship to any Master, or for
entrance into the Community of the Jewish people, or into the Covenant of God,
can never be proved to be: but to be considered absolutely and independently as
they are in themselves constituted by him, or by his appointment. And as, if
his Laws and Constitutions do retrench any liberties, or enlargements that were
given or permitted before, they are to be observed according to those
restraints and retrenchments: So if his Laws and Constitutions do give a
latitude, that was not before (as in the case of meats made lawful to be eaten
under the Gospel, which were prohibited under the Law, etc.) in that latitude
that he gives them, they are in all reason to be understood and observed. And
consequently if (...) (his word) do signify any thing else besides a total
immersion, as a partial mersation, affusion, or aspersion, according to that
latitude of its signification is his mind to be taken, and his precept
expounded. For he has the Key of David, and as well opens, and no man
shuts, as shuts, and no man opens, Rev. 3.7.

. 3. Secondly, if our Savior had designed strictly that way of a total
immersion, used in the time and place when and where he spoke these words, he
could have used words of a lesser latitude than (...), and which could not be
capable of signifying any other way of baptizing, short of, or less than a
total immersion: Such as (...), or (...), not to say (...) and (...). In that
therefore he used a word of greater latitude than the then present use was,
being no way in the least straightened for words, but having plenty at hand, to
express his mind in, had he pleased it should have been otherwise, it is plain
he designed a greater latitude in the performance of that action, than justly
agreed with the then present way of baptizing in that circumstance: and that
according to that latitude we are to understand his mind in that word (...).

. 4. Thirdly, if our Savior had designed the administration of this Sacrament
only in that Nation, it had been reasonable to conceive his meaning was, that
in the administration of it the custom of that nation should be observed, not
only because it would well agree with the temperature of that country, but also
because the customariness of it to another, yet very near, almost the same
purpose, would make the reception of it unto his purpose the more easy to that
people. But being he designed it to be the Ceremony of Initiation of disciples
into his Church throughout all nations, it is most reasonable to believe his
intendment was, that it should be administered in such a way as would best agree
with the temperature of all Countries, and be most readily received by the
people of all nations, either upon that account, or on any other of a near
nature that might be customary among them (as among some of them there were
used purifications by water in reference to divine service; (...), Clem. Alex.
Strom. 5. Nam and sacris quibusdam per lavacrum initiantur, Isidis alicujus aut
Mithrae, ipsos etiam Deos suos lavationibus efferunt. Tertul. de Bapt. p. 257.
Edit. Rigalt. Inter quae [sc. Cereris sacra] pracipuum fuit, ut sacris
initiatos, calda primum abluerent -- Alex. ab Alex. l. 6. c. 19.
) people being much more easily induced to admit of such Ceremonies and
Customs, as are in some respect domestic and home, and they in part acquainted
with, than those that are utterly foraign and wholly new. And according to what
in reason we believe his real intendment to have been, in reason we are to
understand his word to be meant. And then that must be not universally of a
total immersion, but sometimes of other ways of baptizing: because those other
ways are more agreeable to the temperature of some countries, than that is, and
their receptions less liable to exception than that would have been.

. 5. Fourthly, if our Savior had designed this Sacrament to be administered
only to persons of strong constitution, and in healthful state, then in reason
it might be believed, he intended its administration only in that way, which
was in use in that Nation, and at that time, and was but such as persons in
health and strength might without danger endure, and without fear undergo. But
seeing he intended it as an universal door for the letting in persons of all
estates, conditions, and constitutions, as well as Countries, into his Church
(for he makes no limitation in that case, and the Churches practice has so
interpreted his precept) therefore it is most reasonable to believe, he would,
and did, design it so wide, as that it might give entrance unto all, and not by
the straitness of its severity, and dangerousness to the health and life of
persons of sick, or sickly, and weak condition and constitution, exclude any,
especially in cold seasons and climates, and before the use of Fonts, when
there were only rivers, or pools to baptize in. But that could not be by a
total immersion. Therefore he must in reason be believed to have intended it,
when and where that could not be, by a partial mersation, affusion or
aspersion, as the case and condition, the time, place, and person might require.

. 6. If any more were needful I might in the Fifth place add, that (...) is
ordinarily so used, as besides the signification of an act of application of
water to the person baptized, to consignifie also all the other proper
circumstances of baptizing, both for matter and manner, that are omitted, where
it is expressed: as for instance when it is said of S. Paul, It is taken for the
whole work and action of the Sacrament, Matt. 28.19. Leigh. Critic. Sacra.
( Act. 9.18.) that he arose, and was baptized, it is meant that none of the
proper circumstances of baptism were then omitted, though not one of them be
expressed. So then our Savior saying, Go and make Heathens disciples baptizing
them, must be understood to mean, that all the proper circumstances of baptism,
both in point of matter and form, must accompany that act. Now if the manner of
baptizing at that time must determine our Saviors order to one circumstance,
then, no discrimination being made, it must determine it to the others also,
and so we must in all points be baptized as the Jews were; only in Rivers or
Lakes: not in the night, See Dr. Lightfoot, Hor. Heb. in Matt. 3.6. page 45,
etc.
nor on the Sabbath day, nor on any holy day; the party must first be put naked
by others into the water, and there sit, or stand, up to the neck; he must
there learn some precepts of the Law, hard as well as easy, and then he must
at one plunge wholly dip himself, or be dipped by another. And now let our
Anabaptists say in good earnest, whether they think all this should be
punctually observed in Christian baptism; and therefore comprehended under our
Saviors word (...), because this was the manner of baptizing in that time and
place, when and where our Savior spoke that word, I am of opinion they do not
think so, because both the Apostles did, and the Church has, and themselves do
act differently in some respect from this manner and order. For the first
company that ever the Apostles baptized after the sealing of their Commission
to baptize with water, by their own being baptized with the Holy Ghost and with
fire, was on the day of Pentecost, an holy day. Paul and Silas baptized the
Jailer and his family in the night. And it has been the Churches practice in
times of persecution to baptize in the night, and in latter times in Fonts, at
first larger, after lesser, and for many ages by a threefold immersion. And as
in the night the Anabaptists do, or (if they be now grown more confident,) have
formerly baptized in the night; so their Proselytes, I suppose, are not put
into the water by their Baptizer, but go in of themselves; neither (I think)
are they now naked, but have some Linen Garment on; neither do so much as the
Women dip themselves, but even they are dipped by their Baptizer, differently
from the manner of baptizing in our Savior's days. Then neither the Apostles
did, nor the Church has, nor themselves do, think themselves obliged by virtue
of (...), to conform in all points to the manner and order of baptizing in use,
at that time, and in that place, where our Savior spoke that word. They then
who cannot but see, that the Church of Christ has varied, and who themselves
do vary in some circumstances, from the manner and order used then and there,
when and where our Savior spoke that word, cannot in reason, and ought not in
justice, to tie us to the exact observation of others: unless they will be
guilty of that high crime of uncharitableness, or rather injustice and
partiality, which consists in condemning others for what they do themselves, i.
e. varying from the order of baptizing in use, in that time and place, wherein
our Savior gave his order for baptizing: and then St. Paul will have somewhat
to say to them, which I leave them to read, and consider of, Romans 2.1, 2, 3,
etc.

. 7. And now supposing my way to be sufficiently cleared by the removal of this
obstacle, I will proceed to that which is in order to follow.

CHAP. IX. The agreeableness of baptizing by aspersion or affusion unto the
Nature of Baptism.
. 1. IF we inquire into the Nature of Baptism, Nam ad materiam quod attinet,
aqua res est, seu nitro plena esse dicitur, seu quavis alia qualitate, omnium
maxim idonea, quae corporis sordes cluat. Amyrald. These. Salmur. De Bapt.
Sect. 17. 1 John 1.7.

Nam sicut aqua abluuntur sordes corporis, sic sanguine Christi in cruce effuso
and cordibus per fidem asperso abluuntur sordes animae, id est peccata. Piscat.
Com. Loc. 23. These 14. Item Loc. 24. These. 12.

Baptismus est Sacramentum a Christo institutum, ut per illud Ecclesiae
inseramur; cum hac promissione, quod non minus certo quam aqua extrinsecus
lavamur, etiam intrinsecus a peccatis abluimur per sanguinem and Spiritum
Christi. Voss. de Bapt. Disp. 1. These. 1. p. 342.

Baptismus est primum N. T. Sacramentum, quo ex institutione Christi per
ministrum ejus aqua abluimur in nomine Patris, Filii, and Spir. Sancti, ut ita
Receptio in Novum Gratiae Foedus, and intrinseca per sanguinem and Spir.
Christi ablutio a peccatis and clare nobis signotur, and certo obsignetur. Id.
ibid. p. 345.


we shall find it to be a holy Sacrament, wherein, by the external washing of
the baptized with Water, is principally signified his inward washing from sin
by the blood of Christ: the water from the abundance of nitre, which is said to
be contained in it, and its being thereby made the more apt for cleansing, very
fitly representing the blood of Christ, which (as the Apostle says) cleanses
from all sin: and the action of washing no less fitly representing the
application of the blood of Christ to the sinner for the cleansing of him. In
reference to which action the same Apostle has told us of Christ's having
loved us, and (as the best instance of that love imaginable) having washed us
from our sins in his own blood, Rev. 1.5.

. 2. Baptismus dicitur intinctio, i. e. ablutio cortoris exterior facta sub
forma verborum praescripta P. Lomb. Sent. l. 4. Did. 3. part. 1. de Baptismo
in speciali.

Baptismus est primum Sacramentum N. Testamenti per externam aquae adspersionem
and ablutionem, declarans and obsignans fidelibus internam ip^orum ablutionem
per sanguinem and spiritum Christi. H. Alting. com. loc. Baptismus est prius
novi Testamenti Sacramentum, quo qui in foedere sunt, a ministro Ecclesiae
secundum institutionem Christi aqua conspe^guntur and abluuntur ad internam
animae a peccatis ablutionem, quae spiritus sancti operatione propter solum
Christi sanguinem contingit, nec non cum Christo communionem, and in Ecclesiae
Christi receptionem, significandam, obsignandam, and conserendam. Wendelin.
Christ. Theolog. l. 1. c. 22. These. 4. Baptismus est primum novi foederis
Sacramentum, in quo electis in Dei familiam receptis externa aquae aspersione
peccatorum remissio and regeneratio per sanguinem Christi and spiritum sanctum
obsignatur. Wolleb. Christ. Theol. l. 1. c. 23. Baptismus est primum N.
Foederis Sacramentum a Christo institutum ex analogis signo and signato and
analogica relatione ipsorum inter se and action constans, quo foedcrati a
Ministris Ecclesiae abluuntur, ut Christo insiti internae animae ablutionis per
sanguinem and spiritum ipsius fiant participes. Luc. Trelcat. Loc. Com.
Institut. l. 2. Tit. de Bapt. p. 187. Aqua assumitur in Sacramentum baptismi ad
usum ablutionis corporalis, per quam significatur ablutio peccatorum. Aquin.
Sum. 3. q. 66. art. 7. c. a. Quia tota virtus aquae est in significando per
ablutionem, certe non interest quantum quisque abluatur, quomodo in Eucharistia
quantum quisquc comedat. Chamier l. 5. de Baptism. c. 2. Notum est aquam, quae
est res permanens, non dici baptismum, nec Sacramentum Baptismi, sed
ablutionem, quae est actio, dici Baptismum and Sacramentum Baptismi. -- Et
similiter certum est Sacramenti definitionem optime congruere ablutioni, etc.
Bellarm. de Sacram. Euch. l 4. c. 3. Tom. 2. Col. 790. C D. Est hic baptismus,
primam novi Testamenti Sacramentum a Christo institutum, in quo apta and
concinna signi and signati analogia, foederati -- aqua abluuntur -- Tilen Disp.
1. de Bapt. These. 4. Baptismus, est Sacramentum N. T. quo aquae perfusione in
nomine Patris, Filii and S. S facta significatur and obsignatur fidelibus
beneficium purgationis a peccato per filium Dei and regenerationis ad vitam
aet^rnam. Keckerman. System. Theolog. l. 3. c. 8. p. 451. --


And hence the Master of the Sentences defining Baptism says, it is an
intinction, that is, an outward washing of the body, done under a prescribed
form of words. And later Divines define it to be a Sacrament, that by the
outward washing of water, signifies the inward washing of the Soul with the
blood of Christ. It is says Altingius, (a Learned Member of the Synod of Dort)
the first Sacrament of the New Testament by the external sprinkling and washing
of water, declaring and sealing unto believers their inward washing by the
blood and spirit of Christ. So says Wendelinus a later but no less Learned
Divine than he, Baptism is the former Sacrament of the New Testament, wherein
they, who are in the Covenant of God, are by a Minister of the Church,
according to the Institution of Christ, sprinkled with, water and washed, to
signify, seal, and confer the inward washing of the Soul from sin. So others
to the same purpose. Voss. de Bapt. p. 345.

. 3. Hence also among the Fathers, Cur vero liquore corporis sordes abluente
Sacramentum hoc perfici mandavit Jesus? in causa est (...) inter ablutionem
externam quae Aqua fit, and internam quae fit sanguine and Spiritu Christi
Voss. de Bapt. These. 4. p. 347.

Neque enim aqua lavat animam, sed prius ipsa lavatur spiritu, ut alios lavare
spiritualiter possit. D. Hieron. adv. Luciserian. Felix Sacramentum aquae
nostrae qua abluti delictis pristinae caecitatis in vitam aet^rnam liberamur.
Tertul. de Bapt.

Non ideo abluimur, ut delinquere desinamus, sed quia desiimus, quia jam cord
loti sumus Id. ib. Nulla distinctio est mari quis an stagno, flumine an font,
lacu an alveo diluatur. Id. ib. Hortandi sunt homines tunc se potius
interimere, cum lavacro sanctae regenerationis abluti universorum remissionem
cep^rint peccatorum. D. Aug. de Civ. l. 1. c. 27. Ablutos homines purgantibus
undis Nomine sub sancto patris natique lavate. Juven. Lavamur igitur in
baptismo, quia deletur chirographum damnationis nostrae, and gratia hac nobis
confertur, ne jam nobis concupiscentia noceat. si tamen a consensu abstincamus.
D. Bern. Sermon. 1. de Coen. Dom. Divinae autom gratiae lavacrum, non corporis
sed animae maculam sordesque mundare consuevit. D. Chrysostom. ad Baptizandos.
Considerantes ac scientes, quod templa dei sint membra vestra ab omni faece
contagionis antiquae lavacri vitalis sanctificatione purgata. D. Cyprian. de
Habit. Virg. (...). Just. Mart. 2. Apolog. (...). Id. ib. (...). Id. ib.
Quanquam ad simplicom actum competat similitudo, ut quoniam vice sordium
^elidis inquinamur, aquis abluamur. Tert. de Bapt. Edit. Rigalt p. 257. Quid
est baptismus Christi? lavacrum aquae in verbo. D. Aug. Tract. 15. in Evang.
Job. In Christo igitur baptizari, significat credentes in eum ablui. Damasc. de
Orthod. fid. l. 4. c. 10. fol. 148. a. Accepit rex Eduinus cum cunctis gentis
suae nobilibus ac plebe perplurima fidem and lavacrum sanctae regenerationis.
Beda. Eccles. Hist. Ang l. 2. c. 14. -- A mane ad vesperam nihibaliud ageret,
quam confluentem co de cunctis viculis ac locis plebem, Christi verbo salutis
instruere. atque instructam in fluvio Gleni, qui proximus crat, lavacro
remissionis abluere. Id. ib. Quid est baptismus Christi? Lavacrum aquae in
verbo. Id. in Ephesians. 5. fol. 234. E. Si vultis ablui font illo salutari, quo
pater vester ablutus est, potestis etiam panis sancti, cui ille participabat,
esse participes. Sin autem lavacrum vitae contemnitis, nullatenus valetis panem
vitae percipere. Bed. Ec. Hist. l. 2. c. 5. fol. 63.


when they speak of the Sacrament of Baptism, we meet with frequent mentions [
lavandi, abluendi, diluendi, lavationis, lavacri, etc.] of washing, cleansing,
laver, etc. So says St. Hierom. for indeed the water does not wash the Soul,
but first it self is washed by the Spirit, that it may be able spiritually to
wash others. So Tertullian, Happy Sacrament of our water, wherewith we being
washed from the delinquencies of our pristine blindness, are freed into eternal
life. Again, we are not therefore washed to the end that we may leave sinning,
but because we have left it, because we are in heart already washed. On
supposition it were lawful for men to kill themselves, then says St. Aug. were
men rather to be exhorted to kill themselves, when being washed in the laver of
holy regeneration, they shall have received the remission of all sins. And so
others also speak.

Ecce venturi estis ad fontem sanctum, dilucmini baptismo, salutari lavacro
regenerationis renovabi^ini: critis sine ullo peccato, ascendentes de illo
lavacro: omnia quae vos peccata persequebantur ibi delebuntur. D. Aug. Sermon.
119. de Temp. Cum de illo sanctissimo lavacro novi natalis ascenditis. Tertul.
(...) -- Just. Martyr. Apol. 2.
. 4. And from hence it is, that even the very Font it self, wherein men are by
that Sacrament cleansed from the filth of their birth and life, has the name
of laver given unto it. When ye go up out of that laver, (says S. Aug.) ye
shall be without all sin. And so Tertul. When ye ascend out of that most holy
laver of the New birth -- And so others.

. 5. And no wonder, when under such like words as these is this holy Sacrament
proposed in several places of the Sacred Scriptures. It is called by S. Paul
(Tit. 3.5.) (...), i. e. (as St. Hier. translates it) lavacrum regenerationis;
(as we) the washing of regeneration. The same St. Paul writing to the
Corinthians says to and of them (1 Cor. 6.11.) And such (viz. as those were,
whom he had reckoned up in the two foregoing verses,) were some of you, but
(...) ye are (or ye have been) washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified, in the name of our Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God, i. e.
ye have been washed in baptism, sanctified by the Spirit of our God, and
justified in, or by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Again says he to the
Ephesians ( c. 5. v. 25, 26.) Husbands love your wives even as Christ also
loved the Church, and gave himself for it, That he might sanctify and cleanse
it, (...) [ lavacro aquae in verbo, as Vulg. Lat. renders it, that is, as we]
with the washing of water by the word, that is, in or by Baptism. And in these
his expressions to others, he speaks but suitably to what had by another been
spoken to himself, even by Ananias, who, as it were to intimate unto him, that
the nature of Baptism did principally consist in the washing of man from the
guilt and stain of sin, mentions that, and nothing else but that, as the design
of it, when he exhorts him to be baptized. And now (says he, Act. 22.16.) why
tarriest thou? Arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on the
name of the Lord. Much after the rate of St. Peter's exhortation to the
converted Jews ( Act. 2.38.) to repent and be baptized in the name of Jesus
Christ, for the remission of sins; promising therewithal, as an inducement
thereunto, their receiving the gift of the Holy Ghost.

. 6. By all which it appears, that as well in the judgment of Ancient, as of
Modern Divines, -- Aquae proprietates in cluendis corporibus vim sanguinis
Christi in delendis peccatis -- declarant. Tilen. Disp. 1. de Bapt. These. 32.
and even by Scripture Text it self, as water is a suitable element to
represent the blood of Christ, whereby we are cleansed from our sins, so
washing with water is a suitable action, whereby the application of Christ's
Blood unto us for our cleansing is expressed, and so most agreeable unto the
nature of Baptism; and consequently, that by what application of water we may
be so washed as to be cleansed, by such we may be said to be baptized.

-- Cum nec minus in aspersione quam in immersione, Sacramenti analogia
servetur; siquidem in legalibus purificationibus sufficicbant (...). Tilen.
Disp. 1. de Bapt. These. 15. -- Praesertim cum (...) significationis maneat, and
adspersione illae etiam sordes abluantur -- Keckerman Theol. System. l 3. c. 8.
p. 452.
. 7. Now that sprinkling is such a way of application of water, as has been
designed and used for cleansing, will appear from Scripture, and then
consequently it will follow, that it may be so still. And of that we have
instance in Number. 8.5, 6, 7. where the Lord gives order unto Moses to cleanse
the Levites, and directs him too how to cleanse them. And thus (says he) shall
thou do unto them to cleanse them: sprinkle water of purifying upon them, and
let them shave all their flesh, and let them wash their clothes, and so make
themselves clean. See! here is no other washing of them appointed for their
cleansing, but what was done by sprinkling of the water of purification upon
them. In Number. 19. order is given for making water of separation with the ashes
of a red Heifer, ver. 1, etc. This water was to be a purification for sin, v.
10. The way of washing with this water for purification was to be by way of
sprinkling; and that so strictly, that whosoever had touched the body of a dead
man, and had not so purified himself with it, was to be cut off from Israel*
because the water of purification had not been sprinkled upon him, v. 13. So
again for the purifying of a Tent wherein any Man died, and of the persons and
vessels in it, or any that touched any of them, a purification was ordained to
be made by this water; and that purification was to be made by sprinkling: v.
18, 19. with the like menace of cutting off from the Congregation to him that
was unclean on those accounts, and had not so purified himself: because he has
defiled the Sanctuary of the Lord, the water of purification has not been
sprinkled upon him, ver. 20. Which cleansing from the Legal pollution of the
body, by the sprinkling of the water of purification, typified our cleansing
from the moral defilement of the Soul, by the sprinkling of the blood of
Christ. Whereto the Learned Dr. Jackson says, Tom. 3. Lib. 10. c. 50. Sect. 3.
p. 271.
the Apostle has special reference, more than allusion, saying, Heb. 9.13, 14.
If the blood of bulls and of goats, and the ashes of an heifer sprinkling the
unclean sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh, How much more shall the
blood of Christ purge your conscience from dead works? And again, that the
water of sprinkling, consecrated by the aspersion of the ashes of this legal
sacrifice, did truly resemble the water of Baptism, by which we are washed from
sin, and consecrated unto God as clean persons, that is, made Members of his
Church on Earth (says he) is so evident in it self, that it needs no
Paraphrase or laborious Comment upon the forecited Law; yet withal referring
his Reader to Chytraeus his Commentaries on the Book of Numbers, etc. And I
shall not be alone, if I shall say, Ad Sacramentum enim Baptismi Apostolus
respicere videtur, quo externa quidem corporum fit ablutio, interna vero
cordium purgatio per Christi sanguinem obsignatur. D. Pareus in Heb. 10.22.
that the Apostle has a respect unto Baptism, when in Heb. 10.22. he says,
Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, having our
hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure
water. Which words [ having our hearts sprinkled, etc.] to me seem not so much
to declare with what qualification we should draw near unto God, as upon what
ground we may draw near unto him; Est ergo sensus: Cum sanguine and spiritu
Christi a sordibus peccati purgati simus, hujusque purgationis symbolum
baptismum habeamus, accedamus igitur purificatis cordibus per fidem, non
polluti peccatis conscientiam turbantibus per veram resipiscentiam. Par. in loc.
even upon the account of our having been baptized, and therein had our hearts
sprinkled from an evil conscience with the blood of Christ, as well as our
bodies washed with the pure water of Baptism. And to this sense the Original
fairly leads, (...), etc. (...), that is literally, being we have had our
hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and have had our bodies washed with
pure water, that is, being we have been baptized, and so purged and cleansed
(from those sins, which before kept us at a distance from God, and made us
afraid to come nigh him) by the blood and spirit of Christ, who is our High
Priest, and is at the right hand of God interceding for us, let us with a true
heart draw near to God, in confidence of acceptance through his Intercession
for us, who by so purging and cleansing us has fitted us for such access, in
full assurance of faith, that upon our approaching we shall be accepted. And
when the inward washing from sin is styled a sprinkling, how fairly does it
intimate, that the outward washing did hold correspondence with it, and was
performed by sprinkling also? At least so much will be infallibly gained by it,
that washing by way of sprinkling, is an action very suitable to, and agreeable
with, the nature of baptism, as outwardly representing that inward washing,
which is performed therein, and correspondently thereunto termed a sprinkling.

. 8. And even God himself had long before showed the agreeableness of the
outward washing of the body from its filths with water by way of sprinkling,
with the inward washing of the Soul from its sins by his grace through the
blood of Christ applied thereto for its cleansing, when (in Ezech. 36.5.) he
said to Israel, in reference to their defilements wherewith they had been
defiled in the Countries into which they had been scattered, Then will I
sprinkle clean water upon you, and you shall be clean, from all your
filthiness, and from all your Idols will I cleanse you: That is, I will render
you as spiritually clean from your sin, by my pardoning and purifying grace, as
you should be legally clean, by having clean water, even the water of
separation and purification, sprinkled upon you.

. 9. And if the blood of Sacrifices may be thought to have a nearer resemblance
with the blood of Christ, than water has, yet as the application of Christ's
blood to our Souls for the cleansing of them, is set forth by way of
sprinkling, whence his blood is called (...), See Dr. Ham. in lo.
the blood of sprinkling, Heb. 12.24. so the application of the blood of
Sacrifices for cleansing, was mostly made by sprinkling: whence the Apostle (
Heb. 9.21, 22.) says of Moses, that he sprinkled with blood both the
Tabernacle, and all the Vessels of the Ministry. And that almost all things are
by the Law purged with blood. Thence we read of a Ram that was to be slain at
the consecration of Aaron's Sons, and his blood to be sprinkled round about
upon the Altar, Exodus 29.16. When a Bullock was to be offered for a burnt
Sacrifice by any of the People, in order to an atonement to be made for him,
the Sons of Aaron were to bring the blood, and sprinkle the blood round about
upon the Altar, Levit. 15. and so if it were of the Flocks, ib. v. 11. So if it
were a Peace Offering, Levit. 3.8, 13. So also if it were a Trepass Offering,
Levit. 7.2. So if it were a Sin-offering to be offered by the High Priest for
himself and for his House, the blood of it was to be sprinkled seven times upon
the Mercy-seat, and before the Mercy-seat, Levit. 16.14. And the like was to be
done if it were for the People, ( ib. v. 15.) and that in order to the making
an atonement for the holy place, because of the uncleanness of the Children of
Israel, and because of their transgressions in all their sins. ( ib. v. 16.)
And if the sin for which the Sacrifice was to be offered, whether of the
Priests, or of the Peoples, were a sin of ignorance, the blood of it was to be
sprinkled seven times before the Lord, Levit. 4.6, 17. Even whatsoever it was,
Ox, Lamb, or Goat, that was to be sacrificed, so was his blood to be disposed
of, Levit. 17.

. 10. If then the application of that which typified the blood of Christ,
(whether it were water or blood) before the shedding of it, was conveniently
made (and who dares question the convenience of it, since it was by God's
appointing to be made?) by sprinkling, how can then the application of water in
baptism by sprinkling (whereby the washing of our Souls from sins, and the
cleansing of our Consciences from defilements by the blood of Christ (that
blood of sprinkling) now that it is shed, is represented and signified) be any
other but a most agreeable action, and the party to whom it is so applied be
most truly said to be baptized? And the remonstrating of this is the discharge
of the Second part of my undertaking.

. 11. The Third, whereto I shall now advance, is the showing of the
agreeableness of baptizing by other ways than a total immersion, with the
Practice of the Church.

CHAP. X. Other ways of baptizing besides that of a total immersion used in the
Church, in all, or most Ages and Places of it.
. 1. LET no Man think here that I intend to demonstrate sprinkling, or any
other way of baptizing, less than a total immersion, to have been either the
only, or the most general way of administering that Sacrament. I am too well
assured, by a multitude of evidences, of the contrary thereunto to undertake
that. But this is that which I design to evince, that how general soever the
way of baptizing by a total dipping may by some be imagined to be (and perhaps
that may in the issue appear not to have been so general, as it is by them
imagined) yet it was not the only way, but a baptism by aspersion, affusion,
tinging or wetting with water, or however by a partial mersation, has been
practiced in the Church from the Primitive to the present times: whereof I
shall give either real demonstrations, or probable arguments, in all, or most
of the Ages

. 2. For the first Age, to begin with that, there were few, except the Apostles
and Evangelists, that writ any thing: and of what they wrote little is left;
and of that little, nothing, that I know of, concerns the question in hand. The
Reason may well be conceived to have been, because it then was no question; and
the rather because we find the Practice, we contend for, in being, in after
Ages; which is a fair inducement to believe it to have been derived from thence
to them, unless it could be certainly told when, where, and by whom, it was
afterward first introduced into the Church. Our Intelligence then must be
fetched (for this Age) all from the Holy Scriptures. And there also things do
not appear with so bright a light, as to force a conviction upon a prejudiced
or prepossessed understanding: but after all that can be said, contrary minded
persons, if of stubborn temper, may think themselves to have sufficient matter,
whereon to ground a contradiction. What probabilities then, (and I will not
pretend to more than a probability) of such a practice in the Apostles Age, as
I have either conceived of my self, or received from others, I will here fairly
communicate, and then leave the Reader to make his judgment upon the matter;
Quod universa tenet Ecclesia, nec Conciliis institutum, sed semper retentum
est, non nisi Authoritate Apostolica traditum rectissime creditur. D Aug. de
Bapt. contr. Donat. l. 4. c. 24.
only desiring him in the mean time to have an eye on St. Augustin's judgment
touching such immemorial usages, as the Catholic Church holds, and ever has
held, and have not come into use by the institution of any Council, that they
are rightly believed to have been delivered down to it by no less than an
Authority Apostolical.

. 3. And I begin with the Baptism of those first Converts that the Apostles
did, after the sealing of their Commission by the descent of the Spirit upon
them, admit into the Church by that Ceremony. Upon the day of Pentecost St.
Peter preached to a great, but confused multitude. By his Sermon thousands were
converted; and of those Converts, whatever were afterward, no fewer, as is
conceived, than three thousand were the same day baptized. The question here is
in what way they were baptized; whether by immersion, or by aspersion. And the
improbabilities of the former have made learned persons to conceive it was by
the latter. It is not likely (says Zanchie) that they were baptized any other
way than by sprinkling. Confirmatur exemplo Petri in Actis, cap. 2. qui statim
post concionem legitur baptizasse 3000. Baptizati (inquit Lucas, nempe per
Petrum, ut Interpretes exponunt) fucrunt. Non videtur autem very simile fuisse
alia ratione baptizatos, quam aspersione aquae. Hier. Zanch. de cultu dei
externo, l. 1. col. 494. Et verisimile est quod non per modum immersionis, sed
aspersionis baptizaverit Apostolus Petrus, ad cujus praedicationem legitur una
die quinque millia, and alia die tria milliae conversos ad fidem baptizasse.
Lynwood. l. 3. de Bapt Quod in constitut. ad verb. immersio.
And it is very like, says Lynwood, that the Apostle S. Peter baptized, not by
way of immersion, but of aspersion, who at one Sermon converted three, and at
another five thousand Souls; for the baptizing of all whom, and by way of
immersion, I suppose he thought him insufficient, as he might well do. The bare
but pronouncing of the form of words, which the Learned generally judge were
prescribed by our Savior to be used in baptizing, so many thousand times over
(unless he used a plural form, of which yet there is no appearance, and the
singular is more applicative, and affecting) had been enough to have tired one
man; much more that, and the action of putting so many persons all wholly under
the water.

. 4. But it is not said in the Text, that He alone, or that he at all baptized
them: only that they were baptized. But it is rationally supposable, that as
our Savior had joined the rest of the Apostles in Commission with him, and had
sealed that Commission to them by the descent of the Holy Ghost, as well as to
him; and that as they stood up with him, as vouchers of what he would say, when
he began to preach, so they assisted him in the action, when he began to
Baptize. But still what are eleven or twelve men to the baptizing of three
thousand by way of total immersion? Quum enim plura nonnunquam millia hominum
uno die baptizari necesse habuerint, verisimile non est homines in Evangelii
praedicatione occupatos. tantae rei and tam operosae suppeditare potuisse.
Amyrald. These. Salm. de Bapt. Sect. 20.
How long must every man be in baptizing his two hundred and fifty men? For so
many must every man have to baptize, if the number were equally shared amongst
them; nay more when five thousand were at once converted, and as it is probable,
baptized also, though it be not expressed.

. 5. Yet supposing this not only possible but easy also, especially by the
assistance of other disciples, and particularly the Seventy whom our Savior
had before in his life sent out to preach, and who may, perhaps not improbably,
be conceived to have been with them at this time, and assistant to them in this
action, yet where would they in Jerusalem have a water deep enough, and wide
enough for the performance of such an action? Assuredly on this account, that
they could not there have water for it, does Bonaventure ground his Argument
that they baptized not by dipping, Apostoli baptiza verunt tria. millia hominum
una die, and constat quod non mergendo, quia non haberent aquam: ergo
aspergendo, sed aspergi non potest totus homo. Ergo. Bonaventur. in l. 4. sent.
did. 3. ar. 3. q. 2.
but by sprinkling. And that they could not have it is probable, because we
read of no river that was in Jerusalem, of that depth that men might be totally
immersed in it, whether they stood, or but so much as sat in the water, when
they were baptized. And for the pool of Bethesda, if that may be conceived to
be the place, it is hardly probable (if it were of that deepness) that it was
of that capaciousress to afford room in any reasonable time for the baptizing
of three (much less of five) thousand men. And that it did not afford that
convenience, either upon account of the incapaciousness of it, or of some other
use of it (as to wash the entrails of Beasts offered in Sacrifice, etc.)
rendering it unfit for that people so studious of cleanness (even to a
superstitiousness) to immerse themselves in it, is probable, because when John
baptized, it is said there went out unto him all the land of Judea, and they of
Jerusalem, and were all baptized of him in the river of Jordan (St. Mark 1.5.)
which had been needless had there been convenience for their baptizing at home.
And when it is said that John was baptizing in Aenon, because there was much
water there, ( Joh. 3.23.) it intimates a want of that convenience in other
places of Judea, and particularly in Jerusalem it self, for them of that place
to be baptized in; where doubtless else he would have chosen to have baptized
as most conducing to the purpose he came about, and baptized for, had there
been in it that convenience for it. And if there were not convenience for the
baptizing of such numbers in the City, since we read not of their going out of
the City to be baptized elsewhere, in all probability they were baptized in
such a way, as suited with the circumstance of the place they were in; and then
it must be by aspersion or affusion; since there was not convenience in the
City for their total immersion.

. 6. And yet still supposing the Baptizers never so many, and the waters there
never so plentiful, their baptizing by a total immersion is very improbable.
For it must needs be granted, that it was a tumultuary convention, which the
Apostle preached unto, which suddenly came together, upon the noise of what had
befallen the Apostles, upon the descent of the Holy Ghost upon them. And it
will not, I think, be denied that it was a confused multitude, a mixture of
people of different Sexes, and ages, as well as conditions and countries. Now,
not to note how strange a thing it would look like, to see three thousand
people going all in a throng to a pool, to be all dowsed, and stark naked (as
the manner then was) over head and ears there (and even the women, in their
nakedness, by men, no deaconesses being as yet ordained in the Christian Church
for that purpose) how unimaginable is it, that the modesty of many of the male
Sex, and most, if not all, of the female Sex, should not start back, and
recoile from so undecent and unbecoming an action; an action even for the
heavens to have blushed at, as well as for the earth to be ashamed of. And
still the more unimaginable it will appear, when it is remembered with how great
a respect unto female modesty Baptism (as Maimonides tells us) was among the
Jews administered to the feminine Proselytes; Foeminam foeminae sistunt in
aquis, collo tenus: duoque discipuli sapientum, ab extra stantes, edocent eam
de quibusdam levioribus praceptis legis, quibusdamque gravioribus, dum ca
interea stat in aquis: and tum immergit ea seipsam: atque illi aversa^ facic
excunt, dum ascendit ex aqua. vid. Lightfoot. Hor. Hebr. in Mat. c. 3. v. 6. p.
46, 47.
the woman being set by women in the water up to the neck; and two disciples of
the wise standing at some distance and teaching her, as she stood, some easy,
and some harder precepts of the Law; which done she dipped her self, and they
whilst she came up out of the water, turned their faces another way, and
departed. Men (I say) and Women, and so many of them, and in the midst of a
populous City, and at noonday, going all together into a Pool, and there
dipped stark naked (for none can imagine, that, either they would be dipped all
over in their present wearing apparel, or (if that were allowable, as it was
not usual among the Jews) that they had brought any Garments with them suitable
to the action, on that sudden and unexpected, unforeseen, and unforethought of
occasion) is a thing so far beyond all probability as to be without the bounds
even of all credibility. And especially when it may be considered, that there
was no necessity (the excuse many times of indecent actions) for it: a much
easier, and more decent way of baptizing being to be had, even by immersing
their heads into vessels of water, with much facility, especially by the hands
of so many assistants as were upon the place ready thereunto, brought thither
for that purpose; or else by taking water out thence as we do now out of our
Fonts, and sprinkling them with it, or pouring it upon them: or yet else, if
the action must needs be done at a Pool or River, by dispersing themselves in
several companies: some to that Pool, others to several parts of the Brook
Cedron, or such other places of convenience as the City might afford, and there
either sprinkling or pouring water upon them, or else immersing their heads
into water: which might well enough be done without a necessity of that
immodest way of putting off all their clothes, and appearing stark naked in
mixed company. And now let the unbiassed Reader judge, what probability there
is of their being totally dipped: and how far it is from being improbable, that
they were otherwise baptized.

. 7. I proceed to another instance, viz. the Baptism of St. Paul himself, Act.
9. He had seen a Vision by the way from Jerusalem to Damascus: and that an
astonishing one, such an one as made him fall to the earth, v. 4. such a sight
as made him blind, v. 8. Upon that he was led to the City, and there, whether
in that Consternation, or other Prophetic rapture, or Penitential exercise of
Mortification, he continued three days, and did neither eat nor drink. After
three days comes Ananias sent from God unto him, opens his eyes, declares unto
him the design of God in this dispensation, exhorts him to arise, and be
baptized in order to his further adaptment for the Service whereto God had
designed him. He comports with the Will of God, and arose, and was Baptized.
But how? By a total immersion of him? That is not said. Nor is it in the least
probable. First consider the time of the year when it is supposed to have been
done; on the five and twentieth day of January, the sternest and severest
Season of all that cold Winter quarter. Then consider the weakness of the
Person, a man first so enfeebled by an extraordinary Vision, that he was not
able to go or stand, but fell to the earth, and was fain to be led by others:
and then continuing after it three whole days together without eating or
drinking. Thirdly, consider that his baptizing was in the time of his weakness,
and before he had received any meat to get strength. v. 18, 19. And now after
all this, let the impartial Reader judge, what probability there is in it, or
rather how utterly improbable it is, that under those circumstances he was
baptized by a total immersion; and how much more probable it is, that water was
brought to him that was not able to go to it; and he more gently aspersed with
it, that was too weak to endure the severity of a total immersion into it; or
yet that, if there were any dipping in the case, it was but his head, or
perhaps no more than his face, that was dipped: and how far after Ages are from
being to blame in consulting the healths and lives of their weak Infants at
their baptizing, by only aspersing or affusing water on them, when they see in
the Word of God such great probabilities of this dear chosen Vessel's being so
baptized.

. 8. There is a Third instance looking this way in Act. 10. I cannot pretend to
a certainty from thence, more than from any other place; only (methinks) there
is something of probability of a baptism by aspersion in it, and no certainty
of a total immersion, more than can be drawn from the bare signification of the
word (...), which we have long since shown to have no such cogency in it that
way, as necessarily to infer a total immersion of the party to whom it is
applied, wherever it is used. St. Peter being sent for by Cornelius to
Caesaria, and being authorized by a Vision to go to him upon his sending,
immediately after he was come, preached the Gospel to him, and his company.
Whilst he was preaching, the Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the Word.
( v. 44.) St. Peter seeing them thus baptized beforehand with the Spirit,
concluded it but fitting that they, though Gentiles, should be also baptized
with water, (v. 47.) and thereupon commanded them to be baptized in the Name of
the Lord. ( v. 48.) And though their baptizing be not expressed, yet it is but
rational to conceive they were baptized. By the last words in the Chapter,
which express their desiring of him then to tarry certain days, it seems as if
they had not gone out of his presence, but had continued with him all the time
of their baptizing, which was performed betwixt his commanding them to be
baptized, and their desiring him to tarry. Then they went not out of the House;
then the inconveniences of a total immersion incline to believe the baptizing
was by a way of less inconveniency: especially when the Apostle's manner of
expression, when he argues from their inward baptism to their right unto an
outward baptizing, is considered. ( v. 47.) Can any man forbid water, that
these should not be baptized, who have received the Holy Ghost as well as we?
He does not say, can any Man forbid them (we may suppose) going abroad to the
water to be baptized therein? but, can any Man forbid water (we may suppose) to
be brought hither, that they may be baptized therewith? As if he had said, The
Holy Ghost having in this place already begun, and done his part of baptism in
falling upon them, it is but convenient that in the same place we should do our
part, and baptize them with water also; that so they may not go away with a
half baptism, but have their baptism completed. Therefore let even some water
be brought hither, and let them be sealed with the outward affusions of that
upon their bodies, who are already sealed with the inward effusions of the
Spirit upon their Souls. I cannot, I say, pretend hence invincibly to prove
they were not dipped: but how probable it is they were only sprinkled, I leave
to the consideration, and resolution of the calm and unprejudicated Reader.

. 9. There is a Fourth instance, (in Act. 16.) wherein is no less, if not a
greater probability of a baptism by aspersion, than in this. At Philippi St.
Paul and Silas being apprehended and beaten, are thrust into the inner Prison,
and have their Feet made fast in the Stocks. At Midnight there is an
Earthquake, the Prison doors are opened, and the Prisoners bands loosed. The
Jailer seeing what was done, is affrighted; asks Paul and Silas, what he should
do to be saved? They preach the word of the Lord to him, and to all that were
in his House. By their preaching he and his (all that were capable of
understanding and believing) are converted. Upon his conversion he becomes as
kind to them, as before he had been cruel. And remembering the severity of the
stripes he gave them, he applies water for the washing away of the blood he
drew from them. And at the same time is baptized both he himself, and all his.
Baptized? Yes: that he was. But how! By dipping? or sprinkling? or other
application of water, less than a total immersion? The Text says it not: it
speaks nothing more than that he was baptized. We are wholly left then to
conjecture. What should incline us to think of a total immersion here? There is
no mention of their going from the Prison to any River or Pool to dip them
there. Nor is there, though Grotius conjecture it, any mention of any Pool,
that was within the precincts of the Prison, wherein they might be dipped. Nor
was there any need of it: less water than a Pool would serve to wash their
stripes; and another kind of washing, than that of dipping was more proper for
that purpose. One would think a gentle bathing, and wiping off the blood, with
a soft cloth, or a tender hand, the most proper action in that case. Let us but
consult what we our selves would do in the like concern, and our reason will do
us right in it. No probability then of his going to dip them, but only of his
calling for water to wash them. And then as little probability of their
carrying him, and all his Family too, any whither else, in a strange place, and
at mid night too, to dip them. Item multi (sc. baptizati) in domibus privatis,
Act. 16. and 18. 1 Cor. 1.16. ubi ingressus ejusmodi in aquas vix esse potuit.
Walaeus Synops. Theolog. Furior. Disp. 44. These. 19. p. 606.
All that can be imagined fairly, and without a violent detortion in this case
is but this; that finding him to be a believer, the Apostles took the
opportunity of his bringing water for the washing of their bodies, to make use
of that water for the washing of his Soul, cleansing him from the stains of his
sins, as he had cleansed them from the maculations of their stripes, by as
gently bathing him from the one, as he had bathed them from the other. And now
let the unbiassed, and unpassionate Reader coolly judge, in whether Opinion is
the greater probability, that, which is for his total immersion, or that, which
is for some milder way of baptization; there being pleadable, as on the one
side no necessity; so on the other great convenience.

. 10. There is yet one instance more that may be insisted on, which, were it
clear beyond exception, would be of mighty concernment in the case, even so far
as to have the casting voice in the debate. But it is liable to exception: and
therefore I shall only propose it as disputable, and leave the Reader, after
all, to make what estimate he pleases of it, according to those degrees of
probability, or improbability, that shall appear to him to be in it, yet not
altogether without hope, but that, when what is said, for, and against it,
shall be dispassionately considered, it may, to modest and sober inquirers,
prove convincing and satisfactory. It is the Example of our Savior: whose
baptism to have been, according to the manifold usual representations of it in
picture, Exuitur vestimentis rex gloriae, splendour luminis, and figura
substantiae dei. Joannis manibus attrectatur caro illa desumpta de virgin,
candidiorique derivata materia nudatur in flumine felicis baptistae manibus
infundenda. Descendunt angeli, and coelorum agmina tota reverentia currunt ad
creatorem. Baptizantem and baptizatum numina dominantia circumcingunt. Infundit
aquam capiti creatoris creatura nobilior, and dei verticem mortalis dextra
contrectat and contingit. Dr Bernard. Sermon. de S. Jo. Baptista. Tom. 2. Col.
400. K. L. M.
by an infusion of water upon him, and particularly on his head, and that by
the right hand of the Baptist, St. Bernard is most express and positive in.
Infundit aquam capiti creatoris creatura, says he, That very Noble Creature
(meaning John the Baptist) pours water on the head of his Creator; and the
right hand of a Man, handles and touches the Head of a God. A clear and full
instance, if it hold good.

. 11. But there are mighty exceptions against it. Cum primum coepit adolescere,
tinctus est a Johanne propheta in Jordane flumine. Lactant. Instit. l. 4. c. 19.
First Lactantius speaking of the Baptism of Christ, says of him, Tinctus est,
that to some may seem to signify, as if he were dipped of John the Prophet in
the River of Jordan. Then St. Ambrose speaking of it, says, in aquis se
mersit; that seems to speak a dipping of himself in the waters. Again St.
Hierom says, caput extulit de fluento, he put up his head from out of the
flood; Ex quo enim ille in aquis se mersit, ex eo omnium credentium peccata
delevit. D. Ambr. Sermon. 22. Tom. 3. p. 247. Ipse Dominus nost^r Jesus Christus
statim ut caput extulit de fluento, spiritum sanctum accepit. H. Hieron.
Dialog. Orthodox. adver. Luciserian.
that seems to import that he was, head and ears, all over immersed into it.
Nay lastly, as St. Mark says expressly, (...), that is, (as the Interlineary
Version renders it) baptizatus est a Johanne in Jordanem, he was baptized of
John into Jordan. (Mark 1.9.) So St. Matthew says as expressly, that Jesus,
when he was baptized, went up out of the water. ( Matthew. 3.16.) Now whether one
St. Bernard's single, and bare authority, will bear up, and be able to carry it
against all these prejudices, is more than I dare he confident of.

. 12. However, mighty as these prejudices are, (so mighty as to have carried
the assent of several along with them) they will in the sequel appear to be in
a great measure removable: Dum corporis humilitate dominus undas Jordanis
subiit, divinitatis suae potentia coeli nobis januas pandit. Bed. in Luc.
Evang. c. 3. fol. 68. col. 3. The learned Cajetan upon the place ( Matthew. 3.5.)
says, Christ ascended out of the water; therefore Christ was baptized by John,
not by sprinkling, or by pouring water upon him; but by immersion, that is by
dipping or plunging in the water. So is he quoted by Mr. H. Danvers Treat. of
Bapt. part. 2. c. 4. p. 196. Edit. 2. His own words are, Baptizatus autem Jesus
confestim ascendit de aqua. Non ergo per aspersionem, aut desuper effusionem,
sed per immersionem, seu submissionem corporis baptizatus est Jesus a Johanne.
Where per submissionem corporis he may mean, not what Mr. Danvers seems to
understand, a plunging in the Water, but a bowing of his body downward, and
that may be, only to have his head dipped into the water.
whether wholly or no, will be left to the Reader's judgment. And that St.
Bernard, a Person of so great Learning and Piety as he is famed for, who wrote
after all these, and may in reason be supposed to have read and considered all
these, did notwithstanding believe, and deliver his judgment otherwise, gives
reason to conceive, that he had in his mind some reason, that did with him
counterballance all these, and that he knew how to give a satisfactory answer
unto all these. And to every one of them indeed something may be said, perhaps
sufficient to render them no objections at all.

. 13. And first for Lactantius. He, as well as St. Augustine learnt from
Tertullian to use tinguo or tingo for baptizo. Baptizabat enim quia ipse
mundabat, non baptizabat, quia non ipse tingebat. D. Aug. Tract. 15. in Evang.
Joh. Tom. 9. Col. 132. B.
And so tinctus est in him signifies no more than baptizatus est, he was
baptized. But that infers not necessarily that he was dipped. Nay tingo, from
whence comes tinctus, is used to denote a way of haptizing different from that
of dipping See Dr. Whitaker Praelect. de Sacram. Bapt. p. 216.
. And as I shall afterward produce Tertullians authority for aspersion, so I
shall show, in its proper time, that Lactantius himself, in that very place,
did not mean what he said, of dipping, but of sprinkling.

. 14. Then for St. Ambrose, his expression is but in aquis se mersit, that is,
he dipped himself in the waters, not in aquas se mersit, he dipped himself into
the waters. A great deal of difference betwixt in and into. The first would
import that being in the waters he dipped himself, which might be said, though
he dipped but part of himself in them. The second would import his dipping of
himself into the waters, which would lie fairliest to be understood of a total
immersion. But se himself, seems to import his whole self, whether he dipped
himself into, or but in the water. It does but seem so: it does not necessarily
so import. Nothing is more ordinary than such Synecdochical expressions,
wherein the whole is put for but a part. Who, that had casually slipped with but
one leg or foot, into a water, would not presently say, he had wet himself? who
would understand Aspersit me labe, he aspersed me with a spot, otherwise than
by aspersit mihi labem, he aspersed or sprinkled a blot or spot on me? who
would think the labes, spot or blot, so great as to co-extend to the whole
person, to spot or blot him all over? Who understands our Savior's saying to
St. Peter (Joh. 13.8.) (...), If I wash thee not, to intend any thing more,
than, if I wash not thy feet? We have shown before how the expression
concerning our Savior's not washing himself before meat, was (...), that he
was not dipped, literally he, as here, whereas the meaning was, his hands, the
manner of the Jews being not wholly to dip themselves, but their hands, (nor
always that neither, but sometimes) before they did eat. So here se mersit in
St. Ambrose, is not all himself, but some of himself, and particularly his
head, the dipping of the head being a (if not the) manner of baptizing in St.
Ambroses time, as we shall after show from St. Hierom and St. Augustine,
contemporaries with St. Ambrose, and therefore in his time. Nay, who can tell
whether that expression intend any more, than his going into the water, which
he could not do without dipping himself into it, unto John to be baptized of
him? Not to add what yet wholly overthrows this testimony of St. Ambrose, and
makes null all that can be pleaded from it more than what I last mentioned,
that the speech it self, if referring unto Christ's baptism, is not true: for it
makes our Savior to be his own baptizer, which is directly contrary to the
Text, which says not that he baptized himself, but, that he was baptized of
John: unless any will allow of Rebaptization, and say that our Savior was
twice baptized, once by St. John, because the Scripture says so, and another
time by himself, because it is so said by St. Ambrose; but that (Rebaptization)
I think in these days goes down with no party, whether Paedo-, or
Anti-Paedobaptists: though it is thought that the baptizing of those, who were
by John Baptist baptized in Jordan, was so performed: See Lightfoot, Horae
Hebraicae on Matthew.
that being a way of baptizing in use among the Jews.

. 15. And by this which has been said concerning St. Ambrose, an Answer is
already given to what is objected from St. Hierome. For caput extulit de
fluento, he put, or lift up his head out of, or from under the water, can
signify only, that his head, and not that his whole body was under water:
without better proof of it than so: No more than that of the Poets, Haec sancte
ut poscas, Pers. Sat. 2. v. 15, 16.
Tiberino in gurgite mergis Mane caput bis terque -- proves that the person he
speaks to, dipped his whole body two or three times in the river, because he
did so with his head: unless it were impossible for a man to dip his head,
without dipping his whole body too: which I think none will say.

. 16. But what shall we say to St. Mark? That, I confess, looks like somewhat
to the purpose, yet will be capable of receiving an Answer, whether
satisfactory enough, I dare not undertake. But, such as it is, an Answer I have
to return, furnished therewith from Beza, a man whose skill in Critical
learning, I need not publish. And it is this, that (...) here is put for (...):
which Enallage he had (as he says) before made frequent mention of. And then,
he was baptized of John (...) here, will be no more than, The Syriac, Arabic
and Persic Version render it so too: the Aethiopic, in fitivio Jordanis, in the
river of Jordan.
(...) (ver. 9.) in Jordan, as our Translation, as well as Tindals renders it,
agreeably to the rendering both of Beza, and the Vulg. Latin. And that will not
necessarily infer a total immersion. For a Man might be baptized in Jordan, who
was not wholly dipped into Jordan. Unless the mere force of (...) will infer
it; the contrary whereto has been, I hope, sufficiently made out.

. 17. Now toward the making good of the Enallage here of (...) for (...), I
shall note first, that this Preposition (...) is never, that I find, in all the
New Testament, besides this place, used after (...), or any derivative from it,
before a word signifying any River, Pool, Fountain, or Water whatsoever, so
that it is in this sense but an (...), a word used but once.

. 18. Next I shall note, that it is very frequently after (...) set before
other words, where it is incapable of having any such signification, as must
necessarily infer an immersion into that thing which it is set before. Hence we
read, Matthew. 28.19. (...), etc. baptizing them in the Name of the Father, etc.
So Act. 19.5. (...), they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. So 1
Cor. 13. (...); were ye baptized in the Name of Paul? and ( ver. 15.) lest any
one should say, (...), that I had baptized in my own name. Again we read of
being baptized, (...), into Christ, Romans 6.3. and Gal. 3.27. But surely that
signifies not being immersed or dipped into Christ; no more than by (...), (1
Cor. 10.2.) is signified the Israelites being dipped into Moses; or by (...), (
Romans 6.3.) is signified our being literally immersed or dipped into the death
of Christ; or by (...) (1 Cor. 12.13.) is signified our being literally dipped
into one body. And when ( Act. 19.3.) the question is asked, (...), unto (so we
read it even there, not into) what, were ye baptized? the answer is, not,
(...), into water, nor (...), into Jordan, but (...), unto (again, not into)
John's baptism. But John's baptism was not water, but a baptism or washing with
Water unto Repentance: whence it is called (...), the baptism of repentance,
Act. 13.24. (and elsewhere.) And there (in ver. 5.) St. Paul said, John verily
(...), baptized with the baptism of repentance. So then, no more appearance of
(...) in conjunction with (...), where any proper immersion or dipping is
signified.

. 19. Let us now see how the case stands with (...). Now that we meet with
frequently joined to (...), and yet never signifying an immersion or dipping
into that (be it what it will be, Water, River, or Sea) that follows it: but
signifying either (1.) the Place in which the Baptism was performed: as (...)
(Matthew. 3.6.) in Jordan; (...), ( Mark 1.5.) in the River [of] Jordan; (...),
(1 Cor. 10.2.) in the Sea: or else (2) the Instrumental Matter wherewith it was
performed: as when John said, ( Matthew. 3.11.) I indeed baptize you (...) with
water; as also Mark 1.8. Luke 3.16. Joh. 1.26. So when he said, ( Joh. 1.31.) I
am come baptizing (...) with water; and again, ver. 33. he that sent me to
baptize (...) with water. And to show that (...) here signifies water to be the
Instrument of Baptism, we have (...) the Dative case (the case of the
Instrument) set without (...) in several places: and particularly, ( Act. 1.5.)
where says our Savior to his Apostles, John truly (...) baptized with water.
And again ( Act. 11.16.) where this saying of our Savior is remembered, and
commemorated by St. Peter, saying, Then remembered I the word of the Lord, how
that he said, John indeed, (...), baptized with water. By which it is plain,
that the meaning of John's baptizing, (...), is the same, and no more than, his
baptizing (...) (barely, and without (...)) with water, and with that as the
instrument wherewith he performed his action of baptizing; or, more agreeable
to the use of speaking, as the matter wherewith he baptized.

. 20. Shall I add to all this, that (...) is used, and still with (...), before
such things as there can be no immersion or dipping into, or was none intended
in the places where it is used? Such is (1.) the Holy Ghost: as ( Matt. 3.11.)
He shall baptize you (...) with the Holy Ghost. So Mark 1.8. So Luke 3.16.
Again Joh. 1.33. the same is he which baptizeth (...) with the Holy Ghost. So
Acts 1.5. Ye shall be baptized (...), with the Holy Ghost; and again, Act.
11.16. Ye shall be baptized, (...), with the Holy Ghost. Sure none will be so
absurd, as to talk or think of immersing or dipping men into the Holy Ghost; or
to think any other, but that as water is the outward and visible instrument of
Baptism, so the Holy Ghost was the inward, and Spiritual instrument wherewith
the parties concerned in these Scriptures were to be baptized. And such (2.) is
Fire: as ( Matthew. 3.11.) where baptizing (...) with Fire, is joined with
baptizing with the Holy Ghost. So Luke 3.16. Now no man sure ever thought that
by a baptizing with Fire was meant an immersion or dipping into fire. And if
(...) were not intended to be understood, as it is not expressed, with (...),
then the form of Speech clearly points it out to be considered under some
notion of Instrumentality in the business of that Baptizing; and even
determines the former member (...) to be understood so too.

. 21. So then, no proper immersion or dipping pointed at by (...), wherever it
is set in conjunction with (...) throughout the whole New Testament. Now
whether all the so many other Texts, wherein is no immersion, must, without any
necessity enforcing thereunto, be interpreted by that only one, where there but
seems one to be; or whether that (that only one) ought not to have an Enallage
allowed in it, and be interpreted with conformity to all the rest, let the
impartial Reader judge. Only to observe, that in the fifth verse going before
there is (...), they were baptized in Jordan, were enough, and so has been
thought, to persuade, that (...), in the ninth verse were to be, as it is in
our English Translation, interpreted so too. And so St. Bernards opinion of our
Savior's being baptized, not by immersion of him into the water, but by an
affusion of water upon him, may, for ought I see to the contrary, stand good
still. And then we neither need, nor can have any better instance of, or
argument for baptismal affusion, or aspersion, than that.

. 22. Nor will what is observed from ( Matthew. 3.16.) where mention is made of
Christ's coming up out of the water, prove against St. Bernard, that Christ was
baptized by immersion. For (1.) the true reading of that place is (according to
the Original (...)) he ascended, or went up, not out of, but away from the
water. And so might he do, that never was in it, but only had been by it. And
(2.) the learned Cajetans collection from the place, (which I see quoted from
him) that, H. D. p. 196. Ed. 2.
because it is said, Christ ascended out of the water, therefore Christ was
baptized by John, not by sprinkling or pouring water upon him, but by dipping
or plunging him in the water, is weak, and proves nothing; unless no man could
be said to ascend out of the water, who had not first been totally immersed,
that is dipped, or plunged wholly into it; which is contrary to reason, sense,
and experience.

. 23. Nor is St. Bernard the only person among the Ancients, that was of this
opinion: but we have intimation of several others, and many hundreds of years
before him, that had the same thought: as will be seen in the sequel of this
discourse.

. 24. And there may be some reason assigned, why our Savior should will to be
baptized, not according to the then, or formerly, usual way of dipping, but
according to the way now most in use by sprinkling; even by his example to show
a no necessity of persisting in that former way of more severity, and less
decency, and to set the Christian Church at liberty from that part of the Yoke
of Jewish bondage, and especially in those places and countries, where that
Jewish Ceremony might prove to be, either prejudicial to the health of the
Weaker, or scandalous to the minds of the more Modest Converts, and either way
a Yoke of Bondage.

. 25. Nor can I see any reason, why he that departed from the then present way
of baptizing, in one circumstance, may not as well be thought, and especially
on so weighty consideration, to do it in another. The way then was for the
Proselytes to be the dippers or baptizers Omnis baptizatus necesse habuit, ut
totum corpus suum intingeret, jam nudatum, mersione una -- Maim. in Mikvaoth,
cap. 1. and 4. -- Et tum immergit ea scipsum. Id. ib.
of themselves, if Maimonides give a true account of the Tradition in that
case. But Christ did not baptize himself. But, to setle a distinction betwixt
the baptizer, and the baptized, as well then by his example, as he afterward
did by his word, he was baptized of John, per manum Johannis, by the hand of
John, if the Persic Version of Mark 1.9. mistake not: as I know no reason to
think it does. No more improbability then of his being baptized differently
from others, in respect of Manner, than of Agent. And so St. Bernards Conceit
has two legs, the Opinion of Former Writers, and Reason for that Opinion,
besides his own Authority, to stand upon.

. 26. But it is time I should proceed to the next Century. Now that, like the
first, was an Age scant of Writers: and of what was written, little concerned,
or is left remaining, that did concern Baptism. And therefore here again our
intelligence must be expected to be no other but dark, and scanty: And yet such
glimmerings at least of light are left us, as will enable us to discern some
footsteps of this practice even in it. And even, if it said not the least thing
for us, whilst it says nothing at all against us, which yet has its mouth
wide open against other errors then broached, or disseminated in the Church,
its silence is to be interpreted as a consenting to us. And the same will be as
rationally to be said for any following, as for this former Age, wherein
through want of Writers on this subject our intelligence shall either wholly
fail us, or prove penurious and scanty to us.

. 27. Justin Martyr flourished in this Age (about An. Chr. 150.) By what the
Centuriators say from this Author, Magdeb. Cent. 2. col. 110. l. 48.
one would think he had been an asserter of total dipping, saying, as they
report from him, atque ita hoc lavacro mersati lustrantur, i. e. and so being
dipped in this laver they are cleansed. But I suppose those Authors rather
consulted some Translation, than the Original, or else mistook in their own
Translating. For in all that whole passage, as it was penned by the Author,
there is not one word, that signifies immersion, mersasation, or any thing of
like import: unless (...), or some derivative from it, as (...), signify any
such thing, as they do not; for there is no other word there so much as looking
that way. Rather there is something that favors Rantization, or Sprinkling.
For having first spoken of that baptismal washing (I say washing not dipping)
whereby men are regenerated in Baptism: and having alleged as grounds for that
practice, first our Saviors saying, except ye be born again, ye cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God; and then that saying of the Prophet Isaiah, wash ye,
make ye clean, etc. he proceeds to declare, that the Demons (...) having heard
of this (as it is by him interpreted) baptismal washing preached by the
Prophet, in imitation thereof introduced the fashion of Rantization or
Sprinkling to be used by their Worshippers, (...) Just. Martyr. Apol. 2.

Et est notandum, quod pagani sive gentiles circae fontes templa sua facere
solebant, aut saltem ibi semper aquam habebant, per cujus aspersionem
purificari credebant: and inde delubra vocabantur quasi purificantia: and ita
quodammodo figuraliter ad baptismum tendebant. Guil. Durant. Rational. Divin.
Officior. l. 6. fol. 147. col. 1.


when they approached to their Temples, and addressed their Prayers, and
offered their Sacrifices unto them. Which is an intimation of an use of
Rantization in Baptism, or at least of a fitness of that usage in baptizing:
and that that Author did not think otherwise than well of it; whilst he does
not discover and declare any erroneousness in that Heathen practice as
differing from, and so wronging, by misrepresentation, what was in use among
the Christians: but rather pleads the innocence of it, whilst he shows to the
Heathen Emperors, that practice of the Christians to be but such, as the very
Gods themselves whom they did Worship, did in some respect and measure approve
of, and conform unto; and had taken up from the same Prophetic promulgation,
whereon the Christians had founded, or at least whereby they confirmed their
baptismal purgation: and therefore such as they ought not to be offended at. In
short the Rantization of the Heathens founded on that Prophecy, that was
applied to baptism by the Christians, is some though but an obscure intimation
of such a practice used by them in their baptismal introductions of Members
into their Church. Quomodo autem populi veteris, sic and Christiani sacros
ritus aemulatus est hostis ille humani generis. Tert. praescript. c. 40. [Ipsas
res de quibus Sacramenta Christi administrantur aemulantes affectavit exprimere
in negotiis Idololatriae] At quasnam illas? ea nimirum quae in Baptismo
Christiano and in sacra coena adhibentur elementa. [Tingit enim inquit, and
ipse quosdam, utique credentes and fideles suos: celebrat and panis
oblationem.]. Gataker, Adversar. cap. 42. p. 418. See above chapter 8. S. 4. marg.
And for the Demons imitation of the Christians in their Baptism, Tertullian
is by Mr. Gataker produced as a further witness: as more, no doubt, might be,
if there were need for it.

. 28. Magdeb. cent. 2. c. 6. col. 109, 110. Niceph. Eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 37.

Whitgift Answ. to T.C. Tract. 9. p. 519.


But a clearer intimation we have of it in a story related to us by the
Centuriators of Magdeburg from Nicephorus Callistus, in whom it is; and which
is also referred to by Archbishop Whitgift in his Answer to T. C. The Story is
this; that in the time of Marc. Aurel. Antoninus (who began his reign An. Chr.
161.) a certain Jew traveling together with some Christians was Converted, and
falling very sick, desired Baptism: but that they, having neither Priest to do
it, nor Water to do it withal, at first refused him: yet afterward, overcome
by his urgent importunities, yielded, as far as they could, to his request, and
sprinkling sand instead of water three times upon him, they baptized him in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: Whereupon the man
recovered. Now if sprinkling of water in Baptism, at least in some cases, had
not been an use, and that a known one, at that time, how should it have come
into their heads to have used any such action? As in the form of words it is
certain they kept close to the Ecclesiastic usage, so it is not to be doubted,
but they did so in the manner of acting. And when report was made of what was
done to the Bishop of Alexandria, or more probably of Corinth, and his opinion
asked in the case, he after consultation had with the Church about it,
thereunto answered, that the man was baptized, si modo aqua denuo perfunderetur
(as they say) were he but sprinkled again with water, or had he but water
poured on him again. Where it is plain, nothing was disapproved of in that
action, or declared insufficient, not the Baptizer, not the form of Words, not
the manner of application by sprinkling, but only the want of that Element
which was proper for Baptism: which if used, though in the same way of
application to him, that the Sand had been, the Baptism was pronounced to be
sufficient. Than which what proof can be desired more clear or more full? A
like Story to this, if not the very same with this, Johannes Moscus, who lived
about the year 600 relates to have happened in his time, as Vossius says de
Baptismo, page 348.

. 29. We have yet in this Age another intimation of this usage in Tertullian,
who flourished in the latter end of this Century, and in the beginning of the
Century following. His words are, Quis enim tibi tam infidae poenitentiae viro
asperginem unam cujuslibet aquae commodabit? Tertull. l. de Poenit. c. 6.
Who will pleasure you, who are a Man, to whose penitence so little trust is to
be given, with one sprinkling of any water? Now that the speech has reference
unto baptism, the words immediately foregoing do sufficiently intimate. For,
says he, I do not deny the Divine benefit, that is, Neque enim renuo divinum
beneficium, i. e. abolitionem delictorum inituris aquam omnimodo salvum esse.
Tertull. ib.
the abolition of sins, to be every way safe [that is secure] to those that
shall go into the water, that is, be baptized. Now such an allusion unto
baptismal sprinkling would not have been made by Tertullian, a Man so
accurately skilful in all the rites of the Church, had it not been a rite, and
that a known one too, of the then present Church, to baptize, if not always, or
ordinarily, yet in some cases, by sprinkling. An evidence this of such
importance, at least as to me it seems, as were sufficient to over-sway with,
and carry away the assent of any modest Inquirer: as assuredly it did his, in
whose favors to their cause the Anabaptists do so much glory, I mean B.
Tailor. Whence that acknowledgment which he makes hereof, in his Cases of
Consc. ( l. 3. chapter 4. Rul. 15. S. 13. n. 9. page 644.) the very place where his
greatest liberalities on them, as to this matter, are bestowed. And of this
sprinkling, besides what is implied in the former testimonies, there was some
little use in the Primitive Church. Quis enim tam infidae poenitentiae viro
asperginem unam cujuslibet aquae commodabit? De Poenit. c. 6.
says Tertullian, speaking to an impenitent Person: Who will afford thee so
much as one sprinkling of water? (meaning) for his baptism. So he.

. 30. But because there may be others, not of altogether so sanguine a belief
as I am in these concerns, who yet are waxie enough to take other more sinister
impressions, I will prosecute my Inquest into Ages of the Church more remote
than this, and farther distant from the first: as hoping that, if we shall find
this to have been an use, not only begun in the first, but continued in the
following Ages of the Church, and, if in any Age, or Ages of it, it seem
interrupted, for want of a full intelligence of what was done in those Ages,
yet again revived, and still continued on in the following, it will neither be
refused as novel, nor rejected as antiquated, but revived as Catholic, so far
at least as to be thought lawful, yea and fitting too to be used on just
occasion for it.

. 31. If we go on then to the Third Century, See Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 6. c.
5.
early in that (about the Year of Christ, CCXX.) we find Potamiaena a Noble
Virgin of Alexandria, and a Disciple to Origin, Martyred. Basilides a Soldier
led her to Execution. But not long after, himself (whether wrought upon by her
communication in the way to, or by her courage and constancy at, her Execution,
or by appearing to him afterward in a Vision, I know not) becomes a Convert,
and professes himself a Christian: and upon his avowed profession of it is cast
into Prison. There he is visited by the Brethren, that is the Christians, and
having satisfied them touching his conversion, by them received the Seal of the
Lord, that is, was baptized, and the next Day suffered Martyrdom by beheading.
Taking it for granted, that by receiving the Seal of the Lord, is meant being
baptized, as not only Dr. Hanmer in his English Marginal Notes on Eusebius
glosses it, but the Centuriators of Magdeburg report it, and that most
agreeably to the Primitive Idiom, calling baptism (...), Greg. Nazianz. Orat.
4. p. 638, 639.
a Seal, I shall refer it unto the indifferent Reader to consider and
determine, all circumstances of the Place, Persons, and occasion duly weighed,
with what probability this baptism could be performed by a Total immersion, or
rather how utterly improbable it must be for any such thing to be then done.
And if that could not be, then it must needs be yielded to be done some other
way, that had more of privacy, and less of danger to be discovered in it,
namely by an aspersion or sprinkling of water on him: where not so much the
quantity of water applied, as the application of that water for such purpose as
in that Sacrament is designed, is the thing most principally to be considered.

32. And that the baptizing of this Person thus on this occasion was not one
single swallow, Ita and in Carcere baptizabantur conversi. Magdeb. Cent. 3.
cap. 6. col. 123, and 126.
but that it was an usual thing so to do, we are assured, as far as the
Authority of the Centuriators is able to assure us of it. For they, speaking of
the usages of this Age in Baptism, tell us, not only that even in Prison
Converts were baptized, but that to them at least it seemed receptum a received
thing, that is, received into use as an ordinary practice: and it may be I may
give some further instance of it by and by.

. 33. But if there could be any doubt of this, there can be no doubt of the
baptizing of Novatus, (or Novatianus, for he is called by both names) about An.
Chr. CCL. not by a total immersion, See Eusebius. Eccl Hist. l. 6. c. 43. Surius
Council. Tom. 1. page 222.
nor so much as a partial mersation, but by an affusion, ((...), as the
Historian reports it from Cornelius Bishop of Rome at that time) being
sprinkled, when he was baptized, in the very same bed, whereon he lay
dangerously sick, and like to die. And for a further confirmation hereof, if
need were, it might be alleged, that when Fabian Bishop of Rome (who was
crowned with Martyrdom, An. Chr. CCLIII.) designed to make the same Novatus a
Priest, he was withstood by the Clergy in general, and by many of the Laity,
upon the account of the unlawfulness of making any one a Priest, (...), who had
been sprinkled, that is baptized by sprinkling on his Bed. Which unlawfulness,
if not before, (as it is supposed by Surius to have been) was afterward fixed by
Canon, (...).

Ordinatus est Presbyter ab Episcopo, sed contra Canones, quibus minime
licebat, quenquam in lecto propter morbum baptizatum, sicut huic contigerat, in
clerum assumi. Surius Council. Tom. 1. p. 223.


in the Council of Necocaesaria in the 12th. Canon of that Council, custom
Ecclesiastic in the mean time prevailing as, and having the power of, a Law.
Which notwithstanding, Fabian finding some relaxation allowable by Law, even
toward persons so baptized, upon weighty reasons (such as notable diligence,
and faithfulness in persons fit for the Priesthood, besides scarcity of Men)
prevailed to have him ordained, giving assurance, that he would ordain no more
such. Now this neither would he have done, nor the other have suffered, had not
both he and they judged him sufficiently baptized. And, as I suppose, the
Ordination of such Persons to the Priesthood was not prohibited by the Fathers,
because they thought them not sufficiently baptized, but because they thought
it unfit that ever they should be Priests who deferred so long before they
would declare themselves to be Christians (whatever B. Tailor, or the
Anabaptists from him, Duct. Dubitant. l. 3. c. 4. S. 13. n. 9. H.D. Treat. of
Bapt. part 2. c. 3. page 203. Edit. 2.
suggest to the contrary) so I presume the Clergy and Laity of Rome to have
opposed his ordination in particular, upon other accounts than the nullity and
insufficiency of his baptism: and particularly, among the rest, for his
neglecting, after his recovery, to have the Confirmation of the Bishop,
according to the Custom or Canon of the Church, Niceph. l. 6. c. 3. Et
Cornelius apud Eusebius. l. 6. c. 33. narrat Novatum in morbo in lecto baptizatum.
Et addit; si tamen accepisse dicendus est. Neque enim reliqua consecutus est,
quorum oportet participem fieri secundum Ecclesiae Canonem, neque oblignatus
est ab Episcopo. Chemnit. examp. part. 1. page 84. Polyd. Virg. de Rerum
Invent. l. 5. c. 3. Qui autem sic baptizabantur, non morgebantur, nec
perfundebantur, sed aqua, solum aspergebantur, Magdeb. cent. 3. cap. 6. col.
126.

Vbi and ipse baptizatus prius fuerat, D. Cypr. ad Jubaian.


as Nicephorus shows, and Chemnitius notes, and as Pope Cornelius himself
declares: which Confirmation (instituted, as Polydore Virgil tells us, by Clem.
1.) was so necessary, that no man was supposed a perfect Christian man, if that
Rite and Ceremony were by negligence omitted. Which notwithstanding, Cornelius
sufficiently owns his Baptism, whilst he accuses him for forsaking the Church
of God, wherein he was baptized; and so does St. Cyprian too, whilst he
acknowledges him to have been baptized therein. Nor do I discern any exception
made against the manner of his baptizing, but either against his staying so
long before he was baptized, or against his omitting some Rites, then usual in
the Church, after his baptism. And yet those that were so baptized, the
Centuriators of Magdeb. tell us, were only sprinkled, not dipped, nor dowsed
with water in any great quantity poured upon them.

34. But what stand I so long, and so hard pressing one instance; Hinc erat
quod olim quamplurimi baptismum ad extremum usque vitae terminum differebant,
quo puri ac puti ex hac vita migrarent, atque ita non nisi in articulo mortis
per aspersionem se in lecto baptizari sinebant, quos eam ob causam clinicos
vocabant. Wolfg. Muscul. loc. Com. de Baptismo, p. 741. Qui in lecto
baptizabantur, ab aliquibus (ut auctor est Cyprianus. ep. 76.) non Christiani,
sed Clinici appellabantur. Quae vox etiam apud Hieronymum, ep. 26. ad Eusto
hium, and ep. 30. ad Ocean. accipitur pro aegro qui lecto decumbit, nec inde se
movere potest: a (...) lectus. Vtiturque ea voce eadem significatione Plinius
lib. 15. c. 5. Et Paralyticum, cujus fit mentio, Joh. 5. idem Cyprianus ep. 76.
clinicum vocat, eo quod 38. annos in infirmitate fuisse dicatur, Spondan. Epit.
Baron. an. Chr. 254. p. 269. Et in lecto quidem aegrotantes [baptizabantur]
quod prolixe ostendit, Cyprianus in ep. ad Mag. Magdeb. cent. 3. c. 6. col. 126.

Quaesisti etiam frater charissime, quid mihi de illis videatur qui in
infirmitate and languore gratiam dei consequuntur, an habendi sint legitimi
Christiani, co quod aqua salutari non loti sint sed perfusi. D. ep. 7. l. 4.
Nos quantum concipit mediocritas nostra, existimamus in nullo mutilari and
debilitari posse beneficia divina, nec minus aliquid illic posse contingere,
ubi plena and tota fide and dantis and accipientis accipitur, quod divinis
muneribus hauritur. Id. ib. In Sacramentis salutaribus necessitate cogente, and
deo indulgentiam suam largiente totam credentibus conferunt divina compendia.
Id. ib. Nec quenquam movere debet, quod aspergi vel perfundi videntur agri, cum
gratiam dominicam consequantur, quando Scriptura sancta per Ezekielem Prophetam
loquatur and dicat, Et aspergam super vos aquam mundam, and mund ibimini ab
omnibus immunditiis vestris, etc. Vnde apparet aspersionem quoque aquae instar
lavacri salutaris obtinere. Idcirco quantum concipere and sentire nobis datur,
mea sententia haec est, ut Christianus judicetur legitimus, quisquis fuerit
lege and jure fidei divinam gratiam consecutus, Id. ib. Hoc denique and rebus
ipsis experimur, ut necessitate urgente in aegritudine baptizati and gratiam
consecuti, careant immundo quo antca movebantur, and laudabiles ac probabiles
in Ecclesia vivant, plusque per dies singulos in augmentum coelestis gratiae
per fidei incrementa proficiant, Id ib.


when the baptizing of sick persons in their beds, which must be done by way of
affusion or aspersion, was no rarity in those days? which persons, from their
being baptized (...), in their beds, were called Clinics, as Musculus tells
us briefly, and Spondanus more largely. And for proof thereof the Centuriators
truly refer us to S. Cyprians Epistle to Magnus l. 4. Ep. 7. In which Epistle
he does prolixly show to that Magnus, what was his opinion touching them that
were baptized in their weakness and languishment; and answers that question
proposed by Magnus to him, whether those that were so baptized were to be
accounted lawful Christians, in regard they had not been so baptized as could
properly and strictly be called a lotion, but rather a perfusion, that is, not
being carried to the water, and there washed with it, but having water brought
to them, and in sprinkling: drops poured on them. And to the point he answers,
that he conceives that the divine benefits can in none be maimed and weakened:
that is, as I conceive his meaning to be, there is never the less grace of God
bestowed in baptism for the littleness of the water wherewith one is baptized,
where there is no defect of Faith in the Giver and Receiver. And that in the
wholesome Sacraments, when man's necessity compels him to seek, and God is
pleased to bestow his indulgence, divine compendiums do the whole business for
believers. And that none ought to be troubled at it, because sick persons are
seen to be sprinkled, or to have water shed upon them, when they are baptized,
being they read in several places of Scripture mentions of sprinkling of water
for purifications from uncleanness, even natural as well as legal. Whence he
conceives it apparent, that in Baptism even the sprinkling of water is as good
as other washing with it. And declares, that according to his opinion whosoever
shall in the Church, by the law and right of Faith, have obtained the divine
grace, (that is, be baptized, even though by sprinkling, as by the subject of
this discourse it must necessarily be understood) is to be accounted a lawful
Christian. And in fine appeals to the experience, which was had, how free some
were from that foul spirit, which they were troubled withal before; how
laudably and commendably they lived in the Church; how by the increasing of
their Faith, they every day grew more and more in heavenly grace, who upon
urgent necessity had been Baptized in their sickness. Which so clear and full
an evidence from so eminent a Father, and Martyr as St. Cyprian, and so early
in the Church as he was, should methinks be of mighty weight to satisfy even
the nicest scrupulosity of any sober doubter in the case.

35. In this same Century ( an. Chr. 261. Romanus urceum afferens cum aqua
opportunitatem captavit, quae eum offerret Laurentio, ut baptizaretur, etc.
Act. S. Lauren. p. 588.
) was the Martyrdom of S. Laurence. In the Acts of that Martyr it is related,
how one of the Soldiers called Romanus, bringing with him a Pitcher of water
(and by this instance we are informed how baptisms were privately administered
in times of persecution, Item scribitur in passione beati Laurentii, quod
Romanus attulit urccum cum aqua, and tunc non fuit immersus: patet ergo. So
Bonaventure argues from this instance against a total immersion, l. 4. did. 3.
art. 2. q. 2.

Romanus autem accedens ad Laurentium cum urceolo aquae fecit se baptizari ab
co. Quod cum audisset Decius, de Romano -- cum decollari mandavit. Anthonini
Histor. par. 1. Tit. 7. c. 8. fol. 91. col. 1.

And Surius in the life of S. Laurence tells, that as he was going to his
Martyrdom, one Romanus a Soldier brought to him a Pitcher of water that he
might be baptized of him as he went: which in that case must needs have been
done by pouring water upon him. Fudit aquam super caput ejus -- B. Tailor Duct.
Dubitant. l 3. c. 4. S. 13. n. 9. p. 644.


even to persons in prison, as to Basilides before mentioned) watched an
opportunity to offer it to St. Laurence, that so he might be baptized, and at
length obtained his desire: which (says Bp. Tailor) in that case must needs
have been done by pouring water on him. Had that holy Martyr, who had the
courage to die for the Truth, thought it to be an erroneous practice to baptize
by any other way but that of immersion, and that the baptism administered any
other way, had been a mere nullity in it self, and but a mockery of the
baptized, (nothing more but the throwing of a little water in his face, as some
are pleased in their drollery to call our most Holy Baptism) he would not upon
any terms have consented to it: he could not by any means have been prevailed
upon to do it. His doing it then is at once an instance of the thing, and an
argument of his approbation of it: which yet had not been, had that glorious
Martyr judged that way of baptizing to have been repugnant, either to the
nature of the thing, or to the command of Christ, or yet unto the practice of
the Church.

. 36. Of the same St. Laurence it is also said that, Anthonini Historiae Par.
1. Tit. 7. c. 8. fol. 191. col. 1.
at his entering into Prison, he found there one Lucillus, who had wept himself
blind, to whom he promised sight, on condition of his Faith in Christ; and
that, upon his conversion, being baptized he received his sight. But how can it
possibly come into our minds, that he should there be tolly immersed? No fancy
in its utmost extravagancy can imagine any other, but that water being either
allowed for the Prisoner to drink, or otherwise privately in some small
quantity stolen in, he therewith sprinkled him, or poured it upon him. B. Tailor
Duct. Dub. l. 3. c. 4. S. 13. n. 9. p. 644. Wal^frid. Strabo, de Reb. Eccles.
cap. 26.
Indeed Bp. Tailor from the Historian says, he poured it upon his head. And
from these examples, Walafridus Strabo (as that Bishop tells us) did conclude
(and why may not we as well do so too?) that in cases of necessity it is lawful
to use sprinkling.

. 37. I should here end this Century, but that Lactantius, Tinctus est a Joanne
Propheta in Jordane flumine: ut lavacro spiritali peccata non sua, quae utique
non habebat, sed carnis quam gerebat, aholeret: ut quemadmodum Judaeos suscepta
circumcisione, sic etiam Gentiles baptismo, id est, purifici roris perfusione
salvaret. Lactant. l. 4. c. 15.
who flourished ( an. Chr. 290.) stands so fair in my way, inviting my
attendance to his evidence, that I cannot civilly pass him by. And indeed the
rather am I willing to take notice of him, in regard I have before declared my
intention to give a more full account of his sense in the proper place for it,
which is this. Now he speaking of the baptism of Christ says, that he was
baptized by John the Prophet in the river Jordan, that by that spiritual
washing he might put away his sins, not his own, which (to be sure) he had none
of, but of that flesh, which he did bear; that he might save, as the Jews, by
undergoing Circumcision, so the Gentiles also, by baptism, that is the
perfusion or sprinkling of the purifying dew. Where his Paraphrasing of Baptism
by the sprinkling of the purifying dew, intimates Baptism to have been
performed purifici roris perfusione, by the sprinkling of purifying dew, that
is shedding of water on the party baptized; it not being to be doubted, but
that he founded his expression on the then present usage of the Church, at
least in some cases, if not generally: nor can it well be said whence else he
should borrow it. And these Testimonies without more, I think enough for this
Age.

. 38. If we step forward from hence into the Fourth Age, we shall find, about
the Thirteenth Year of that, Anno 313.
a Council held at Neocaesarea (somewhat before that famous one at Nice) and
afterward confirmed in the Sixth Council at Constantinople in Trullo. In that
Council Fourteen Canons were made. Amongst them one viz. the 12th. is
concerning those who got to be baptized in their sickness. De his qui in
aegritudine baptisma consequuntur. Siquis in aegritudine constitutus baptizatus
fuerit, presbyter ordinari non debet. Council. Neocaes. can. 12. Carang.

Ordinatus est Presbyter (sc. Novatus) sed contra Canones, quibus minime
licebat quenquam in lecto propter morbum baptizatum, sicut buic contigerat, in
clerum assumi. Surius, Council. Tom. 1. p. 223.


And touching them, the decree is, that no one baptized in his sickness should
be ordained a Priest. Now if we remember but, after what manner the
Centuriators tell us the persons called Clinics were baptized, namely not by
immersion, for they were baptized in their beds; nor by any larger effusion of
water upon them as they lay in their beds; for that were as ill as, perhaps
worse than, to take them out of their beds and put them into water, and a sure
way to give them, or hasten their death, or highly endanger it; then we must
conclude, that the way of baptizing such persons was by an aspersion, or
conspersion of water upon them, or in plainer terms by sprinkling. The decree
of the Council then is, that such as had by reason of sickness been baptized by
sprinkling, should be incapable of Ordination to the Priesthood. The consequent
hereof infallibly is this, that there was such a way of baptizing, and persons
so baptized then.

. 39. But here we must note, that the Council does not condemn the way of
baptizing, but the Persons that drive their baptism so long, till they could no
other way be baptized. Nor do they forbid any from thence-forward to be so
baptized: but only declare the incapability of such, as would no sooner be
baptized, to be ordained to the Priesthood. They do not evacuate their baptism
as null, and put them out of the state of Christians: but judge them unworthy
to be of the Clergy, In clerum assumi. Sur.
and forbid them to be ordained Priests. In a word, they do not order them to
be rebaptized, but decree they shall not be ordained. So, no quarrel here lies
against the Baptism, but against the Baptized: and that, not for being baptized
so, but, no sooner.

. 40. And if we consult the reason, on which the Council grounded this Canon,
it will appear to be so. That was, not because their Baptism was unlawful, and
a mere nullity (as some say by ours) but because the faith ( i. e. as I
conceive, the confession of the faith) of those that would not be baptized,
till they believed themselves to be no longer Men of this World, Non enim fides
illius voluntaria, sed ex necessitate est.
but just departing out of it, was not voluntary, but merely upon necessity.
And high reason certainly was on that Councils side: It being unfit that they
upon choice should be made Shepherds, who would not but upon necessity declare
themselves Sheep. No hope being that they would ever die for the Faith, who
till they were going to die, would never declare themselves to be of the Faith.
Little expectation, that they should ever by example at their Death encourage
others to be Martyrs, who never in their life, before they were going to die,
had the courage to own themselves so much as Professors.

. 41. And yet was not the Council so rigid neither in its censure, as utterly
to exclude them from the very Priesthood it self, but left a Door open for
them, even unto that. There was a nisi, an exception in the case: Nisi forte
postea ipsias studium and fides probabilis fuerit, aut hominum raritas cogat.
Caranz. Vid. D. Hammond de Confirmatione c. 4. S. 1. Paragr. 11. page 112.
and upon several considerations they might be admitted thereunto. One was in
case they did (after their recovery) by very great diligence in their future
actings approve themselves fitted for it. Another was in case their faith did
evidence it self such, as was like to abide in the day of Trial. And lastly, in
case there was a scarcity of other Men fit to be taken up into holy Orders. Now
certainly they would never in any case have admitted them to be Priests, whom
they had not judged to be Christians. They would never have permitted them to
be ordained, whom they did not believe to have been baptized. It is plain
therefore it was the doubt, which they had of the truth of their faith, not any
question they made of the validity of their baptism, that was the ground of
their making this Canon. Which yet may receive further confirmation from
another custom in the Church, Council. Carthag. 4. c. 68.
which was, to admit none to be of the Clergy, who had been put to penance. For
this shows that the thing required to capacitate Men for the Clergy, was
unexceptionable Christianity. But the Clinicks deferring their baptism so long,
and on such reasons as they deferred it, rendered their Christianity suspicious
and questionable. And so thence it was, not from the manner of their baptizing,
that they were debarred the Priesthood.

. 42. And so, upon all accounts, this Council is a fair evidence of a practice
of baptizing by way even of sprinkling, so early in the Church as the beginning
of the Fourth Century.

. 43. And as this Council, and consequently this Canon of it, was afterward
confirmed in the sixth Council of Constantinople, so there is fair reason to
think something established by Canon (though my small reading serves me not at
present to tell when, or where) long before. For when Pope Fabian ordained
Novatus a Priest (about An. Chr. CCL.) it is said by Surius, Ordinatus est
Presbyter, sed contra canones, etc. Sur. Council. Tom. 1. p. 223.
as we noted before, to have been done contra canones, against, or contrary to,
the Canons. Canons then there must have been against it, and more Canons than
one, and all before that time, or else his Ordination could not have been
against the Canons. And Pope Cornelius's objecting against Novatus, Eusebius.
Eccl. Hist. l. 6. c. 43.
that after his recovery he did not obtain that, which he should have done
(...), according to the Canon of the Church, viz. Confirmation of the Bishop,
is a bright intimation of something established in the Church about this
matter, and by Canon too.

. 44. And if there were no Canon, yet there was something equivalent to a
Canon, something that made it (...), unlawful to ordain a Clinic Priest, before
the time of Fabian's ordaining of Novatus; else the Clergy and Laity of Rome
could not have objected that against it. And if that unlawfulness were not
founded on any Canon, but Custom [and even Dr. Hammond (that accurate searcher
into, Ideoque cum illa sive lex sive recepta in Ecclesia consuetudo, de non
promovendis ad sacros ordines clinicis -- D. Ham. de confirm. c. 4. Sect. 1.
Parag. 11. page 112.
and observer of Church-Antiquities) seems not to have been punctually resolved
in the case, while he speaks doubtfully of it, saying, that whether Law, or
Custom received in the Church,] then the Antiquity of it may, for ought I
know, reach much higher than this, or the foregoing Century, even unto the
Apostles days.

. 45. However from that resolution of the Church in the case, whether by Canon,
or Custom, I shall conclude, that wherever hereafter we shall meet with a
baptism permitted, or persons baptized upon the account of sickness, or, (what
is equivalent thereunto) natural weakness, before the Customary times of the
Church for more solemn baptizations, there we are to conclude the Baptism so
permitted, and received, to have been sprinkling, the case of the parties
concerned therein rendering them incapable of being baptized (without eminent
danger of their healths, and even lives) any other way; and that Sprinkling
till good evidence be brought to the contrary, (which must be some Law of the
Church ordaining, or some instance of the Churches practicing the Rebaptizing
of the persons formerly so baptized) to have been in the judgment of the
Catholic Church held lawful, and a sufficient baptizing.

. 46. Not long after the Council of Neocaesarea (about the Year of Christ,
326.) shone in the Church with an illustrious glory that great Luminary of it
St. Athanasius, from whose Rays we shall borrow a beam, to light us on further
toward the discovery of this Practice in this Age. This great Author in his
3d. Oration against the Arians, Edit. Paris a Michaele Sonnio, etc. An. Dom.
1627. Tom. 1. p. 413. Edit. Commelin. Tom. 1. page 219.
speaking of their colluding with the Form of Baptism, as meaning other things
by the words of it, than they truly imported, by way of parallel tells, that
other Heresies besides them, and they not a few, named the names expressed in
the Form of baptizing, but had perverse sentiments concerning the persons
therein named, and did not retain the sound Faith, and thereupon gave water
that was insignificant through the defect of piety, (...), Adeo ut qui ab illis
adspergantur, sordescant potius prava religione, quam redimantur, Lat. Verse.
i. e. insomuch that he that was sprinkled by them, was through their impiety
rather defiled, than redeemed (I should rather say washed or cleansed, if in
stead of (...) we might read (...); for so the Antithesis seems to require, and
so I believe the Author intended.) Here it is plain he puts (...) sprinkled, for
(...) baptized, which is so fair an evidence of Baptisms being in that Age, if
not generally, yet sometimes, and on some occasions, administered by way of
Sprinkling, as renders that practice indisputable for that time; (...). ib. p.
413.
it being beyond all controversy, that he is there speaking of Baptism, and of
the Arian, and other Heretical abuses of the Form of it.

. 47. In the same Century ( an. Chr. 364.) was the Council of Laodicea. And
whereas that Council had decreed in the 46th. Canon of it, that such as were to
be baptized should before learn the Creed, and upon the Fifth day of the last
week say it to the Bishop or Priest, it makes another (the very next) decree,
Qui in aegritudine constituti baptismum perceperunt, sani facti fidei symbolum
doceantur, etc. Council. Laodic. can. 47.
de his qui in aegritudine baptizantur, concerning those that were baptized in
their sickness, namely, that such as in that condition had received Baptism,
should be taught the Creed after their recovery, that they might be made
sensible of the favor that had been vouchsafed to them. I need hot here again
discourse what was the manner of baptizing sick persons, having so lately,
(whilst I was speaking of the Council of Neocaesarea) shown it to have been by
way of sprinkling. Nor need I for the same reason, argue from the Councils not
condemning the Baptism so administered, nor ordering the re-baptizing of such as
had been so baptized, to their approving, at least as to the sufficiency
thereof, that manner of Baptism.

. 48. (...), etc. Gr. Naz. Orat. 40. p. 643, 644.
Much about the time of that Council, or a little after ( An. Chr. 370.)
flourished Gregory Nazianzen. And by his most passionate arguing against men's
deferring their baptism till their sickness was grown desperate, and they
almost, if not wholly, past either speech or sense, it is evident, that some
did defer their baptizing so long. And that yet in that condition they were
baptized, it is likewise evident from his pressing them to be baptized before
they had so far lost the use of their tongue, that they were not able well to
utter, what was on their part to be said at their baptizing; and whilst their
commencing Christians might be grounded on certain arguments, and nor on
uncertain opinion; with much more to that purpose. Now how persons in this
condition could be baptized by a total dipping, or any other way but by a
gentle sprinkling (unless the Baptizer meant to put them out of doubt, and
dispatch them quickly out of the way) the indifferent Reader may with hope of a
favorable judgment in the case be appealed unto. In the mean time I cannot but
take notice of it, that whereas the unlawfulness of such a Baptism was the most
powerful argument that possibly could be used, to draw men off from such a
course, and hasten their baptizing, if ever they meant at all to be baptized,
since that on death bed (by sprinkling, and those in that condition were
incapable of any other) was perfectly unlawful, (besides that it signified
nothing at all to the baptized) because not administered according to Christ's
institution, which is supposed to be by dipping, he does not in the least press
that argument; nor do any of the Fathers else, that I know of: which is a clear
evidence, that though he and they wished men sooner baptized, yet they thought
that baptism, which was administered so late, to be in it self lawful, though
through their fault, so late administered, and in that manner.

. 49. In this Age flourished St. Hierom: about An. Chr. 385. And though he
speak not, (that I know of) concerning sprinkling, yet there is in him an
intimation of a baptizing by less than a total dipping. Many things (says he)
which are observed in the Church by Tradition, Nam and multa alia quae per
traditionem in Ecclesiis observantur, autoritatem sibi scriptae legis
usurparunt, velut in lavacro ter mergitare caput, etc. D. Hieron. adv.
Luciferian.
have Usurped to themselves the authority of a written Law: as for instance, to
dip the head thrice in baptism, etc. Here Is dipping indeed mentioned as a way
used in baptizing, but it is not mentioned as the way; nor is that dipping of
the whole person, but only of a part; namely the head of the party baptized.
And so hence it appears, that a total immersion was not always the only way of
baptizing; but that as sprinkling, (as we have showed) was sometimes, so
sometimes a partial mersation was used in stead of it.

. 50. Contemporary with S. Hierom, was Siricius Bishop of Rome, Spondan. Epit.
Baron. An Chr. 385.

Nam de Infantibus baptizandis, qui nec dum baptizati nascuntur, quoties
necessitas exegerit. Regula Ecclesiastica per beatum Siricium prolata
demonstrat dicens, etc. Magdeb. cent. 9. c. 4. col. 140.


elected to that See (a clero populoque) by the Votes both of Clergy and Laity
( An. Chr. 385.) And his Authority (as the Centuriators tell us) is vouched,
and under the title of Regula Ecclesiastica, an Ecclesiastical Rule by
Hincmarus Archbishop of Rheims, for the baptizing of Infants, as often as
necessity should require. The necessity for baptizing of Infants can be no
other but danger of death, in regard of sickliness and weakness. Now in what
manner it was the use in those times to baptize persons in that condition, we
have before declared; so that it is almost needless to say, it was not by that
severe way of a total immersion of them three times into water, -- Vel his
quibus in qualibet necessitate opus fuerit, sacri unda baptismatis omni volumus
ecleritate succurri, ne ad nostram perniciem tendat animarum, etc. Id. ib.
but by the more safe and gentle way of aspersing, or sprinkling water thrice
upon them. Nor was his care only for weak Infants, but for all others, in what
necessity soever they were: whom he willed should be baptized with all speed,
lest if any, being in that condition denied baptism, should depart out of this
world unbaptized, and so lose both Kingdom and Life, that loss of theirs should
tend to the destruction of our Souls.

. 51. A little after him (about An. Chr. 390.) flourished Aurelius Prudentius,
a man of Consular dignity, and a no less pious Christian, than ingenious Poet.
And in him we have a plain instance of such baptizing, as that the party
baptized was not dipped, but only bedewed with the water of baptism, and that
must be by sprinkling or shedding water upon him. Cultor dei memento, etc. O
Worshipper of God (says he) remember that thou did go under the holy dew of
the Font, Cultor dei memento Te fontis and lavacri Rorem subisse sanctum,
Prudent. Hymn. ante somn.
and Laver, that is, in plain English, that thou wast sprinkled in baptism: for
what else can be meant by the dew of the Font; and going under that dew?

. 52. And let no man think this was a mere piece of Poetry: and that he was
compelled to this way of expressing himself by necessity of his verse: for he
was a person of such fluency of expression, as that if there had been need for
it, he could have otherwise expressed himself. And besides in another case,
when he could as well have used the word Immergit, he dippeth or baptizeth by
dipping, he does use Perfundit, he pours water on, or does baptize by pouring
on water. It is in the case of John the Baptist: and so may be added as a
superventional testimony, Perfundit fluvio pastus Baptista locustis, etc.
Prudent. Enchirid.
or at least as a further light to St. Bernard's opinion before mentioned,
concerning our Savior's being baptized by John in Jordan, not by way of
Immersion, but of perfusion, not by putting him under water, but by pouring
water upon him.

. 53. I will end this Century, and begin the following with St. Augustine, who
lived in both, being converted to the Christian Faith, ( An. Chr. 385.) and in
the (31.) Year of his own Life. And he in his Confessions ( l. 1. c. 11.) tells
us, that in his Childhood, (and therefore this passage of his Life must of
necessity be referred unto this Century) being in a fit of sickness and like to
die, he earnestly desired to be baptized: and that, had he not recovered,
through his Mothers hastening care, he had then been baptized. But sure he had
not been baptized by dipping (pene moriturus) when he was just at the point of
Death. That pious care of his Mother, which made her hasten his baptism to save
his Soul, would have provided, that, in the manner of his baptizing, nothing
should be done that might destroy his Body. There was a way then for baptizing
of Persons in danger of Death: that is the thing I hence observe: and I leave it
to the Reader to think, if he can, how it should be done by dipping; or what
other so convenient a way there was, or could be for it, as sprinkling.

. 54. In the beginning of the Fifth Century (to proceed (...), and turn at
Lands end) flourished St. Augustine, with whom I ended the last Century. And as
in the first Book of his Confessions, he tells us of his own being like to have
been baptized, so in the Fourth Book, he tells us of a friend of his, that
really was baptized, in his sickness: Cum enim laboraret ille febribus, and
jacuit diu sine sensu, in sudore letali, and cum desperaretur, baptizatus est
nesciens. D. Aug. Confess. l. 4. c. 4. See D. Aug. ad Pollent. l. 1. c. 26.
Tom. 6. col. 854.
and that, being in a high Fever, and in a deadly sweat, given over for life,
and utterly ignorant of what was done. That the Baptism administered to this
Person, be it after what manner it would, or could, was a baptism, is clearly
intimated by St. Augustine, whilst he says expressly of him, baptizatus est, he
was baptized. But whether this baptism was administered by a total dipping of
the Person under these circumstances, (in his sickness; in a high Fever; in a
deadly sweat; given over for life; past sense;) or whether he was not rather
baptized by sprinkling of water upon him, I leave even to the most prejudicated
Reader in the World to judge.

. 55. The same St. Augustine, whilst Bishop of Hippo, tells us (in his 22th.
Book, de Civ. Dei, c. 8.) how one Martialis was converted on his Deathbed, and
baptized. Therefore not dipped: but, what is most probable, because most usual,
in cases of necessity, sprinkled at his baptizing.

. 56. But he that shall read the Fourth Chapter of St. Augustin's sixth Book
against Julian the Pelagian, Non enim frustra crederis noluisse dicere, quod
renascitur, sed quod perfunditur.
and there find perfundi used for baptizari; and perfusio for baptismus, and
perfusus for baptizatus (though St. Augustine find fault with Julian for using
that word out of a design to put a contempt upon Baptism, Hoc enim verbum [sc.
baptizatur] ex Graeco Latina consuctudo sic habet, ut non soleat alibi nisi in
Sacramento Regenerationis intelligi. Nihil horum dicere voluisti, sed elegisti
verbum, quo fieret contemptibile quod dicebas. Nemo enim legentium praeferre
potest natum renato, vel regenerato, vel baptizato, sed facile putasti natum
praeferri posse perfuso. Si autem quantum distat coelum and terra, tanto melius
est perfundi, ut portetur hominis imago coelestis, quam nasci, ut portetur
hominis imago terreni, evanuit jam tua ista invidiosa partitio. Neque enim
mirandum est, si coelestis hominis imaginem, quae sacra perfusione suscipitur,
sibi vendicat Deus, etc. D. Aug. contr. Julian. Pelag. c. 4. Tom. 7. col. 1110.
telling him that this word Baptizari, though originally Greek, yet was by the
custom of the Latins appropriated to the Sacrament of Regeneration) will be out
of doubt, that Baptism was administered in those days by way of perfusion,
pouring or shedding on of water. For wherein else can that appellation be
founded? And St. Augustine, that found fault with his using of that word, only
because not so customarily applied to the thing, as baptism was, would not have
failed to have found fault with him, if there had been no such thing in use as
was signified by that word.

. 57. And that Baptism was performed in those days, not only by pouring, but
also by sprinkling of water on the baptized, is beyond exception declared by
that Father in his Book de Ecclesiasticis Dogmatibus, if that Book were his.
But because though inserted among his Works, it is, and I suppose more truly,
imputed to Gennadius, who flourished too in this same Century, though somewhat
after St. Aug. I shall refer it to its proper place.

. 58. I will not say, In hoc ergo font antequam vos toto corpore tingeremus,
interrogavimus, Credis Deum Patrem omnipotentem? D. Aug. ad Neophyl. apud
Gratian. de Consecr. did. 4. fol. 449. col. 3.

De trina immersione Aug ait, Postquam nos credere promisimus, tertio capita
nostra in sacro font demersimus. P. Lomb. l. 4. did. 3. Tit. de Immersione.
Or as Gratian reports it, Postquam vos credere promisistis, capita vestra --
(which reading I rather approve of) Gratian. de Consecr. did. 4. sol. 449.
col. 4.


but that there might be baptizings of Persons in that Age by a total immersion
of them. Yet what Peter Lombard quotes from St. Augustine, seems to intimate it
to have been a fashion also to baptize, not by a total immersion of the whole
Person, but by a demersion of the head of the Party baptized. After that we had
professed our selves to believe, we did three times demerse, or dip our heads,
in the holy Font. So he.

. 59. Contemporary with St. Augustine, (and even in both the Centuries) was
Paulinus Bishop of Nola, flourishing about An. Chr. 420. And from him I find
quoted, by Rigaltius, a passage, which seems to intimate even the Baptism of
John the Baptist to have been, not by dipping of the Party baptized into the
water, but by pouring of water on him. Diluit infusis, Diluit infusis credentum
crimina lymphis, Absolvitque metus hominum, poenasque remittit. Paulin. Ep.
Nolan. ap. Rigalt. Not. in Tertull. p. 70.
etc. i. e. He washes away the sins of believers by waters poured on. The
waters poured on here must certainly be meant to be poured on the baptized
person: or else into the River; for he baptized in the River. To conceive the
later is ridiculous: for what should he pour water into the river for?
Therefore it must be on the parties baptized. And then here is another proof
yet more, besides those of St. Bernard, Lactantius, and Prudentius, to
strengthen the opinion, that our Savior was not baptized by dipping into
water, but by having water poured upon him. And whether that were so, or not,
yet still the expression inevitably infers that Authors knowledge of a way of
baptizing, other than by a total dipping, and even by a pouring on of water, in
his own age at least, if not in former, and even in the Primitive too, to which
the passage makes a fair pretension, being quoted out of the Authors Poem of
John the Baptist.

Item placuit, ut quicunque parvulos ab uteris matrum baptizandos negat,
anathema sit Synod. Milevit. ap. Magdeb. cent. 5. c. 9. col. 835. and Caranz.
fol. 123.
. 60. In the same Age ( An. Chr. 418.) the Council of Milevis decreed him
anathematized, who should deny baptism to Infants coming new from the Wombs of
their Mothers. Now certainly Infants in that condition, cannot be looked upon
as other than persons under great weakness, and necessarily exposed to manifest
danger of health, and even life it self, should they be put to the undergoing
of the Severities of a threefold total Immersion, which was the way of
baptizing those that were dipped in those times, even Infants and all, if
arrived at that hardiness for strength as to be able to endure it. There must
therefore be allowed a more favorable way of baptizing of newborn Infants
(which I presume also was never done, but when the Infants were weak and not
likely to live) unless we will put such an Interpretation on the Councils
decree, as shall expose them to a severe censure for cruelty, even to tenderest
babes, for that very thing whereby they designed the greatest mercy and
kindness to them, as if they meant to kill their bodies, whilst they pretended
to save their Souls. Now I need not tell you, what has been so often already
sufficiently intimated, that the most favorable and so the most befitting way
of baptizing in such case is that of Sprinkling.

. 61. Fst de Columbethra (quae aquae in baptisterio receptaculum fuit) ex qua
aqua baptizato superfusa per interiorem meatum secedebat, apud Socrat. l. 7. c.
17.
The Centuriators tell us of a Font, out of which baptizato aqua superfusa --
the water poured from above on the person baptized, went away by a secret
passage made for it below. And this Font was in this Age. And this pouring
water on the person baptized at it, imports a baptism other than by way of
immersion. For this, and the story appendent to it they refer us to Socrates,
l. 7. c. 17. That Author speaks of such a Font, as had a conveyance for the
water by a lower passage: but mentions no pouring of the water from above on
the baptized. And (because I am unwilling to force a meaning on them different
perhaps from their mind, though lying fair in their words) it may be, they did
not by aqua baptizato superfusa, intend water poured from above on, but for the
baptized. Though, by the way, this is much the manner of baptizing in Russia,
Purchase Pilgrim. part. 3. p. 229. about An. Chr. 1557.
according to a Relation of it, that I meet with in Purchas's Pilgrimage. For
there, as the Relation is, when the water is Sanctified, the Priest takes the
Child, and holds it in a small Tub, and one of the Godfathers pours it all
upon the Child's head. Yet (to come to the story in Socrates again) there he
tells us, what is material to our purpose, viz. a story of a deceitful Jew,
that having been baptized before by Atticus Bishop of Constantinople, and made
a practice of it in several places, upon avaricious designs for money, to offer
himself to baptism, came to this Font, offering himself to be baptized there
also: and that when he hanged his head over the Font, the water vanished away,
once, and again: whereupon his fraud was discovered. This happened in the Sixth
Consulship of Theodosius, (An. Chr. 415.) Now that, which I note it for, is
this. This hanging his head over the Font, in order to his being baptized,
intimates (what any man would think, that should see a man in that posture,
hanging his head over one of our Fonts) that his baptism was not to have been
by an immersion or dipping of his whole body into the water, but only by a
Sprinkling of water upon his face, or by a pouring of water upon his head, at
most by a dipping of his head only, and no more of him, into the water.

. 62. In the middle of this Century flourished Pope Leo, advanced to the
Papacy, An. Chr. 440. He was for having the Solemn times of baptism observed.
Non interdicta licentia qua in baptismo tribuendo quolibet tempore
periclitantibus subvenitur: -- ut in periculo mortis, in obsidionis discrimine,
in persecutionis angustiis, in timore naufragii; nullo tempore hoc vere salutis
singular remedium cuiquam denegemus. Leo, ep. Decret. 4. c. 6. page 15, 16.
Nevertheless he would not inhibit that liberty, which had formerly been taken,
to baptize at any time persons in danger of death, in the difficulties of a
Siege, in the straits of persecution, in the fear of Shipwreck. Now this being
so, it must needs follow, that he must allow of such ways of baptizing, as the
circumstances those persons were in would admit of. Which might not be always
by way of Immersion, even for want of water, as in sieges, prisons, ships; and
sometimes might not be safe, as in case of dangerous sickness, when to baptize
by way of Immersion might be more destructive to the baptized, than his very
disease, and a sure way to bring a certain death upon him here, whilst we
design to save him from a feared death hereafter. And then not only partial
mersation, but even affusion, and conspersion, or Sprinkling, will fall under
the allowance of that (...), and be the Practice, which the Church in that ^^ge
took, or had granted to it, the liberty to make use of.

. 63. In the Year 499. was baptized Clodoveus King of the Franks, Spondan.
Epitome of Baron. An. Chr. 494. n. V. and An. Chr. 499. n. IV. Georg. Cassand.
de Baptismo Infantum, p. 713. Isle Clodovaeus primus Christianus fuit inter
Reges Francorum, a beato Remigio baptizatus. Gotfrid. Viterb. Chron. part. 17.
col. 433. See Werner Rolewinks Fascic. Temp. fol. 53. Herm. Contract. Chron. p.
419. Flosc. Historici cap. 3. p. 204. Expedit ut per infusionem aquae fiat, and
non per immersionem. Cujus rei exemplum trahimus ab Apostolis, Sancto
Laurentio, Remigio, caeterisque pluribus, qui aspergendo and super infundendo
aquam baptizabant. Sic Sanctus Laurentius urcco aquae superinfuso baptizavit
Romanum. Sic etiam Remigius Regem Franciae baptizavit. Agend. Eccl. Mogunt.
Edit. Mogunt. An. 1551. fol. 22, 23.
first brought to believe the Christian Faith by his Queen Clotildis who was a
Christian, and after to profess it, and be baptized, partly by occasion of a
vow, which he had made to Jesus Christ, in a battle with Alaricus, by whom he
was at the instant of being overthrown, but became the overthrower of the
battle immediately turning upon his Vow (the like whereto befell Amurath the
Emperor of the Turks in his battle with Ladislaus King of Hungary) and he not
only Routing his Enemies Army, but also killing his Enemy himself with his own
hand; and partly by the solicitation of St. Remigius Archbishop of Rheims to
perform his Vow, to whom he yielded, and by whom he was baptized: and not he
alone, but also Albofledis his sister, and a great number of his people
amounting to some thousands. But how was he baptized? Not by Immersion, but by
superfusion, as we are told in the Agenda Ecclesiae Moguntinensis published by
Sebastian, Arch B. of Ments, and Prince Elector. Where this Example is amongst
others alleged in justification of baptizing by pouring on of water. Whereof
(says the Agenda) we fetch example from the Apostles, St. Laurence, Remigius,
and many others, who baptized by Sprinkling, and pouring on of water. And as
the King himself was baptized, so no doubt was his Sister, and all his people
(Regis ad exemplum) baptized also: it being not well to be imagined, why they,
who followed him in his believing, should not follow him in his baptizing, and
be baptized as he was, whose baptism was the cause of their being baptized,
especially seeing the baptism of both, (his, and theirs) were at the same time;
unless some good Record shall appear in contradiction to it, which I have not
as yet met withal.

. 64. And now no wonder if Gennadius, Dr. Cave Life of St. Steph. p. 17.
who flourished toward the latter end of this Century ( An. Chr. 490. and many
Years before) were dogmatical in his opinion of the sufficiency either of
dipping or sprinkling: to whose 74th. dogma we are referred for proof hereof by
the Right Reverend, Dr. Sparrow Rationale of the Common Prayer, p. 298. Ed.
1661.

Baptizandus consitetur fidem coram sacerdote, and interrogatus respondet: hoc
and martyr coram persecutore facit, quia and confitetur fidem, and interrogarus
respondet. Ille post confessionem vel aspergitur, vel intingitur: and hic vel
aspergitur sanguine, vel contingitur igne. Gennad. de Dogm. Eccles. c. 74. ap.
D. Aug. Tom. 3. col. 207.


the Author of the Rationale of the Common Prayer. And with his Testimony I
will end this Century. The Person (says he) to be baptized makes Confession of
his Faith before the Priest, and being asked, makes answer, and after his
confession, he is sprinkled with water, or dipped into it. To such indifferency
was it grown even in that Age.

. 65. In the fore-end of the Sixth Century, An. Chr. 517. and in the Seventh
Year of Theodoric King of Spain, was held at Gerunda in Catalonia a Provincial
Council of Seven Bishops. And in the 4th. Canon of that Council it was Decreed,
Vt parvuli, si infirmari contingat, eodem die. quo nati sunt, baptizentur.
Council. Gerund. Can. 4.
That Infants, in case of weakness, should be baptized the same day that they
were born. That they should be baptized, this they Decree. But how, they say
not. Whence it is plain, their meaning was, that they might be baptized in such
manner, as was most suitable to their condition, and had been usual in the like
cases in the Church, (for else they would have given their determination
otherwise) and then their baptism must not have been by dipping, but
sprinkling, or something more favorable and safe than a total immersion. And
especially is it rational so to conclude, when the way of baptizing (and for
ought I know in public as well as private) was grown to such an indifferency
in the Century foregoing, as we see by the new cited Testimony from Gennadius.

. 66. And agreeably to what that Council decreed in the fore-end of it, Item
liberum esse Infantes mox in ipsa hora, si est periculum mortis, baptizare,
Gregorius testatur, l. 12. Ep. 10. ap. Magdeburg. Cent. 6. c. 6. col. 367. l.
21.

Baptizare autem vel enixam mulierem, vel hoc quod genuerit, si mortis periculo
urgetur, vel ipsa hora cadem qua gignit, vel hoc quod gignitur cadem qua natum
est, nullo modo prohibetur, etc. Greg. Respons. ad Interrogat. Augustini ap.
Bedae Eccles. Hist. Gent. Angl. l. 1. c. 27. fol. 36. a.


it was declared by Pope Greg. I. in the latter end of it (for he was chosen
Pope An. Chr. 590. and died An. Chr. 604.) that it should be free to baptize
Infants, in case of danger of death, the same hour that they were born. A great
Charity was no doubt in this Concession designed to the Souls of the poor
Babes, namely to secure them, as far as Man could do it, from the future
infelicities of those that died in an unbaptized estate. But we must not think,
that charity to their Souls could consist with cruelty to their bodies, and
intend the destruction of the one, whilst it pretended the salvation of the
other. Therefore we must think also, that the rigors either of a threefold, or
but a single total immersion, especially in this cold climate of ours, in
reference to which that declaration was made by that Bishop, were not imposed
upon those Infants (in periculo mortis) but that a more benign and gentle way,
and which better suited with the weakness of their Infant-state, especially in
such danger, was permitted to them. And then we can think of no so fit a way
for their baptizing, as that of sprinkling.

. 67. Nay more, the Centuriators from the same Authority tell us, Mulieres
gravidas, vel recens enixas licitum esse baptizare -- Greg. testatur, l. 12.
Ep. 10. Magdeb. Cent. 6. col. 367. Vid. Bed. Eccl. Hist. Gent. Angl. l. 1. c.
27.
that it was lawful to baptize Women big with Child, or even newly brought to
bed, (yea even in the very same hour, that they were delivered,) as Bede
relates it from him. But sure to dip the former was very dangerous, and the
latter, certain death. And therefore it is without question, that the baptism
allowed them was one more safe, viz. that of sprinkling.

. 68. In the Seventh Century the Magdeburgensians tell us, that Baptism was
administered publicly in Temples: Baptizabant in templis: -- In privatis tamen
domibus etiam interdum, cum necessitas postulabat, baptizatum est. Magd. Cent.
7. col. 144, 145, 146.
yet not so, but that sometimes, when necessity required, it was administered in
private houses also. Now that necessity, which would keep them from coming to
the Temple to be baptized, must in reason be supposed also to be so great, as
to keep them from being totally dipped: there being greater danger to them from
that manner of baptizing, than from the place where they should be baptized.
And then both Reason, and the Usage of the Church in the former Ages of it upon
such like occasions, will determine the most befitting way of baptizing to be
that of sprinkling: not only in regard of the want of conveniences of Vessels
fit for a total immersion that might be in some private houses; but also in
regard that sick Infants were then to be baptized, whom to dip in that
condition, and as the manner of baptizing them that were dipped then was, (
viz. three times over head and ears) were enough to kill. And he that will
consult Baronius may perhaps find an instance of one, Ann. Chr. 370. 51.
(and him the Son of an Emperor) by name Galates the Son of Valens, killed in
Baptism. The inconsistency whereof with the Charity of the Church is so
visible, or rather palpable, as to need no further demonstration.

. 69. They tell us also how in the Eighth Council of Toledo, which was held An.
Chr. 633. and in the Sixth Council of Constantinople held in the Trullus (the
name of a Room within the Emperor's Palace where the Council sat) An. Chr.
680. it was decreed that Baptism should by no means be denied to any sick
Infant; adding as an Enforcement to their Decree, Parvulo aegrotanti nullo modo
baptismus denegetur; si quis neglexerit ejus morientis animam, ille pro ea
reddet Deo rationem. Council. Tolet. and Constantinop. ap. Magdeb. Cent. 7. c.
6. col. 146.
that if any should neglect the Soul of any such dying one, he should give an
account thereof to God. And it is certain, that in the Second Canon of this
Council of Constantinople was confirmed the Council of Neocaesarea, and
consequently that Canon of that Council, which concerned such as were baptized
in their sickness, whereof we made mention before. Well now, sick Infants were
to be baptized: and their Baptism by no means to be neglected. The way of
baptizing then, was a threefold immersion. But what if the Baptizer saw he
could not so baptize the Infant without endangering the death of it? Must he
not baptize the Infant at all? Then he violated the Decree of the Council, and
incurred the hazard of answering for the Soul of the Infant, if it perished for
want of Baptism. Must he baptize it by the threefold immersion? Then he
endangered the death of the Infant (which though very sick, yet possibly might
not die, unless drowned or starved by that baptizing, but recover, as many no
doubt in the like case have done) and so incurred the guilt of homicide, which
he could not but be loath to have his Conscience charged withal. What must he
do then? What? Even take the middle course; neither neglect to baptize it, nor
dip it in the baptizing: but do as Reason would dictate in the case, and as the
Custom of the Church on such occasions would direct him, and baptize it in a
gender, kinder, safer way, by Sprinkling.

. 70. And the same Observation may be made upon, and drawn from the Law of Ina
King of the West Saxons, (about An. Chr. 692.) That Infants shall be baptized
within Thirty days after their birth, under penalty of Thirty shillings (a
great sum in those days. Infans intra triginta dies postquam in lucem
prodierit, baptizator. Id si non fiat, ter denis solidis culpa pensator. Sin
prius vitam cum morte commutarit, quam sacro baptismate tingatur, rebus suis
omnibus mulctator. Leg. Inae. c. 2. ap. Spelman, Council. Anglic. Tom. 1. p. 183.
) And that if any of them died unbaptized, he through whose default that came
to pass, should forfeit all his goods.

. 71. In the Eighth Century flourished the Venerable Bede: An. Chr. 731. Obiit
An. 735.
in the one and thirtieth year of which he wrote his Ecclesiastical History of
the English Nation. And though he do not therein, that I yet find, tell us of
any that were expressly baptized by way of Sprinkling (yea so far is he from
that, that he is produced as an Author against it, because he in that work
tells us of many that were baptized in Rivers, viz. Glen and Swale) yet still
methinks he looks favorably on that way.

. 72. First because he there ( l. 2. c. 14. Igitur accepit rex Edwinus cum
cunctis gentis suae nobilibus, ac plebe perplurima, fidem, and lavacrum sanctae
regenerationis, anno regni sui 11o. qui est An. Dom. incarn. 627. -- Baptizatus
est autem Eboraci die Sancto Paschae, pride. id. April. in Eccles. Sancti Petri
Ap. quam ibidem ipse de ligno, cum catechizaretur, atque ad percipiendum
baptisma imbueretur, citato opere construxit. Bed. Hist. Eccles. Gent. Angl. l.
2. c. 14.
) tells us of a baptism of a King, by name Edwin, who with many of his Nobles
and People, was baptized in a Church; and then sure not in a River, but in a
Font: and then most probably by Sprinkling, or pouring of water upon him; there
being no remains that I know, or hear of, in England, wherein this was done, if
any Fonts, of that capacity, to receive into them the whole body of a man, so
as to dip it therein; especially if the Rite of being baptized standing upright
in the waters, as the ancient manner of baptizing is by some said to have been,
were to be observed (and it is strange that, if the Fonts in our Churches ever
were of that capacity, there should in no part of the land be any one of them
remaining, especially seeing there has been since that time no such universal
inundation of Heathens, as destroyed all those Sacred Utensils of Christianity,
but the Churches themselves, wherein they may be supposed to have been, as that
of York and Lincoln are standing still) and that particular Church being but a
Wooden one, erected in haste for that present purpose, and so probably
unfurnished of such a capacious Baptistery, as was requisite for the total
immersion of a person of that Stature.

. 73. Secondly, because in that whole passage, Quibus diebus cunctis a mane
usque ad vesperam nihil aliud ageret quam confluentem eo de cunctis viculis ac
locis plebem Christi verbo salutis instruere, atque instructam in fluvio Gleni,
qui proximus erat, lavacro remissionis abluere. Id. ib.
and the rest that follows in that Chapter, where he speaks of baptizing
confluences of people, and in Rivers, he never mentions one word of their being
dipped, either in Font or River (unless Baptizo do necessarily infer it, as I
have shown it does not) neither immergo nor mergo, neither immersio nor mersio
being used to express that action; but words of a more general import, which
coextend to any manner of Baptismal washing, such as lavacrum and abluere: and
Baptizing in a River does not necessarily infer a dipping into it. And yet as
shie as he is of using immergo in the case of Baptism, he is not shie to use it
in other concerns. Whence in his Relation of the Severities of Drithelm the
Anchoret to himself, Solebat hunc creber ob magnum castigandi corporis affectum
ingredi, ac saepius in eo supermeantibus undis immergi. -- refluentibus circa
cum semifractarum crustis glacierum, quas and ipse aliquando contriverat, quo
haberet locum standi sive imm^rgendi se in fluvio, Bed. Eccl. Hist. l. 5. c.
13. fol. 223. a. b.
he has it twice, and within the compass of a few lines.

. 74. Thirdly, because the Reason, Sed in Provincia Deirorum, ubi saepius
manner cum rege solebat, baptizabat in fluvio Sualva, qui vicum juxta
Cataractam praeterfluit. Nondum enim Oratoria vel baptisteria in ipso exordio
nascentis ibi Ecclesiae poterant aedificari. Id. ib. l. 2. c. 14.
which he gives, why men were then baptized in Rivers, is not fetched from any
thing in the nature of baptism requiring baptization in such places; as because
men should be totally dipped, when baptized, and the best convenience for such
baptizing was there: but because in the Infancy of that Church, which was then
but in its Nativity, Oratories, or Baptisteries could not be builded. Which
supposes, that it was not choice, but want of other convenience, which then led
to that River-baptizing: and that, had there been Fonts in Churches, in those
Churches, and at those Fonts, should the people too have been baptized, as well
as the King, we spoke of before, had been.

. 75. Fourthly, in several parts of his works he expresses baptizing by such
words and phrases, Non baptizabat, quia ipse non tingebat. Bed. in Ephesians. 5. fol.
234. D. Quasi vero alterius dono, quam illius quisquam etiam Sacramento
corporalis, and visibilis baptismatis imbuatur, Id. ib. Ipse instructos eos
verbo veritatis ac font salutari ablutos de ingressu regni aeterni certos
reddidit, Id. Hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 16. Etsi font baptismatis non est ablutus:
Id. ib. l. 1. c. 7. Cum rex ipse Catechizatus font baptismi cum sua gente
ablueretur -- Id. ib. l. 3. c. 7. fol. 98. b Itaque Episcopus -- primos
provinciae duces ac milites Sacrosancto font abluebat, ib. l. 4. c. 13. fol.
165. a Omnes fide Christi institutos unda baptismatis abluit, ib. fol. 166. b.
-- Plebem Christi -- lavacro remissionis abluere, ib. l. 2. c. 14. fol. 80. b.
Nec multo post plene curatus vitali etiam unda perfusus sum. Id. ib. l. 5. c.
6. fol. 209. b.
as not only, do not by the mere power of their own significancy import
dipping, but are sometimes used to denote a distinct manner of baptizing,
differing from that: as is sufficiently shown in these Papers, such as tingo,
and unda perfundo, etc.

. 76. Lastly, I meet in Bid with a Relation of a Baptism, in the beginning of
this, or the latter end of the foregoing Century, that was performed by
perfusion, which we have seen from St. Cyprian to denote a distinct way of
baptizing differing from a total immersion. The person baptized was Heribaldus
Clerk to John Bishop of York. And the Relation, as made by Heribaldus himself,
in short is, that being by that John, in the time of his weakness by a fall
from an horse, Catechized and Exorcized, Bid Eccl. Hist. l. 5. c. 6. fol. 209.
a. b.
shortly after his recovery he was baptized, and that by way of perfusion.

. 77. And now who can think, but that this Author did judge it, not only
lawful, but even necessary, that Baptism, (in some cases, as that of women new
brought to bed, and children new born, if in danger of death; touching which
himself has declared the judgment of St. Gregory, with the reason also of his
judgment) should be administered in a way of more mercy and less danger, -- quia
sancti mysterii gratia sicut viventibus atque discernontibus cum magna
discretione providenda est: ita his quibus mors imminet, sine ulla dilatione
offerenda, ne dum adhuc tempus ad praebendum redemptionis mysterium quaeritur,
interveniente paululum mora inveniri non valeat qui redimatur. Bed. Eccl. Hist.
Gent. Angl. l. 1. c. 27. fol. 36.
than that of a total immersion; even by Sprinkling or pouring on of water?

. 78. And with the same caution of not baptizing by a total immersion, but by
affusion or aspersion, is that Constitution of Egbert Archbishop of York
(ordered about the Year of Christ, 750.) unquestionably to be understood:
whereby all Priests are enjoined, Vt omnes Sacerdotes, quibuscunque horis,
omnibus indigentibus baptismum infirmitatis causa diligentissime tribuant.
Excerpt. 10. Dom. Egberti Archiep. Eborac. ap. Spelman. Council. Anglic. Tom. 1.
p. 259.
in case of infirmity, with greatest diligence to administer baptism at any
hours whatsoever, to all that need it. For it is unreasonable to think, that
the cruelty of a total immersion was ever designed in so merciful a
Constitution.

. 79. In the Ninth Century, (An. Chr. 826.) as Baronius in his Annals informs
us, came Herialdus, King of the Northmans, or Danes, with his Wife, and a great
company of his People to Mentz, and in St. Albans Church, together with the
rest of his Followers, sacri baptismatis unda est perfusus, had the water of
holy Baptism poured upon him. In which one expression the Historian notifies
unto us two things; first the Baptism of that King and his People: and then the
manner of their baptizing; which was not by immersion, but by perfusion, or
pouring of water upon them, whether in greater or lesser quantity.

. 80. In the same Century flourished Hincmarus Archbishop of Rheims (An. Chr.
845. or according to Bellarmin, 860.) He had a Nephew of the same name Bishop
of Laudum. That Bishop upon private injuries, excommunicated all the Priests of
his Church, interdicting them the baptizing of Infants, absolving of Penitents,
and even burying of the Dead. This incenses his Uncle the Archbishop of
Rheims, who thereupon pleads the cause of the Infants against him: urges the
authority of Pope Siricius upon him, declaring for the speedy baptizing, not of
Infants only, but of all persons in necessity, as we have noted before. Now
this pressing of the decree of Siricius by the Uncle on the Nephew, shows his
approbation of, and consenting to what that Pope had declared for: and that
amounted to a baptizing them in a way agreeable to their necessity, which could
not be a total immersion, but a pouring, or sprinkling of water upon them.

. 81. Yet again in this Century ( An. Chr. 850.) flourished Walafridus Strabo.
(the Anabaptists grand Patron.) And yet even he, as luck serves, is a most
full, and express witness on our side. He speaking of the baptism of Lucillus
recorded in the Acts of St. Laurence, which is expressly delivered to have been
by pouring the water on his Head, (if, fudit super caput ejus, can signify so
much) says upon that occasion, It is to be noted, that many have been
baptized, not only by dipping them, but also by pouring water from above upon
them; Notandum, non solum mergendo, sed etiam desuper fundendo multos
baptizatos fuisse, and adhuc posse baptizari, etc. Hoc etiam solet evenire cum
provectiorum granditas corporum in minoribus vasis hominem tingi non patitur.
Walafrid. Strabo de Rebus Eccles. c. 26. p. 415.
and that they may still be so baptized --. This also uses to come to pass,
when the greatness of the overgrown bodies suffers not a Man to be dipped in
the lesser Vessels: which is the present condition of most, if not all the
Fonts in England, so that there can be no way of baptizing persons of ripe
years in them, but by affusion, or a partial mersation. I wish those that give
such credit to this Author in other things, would be impartial, and give the
like credit to him in this, wherein he is so full and clear, as nothing can be
more, both as to what has been, and what may be.

. 82. Yet further in this Century ( An. Chr. 858. Praeterea si tibi ad
Baptismum Baptismi cupiditas propositumque sufficit, atque idcirco little qui
purifica aqua perfusi sunt, gloriam quaeris; ad gloriam quoque tibi sufficiat
sola gloriae cupiditas. Nicet. Not. 21. in Gr. Nazianz. Orat. 40. Col. 1062.
Edit. Paris. 1611.
) flourished Nicetas Serronius, who wrote Commentaries on several Orations of
St. Greg. Nazianzen. And in his Commentary on the Fortieth Oration of that
Father (which is of Baptism) If, says he, a desire and purpose to be baptized
serves you for baptism, and you therefore seek the glory of those, qui purifica
aqua perfusi sunt, who have had the purifying water shed or poured upon them,
i. e. have been baptized, let then the only desire of the glory serve you too
for the glory. This, if the Author be rightly translated (who, I suppose wrote
in Greek) is a clear intimation of that Author's having in his mind a notice of
a baptizing by way of perfusion, shedding or pouring on of water, which made
him paraphrase baptism so; nay more, that he supposed others had the same
notice of it too, and would understand what he writ, or else he would not so
have written it. Commentaries being designed, not to obsuscate the Authors
commented on, by words less usual and of greater obscurity, but to illustrate
them, by words more known, and of greater perspicuity, than their own.

. 83. In the Tenth Century amongst other Ecclesiastical Constitutions of King
Edgar, Si infans infirmus [absque baptismo] obierit Ethnicus, and hoc ex culpa
Sacerdotis evenerit, amittat ille ordinationis gradum, and solicit componat.
Et si amicorum negligentia acciderit, jejunent illi 3. annos; unum sc. pane and
aqua, and per reliquos 3. dies in hebdomada, and id semper lugeant. Can. dati
sub Edgaro Rege, apud Spelman. Council. Anglic. Tom. 1. page 467. Can. 44.
(about An. Chr. 967.) there is one Canon, deposing from (at least one degree
of) Orders, the Priest, that, through his default, should suffer any weak
Infant to die unbaptized: and imposing the penance of a three Years Fast on the
Infants friends, if the fault were theirs. Now surely he must either never have
had, or else have lost his understanding, who imagines that the Infant, in the
case supposed by the Canon, was necessarily to be dipped. For that were to
oblige both the Priest and Parents, under so great penalties as neither would
be willing to undergo, to expose the Child to a manifest peril of death, rather
than let it go unbaptized. But the Church then could not but know, what had
been the practice of the Church in former Ages in the like case: which was to
baptize by aspersion, or a gentler affusion: and therefore it is to be
understood to mean, that the Children so strictly ordered to be baptized,
should be baptized after such a way, as was most agreeable unto the condition
they then were in; and that must be by sprinkling; and not that they must be
dipped, come on it what could come (life or death) by their dipping.

. 84. And much about the same time, or a little after, Infans omnis intra 9.
noctes matare baptizetur, sub poena sex orarum. Et si infans aliquis intra 9.
noctes per negligentiam mortuus fucrit, componatur apud Deum absque mulcta
seculari. Sed si exactis 9. noctibus per negligentiam mortuus fuerit:
componatur utique apud Deum, and solvantur praeterea illi parochiae 12. orae,
quod infans tam diu fuisset Ethnicus. Leges Presbyter. Northumbr. ap. Spelm.
Council. Angl. Tom. 1. page 469. Can. 10.
were composed the Laws of the Northumbrian Priests, probably by Oswald
Archbishop of York. Amongst which there is one, that under a certain penalty
orders all Children to be baptized within nine Nights. But what if a Child were
so sick, as not to be able to endure dipping? Must it, rather than not be
dipped, be let dye without being baptized? That was not the Lawmakers meaning,
which was to prevent the Child's dying without baptism. Must he be dipped then,
though that dipping should cost him his life? That is too irrational to
conceive to have ever been meant by any wise Lawgiver; the end of whose Laws
is the preservation, and not the destruction of lives. What then? It Is plain,
nothing else could be meant, but that, as the Child was not to be suffered to
dye unbaptized, so it was to be baptized in such a way as would not endanger
its death; and that is by sprinkling, or pouring water in a befitting quantity
upon it, according to the practice of former Ages on the like occasions.

. 85. In the Eleventh Century the Magdeburgensian Historians tell us, that
Infants, if weak, Cent. 11. c. 6. col. 260.
were baptized even presently after their birth. And (as I have noted in
another place) they instance, from Schafnaburgensis, in the Son of an Emperess,
baptized, by reason of his weakness, and fear of his death, within three days
after his birth. They tell us also of a Son of the Queen of Moguntia, who was
baptized presently after his birth, and dyed presently after his Baptism. But
now, who is able to imagine, that any ordinary Parent, much less Persons of
such high Nobility, would ever endure that their tender Infants, in that
extremity of weakness and sickness, should be put to endure the hardship of a
threefold (or even but one single) total immersion into cold water? How could
they expect any other, but that the Font, which should be the Mother of their
Spiritual birth, would become the causer of their natural death? and that they
should be realy, as well as Sacramentally, buried in Baptism? But Reason
inviting, and long Custom of otherwise baptizing Persons in such condition
authorizing thereunto, no doubt is to be made, but that they were baptized in a
way that was compliant with their condition, namely by a gentler application of
water shed, or sprinkled on them.

Si puer non baptizatus libere adducatur ad Presbyterum [caveat ille] ut cundem
protinus baptizet, ne forte moriatur Ethnicus. Can. Aelfrici. 26. ap. Spelman.
Council. Angl. Tom. 1. page 579.
86. And with the same gloss is to be read that Canon of Aelfric (about An.
Chr. 1052.) whereby the Priest is ordered forthwith to baptize the Infant that
is brought unto him, lest happily he dye an Heathen.

. 87. In the Twelfth Century (An. Chr. 1120.) flourished St. Bernard. And we
cannot but think that he approved of the baptizing of Christians by way of
perfusion, or pouring of water on their heads, whose Opinion was, as we have
showed before, that Christ himself was so baptized of John in Jordan. But if he
had said nothing of that, yet that question of his, in his Epistle to Hugo de
Sancto Victore, Quaenam enim natura seu ratio docet internam aeternamque
salutem mortalium neminem posse percipere, cujus foris corpus perfusu^ visibili
non fuerit elemento? D. Bernard, Ep. 77. ad Hug. de S. Victore, col. 1455.
when he asks, what nature or reason taught, that no mortal Man could ever be a
partaker of the internal and eternal Salvation, whose body was not outwardly
baptized by a perfusion of it with the visible element? this question, I say,
sufficiently shows his opinion of a baptism by such a way of administration,
namely that it, like Baptism any other way administered, conduced to the
internal and eternal Salvation of the Soul, though both to reason and nature it
seemed strange, and was a thing that neither of them ever taught, that there
was no being saved without it.

. 88. Contemporary with S. Bernard was S. Otho Bishop of Bamberg, Spondan.
Epit. Baron. An. Chr. 1124.
called the Apostle of the Pomeranians, from his Converting that people, being
invited to that work by Bolislaus King of Polonia, An. Chr. 1124. He at his own
charge built fifteen Monasteries, and prescribed orders to be observed in the
Churches founded by him. Several concerned Baptism. Among the rest this (as
Novarinus informs us from the History of his Acts) that when any was to be
baptized, his Baptism was to be dispatched by a threefold immersion of his
head. So, Sacerdos trina immersione capitis illius mysterii Sacramentum
perfecit. Novarin. Schediasm. Sacroprophan. l. 3. number. 57. p. 82.
an immersion there was, and that three times, settled by him, yet not a total
one, not of the whole body, but only a partial one, of the head, the principal
part.

. 89. In the same Century ( An. Chr. 1140.) flourished Gratian. And he from the
Capitulars, l. 5. c. 76. cites a direction for any man that has a mind to have
the Consecrated water in his own house for Sprinkling, Nullus ministrorum qui
baptizandi recepit officium, etc.
( i. e. to baptize withal) to take it out of the Font before the pouring in of
the Chrism. Nec quenquam debet movere, quod aspergi, vel perfundi jubentur
agri, cum gratiam divinam consequuntur, etc.
And however that may be interpreted otherwise, though against the meaning of
the Author, by such as have a kindness for Holy water sprinkling, Hic primo
ostenditur quod aqua benedicta qua homines qui baptizantur asperguntur, valet
ad little sanctificationem, Gratian. Decret. 3. part de Con ecrat. did. 4.
fol. 452. b. col. 4. and litera c. i. c. capitis satis innuit in pluribus locis
quod de baptismo intelligitur, and de illis qui propter aegritudinem immergi
non possunt. Id. ib.
yet that which follows is clearly to be interpreted of sprinkling in Baptism,
and shows that this ought so to be interpreted too; being Notes on St. Cyprians
Epistle to Magnus, before cited, of that matter. And here, says Gratian (on
St. Cyprians words) first is shown, that the blessed, (i. e. Consecrated)
water, wherewith men who are baptized, are sprinkled, is of avail to their
Sanctification.

. 90. In the Thirteenth Century the Magdeburgensian Historians quote Hugo (I
suppose they mean him de S. Caro) whom Bellarmin, Si vero tanta copia aquae
haberi non possit, ut infans in ea totaliter mergi possit, cum scutello vel
Scypho, vel alio vase aliqua quantitas aquae super infantem effundatur a
baptizante, and fundendo dicat baptizans, Ego baptizo te in nomine patris, and
filii and Spiritus sancti. Et erit insans baptizatus. Hugo in 16. in Johan. ap.
Magdeb. cent. 13. col. 596. l. 6, 7. etc.
as well as Alsted, places, An. Chr. 1245. for baptism not by total immersion.
And (says he) if there cannot be had a sufficiency of water for the infant to
be wholly dipped into it, then let the Baptizer pour some quantity of water upon
the Infant, with a dish or other vessel, and as he pours it, let him say, I
baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
And the Infant will be baptized. How? baptized without being dipped? yes, in the
Opinion of this Author, a person of Reputation in his time for Judgment and
Learning.

. 91. In the same Century (about An. Chr. 1251) the said Authors tell us of a
Synodical Constitution, Et in libro ab Episcopo Nemansensi conscripto dicitur,
Praecipimus itaque ut infans quam cito natus fuerit, si periculum sibi mortis
immineat, ita, quod Presbytero praesentari nequeat, a circumstantibus masculis
baptizetur, etc. Magd. cent. 13. c. 6. col. 594.
written by the Bishop of Nemans: wherein it is ordained, that as soon as ever
the Infant is born, if there be any danger of death, so as that it cannot be
presented to the Priest, then any either man or woman, the very Father, or
mother of it (so there be no body else present that can) may baptize it. But in
such necessity who can imagine the Constitution intended the dipping of the
Infant? who can think any other, but that Reason moved by pity, swayed by
Charity, and guided by the Custom of the Church, in such cases, would dictate
the more favorable way of sprinkling?

. 92. About the Year of Christ, 1255. flourished Thomas Aquinas. And he
disputes the case whether immersion be of the necessity of Baptism: and
produces Arguments for it, and Answers to them. And grounding on what is said
by the Apostle, Heb. 10.22. Cum in baptismo assumatur aqua ad corporis
ablutionem, non modo per immersionem verum etiam per aspersionem, vel etiam
effusionem aquae baptismus dari potest, etc. Aquin. Sum. 3. q. 66. art. 7.
Conclus. etc. art.
Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of Faith, having our
hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and our bodies washed with pure
water, he answers to the question, that inasmuch as Water is made use of in the
Sacrament of Baptism for bodily washing, whereby is signified the inward
washing away of sins; and a washing with water may be made not only by way of
immersion, but also of aspersion or effusion: therefore, though it be the
safer, because the more common way, to baptize by dipping; yet may a baptism be
made by way of sprinkling, or pouring on of Water, the way (as he also says)
S. Laurence is said to have baptized. And that this may be done through
necessity, either by reason of the multitude to be baptized, or scarceness of
Water, or feebleness of the Minister, or weakness of the party, whose death may
be eminently endangered by dipping.

. 93. His Contemporary Bonaventure, Dicendum quod praesumitur quod Apostoli
baptizaverunt aspergendo; and mos ille servatur adhuc in pluribus Ecclesiis,
and maxim in Ecclesia Gallicana. Servari autem potest propter hoc, quod ibi
est integra ratio Sacramenti: and servari debet cum necessitas imminet. etc.
Bonavent. l. 4. did. 3. art. 2. q. 2.
yet a little behind him, ( An. Chr. 1263.) does just as he does, disputes the
question, (An immergendus, vel tantummodo aspergendus sit baptizandus?) and
gives Arguments pro, and con. But his Answer to the question is, that it is
presumed, that the Apostles baptized by sprinkling; which way is yet kept in
many Churches, and most in the Gallican. And kept it may be, because therein is
the whole Reason of the Sacrament; and kept it ought to be in case of
necessity, by reason of the weakness or timerousness of the Baptizer, the
feebleness of the party to be baptized, or the scarceness of Water to baptize
withal.

. 94. In this Century the Magdeburgensians tell us of a Synod at Colonia under
the Emperor Rudolphus, who was elected to the Empire ( An. Chr. 1274.) wherein
(if it were not rather the Council of Lions held that year) it was decreed,
That if there were any fear the Infant would die before it was born, Si
timeatur de morte infantis antequam nascatur, and caput ejusdem appareat extra
uterum, infundat aquam, quae adfuerit, super caput nascentis, dicens, Ego te
baptizo -- Synod. Colon. sub Rudolpho Imperatore, apud Magdeb cont. 13.
so the head did but appear out of the Womb, the Baptizer should pour such
water as was present upon the head of the child now in the birth, saying, I
baptize thee, etc. Now this, a Synod, especially of so many Bishops (500. if it
were the Concilium Lugdunense that made this decree) would never have ordained,
had they not judged the act to be lawful and valid to all intents and purposes;
and that there was a baptism performed, when to that action was added (and in
the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost) I baptize thee.

. 95. In the same Century the said Authors quote Gulielmus, (I suppose they
mean Durantus) who lived (as Bellarmin says) in the time of Pope Nicholas the
Third ( An. Chr. 1280. Quandoque datur per immersionem, ita quod totus puer
immergitur in aqua. Quandoque etiam datur per aspersionem, quando puer
aspergitur, and super eum aqua infunditur. Guil. Durant. de ritu baptizandi, c.
2.
) and flourished about An. 1286. And he speaking of the several ways of
Baptizing says, sometimes Baptism is given by Immersion, so that the whole
child is dipped in Water. And sometimes it is given by Aspersion, when the
child is Sprinkled, and water is poured upon him. This is a report from him of
what was done in his time. As to what was his own Opinion in the case, I shall
report that from the Author himself, whom since the reading of their quotation,
and the writing it from them, I have had the opportunity to consult; and he
having said concerning the baptismal ablution, Quintum est baptismi ablutio.
Circa quod notandum est quod trina fit immersio seu lotio in baptismo in nomine
Trinitatis, etc. -- Si tamen quis ita aeger sit, ut non possit ter sinc
laesione immergi, sufficit illum aqua aspergi, ut probatur multipliciter in
Canone Cypriani. Licet quidem illud intelligunt de aquae benedictae aspersione.
Sed and si magna corporis pars praeter caput infunditur, vel saltem caput,
baptizatus quis reputatur, and non aliter. Licet quidem etiamsi super pedem
aqua ceciderit, reputent baptizatum. Guil. Durantus l. 60. Rationalis Divinorum
Officiorum. Fol. 148. col. 1.
that it is a threefold dipping, or washing in baptism, in the name of the
Trinity; adds this to what he had said, Yet if any be so sick, that he cannot
without hurt be thrice dipped, it is sufficient that he be thrice sprinkled
with water. He adds also, that if a good big part of the body besides the head,
have water poured upon it, or at least the head, the party is held to be
baptized; and not otherwise: though some think him baptized, if water do but
fall upon his foot.

. 96. In this Century also I suppose I may place Johannes Duns Scotus; but
whereabouts I cannot tell: so different are the accounts that are given of his
time. For Alsted places him Anno 1300. Bellarmin (in his book de Scriptoribus
Ecclesiasticis, page 381.) says he died An. Dom. 1380; who yet (in
Chronologiae part altera, page 107.) places him about An. 1294. The Author of
the Flosculi Historici, about An. 1295. Balaeus says that he died An. 1208. I
suppose the figures in Bellarmin, and Bale are mistaken, and both should be,
1298. But be that as it will, which is not material to the point, his judgment
was for a sufficiency of a Baptism by less than a total immersion. For (says
he) if the principal part of a child (not yet wholly born) as the head, Si
principalis pars, ut caput, appareat, sic illa part baptizata simpliciter
baptizatur [sc^puer] nec est iterum baptizandus, quia in illa part sunt omnes
sensus humani, and per consequens totus homo, etc. Joh. Duns Scotus in sent. l.
4. did. 4. q. 3.
do appear, that part being baptized so, (which cannot be by dipping, but must
be by Sprinkling, or such like shedding of water upon it) the child is fully
baptized, nor is he again to be baptized, because in that part there are all
man's senses, and consequently in a manner the whole man. So then with this
acute School-man a principal part being baptized, the whole person is baptized,
which yet could not be, if baptism were nothing less than the total immersion
of the whole person.

. 97. In the Fourteenth Century ( An. Chr. 1360.) flourished Dr. William
Lynwood, who wrote Commentaries on the Constitutions of several of our Bishops.
And whereas by the words of a Constitution of Edmund Archbishop of Canterbury,
(who dyed as Bellarmin says, an. 1240, and was Canonized by Innocent IVth.) it
seemed that baptism ought so to be administered in some kind of vessel, that the
party to be baptized might be dipped into the water, he tells you, Tamen hoc
non intelligas de necessitate baptismi, scilicet ut fiat immersio, sed potest
fieri etiam per modum effusionis, vel aspersionis. Et hoc maxim est verum,
quando consuetudo Ecclesiae hoc patitur, vel quando necessitas incumbit propter
defectum aquae, sive periculum pueri de cujus morte timetur, vel etiam propter
imbecillitatem sacerdotis non potentis sustentare infantem. In his enim casibus
and similibus sufficit, quod caput aspergatur, vel super caput aqua effundatur,
vel in aquam mergatur tanquam pars principalior. Lynwood. Constitution. l. 3.
c. de Baptismo and ejus effectu. super verbum [Vas illud] in Constitutione
Edmundi.
that you are not to understand it to be of the necessity of baptism, that
there be dipping; but that it may be dispatched by way of effusion or
aspersion, that is sprinkling. And this (says he) is especially true, when the
custom of the Church permits it to be done, or when there is a necessity for
it, by reason of want of water, or fear of the Child's death, or weakness of the
Priest not able to bear up the Infant. For in these, and the like cases, it is
sufficient if the head be sprinkled, or have water poured upon it, or, as being
the more principal part, if it be dipped into water. Whether then it be any
circumstance in the case that leads thereto, or whether it be the custom of the
Church, that is the Inducer unto it, baptism however performed, by pouring or
sprinkling of water on the Party baptized, though he be not totally dipped, is,
at least in the judgment of this Learned Man, sufficient.

. 98. A little after (about An. Chr. 1370.) flourished John Wickliff, and
taught here in England. And he, having first declared it an Ordination of the
Church, that any believer might in case of necessity be baptized; adds thereto,
that it mattered not, -- Et ordinavit Ecclesia quod qualibet persona fidelis in
necessit^tis articulo peterit baptizari; nec refert sive immergantur semel vel
ter; sive aquae super capita sua effundantur: sed faciendum est secundum
consuetudinem loci, quem quis incolit, tam in uno legitimo ritu, quam in alio.
Jo. Wickliff. Trialog. l. 4. c. 11.
whether they were dipped once, or thrice; or whether water were poured upon
their heads; but that every one was to act according to the custom of the place
he lived in, as well in one lawful rite as in another. By which it is most
evident, that he held pouring of water on the head a lawful rite in baptism, as
well as dipping the body into water: or else he would never have left it so at
liberty as he did, to have it done either way, with a non refert, it matters
not which way it is done. And so how much soever the Anabaptists think Wickliff
was for them, he was not for the necessity of a total immersion in baptizing.

. 99. In the Fifteenth Century (about An. Chr. 1452.) flourished Nicolaus de
Orbellis. And upon the question, whether a Child could be baptized whilst in
the Mother's Womb? he resolves, that if it were wholly in, it could not be
baptized; but that if any principal part, as the head, were out; it might be
baptized in that part; Aut patet pars principalis, puta caput, and tunc potest
baptizari in illa part, and in hoc simpliciter baptizari. Non enim est
verisimile quod in die Pentecostes quando baptizati sunt tria millia, quod
quilibet lavaretur quantum ad totum corpus suum in aqua: sed praecise quantum
ad faciem aspergendo, vel quantum ad caput perfundendo. Nicol. de Orbellis in
4. Sentent. did. 4. q. 1. de Baptismo, fol. 10. a.
and that such baptizing was sufficient without any more ado. But that
baptizing could not be of the whole person: therefore his opinion was, that
less than a total immersion was sufficient to speak a complete baptism. But his
own reason which he adds to his opinion will put all out of doubt. For, says
he, it is not probable that, when on the day of Pentecost Three Thousand were
baptized, every ones Body was washed all over with water ( i. e. was dipped)
but his Face only by sprinkling, or his Head by pouring water upon it.

. 100. In this Century (about. An. Chr. 1480.) flourished Angelus Clavasius
Author of the Angelic Sum of Cases of Conscience. And he, having delivered
the several Opinions there were, as to the manner of baptizing, one holding
that all was to be washed, another the head, or face, or breast, declares at
last, what the opinion was, which was most commonly held, namely that the
Infant, T^netur tamen communis [sc. sententia] quod qualitercunque contingatur,
est baptizatus: and quod sufficiat aspersio quantumcunque modica in casu
necessitatis. Angel. de Clavasio, Summa Angelica. fol. 25. b -- col. 2.
which way soever he be touched [ i. e. with the water] was baptized: and that
a sprinkling, how little soever it were, was sufficient in case of necessity.

. 101. In this Century, toward the latter end of it, Sed detur quod puer
partim sit in utero, and pars extra baptizetur, nunquid est baptizatus? V.
Dicendum quod si pars principalis est extra ut caput, tunc potest baptizari:
nec est postmodum rebaptizandus. Guil. Vorrilong. in l. 4. Sent. did. 4. fol.
126. col. 1. Edit. Venet. An. 1503.
flourished Guil. Vorrilong: So I suppose, because his Book was printed at
Venice, Anno 1502. And, in case part of a Child in the Birth appeared out of
the Womb, whilst part was within, if that part which appeared out was a
principal part, as the head, his opinion was, that then the Child might be
baptized by an application of water to that part, and was not after to be
baptized again. Which clearly shows, that he held a baptizing by other than a
total immersion, lawful and sufficient.

. 102. In the Sixteenth Century, to pass by the Christians of St. Thomas in
India, and the Habassins in Africa, who baptize their Infants sooner than the
time of Forty days, if there be any danger of their dying before; which so
great care for their Souls, cannot be without some care for their Bodies, which
would little appear, if for the saving of the one, they should unnecessarily
destroy the other; and so is, like other examples of the same sort, an
intimation at least of a baptism by other gentler ways, than that of a total
immersion among those Christians. We are told by Johannes Faber, in an Epistle
of his to Ferdinand King of the Romans, dated ( An. 1525. Cum puer fortioribus
naturae viribus apparet, ter totus immergitur, alioquin, aqua tingitur, raro
tamen: conspersio enim minus sufficiens judicatur. De Russorum, Tartarorum and
Moscovitarum Religione, page 176.
) concerning the Muscovites, that they baptize their Infants, if strong, by a
threefold immersion, else by a tinging or sprinkling them with water, though
this latter way they do use but seldom, as holding sprinkling not altogether so
sufficient. Now these having received their Religion, as they say of
themselves, from St. Andrew; and being very firm to what they have once
received, as he says of them, may be an instance of a baptizing by pouring on
of water, as well as by putting into water, not only for the time that Author
writ in, but for all the time since the first reception of their Religion,
which may, for ought I know, reach up to the Apostles days; and does so, if
their own Tradition be true; and why it may not, may perhaps be more than every
one can tell.

Tunc Sacerdos puerum sinistrae manui suae impositum teneat supra fontem, and
manu dextra de font hauriens aquam fundat super caput pueri tribus vicibus:
ita quod aqua tangat caput and scapulas, dicens Ego te baptizo in nomine
patris, fundat semel capite ad Orientem verso. Et filii, secundo superfundat
aquam Baptismi, capite verso ad Aquilonem: Et Spiritus Sancti, fundat tertio,
capite verso ad meridiem. Notandum circa Baptismum, sive ipse actus baptizandi
siat p^r trinam immersionem, sive per trinam superinfusionem aquae, utrumque
ritum and modum Ecclesia recepit. Vtrum autem semel aut ter immergatur, aut si
aqua superinfundatur tertio, non variat Baptismi essentiam: Ita tamen ut
Ecclesiae consuetudo observetur, quam non observans peccat. Magis tamen
amplectendum, si alias illius Ecclesiae fuerit consuetudo, quod ter aqua
superinfundatur. Si enim Sacerdos sit senex, aut tremulas habens manus, aut si
sit vehemens frigus. si infans sit debilis, aut adultus, aut perfectioris
aetatis, qui commode immergi non possunt: expedit, ut per infusionem aquae
fiat, and non per immersionem. Cujus rei exemplum trabimus ab Apostolis, Sancto
Laurentio, Remigio, caeterisque pluribus, qui aspergendo and superinfundendo
aquam baptizabant. Sic sanctus Laurentius urceo aquae superinfuso baptizavit
Romanum. Sic etiam Remigius Regem Franciae baptizavit. Quare ne ritus alius ad
sanos, alius ad infirmos, alius ad pucros, alius ad adultos varietur, sed unus
permaneat modus: expedit, ut hujus Sacramenti ministri tutiorem amplexantes
modum, superinfundendo ter baptizent, nisi consuetudo contrarium habeat. Agenda
Ecclesiae Moguntinensis per Reverendiss. in Christo Patrem, etc. Dom.
Sebastianum Archiep. Moguntin. and Princip. Electorem. Edit. Moguntiae, Anno
1551. fol. 22, 23.
. 103. Of the manner of baptizing in the Archbishopric of Mentz, we have an
account given in the Agenda of that Church, published by Sebastian Archbishop
of that See, An. Dom. 1551. and that is, that the Priest holding the Child over
the Font in his left hand, shall take water out of the Font with his right
hand, and pour it upon the head of the Child three times. Nor is there only
this Order given, but a Note also added, declaring the indifferency of both the
Ceremonies Immersion and Superinfusion, neither way varying the Essence of
Baptism, and both ways being received by the Church: whose custom in either is
to be observed: though on diverse accounts pouring on of water is judged more
expedient than dipping into it: and that practice justified by the example of
the Apostles, St. Laurence, Remigius, and diverse others.

. 104. Of the Russian manner of baptizing I find different accounts given.
According to one relation made by Dr. Giles Fletcher (An. Dom. 1588.) the
manner is, Purchase. Pilgrim. part. 3. page 451.
that after certain prayers, the Priest plungeth the child thrice over head and
ears. For this, as that Relator says, they hold to be plain necessary, that no
part of the child be undipped. But according to another account given in
another relation ( An. Dom. 1557.) recorded by Purchase, the manner is, that
when the water is sanctified, Purchase Pilgrim part. 3. page 229.
the Priest takes the child, and holds it in a small Tub, and one of the
Godfathers takes the Pot with warm water, and pours it all upon the child's
head. And with this in part agrees that Relation which was made in an Epistle
written to David Chytraeus, (dated Aug. 1. Post longas tandem Caeremonias
Flamen toto congio perfundere solet infantem, ita inquiens, Baptizo te, etc.
Lib. de Russorum, Moscovitarum, and Tartarorum Religione, page 240.
1576) wherein it is shown, that their manner of baptizing their Infants, was by
pouring a large quantity of water on them. The Priest (as says that Author
relating the manner of their baptizing) uses to pour a whole gallon of water
upon the Infant, saying, I baptize thee, etc. So that, according to this
relation, pouring on of water is with them a baptizing. And for the diversities
of the Relations, they may easily be reconciled, by considering, that they
might be founded in the different accounts, that in different times and places,
might be given to the Relators; that thing being in use at one time, which was
not in another, and that in one place, which was not in another; as it were
easy, were it needful, to prove by instance without going half so far as
Russia for the proof of it: indifferent rites and customs in the Church, being
quickly taken up, or laid down, as the Pleasure of the Governors, or Fancy of
the people is.

. 105. And truly as the general custom now in England is to Sprinkle, Deinde
accipiat sacerdos infantem per latera in manibus suis, and interrogato nomine
ejus baptizet eum sub trina mersione, tantum sanctam Trinitatem invocando. ita
dicens [N. Et ego baptizo te in nomine patris] and mergat eum semel versa facie
ad aquilonem, and capite versus orientem [and filii] and iterum mergat semel
versa facie ad meridiem [and Spiritus Sancti. Amen] and mergat tertio recta
facie versus aquam. Tunc Patrini accipientes infantem de manibus Sacerdotis
levent cum de Font. Manuale ad Vsum Ecclesiae Sarisburiensis, fol. 41. b.
Edit. An. 1530.
so in the fore end of this Centurie the general custom was to dip. And yet at
the same time in Belgia it was the manner to baptize by pouring of water on.
Thence that Note set in the Margin of St. Cyprians Epistle to Magnus in the
Edition of that Author set forth by Erasmus, and Printed at Leyden, by
Gryphius, An. 1537. Perfunduntur apud nos, merguntur apud Anglos, i. e. They
are sprinkled or baptized by the pouring of water on, in our Country, they are
dipped in England; that is, as I suppose, some were so baptized, and perhaps
the greater number, though others, whose weakness required more favorable
dealing with them, were sprinkled; which within the time of half a Century
prevailed to be the more general, Then the Priest shall take the child in his
hands and ask the Name. And Naming the Child, sh ll dip it in the Water Thrice:
first dipping the right side, secondly the left side, the third time dipping
the Face toward the Font, so it be discreetly and warily done, saying, N. I
baptize thee, etc. And if the Child be weak, it shall suffice to pour water
upon it, saying the foresaid words. K. Edwards Com. Prayer book, of the first
Edition Printed, An. 1549.
as now it is almost the only way of baptizing. And no marvel, when as by the
Rubric of that Office, (as the Administration of it was settled by Queen
Elizabeth, and by King Edward the Sixth before her) whereas dipping was the
appointed way of baptizing, yet it was declared, that if the Child were weak,
it should suffice to pour water upon it. And when the liberty of Sprinkling was
allowed, what tender mother would not think her newborn child too weak to
endure to be dipped? especially if once some instance really were, or were but
fancied, and famed, of some child's taking cold, or being otherwise prejudiced
by its being dipped. And when withal some learned Persons of the Nation
declared for the lawfulness of baptizing otherwise than by dipping: of whom,
for an instance, I shall name one without exception, and that is Dr. Whitaker,
who flourished a little after the middle of this Century dying in the year of
our Lord, 1595.

. 106. And though that then learned, and still famous man, (...) aut (...)
immersionem significat, quia olim qui adulti baptizabantur, non leviter aqua
tincti aut astersi fuerunt, sed immersi; and quibusdam in locis ter immersi:
qui mos in Ecclesia diu permansit -- Alia tamen locorum and populorum quorundam
consuctudo fuit, ubi tinctione contenil, quam sufficere putabant, immersionem
non desiderabant.

Quanquam autem in adultis and sanis immersionem meliorem esse putem, tamen
sufficere in parvulis and clinic s aspersionem arbitror. Nam Christus jussit
(...), non modum praescripsit: (...) vero non immergere tantum significat, sed
and tingere, etsi nusquam, quod sciam, aspergere, nam illud est (...). Dr.
Whitaker Praelection. de Sacram. de Baptismo. qu. 1. c. 2. p. 216.


Master of St. John's College in Cambridge, and the Kings Professor of
Divinity in that University, do say that (...) and (...) signify immersion,
and thinks immersion the better way for those that are of grown Age, and in
Health (wherein I believe he is not alone) yet he thinks Sprinkling sufficient
for little Children, and such as keep their beds; adding that for a reason,
which is much to the purpose, namely, because Christ did command to baptize,
but did not prescribe the manner of baptizing; and that (...) did signify, not
only to dip, but to wet, though it did not, that he knew of, signify to
sprinkle, that being (...), another word. Thus we have this learned man
declaring his judgment and in his Lectures too, for a sufficiency of Sprinkling
for children, and sick persons; and that grounded on a no prescription of the
manner of baptizing by Christ the Ordainer of the Sacrament of baptism, which
is as much as can be desired to be said by any.

. 107. And no wonder if that Custom prevailed at home, Caeterum mergaturne
totus qui tingitur, idque ter an semel, an infusa tantum aqua aspergatur,
minimum refert: sed id pro regionum diversitate Ecclesiis liberum esse debet.
Quanquam and ipsum Baptizandi verbum mergere significat, and mergendi ritum
veteri Ecclesiae observatum fuisse constat. Calvin. Inst. l. 4. c. 14. Sect.
19. fol. 443. Hic perspicimus quisnam apud veteres baptizandi ritus fuerit:
totum enim corpus in aquam immergebant: nunc invaluit usus, ut minister corpus
vel caput tantum asp rgat. Calvin. in Act. Apost. c. 8. v. 38. p. 144. a.
Promissione facta nomen infanti imponitur* tum in cum aquam Baptismi minister
effundit, inquiens, N. Baptizo te, etc. Calvin. Tract. Theolog. de Baptismo, p.
45.
which our Reformed Divines in the time of the Marian persecution, had found to
be the judgment of other Divines, and seen to be the practice of other Churches
abroad: and especially of Mr. Calvin, and his Church at Geneva. For that great
and leading man, Mr. Calvin, whose glory needs not my Taper to show it to the
world, as illustriously shining therein by its own native light, (whose time
was about An. Chr. 1535.) though he grant the verb (...) to signify to dip,
and say it for a certainty, that the rite of dipping was observed by the
ancient Church, yet he says it is not material at all, whether he that is
baptized be totally dipped, and that once or thrice; or whether he be only
sprinkled with water poured on him: but that it ought to be free for the
Churches to do as they think good in that, according to the diversity of
Countries wherein they are. In this learned Man's judgment then sprinkling is
lawful, notwithstanding the signification of the word, and use of the Church to
dip, unless, as I suppose he means, though he mention it not, in case of
necessity, wherein it appears to have been the custom to sprinkle, etc. or else
it could not be free for Churches to use it. Yea in the Forth of Administration
of Baptism written by this Great Man, for the Church of Geneva, the way of
baptizing, as it is there by him set down, is by pouring out of water on the
Infant to be baptized.

. 108. Contemporary with Calvin, and somewhat before him, was Martin Bucer,
flourishing about An. Chr. 1520. And he tells us, that God commended unto men
such a rite, as that by either the tinction, ablution, Porro quod Deus ejusmodi
ritum hominibus commendavit, ut aquae vel tinctione vel ablutione, aut
aspersione peccatorum a se ablutionem acciperent, and eam per publicos
religionum administros, and hinc denique suum cultum semper auspicarentur,
causa est, quod initium and caput salutis nostrae, fidem remissionis
peccatorum, hoc est gratuitae justificationis confirmare hominibus ^o pacto,
and excitare voluerit. M. Bucer. enarrat. Ep. Pauli ad Roman. c. 6. p. 289.
Edit. 1536.
or aspersion of water they should receive remission of sins, and that by the
public Ministers of the religions, and lastly would always have them begin his
worship with this, because he would have the prime and principal point of our
salvation, the belief of remission of sins, that is of free justification, by
that means confirmed unto men, and more powerfully stirred up. His speaking so
indifferently of all these ways of baptizing, tinction, ablution, and
aspersion, speaks his allowance and approbation of every one.

. 109. But not Calvin only, and the Men of his judgment, were so minded, but
Persons also of a different persuasion from him, and that both at home and
abroad. Ter vero infans vel immergitur, vel tingitur aqua baptismatis. --

Tertio quoque repetita immersio vel tinctio typum triduanae domini sepulturae
exprimit, per quam Christo consepulti sumus in baptismo, and cum Christo
resurreximus in fide, ut a peccatis abluti, in sanctitate virtutum vivamus,
imitando Christum. Canon. Council. Provincial. Coloniens. sub Hermanno
celebrati, Anno 1536.


For instance, Herman Archbishop of Colen, for the Reformation of his Diocese
held a Provincial Council in the Year of our Lord, 1536. for which he was after
by the Emperor forced to leave his Bishopric. In that Council the Canon, which
concerns the baptizing of Infants, is delivered in such terms, as speak
differing ways of baptizing, viz. either by immerging, or by tinging, that is,
by dipping or sprinkling, (or otherwise wetting than by dipping) in use in that
Church. It adds also, that the thrice repeated immersion or tinction, expresses
a type of our Lord's three days Sepulture or burial. Now it is plain, that
though tingo, where it stands alone, does not denote any particular way of
baptizing, but notes baptizing in general, without reference to any particular
way of it, and is so used in the writings of Church Authors both ancient, and
Modern; yet when it is set with immergo, and in contradistinction to it, then
it notes another way of baptizing than that, whether by aspersion, affusion, or
perfusion, and not dipping, as I have before sufficiently showed, Chapter 3. S. 6,
7. And it must do so here unless we will in so few words make a ridiculous
tautology, as if the Council had said, But the Infant is thrice either dipped,
or dipped: which would be very little becoming the gravity of so wise and
learned a Council as that was. And tingitur cannot be here said to be added to
immergitur by way of exegesis, or explication; for it is the particular that is
to explain and determine the general, and not the general the particular. And
if but one and the same thing had been meant by both the words, it must have
been, The Infant is tinged, or dipped; not dipped, or tinged. Besides dipping
is a word of a more known and determinate use than tinging is. And 'twere
absurd to explain notum per ignotius, a more known term, by a term of whose
import there was less knowledge. And so here is a fair evidence for a baptism
by other than a total immersion in that Church.

. 110. And thus at home, in the Year 1558. Thomas Watson Bishop of Lincoln
published a Volume of Sermons about the Sacraments: in the fourth of which (
fol. 226.) he says, concerning the matter in hand, although the old and
ancient Tradition of the Church has been from the beginning to dip the Child
three times in the water, as Christ lay three Days in the Grave, yet that is
not of such necessity, but that if he be but once dipped in the water it is
sufficient: yea and in time of great peril and necessity, if the water be but
poured on the head, it will suffice.

. 111. About that time flourished Wolfgangus Musculus, a Man of great Learning,
and equal Modesty. And he An. Chr. 1560. published his Common Places of
Divinity, wherein, Postremo, quod immersionem infantis attinet, judicamus hanc
non sic esse necessariam, ut non sit liberum Ecclesiis baptizare vel mergendo
vel aspergendo. Libertatem hanc servatam esse in Ecclesiis videre est in
Augustino de Ecclesiasticis dogmatibus ( more truly Gennadius was that Author)
c. 74. and Cypriano, l. 4. Ep. 7.
when he comes to speak of the manner, how baptism ought to be administered, he
says, as to the immersion of the Infant that is to be baptized, we do not
judge it so necessary, as that the Churches may not be at liberty to baptize
either by dipping or sprinkling. And then goes on to prove that this liberty
had been kept in the Churches, by two testimonies (already mentioned) from St.
Augustine, and St. Cyprian. This was the judgment of this Man worth a World, as
I have somewhere read him reckoned.

. 112. Much about the same time, or a little after, Ann. Chr. 1565. flourished
Martin. Chemnitius. And he tells us that St. Paul, the best Interpreter of what
is meant by (...), Sed Paulus certissimus interpres dicit baptizare esse
mundare, seu purgare per lavacrum in verbo. Sive igitur per ablutionem quae
fiat adh bita aqua, Ephesians. 5. Tit. 3. Act. 2. sive adhibitio aquae fiat mergendo,
tingendo, perfundendo seu aspergendo, est baptizatio: est enim purgatio, seu
ablutio per lavacrum aquae. Nec ad lavacrum necessario requiritur immersio sub
aquam -- Christi igitur mandatum est, ut in baptismo fiat purificatio seu
ablutio per lavacrum aquae. Quo vero modo illa fieri deb^at, sive mergendo,
tingendo, perfundendo, sive aspergendo, Christus non praescripsit. Chemnitii
Exam. Council. Trident. part. 2. p. 122. a.
says, that to baptize is to cleanse or purge by the washing of water with the
Word. Therefore (concludes he thence) whether the washing be performed by
mersion, tinction, perfusion, or aspersion, it is a baptizing: for it is a
purgation or cleansing by the washing of water. Nor unto this washing is
necessarily required an immersion under Water --: And again, The command of
Christ is, that there be in Baptism a purification or cleansing by the washing
of Water. But how that cleansing ought to be made, whether by dipping, tinging,
pouring on, or sprinkling, Christ has not prescribed. So then at great liberty
is the Church of Christ in this case, to baptize which way she pleases, by
dipping, or sprinkling, or otherwise, and all without sin; at least in the
judgment of this Learned Author, the Trident^ne Council's severe Examiner.

. 113. In the year 1586. was printed at Wirtzburg, the Confessors Manual by
Martinus ab Azpilcueta, and as in his opinion there must be an ablution in
Baptism, Add quod ad hoc, ut aliquis sit vere baptizatus, sufficit quod
quantulacunque pars ejus tingatur aqua quamlibet modica, etc. Martin. ab
Azpilcueta, Dr. Navarrus, Confession Manual. c. 22. n. 7. p. 693.
so the wetting of but a little part, and that but with a little water, is
sufficient to speak the party baptized.

. 114. About the year of our Lord, 1589 flourished Nicolaus Hemingius, and
published his Commentary on St. John. And (says he there) as often as we see
Infants sprinkled with the water of baptism, we are put in mind of the secret
regeneration of Infants, etc. Quoties igitur videmus Infantes aqua Baptismi
aspergi, admonemur arcanae regenerationis infantium quae fit, non per aquam
^lementarem, sed per spiritum sanctum, cujus tamen aqua clementaris efficax
symbolum est. Heming. in Joh. 3.5. col. 132, 133.
No need of arguing hence either the practice of his time to have been to
sprinkle in Baptism; or his opinion of the lawfulness and sufficiency of such
baptizing; since it was symbolical of that secret regeneration that inwardly
was wrought by the Holy Spirit.

. 115. A little lower down in this Century was Lambertus Danaeus, Hodie autem
aqua fere tantum asperguntur qui sunt baptizandi, non autem immerguntur. In quo
ipso nulla est in fide dissentio inter nos and veteres. Lamb. Dan. Isagog.
Christian. pars 4. de Sacramentis, c. 29. page 522.

Nam in baptismi administratione alia sunt aut substantialia, aut Ceremontalia,
aut Accidentalia. Substantialia sunt aqua, and illius applicatio, etc.
Ceremonialia sunt reliqua. Ac substantialia quidem neque possunt, neque debent
praetermitti, vel immutari. At Ceremonialia possunt immutari, quaedam etiam
praetermitti, quaedam etiam omnino rejici and repudiari debent. Id. ib. p. 521.


a learned Author: who (about An. Chr. 1591.) published his Isagoge Christiana.
And having declared the ancient manner of baptizing to have been by dipping,
and that naked, he says, At this day, they who are to be baptized are mostly
sprinkled only with water, and not dipped into it. Wherein yet (he adds) there
is no disagreement in Faith between us and the Ancients. His reason he had
given before, which was, that Substantials of Baptism, as water, and an
application of it, might neither be omitted, nor changed: but the Ceremonials
(as the manner of applying the water by affusion or immersion, and that once or
thrice are) may be changed.

. 116. In the year 1592. was published by Joh. Stephan. Durantus, Huncque ritum
baptizandi, sub trina immersione vel aspersione, servavit Ecclesia, ut ex
Romanae Ecclesiae Sacerdotali apparet. -- Et constat quod in Ecclesiae Romanae
Provinciis aspersione seu perfusione aquae baptismus confertur, quod nec novum,
nec recens est. Legimus quendam a S. Laurentio, dum ad mortem ducebatur, urceo
allato baptizatum fuisse. S. Cyprian. Ep. 76. ad Magn. Nec quenquam movere
debet, quod aspergi vel perfundi videntur aegri, cum gratiam dominicam
consequuntur. Notandum, ait Walafrid. Strabo de Reb, Eccles. c. 26. non solum
mergendo, sed etiam desuper fundendo multos baptizatos fuisse, and adhuc posse
baptizari, etc. -- Joh. Stephan. Durantus de Ritib. Eccles. Cathol. l. 1. c.
19. number. 37. p. 135. Edit. Colon. Agrippina, 1592.
a Book of the Rites of the Catholic Church. Therein he declares how the
Church of Rome had to that time kept (but he says not how long before it had
held) the Rite of baptizing with a threefold dipping, or sprinkling: and that
in the Provinces of the Church of Rome baptism is given by sprinkling or
pouring on of water: which he affirms to be no new thing, nor lately come up;
and backs his affirmation, with the example of St. Laurence, and the
Authorities of Walafrid Strabo, and St. Cyprian. In this testimony there seems
to be great weight, every circumstance considered; whether the Dignity of that
Church, wherein it was, the Church of Rome, the leading Church of the World for
many Ages; or the Diffusedness of it, not only through that Church, but the
Provinces also of it; or the Antiquity of it, from Strabo's time, from St.
Laurences time, from St. Cyprians time (who was martyred about An. Chr. 258.)
nay no beginning is set to its being in the Church of Rome, as if it had been
there held in practice from the beginning. Which (being the contrary thereto
cannot be proved,) is with me an Argument of weighty force: and how slightly
soever some may look upon it, yet others I hope, of cooler temper, may think it
to be of some moment.

. 117. Much about the same time, or a little after ( An. Chr. 1598.) flourished
Daniel Chamier; a person whose learning needs none of my pen to commend it. And
his opinion was, that forasmuch as the whole virtue of the water lay in
signifying by washing, Quia tota virtus aquae est in significando per
ablutionem, certe non interest quantum quisque abluatur, quomodo in Eucharistia
non quantum quisque comedat. l. an. Chamier. l. 5. de Bapt c. 1. p. 1404.
parag. 4.
it mattered not how much every one was washed; even as in the Sacrament of the
Eucharist it did not matter how much every one did eat. Then with him, it was
not material whether the baptism were by immersion, affusion, or aspersion, so
there were but water, and any way an ablution with it.

. 118. In the beginning of this Seventeenth Century now current ( anno 1606.)
Mr. Attersol published his Treatise of the Sacraments. And touching the Point
in hand he delivers his opinion thus. Dipping into the water is not necessary
to the being of a Sacrament: Lib. 2. chapter 1. p. 108, 109.
Sprinkling of water is not necessary to the being of a Sacrament: but wetting
and washing with water is necessary to the being of a Sacrament. Now whether
the whole body should be washed, or the face only: and whether it should be
done once or thrice, is not greatly material, but left indifferent to the
Church to decree and determine, what shall be thought fittest to be received
and practiced.

Materia propinqua est ablutio: est enim opus, quod a^luat corpus Nota tamen
quod per ablutionem intelligimus vel immersionem sive unam sive trinam, vel
aspersionem, vel effusionem: quocunque modo horum fiat, tenet baptismus. Tamen
quisque debet baptizare, juxta ritum suae Ecclesiae, nisi aliud petat
necessitas, vel honestas. Necessitas quidem, ut in loco, ubi est trina, vel una
immersio, cum est periculum nocumenti infantis, potest aspergi, vel pauca aqua
suffundi. Honestas, ut, si adultus est, non debet immergi, sed sufficit
effusio. Tolet. Instruct. Sacerdot. l. 18. p. 372, 373.
. 119. In the year 1603. was Printed (Colon. Agrippin.) Cardinal Tolets Cases
of Conscience. And therein he delivers it as necessary, that there be an
ablution of the body of the baptized with water. But then he tells you, that by
ablution is meant either immersion (once, or thrice) or aspersion, or effusion;
and that which of these ways soever it be done, the Baptism holds good, etc.

Quid de immersione sentiendum, nam Baptizare significat immergere? Nihil
prorsus refert, sive immergantur, sive aspergantur aqua qui baptizantur. Sicut
and illud plane Adiaphorum est, utrum una, duabus vel tribus vicibus id fiat,
and sive front, sive pectore, sive corpore toto. Quia nullum ea de re Verbum
aut Mandatum divinum extat. Modo Aqua secundum Institutionem debita ratione
adhibeatur. Hafenreffar. Theolog. Loc. l. 3. Loc. 7. de Sacrament. p. 493.
. 120. In the Year 1611. was Printed at Tubing, Hafenreffars Common Places,
wherein, though he grant that Baptizo does signify to dip, yet he says, it
matters not at all, whether the Baptized be dipped, or sprinkled with water,
and whether on the forehead, breast, or whole body.

. 121. And thus without adding more, we have seen the judgment and practice of
our Particular Church, agreeing with the judgment and practice of the Church
Catholic, in all the former Ages of it. That the Church has ever allowed of
other Baptisms, besides a total immersion, and upon befitting occasions has
admitted of them. That the Church has never declared any unlawfulness to be in
other ways of baptizing, besides that of a total dipping, nor pronounced the
baptisms of such to be null and void, as were otherwise baptized. Let the
Council, either General, or but Provincial, be produced, wherein any such
Decree has passed, and it shall have all becoming respect paid unto it. And
can now any man, that owns any degree of Communion with the Catholic Church,
be so uncatholick, (not to say Unchristian) as to charge upon that Church so
high a crime, as to continue, through all the Ages of it, so gross an Error in
it, as baptizing by other ways than a total immersion is made, without so much
as attempting the Reformation of it; yea, suffering it by degrees to gain such
ground in it, as to become at length the General, almost the Universal practice
of it? Can any man think that Church so deserted of the Spirit of Christ, and
the gracious influences of his assisting presence, as not to be able to discern
an error to be in this practice, if there were one? Or can any man think her so
deficient in her fidelity to Christ, and care to keep what has been committed
to her, as not to have disowned it, opposed it, and condemned it, if she had
judged any erroneousness to have been in it? She that has appeared so brisk
and vigorous in her oppositions of other errors, as to resist them even unto
Blood, enduring the sharpest and heaviest of persecutions, rather than give way
in the least unto them, how came she to be so stanch and tame in this, as
calmly and coolly to let it slide along in her, from Age to Age, without giving
the least stop or check unto it, or so much as setting any brand of infamy, or
even remark of dislike upon, precisely upon the account of its being such?
What? are all Baptisms, but total immersions, mere nullities? nay worse,
mockages, and abusings; yea frauds and cheats, put upon the parties baptized?
and would never a Church, never a Council, never a Father, once in so many
years appear, in one Decree, in one Canon, in one Homily, in one Condemnation
of them, and in vindication of the one only lawful, effectual way of baptizing?
What? had they all lost their senses? all their courages? all their honesties?
that there should be never a one to stand up for the truth, and bid battle unto
so pernicious an error? What? the Catholic Church turning Conspirator against
it self, and contriving or conniving at a way of bringing members into it self,
which must in the issue prove a turning of it self out of the Church, and a
returning of it into the state of Heathen, or a condition next it? Let man
endued with reason admit of so wild a thought if he can. He must efface all
rationality from off his Soul, that can think any other, but that the Church in
this concern has demeaned her self with all integrity, neither acting therein
without judgment, nor yet against her judgment. And if the Catholic Church be
so innocent, then the Church of England cannot be guilty, which walks but in
Communion with her, in the same judgment, and in the same practice.

CHAP. XI. Answers to Authorities produced to the contrary, by Mr. Danvers,
from diverse Grammarians, Divines, and other Writers.
. 1. BUT methinks I see an Army of Authors drawn up in Battalia, Mr. Danvers
Treat. of Bapt. Part. 2. chapter 4.
by a Major in Arts as well as Arms, and standing ready to attack my
Hypothesis. I will first clear the way of them, and then pass on to other
matter. And I am the more encouraged to the encounter, in regard I discern few,
or no Volunteers among them, but most, or all Prest-men: which, when disengaged
from the force put upon them by their Commander, may hap to face about and be
for us, or at least to march off, without doing any thing at all on either side.

. 2. And the first that appear are Scapula and Stephens, two (as Mr. D. tells
us) as great Masters of the Greek Tongue as any we have (and also great
Defenders of Infants Baptism) and they (as he says) do tell us in their
Lexicons, that (...) from (...) signifies mergo, immergo, submergo, obruo, item
tingo, quod fit immergendo, inficere, imbuere, viz. To dip, plunge, overwhelm,
put under, cover over, to die in color, which is done by plunging.

. 3. If (say I) they be so great Masters of the Greek Tongue, then it is fit
that their word be of suitable Authority with those that appeal to them; and in
one thing as well as in another: else the Appellants take the Authority out of
their hands, and make themselves the Judges of those, whose judicature they
appeal unto. If that may be, things will do well enough. For then as we are to
believe them, when they say that (...) signifies more especially to dip, so
also when they say, that it signifies more generally to wash. And that they
both do, though Mr. D. is not pleased to take notice of any such thing.

. 4. For Scapula, having first rendered (...) by mergo, seu immergo, ut quae
tingendi, aut abluendi gratia aquae immergimus, and again, mergo, submergo,
obruo aqua, adds, Item, (and it is an item fit to be adverted unto) abluo,
lavo, to cleanse with washing, (and in general) to wash. So then by the
judgment of this great Master of the Greek Tongue, (...) signifies, not only
strictly to dip, but also more largely to wash: and then a baptism may be said
to be, where there is a washing, though there be no dipping.

. 5. Then for Stephanus, having first (as did Scapula, who verbatim transcribes
Stephanus) rendered (...) by mergo, seu inmergo, ut quae tingendi, aut abluendi
gratia aquae intingimui, and again mergo, id est, submergo, obruo aqua, he
afterward adds (as Scapula from him has done) (...), abluo, lavo; and after
all renders (...) and (...) by mersio, lotio, ablutio. So then with him, as
with the other great Master of the Greek Tongue, to baptize is not only
strictly to dip, but more largely to wash; and baptizing is not only in
strictness dipping, but in general any washing. And thus much for these two.

. 6. The next Mr. Danvers quotes is Grotius. And (says he) Grotius tells us,
it signifies to dip over head and ears.

. 7. Like enough: but we are not told where, that we might see, whether, if he
say so, he do not say something more. And all he says, being granted,
signifies nothing, unless he had said, it always signifies so, and never
(either in profane, or sacred Authors) any thing other, or less than so. But
that is not said: and this great Man's saying, without that, stands but like a
Cipher without a Figure.

. 8. Pasor comes next, and tells, as Mr. D. informs us, that it signifies, an
Immersion, Dipping, or Submersion.

. 9. But either Pasor says not so: or else my eyes are so bad, that they
cannot, no not with the help of Spectacles, read those words in him. In Page
133. he renders (...) by baptisma, and per Metaph. Afflictio; and page 134.
(...) lotio and baptismus: but not a word of What he is quoted for. But perhaps
the meaning is, that (...) signifies an Immersion, Dipping, or Submersion. He
does indeed render (...) by immergo, but (what was not minded, or wilfully
omitted) he adds also in the very next abluo: and after renders (...) (in Luc.
11.38.) by lavisset, had washed; and (...), Marc. 7.4. by loti fuerint, wash.
So then his bare saying of (...), that it signifies immergo to dip, signifies
nothing at all, unless he had spoken exclusively, as to all other
significations of the Verb: whereas he does not that; but expressly allows it
the general signification of washing, according to the then current exposition
of the Texts he cites for that signification of it. And so here is nothing to
the purpose out of this Author neither.

. 10. Vossius succedes him, and (as Mr. D. says) tells us, ' that it implies
a washing the whole Body.

. 11. 'Twas modestly said by Vossius, if he did say it, and will find no
contradiction, provided his meaning be not, that it always signify so, and
never any thing other, or less. But where did Vossius say so? Mr. D. does nor
here tell us. But I suppose he means in his Disp. 1. de Baptismo, These. 1. page
343. For there he speaks directly, and distinctly of the import of the word.
And Mr. D. has said here nothing contrary unto what he there says, only he
tells us not all he said. He says, that (...) properly notes mergere to dip,
and that it is so explained in the old glossaries, first put forth by H.
Stephanus, so as that it is more than (...), to swim lightly at the top, and
less than (...), which is to go to the bottom to ones own destruction.

. 12. But first, if this be the proper import of the word in Profane Authors,
unless it could be proved, that it were used in no other acception in the Holy
Writers, the Argument makes nothing against the Church of England's Hypothesis:
as I have elsewhere in these Papers made good.

. 13. Secondly Vossius says (what Mr. D. was not pleased to take notice of)
that because a thing uses commonly therefore to be dipped and wetted, that it
may be washed, thence it is that, as the Heb. (...) (which the LXX. render
(...)) is taken also for (...) which is to wash, so likewise among the Greeks
is (...) by a Metalepsis used for the same, giving several instances thereof in
Jud. 12.7. Sirac. 34.30. Marc. 7.4. Luke 11.38. And that the baptisms of Pots,
and Cups, of brazen Vessels and Beds, in Marc. 7.4, 8. ought not otherwise to
be understood.

. 14. Thirdly, that, notwithstanding what the word in its proper acception did
note out of the Church, Vossius thought sprinkling to suffice for a baptism in
the Church, is evident by his express assertion hereof in his These. 9. p. 356.
To which he adds as the reason, because in that there remains the substance of
the Sacrament. And that in as much as in both there is an ablution, there may
be seen a Sacramental analogy between the sprinkling of water, and that which
is made with the blood of Christ. Now in fair dealing Mr. D. should as well
have told us, what he said of the thing, as of the word; and of the grounds and
way of his reconciliation of the one with the other: and then he had done
ingenuously indeed. And if there had been no way of fair accommodation, then
might this great Author, with all the weight of his reputation for deepness of
Learning, and soundness of Judgment, have passed for as clear a witness for
him, as he is now against him.

. 15. Mincaeus (as Mr. D. says) in his Dictionary (tells us) That (...) a
(...) is in the Latin Baptismus, in the Dutch Doopsel, or Doopen, English
Baptism or Baptime, viz. to Dive, or Duck in water, and the same with the
Hebrew (...) to dip.

. 16. I will not say, but that (...) does signify to dive or duck (if he will)
in water (though I am not altogether satisfied with those words, when I
remember they are words (especially the latter) whereby is expressed the manner
of Ducks going into the Water, and consider what pleasances it would afford
some Persons to see naked Men and Women go into the Water after that manner;
and cannot call to mind, that ever any Men, or Women went, or were put, so,
into the Water, when they were baptized, but after a way of more gravity and
modesty) nor but that it is the same in sense with the Heb. (...) to dip: But
then I must add, that its signifying thus much, does not prove that it
signifies no more; its signifying this does not prove (what Mr. D. undertakes
to prove, and for the proof whereof, as I suppose, he produces all these
Testimonies) that the word we call Baptism is nothing else, but to dip, plunge
(as they love also to speak, though I am not overwell satisfied with that
neither, it having never been the use of the Church to plunge Men, according to
the propriety of that word, into Rivers or Fonts, when they were baptized, but
for themselves to go into them, or by others to be fairly put into them, if
they were such as could not go in of themselves) or cover all over. In plain
English, (as Mr. D. speaks) it is like the Heb. (...), signifies that, and
something else; to dip in particular, and to wash in general, as the Learned in
the Oriental Languages say, and has been showed in these Papers. Nor is this
contradicted by Mincaeus. And thus much for him.

The next, that is brought in to charge us, is Leigh (as Mr. D. is pleased
without any the least title of respect to introduce that honorable Gentleman)
and he (as Mr. D. tells us) in his Critica Sacra, says, Its native and proper
signification is to dip into water, or to plunge under water; for which he
cites these Scriptures, where so used, viz. Matthew. 3.6. (it should be 16.) Act.
8.38. And that it is taken from a Dyer's Fat, and imports a Dying, or giving a
fresh Color, and not a bare washing only, Rev. 19.13. And for which he quotes
Casaubon, Bucan, Bullinger, Zanchy, Spanhemius. He says withal, That some
would have it signify washing, and which sense Erasmus, he says, opposed,
affirming, that it was not otherwise so, than by consequence, for the proper
signification was such a dipping or plunging, as Dyers use for Dying of
Clothes.

. 17. It is comfortable, that the Author is to be easily had, and the place
consulted. And for answer hereto little need be said to him, that shall consult
the place. The first view, that shall be taken of it, will sufficiently
vindicate Mr. Leigh, and the truth. And because it is material, and all
Persons, that shall be concerned in this debate, may not be in condition to
consult, or make the best advantage of that passage of that Author; therefore I
will here by degrees give a total transcription of it.

. 18. It is true, Mr. Leigh says, That the native and proper signification of
it is to dip into water, or to plunge under water, for which he cites Matthew.
3.16. Act. 8.38. and also (what Mr. D. omits) John 3.22, 23.

. 19. But first I have made it appear in these Papers, that neither Matthew.
3.16. nor Act. 8.38. prove that signification of the word. A baptizing they
prove; but not a dipping.

. 20. Secondly, though it be probable from John 3.22. that the baptizing in
Aenon was by dipping, yet that is not so much from the force of the word, as
from that addition of the reason of John's baptizing there, which was, because
there was much water there. And yet, if a Man would dispute it stiffly, even
that reason will not demonstratively prove it. This it will prove, that it was
a place of great convenience for John's purpose to baptize confluences of
People in: (1.) Because there were (...), not deep, but many waters there. That
may mean this, and nothing else but this, that there were there many several
places of convenience for baptizing, by reason of the windings in and out of
the Brook, Maeander-wise, so that one company might be privately fitting and
preparing themselves for baptism in one place, whilst John was administering it
to another company in another place, or here a company of Men by themselves,
and there a company of Women by themselves, as afterward in the Christian
Church there were distinct apartments in the Baptisteries for the Men, and for
the Women; and so the actions of stripping themselves, and going into, and
coming out of the water naked, might be performed with more decency, and less
observance; not with that disturbance to the company, not with that violence
unto modesty, which must needs be, where the baptizing place was but one, and
the multitudes to be baptized all together. And (2.) this is still the more
probable, if we imagine any Women were baptized there also, as well as Men. And
it is reasonable enough to imagine it, when it is said, Matthew. 3.5, 6. that
there went out to him Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the Region round about
Jordan, and were baptized of him; and when it is remembered, that the Women also
among the Jews were admitted unto Proselytism by Baptism, as well as the Men.
For great caution and respect unto the Feminine modesty was had amongst that
jealous as well as lustful People in the baptizing of their Women, that neither
themselves might be put to the blush, nor others have any lascivious thoughts
stirred up in them by any thing seen, or observable, in the baptizing of them.
And if this be a probable account of the reason given for John's baptizing in
Aenon, because of the many waters there (and I appeal even unto Mr. D. himself
whether it be not) then can that reason conduce nothing to the proving, that
the baptism performed there was by dipping. For not the multitude of waters,
but the deepness and wideness of the water, had been proper to have been
alleged in that case. And John might baptize many persons, and companies of
Persons, in these many several, and not far distant waters, and yet dip none of
them totally in any of them. And this is all it will prove.

. 21. But thirdly, though it might be infallibly proved from these, or any
other places, that the baptism, then and there, was by dipping, yet that can
only prove, that (...) signifies to dip; and is sometimes used in that sense:
(and we that are for dipping as well as for sprinkling, are willing it should
signify the one, as well as the other) but it cannot prove, that it signifies
nothing more but to dip, and is never used in any other signification. And this
indeed is the great mistake, that because (...) signifies (and, if ye will,
primarily and properly) to dip, therefore they will not grant, that it
signifies any thing else, especially in the administration of Baptism. Whereas
it has a latitude in its import and use, as well as most words else have, and
is granted so to have by Learned Authors, in that Sacrament, and particularly
by Mr. Leigh, the Author quoted by Mr. D. against it, as we shall see instantly.

. 22. For, so he begins, (...), Baptizo, often. And then he goes on (whether as
speaking his own sense, or Dr. Featlyes, or his own sense in Dr. Featlyes
words, whose name I see set in the end of the Period) The word Baptize, though
it be derived from (...), ringo, to dip, or plunge into the water, and
signifies primarily such a kind of washing as is used in Bucks, where Linen is
plunged and dipped: yet it is taken more largely for any kind of washing,
rinsing, or cleansing, even where there is no dipping at all, as Matthew. 3.11.
and 20.22. Mark 7.4. and 10.38. Luke 3.16. Act. 1.5. and 11.16. 1 Cor. 10.2.
This Mr. D. should, methinks, have taken notice of, as well as of that which he
transcribed, and reported this too to have been Mr. Leigh's sense of the word,
as well as the other, if he had meant to do right to Mr. Leigh, and not be
disingenuous both to the truth and him. For whilst unwary people hear only what
Mr. D. says from Mr. Leigh, and hear not also what Mr. Leigh says of himself,
they are apt to think, that what Mr. D. reports from him, is all that Mr. Leigh
said of the thing, and that he was of Mr. Danvers's judgment, imbued with the
same Sentiments with him, dipped into the same error that he is.

. 23. But Mr. Leigh goes on, and from himself and others tells us, of six
several acceptions of the word; the five first of which Mr. D. slips by, and
reports only the Sixth and last, as if that were (as who, that saw no more
reported from him, could think any other, but that it was?) Mr. Leighs only
sense of the word; with how much ingenuity I leave to himself and others to
judge.

24. It is put (says Mr. Leigh) 1. generally, for washing, Luke 11.38. Heb.
9.10. Mark 7.4. (...), they baptized themselves. This he strengthens by the
Authority of Dr. Featly and Vossius, as follows. Christ no where requires
dipping, but only baptizing: which word (as Hesychius, Stephanus, Scapula, and
Budaeus, the great Masters of the Greek Tongue, make good by very many
instances, and allegations out of Classic Writers) imports no more than
ablution or washing. (...) (say they in their Lexicons and Commentaries) lavo:
(...) lavatio, ablutio, which may be done without dipping. Dr. Featly against
the Anabaptists. (...) proprie notat mergere: sed quia fere aliquid mergi ac
tingi solet, ut lavetur atque abluatur, hinc pro lavare usurpatur, Mark 7.4, 8.
Luke 11.38. A priore notione quae mergere significat, profluxit ea, quae pro
affligere usurpatur: Quia qui affliguntur, calamitatum gurgite quasi merguntur.
Vossius in Thesibus. Then goes on Mr. Leigh, descanting as I suppose on Mark
7.4. (the Text last named by himself, (the Two Testimonies from Dr. Featly and
Vossius coming in by way of Parenthesis) It implies the washing of the whole
body: There we read also of the washing of cups, pots, vessels, tables. After
this account of what it signifies generally, he goes on to show that it is put
2. Figuratively, to plunge into great afflictions, Matthew. 20.22. Mark 10.38.
Luke 12.50. Baptismus non significat afflictionem quamlibet, sed vehementem,
and forinsecus irruentem, ut sunt in Scripturis undae persecutionum and
tribulationum, quibus qui merguntur and obruuntur, baptizari videantur. Estius
ad 1 Cor. 15. v. 29. 3. To sprinkle or wash ones body Sacramentally, Matthew.
3.11. (This Mr. D. should in justice to the Author have taken notice of.) 4. It
is taken for the whole work and action of the Sacrament of Baptism, as Matthew.
28.19. 5. To wash the Conscience Spiritually, Matthew. 3.11. Act. 1.6. 6. The
native and proper signification of it (which Mr. D. only takes notice of,
overleaping all the rest) is to dip into water, or to plunge under water. Joh.
3.22, 23. Matthew. 3.16. Act. 8.38. To all which places I have spoken in these
Papers, showing it not proved even from them.

. 25. After this immediately Mr. D. adds, (as if spoken by Mr. Leigh of the
word (...), as all the rest that went before is) And that it is taken from a
Dyers Fat, and imports a Dying, or giving a fresh color, and not a bare
washing only, Rev. 19.13. And for which he quotes Casaubon, Bucan, Bullinger,
Zanchy, Spanhemius. But (not to urge upon Mr. D. that thence it would follow,
that in Baptism men ought to be dyed, and have a fresh color given them, or
else they are not baptized) Mr. Leigh says not this of (...), but of (...),
(which, by the way, are not words of exactly equal import, for why else is not
(...) used in the writings of the Evangelists and Apostles for baptizing, as
well as (...)?) which he renders intingor from Rev. 19.13. which yet I have
shown to signify nothing of dipping in that place, but to be meant only of
dying or staining, and that without dipping. Nor does he quote those Authors to
prove this: but to prove what he had said of (...), as to the last
signification he had given it: to which he immediately subjoyns their
Testimonies, however Mr. D. pulls them asunder from what they were set to
prove, and chops in other matter betwixt. Their Testimonies, as Mr. Leigh
quotes them, are. Tanquam ad tingendum mergo. Casaub. Immergo, abluo. Bucan.
Mergo and tingo. Bullinger. Proprie significat immergo, submergo, obruo aqua.
Zanchius. Videtur copiam, and abundantiam, perfectam quandam perfusionem
denotare. Aret. I wonder why Mr. D. did not Transcribe their Testimonies,
unless it were because he saw among them abluo, and tingo as differing from
mergo, which he was not willing his Reader should know. And why he left out
Aretius, unless it was because he makes it to signify perfusionem a pouring on
of water, which he had no mind neither to have known. As for Spanhemius he
says nothing there. Only Mr. Leigh refers to him to see what he says of these
Verbs, (...) and (...) in his Dub. Evang. part. 3. Dub. 24. And it may be
wondered also, why he skipt over what Mr. Leigh says by the way of (...) and
(...): but that there was something fitter to be concealed. On the first word
Mr. Leigh says, (...) baptisma (1.) Dipping into water, (that would have done
well; but the next that follows would not, and so it was left out) or washing
with water, often. 1 Pet. 3.21. (2.) Ministry, and Doctrine of John, Act.
19.3. Mark 1. ver. 4. On the second Mr. Leigh says (...), Baptismus, Mark
7.18. Heb. 6.2. and 9.10. Then he adds a quotation from Zepperus de
Sacramentis; which Mr. D. could well have found in his heart doubtless to have
added, (for he does quote it afterward in another place, when he has drawn it
from its company, as if from his own reading, whereas I make no question, but
he had it here; and I shall answer it, when I come at it) but that there
followed it immediately a quotation from Danaeus, which he had no mind to,
which is this. Deducitur (...), e quibus illud proprie tingere significat: hoc
autem immergere, maxim vero aquae: Quia vero qui ex aquis emergunt, loti and
candidi and mundi apparent, idcirco (...) pro lotione, and mundatione in Sacra
Scriptura fere accipitur. Heb. 9. ver. 10. Luke 11.38. Mark 7.4. Danaeus Isag.
Christ. l. 5. de Sacramentis. c. 21. He saw there (...) rendered tingere; and
tingere contradistinguished from immergere; that (...) was frequently in
Scripture taken for washing, and cleansing; and that, if I may guess, was the
thing that scared him.

. 26. But after all this Mr. D. has a (...), a salvo to save himself whole
from any thing that can be said against him for his omissions; and to that I
shall now attend him. He tells us, that he [ i. e. Mr. Leigh] says withal,
that some would have it to signify washing (he might have been so kind as to
have told us who) and which sense Erasmus (he says) opposed, affirming that it
was not otherwise so, than by consequence: for the proper signification was
such a dipping or plunging as Dyers use for dying of clothes.

. 27. He should have told us, that it was the sense of Mr. Leigh himself, as
well as of others. But then Mr. Leigh's Testimony had been against him, as well
as for him, and so had signified nothing to his advantage. For to grant it
signifies dipping, and yet to say (as Mr. Leigh does) that it signifies
sprinkling too, spoils all, and will do the Dippers no service.

. 28. And whereas he tells us, that Mr. Leigh says, Erasmus opposed that
sense, affirming that it was no otherwise so, than by consequence. I answer
first, that if it be but any way so, whether directly, or by consequence, it is
all one to our purpose, and will do our business as well. Let it but signify
washing, and that as distinct from dipping, and then whether it signify so
directly, or by consequence, baptizing will not necessarily import dipping.
Secondly, I answer, that Mr. Leigh does not say, that Erasmus opposed that
Sense. But that which he says is this, that whereas the Vulg. Latin rendered
(...) in Mark 7.4. by baptizentur, he tells us in his Margin from Beza on Mark
7. that Erasmus deservedly changed it: inasmuch as in that place the discourse
is not of that solemn washing, whereunto (says Beza) now by long usage of all
Churches the term of Baptism has been Dedicated and Consecrated. Nor indeed,
says Beza, (not Erasmus) does (...) signify lavare, but by consequence: for
properly it signifies to dip in order unto dying: which he proves by instances
from Plutarch and Nazianz. as may be seen in his Notes, on Mark 7. v. 4. Nor
does any body deny its signifying to dip, the granting of it being no way
prejudicial to our Hypothesis, which proceeds not on what the word primarily
and strictly notes in its first imposition and use, but on what it is used,
secondarily and more generally, to import in the Scriptures and Ecclesiastical
Writers; and that as we have showed in these Papers, is a washing in order unto
the attaining of those Spiritual ends ordained by the Institutor of that
Sacrament, however performed, whether by Dipping or by Sprinkling, by putting
into water, or by pouring of water on the Party baptized. And the Reader of
this Authors Writings may do well from hence to take warning, that he be not
too hasty in giving credit to such a Writer's quotations, as in his reports
from Authors takes a liberty to chop and change, to put in or leave out, as may
best serve, not the truth, but his own advantage.

. 28. I cannot, before I pass hence, but propose to the consideration of Mr. D.
or any else that insist on that Notion of Beza's, that (...) properly signifies
to dip in order unto dying; whether any dipping that is done, not in order unto
dying, be properly a Baptism, or no? If not, then, unless they dip, when they
baptize, in order unto dying, theirs is no baptism, no more than ours: because
though theirs be a dipping, yet it is not a Dipping in order unto Dying. If it
be, as they must say it is, because it is impossible otherwise to justify
their own way to be a lawful baptizing; then I infer, either that Christians
are not bound to stand always, no not in Sacramental rites, to the proper and
strict significations of words, and so we are free from blame, as to that, in
what we practice, as well as they: or else they are guilty in what they
practice, as well as we; in that they deviate in their practice from the Divine
Institution, not acting according to the proper import of the word in it. For
though they stick close to the Act, and dip, yet they deviate from the End of
the Act, and dip not for dying. And it is the End that specifies the Action.

. 29. And again I propose, whether the insisting so strictly on this Notion of
the word do not tend to the strengthening of the Papists in their notion of an
Indelible Character introduced by Baptism on the Soul. For if baptizing be,
according to the proper signification of the word, a dipping in order unto
dying; and there is no Dye brought by the baptismal water on the body; it
remains that by baptizing there be a Dye brought upon the Soul, and that is, or
may be the Character they contend for. If this be not to be granted, then is
not that Notion fit to be received, or insisted on, but to be cashiered. The
next Author that calls for our attendance is Salmatius. And he in his Book de
Prim. Papae, p. 193. says (as Mr. D. tells us) That is not Baptism they give
to Children, but Rhantism.

. 30. I hope Mr. D. reports the Author right; not having him by me to examine.
And if it be true, that he so say, (which the Reader may do well to demur upon,
till he have the opportunity to see it in the Author) then I answer to him,
that the word Baptism may be considered either more strictly, as signifying in
particular, immersion or dipping, as it is mostly used in Profane Authors; or
more largely, as signifying in general, any washing, and, as it is used in
Christian Writers, to denote that Sacramental washing, whereby we are initiated
into the Church, however performed, whether by putting into water, or by
pouring water upon. If we take Baptism in the first and strict sense, then it
is not Baptism they give to Children: for sprinkling is not dipping. But if we
take it in the second, then it is: for to sprinkle with the due form of words
is to baptize. And so this Testimony is either impertinent, or untrue. Let Mr.
D. choose which he will have it to be.

. 31. After him follows Casaubon, and He in his Annotations upon Matthew. 3.
annexed to the New Testament set forth by Stephens, (as Mr. D. tells us) says,
That immerging was the Proper Right in Baptism, which the word it self (he
says) sufficiently declares, which as it signifies not (...), a going down to
the bottom, without any ascending; so not (...), a swimming like a Cork above
the water, but (...), a going down, and coming up again.

. 32. Mr. Casaubon does indeed say, This was a baptizing Rite (or Ceremony in
Baptism) that they were dipped into the waters. But he does not say, either
that immersion was total of the whole Person, which is the thing in question;
Hic enim fuit baptizandi ritus, ut in aquas immergerentur.
or that, if it were so, it was the proper rite of baptism, as if there were no
other rite but that. That word [proper] wherein the whole stress of the
Testimony lies, is an Addition to his words. And at this rate what may not any
Man make any Man say? Yea but that was his meaning, for the word it self (...)
sufficiently declares it, which as it signifies not (...), a going down to the
bottom without ascending; so not (...), a swimming like a Cork above the water,
as Mr. D. reports him. But Mr. Casaub. does not so explain (...). He only says
it means to go to the bottom to ones hurt or destruction, if ye will. Est
fundum petere cum sua pernicie.
But one may go down to the bottom, and come up again without either his
destruction or hurt any way. And so many have done in their baptizing. And what
ever (...) in its primitive use imports, it is not in the Ecclesiastical use of
it exclusive of what (...) signifies, else those that went down to the bottom,
must not be said to be (...), but (...); and then many supposed anciently to
have been baptized, will prove not to have been so. For, contrary to what he
says, both (...) which signifies to go down to the bottom, is by St.
Athanasius (...) -- Athanas. q. 94. de Interp. Parab. Script. (...). Basil. de
S. Sp. c. 15.
used of baptizing; and (...) is by St. Basil used to express the act of
baptizing; unless (...) do not signify the same with the verbs compounded of
it. And then, if they signify to go down to the bottom, it must not signify
so much (which yet it does, if fundum petere do so signify.) And then if (...)
be neither to swim at the top, nor to go down to the bottom, What will it
signify other than (...); which yet is quite contrary to Mr. Casaubon, who
says, non significat (...), that it signifies not that.

. 33. As for (...), Mr. Casaubon explains it not. But Mr. D. does, calling it a
swimming like a Cork above the water. And truly I think the manner of baptizing
was never such, as that Children, or others, swam in the waters on that
fashion, like Corks, whilst they were baptizing. But as for some other words,
by which Scapula explains (...), viz. in superficie sum, exto, existo, to be
on, or appear out of the surface or top, I think that which they signify
reconcilable with some ways of baptizing, and theirs particularly, whose
baptizing is but a partial mersation, a dipping of their heads or faces into
the water.

. 34. But supposing (...) to signify neither (...), nor (...), as Mr. Casaubon
says, What signifies it then? Mr. D. tells you (not Mr. Casaubon) that it
signifies (...). Good. It puts me in mind of the story of the old Countryman,
who being to explain, what was meant by an inundation, very gravely did it
thus, An inundation is, as if a Man should say, an inundation. So here (...) is
not (...), nor (...), but (...).

. 35. But however we are told, what (...) signifies, a going down, and coming
up again. Going or putting down may be in the import of it, but coming up again
is not. Unless to go down be the same thing with coming up, or coming up the
same thing with going down. And the Fathers have other words for that part of
the Ceremony, (...), etc. D. Chrysostom.
viz. (...), and (...), as appears from St. Athanasius in the place before
mentioned; as also from St. Chrysostom. Hom. 40. on 1 Corinthians.

. 36. But after all this, was Mr. Casaubon an Anabaptist? or did he in his
judgment think a total immersion necessary unto Baptism, so as that nothing
less than that was a baptizing? but all a mere nullity? No such matter. He
tells you indeed, that some, who long before had disputed for that Ceremony,
had somewhat whereon they grounded their dispute: for they urged the word
(...). But, says he, these Men's opinion has long since been deservedly
exploded: in as much as the force and energie of this mystery does not lie in
that. So then with him baptism is good, though not by a total immersion. And it
is plain he was satisfied on other accounts, in the lawfulness of sprinkling,
whatever he thought (...) might signify. And this should have been told us
with the rest upon fair play.

. 37. Pindarus (to go on with his Authors) in his Ode 2. calls a Cork swimming
upon the face of the waters unbaptized; and Plutarch a ship floating on the
water unbaptized.

. 38. This looks like an Argument indeed, and is in a manner the only one that
I have met withal, that has the look of one. And if we were of necessity bound
up by the Heathenish signification of the word, and had no way of relaxation
from it, it would be of some moment. But both the force of it is taken off in
general; and it is at large answered to in particular, in these Papers. chapter 8.
and chapter 5. Sect. 18. etc.

. 39. Beza (to proceeed) says (as Mr. D. tells us) that the word (...)
signifies to Dye by dipping or washing, and differs from the word (...)
signifying to drown, or go down to the bottom as a stone.

. 40. Supposing Mr. D. to have rightly quoted him, and that Beza did say so,
hence it will follow, that in strict speaking according to the propriety of the
word, none now are baptized, even amongst the Dippers themselves, (1.) Because
none of those whom they dip, are dyed by their dipping; the deepest water they
dip them in, gives them a wash, if ye will, but not a dye. If it do, 'twere
well we knew it, that we might know them, as well as they one another by it.
(2.) Because, in regard they baptize no Infants, (whose way of baptizing, when
dipped, as anciently most were, was to be put so under the water, as neither to
swim at the top, nor go down like a stone to the bottom, but to be for the time
they stayed in the water, betwixt both) but baptize all Adult persons, all the
persons, whom they baptize, go down to the bottom, though indeed not hurled
into the River, and sinking to the bottom like Stones, yet going into it of
themselves on their feet, and having their heads and upper parts of their
bodies put down further toward the bottom by their Dipper. Now methinks they
should not press upon us, strictness of significations of words, whose own
practice is liable to be pressed, even by us, with strictness of significations
of words, of their own giving, or owning.

. 41. But having consulted the place here referred to by Mr. D. I do not find
one such word in it. So that unless he quoted from an Edition differing from
mine, instead of being a Quoter, Mr. D. is become the Author of those words.

. 42. But suppose there had, what is the advantage to his cause by it, when the
truth by us contended for is granted, even by the Testimony produced by him
against it? For if (...) do signify to dye by dipping, or washing, then,
unless dipping and washing be exactly Synonymous, and signify just the same
thing, which not Mr. D. himself will say, if there be a Dying by washing,
though not by dipping, yet that will be a Baptism by this Testimony, which
tells us, that (...) signifies to Dye by washing, as well as by dipping; which
is the thing in question.

. 43. Yet there is something said by Beza on that Text, which may seem to
favor Mr. Danvers. And it is a wonder, that he, that can find an advantage,
where there is none, would overlook one, where it seems to be. For Beza says,
Baptizandi verbum, the word to Baptize, rather answers to the Hebrew (...),
than (...). But if it do, still that will not do the business, for I have shown
in these Papers ( chapter 7.) from Dr. Pocock, that that word also is not always
necessarily to be understood of a total immersion. And Beza himself does not
contradict this, For he does not say, that it answers absolutely and strictly
to this, and not at all to the other, but rather to this than to the other
word. Which in English is thus much, that it answers to both, but yet is
seldomer used in the sense of the latter, than of the former; which I believe
to be the very truth. But it is not the least tittle of advantage that Mr. D.
gains to his cause thereby, if granted him with the greatest liberality of
Concession, as I have elsewhere showed.

. 44. And there is something also on that Text, which it need not be wondered if
Mr. D. did overlook. This it is, that the Preposition (...) was added to (...),
by an Idiotism of the Hebrews, amongst whom (...) declares every sort of cause,
and is omitted by Luke, who followed not the Hebrew Dialect so much as the
other three Evangelists. His meaning was, that was, here (...) was a redundant,
needlessly added to the case of the Instrument, as is apparent from what he
says after, of the same Particle when joined to (...) in the latter end of the
verse. And he tells you, that he notes this, lest any should think there was
any force in this Particle, which they seem to be persuaded of, who do not
think children rightly baptized, unless they be totally dipped. And in his Note
on Mark 1.8. where the same Preposition comes again with the same words, he
says, of the Pleonasm ( i. e. redundancy) of the Preposition (...) I have
spoke elsewhere, which truly is to be noted in this place, lest any altogether
unskilful person should take in aqua for intra aquam: of which kind of
fopperies the books of Sophisters are full.

. 45. And though Beza do elsewhere declare that (...) does properly signify
tingendi causa immergere, to dip in order unto dying, and that it signifies not
to wash, but by consequence: yet (1.) he does not always render it by immergo,
but sometime by lavo; and particularly in Mark 7.4. where for (...) he has
loti fuerint, and for (...) lotiones: and on Luke 11.38. he says that (...)
means the same in that place, that (...) and (...) do, i. e. in general to
wash, and particularly to wash the hands: of which I have spoke before, chapter 5.
And (2.) in his Ep. 2. ( Tract. Theolog. Vol. 3. p. 195.) he maintains them to
be rightly baptized, who are baptized but by sprinkling, though the word do
signify dipping; no diminution being made of baptism by the change of a
circumstance in it, whilst what is substantial in it is retained, as I shall
show more at large in these Papers, c. penult. But to go on,

. 46. Seldom (that University of Scholars in one man, and a Gentleman not to be
mentioned without some signification of respect, though here he have none given
him.) De Jure Not. etc. l. 2. c. 2. (as Mr. D. tells us) says, That the Jews
(from whom this Rite is conceived to come) took the Baptism wherein the whole
Body was not baptized, to be void.

. 47. I believe Mr. D. to be fair in this report, though I have not the Author
to consult. But I Answer, First, that Christians are not so scrupulous about
the business as the Jews were. Nor do I believe, Mr. Danvers himself, or any of
his party, would think a baptism void, in case one hair of a head should chance
to miss dipping, as a Jew would. Some few may have anciently questioned the
lawfulness of the baptism, that is not administered by a total immersion (though
I remember but one, that did it:) and of late some more have done it. But the
generality of Christians both are; and have been anciently satisfied with it,
though done other ways. And in some circumstantial point, a thing may fail of
being exactly according to the accurate prescription of the Law, or Rule of
Custom, and yet not be invalid for all that, whilst nothing of substance is
omitted, as for instance, a Marriage without a Ring; or a Baptism without a
Cross. Though it should not have been done so, yet being so done it will stand
good. Fieri non debuit, factum valuit. Yea Mr. Seldom quotes a saying from the
Rabbis, -- Ideo nec Sabbato Baptismus rite satis adhibebatur, nec die festo,
nec noctu. Quibus temporibus nihilominus si forte adhiberetur, Proselytus
quidem is erat qui sic baptizatus. Actus scilicet (says Mr. Seldom) non
irritus erat, tametsi fieri non debuisset. Seld. de Jure Not. and Gent. l. 2.
c. 2. p. 143.

. 48. Secondly, I answer, that unless Christians had been indispensably obliged
by some Precept, to an exact conformity herein with the Jews, their practice is
no Tie on us. But as the Dippers, I think, are unable to prove the one, so I
hope I have satisfactorily in these Papers proved the other, v. chapter 8.

. 49. Mr. Daniel Rogers (to pass on to him) in his Treatise of Sacraments,
Part. 1. c. 8. p. 177. (it should be chapter 5. p. 69. and 70.) says, as Mr. D.
reports him, That the Minister is to dip in Water, as the meetest Act; the word
(...) notes it, for the Greeks wanted not other words to express any other Act
besides Dipping, if the Institution could bear it. What resemblance of the
Burial or Resurrection of Christ is in Sprinkling? All Antiquity and Scripture,
says he, confirm that way. To dip therefore is exceeding material to the
Ordinance; which was the usage of old, without exception of Countries hot or
cold.

. 50. A very smart, and pressing Testimony this; if all be as Mr. D. reports
it. But here to see the luck of it, (good or bad, let Mr. D. look to that) he
has not given us Mr. Rogers's words in full, nor in the order he spoke them,
but has picked out here and there, what he thought good, leaving the rest. A
way of proceeding, this, by which a man may be made to say what one will. But I
will not go about to charge him with wronging Mr. Rogers in the whole of his
sense, who speaks much to the same purpose, though not exactly in those words.
And yet I cannot find in Mr. Rogers the very first, and those very material
words, [That the Minister is to dip in water as the meetest Act.] Nor those
words [ the word (...) notes it.] But something there is, that is near it, if
Mr. D. would have spoke it out. (And it is pity he should either muzzle his
Author, or ham-string his own Pen.) But then it would not have been for his
purpose. For he says, the word baptized signifies the true Act of the Minister
to dip or dop the body, or some part of it into the water. This one word [or
some part of it] has quite spoiled all Mr. Rogers Testimony, as to the doing
of the Dippers any service in their cause. For nothing will serve their turn to
be done in baptism, or signified by the word baptize, but a total dipping of
the whole body, and Mr. Rogers Testimony reaches but a dipping of the body, or
some part of it into the water.

. 51. And that this was not an expression, that fell casually from him, but was
his very judgment, appears by what he said before, That it ought to be the
Churches part to cleave to the Institution, especially it being not left
arbitrary by our Church to the discretion of the Minister, but required (as it
then was) to dip or dive the Infant more or less, except in case of weakness. A
dipping, total or partial, the Man would have: but so there was but either, the
Institution was cleaved to, and the Churches order observed, so far as I can
perceive, in his judgment.

. 52. And that, as warm as Mr. Rogers was for retriving the use of Dipping, as
witnessed to by Antiquity, approved by Scripture, required by the Church (as
then it was, with not so much appearance of liberty in the case granted to the
Minister, as now is) and Symbolical with the things signified in Baptism, which
I could wish as well as, and as heartily as he, in order to the making of peace
in the Church, if that would do it, I say, that he was only so for dipping, as
yet not to hold any unlawfulness to be in sprinkling, there is sufficient
evidence, because he thinks, that for the allowance of that, in case of
weakness, we have cause to be thankful. And I presume his zeal was only against
those, that stretched the liberty of the Church in this case deeper and further,
than either the Church her self could, or the solemness of this Sacrament might
well and safely admit, as himself speaks. And as in the beginning of this
Section he says, I would not be understood, as if Schismatically I would
instill a distaste of the Church into any weak minds by the act of sprinkling
water only: so in the end of it he says again, I do not speak this as a thing
meet to disturb a Churches peace, but as desiring such as it concerns, in their
places to look to their liberty and duty in this behalf.

. 53. And I shall conclude with a wish, that the Quoter of him would have but
the same thoughts of it, as his Author had, and there would soon be an
agreement with him and the Church, which requires dipping, but allows
sprinkling, on just reason for it. And if he had any Children to be baptized,
he might have them dipped, and totally too in it, if he desired it. And I must
needs say, that if there be any failure in this case, and perhaps there may be
some, it is not in the Church, nor in her Orders; for by them dipping is
prescribed, unless where an inability well to endure it in the Infant is
certified; but in the Actors, and if any way at all in the Baptizer, yet
mostly, if not solely, in the Bringers of the Infants unto Baptism; which every
Man may have, as to his own concern, amended and reformed at his pleasure. Nay,
if I may speak my thoughts, I believe the Ministers of the Nation would be
heartily glad, if the People would desire, or be but willing to have their
Infants dipped, after the ancient manner both in this and in other Churches,
and bring them to Baptism in such a condition, as that they might be totally
dipped, without fear of being destroyed.

. 54. Dr. Tailor (so Mr. D. goes on) in his Rule of Conscience, l. 3. c. 4. If
you would attend to the proper signification of the word, Baptism signifies
plunging in water, or dipping with washing.

. 55. I am not willing to say it, yet am apt to suspect it, that Mr. D. is the
Author of those words, and not Dr. Tailor. My reason is, because he gives us no
particular direction to the place where they may be found. He quotes indeed, l.
3. c. 4. but he names not the Section, Rule, Number, nor Page. And he had need
have more time and leisure than I, that shall make it his business to read over
a Chapter of an hundred and ten pages in Folio, to find whether he speak true
or no. He names afterward, when he had a mind to be found, l. 3. c. 4. p. 644,
645. Why not here? I have showed my suspicion, and my reason to suspect. And I
am strengthened therein by this, that (as I shall show afterward) he quotes a
saying of Musculus, on Matthew. 3. at large, without naming verse of the Chapter,
or Page of the Book, and, as upon diligent search I have found, there are no
such words said by Musculus on that Chapter. And though I have not read all
this Chapter, yet I have read all the places in it, which speak of Baptism, as
far as I can find direction thereto by the Index: And no such words appear to
me therein. Nay, a Friend of mine, that has twice perused the whole Chapter,
upon the mere design of finding that passage in it, assures me that it is not
there. And if it were, the answer thereto is very easy, that though what he
names were the proper signification of the word, it does not follow, that it
must be taken in no other but that proper signification in Baptism; in regard
words are not in all places, and upon all occasions, used in no other but that
which is their proper signification; but sometimes in acceptions very
different, and remote from the first; as he that is but a little acquainted
with Rhetoric can tell. And this word in particular has in the Ecclesiastical
use of it (by a Metalepsis, or a Synecdoche of the Species for the Species)
been of ancient time, even up to the beginning, for ought that any Man can
prove to the contrary, used to signify that Sacramental washing, which we call
baptism, though not performed by that specifical way of dipping, but by any
other way of washing, whether it be perfusion, affusion, or aspersion.

. 56. Mr. Joseph Mede is the next witness produced by Mr. Danvers. And he in
his Diatribe, on Tit. 3.2. says, That there was no such thing as sprinkling or
Rhantism used in Baptism in the Apostles days, nor many Ages after them.

. 57. To this I answer, (1.) If Mr. Mede had said, he knew of no such thing, or
had read of no such thing, it had been an expression suitable to his modesty.
But positively to say, There was no such thing, seems a stretch somewhat too
far beyond what ought to have been said. It is easy to say of a thing, that it
was done in the Apostles days, when there appears just evidence for it. But who
can say what was not done in the Days of the Apostles? Unless he had read (what
yet I am apt to think Mr. Mede himself, as great a Searcher into Antiquities as
he was, would not have pretended to have read, viz.) all that has been writ of
what was done in the Apostles days: and withal unless all that was done in
their days had been written too, which no Man with any the least appearance of
reason can pretend to say. But great Men sometimes take a pleasure to say great
things, and think that their greatness carries authority enough with it to bear
them out in all they say. But it will not, beyond reason, when what they say
comes to be examined by reason. And so this great Man's word here is of no more
weight, than a great Man's word can be without its ground, whereof here he
gives us none.

. 58. And on the contrary to what he faith, I have in Chapter 10. shown fair
probabilities even of a sprinkling or Rhantism used in Baptism even in the
Apostles days. Unto which I may now here add, that if there be any soundness in
their exposition of that difficult Text [1 Cor. 15.29. What shall they do that
are baptized for the dead? Vnde etiam super Sepulchris baptizabantur in veteri
Ecclesia, qui super mortuis baptizari dicuntur. 1 Cor. 15.29. Voss. de
Sacrament. efficacia, disp. 1. These. 29. p. 302.
] who expound there (...), not for, but over the dead; grounding their
exposition on a Custom in the Ancient Church to baptize the living over the
Graves of the dead, this gives a further probability unto it; it being nothing
so likely that in such places they were dipped (there being neither Rivers nor
Fonts there) as that they were sprinkled. And that we find it in most Ages
after the Apostles, and can find no Original of it in any Age after theirs,
this is probability enough of its being in use even in their Age.

. 59. Secondly, whereas Mr. Mede says, it was not used many Ages after the
Apostles days (unless he mean, that it was not used solemnly and in public,
but only in private, and upon cases of necessity, in which, if he say it, he
does not contradict us) I am not able to say, it is true, having by sufficient
instances already in these Papers demonstrated the contrary. And if what Mr.
Danvers says ( p. 204.) be true, that until the Third Century we find not any,
that upon any consideration, did admit of sprinkling, yet if any in that Age
did admit it, then there was such a thing as Sprinkling or Rhantism used in
Baptism (quite contrary to what Mr. Mede says, and that even by the confession
of Mr. D.) not many Ages after the Apostles, Unless any will say, that the
Third Century was many Ages after the First, which yet I think none that
understands Number and Multitude will say. And that some body in that Age did
admit of it Mr. D. is our witness, who quotes Cyprian for it in his Epistle to
Magnus, l. 4. ep. 7. Where he pleads for the baptizing of the sick by
Sprinkling, and not by dipping or pouring, called the Clinical Baptism, Magd.
Cent. 3. c. 6. p. 126. As also for the Sprinkling of new converted Prisoners in
the Prison house. And which by degrees afterward they brought in use for sick
Children also, and then afterward all children. So that by this Testimony
little is gained to the cause more than what the credit of the bare name of Mr.
Mede can give to it. But amicus Socrates, amicus Plato, magis tamen amica
veritas.

. 60. But what, after all this, if Mr. Mede in saying, no such thing was used,
did not mean, that no such thing was done, but that it was not done so often, as
that the doing of it might be called an use; as if he had said, no such thing
was come up, or grown into use, or to be an use? Then is his saying clearly
reconcilable with what we say. For we contend but for the doing of it on some
occasions; not for its being the use so to do. And methinks his saying that no
such thing was used many Ages after the Apostles, must needs enforce that to be
his meaning. For Mr. Mede was too knowing a Person in Antiquity, to be ignorant
of it, that such a thing as Sprinkling or Rhantism was done within few Ages
after the Apostles (and particularly St. Cyprians Epistle to Magnus must needs
tell him it was done in the Third) though he knew it was not come so soon to be
the use. And if that be his meaning, then are his words nothing at all to the
purpose of Mr. D. as speaking but the same that we say. If not, I shall add no
more, but that Quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus, it was a slip of his unwary
Pen, whilst his thoughts were more intent upon other matter.

. 61. Chamier succeeds Mr. Mede (one great man after another) and from his Pan.
Cathol. Tom. 4. l. 5. c. 2. Ser. 6. Mr. D. quotes this. The ancient use of
Baptism was to dip the whole Body into the Element, which is the force (...):
therefore did John Baptize in a River, which is, nevertheless changed into
aspersion, though uncertain when, and from whence that Custom was taken.

. 62. To this I Answer First, that if Chamier did say, that the Ancient use of
Baptism was to dip the whole body into the Element, then his meaning only was,
that it was anciently the more general or more constant, or public and solemn,
but not the only manner, so to baptize. But this hurts not our cause, who do
not contend that Sprinkling was the only, or the more general, or the more
public, and solemn way of baptizing in the ancient Church, but only that it
was sometimes, and mostly in private, and in cases of great necessity, charity,
or convenience, made use of in it. And as this has been, I hope sufficiently,
manifested in these Papers, so the words of Chamier, even as Mr. D. reports
them, do not contradict it: they only affirming what anciently was in use, but
not denying any thing else to have been then done. Suppose it should be said,
that the Modern use of Baptism in this Kingdom for this last Century has been
to sprinkle water on the face of the baptized. Would this conclude that none in
this Kingdom have been otherwise baptized in this last Century than by such
Sprinkling? I suppose not. Nor do I believe the thing true, if it should be
asserted. No more does the affirming of the ancient use to have been dipping,
conclude that there was none then any other way baptized than by dipping. As
some therefore in the late times of the prevalency of Sprinkling have been
dipped, so no doubt some in the ancient times of the prevalency of dipping were
sprinkled.

. 63. But secondly, Chamier does not say so, In usu vero Elementi ab initio
immersio totius corporis adhibita fuit. Chamier, Contract. l. 5. c. 1. p. 1404.
parag. 4.
if Spanhemius his Contracter report him truly. His words are, That in the use
of the Element at the beginning immersion of the whole body was practiced.
These words do only imply that at the first beginning to baptize, dipping of
the whole body was in use, which we grant. But they do not imply that no other
way of baptizing besides dipping was then also used. Though that then were, yet
there might be other ways also besides that, for ought here said by Chamier.
And admitting that to have been the only way of baptizing at the very beginning
of the use of that Sacrament, suppose in our Savior's life, or just
immediately after his death: yet if other ways of baptizing came into use
presently, or a little after, suppose in the time of the Apostles, then will
those ways of baptizing be good enough: though dipping have a little the start
of them, and be in priority of time somewhat before them. But this Chamier does
not contradict, only telling us what was at the beginning, but not denying what
might presently after follow.

. 64. As for his saying, that the force of (...) is to dip the whole body into
the Element: Quae vis est (...), Chamier. ib.
I answer, if his meaning be, that the Verb (...) has that force, we freely
grant it. But that hurts not us. But if his meaning be, that (...) has no
other force but that, and that it is never used in any either profane or sacred
Writer but in this only signification, then we as freely deny it. And I suppose
the contrary thereunto has in these Papers been already made sufficiently
manifest.

. 65. As for what Mr. D. adds, as said by Chamier, viz. that therefore John did
baptize in a River; this, if Chamier did say it, is capable of a double
meaning: either that John did baptize in a River, because that was the force of
(...); or else that (...) has that force, because John baptized in a River.

. 66. If the first be meant, it is said without proof; nor can be credible,
unless we could be assured of two things. (1.) That (...) signifies always
exactly so, and never otherwise. (2.) That the Commission, by virtue of which
John did baptize, was given in Greek; and that (...) was the particular word in
that Commission. But these two things will never be attempted to be shown,
unless I take my measures much amiss.

. 67. If the Second be meant, and the force of (...) be concluded to be, to dip
the whole body in the Element, because John did baptize in a River, I answer,
first, it is ridiculous to think, that the word (...) should take its
signification from any action of John's, which was a word in possession of its
being and signification long before John's either Baptism, or Birth. Secondly,
the vanity of concluding, that Baptism ought to be by dipping the whole body,
because John baptized in a River, if that be it that is meant, and was designed
by the Author, or Reporter (as I am apt to believe it was, and only by the
Later) the vanity, I say, and unconcludingness (if I may so speak) of that
Argument has already so often been detected in these Papers, that I shall not
vex the Reader with a tedious repetition thereof. In short therefore it
signifies nothing unless it were impossible for a man to go into a River, and
be baptized therein, by sprinkling or pouring water on him, or dipping some
part of him, as namely his face, or head into it, without his whole body be
immersed into it also: which no man of reason, or even of common sense, will
adventure to say.

. 68. But I am apt to think that Chamier did not say any such thing: partly
because it is too inconsequent and ridiculous to be affixed on a man so
judicious, and learned; and partly because there is no such word reported from
him by his Contracter Spanhemius. And then it must remain that it be an
Addition made to Chamier by Mr. Danvers.

. 69. As for those words reported by Mr. D. as Chamiers [Which is nevertheless
changed into aspersion, though uncertain when, and from whence that custom was
taken] they are not exactly the words of Chamier, but these (as his Contracter
reports them [postea mutata fuit in aspersionem, incertum quando, aut quo
initio] it was afterward changed into aspersion, though it be uncertain when,
or at what beginning. It is and it was, are different words, and speak of
differing times; the first, of the Present, the second of the Past: The first
makes the alteration seem to be Modern, the second entitles it to Antiquity.
And we must not be wrenched from any thing of our right by any man's never so
subtle Sophistry. It was changed, says Chamier, and so say we, though neither
he nor we know when; nor what it was that gave the occasion to its change. And
Mr. D. had done himself and his Cause more right, if he had made a Right report
from his Author.

. 70. But is this all that Chamier says? -- Nisi quod videntur 3000. uno die a
paucis Apostolis, non potuisse baptizari si singuli mersi fuissent; nec
carcerario intra carcerem fuisse ad manum tantum aquae quantum mergendo opus
erat. Cham. ib.
surely no. We find a nisi in the case; and even no less than a double
exception to what went before; the first is of the baptizing of three thousand
in one day, by a few Apostles, which says he, seems impossible to have been
done by the immersion of every single person. The other is of the Jailer
baptized in the prison, who seems not to have had there so much water at hand
as was needful for a baptism by dipping. So here, at one of these times, to
Chamier it seems aspersion might begin (and if at either, it was early enough
begun, and by Authority good enough done, to justify its practice) and but for
these instances the beginning of it would be uncertain. But if neither of those
was the beginning time of Sprinkling, yet his very confessing the uncertainty
of it, when and from whence was taken that custom of Aspersion, into which the
way of total immersion was afterward changed, is a plain confession of the
very great Antiquity, and even Primitiveness of that custom: those
Ecclesiastical Usages being Rationally to be presumed such, whose practice is
derived to us from ancient times by the Catholic Church, but of whose Original
in after times, that are short of the Primitive, no account can be given.

. 71. Nor yet has Chamier done, but adds (what Mr. D. could not but be
unwilling his people should have reported to them from a Protestant Author so
learned and judicious as Chamier) that certainly the use of Sprinkling is the
more commodious, Certe commodior aspersionis usus, and propter tempestatum
incommoda, and propter pudorem, cujus gratia adhibitae olim Diaconissae
mulicribus nudandis. Vnde Constit. Apost. l. 8. c. 28. munus earum dicitur
ministrare presbyteris dum baptizantur foeminae propter decorem. Cham. ib.
both in regard of the discommodities of Seasons, and in respect of Modesty, on
account whereof Deaconnesses were in time past made use of for the stripping of
women naked. Whence in the Apostolical Constitutions it is said to be their
office to wait on the Priests, whilst the Baptism of women was a performing,
for decencies sake.

. 72. Nor yet (to go on still with Chamiers words in the case) was the nature
of the Sacrament altered for that. Nec ob id fuit alterata Sacramenti natura.
Nam quia tota virtus aquae est in significando per ablutionem, non interest
quantum quisque abluatur; ut in Eucharistia non quantum quisque comedat. Est
enim unius partis ablutio ejusdem naturae cum totius ablutione. Id. ib.
For because the whole virtue of the water is in signifying by ablution [or
washing] it matters not how much every one is washed, as [it matters] not in
the Eucharist how much every one eats. For the washing of one part is of the
same nature with the washing of the whole.

. 73. How ought not Mr. D. here to commune with his own heart about his dealing
thus with Authors, so as in the quoting of them, to put in, and leave out, at
his pleasure, and as may best serve his interest, without regard to truth or
justice; and from henceforth to be still, and deal no more so injuriously with
any, as he has done with Chamier?

. 74. The Rere of this Squadron is brought up by Dr. Hammond, a man of that
singular goodness as well as Learning, as was able to give credit to any party
that he should appear to own, or but countenance. And therefore he, as the
best, is reserved for the last. I might, says Mr. Danvers, add many more, but
shall conclude with that observable Remark, that Dr. Hammond gives us hereon,
in his Annotations upon John 13.10. Telling us, that (...) signifies an
Immersion or washing of the whole body, which answers to the Hebrew word
(...), used for dipping in the Old Testament. And therefore upon Matthew. 3.1.
tells us, that John baptized in a River, viz. Jordan. Mark 1.5. in a confluence
of much water, as Aenon. John 3.22. That as the Greeks called the Lakes, where
they used to wash, (...), so the Ancients called their Baptisterions, or
vessels containing their Baptismal water Columbethras, i. e. swimming or diving
places, being made very large with Partitions for Men, and Women. And upon Mark
7.4. tells us, that the Washing or Baptizing of Cups, Vessels, Beds, etc. was
no other than a putting them into the water all over, rinsing them.

. 75. I believe he may add many more, and to as little purpose, as any thing
that yet has been produced. But as to his Triumphant Conclusion with that
observable Remark from Dr. Hammond, thereto I shall answer by degrees.

. 76. And first, that if Dr. Hammond did say, That (...) did signify an
Immersion, or washing of the whole Body, though in the place mentioned, Joh.
3.10. he does not strictly say those words, no not in his first Edition, but
these [ The Hebrews had their (...), or (...), and their (...), the former,
washing of the whole Body, which they call (...), the other of the hands or
feet, which they call (...), sanctifying:] and those words [ and answers to
the Hebrew word (...), used for dipping in the Old Testament] are none of Dr.
Hammonds, at least not in that place, yet it does not follow, even upon
supposition of his so saying, that he did think it signified nothing else, nor
any otherwise than to immerse: but that as sometimes it might signify
immersion, so sometimes it might signify also a perfusion, or an affusion. And
the rather, if, as Mr. Danvers tells us, the Dr. said it did answer to that
Hebrew word, which I have shown in these Papers, as well to signify in general
lotion or washing, as in special immersion or dipping. Nay, to take notice of
that, before we pass any further, it is observable, that whereas both to the
Greek word (...), and to the English word Immersion, Dr. Hammond adds other
words, viz. (...), to the first, (in Edit. 1.) and washing to the second, those
added words are both of a general import, and the addition of them might
intimate, that the Doctor thought the word (...) not to be so confined to that
particular way of dipping, as that it might not also signify in a more general
way any washing. And if, which is the most that can be said, still that
washing, which the Doctor meant by (...), was of the whole body; To this any
one may easily reply, That there may be a washing of the whole body without an
immersion of it. And to go but a while in a Meadow naked in a good shower of
Rain, will afford an experiment able to evince the truth hereof even to sense.

. 77. And as the Doctor does to where say (that I find in him) that (...) does
signify nothing else but immersion (how frequently soever he grants it to
signify that:) so whereas he had before, in the 1. Edit. of his Annotations on
Joh. 13.10. divided the Hebrew washings into two sorts, their (...) or (...),
and their (...), the former the washing of the whole Body, and the other of the
hands or feet, etc. in his Review, and consequently in the following Editions,
and particularly in the Third, which I have by me, he does divide them into
their (...), and their (...) or (...); the former, viz. (...), the washing of
the whole Body, the other two, viz. (...) and (...) of the hands or feet, of
one part alone, either by immersion, or pouring on of water. And again
afterward he says, All that is needful to him [viz. the (...)] is the (...) or
(...), the immersion, or pouring on of water. By which alteration of his words,
from making (...) to be synonymous with (...), which he makes (amongst the
Jews) to signify the washing of the whole body, to the making of it to be
synonymous with (...), which he makes to signify the washing of the hands or
feet, and that either by immersion, or affusion, is clearly showed, that the
Doctor in his second thoughts was of opinion, that (...) did not so strictly
signify immersion, but that it was extendible also to other significations,
even so far as to signify a washing in general, however performed, either by
immersion or affusion. And according to the later more correct sentiment of the
Doctor, in reason and ingenuity should Mr. D. have quoted him, if he knew of
it. For so would Mr. Danvers be done unto himself.

. 78. And in further confirmation hereof the Doctor tells us (on Mark 7.4.)
differently in the later Editions from what he had said in the first, that the
word (...) here used, as it differs from (...), ver. 3. signifies not only the
washing of the whole body -- but washing any part, as the hands here, by way of
immersion in water, as that is opposed to affusion or pouring water on them.
And adds from Dr. Pocock, that all the difference observable between (...) and
(...) was, that the former noted immersion, the other affusion of water, both
indifferently used of any part, both sometimes for any kind of washing that
part. So that if (...) answer to (...) (as Mr. Danvers makes the Doctor to say
it does) then the former, as well as the latter, must signify any kind of
washing of that, whereto it is applied, which is the thing we contend for. And
though the Doctor say of (...), as it differs from (...), that it signifies
immersion, yet that hinders not but that, as (...), which just so differs from
(...), is put to signify indifferently any kind of washing, ( viz. when it is
not set in contradistinction unto (...)) so (...), though when set in
contradistinction unto (...), it signify immersion, yet when it is not so set,
it may signify in general any kind of washing: nothing being more ordinary in
the use of words, than such kind of Synecdoches as those, whereby both the
Genus is put for the Species, and the Species for the Genus, and even sometimes
one Species for another; as when Homer, Virgil, or Ovid call that armor
brasly, which was made of iron; or that irony, which was made of brass.

. 79. As for that which Mr. Danvers says, the Doctor tells us (upon Matthew.
3.1.) of John's baptizing in a River viz. Jordan, Mark 1.5. and in a confluence
of much water, as Aenon, Joh. 3.23. Because, it is added, there was much water
there; and so for that, which he says upon Mark 7.4. of the washing, or
baptizing of Cups, Vessels, Beds, etc. I have spoken to it elsewhere, and I
hope to the satisfaction of the Reader.

. 80. And as to the Ancients calling their Baptisterions, or Vessels containing
their Baptismal Water by the same name, whereby the Greeks called their Lakes,
where they used to wash, viz, Columbethras, i. e. swimming or diving places; I
answer, that the ancient manner of public and solemn baptizing being much
after the Jewish way of Immersion, it was not only convenient, but necessary,
that the Baptisterions or Fonts, should be made of such capacity, as that the
baptized might be immersed therein; and this the Doctor declares, and no body
denies. But this does not do the Dippers business, nor prove that Dr. Hammond
ever denied, or intended by any thing he said to deny, or imply a denial of
any's being baptized among the Ancients otherwise than by immersion. The Doctor
knew better things than so. For to grant that public Baptism was administered
by immersion, does not affirm that private Baptism was so administered; to grant
that Persons in health were dipped, does not affirm that Persons in sickness
were so baptized too. In short, unless these two things can be made good, which
yet never can be, first that none were ever baptized amongst the ancients, but
in the public Baptisterions (none in private Houses, none in Prisons, none in
their Beds;) Secondly, that even in those public Baptisterions none were ever
baptized but by a total immersion, and that it did not suffice to some Persons,
and in some places, to have their Heads only dipped, all the Doctor's discourse
of the largeness of the ancient Columbethras makes nothing to the confirmation
of the Dipper's supposition. It is one thing to talk of what is done in
ordinary and common cases, and another thing to talk of what is extraordinary,
and but done upon special emergency, and the proof of the one is no disproving
of the other.

81. Secondly, I answer, that whatever Dr. Hammond said, either of the word
(...), or of the ancient manner of baptizing, he did not hold all Baptism
unlawful, but that which was administered by a Total immersion. And this, if his
published Writings did not declare it, I should be able to make good out of his
private. For taking notice of what he said of these things, and foreseeing what
use would by the Anabaptists be made of what he said, I did by Letter advertise
him thereof; and he again by Letter to me did not only clear his own discourses
of the strict import of (...) from giving any advantage to the Dippers, but
also lay down several grounds, whereon the Church proceeded to use sprinkling
instead of dipping. And because the communication of so much of those Letters
of his as concerns the present debate, might tend, as I thought, to the
satisfaction of the Reader, as well as to the vindication of the Doctor, I once
had thought to have made so much of his Letters public. But seeing his public
writings do declare it, and particularly his Pract. Catechism, l. 6. S. 2. p.
154. Edit. 1674. where he says, that by Christ's appointment, whosoever should
be thus received into his Family, should be received with this Ceremony of
Water, therein to be dipped, (i. e. according to the Primitive ancient custom to
be put under water) three times, or instead of that, to be sprinkled with it --
Therefore I shall, as thinking it a needless thing, supersede the Reader all
further trouble about them.

. 82. And thus I have (fairly I think) cleared the Field of this first
Squadron. I shall, after a little pause for refreshment of the Reader, attack
the Second.

CHAP. XII. Answers to Authorities produced by Mr. Danvers from Commentators,
etc.
. 1. THE Second Squadron consists most of Commentators, and marches under the
Banner of Holy Scripture: several Texts whereof Mr. Danvers displays before
them. To their motions I shall now pay my attendance.

. 2. Secondly, (says Mr. D.) It appears to be so from the practice and usage
we find hereof in Scripture, and the Opinion of the Learned upon it.

. 3. Whether there be any rational ground from what appears, to conclude what
was, or ought to be, will be seen in the Issue. But what it is, let us have it.

First (says he) in the Story of Christ's baptism, we read, Matthew. 3.5. (it
should be v. 13.) That Jesus came from Galilee to Jordan unto John, to be
baptized of him. And v. 16. And when he was baptized, he went up straightway
out of the water.

. 4. The Learned Cajetan upon the place, says, Christ ascended out of the
water; therefore Christ was baptized by John, not by Sprinkling or pouring
Water upon him, but by Immersion, that is, by dipping or plunging in the water.

5. To the Text I have already spoke, in chapter 10. I shall now therefore speak to
the Cardinal.

. 6. And that Cardinal (who, no doubt, was learned enough to deserve that
Emphatical Title of the Learned; and from an Anabaptist, especially when he
seems to speak for Dipping in Baptism) does indeed make such Collection, that
because of its being said, that Jesus straightway went up out of the water,
therefore he was baptized by John, not by Sprinkling, or pouring water upon him
from above, but by dipping in, or bowing down his body. But this Learned man's
assertion being founded on a reason, his word can be of no more weight than his
reason is. But his reason is none, as I have showed in these Papers, chapter 10.
Nor could all the Learning he had ever prove, from Christ's ascending (...), ab
aqua (as Musculus, the next Author that Mr. D. here cites, does render it) from
the water (as that is in the Original; which in his Translation is de aqua, in
ours, out of the water) that Christ was baptized by a total immersion. It
follows therefore that his word is nothing also. And so with this I might
dismiss him.

. 7. But further, having consulted that Author himself, and the place here
quoted, I find something, not taken notice of by Mr. D. or thought fit by him
to be slipped by, that makes the Cardinal seem not altogether so peremptory in
his Conclusion, which is, that having said, Jesus was baptized by John, per
immersionem, that is, by dipping, he adds, seu submissionem corporis, which Mr.
D. Englishes not, Baptizatus autem Jesus confestim ascendit de aqua] Non ergo
per aspersionem aut desuper effusionem, sed per immersionem seu submissionem
corporis baptizatus est Jesus in Jordane. Cajetan, in Matthew. 3.16.
unless plunging in the water be the English of it with him: but it signifies
only a bowing down of the body. And who knows but that the Cardinal might speak
those words by way of Correction of, or explication to what went before, and
intend only thereby, that he bowed down his body in order to the having of his
head only dipped in water, which has been since, if it were never before that,
a way of baptizing. And if this be the meaning of the Phrase, then the Cardinal
having proposed two ways, and having determined for neither, cannot be produced
as a positive witness for either: unless by him, that will do as Mr. D. has
done, and leave what makes against him, out.

. 8. But were it so, as Mr. D. makes the Cardinal say, and that by submissionem
he meant nothing more, nor other than what he meant by immersion (though those
words are far enough from being Synonymous,) yet it does not follow, that it
must be necessarily so with us too: unless there were a necessity of our
conformity with Christ in all his Sacramental Circumstances, which I think our
Anabaptists will not say we should, no not in those which concern Baptism. For
then we must not be baptized till above thirty years of Age; we must be
unmarried when baptized; we must be baptized no where but in a River, and that
River must be Jordan: in which circumstances yet some have been more zealous,
than judicious imitators of him.

In the mean time it may be taken notice of, that by Baptism the learned
Cardinal understood an Ablution. Therefore in v. 5. of this Chapter, upon the
word [Baptizabantur] he says, the old Greek word remained among the Latins in
their Ecclesiastic Mysteries, and that it ought to have been abluebantur, and
that John himself did exercise ministerium abluendi, and that the sinners
offered themselves, abluendos a Joanne, tanquam exterior ablutio esset quaedam
professio poenitentiae, and mundae deinceps vitae ducendae, to be washed by
John, as if the external washing were a kind of profession of repentance and a
new life thenceforth to be led. So that with him washing seems to have been the
most material thing in John's Baptism: and then no question, but that where that
is, the Cardinal will allow of a Baptism, though it be not performed by a total
immersion.

. 9. From Cajetan Mr. D. passes on to Musculus; and says he, Musculus on
Matthew. 3. calls Baptism Dipping, and says, 'the Parties baptized were dipped,
not sprinkled.

. 10. But he tells us not on what verse of that Chapter; nor in what Page of
that Volume he says it. The discovery had saved me some time, and labor in
searching. And what is the worst of it, after all my pains in reading two and
twenty pages in folio, with care to find the place, and all those places where
there seemed to be any probability of finding it, twice over, all the Return I
can make upon my Inquest is this, Non est inventus, there is no such place or
passage in all that Musculus says on that Chapter, that I could find.

. 11. This indeed there is, that he uses the word tinctio for baptizing in
several places. Adumbrat enim externa illa tinctio, and mystica ablutio quae
fit in corpore renovationem mentium and ablutionem sordium, etc. Baptis^a quo
tincti sunt and Christus, and Christiani, p 28. Bapti^mus quo non mentes sed
corpora tinguntur, p. 36.
But surely tinctio does not signify precisely dipping, but wetting, or dying,
be it what way it will that a thing is wetted or dyed; whether by dipping into,
or pouring on, that which wetteth or dies. And I have showed in these Papers,
that as tingo is sometimes put to signify baptizing in general however
performed, viz. when it stands alone: so it is sometimes put to signify
baptizing by Sprinkling or pouring on water in particular, and in opposition to
dipping. His calling baptism then tinction, if that be it which Mr. D. means,
no more proves his calling it dipping, than sprinkling.

. 12. But as for his saying, that the Parties baptized were dipped not
sprinkled, there is no such thing said by him there. And I cannot but wonder
with what confidence Mr. D. should say any such thing. Had I said it, a crime
would have been charged on me; which out of respect and honor to that
Gentleman, because a Gentleman, though unknown to me, I shall forbear so much
as to name. All I shall say is, that Truth needs no Untruths to defend it: and
that the Champion that goes about by such supports to maintain a cause, rather
ruins it, than upholds it. And those of his Party may do well to take heed how
they trust his reports from other Authors, who has so unbecomingly, to say no
worse, misreported this. The best excuse that I can make for him is, that it is
not impossible, but that either himself, or his Amanuensis, might mistake the
place in writing, or that it might be amiss ordered by the Compositor in the
Printing (such things very ordinarily happening to be:) and if that will any
way salve his reputation, as I wish it may, much good d'it him with it.

. 13. But to go on, A Second Scripture considerable is that of John 3.23. And
John was baptizing in Aenon near Salim (and the reason why he pitched upon this
place is given) because there was much water there.

. 14. To this Text I have already spoken in chapter 11. and so I think it needless
to say any thing farther here. But --

. 15. Piscator upon the place (as Mr. D. tells us) says (...) signifies many
Rivers, as (...) in the singular number, signifies the River of Jordan: This
says he, is mentioned to signify the Ceremony of Baptism which John used in
dipping or plunging the whole body of man standing in the River; whence he
says, Christ being baptized by John in Jordan, is said to ascend out of the
Water.

. 16. Not to trouble Mr. D. with asking him, how the body of a man can be
plunged (which is Mr. D's word, and none of Piscators) in the River, whilst he
is standing in it, I shall acknowledge Piscators words to be much to this
purpose, only a little more clear. Those to the present purpose are these.
Commemoratur autem hoc ad significandum ritum Baptismi, quo Johannes utebatur,
immergens scilicet totum corpus hominis in fluvio stantis. Vnde Christus a
Johanne in Jordane baptizatus, ex aqua ascendisse dicitur. Matthew. 3. v. 16. It
is not material what (...) signifies, whether many waters, or many rivers, or
much water (only by the way, if it signify many waters, and those distinct in
place, or many Rivers, it the better confirms the Notion I have of it, where I
speak concerning it.) We will suppose the water, or waters deep enough for a
man to be dipped in; and that it was John's way to baptize by dipping. But
Christ's ascending out of the water proves it not: as I have showed, chapter 10. And
though Dipping were John's (as well as other Jews) way of baptizing, yet it
does not necessarily follow, that ours must be so too, as I have showed, chapter 8.

. 17. Nor did Piscator think so. Else he would never have delivered it for a
Theological Aphorism, That whether the Baptized Party were dipped, and that
thrice or once, or were only sprinkled or wetted with water poured on, that
ought to be at liberty in the Churches, Caeterum mergaturne totus qui tingitur,
idque ter an semel; an infusa tantum a qua aspergatur nut perfundatur: id pro
regionum diversitate Ecclesiis liberum esse debet. Etsi enim mergendi ritum
veteri Ecclesie observatum fuisse constat: tamen verbum (...) non solum mergi,
sed etiam quavis alia ratione tingi, aut lavari abluive significat. Piscat:
Loc. 24. Aphorism. 9.
according to diversity of Countries. Adding also as a reason for what he had
said, for though it be certain, that the rite of dipping was observed by the
ancient Church, yet the Verb (...) signifies not only to be dipped, but also to
be wetted, washed, or cleansed with washing any other way. So then Piscator is
no witness for the Anabaptists: nor his Testimony any thing to the prejudice of
baptism by Sprinkling.

. 18. Calvin, upon these words, Caeterum ex his verbis colligere licet
Baptismum fuisse celebratum a Johanne and Christo totius corporis submersione.
Calv. in loc.
says, That from this place you may gather, that John and Christ administered
Baptism by plunging the whole body into water.

. 19. I answer, It is probable they did so: and that they so did it is probably
conjectured from this place. But first probability is no proof of certainty.
Secondly, that they did administer Baptism by plunging in this place, does not
prove, that they did not administer it also by sprinkling, neither in this, nor
in any other place. And without that all is nothing.

. 20. And is this all that Calvin says of the matter in this place? what then
means that which follows, spoken by him as it were on purpose to prevent that
ill use, that he foresaw would be made of those his words? Notwithstanding we
ought not with so great anxiety to trouble our selves about the external rite,
Quanquam de externo ritu minus anxie laborandum est, modo cum spirituali
veritate and Domini instituto ac regula congruat. Calv. in loc.
so it do but agree with the spiritual truth, and the Appointment and Rule of
the Lord. And I hope it does sufficiently elsewhere appear in these Papers,
that there is no discongruity betwixt those things, and the now prevailing
Ceremony. And so Mr. Calvin's name is but used here for the Authority of his
name (which is truly great) against himself, and those that follow that way
now, which he followed in his time and Church; on what design Mr. D. knows, and
with how much ingenuity let others judge. But we shall have more of this
presently.

. 21. A Third Scripture worthy our notice, is Acts 8.36, 38. As they went on
their way, they came to a certain water; and the Eunuch said, see here is
water; and they both went down into the water, both Philip and the Eunuch, and
he baptized him; and when they were come up out of the water: Upon which place,

. 22. Calvin says, We see what fashion the Ancients had to administer Baptism;
for they plunged the whole Body into the Water: The use is now, says he, that
the Minister casts a few drops of Water only upon the Body, or upon the Head.

. 23. To this Scripture my Answer will be given in chapter 14. Perhap; Reader you
may wonder why I refer my Answers to these Scriptures to other places, and
answer them not here, where it might seem most proper to answer them. Know
therefore, that these Three Chapters, which contain Answers to the Authorities
alleged by Mr. Danvers, are postnate to the rest of the Treatise; which was
gone out of my hand before much of these Three Chapters was finished: and so
these Scriptures being considered in other places of the Treatise, I think it
needless to say any thing to them here; and that I make not particular
References, is because I have neither the Treatise, nor so much as any Copy of
it by me, whereby I might be enabled to give certain Directions. Herein
therefore I humbly beg a favorable construction of my doings. And now to what
is alleged from Mr. Calvin; I answer,

. 24. First, That Mr. Calvin does not say, that we here see, what was the only
fashion of baptizing the Ancients had: but what rite of baptizing was among the
Ancients. That dipping was one fashion we shall give them leave to believe: but
that it was the only fashion, is the dispute, and not proved from hence.

. 25. Secondly, Mr. Calvin's saying, Hic perspicimus, we see here, is no proof
that dipping was the Ancient way of baptizing, unless it were to be seen here.
But that no such thing is here to be seen, I shall make sufficiently to appear,
chap. 14. And so this place, on that supposition, is nothing to the purpose.

. 26. Thirdly, This place is an intimation, that the use for the Minister to
sprinkle (not as Mr. D. renders it to cast a few drops only on) the Body or
Head was formerly in being. First, because he calls it an use; and that must
have some time to be begun in, and continued in to make it an use. And
secondly, because he says (not as Mr. D. renders him) the use is, but invaluit
usus, it was grown to be an use, or the use that was begun was grown strong,
and had gained confirmation by custom, for the Minister to baptize by
sprinkling.

. 27. Fourthly, Was Mr. Calvin against sprinkling in Baptism, by any thing that
appears in this place? Far be it from any to think so. It had been more
ingenuous in Mr. D. to have given us the rest that follows: wherein Mr. Calvin
speaks as much to the purpose in vindication of sprinkling, as any Rhantist, as
some call those that are for baptizing by sprinkling, would desire. Which
because Mr. D. has not done, as well for vindication of Mr. Calvin, as the
truth, I will do it.

. 28. But (says he) so little a difference of a Ceremony, Caeterum, non tanti
esse nobis debet tantillum Caeremoniae discrimen, ut ecclesiam propterea
scindamus, vel rixis turbemus. Pro ipsa quidem Baptismi Caeremonia, quatenus
nobis a Christo tradita est, centies potius ad mortem usque digladiandum, quam
ut eam nobis cripi sinamus. Sed quum in aquae symbolo testimonium habemus tam
ablutionis nostrae, quam novae vitae: quum in aqua velut in speculo, sanguinem
nobis suum Christus repraesentat, ut munditiem inde nostram petamus: quum docet
nos spiritu s^^o refingi, ut mortui peccato justitiae vivamus: nihil quod ad
Baptismi substantiam faciat d^esse nobis certum est. Quare ab initio libere
sibi permisit Ecclesia, extra hanc substantiam ritus habere panlulum
dissimiles. Nam alii. ter, alii autem semel tantum mergebant: quare non est
quod in rebus non ita necessariis nimium morosi simus: modo ne adventitiae
pompae simplicem Christi institutionem contaminent. Calvin. in Act. 8.36.
ought not to be of that esteem with us, as that for it we should rend the
Church, or trouble it with Brawls. Truly for the Ceremony of Baptism it self,
in as much as it was delivered to us by Christ, we ought to fight to the death
an hundred times over, rather than suffer it to be taken away from us. But
seeing that in the Symbol of water we have testimony as well of our washing, as
of our new life: Seeing that in the water, as in a Looking-glass, Christ
represents unto us his Blood, that from thence we may seek our cleansing:
seeing that he teaches, that we are fashioned again by his Spirit, that being
dead to sin we may live to righteousness; it is certain that we want nothing
which can make for the substance of Baptism. Wherefore from the beginning the
Church took free liberty to it self, save in this substance, to have rites a
little unlike. For some dipped thrice, but some only once: wherefore we have no
reason in things of not so great necessity to be too morose, so that
adventitious pomps do not defile the plain institution of Christ.

O that our Dippers would but be so tender as not to rend and trouble the
Church about so little a difference as this is. Sure they would not be so stiff
about it, if they did not think, that whilst we have not the Ceremony of
dipping, we want something that is of the substance of the Sacrament, which is
quite contrary to the judgment of their here-appealed-unto witness, Mr. Calvin:
who looks upon it as one of those things which are not so necessary; and thinks
that the present Church may, as the Primitive Church did, and (mark that) from
the beginning allow it self some liberty in the use of several, not greatly
differing Rites and Ceremonies.

. 29. A fourth Scripture we shall mention, is Romans 6.4. Buried with him in
Baptism: Where the Apostle elegantly alludes to the Ceremony of Baptizing in
our Death and Resurrection with Christ.

. 30. Cajetan upon the place, says, Thus we are buried with him by Baptism
into Death: By our burying he declares our death from the Ceremony of Baptism;
because he who is baptized, is put under the Water, and by this carries a
similitude of him that is buried, who is put under the Earth. Now because none
are buried but dead men, from this very thing that we are buried in Baptism, we
are assimilated to Christ buried, or when he was buried.

. 31. To the Text, I answer, First, That it is plain by it, that there was such
a custom in those days, as to baptize by immersion, which carried a very
sensible show of a Burial, and a Resurrection. But the Negative cannot be
thence concluded, that there was no other way of baptizing, but that. Nor is it
probable there was no other way: First, because there are other Texts of
Scripture, which allude to sprinkling in Baptism, as this cloth to dipping. And
the like Collection must be allowed to be made from the one, that is made from
the other. Secondly, because there may be, and is a baptismal representation
made of a burial, and of a Resurrection, not only in partial mersation, but in
aspersion or affusion of water, as well as in immersion, as we shall more at
large show hereafter.

. 32. And now to the Cardinal, I answer, that not having the Book by me to
examine, I must stand to the Quoter's ingenuity for the Truth of the Quotation;
which yet if truly made, is not much to the Quoter's advantage. All that I can
find in it to the purpose, is in these words. [ He who is baptized, is put
under the water, and by this carries a similitude of him that is buried.] But
what makes this against sprinkling? or what more for dipping, than for
sprinkling? He that is dipped is put under the water. True: And where is he put
that is sprinkled? Above it? That were a new fashion of baptizing indeed. In
short, he that is sprinkled, as well as he that is dipped, is put under the
water, and the water's falling upon him that is sprinkled, fairly represents
the Earth's falling upon him that is buried; and so in sprinkling, as well as
in dipping, there is a similitude of a burial, and by the one as well as by the
other, we may be said to be buried with Christ by Baptism into Death. And so
the Cardinal's testimony might have been spared, unless to fill up room, and
make a show, being every whit as much for us, as it is for them that are
against us.

. 33. If it be replied, that by putting under water the Cardinal meant such a
putting under water as is done in a total immersion, and not by affusion or
aspersion; I answer; it may be, or may not be so, for ought I know. But
however, that affirmative, that he that is put so under the water carries a
similitude of a burial, does not imply a negative of contrary in it, that none
carries a similitude of a burial, but he that is so put under the water. That
representation is made both ways, though in the one it is more lively than in
the other. And so the passage is impertinent, and proves nothing.

. 34. Keckerman (as Mr. D. tells us) in his Syst. Theol. l. 3. c. 8. says, That
Immersion, not Aspersion, was the first Institution of Baptism, as it does
plainly appear from Romans 6.3.

. 35. To that purpose Keckerman does indeed speak in that place. Yet that he
nevertheless did not think Immersion necessary, abundantly appears in the same
place: which for the vindication of him, I will set down at large, since Mr. D.
thought good only to pick so much out of him as might serve for his turn, and
entitle Keckerman to a piece of Patronship to Anabaptism.

. 36. Coming to give the Definition of Baptism, Baptismus est Sacramentum N.T.
quo aequae perfusione in nomine Patris and Filii and S. S. facta significatur
and obsignatur fidelibus beneficium purgationis a peccato per filium Dei, and
regenerationis ad vitam aeternam. Keck. Syst. Theol. l. 3. c. 8.
he does it thus. Baptism is a Sacrament of the New Testament, wherein by a
perfusion of Water made in the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, there is signified and sealed to the Faithful the benefit of Purgation
from sin by the Son of God, and of Regeneration unto Eternal Life.

. 37. And going to set down the Canons of Baptism, Eisi Baptismus proprie
significet immersionem; and in vetere etiam Ecclesia per regiones Orientis non
adspersione sed immersione Baptismus celebrabatur, tamen in regionibus
Christianismi frigidioribus adspersio loco immersionis recepta est propter
infantes; quia charitas and necessitas dispensant de Ceremoniis easque (...)
quadam temperant, quatenus id salva (...) fieri potest. Keckerm. ib.
his second he makes to be this. Though Baptism do properly signify immersion,
and in the ancient Church throughout the Eastern Countries, baptism was
administered not by aspersion, but by immersion: yet in the colder Countries of
Christendom sprinkling is entertained in stead of immersion by reason of
Infants: because Charity and Necessity dispense with Ceremonies, and temper
them with a kind of (...) [moderation, clemency, gentleness] as far as it may
be done with safety to the Analogy.

. 38. Then proceeding to a Note upon this Canon, he sets down that, Non
possumus diffiteri primam institutionem Baptismi immersione, non vero
aspersione constitisse, quod diserte patet ex cap. 6. Romans versu tertio and
quarto. Sed quia primae institutio Baptismi facta est in regione calidiori, and
quia tunc temporis potissimum baptizabantur adulti, ideo de hic Ceremonia in
regionibus frigidioribus, and ho^ tempore, quo infantes plerumque, rarissime
adulti baptizantur, potuit Ecclesia dispensare: praesertim cum (...)
significationis maneat; and adspersione etiam sordes abluantur; cumque etiam
non homo propter Baptismum, sed Baptismus propter hominum factus sit, ut
propter necessitatem infantum Charitas aliquid in ritu illo potuerit mutare
Praesertim cum (...) and (...) sit a verbo (...), quod est a (...) autem non
tantum immergo, sed and aspergo significat. Keck. ib.
which Mr. D. quotes from him, which is this, as it stands all together in him.
We cannot deny, but that the first institution of Baptism stood in immersion,
and not in aspersion, as plainly appears from Romans 6.3, 4. But because the
first institution of Baptism was made in a hotter Country, and because at that
time, adult persons were mostly baptized, therefore the Church might dispense
with this Ceremony in colder Countries, and at this time when Infants mostly,
and seldom any adult are baptized: especially seeing the Analogy of
signification remains, and filths are washed away too with that sprinkling: and
seeing that man was not made for Baptism, but Baptism for man, so as that by
reason of the necessity of Infants Charity might be able to change something in
that Rite, especially since (...) and (...) is from the Verb (...), and that is
from (...): but (...) signifies not only to dip, but also to sprinkle.

. 39. What would we have any man say more for Sprinkling, than is said by this
Author produced by Mr. D. as a witness against it, and for dipping? His
judgment is so clear and full in the case, that without any remarks made on him
I might fairly leave the consideration thereof to the Impartial Reader. And I
wonder Mr. Danvers's heart aked not, when he read this, and yet resisted it.

. 40. Yet it may not be amiss to note some few things, as First, That admitting
Immersion to have been the first institution of Baptism, that hinders not but
that Aspersion might come up presently after it, even in the Apostles days; and
that there is fair appearance of it, in Heb. 10.22. as is elsewhere showed in
these Papers. Secondly, that it does not appear from Romans 6.3, 4. that the
first institution of Baptism stood in Immersion, and not Aspersion. It appears
from thence, that Immersion was a way of baptizing then, but it does not thence
appear, that Immersion was the only way, that they did baptize by; nor that
Aspersion was not then in use too as well as Immersion; nor yet which of them
was first. Thirdly, that the Author does not say, that anciently through the
Universal Church baptism was administered only by Immersion, but only through
the Eastern Countries. Fourthly, that the Reasons on which he founds the change
of this Rite in these colder Countries, viz. necessity and charity, are such,
as the most positive Laws of God, even those for the Sabbath and Circumcision,
have given way unto, as we shall further show afterward. And if a substantial
part of Divine Laws have given way to them, then much more may a Circumstantial
part of them. Thus much for Keckerman.

. 41. The next charge is given by three at once, and those Men of renoun,
Diodat. Grotius, and Davenant. Diodat. (says he) Annot. on Romans 6.4. Grotius
on the same, Davenant, Col. 2.12. do own dipping to have been the Rite in
Christ's time.

. 42. Mr. Danvers had done well to have given us their words, and not only have
mustered up their names. For, for my part, I cannot find in them, what he
quotes from them.

. 43. Mr. Diodati has these words in the place quoted, viz. Romans 6.4. In
baptism being dipped in water according to the ancient Ceremony, it is sacred
figure unto us, that sin ought to be drowned in us by God's Spirit: as that it
is a Seal unto us of the washing of our Souls before God. But now in which of
these words does he express, or imply, that dipping was the Rite in Christ's
time? Christ's time is not so much as mentioned in the whole passage. So then
the words can speak nothing for the time they do not mention.

. 44. But it is called the Ancient Ceremony. An ancient Ceremony acknowledgedly
it is. And so it might be, yet not so ancient as Christ's time. There have been
ancient Rites in the Church, which yet have not reached up so far. And as for
the Particle the, if any stress be laid upon that, as if thereby were meant,
that it is the only ancient Ceremony, and so must needs reach up to Christ's
time; I answer, that not having the Author's writing in its original Language
by me. I cannot tell, whether he expressed any thing, that necessarily did
import so much; and if it chance so to be that he did not, then his words, as
they are translated, are of no force: but if he did, then I cannot but
question, whether there be in them any truth: in as much as I have in these
Papers made it evident, that there were other Ceremonies anciently in use, as
well as dipping; and their first original being not to be found, they are
rationally believed to have been from the beginning; and the contrary thereunto
cannot be demonstrated. And so this Testimony is either untrue, or impertinent.

. 45. In short, this Author does not here determine Immersion to be the sole
Ceremony that indispensably is to be used in Baptism; but he declares what is
designed by that Ceremony, where it is used; and in that he has none to
contradict him.

. 46. The like I say by Grotius. His words on that place, Ostendit non verba
tantum Baptismi, sed and ipsam ejus formam hoc innucre. Nam immersio totius
corporis in flumen, ita ut non conspiceretur amplius, imaginem gerebat
sepulturae quae datur mortuis. Sic Col. 2.12. (...). Grot. in Romans 6.4.
mention nothing of Christ's time (unless any would think his time to have
extended it self as far as to St. Paul's writing his Epistle to the Romans, who
was dead and gone many Years before:) and so do not prove, what they are quoted
for. He tells us indeed, that not only the words, but form of Baptism do
intimate a representation to be made of the Burial of Christ; the total
immersing of the Body so far under the water, as to be for a while covered
thereby from sight, bearing a certain Image (as he says) of that Burial, which
is given to the Dead: and its rising again from under the water, bearing an
Image or show of Christ's rising again. And this we freely grant, where it is
so administered. But as he does not say, so neither do we grant, that it is not
signified any other way, yea we show the contrary in these Papers. It is very
probable, or rather certain, that such a way of baptizing was in use among the
Romans, in as much as the Apostle alludes thereto, as a thing known amongst
them; and makes Inferences therefrom for the instructing of them. But that is
not the question in hand: but whether that was the only way, not there only,
but throughout the whole Christian World. If it were not so, then can no
Argument thence be drawn to the evacuating of other ways of baptizing. And if
it were so, yet still, unless the Church had no power to vary at any time from
what was before time, in the accidentals and circumstantials of worship, other
ways of baptizing instituted and approved of by the Church, will be lawful.

. 47. And as for Davenant, he says not a word tending that way, viz. to prove
dipping to have been the (i. e. the only) Rite in Christ's time: but rather the
quite contrary. For having said, that in Baptism, when the Party baptized is
let down into the water, thereby is designed the burial of the Body of sins, or
the old Adam; as the Resurrection, when he is brought out; he adds this as a
reason: In veteri enim Ecclesia non tingebant solummodo, sed in aquam
immergebant cos, quos baptizabant. For in the ancient Church they did not only
tinge, but immerse into water, those whom they baptized. I have showed that
tingo, though when it is set alone, it is often put to signify baptizing in
general, whether by dipping or sprinkling, yet when it is set in opposition to
dipping, it signifies only sprinkling, or some other way of baptizing distinct
from dipping. So then, as this Author speaks not at all of Christ's time in
particular, but only of the ancient Church in general, so what he speaks of
that time, reaches as well to sprinkling, as to dipping, and asserts the
antiquity of the one, as well as of the other. Non tingebant solummodo, sed
immergebant, signifies plainly, that they did both tingere and immergere. And
if both were Rites in that time, then was not only one of them, namely dipping,
the, i. e. the only Rite in that time: And so Mr. D. gains nothing to his cause
by the Testimony of this no less learned, than honorable Father of our Church.

. 48. After this triumvirate of learned Men follows a Man, who alone was a
triumvir in Learnirg, Tilenus, (a learned Protestant Writer, as Mr. D. himself
styles him) and he in his Disputation, p. 886, 889, 890. gives, as Mr. D. tells
us a most remarkable testimony in the case. Baptism, says he, is the first
Sacrament of the New Testament instituted by Christ, in which with a most pat
and exact Analogy between the sign and the thing signified, those that are in
Covenant are by the Minister washed in Water. The outward Rite in Baptism is
threefold; 1. Immersion into the Water. 2. Abiding under the water. 3.
Resurrection out of the water. The form of Baptism, viz. Internal and
Essential, is no other than the Analogical proportion, which the signs keep
with the things signified thereby. For the properties of water in washing away
the defilements of the Body, do in a most suitable similitude set forth the
efficacy of Christ's blood in blotting out of sin; so dipping into the Water
does in a most lively similitude set forth the mortification of the old man;
and rising out of the Water, the vivification of the New. The same plunging
into the Water, holds forth to us that horrible gulf of Divine Justice, in
which Christ for our sins sake (which he took upon him) was for a while in a
manner swallowed up. Abiding under water, how little a while soever, denotes
his descent into Hell, even the very deepest of lifelesness, while lying in the
sealed and guarded Sepulcher, he was accounted as one dead. Rising out of the
Water, holds out to us a lively similitude of that Conquest, which this Dead
man got over Death, which he vanquished in his own Den, (as it were) that is
the Grave. In like manner therefore (says he) it is meet that we being
baptized into his death, and buried with him, should also rise with him, and so
go on in newness of life. Romans 6.3, 4. Coloss. 2.12.

. 49. I close with Mr. D. in his judgment of Tilenus, that he was a learned
Protestant Writer, and also that he gives a most remarkable Testimony in the
case. But how Mr. D. will clear himself from disingenuity in the case, when he
so cries up Tilenus, and his Testimony as being for them, and yet conceals,
what he could not but know, that he is one of the most positive and clear
witnesses for us that ever writ, I leave it to himself to consider. The words
cited by Mr. D. viz. the six first lines, ending with [washed in water] are in
his 4th. Thesis: and signify nothing on either side: and therefore might as
well have been spared. But how came he to skip over the Second Thesis? where
that Learned man plainly says, Baptism, if you consider the Etymology of the
word: signifies dipping, and also sprinkling: Baptismus, si Etymon vocis
spectemus, immersionem significat atque etiam aspersionem. quo sensu usurpatur
Mar 7.4. and a consequenti, ablutionem; cujusmodi non paucas praecipiebat lex
vetus, quam deinde etiam hac in part auctariis suis cumularunt Pharisaei.
Ti^en.
in which sense it is used Mark 7.4. and from the consequence a washing, such
as the old Law prescribed many of: which also even in this part the Pharisees
augmented with their own eekings. It was not for the turn it should be known,
so learned a Protestant Writer said thus much for the side, against which his
name, authority, and testimony was to be produced: and therefore it was warily
passed over.

. 50. But to go on with Mr. D. from the Fourth Thesis he skips to the
Fifteenth, without ordering his Testimony any otherwise than so, as if the
whole of what Tilenus said, had been one continued speech: -- quo pertinent
etiam reliquae actiones and ritus externi, puta immersio, vel aspersio, cum
adjectione verborum, and emersio ex aqua. Id. ib. These. 15.
and without taking notice of what he might have observed by the way in the
Twelfth Thesis, that speaking of the action and external Rites belonging to the
external part of Baptism, he names them dipping or sprinkling, with an addition
of words, and appearing out of the water. And whit says Tilenus there?
Much-what as Mr. D. reports from him. Ritus in baptismo est triplex: immersio
in aquam, mora sub aqua, and emersio ex aqua. i. e. as Mr. D. Englisheth it,
the outward Rite in Baptism is Threefold, (1.) Immersion into the Water, (2.)
Abiding under the water, (3.) Resurrection out of the water. But is this all
that the Learned man there says? All I suppose, Mr. D. was willing should be
known was there. But to do the Author right, and to preserve the Reader from
being imposed upon by a lame quotation, I will add the rest of that Thesis: in
which the words immediately following to those quoted by Mr. D. are these,
Quamvis autem immersio usitatior olim suerit, praesertim in Judaea, and aliis
regionibus calidioribus quam aspersio: tamen cum neque ad baptismi substantiam
perticat haec circumstantia; nec minus in aspersione quam in immersione
Sacramenti anal^gia ^^rvetur: siquinem etiam in legalibus purificationibus
sufficiebant (...) cum denique immersio, praesertim in tenellis infantibus,
quales hodie sunt plenaque qui baptizantur, non carcat valetudinis periculo:
nos quemadmodum uterque ritus voce baptismi significatur, Matthew. 3.16. Luc.
11.38. Marc. 7.4. sic utriuslibet usum, ex charitatis and necessitatis lege ab
Ecclesia retineri posse existimamus. Id. ib.
But though dipping were formerly more usual, especially in Judaea, and other
hotter Countries, than Sprinkling; yet seeing neither this circumstance does
pertain to the substance of baptism; and that the Analogy of the Sacrament is
kept no less in sprinkling than in dipping; since even in the legal
purifications sprinklings did suffice; finally seeing that dipping, especially
in tender Infants, such as are most that now adays are baptized, is not without
danger of health: we think, that as each Rite is signified by the word baptism
(in Matthew. 3.16. Luke 11.38. Mar. 7.4.) so by the Law of Charity and necessity
the use of either of them may be retained by the Church.

. 52. This is indeed a most remarkable Testimony in the case. And I thank Mr.
D. for it: which probably else I should not have enquired after. But why Mr. D.
concealed thus much of it from us, when he gave us the rest, himself can better
declare, than I divine. In the mean time the Reader may be pleased to take
notice of these remarks in it. (1.) That the Etymology of the word signifies
dipping and also sprinkling. (2.) That he says, that dipping was formerly more
usual than sprinkling; but not that it only was usual. (3.) That this
circumstance does not pertain to the substance of baptism. (4.) That the
Analogy of the Sacrament is kept no less in sprinkling, than in dipping. (5.)
That each Rite is signified by the word, in Mat. 16. etc. (6.) That by the Law
of charity and necessity the use of either of them (and then sprinkling as well
as dipping) may be retained in the Church. A remarkable Testimony indeed, this,
especially from an Author quoted against us by an Anabaptist.

. 53. After this Mr. D. claps two Theses more ( viz. the 32. and 34.) to the
rest, so still, as if all had been one continued discourse, and as if that
learned Writer had made one long continued harangue of dipping in Baptism, and
spoken nothing between of any thing else. But because what follows, consists
only in a fair declaration of the Analogy between dipping into water,
continuing under it, and coming up again out of it, and things said by him to
be signified by those actions, which are no matter of controversy between us
and the Anabaptists: therefore I forbear to transcribe any further: but leave
the Reader to make his estimate of this Testimony, and of the Quoter of it.

. 54. Mr. Leigh was a Commentator, as well as a Critical Writer, and upon that
account he is brought in by the Major in this Squadron also, and charging us
thus, Mr. Leigh in his Annotat. upon Romans 6.4. [Buried with him in Baptism unto
death.] Baptism, says he, is an Instrument not only of thy death with Christ,
which is the killing of sin, but also of thy Burial with him, which is a
perpetual mortification, or abiding under that death. He alludes to the manner
in which Baptism was then administered, which was to plunge them in the water;
the plunging of them into water, which were baptized, was a sign of their death
and Burial with Christ. So Mr. D. reports him.

. 55. His words are, He alludes to the manner in which baptism was then
administered, which was to strip them naked whom they baptized, and plunge them
in the water; after which they put on new garments: whence those manners of
speaking used in Scripture, to put on Christ, to put off the old man, and put
on the new, Gal. 3.27. Ephesians. 4.12, 13. Coloss. 2.11. and 3.9, 10. And he adds
in the Margin, the plunging of them into the water which were baptized, was a
sign of their death, and burial with Christ.

. 56. To this I answer, First, it is not to be doubted, but that putting wholly
under the water was one manner of baptizing then used. But if in calling it the
manner, it be meant, it was the only manner, this is easilier said, than
proved; and better proof must be given of it, than has yet appeared, before it
be consented unto. Not Mr. Leigh's bare word, though a very worthy and learned
Person he were, has authority enough for that, whilst there are so many, and
strong presumptions of the contrary.

. 57. Secondly, though in that place, and at that time, and by that Apostle,
Baptism by a total dipping were the only baptism that were used, yet who can
say, but that at another time, and in another place, and by the same, or some
other Apostle, there was a baptizing by sprinkling, pouring on of water, or
partial mersation? We have these other ways of baptizing in the Church; and in
the Church they have anciently been had; and their original cannot be shown;
and therefore we have reason to believe them to have been from the beginning;
though as being not the general way, which acknowledgedly was dipping, and as
being administered but in cases of necessity, there appear not so many, nor so
bright instances of them; and it is some matter of difficulty to trace them
particularly up so high.

58. Thirdly, I wonder Mr. D. did not as well mention their stripping too, as
their dipping. If I might guess, it should be this, that he was loath it should
be known, that the present practice of the Dippers were in any thing different
from the Primitive. But that it most apparently is. For in the Primitive times
they were dipped naked, as this Author of Mr. Danvers's does declare: but, as
far as I understand, those whom our Dippers now baptize, are not naked when
dipped, but have some Garment on. And this to avoid indecency. Now if in one
thing, to avoid indecency, they may vary from the Primitive practice (whereto
the manner of baptizing among the Jews also contributes its obligations) Why
may not we, for the same end, vary from it in another? I shall not need to add,
that anciently the baptized did put on new Garments after their baptizing, as
Mr. Leigh says, and for the reasons mentioned by Mr. Leigh. But I hear nothing
of that practice among the Dippers: nor any thing but that the same Garments,
which they did put off before their baptizing, they do put on again after their
baptism. Which is another difference in theirs, from the Primitive way. And
since the Primitive Saints did wholly strip themselves, to signify that they
did wholly put off the old Man, as concerning their former conversation; they
should be afraid lest their not stripping themselves wholly, should signify,
that they did put off the old Man not wholly, but in part; and their putting on
again the same Clothes they had on before, should signify their being wholly
the same that they were before. Those that stand so nicely upon it to be in all
punctilio's of Rites conform to the Apostolic and Primitive practice, should,
methinks, think of these things: for others, that are not so scrupulous about
them, there is not the like necessity of observation of them.

Lastly, The Assembly Divines, who bring up the Rere of this Squadron of
Commentators, do (as Mr. D. tells us) in their Annotations upon the place, say,
That in this phrase the Apostle seems to allude to the ancient manner of
baptizing, which was to dip the Parties unbaptized, and as it were to bury them
under water for a while, and then to raise them up again out of it, to
represent the burial of the old Man, and our Resurrection to Newness of Life.
The like says Piscator, and Diodate upon the place.

. 59. Mr. Danvers here fairly reports them; only in stead of those words [to
raise them up again] the Divines have [to draw them out of it, and lift them
up,] which change why he made I cannot discern: unless it were this; That he
feared those words [to draw out, and lift up] should import, that the Persons
then baptized were such as were capable of being so drawn and lifted; and so
make the Reader think that Infants, the properest persons for such actions to
be done to (it being no easy thing to imagine how they could be performed to
persons that were Adult; nor did I ever, to my remembrance, in any ancient
Author read of any such action done to them) were then baptized: and then this
testimony would do as much hurt to his cause one way, whilst it proved Infants
Baptism as old as the Epistle to the Romans, as it did it good another way,
whilst it asserted their Baptism to have been by dipping. And perhaps he
feared too, that the lifting up might make some think, that the use of
Godfathers (the things so horribly decried by the Men of his way) was
Primitive too: that work [levare de fonte] to lift up out of, or from the Font,
being so proper to the Godfathers, as that it is made the common Phrase to
import ones being a Godfather. Thus much to him.

. 60. Now to his Authors, I say the same that I said to Mr. Leigh, that if by
those words [the ancient manner] they meant only, that it was, a way, or one
manner, and that the most general way and manner so to baptize, I shall grant
it. But if they mean, that it was the only way, and manner, then their word
signifies no more with me, than the ground, which they give for it, amounts
unto, which is none at all. Now that being none, their word is nothing.

. 61. And the same I say to Piscator and Diodate, if they so say, as the
Assembly Divines have said. Though I rather think it was the Assembly Divines,
that said the like to them, than they to the Assembly Divines, as being and
writing before them. But however it were, to the same, or the like Argument,
the same, or the like Answer is to be returned.

. 62. And thus I have also cleared the Field of this Squadron of Commentators.
The third and last, which consists of a mixed multitude of Writers, Historical,
Didactical, Polemical, Scholastical, and Casuistical, comes up so close to and
near with this, that I cannot defer the encounter, but must instantly cope with
them.

CHAP. XIII. Answers to more Authorities produced by Mr. Danvers, from
Historians, Casuists, and other Polemical, as well as Didactical Writers.
. 1. DOctor Cave (whom Mr. D. truly calls a great Searcher into Antiquity; and
who, I truly believe, has digested more of that, than many others have read)
leads up the last Squadron. And he (as Mr. D. tells us) in his late Book called
Primitive Christianity, says, p. 320. That the Party baptized was wholly
immerged, or put under water; which was the almost constant and universal
custom of those times, whereby they did most notably and significantly express
the great End and Effects of Baptism; for, as in immerging, there are in a
manner, three several acts, the putting the Person into water, his abiding
there for some time, and his rising up again; thereby representing Christ's
Death, Burial, and Resurrection; and in conformity thereto, our dying unto sin,
the destruction of its power, and our Resurrection to a new course of life. By
the Persons being put into water, was lively represented the putting off the
body of the sins of the Flesh, and being washed from the filth and pollution of
them. By his being under it, which is a kind of Burial into water, his entering
into a state of Death or Mortification; like as Christ remained for some time
under the state or power of Death; therefore it is said, As many as are
baptized into Christ, are baptized into his Death, etc. And then by his
emersion or rising up out of the water, is signified his entering upon the new
course of life, that like as Christ was raised from the Dead by the Glory of
the Father, so we should walk in newness of life. Thus Mr. D. reports him.

. 2. But for all this, (1.) that Doctor is no Anabaptist; nor against
sprinkling in Baptism. For he does not say that immerging was absolutely the
constant, and universal custom of those times, but, with a restriction, almost
the constant, and universal custom: that is, it was not the constant, nor the
universal custom, but yet very much in use, the common practice of those
times, as he after explains himself, p. 321. Which is a clear confession of
some other way of baptizing then in use, besides immerging, though not so much
in use as that.

. 3. Secondly, after the Doctor's discourse of the signification of the Persons
being put under, and being under the water, and rising up out of it, (which is
all that Mr. D. takes notice of, and stops, when he comes at the end of it) the
Doctor goes on to speak of Sprinkling: and says, -- But though by reason of
the more eminent signification of these things, immersion was the common
practice in those days, and therefore they earnestly urged it, and pleaded for
it, yet did they not hold sprinkling to be unlawful; especially in cases of
necessity, of weakness, danger of death, or where convenience of immerging
could not be had; in these and such like cases Cyprian does not only allow, Ep.
76. ad Magn. p. 153.
but plead for it, and that in a discourse on purpose, when the question
concerning it was put to him. Upon this account it is, that immersion is
generally disused in these parts of the World, and sprinkling succeeded in its
room, because the tender bodies of most Infants (the only Persons now baptized)
could not be put under water in the cold Northern Climats, without apparent
prejudice to their health, if not their lives: and therefore in this, as in
other cases, God requires mercy rather than Sacrifice, especially considering,
that the main ends of Baptism are attained this way, and the Mystical effects
of it as truly, though not so plainly and significantly represented by
Sprinkling, as by putting the body under water.

. 4. In which discourse of his these remarks are so obvious, that it is loss, I
fear, of time, to take notice of them to the Reader. (1.) That the practice of
dipping, was but almost, and was not absolutely universal in the Primitive
times. (2.) That sprinkling was not then held unlawful. (3.) That Sprinkling
was especially allowed in cases of necessity, weakness, danger of death, or
want of convenience for immerging. (4.) That in this case God requires mercy,
rather than Sacrifice. (5) That the main ends of baptism are this way obtained.
(6.) That the Mystical effects of it are as truly represented this way, as by
dipping, though not so plainly. So grave a witness was Dr. Cave against
Sprinkling in Baptism.

. 5. Bishop Jewel is the next that Mr. Danvers makes to appear in this cause.
And he (as Mr. D. tells us) in his Apology, p. 308. brings the Council of
Worms determining the manner of Baptism thus, viz. That the dipping into the
water is the going down into Hell (or the Grave) and that the coming out of the
water is the Resurrection.

. 6. But B. Jewel has nothing of this in his Apology, which I read all over,
to find it. Missing it there, I sought for it in Caranzas Epitome of the
Councils: but that has nothing of it neither. Then I searched the Councils at
large in Surius, and there I found what that Council said in reference to this
matter; as also at last in B. Jewels Defense of his Apology, part. 2. page not
308, but yet 309 And it is plain to every man, that has but a dram of brains
in his Skull, that the Council there does not determine the manner of Baptism,
as Mr. D. would make the B. say it does, but only declares the meaning of that
way of Baptizing, when persons are dipped, namely that going into the water
represents going down into a grave, or a burial, and that coming out of the
water represents a coming out of the grave, or a resurrection. The words of the
Council as they are in Surius, are these, Et ne forte cuiquam sit dubium hujus
simplex mysterium Sacramenti, Vormatiense Council. Can. 5. de Baptismi
Sacramento, ap. Surium, Tom. 3. p. 522.
videat in eo mortem and resurrectionem Christi significari. Nam in aquis
mersio, quasi in infernum descensio est; and rursum ab aquis emersio,
resurrectio est. Therefore (so B. Jewel reports part of them) in the Council of
Worms it is written thus, In aquas demersio, in Infernum descensio est; and
rursus ab aquis emersio, resurrectio est: The dipping into the water is the
going into hell; and the coming out from the water is the Resurrection. So no
determination here of the manner of Baptism to be by dipping, but only a
declaration of the meaning of that Ceremony, when the person baptized is dipped.

. 7. Now to requite Mr. D. for his Quotation out of B. Jewel, Et [credimus]
baptismum quidem Sacramentum esse remissionis peccatorum, and ejus ablutionis,
quam habemus in Christi sanguine: and ab eo neminem qui velit profiteri nomen
Christi, ne infantes quidem Christianorum hominum, quoniam nascuntur in
peccato, and pertinent ad populum dei, arcendos esse. Juelli Apol. p. 38. edit.
Londin. 1581.
I will, before I part, give him one out of that his Author also, telling him,
that Bishop declares the Church of Englands belief of Baptism to be a
Sacrament, not of immersion, or dipping, which is but the Secondary
consideration in that Sacrament, but of that, which is primary and principal in
it, namely, that ablution or washing which we have in, [or by] the blood of
Christ: and also that she believes, not only that none who are willing to
profess the name of Christ, but no Infants of Christian Parents, in regard they
are born in sin, and belong to the people of God, are to be kept from it.

. 8. Next to B. Jewel succeeds Mr. Baxter, And (says Mr. D.) most remarkable
is the Testimony Mr. Baxter himself gives to this Truth, wherein he also owns
the changing of the Ceremony in his third Argument against Mr. Blake in these
words, viz.

. 9. Quoad modum, To the manner, says he, it is commonly confessed by us to
the Anabaptists (as our Commentators declare) that in the Apostles time the
Baptized were dipped over head in water; and that this signifies their
profession both of believing the Burial and Resurrection of Christ, and of
their own present renouncing the world, and flesh, or dying to sin, and living
to Christ, or rising again to newness of life, or being buried and risen again
with Christ, as the Apostle expounds in the forecited Texts of Coloss. 2. and
Romans 6. And though (says he) we have thought it lawful to disuse the manner of
dipping, and to use less water; yet we presume not to change the use and
signification of it. So then he that signally professes to die, and rise again
in Baptism with Christ, does signally profess saving Faith, and Repentance; but
this do all they that are baptized according to the Apostles practice.

. 10. I answer, that I see nothing in this Testimony that merits so triumphant
a Remark to be set upon it, for any advantage that is given to Mr. Danvers
Cause by it. Mr. Baxter confesses that in the Apostles time the baptized were
dipped over head in water, But he does not confess that they were dipped over
Body too. Plainly, that which Mr. Baxter confesses amounts but to a partial
mersation of the head, and does not necessarily imply a total immersion of the
Body; unless it were impossible for a man to have his head dipped in water,
except his whole body were dipped into it also. And if that will do Mr. D. any
service, much good d'it him with his Testimony. The like we have shown in these
Papers from St. Augustine, and St. Hierom, etc. But that will not do the Dippers
business; whom nothing will serve, but a total Judaical immersion of the whole
Body. And the change Mr. Baxter speaks of I suppose to be from this partial
dipping, into sprinkling, which granted signifies nothing.

. 11. But suppose he meant, what he said, of a total immersion, then I judge
his sense was, that generally the baptized were in the Apostles time dipped
over head in water, not universally; that most were so baptized, not that none
were baptized otherwise. And then his Confession will neither hurt himself nor
us.

. 12. But if he meant more than so, then since he has at the same time
declared himself to have thought it lawful to difuse the, i. e. that manner of
Dipping, and to use less water, it is plain he thought the Church not to be
obliged by that Apostolical practice to an universal observance thereof through
all successions of Ages, but to have power to make alteration even in
Sacramentals, so they were but Circumstantial, and not Essential parts of
Worship. And so the producing of his Testimony seems to be but a wresting of
his words to signify what was not in his mind: which whether it be fair or no,
I leave to Mr. D. himself to consider.

. 13. If I have not spoken Mr. Baxter's mind, or have not spoken it unto his
mind, he is alive, of age, and ability to answer for himself. And I rather wish
he would be pleased to do it himself, who can do it infinitely better, than I
dare presume my self able to do.

. 14. The next that we are to encounter, is Daille, on the Fathers, who (as Mr.
D. tells us) l. 2. p. 148. says, That it was a Custom heretofore in the
Ancient Church, to plunge those they baptized, over Head and Ears in the Water;
There is some little mistake in these quotations, which may be rectified by Mr.
Daille's Margent thus.

Tertul. l. de Cor. Mil. c. 3. Cyprian. Ep. 76. p. 211. Edit. Pamel. Epiphan.
Pan. Haer. 30. p. 128. Cassand. l. de Bapt. Ins. p. 693.


as, says he, Tertullian (in his Third Book, De Cor. Mil.) Cyprian, (in his
seventh Ep. p. 211.) Epiphanius, Pan. (30. p. 128.) and others testify. And
this, says he, is still the practice both of the Greek and Russian Church at
this day; as Cassander De Bapt. (p. 193.) And yet, says he, notwithstanding,
this Custom, which is both so ancient, and so universal, is now abolished by
the Church of Reme; and this is the reason (says he) that the Muscovites say,
that the Latins are not rightly and duly baptized, because they are not wont
to use this Ancient Ceremony in their Baptism.

. 15. Either Mr. D. misunderstands Mr. Daille: or Mr. Daille mistook the
matter: Possibly both may be true. First, Mr. D. might misunderstand Daille.
For he might think Daille meant, that Dipping was the only custom in the
Ancient Church. But Daille does not say so. He only says it was a custom, but
he does not say it was the only custom. And it is true: a custom it was so to
baptize healthy Persons; but it was not the custom so to baptize all Persons,
for Clinicks were baptized in their Beds. Now for Mr. D. from an expression of
a custom, that is, one custom, to conclude for the custom, that is, the only
custom, is, as I humbly conceive, a misunderstanding.

. 16. But secondly, if that were Mr. Daille's meaning, as it may seem probable
by his after words, when he says, -- this custom which is both so ancient, and
so universal, is now abolished -- then, yet under correction, I say, that great
Man herein showed himself to be but Man, and liable, like other inferior
mortals, to mistake. For though the custom was so ancient as to reach up to the
Primitive times, yet it was not so universal as to extend to all Persons in
all, either of the ancient, or later times, as, I think, I have invincibly
demonstrated in these Papers. And perhaps the consideration hereof was the
reason why that great Man did not speak positively in the case, and say
absolutely, that it was the Universal custom of the Ancient Church, but in a
modified strain, so ancient, and so universal, i. e. so ancient as to have been
in the Primitive, and so universal as still to be in the Greek and Russian
Church. A great piece of matter.

. 17. But after all this, it may not be amiss to make some few further Remarks
on this Quotation. As First, that Mr. Danvers leaves our after these words [and
others testifie] these which follow, [ And indeed they plunged them thus three
times: as the same Tertullian and St. Hierom both inform us] But why left he
out this passage? Let the Reader judge. He espied in Mr. Daille's Margent,
where St. Hierom's testimony was referred to, these words at length, and not in
figures, [In lavacro ter caput mergitare] by which it is plain, that this
plunging over head and ears, at least as far as St. Hierom gives testimony to
it, was but of the whole Head, and not of the whole Body. Now that, had it been
put in, would have spoiled all. For that would have proved but a partial
mersation: and then it would have been no proof of a total immersion; and so
have signified nothing to the purpose, that by Mr. Danvers it was quoted for.

. 18. Secondly, whereas Mr. Daille says, that this is still the practice both
of the Greek, and of the Russian Church, even at this very day, I am not so
well skilled in the present Rites of those Churches, as peremptorily to
contradict him. Yet that it has been universally the practice of both those
Churches from the first to this day to baptize at all times by a total
immersion, I cannot consent unto it. And that the Russian Church at least has
formerly, if it do not at this day baptize by pouring of water on the baptized,
I have showed in these Papers. Chapter 10.

. 19. Thirdly, after those words, wherewith Mr. Danvers concludes, [in their
baptism] Mr. Daille adds [which, they say, is expressly enjoined them in the
Canons of Joannes Metropolitanus, whom they hold to have been a Prophet.] But
why did not Mr. Danvers add this? The Reader may easily conjecture the reason
of it: even because the Muscovites did ground their custom, for non-observance
whereof they say that the Latins are not rightly and duly baptized, not on the
Word of God, but on the Canons of a Man, one Joannes Metropolitanus. Now to
make it a Humane Institution, or the Institution of a Man, of whose Divine
Inspiration, and to such purpose too as to give Laws to the Church in the name
of God, we have no infallible assurance, would not do the Total Dippers
business, who urge the universal observation of their Baptismal Rite, on no
less an Authority, than that of a Divine command: and so Mr. D. wisely let it
alone. But others may observe it, and make of it what use they can.

. 20. Fourthly, whereas Mr. Daille, and from him Mr. Danvers says, this is the
reason that the Muscovites say, that the Latins are not rightly and duly
baptized, because they are not wont to use this ancient Ceremony; it may be
noted, that the Muscovites (even taken according to what is here said of them)
do not charge the Latins with not being baptized at all, but with not being
rightly, and duly baptized. This then is as clear an intimation of their
allowing of the Baptism of the Latins, for substance, and granting that it is
a Baptism, as it is of their disallowing of it for circumstance, and denying it
to be rightly and duly performed. For he that says a Man is not rightly
baptized, grants him baptized, whilst he denies his baptism to have been
rightly administered. For there can be no right or wrong, no due or undue
baptism, where there is no baptizing at all. Sublato subjecto tollitur
proprietas. And so this part of the Testimony clearly destroys that which it
was produced to prove: and makes the Muscovites witness to the truth of a
Baptism amongst the Latins: whereas the contrary was designed by their
Testimony, which I wonder Mr. Danvers did not see, and consider, and for the
sake thereof pass that by.

. 21. Lastly, whereas Mr. Daille says, this custom is now abolished by the
Church of Rome; I ask what he means by Abolishing. If he say, the cessation of
it by virtue of any Canonical Decree of that Church, then I shall require the
Council, and Canon, by which its abolition was decreed; and be of opinion, till
I see the contrary, that none such will be produced. If by Abolishing he mean
Disusing, then I grant, that in that sense this custom was indeed that
abolished, when that Author writ. But I must say withal that it was not then
first abolished, but long before: and that the beginning of such its abolition
is like the head of Nilus, undiscoverable: the custom growing by insensible
degrees from being at first almost universal, to become at last almost quite
out of use, if yet at all it be used in that Church. So little grist is by this
Testimony brought to the Anabaptists mill.

. 22. From him Mr. D. proceeds to Walafridus Strabo, who De Reb. Eccles. tells
us, That we must know, that the first Believers were baptized simply in Floods
and Fountains.

. 23. Well, admit this: it follows not, First, that all that were baptized in
floods and fountains, were totally immersed into them: they might be but
sprinkled, or but partially dipped in flood or fountain.

. 24. Secondly, it follows not hence, that if any Believers were totally
immersed, all were so. The expression is but Indefinite, and not Universal: and
it is true, if but some Believers were so baptized. But that all Believers were
so baptized, as he does not say, so it is, if he had said it, without
convincing evidence to prove its truth.

. 25. Nay Thirdly, that he did mean his words but Indefinitely and not
Universally, is plain by his own words that follow (which Mr. D. thought it not
for his interest to discover) It is (says he) to be noted, that many have been
baptized not only by dipping, but also by pouring water from above upon them
(and he had given before an instance in Lucillus baptized by St. Laurence that
way) and that they may still be so baptized; Notandum, non solum mergendo, sed
etiam desuper fundendo multos baptizatos fuisse, and adhuc posse baptizari,
etc. Hoc autem solet evenire cum provectiorum granditas corporum in minoribus
vasibus hominem tingi non patitur. Walafrib. Strabo de Reb. Eccles. c. 26.
adding also an account on which it was usual to baptize otherwise than by
dipping; even when the Fonts were too little to contain the greater bodies.

. 26. His next Author is Mr. Fox; and he (as Mr. D. says) tells us in his Acts
and Monuments, part. 1. page 138. out of Fabian, c. 119, 120. That Austin and
Paulinus did in the Seventh Century, baptize here in England great multitudes
in the River Trent, and the River Swol: where note by the way, says Mr. Fox,
it followed, there was no use of Fonts. The like also, as you will hereafter find,
Germanus and Lupus, the two French Evangelists, did in the Fifth Century,
baptize multitudes in the River Allin near Chester.

. 27. Grant all this, and what then? Then it follows, that it is probable that
some were baptized in England in two several Centuries, by immersion: because
many were baptized in Rivers. Yet I say it is but probable, not certain; unless
appearing from other evidence: because a man may be baptized in a River,
without being totally immersed into it. And in that multitudes are said to have
been baptized in those Rivers, it makes it the more probable, that the baptism
was not by a total immersion; because the labor and time was more in baptizing
so, than otherwise; and when the Baptizer was but one, or but a few; and the
Persons to be baptized many, reason would prompt, that the more compendious and
less troublesome way should be taken; and that was sprinkling, pouring on of
water, or partial mersation into it.

. 28. And if there were no Fonts, as Mr. Fox notes, then there was the more
reason they should go to Rivers. Though their going to Rivers does not prove
there were no Fonts. For where many were to be baptized, Fonts, unless of large
capacity, were not so convenient as Rivers, where many Ministers at once might
be doing the work, whereas at a Font hardly any more baptized than one at once.
But, be that as it will, does this prove, that none either in England, or in
any other country, either in those, or any other Ages, were baptized by
sprinkling, or any other way than by a total dipping? It is impossible it
should, especially when the contrary to it is evidenced by Fact, as I have made
appear in these Papers, chapter 10. This then only follows hence, that this whole
passage is a grand impertinence, and proves nothing of what is disputed of in
this question: which is not, whether any, or what number, were baptized by
dipping; but whether never any in the Church were baptized by Sprinkling, or
other way than by a total immersion.

. 29. Having written thus much on supposition of integrity in the quotation, I
resolved to consult the Author himself. And though not according to the
quotation made by Mr. D. of Part 1. p. 138, etc. yet in page 107. col. 2. l.
70, etc. I found this which follows. But to return to Austin again, who by
report of Authors was departed before this cruelty was done, after he had
baptized and Christened ten thousand Saxons or Angles in the West river, that
is called Swale, beside York, on Christmass-day, perceiving his end to draw
near, he ordained a Successor named Laurentius, to rule after him the
Archbishops See of Dorobernia. Where note by the way (Christian Reader) that
whereas Austin baptized then in Rivers; it follows there was then no use of
Fonts. Again if it be true that Fabian says, he baptized Ten thousand in one
day: the rite then of baptizing at Rome was not so Ceremonial, neither had so
many Trinkets at that time, as it has since: or else it could not be that he
could baptize so many on one day.

Upon this Relation I shall crave the Readers leave to make some remarks.

. 30. And first, supposing Augustine to have been a man of great strength, and
then at the fullness of it, yet the number of the Persons said to be baptized by
him, and all in one day, ( viz. 10000.) is so great, as that it exceeds all
measures of credibility, that so many could be baptized of him by a total
dipping of them. When we read of but Three thousand baptized in one day by
twelve persons, wise and learned men think it reasonable, from the difficulty,
if not impossibility of it, that so many should by a total immersion be
baptized by so few in so short a time, to conclude, that there baptizing was
performed, not by dipping, but by sprinkling. Now much more strongly is the
same to be argued, when against three thousand to twelve, is set Ten thousand
to one.

. 31. But then Secondly, if we consider the time of his Life, when this was
done, the improbability, or rather impossibility of it will still the more
appear. It was when his strength was gone, when he was an old man, and near his
death. For the very next thing, that our Author mentions of him, after his
performance of this great baptism, is his perceiving his end to draw near. Had
he had the strength of Samson, such a days work as the total dipping of Ten
thousand men had been enough to have tired him to the death. How much more
unable was an old man with one foot in his grave to go through such a service!
And if it be argued from the inability of all the Ministers of a whole City to
baptize by dipping, but so many as came to be baptized at the mother Church,
only on one of the three solemn times of the year, that (because the greatness
of the work of lifting of so many into and out of the Fonts exceeded the
strength of the Baptizers) therefore they baptized by Sprinkling: how much more
may it be argued from the insufficiency of one old, and consequently a weak
man, for the total immersion of so many as Ten thousand at once, that he did it
not by dipping, but by sprinkling?

. 32. And yet Thirdly, if we consider the time of the year, when this is said
to be done, it will still render it more improbable, or rather impossible. It
was on no other than Christmass-day, anciently called Midwinter-day. It cannot,
I think, be well imagined how one man should totally dip another in a River,
who is not himself in the same River with him. Nor is any thing suggested to
the contrary in all the Antiquities I have conversed with, so far as I can call
to remembrance. So then Augustine must be supposed in that starving Season to
stand in the same River all the while that he was baptizing them. Now that an
Old man should be able to stand either naked, or clothed in a River, and on a
Christmas Day, and till he had totally dipped Ten thousand men, is so far
beyond all degrees of probability, that it can be concluded nothing less than
impossible.

33. Either then there was no such baptizing of such a multitude in a River (at
that time especially) and then, why did Mr. D. urge that practice of Augustines
upon us? or else it was done in a way that was more practicable: and then
nothing can put in so fair a plea for it as sprinkling. Nay, Mr. Fox himself
argues, that either there was less to do about Baptism in Augustines time, than
in his own (his words are, that the Rite of it was not so Ceremonial, neither
had so many Trinkets at that time, as it has since,) or else it could not be,
that he could baptize so many in one day.

. 34. Now why Mr. D. would only tell us in general of Augustines baptizing
great multitudes in Rivers, and not tell us of these particularities of his
baptizing them, it is easy to conjecture; even because he saw he could not
relate them, but that presently these, or some such like remarks would be made
upon them, and so his quotation would either prove to be to no purpose, or else
to be against his own purpose.

. 35. And as for the story of Paulinus, which is a different thing from that
of Augustines, however jumbled together into one by Mr. D. it is plainly this,
as it is related by Mr. Fox, page 109. col. 2. lin. 3. etc. that having first
baptized King Edwine with many other of his subjects with him at York, he did
from that time forth, during the life of Edwine, which was the term of six
years more, continually Christen in the Rivers of Gwenie, and Swala, in both
Provinces of Deira, and in Berenicia, using the said Rivers for Fonts.

. 36. But first, it is not here said, that he dipped them in those Rivers. And
if it had been so said, it had only proved positively that dipping was thenin
use, not negatively, that sprinkling was not. Secondly that Note, which Mr. Fox
makes concerning Augustines baptizing in Rivers, viz. that it was because there
was then no use of Fonts, is not added also upon Paulinus's baptizing in
Rivers, though Mr. Danvers sets it after both, as belonging to both. Thirdly,
River-dipping was not the only way of baptizing used by Paulinus. For neither
King Edwine himself, nor those many subjects of his, that were baptized with
him, were, by the Confession of Mr. Fox, baptized in any River. For he tells us
in his Margin to that place, where he relates the story, that King Edwine was
baptized in St. Peters-Church at York, which he caused first to be made of Wood
(and that in order to his being baptized therein, as Bede informs us) which was
after by St. Oswald builded of Stone. Bed. Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c. 14.
And if that baptizing was in the Church, then it could not be in the River,
especially as the Church now stands, unless afterward weary of standing so low
it took its progress and walked up the hill. And if it were in a Church, that
the baptism was, then whether it were not in a Font; and whether not by
sprinkling, or at most a partial mersation, since we have no remains, that I
know, of any Fonts of capacity for a total immersion unless of Infants, it is
free for the Reader to make his conjecture. And he that five hundred years
hence should read the story of the baptism of the Turk converted by Dr.
Gunning, and should see in the Churches then, no other Fonts, but such as we
have in our Churches now, would never imagine that Baptism to have been by
dipping, but would conclude, that it was by aspersion, or affusion, or at most
by a partial mersation.

. 37. As to what he says concerning Germanus and Lupus, the two French
Evangelists, viz. that they did in the Fifth Century baptize multitudes in the
River Allin near Chester, which we shall find hereafter, I answer, first, that
having neither told us where, nor when we should find it, we might well pass it
over without further notice, till we should meet with it. But secondly, having
a desire to know further, what might be discovered of them, that concerned our
present purpose, and not having time to read over all that remained behind in
his book for it, I consulted his Index: but it should seem, what was said of
them, was not worthy so great a remark as to be put in there. Notwithstanding,
out of a desire to be satisfied, turning over the leaves of his book, I found
in page 228. that those two famous French men being sent over into Britain, to
help against the Pelagian heresy, were instrumental to convert many, and did
baptize great multitudes upon confession of Faith in the River Allin near
Chester. But still we are but where we were before. For it is only said here,
that those two Evangelists did baptize many in the River Allin: and it is but
the same man, viz. Mr. D. that says it. But how they baptized there, whether
by aspersion, affusion, partial mersation, or total immersion, is not said, no
not by Mr. D. himself. Yet thirdly, I examined several Chronicles, and
Historians about it, viz. Fox, and Holinshead, Marian. Scotus; Sigebert
Gemblac. Fascic. Temp. Magdeburg. Cent. Vincent. Belluacens. Spondan. Baronius,
and Bedes History: but not a word in them all appears, by which their total
dipping in that River is necessarily concluded. Fourthly, then it must be
concluded, that because it was in a River, that they were baptized, therefore
at their baptism they were dipped. But that, as we have already showed, is a
weak inference; and grounded on no certain bottom. And if River-baptizing infer
total immersing, then by the same consequence, or as good, Baptism out of a
River infers Sprinkling, or some other way distinct from total dipping. And if
that be good, then from Bede's relation of the baptizing of a great multitude
in a Church erected for that purpose, so far as I can gather from the
circumstances of that History, Bed. Eccl. Hist. l. 1. c. 20. fol. 23. a.

Holinsh. Hist. of Eng. l. 5. c. 6. p. 8. a l. 10. etc.


against the day of our Lord's resurrection, as Bede words it, or Easter day,
as ( Holinshead interprets it) by the same Germanus, it may be concluded, that
the said Germanus did baptize a great multitude otherwise, than by dipping. And
so his baptizing in Allin, though we suppose it to have been done there by
dipping, is no prejudice to our cause. Let Mr. D. give us the one, or not ask
of us the other. Though in truth neither way of arguing is demonstrative, what
probability soever may be supposed to be in either. But --

. 38. Hieremias Patriarch of Constantinople (his next Author) ad Theol.
Witebergenses, Resp. 11. c. 4. says, The Ancients baptized not by sprinkling
the baptized with water with their hands, but by immersion, following the
Evangelists who came up out of the water; therefore did he descend, which must
needs be Immersion, and not Aspersion.

. 39. The words, as thus translated, are not in my apprehension reconcilable
with good sense. Therefore I will set down the original, as I find them in B.
Tailor. Cas. Consc. p. 644.
Baptizabant enim veteres, non manibus suis aquam baptizando aspergentes, sed
trina immersione, hoc Evangelii sequentes, Ascendit ex aqua, ergo descenderat.
Ecce immersio, non aspersio.

. 40. Whom does he mean by the Veteres, the Ancients here? The Predecessors of
Christianity in any one Age, or more? And does he speak of them universally, so
as to mean, that in any one, or more of the first Ages, no one was baptized by
sprinkling, but all, without exception, by dipping, and that thrice? It will be
long before his Patriarchship will be able to prove either the Affirmative or
Negative part of his Proposition.

. 41. First, to prove an Immersion (meaning a total one) in the first Age is
not very easy, much less a threefold one, by any witness that lived in that
Age. By the Scripture I am sure he cannot. For that speaks indeed of baptizing
into the name of three persons, but not of three dippings at the three namings
of those Persons: though I rationally believe it to have been so in the first
Age, because I find it to have been so in the second, and yet find no original
of it there.

. 42. And secondly, to prove, that none were baptized by sprinkling, is more
hard. For finding sprinkling in the after Ages, and finding no rise of it, when
first it began, in any one of them, it is as supposable, that it also came from
the first, as that the trine Immersion did. Which, as I noted, none of the
first Age more speak to, than they do of sprinkling.

. 43. But the Patriarch gives us their ground of that practice, the words of
the Gospel, Ascendit ex aqua, and thence he supposed, that they gathered, ergo
descenderat, therefore he went down into it. And thereupon infers his
Conclusion with an Ecce of Triumph, Ecce immersio, non aspersio, Behold an
immersion, not an aspersion.

. 44. But I think those Ancients lived nearer Aristotle's time than he, and were
better Logicians than to infer such a conclusion from such premises. For
first, the word in the original is (...) not (...), but (...), he ascended, not
out of, but from the water; now that he might do, that was not at all in it,
but only by it, at the brink, or bank of it. A going down to the water they
might gather, but not a going down into the water. And secondly, unless it had
been impossible for any man to go into the water, without going so into it, as
to be covered all over with it, neither his going into it, nor his coming out
of it, can ever prove his total immersion in it. If from any Topic else it may
be inferred, well, and good: but from this it can never be: as I have shown in
these Papers, chapter 10. where this matter is particularly, and at large debated
on. So that there is no need to seek for shelter in the Patriarchs only
gathering from hence an Immersion, and not expressing that Immersion to be a
total one: less than which nothing will serve our Total Dippers: and therefore
I shall pass on, and receive the charge of his next Author.

. 45. And as he tells us, Zepperus Si vocis notationem attendere velimus,
vocabulum baptismi mersionem significat in aquam, vel ipsum mergendi and
abluendi actum, ex ipsa erga vocis notatione and Etymologia apparet quae
baptismi administrandi consuetudo fuerit initio: cum nos pro (...) potius, hoc
est aspersionem nunc habeamus. Zepper. de Sacram. ap. Leigh. Crit. Sacra.
De Sacramentis, from the Annotation and Etymology of the word (says) it does
appear, what was of old the Custom of administering Baptism, which though we
have changed into Rhantizing or Sprinkling.

. 46. I suppose Mr. D. had this quotation from Mr. Leigh, in whom it is, but
was loath any body should look for it there, for fear of what follows from
Danaeus, by whom we are told that (and told the reason too why) (...) is
commonly in Scripture taken pro lotione and mundatione, for washing and
cleansing.

. 47. But be that as it will, the Testimony will not trouble us much to answer
it. For if the Author meant, that of old it was a custom to administer Baptism
by dipping, or the more usual, or more general custom so to administer it, we
shall easily grant it. But if he meant, that it was the only custom of old so
to administer it, I have given so sufficient evidence of other customs besides
that, even of old, that we must, and with good reason enter our dissent from
him.

. 48. And whereas the Quoter says, it was of old the Custom, the Authors word
is initio, at first or in the beginning. Now it is to be suspected by his
rendering that word of old, that he designed to put a slur upon us, as if that
Author had intended to declare or intimate, that sprinkling was no custom of
old, but a new practice come up but of late into the Church: whereas it pleads
Antiquity for it self, and that so high, that none can find any original of it
lower than the Primitive times. And so, though it might not have been a custom
initio, at the very first, to baptize that way, but dipping may claim the
priority of it for that, yet it might very soon after the first beginning upon
reasons thought well of by the Apostles, or Apostolical persons, come into
practice, and so become a custom of old, though it were not a custom initio,
in, or at the first beginning. Deacons, as distinct Officers from Apostles,
were of old, in the Primitive times, even in the Apostles days: and yet they
were not initio, at the first beginning of Christianity, or constitution of the
Christian Church, but ordained some time after its beginning, and by the
Apostles themselves, Acts 6.5, 6.

. 49. And whereas that Author says, that we now rather have pro (...), i. e.
Rhantism instead of Baptism; I answer, that the word (...) is taken two ways:
first, more strictly, for the act of immersion or dipping, or more largely, for
the Sacrament of Baptism however administered. And so, though instead of (...)
dipping, we have (...) sprinkling; yet we have not that sprinkling instead of
baptism, as if our sprinkling were no baptizing, but somewhat else instead of
it: but we have it for what it really is, a true baptism in the larger sense,
though it be not a (...) in the strict sense of that word as it signifies
dipping; though sprinkling be not strictly dipping, yet it is truly baptizing.

. 50. From Zepperus he is in haste to go to Dr. Tailor, (a Champion he often
glories in,) and says he, Dr. Tailor, in his Rule of Conscience, l. 3. c. 4.
p. 644, 645. The Ancient Church did not in their Baptism sprinkle Water with
their hands, but did immerge; and therefore we find in the Records of the
Church, that the Persons to be baptized were quite naked, as it is to be seen
in many places, particularly in the Mystagogy Chat. (as he writes it) of St.
Cyril, and many others (as you have before in the second Chapter of this Part,
from Vossius, p. 133.) And I shall follow him as fast to attend the motions of
that Doctor. And I answer.

. 51. Bishop Tailor did, as I, and all good men, I believe, would do, i. e.
wished as near a conformity in the present Church to the Primitive, as the
Circumstances of both may well permit: and therefore represents things tending
that way as favorable as he could: but his words must not be tenter-hook'd,
and stretched to a meaning beyond his mind. And whether they be not so here,
will be left to the Readers judgment. In this very Section and Paragraph he
tells you, that of this Sprinkling, besides what is employed in the former
Testimonies, there was some little use in the Primitive Church. And he backs
this saying of his with proofs from Tertullian, Surius, and Walafrid Strabo.
When therefore he says, that the Ancient Churches did not in their Baptisms
sprinkle water with their hands, but immerged the Catechumen, or the Infant
(for those are his words, which Mr. D. disguises, and curtails, and shrinks up
into a barely, but did immerge, for ends best known to himself, but easily
guessable at by any man, though of no greater abilities than I am) I say, in so
saying, his words cannot in reason be taken, as if he meant, that absolutely
and universally all without exception were then immerged, and none were
sprinkled: for that is contradictory to what himself afterward in the same
Paragraph says and proves, as I have already noted: but that mostly and
generally it was so: the contrary practice being so infrequent (as not used in
ordinary cases, but only such as were of high charity and great necessity) that
it was little taken notice of in public. So that speaking according to what
was generally done, and publicly observed, he might infer from the Authorities
by him insisted on, that the custom of the Ancient Churches was not sprinkling,
but immersion. But though it may be granted, that the custom was not
sprinkling, but dipping, yet it will not follow thence, that there was never
any thing of that nature done in those times contrary to the custom: for the
contrary is apparent. And therefore D. Cave in his Testimony cited by Mr. D. p.
200. speaks warily and safely in the case, saying, not absolutely, that it was
the constant and universal custom of those times, but the almost constant and
universal custom. And so B. Tailor is to be understood, if we will make him
consistent with himself: as we must do, or else his Testimony will be nothing
worth on either side, and he will be no more against us, than for us: and his
quoting will signify nothing more, but that the Quoter had a mind to make a
noise with his Name, and object him to us, as being an eminent, not only member
of, but Minister in our Church, and a Bishop in that Church wherein he lived,
when he published that Writing, at least the second time. I wonder the Quoter
did not take notice of this conclusive passage of his, and especially of what
follows immediately added to the words recited by me, viz. That that custom of
the Ancient Churches was in pursuance of the sense of the word in the
Commandment, and the example of our Blessed Savior. Which if he had, I have
given answer thereto in these Papers, chapter 10. and 16. I shall only make this
remark upon it in favor of Mr. D. That he is the more pardonable, if he
sometimes takes no notice of what is against him, when he can pass by some, and
such notices, that seem to be for him. But if there be wilfulness on the one
side, and but inadvertency on the other side, I shall then plead nothing for
him, but leave him there to plead for himself.

. 52. But Mr. D. goes on (and I shall follow him) And this Immersion (says he
from Dr. Tailor) was of so Sacred an account in their esteem, that they did not
account it lawful to receive him into the Clergy, who had been only Sprinkled
in his Baptism, as we learn from the Epistle of Cornelius to Fabianus of
Antioch, Eusebius. l. 9. c. 43. It is not lawful that he who is sprinkled in his
Bed by reason of sickness should be admitted into Holy Orders, doubting whether
such a Sprinkling should be called Baptism.

. 53. I wonder Mr. D. should produce this instance: because it is an
unanswerable proof of a baptizing by way of Sprinkling so early in the Church
as the time of Novatus, of whom the story is: and who no doubt, was not the
first man, that was so baptized: because his being baptized so was pleaded in
Bar against his admission into Orders, as being against Law: and so this
instance is a clear evidence of such a practice even before his time, which
falling to be about anno 250. it may well be presumed, that such baptizing was
at least in the Century before, that is the second, if it were not also in the
first (as who can say it was not?) Laws not being in that persecutious time of
the Church so easy, and suddenly made for the Catholic Church: especially if
it were unlawful by any Canon; (as I see none made for it before that time,
though it came afterward into the Codex of Canons, being so established after
in the Council of Neocaesarea) and much less if by custom: for that requires
long time, and many instances, and much observation to be brought up by. And as
to the Baptism it self, I apprehend it was not the unsufficiency of that, which
made it unlawful for the so baptized to be admitted into Holy Orders, but other
Reason, which I have given in these Papers, chapter 10. And as for Novatus's
Baptism, it is by Cornelius sufficiently owned to be a Baptism, whilst he
accuses him for his forsaking of the Church of God, wherein he was baptized, as
I have showed there also. Which could not have been said with sense, if he had
not at all been baptized; or if the baptism, which he had received, had been a
nullity.

. 54. As for those words added to what went before, as if they had been Dr.
Tailors words [doubting whether such a sprinkling should be called a baptism] I
cannot be just to the truth, unless I say, they are not Dr. Tailors words, but
an Addition of Mr. D's. as any that will consult the place may see. Yet
something there is, that is near to, not altogether the same with, this
passage: for it follows in the Doctor, Nay it went further than this, they were
not sure, that they were rightly Christened, yea or no, who were only sprinkled;
as appears in the same Epistle of Cornelius in Eusebius, (...), which
Nicephorus thus renders [if at least such a sprinkling may be called a
Baptism.] Yet this is but near to, not the same. For it is one thing, not to be
done at all; and another thing not to be done rightly: and many things are not
done rightly, which yet when done, are held valid and good: according to the
Vulgar saying in this case, Fieri non debuit, factum valuit. That which they
were not sure of was, not whether such a Sprinkling should be called a Baptism;
but whether those that were only sprinkled, were rightly baptized: I say, not
whether they were baptized at all, but whether they were baptized rightly,
which is clear another thing from what Mr. D. would infer. And as for the
Reason of Cornelius his words of doubt, I have spoken to that in chapter 10. and
showed it to be another thing. And if Nicephorus misunderstood him, who is to
blame for that? There is a great deal of difference between those words [if one
ought to say, that such a man did receive baptism] and these [if at least such
a sprinkling may be called baptism.] For a total dipping into water by a due
Minister, with a right form of words, is even in the Anabaptists Dictionary a
baptism: and it cannot be said, but that such an immersion is a baptism. And
yet of an Infant so baptized, an Anabaptist would say, [if one ought to say,
that such a one did receive baptism] or rather he would deny that he did
receive it. But I will suppose Nicephorus understood well enough what he said,
and that his Translators did not understand him (I would be loath to say were
willing to mistake him.) For what says he? If at least such a sprinkling may
be called a Baptism. He does not say absolutely, if a Sprinkling, or any
sprinkling, may be called a baptism: no, that was not the doubt with him: but
if such a sprinkling, [that is, a sprinkling given to such a person, and in
such a condition, at such a time, and not consummated by that, which was by the
then Canon, or custom to have followed, as I have showed chapter 10] may be called
a baptism, which is no more than to say, if such a baptism, [be the manner of
it, what it will] may be called a baptism. Which makes nothing to the purpose.

. 55. But to go on with Mr. D. And therefore (says he as from Dr. Tailor)
Magnus in his Epistle, questions whether they are to be esteemed right
Christians, who are only sprinkled, and not dipped in water.

. 56. Dr. Tailors words (which it had been more ingenuous, as I conceive, in
producing his Testimony, to set down, as he spoke them) are these. And this was
not only spoken in diminution of Novatus, and indignation against his person:
for it was a formal question made by Magnus to St. Cyprian, an habendi sint
Christiani legitimi, co quod aqua salutari non loti sunt, sed perfusi. Whether
they are to be esteemed right Christians, who were only sprinkled with water,
and not washed or dipped.

. 57. Mr. D. sure was loath to hear baptism called by any other name, but what
necessarily implies dipping; and therefore he left washed out: and yet washed,
not dipped is St. Cyprians word: and perhaps his meaning too. For within a few
lines he says, The breast of the Believer is washed one way, Neque enim sic in
Sacramento salutari delictorum contagia, ut in lavacro carnali and seculari
sordes cutis and corporis abluuntur, ut and sapone and nitris and caeteris
quoque adjumentis, and dolio, and piscina opus sit, quibus ablul and mundari
corpusculum possit. Aliter pectus credentis abluitur, aliter men's hominis per
fidei merita mundatur, Cypr. l. 4. ep. 7.
the mind of man through the merits of Faith is cleansed another way. So that
he seems not at all to speak of dipping, but of washing, and that of the breast
only. And what if one Magnus (more scrupulous it seems than others) did make
such a formal and solemn question? It follows not that all else, or any other
besides him were unsatisfied about it. And it is apparent that St. Cyprian
himself was well satisfied in the case. For he answers (as Dr. Tailor tells us,
though Mr. D. does not, In Sacramentis salutaribus necessitate cogente and deo
indulgentiam suam largiente, totum credentibus conferunt divina compendia. Id
ib.
it being not for his interest so to do) that the baptism was good, when it is
done necessitate cogente, and Deo indulgentiam suam largiente, in the case of
necessity, God pardoning, and necessity compelling, or rather, as I think it
ought to be rendered, necessity compelling, and God permitting.

. 58. And this (he goes on) is the sense and Law of the Church of England; not
that it be indifferent, but that all Infants be dipped, except in the case of
sickness, and then sprinkling is permitted. And so it was in those times when
the Doctor first wrote this. But the sense and Law of the Church of England is
since that grown still a little more favorable. For in the Office of Public
Baptism of Infants the dipping of the Infant is appointed with an If [if they
shall certify that the Child may well endure it.] So then no such
certification being made, the Minister is not appointed to dip it; nor is he
required to ask, whether the Child may well endure it or no: and seeing them
offer the Child to Baptism in such a condition as it is unfit to dip it in, he
may in reason presume, without their certifying either way, that it may not
endure it. Their very offering it in that condition is an Interpretative
Certification of its inability to suffer baptization by a total immersion. And
being that in the Office of Baptism of persons of riper years, dipping in the
water, or pouring water on, is indifferently prescribed, and clearly left to
the Minister's liberty, without ifs or ands, where yet the Person is of age and
strength enough to endure it: he may rationally presume he is at the same
liberty with Infants, of whose strength, in regard of their age, there is no
ground for such presumption.

. 59. After this the Doctor goes on to confirm the use of sprinkling from
instance of some, though little use of it in the Primitive Church, which he
shows from Tertullian, the Acts of St. Laurence in Surius; and Walafrid Strabo:
and for further confirmation adds the Opinion of Aquinas, that the Three
Thousand, and Five Thousand Converts in the Acts, were so baptized. All which
Mr. Danvers is pleased to over-pass.

. 60. But then having weakened this last proof from Aquinas, by calling it but
a conjecture, and saying it has no tradition, nor record to warrant it, he
draws toward the conclusion of that, which all this discourse about dipping
and sprinkling is brought to prove, viz. that a custom in the administration of
a Sacrament introduced against the Analogy and mystery, the purpose and
signification of it, is not to be complied with, saying, And therefore although
in cases of need and charity the Church of England does not want some good
Examples in the best times to countenance that permission, yet we are to follow
her command, because that command is not only according to the meaning and
intent of the word (...) in the commandment, but agrees with the mystery of the
Sacrament it self; For we are buried with him in baptism, says the Apostle;
adding thereto this testimony from St. Chrysostom, which Mr. D. transcribes
from him, In aqua tanquam in sepulchro caput immergentibus vetus homo
sepelitur, and immergitur, deinde nobis emergentibus novus resurgit inde. The
old Man is buried and drowned in the immersion under water, and when the
baptized Person is lifted up from the water, it represents the Resurrection of
the new Man to newness of life.

. 61. In which part of the discourse I cannot but note three things, which Mr.
D. was not pleased to advert unto. First, an acknowledgment, that the Church of
England does not want some good examples in the best times to countenance her
permission of sprinkling. Good Examples, and in the Best Times, are very
material words for us, and give us an Antiquity as old, and as good, as we can
desire, and utterly overthrow all that ever can be said against us, especially
on the account of Antiquity. Secondly, that the Analogy betwixt Immersion and
Emersion, and the Death or Burial of the old Man, and Resurrection of the new
Man, is made the mystery of the Sacrament, and by the manner of speech so made
the mystery, as if it were the only mystery of it: our washing from sin by the
blood of Christ, which is the prime signification and mystery of the Sacrament,
being passed by, on no account, that I know of, unless, because if that were
either the whole, or any part of the mystery of the Sacrament, that would hold
analogy with sprinkling, and so weaken the Inference for Dipping. Thirdly, that
whereas the Immersion St. Chrysostom speaks of, is, as far as his words will
bear, but an immersion or dipping of the head [caput immergentibus, is his
word] both the Doctor and Mr. D. slip that by, without the least notice of it,
and hide it under a general ambiguous term of immersion under the water, which
is apt to carry away the mind to think of a total immersion of the whole man,
whilst it is but the head, whose immerging the Father speaks of. At this rate
who may not be made to say even what one wills?

. 62. At length both the Doctor and Mr. Danvers come to a Conclusion. And
therefore (says Mr. D.) he concludes, That the contrary custom being not only
against Ecclesiastical Law, but against the Analogy, and mystical signification
of the Sacrament, is not to be complied with.

. 63. But why did Mr. D. stop there? and not do the Doctor and the truth right,
in adding the Exception following? Unless in such cases that be of themselves
sufficient to justify a liberty in a Ritual and Ceremony; that is, a case of
necessity.

. 64. To Mr. D. I shall answer first, That, as I conceive, the allowance of any
such case or cases, were not consistent with his Hypothesis; and that the
adding of those words would have made the Doctor's testimony unserviceable to
his turn, and therefore he thought fit to leave them out. With how great
ingenuity I leave to his own judgment.

. 65. Then to the Doctor I say first, that the Custom of sprinkling is not now
against our Ecclesiastical Law, which has prescribed dipping, or pouring on of
water indifferently in the case of the public baptism of persons of riper age;
and has appointed pouring on of water in the case of the sick Infant baptized
privately; and has neither appointed dipping, nor sprinkling in the case of
Infants brought to Public Baptism, but accordingly as certification of their
ability, or inability to endure dipping, shall be made. And then as to the
Analogy and mysterious signification of the Sacrament, that sprinkling or
pouring on of water is not against that, but very agreeable with it, I have
shown at large in the Ninth Chapter of this Book, and shall further show in the
Sixteenth; whither I refer the Reader for his satisfaction. And in the mean
time I think I may conclude that the advantage which Mr. D. has gained to his
cause by this great Man's testimony signifies as much as comes to nothing.

. 66. I wonder Mr. D. slipped what the Doctor says in the close of his 15th.
Paragr. p. 646. viz. that because it is better to use dipping, and it is more
agreeable to the mystery to use it three times, and that so the Ancient Church
understood it, therefore these things are a sufficient warrant to acquit us
from the obligation of the contrary custom; because a custom against which
there is so much probability, and in which there is no necessity and no
advantage, is to be presumed unreasonable. The reason, if I may presume to
guess, was partly because he saw the Doctor's dispute lay not against the
unlawfulness, but obligatoriness of the contrary custom. And he might see, that
as the probability against it was not so great, as the Doctor fancied, so the
necessity of it was sometimes so much, and the advantages in cases of necessity
and charity so considerable, as that it could not be presumed unreasonable, but
on the contrary ought to be judged very rational. Partly it was because the
Doctor does in the very next words in the former clause of the same period
assert, that because there is even in sprinkling something of the analogy of
the mystery, as is rightly observed by Aquinas, and Dominicus a Soto; and
because it is not certain, that the best representation, and the most
expressive ceremony, is required; therefore the Church, upon great cause, may
lawfully do either. Which he was unwilling any of his Party should know. And
thus much for Dr. Tailor.

. 67. From this Champion of our own Church, we are next called to receive a
charge from a brisk Champion of the Church of Rome; nay from the Church of Rome
it self, as Mr. D. words it. The Church of Rome (says he) confesses by a
Learned Pen, the Marquis of Worcester in his Certam. Relig. That she changed
dipping the Party baptized over Head and Ears, into sprinkling upon the Face.

. 68. Mr. D. should rather have said, as I think, a Learned Pen of the Church
of Rome confesses. For not the writing of every Learned Man is presently the
Confession of the Church he is of: for when so Learned Men of the same Church
are of contrary judgments, and write contrary things, then the Church they are
of must be judged to be so too: and that is to speak her a Church of no
judgment. And the Church of Rome will not endure that. Nor would Mr. Danvers's
Church (I believe) be willing to espouse all his assertions as her Confessions.
But that is to be taken for the Confession of a Church, which is professed by
her in her public Writings, compiled by Persons authorized thereunto,
confirmed by the Subscription of her Ministers, and made authentic by the
attestation of her Supreme Magistrates.

. 69. But what is it that the Marquis says she did? That she changed dipping
into sprinkling. This cannot signify that before that change there was no
sprinkling at all in that Church: but that it wholly left off to dip, which had
been the public and solemn way of baptizing in that, as well as in other
Churches; and in stead thereof, even in the public and solemn baptizings, as
well as in the private baptisms, upon cases of necessity, she baptized by way
of sprinkling.

. 70. And what was the change in this respect made? Dipping all the whole Body
under the water into sprinkling upon the Face? The Marquis, even as Mr. Danvers
quotes him, says not so: but dipping the Party baptized over Head and Ears.
That may mean no more, but dipping his Head only all over (and by a Pleonasm of
speech, his Ears too) under water, and not his whole Body. And that such a way
of baptizing has been in use in the Western Church, I have showed before, Chapter
10. And if that were the Church of Romes meaning in what she confesses here by
her Learned Pen, then Mr. D. gets nothing to his Cause by her Confession.

But if not, yet still what change soever she made therein, she did no more
than she lawfully might, being invested with the same power in such cases, as
other Churches have; and the thing it self being no substantial part, but only
an accidental circumstance of that Sacrament: wherein Churches have power to
continue, or alter as they shall see best conducing to order, decency, and
edification: and proceed upon grounds of necessity, charity, or great
convenience.

. 71. But I am of opinion, it was not the Church of Rome, that made this
Change: but a Church that had more power than that Church ever had, even the
Catholic Church: which Rome is not any more, than any other particular
National Church is; even so far as she holds union, and fellowship with the
Church Catholic in truth of Doctrine, Essentials of Worship, and Substantials
of Discipline. And this appears, because the Church the Marquis there speaks
of, is that Church, that could deposite the observation of the Jewish Sabbath,
and introduce the observation of the Christian Lord's Day; which sure was not
done by that particular Church, but by the whole Catholic Church throughout
the World. And that Church indeed that could do that, could without doubt
change the dipping over Head and Ears in Water, into a little sprinkling upon
the Face, by reason of some emergencies and inconveniences, occasioned by the
differences of Seasons and Countries, (as the Marquis there adds) and may upon
the like occasion, accordingly dispose of the manner of her administration of
her Sacraments. For sure to deposite the observation of a day expressly
commanded to be kept holy, and to introduce the like observation of another
day, touching the keeping of which holy never any Command was given, (as none
that we know of, was ever given for its sanctification, though in all
probability it was founded in Apostolical Practice partly intimated in the
Scriptures, and further notified by Tradition) implies a power as great as, if
not greater than, to change a Rite in a Sacrament, not more commanded than the
Sanctification of the Sabbath day, nor so much as that, if it were ever at all
under any command, which is denied by Learned men, as in those Papers is shown.

. 72. So then, if there were no change made, then we are as we were at first.
And if there were a change made, it was made by a Church, whether the Catholic
or Roman, that had power to make it. Either way will serve our turn. For which
way soever it be, our practice will be free from guilt: either as being it self
Primitive and Apostolic: or as being taken up into use instead of somewhat
that then was used, by a Church that had power to make that change.

. 73. Though after all, I shall not grant any change made herein, other than
what I have already said, from a practice but privately used in case of
necessity, to become the general practice, even where Baptism is administered
with greatest solemnity.

. 74. Having done with the Marquis, he goes on to tell us, that, until the
Third Century we find not any, that upon any consideration, did admit of
Sprinkling: and that the first we meet with is Cyprian. To which having spoken
before, I shall say nothing, but that, if in that Century it was admitted, it
has a fair antiquity to plead for it self. But what probabilities there are of
its having been practiced before, I have already showed, and therefore will not
here repeat, but pass on to his next Authors.

. 75. Aquinas, Scotus, and others of the Schoolmen conclude (as he tells us)
that Dipping is most agreeable to the Institution, but admit, that in case of
necessity, viz. when either many are to be baptized, scarcity of water, or
sickness, or weakness, they may Sprinkle. Voss. p. 38.

. 76. Suppose they do conclude Dipping to be most agreeable to the Institution,
yet things are well enough With us, since they do not conclude it only to be
agreeable to it. And if they admit it in case of necessity, then in that case
they hold it lawful. For in no case would they admit of that, which they judged
unlawful. Because evil is not to be done, that good may come thereof. But to
come closer to him.

. 77. In what part of Vossius this is set down Mr. D. names not. But I guess it
is in his first Disput. de Baptismo, These. 9. and page 358. for which the
Printer by mistake put 38. Touching which, if that be the place, I observe
first, that it is not Scotus, that is named there, but Sotus; not Jo. Scotus
that was an opposer, but Dominicus Sotus, that was a follower of Aquinas. But
this might be a mistake of the Printers.

. 78. Secondly, that no others of the Schoolmen are there named, but those two,
Aquinas and Sotus. But it may be he put that in of his own head, besides what
he had in his Author. And yet if so, he should not have vouched his Author for
more than he named.

. 79. Thirdly, that neither any Schoolmen there named, nor Vossius from them
says, That Dipping is most agreeable to the Institution. Indeed Vossius says
of Aquinas, that he says, mersionem quidem magis congruam esse, that dipping
is indeed more congruous; but he says not to what. Mr. D. supplies it to the
Institution. I blame him not: it would make well for his cause, if it were so.
But if we consult Aquinas (in the place referred to, as I suppose, Cum in
baptismo assumatur aqua ad corporis ablutionem, non modo per immersionem, verum
etiam per aspersionem, vel effusionem aquae baptismus dari potest: tutius tamen
est (quia hoc habet communior usus) per modum immersionis baptizare. Aquin. 3.
q. 66. art. 7. Conclus.
by Vossius) 3. q. 66. art. 7. conc. there is no mention of the Institution of
Baptism, to which Dipping is either most agreeable (as Mr. D. says) or more
agreeable than sprinkling, but of the Common use of the Church: in respect of
which he says it is the safer to baptize by way of immersion. A great deal of
difference betwixt more safe in respect of common use, and most agreeable to
the Institution. So that neither these Schoolmen, nor the Quoter of them,
afford Mr. D. any the least patronage to his cause; which may justly be
suspected so much the worse, in regard such shifts are used for the maintaining
of it.

. 80. Fourthly, I will fairly relate, what these Schoolmen say, and then leave
the Reader to make his judgment on the case. The words of Dominicus Sotus, as
Vossius quotes them from did. 3. qu. un. art. 7. are these, In baptismo
aliquid est de essentia, ut ablutio, juxta illud ad Ephesians. 5. ubi Apostolus
baptismum appellat lavacrum aquae; aliud vero accidentarium: nempe ut ablutio
hoc vel illo modo fiat. In baptism something is essential, as washing,
according to that Ephesians. 5. where the Apostle calls baptism the washing of water:
and something is accidental, as that the washing be made this or that way. Now
if so, then dipping is not of the Essence of Baptism, and so not necessarily to
be always used in baptizing. But herein (says Vossius) he followed Thomas
Aquinas, who also himself says, that dipping is truly the more congruous (
viz. to the common use, as I said before:) and therefore thinks it ought not to
be done otherwise unless for a reason that is either necessary, or honest, or
at least agreeable unto reason. Yet notwithstanding inasmuch as water is taken
in the Sacrament to signify the washing of the Soul by the washing of the
body, and that washing may be made not only by immersion, but also by effusion,
and aspersion, he thinks truly that baptism may be administered after every one
of these ways. And he adds four Causes for which it may be otherwise done than
by dipping, which are (1.) great multitudes of persons to be baptized, (2.)
Scarcity of water, as when there is not enough for dipping, (3.) Weakness of
the Baptizer, unable to bear the person to be baptized, (4.) Sickness of the
person to whom the baptism is to be administered, by reason of which he would be
endangered if dipped. And now, Reader, I leave you to make what estimate you
please of these Authors, Aquinas, Sotus, and Vossius, and of their Quoter, Mr.
Danvers. And I leave him to triumph, as much as he pleases, in the advantage
he has gotten by this, or any other the like Quotations.

. 81. After the Schoolmen he proceeds to draw to a conclusion by way of
Recapitulation of Arguments from the Genuine sense of the word, Nature of the
Ordinance, and Usuage of the Ancients, which he says were excellently
inculcated by the Learned Dr. Tillotson in a Sermon preached at his Lecture in
Michaels Cornhil London, April 15. 1673. from Romans 6.4. Therefore we are buried
with him by Baptism into Death; proving from thence, that dipping or plunging
was the proper Ceremony and Rite in that Ordinance; and how naturally Arguments
did arise from that Sign in Baptism to enforce Holiness and Mortification the
thing signified thereby.

. 82. That that Reverend Divine did preach a Sermon in that place, and at that
time, and on that Text, I am apt to believe. But what he said in it is not so
easy to know. For not Mr. D. gives us his words. And after many inquiries in
the Country, and at last sending for it to London, I understand that Sermon was
never yet Printed. And therefore Mr. D. whom we have not found over candid in
things that have been Printed, must excuse us, if we be not over hasty to take
his word in things that never yet came at the Press. As to the matter I easily
believe that from the Rite of Dipping in Baptism there alluded unto by the
Apostle, the Doctor did rationally deduce and powerfully inculcate Arguments to
enforce to Holiness and Mortification. But that the Doctor did prove, or had
any such design in that Sermon as to prove from that Text, that dipping or
plunging was the proper Ceremony and Rite in that Ordinance, meaning by the
proper, the only lawful Rite, whence must follow, that there was therefore a
necessity of Dipping in Baptism, I am not satisfied, nor shall be, till he tell
us so himself. A proper Ceremony and Rite I shall easily grant he might affirm
it to be: because no body denies it. But that it was the proper Rite and
Ceremony in the sense newly expressed and explained, I am very confident he
never said, he never thought. Partly because the Doctor is too learned not to
know better things than so, Partly because I suppose his own practice, as well
as other men's, has been to baptize after another manner. And partly because I
am assured from himself, that what he said of the Apostles alluding in those
words [being buried with him in Baptism] to the ancient Rite or Manner of
Baptizing, Letter dated Jan. 31. 1677.
which was immersion, was without any mention, or so much as thought of any
necessity thereby laid upon Christians of observing punctually all the
Circumstances, used in the Institution of this Sacrament, any more than of the
other. Which not the Anabaptists themselves will say there is. And therefore
the Reader may be satisfied, that, whatever Mr. D. suggest to the contrary,
that Reverend Person is no more conformable in judgment than in practice to the
Anabaptists; nor is by any thing that he has writ, or said, a witness for
them, and against the Practice of the Church of England, when by the allowance
of the Church of England they baptize otherwise than by a total dipping, as in
several cases they do and may do it, by her allowance.

. 83. And now, the field being thus far cleared, I might fairly retreat. But
because I discern two straglers behind and coming up at a distance, I will
stand a while and receive their charge.

. 84. The first is Ainsworth (who as we are told by Mr. D. says) upon Lev.
15.5. To baptize or wash his flesh, as is expressed, v. 13.16. meaning his
whole body, and so the Greek Translateth, shall wash his body. The Hebrews say,
every place where ought is said in the Law of Bathing the flesh, and washing
the Clothes of the unclean, it is not meant, but of baptizing the whole body in
water, Maim. in Makraoth, c. 1. s. 2. Figuring out our Sanctification by
Christ, and his Spirit, by whom we draw near to God, having our hearts
sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and bodies washed with pure water, Heb.
10.22. v. 11. If a man be baptized all over, saving the tip of his little
finger, he is yet in his uncleanness. And if clay or any such thing cleave to
the flesh of a man, it is unclean still as it was, and the baptizing profits
them nothing, c. 1. sc. 2, 7, 12, etc.

. 85. The Greek Translateth indeed v. 13. shall wash his body, (...).
and v. 16. shall wash all his body. But they do not Translate it shall dip his
body. I hope a thing may be washed, and washed all over, and yet not dipped. So
their Translation helps the cause nothing at all. And suppose the Hebrews say
true, as I am not so much a Rabby as to manage dispute on this head of
discourse: yet then this only follows, that baptizing the whole body is meant,
wherever bathing of the flesh is mentioned, but not that it is meant other
where. And there is mention often enough of cleansing with washing, where yet
bathing is not mentioned. Though I am not satisfied that bathing does in the
notion of it necessarily imply dipping. Again there can be no Arguing from this
sort of washing, but to washings of the same sort. But washing of Proselytes
for admission into the Covenant is another thing from washing of Persons from
pollutions by Issues. And this washing is of divine Institution: but whether
the other were so is uncertain. Of this the Institution clearly appears in the
Word; and so it may be better judged of: but of the other there is not the
like, if any appearance; and so of that we cannot be so certain in our
judgment. Further, though it were never so much as they say, yet still is that
no obligation unto us, who are under another Dispensation, and have Liberties
conferred on us by Christ, from that yoke of bondage, which was imposed on them
by Moses, until the times of Reformation. See Chapter 8. of this Treatise. Lastly,
I argue thus, If there is to be so much scrupulosity in the baptizing of
Christians, as the Rabbis say there was in the baptizing of Jews, and the same
things rendered the baptism of the one of no effect, which rendered the baptism
of the other ineffectual; then it would follow, that though the whole body of a
Man were put under water, as the Dippers would have it, yet through the
adherency of clay, or some other adventitious, perhaps excrementitious, matter
to his body, he might still be unbaptized: and we should be as uncertain on
that account, when any Person were truly baptized, as they are in the Church of
Rome, on account of the Priests Intention to baptize. If there is not to be
that scrupulosity among us, as was amongst them, then why are their customs in
that kind so scrupulously urged upon us? This for Ainsworth.

. 86. Then for Dr. Goodwin. To this purpose we have Dr. Goodwin, in his support
of faith, p. 54. very excellently, viz. That the eminent thing signified and
represented in Baptism, is not simply the blood of Christ, as it washes us
from our sins; but there is a further representation therein of Christ's Death,
Burial and Resurrection in the Baptized, being first buried under Water, and
then rising out of it; and this is not in a bare conformity to Christ, but in a
representation of communion with Christ in that his Death and Resurrection:
Therefore it is said (we are buried with him in baptism) and wherein we are
risen with him, etc.

. 87. That the blood of Christ, as it washes us from sin, is represented in
Baptism, is tacitly consented to by that Doctor in this place: and that it is
the eminent thing signified, and represented in it. But that it is not simply
so, (I suppose he means, that it is not only so, or that that is not all the
thing which is signified, and represented in it) but there is a further
representation therein, etc. is the thing, if I understand the Doctor, asserted
by him. Wherein I know none will contradict him; provided he make not that,
which was the primary design of baptism, to truckle to other secondary
designations by it.

. 88. But here I observe the Doctor is not writing about Dipping, or
Sprinkling, in a way of Dispute for the one, and against the other, nor meddles
in the least in those Points, in a way of controversy: only shows how that by
the baptized's being first buried under Water, and then rising out of it,
(which is a way of speaking familiar to Divines, even those that own and avow
the lawfulness of sprinkling) a representation is made of Christ's Death,
Burial, and Resurrection. And no doubt it is so, and very eminently, where the
Baptism is that way administered. But there is a representation also made of
these things by aspersion and perfusion. (as will be further showed in Chapter 16.)
And therefore there being no opposition between what that Doctor asserts, and I
affirm, I dismiss his Testimony, as a thing alleged impertinently by Mr. D. as
to the purpose in hand, if it were, as doubtless it was, by him designed to be
exclusive of other ways of baptizing, besides Dipping. And I conclude, that by
the alteration of this Rite from Dipping to Sprinkling, the Symbol is not (as
Mr. D. says it is) quite spoiled, nor made any other thing, than the
Institutor of it did design it; viz. a Sacrament whereby his washing us from
our sins with his blood is represented, as the primary design of it; and his
Death, Burial, and Resurrection, as the secondary.

And now after this Interruption to my Discourse in Answer to Authorities
alleged by Mr. D. against my Hypothesis, I shall proceed in what I intended.

CHAP. XIV. The Churches Grounds for admitting of Sprinkling, in general.
. 1. THat Baptism by other ways than that of a total immersion, and
particularly by pouring, or sprinkling of water on the baptized, has been
practiced in the Church, of ancient as well as later times, has sufficiently
(I hope) been made to appear, by what has on that Subject already been
delivered in these Papers.

Perhaps it may not be unprofitable to make Inquiry into the Reasons, or
Occasions, of the Churches gradual declining, from the first more general way
of dipping, to that less usual way of sprinkling, which yet is now grown to be
the more general way.

. 2. And truly I cannot think it proceeded from any wanton humor in the
Church, causlesly to throw off any Precept of Christ's, or Practice of the
Apostles. Far be that from being thought of that Company of Men, who are called
to be Saints, and who know themselves to be no further such, than they keep
both to his Precepts, and to their Practice, in things wherein their conformity
thereunto is indispensably required. What shall we think then in the case?
This, as I humbly conceive; and no more but this: That when the Church saw,
that there was nothing in the Precept of Christ, nothing in the Practice of the
Apostles, whereby it was bound up into so strait a room, as to be confined in
all, even the greatest cases of necessity to one way of baptizing, and
particularly to that of a total immersion, it made use of that power about the
Rituals of Religion, and Circumstantials of Worship, wherewith Christ, as his
Trustee on Earth, after his departure to Heaven, for the managing of the
affairs of his Kingdom here, till his coming again, had endued it; Vt
instituendi alicujus ritus si usus exigat, ita ejus abrogandi, si abusus
requirat, Ecclesia habet potestatem. Voss. de Bapt. disp. 1. These. 8. page 347.
and in order both to the fulfilling of that, which being the declared will of
his Father must needs be interpreted to be his will too, even that of having
mercy, and not (i. e. rather than) sacrifice: and to the performing of that
Precept of his Apostle, whereby he commanded that all things in the Church
should be done (...), with an honest decency, on just occasions waved that
severer way of baptizing by a total immersion, and admitted the other more
benign ways of affusion and conspersion.

3. How far the Church was from being enforced by any indispensable Precept of
Christ's, to keep solely to the way of a total immersion, has been shown (and,
I would fain hope, sufficiently) in the foregoing Papers. And, if nothing else
had been said, to any modest Inquirer this, methinks, might be sufficient to
persuade, that our Savior intended only a prescription of the substance of the
Ceremony, that Men should be baptized, and not a description of the
Circumstance of it, or manner how they should be baptized, in that, whereas he
knew there were in use among the Jews, diverse washings called baptisms, some
total of all the Body; some partial, only of the hands, etc. having in a
general term prescribed the matter, he adds not one syllable to determine the
manner; neither saying, baptizing their Heads; nor baptizing their Hands, nor
baptizing their whole Bodies; neither sprinkling them with water; nor dipping
them into water; nor pouring water upon them, nor particularizing any manner of
way how he would have the application of water made to them: and consequently
that the Church keeping to the substance, was by him left at liberty to
determine her self as to the circumstance, baptizing this, that, or the other
way, as reason, from convenience, expedience, or necessity should persuade.

. 4. And that she was not bound up to a total immersion by the Practice of the
Apostles, it sufficiently appears from this, that whereas there are several
Instances of baptisms by the Apostles, which with great probability may be
presumed to have been performed by sprinkling, or pouring of water on the
baptized, no one example can be produced of any one Apostles baptizing any,
which carries with it any more than a probability of its being performed by
dipping; of no one of them, by what is expressed in the Text, can it certainly
be said, that it was a total immersion. So then there being but probability
against probability, and no infallible certainty on either side, what could the
Church think other, or what other can any Man imagine the Church should think,
but that in such case she had power to determine her self to one way, or to be
at liberty, to use both, or neither, according to her discretion.

. 5. But methinks I hear such a Thunder in mine Ears about Philip's baptizing
the Eunuch, (Act. 8.38.) that I am not able to get any further, before I say
something to it. Well then, let us calmly consider the Case. Philip having
converted the Eunuch by preaching unto him Jesus, as they went on their way,
(v. 36.) they came unto a certain water, and the Eunuch said, See here is
water, what does hinder me to be baptized? Philip hereupon consenting to it,
upon his further profession of faith in Jesus Christ, (v. 37.) He commanded the
Chariot to stand still: and they both went down into the water, both Philip and
the Eunuch, and he baptized him. This is the case. Now what is here, that
necessarily infers a total immersion? The Eunuch said, Here is water. True: but
he does not say, how much of the water there was. Here is water, he says;
that is true indeed; but he does not say, here is a River, here is a Pool,
here is water enough for me to be dipped into. It is said, John was baptizing in
Aenon, because there was much water there. But here the muchness, (if I may so
speak) or quantity of the water is not by the Eunuch insisted on, as any reason
why he should here be baptized. He does not say, here is much water, but only
here is water (without much:) what does hinder me to be baptized? which fairly
intimates unto us, that where there is water, be it much or little, there a
baptism may be.

. 6. But it is said, that both Philip and the Eunuch went into the water. Now
sure that they might do, though the water were far from being so much, as to be
capable of receiving a man's whole body into it, so to be baptized in it, as the
manner of the Jews was, sitting, or rather standing up to the neck in it. He
that goes into the water but up to the knees, as truly goes into it, as he that
goes up to the breasts. Their going into it then enforces not the Eunuchs being
wholly dipped in it.

. 7. And then no more does their coming out of it. For cannot a man be said to
come out of the water, unless he have been first all, over head and ears, in
it? He that is in the water but up to the ancles, as truly, when he leaves it,
comes out of it, as he that goes into it up to the neck.

. 8. Yea, but it is not barely said, they came out of it, but they came up out
of it. Well then: if coming up out of the water signifies a having first been
all in it, then it seems Philip was dipped too, as well as the Eunuch: for it
is not said of the Eunuch singly, that he came up out of the water, but of him
and Philip jointly, that they (that is they both) came up out of the water. If
then no total dipping of Philip follows upon his coming up out of the water (a
thing never pretended by any, and unimaginable in it self) there follows none
from the numerically same expression of the Eunuchs coming up out of it. No
more being said of him than of Philip, but the self and same of both.

. 9. Yea, but it is said (...), i. e. they ascended out of the water. Yes, just
as it is said, (...), they descended into the water. The Objection is too
trifling to deserve a serious answer. How can there be a going into the water,
especially such a one as this is supposed to be, a water in, or by the high
way, without going down into it? where lie confluences of waters, but in low
places, which must be gone down to by those that will go into them? where is
there such a water, though on the top of the hill, that is not lower at the
bottom of it, than the earth that bounds it, so that there can be no going into
it, but there must be a going down to it? Descending then, or going down unto
it, or even into it, does not necessarily suppose a going so far into it, as
till one be over head and ears in it. No more than does ascending, or coming up
out of it. One may well enough ascend, or come up out of the water, who has
been no further than knee deep in the water.

. 10. But still it is said of the Eunuch, that being in the water Philip (...)
baptized him. Yes, and that he might well enough do without a total dipping of
him. He might sprinkle water in his face, pour water upon his head, wash him
with taking water by handfuls and casting it upon his body, or rubbing him
therewith, or might dip his head, and no more of him, into it; and yet still
here was a baptizing, though no total immersion of him. Here Is nothing then but
the mere force of the word (...) to persuade to it. And then any other Text of
the New Testament, where St. Peter or St. Paul, or any other Apostle is said to
have baptized any, might to as much purpose be alleged as this Text, that
there is such a stir about. Now to go about to go to confute the Inference
drawn from the signification of the word is needless here: for that were but to
say over again all that has already been said on that subject, which I hope
the Reader bears in mind: and therefore I shall neither trouble my self nor him
with it: but leave it to him to judge of it.

. 11. And yet again, that this Baptism was by Conspersion, or affusion, rather
than immersion (unless of the head, or face only) may seem probable. Because,
First, there is no mention of their putting off their clothes, when they went
into the water; which indeed it was but necessary, as the case stood with them,
that they should keep on, unless they meant to catch their deaths, the season
being supposed to be in Winter, not long after the stoning of St. Stephen, and
they in a journey upon the highway, where they could have no fire to warm
them, after their coming up almost starved with going naked into the cold
water; and unnecessary they should put off, being the business might be done
without it, by going but only with their legs bare into the Water. Secondly the
Eunuch, being (as I suppose) a Black Moor, may be well thought to be unwilling
to be wholly stripped naked before St. Philip, who was a White. Thirdly, there
is no mention of the manner of Philips baptizing him expressed, that enforces
to think it otherwise, it being not said, (...), that he dipped him into the
water, but only that (...), he baptized him, which might be as well, (nay more
conveniently, as circumstances might be) by conspersion, as by immersion. And
fourthly, I can find no water in the way, that the Eunuch traveled in, fit for
the purpose of a Jewish total immersion, but a Brook in a Valley, or a Spring
bubling up at the foot of a hill to do it in: See Dr. Caves Life of St. Philip
the Evangelist, Sect. 11. page 30.
neither of which probably were deep enough for it; and the rather because it
is not said, that he dipped him into it.

. 12. But suppose it probable, notwithstanding all that I have said, that his
Baptism was by dipping: yet probability is no certainty, and so can afford no
demonstration. And if it be but probable that it was so, then it may be
probable (nay I have shown something of a probability) that it was not so. And
then what is all the noise of Philips dipping the Eunuch come to? To nothing
else but mere noise. And I wish that they who use that Argument, would weigh it
better before they use it again, to confront therewith the Authority and
Practice of the Church, when she makes use of that Liberty and Power, wherewith
Christ, the Head of his Church, has invested her; and orders, or practices
baptism any other way, than by a total immersion.

. 13. I might add after all this, that had all things been here as their hearts
could wish, yet still this had been no example of any Apostle. For it was but
Philip the Deacon, not Philip the Apostle, that baptized the Eunuch. An
Apostolical person, or, if ye will, an Apostle, in the larger sense (as
Clemens, Ignatius, or any other of the Primitive Fathers are called Apostles)
he was: but no Apostle in the strict sense we now speak of, as designing by
that Appellation only those Eleven Persons, who were by our Savior, just at
his Ascension, sent by him (and from his sending them called Apostles) into all
Nations, to make Disciples all the world over, by teaching and baptizing them,
with Matthias, after, by divine appointment, elected to take part of that
Ministry and Apostleship.

. 14. And had he been never so much an Apostle, yet still that could only have
warranted the lawfulness of dipping, not enforced a necessity of it. Unless one
could have been sure, both that no Apostle baptized any other way, and that
they all decreed, that their example should in that particular, be binding to
all posterity; or that all, or any one of them, had by a peremptory
irreversible determination from heaven declared, that none ever should be
baptized any other way. But who can be assured of the first, that has not been
made privy to all the actings of all the Apostles in that kind, in all places
wherever they went and planted Churches? And who can be assured of the second,
who has not heard or read all, that they all ever decreed, preached or writ? or
has not an infallible assurance (which no mortal man can have,) that neither
all of them, nor any one of them, ever decreed, writ, or preached, any thing,
to the contrary?

. 15. And so now, upon serious consideration, I refer it to the most
prejudicate Reader to say, what enforcement can lie upon the Church from
Philips baptizing the Eunuch, to necessitate her to the dipping of all she
baptizes.

. 16. And now the Church being supposed at liberty, for any thing either in the
Precept of Christ, or Practice of his Apostles, to use what way she pleased in
baptizing, I will pursue my intended course of showing, on what accounts she
first more sparingly permitted, and after more freely admitted, baptizing by
way of Sprinkling.

CHAP. XV. The Churches particular Inducements to admit of Sprinkling.
. 1. BAptism in the foremost Ages of the Church, For excepting the case of
Martyrs (whom they thought sufficiently qualified for heaven by being baptized
in their own blood) they reckoned no man could be saved without being baptized.
Dr. Cave, Prim. Christian. part. 1. chapter 10. page 300.

We hold the same Necessity of Baptism, that the Fathers did hold, which is via
ordinaria: yet non alligando gratiam dei ad media, no more than the Schoolmen
do. B. Andrews Answ. to Peron. p. 12.

Nisi enim renatus fuerit ex aqua and spiritu sancto, non potest introire in
regnum Dei. Vtique nullum excipit, non infantem, non aliqua praeventum
necessitate. D. Ambros. de Abraha^o Patriarcha, l. 2. c 11. Sine baptismo
mortuos periisse non dubium est. Id. de Voc. Gent. l. 2. c. 8. Sed antequam per
aetatem possit homo vivere secundum spiritum, necessarium habet Mediatoris
Sacramentum -- D. Aug. l. 10. de Genes. ad literam, c. 14. Parvulis non
sufficit fides ecclesiae sine Sacramento: qui si absque baptismo fuerint
defuncti, etiam cum deferuntur ad baptismum, damnabuntur -- P. Lombard. l. 4.
did. 4. c. 5. p. 387.


how little account soever any may make of it in this, was held necessary in
order to salvation. No coming for any into the Kindom of heaven, that might
have baptism, and despised it, or neglected it, was believed then. Yea some in
process of time went so far (perhaps too far) as to hold, not as the Church now
holds, a necessity in the ordinary way, without tying God to the means, but an
absolute necessity of it (so as that the salvation even of Infants, who could
neither seek it, nor desire it, nor despise it, nor neglect it, if they died
unbaptized, was by some doubted, disputed, denied) unless that defect were
supplied baptismo sanguinis, with the bloody Baptism of Martyrdom. How rightly
this was believed and held, is not my present concern to enquire, much less to
determine. Sufficient it is to my present purpose, that it was (as I think
none, that has had any insight into Antiquity, but will say that it was) so
believed and held.

. 2. Yet this notwithstanding, it is evident, beyond all possibility of
dispute, or doubt, that many in the Primitive times who did believe this, did,
for all that belief, defer their baptism, not only till their old age, but to
their deathbeds, or what they thought might be so. Their reasons why they did
so are not one, but many, Preface to Mod. Plea for Inf. Bapt.
as I have abundantly elsewhere declared. It may be sufficient to note here
three or four of them. Some did it out of lothness to part with the world, and
their sins, and their pleasures, as thinking that, if once they took the Yoke
of Christ upon them, they must thenceforth renounce, not the devil only, and
all his works, but also the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked world, and all
the sinful lusts of the flesh; assuring themselves, that, though they enjoyed
the pleasures of sin for never so long a season, yet if they could but get to
be baptized at last, though it were never so late first, (not till they were
upon their deathbed, and at the last gasp) all their sins past should be
forgiven them.

. 3. Some did it out of an apprehension, that though they did by baptism obtain
remission of all forepast sins, though never so many and great, yet if they
sinned after Baptism, for such sins there was no pardon: and therefore as
knowing the multitude of temptations they must daily be exposed to in the
world, and their own weakness to resist them, to prevent endangering the
forfeiture of their pardon for what was past, and secure their present peace,
and future salvation, they would not be baptized, till they thought themselves
to have out-sail'd all rocks and shelves, to be past all storms and dangers, to
have arrived in the port of happiness, and to have nothing more to do, but
through the gate of death to enter into eternal life.

. 4. Some did it to avoid the danger of Persecution for religion; since, till
they were baptized, they could neither by the cunning of the persecuting
Heathens be discovered, nor by the cowardice of any persecuted Christians be
betrayed, See Dr. Cave Prim. Christ. part. 1. c. 10. page 308.
to be of the Christian Faith: and so would not embody themselves with the
Church all their life, though they meant to expire in her bosom at their death;
as knowing by her principles and practices, that She did sympathize with him
that was her Head, and would not be willing that any should perish, but be
ready to save all those that would not destroy themselves, and open her Arms to
relieve their Souls at the last gasp of their bodies.

. 5. Whether upon these or any other Reasons, as there were many, I say not;
but so it was, that the baptism of very many was deferred to the utmost
extremity; and there was a necessity, either of baptizing them then, in that
condition, or of letting them depart out of this world unbaptized, or venturing
it at least.

. 6. What should the Church do in this condition? should she stop her ears
against their cries? shut her eyes against their tears? harden her heart
against their prayers, and deny them baptism? Where were then her compassion to
Souls? How should she show herself merciful as her heavenly Father is merciful?
with what heart could she shut any out of Gods Kingdom, that sought with
prayers and tears to be let into it? Why should she let any be damned, or but
dye in danger of damnation, that by her means might be delivered and saved?
Yea, why should she let any dye in despair or disconsolate, when she was able
to open to them a door of hope, and draw out for them a breast of consolation?

. 7. Should she grant them baptism, but on condition they would be totally
dipped? Alas! that were either as ill as a denial, because it would propound a
condition they were incapable of performing; or else, whilst the exercised
mercy toward their Souls, to be acting cruelty to their bodies; to make sure
of sending some out of this World, who else might have lived longer in it: an
act so like murder, and so near killing, that it would be hard, amongst any
that were Christians, to find either a hand or a heart, that could do it; much
more, amongst Ministers, who would never be persuaded it were either any part
of their office, to kill Men for their salvation; or any of God's methods, to
destroy Men's lives, for the preserving of their Souls.

. 8. What then should she do? What? but take the middle way: neither deny them,
nor dip them: but (what would neither endanger Body, nor Soul, neither destroy
Life, nor endamage Health) baptize them by a gentle application of water to
them in the way of Sprinkling. And this is the way which the Church in the
Primitive times did take, and has persevered in, on such like occasions; as
has, I hope, been competently evidenced in these Papers.

. 9. And what Necessity (real, or but supposed, Et servari debet cum necessitas
imminet -- propter infirmitatem vel impotentiam baptizati. Bonavent. l. 4.
did. 3. a. 2. qu. 2.

Potest etiam fieri per modum effusionis vel aspersionis -- propter periculum
pueri de cujus morte timetur. Lynwood. Constitut. l. 3. c. de Baptismo. -- Vel
propter debilitatem baptizandi cui potest imminere periculum mortis ex
immersione. Aquin. Sum. 3. q. 66. a. 7. c.

Praeterea cur Aspersionem quae jam obtinet in Ecclesiis nostris retineri posse
credamus, charitatis and necessitatis Lege compellimur. Siquidem ut Nuda
Corpora, praesertim Infantum (quaeles fere sunt qui nunc Baptizantur) aeri
frigido exponantur, and Aquis Tota immergantur, in hisce ad septentrionem sitis
regionibus, prasertim hyberno tempore, sine valetudinis periculo fieri non
potest. Voss. de Bapt. Disp. 1. These. 9. 356, 357.


for that is all one) could persuade to in one case, was the easilier yielded to
in other the like cases. Such as is that of new born Infants, of whom many are
really sick when born; so sick, that, as if they came into the World only to
cry for a Tomb to be buried in it, they depart almost as soon as born, scarce,
nay sometimes not at all living till they can, though with the expedition of
the most compendious method, be got baptized. And of those whose condition
appears more sound and healthful, many suddenly have alterations, and are gone
in a moment, when any such thing was least expected. And therefore the
condition of the whole sort of them has been held but the same with, or near a
kin to that of elder persons in sickness, and so they thereupon, to prevent the
worst which they might feel, or others fear, have been thought proper Subjects
of baptism, and admitted in all Ages thereunto, if offered to it. And truly, of
the two, favor would cast the scale on their side, in regard that, as they
need it, as well as the others, so, though they do not desire it, as others do;
yet they have neither refused it, nor neglected it, when they might have had
it, as others have done.

. 10. Et hoc maxim est verum quando necessitas incumbit etiam propter
imbecillitatem sacerdotis non potentis sustentare infantem. Lynwood. Constitut.
l. 3. c. de Baptis.

Quandoque autem potest imminere necessitas -- propter debilitatem Ministri,
quia non potest sustentare baptizandum. Aquin. Sum. 3. q. 66. a. 7. c. Et
servari debet cum necessit^ imminet, aut propter infirmitatem baptizantis, quia
manus sunt debiles, etc. Bonaventur. l. 4. did. 3. a. 2. q. 2.


And if weakness in the baptized might excuse them from being dipped, then
might Infirmity in the Baptizer excuse him also from dipping. This may be a
very real case, for ought I know, unless the Ministry were by some special
privilege exempted from weakness by Age or sickness. And if it were not
supposable, such learned, and judicious Persons as, not Lynwood only, but
Aquinas, and Bonaventure, would never have pleaded for sprinkling upon the
account of it. For this they make one piece of that necessity, upon account
whereof a total immersion is abatable, and conspersion admittable.

. 11. And what Necessity there is to allow of baptizing by way of sprinkling,
in case the Minister, by reason of natural or adventitious weakness, be unable
to lift into, and out of the Font, any heavy Child, the same will be pleadable
for its allowance in case the Number of Persons to be baptized be such, as
exceeds the strength of him, that otherwise is not weak, to dispatch their
baptism by dipping. For weariness reduces him that is strong, for the present,
into the condition of weakness. And he that has lost his strength with labor,
is so far equal with him that had it not to labor with.

. 12. Now this case has no doubt already many a time happened, not only when
multitudes of Heathen Nations turning Christians have come flocking, Men and
Women, Pontifex, nocte sancta Pentecostes, vigiliis celebratis, ad baptisterium
for as muraneum egressus est, ibique omnis multitudo coram to prostrata
baptismum flagitavit. At ille prae gaudio lacrymans, cunctos aqua abluens and
Chrismate liniens in sinu matris Ecclesiae congregavit. Fuerunt autem qui
baptizati sunt amplius quingenti. Baron. Ann. Chr. 579. N. xxvi. The time when
Baptism was wont to be administered: at first all times were alike, and persons
were baptized as opportunity and occasion served; but the discipline of the
Church being a little settled, it began to be restrained to two solemn and
stated times of the Year, viz. Easter and Whitsuntide, Dr. Cave Prim.
Christianity, part 1. chapter 10. p. 306. Vid. Novarin. Schediasm. Sacroprophan. l.
3. c. 9. Number. 47. Lambert. Danaei Ethic. Christian. l. 2. c. 10. page 121. col.
1. B. Baron. Ann. Chr. 723. Number. 9. Zuingeri Theatrum, Vol. 27. l. 3. page
4171, 4172. Et verisimile est quod non per modum immersionis sed aspersionis
baptizaverit Apostolus Petrus, ad cujus praedicationem legitur una die quinque
millia, and alia die tria millia conversos ad fidem baptizasse. Lynwood
Constit. l: 3. de Baptismo. Et hoc propter necessitatem; vel quia est magna
multitudo baptizandorunt, ut patet Act. 2. and 4. Aquin. Sum. 3. q 66. a. 7. c
and Children, to Baptism; as the Saxons in England and Germany, and Pomerania;
as also the Lithuanians and Polonians; but also when the times of public
baptizing, especially for Catechumens, were but only two in the Year, Easter,
and Whitsuntide, and at the Mother Church. Which in populous Cities, and in the
times of growing Christianity, must needs occasion the Numbers of the baptized
to be, as they sometimes were, very great, enough to tire the most brawny arms of
all the Ministers of any one City wholly to immerse them: and especially when
Infants, not just new born only, but those also of some Months, it may be Years
old, were brought to be baptized. And upon this account those that look upon
St. Peter, as the alone Baptizer of the Converts in Act. 2. and 3. argue to his
baptizing by way of sprinkling, because of his insufficiency to baptize so many
by way of dipping. And it may very rationally be supposed of any other, when
the like or any near case has happened. And it is most rational to allow the
same liberty, that he is supposed to have taken, unto any other, if the like
case shall again happen, as it may, though it be unlikely, in the general
conversion of the Jews, Turks, or Heathens to the Christian Faith.

. 13. And because an immersion cannot be, Quandoque autem potest imminer^
necessitas propter parcitatem aquae. Aquin. Sum. 3. q. 66. a. 7. c. Et hoc
maxim verum est, quando necessitas incumbit propter defectumi aquae. Lynwood
Constit. l. 3. c. de Baptismo. Et servari debet cum necessitas imminet --
propter penuriam elementi, ut si sit modicum de aqua. Bonavent. l. 4. did. 3.
a. 2. q. 2. Item esto quod sit ita parum de aqua, quod non posset mergi una
pars, quaeritur utrum possit baptizari, and videtur quod sic, quia est ibi
verbum and elementum, etc. Id. ib.
without a sufficient quantity of water to receive wholly into it the person to
be immersed, therefore the defect of that has been looked upon as a case
rendering baptism by sprinkling, not only lawful, but necessary. And this is a
case that is rationally supposable in hot Countries, and droughty seasons, and
night times, upon sudden emergencies. Water being not at all times, and in all
places to be had, when there may be a necessity for baptism, in sufficient
quantity for the immersion either of a man, or of a child. And this defect
Aquinas, Lynwood, and Bonaventure instance in as a case of necessity for a
baptism by sprinkling.

. 14. And what influence the consideration of Necessity had upon the Church, to
incline it to admit of Rhantization instead of Immersion, no doubt the
consideration of Praeter vero qua^uor istas quas Thomas attulit causas; etiam
quintam aliqui addunt, honestatem; propter quam decentius est hodie adultos
ipsos adspergere vel perfundere, quam nudatos toto corpore immergere. Nempe
antiquis temporibus, quando candida simplicitas magis vigebat, honest
denudabantur toti: sed postquam, ut aliorum, ita Sacerdotum accrevit nequitia,
experientia id toti Orbi testante; honest amplius id fieri non potuit: and
haec propter, jam a quinque retro saeculis paulatim per universum fere
occidentem consuctudo illa exolevit, Voss. de Bapt. Disp. 1. These. 9. p. 360.
Decency had the same, it being necessary even by order Apostolical, that in
the Church all things should be done (...), with a becoming decency: that no
offense might be given either to the Jews, or to the Gentiles, or to the Church
of God; that all occasions of lascivious thoughts might be cut off from those
within the Church, and of derision and scoffing from those without it; and a
sufficient provision made for the modesty of chaste persons, that were by
baptism to be brought into it.

. 15. It is too notorious to need proof, that in the Primitive times, those
that were baptized by dipping, were stark naked, when baptized. But if any
question were of it, that of S. Chrysostom would put it out of doubt, when, in
his Epistle to Pope Innocent, speaking of the insolences and outrages
committed by Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria, and party in Constantinople, he
remonstrates how a party of Soldiers went on the Sabbath day into the
Churches, Mulieres quoque, quae per illud tempus se exuerant ut baptizarentur,
metu graviorum insidiarum nudae aufugerunt. Neque enim concedebatur ut se
velarent, sicut honestas decet. Multae etiam acceptis vulneribus ejiciebantur,
and sanguine implebantur natatoria, and sancto cruore rubescebant fluenta. D.
Chrysostom. Ep. Innocentio.

Nam ideo nudi nascimur in hoc seculo, nudi etiam accedimus ad baptismum, ut
nudi and sine impedimento perveniamus ad coelum. D. Bernard. de Mod. ben.
vivendi Sermon. 46.

Eundem morem in Latina obtinuisse Ecclesia etiam usque ad Bernardi Tempora,
(post quae succrescente tam Sacerdotum, quam aliorum nequitia, scandali and
flagitii causa sublatus fuit,) illustria haec Testimonia ostendant, Voss. de
Bapt. Disp. 1. These. 6. page 350.

Et sane quia toti immergebantur: baptismus autem sive immersio non vestium
est, sed humani corporis: ergo etiam posito pudore, toto penitus corpore
nudabantur, adeo ut ne fasciam quidem obduxisse videantur partibus pudendis:
saltem earum apud veteres non est mentio; sed ita loquuntur universi, quasi non
minus nudi baptizarentur, quam Adam fuerit in Paradiso, vel quam de Matre omnes
nascimur; vel quam petemus coelos, vel quam Christus crucifixus fuit. Voss. de
Bapt. Disp. 1 These. 6. p. 350.

In divino nostro ortu ad Sacerdotem quidem is adducitur qui spirituali
regeneratione donandus est. Ipse autem, and pedes ejus, adhibita ministrorum
eorum, qui ad hoc constituti sunt, opera, calc is nudat, and corpus universum
detegit. -- Per id quod ille excalceatur and denudatur, prioris vitae vitiosis
affectionibus addictae denudatio atque ad extremos etiam usque ipsius habitus
abjectio significatur. Elias Cretensis Com. in Greg. Naz. Orat. 4. Not. 24. p.
448. Immersio olim fiebat. Ergo totus homo nudus aquam, quae erat in
baptisterio, ingrediebatur, and in ea mergebatur ter, vel semel tantum, pro
diversa Ecclesiarum consuetudine. -- Sed postquam Copronymus imperator infans
and nudus alimoniae excremento baptisterium infecit, desierunt homines nude
baptizari. Lamb. Danaeus Isagog. Christ. l. 5. de Sacram. c. 29. part. 4. page
522. Mos fuit apud veteres, ut qui baptizabantur, nudi baptizarentur, etc.
Musc. in Psalm. 22. page 259.


and with great violence drove out all thence, insomuch that even the women,
who at that time had stripped themselves to be baptized, for fear of worse
mischief, fled away naked, being not suffered to cover themselves. And as it
was then, so it seems it continued still in the Church for many Ages, even down
to S. Bernards time. Whence says he, we are born naked into this world, naked
also we come to baptism, that naked and without impediment we may arrive at
heaven.

. 16. This being the manner of baptizing, the greatest care imaginable to
prevent indecencies was no more but necessary. It being scarce possible that
all, who were either Spectators, or even Actors, in that concern, should so far
have mortified their fleshly appetites, but that on occasion or such objects
unbefitting thoughts would, Idem constat ex iis quae Jo. Moscus
Pratispiritualis cap. 1. narrat de Conone Presbytero, qui ob Tentationem quam
patiebatur, non poterat puellam nudam sancto oleo inungere: nam si inungebantur
nudae, etiam baptizabantur nudae, quia inunctio baptismum consequebatur. Voss.
de Bapt. Dis. 1. page 353.

Diaconissas in baptismo sive ministerio verbi mulieribus ministrare. vid.
Magdeb. cent. 5. c. 7. col. 736 l. 29. etc.

Interea Foeminarum pudori plerisque in locis consulebatur mulierum ministerio,
quae eas ad Baptismum venicut ^s honest nudabant and exuebant, ne quid
Baptizantis oculis inverecunde ingereretur; ut S. Cypr. Haeres. 89. Voss. de
Bapt. Disp. 1 These. 8. p. 354.

Eadem etiam consuctudo in mulierum baptismo obtinebat, ita tamen ut earum
pudori non una ratione consuli sere solcat. Voss. de Baptismo Disp. 1. These. 8.
p. 353. See Dr. Ca^e Prim. Christian. part. 1. c. 10. page 312. and 317. Deinde
Presbyteri ingrediuntur in fontem intro in aquam, and baptizantur primo
masculi, deinde foeminae. Novarin. ex Authore Ordinis Romani. lib. 3.
Schediasm. Sacroprophan. c. 9. p. 81. Alia etiam ratione consulebatur muliebri
verecundiae; nam viri separatim a foeminis Baptizabantur. Id. ibid. p. 355.
Interim tribus extructis Baptisteriis ita ordinavit, ut ipse solos mares pueros
in uno baptizaret: alii autem Sacerdotes foeminas seorsim, and viros seorsim,
Act. Othonis, l. 2. c. 15. ap. Novarin. ib. Cortinas circa dolia fixis
columellis funilusque inductis oppandi f^cit; -- ante Sacerdotem vero and
comministros linteum fune trajecto pependit; quatenus ver^cundiae undique
provisum foret, ne quid ineptiae aut turpitudinis notaretur in sacramento, etc.
Novarin. ib.


with the violence of an irresistible surprise, intrude themselves into their
minds, and sally out too, in unbecoming looks, if not motions and gestures also
of their bodies. And indeed indecencies, and inconveniences, arising from that
custom, and requiring the guardance of the strictest care, were observed, and
taken notice of. And what care could be taken, was used on such occasions.
Hence the Institution of Deaconesses to attend and assist at the baptizing of
women, to stand about and overshadow them, that nothing of indecency might
appear. Hence the baptizing of Men by themselves, Women by themselves, and the
Youths by themselves; and that not only in distinct companies, but sometimes in
distinct baptisteries, or distinct apartments in the same baptistery. Hence
curtains drawn about the Fonts, and even between the Baptizer, and the
Baptized. And hence the Godfathers holding the Garment of the Baptized before
their faces, till he returned to them out of the water.

. 17. But all care that could be taken, all courses that could be devised,
(even though it were the baptizing in garments provided for the purpose)
proving insufficient to preserve this Sacred performance from the profanations
of wantonness, the Church at last on this reason, besides what inducement she
had, from what had befallen at the baptizing of Copronymus, thought good by
degrees to deposite this way of baptizing by Immersion, and even to baptize the
healthy also, as well as the sickly, in a way, better secured from lascivious
indecencies, less exposed to scoffing railleries, and more agreeable with the
humor of female modesties, even the way of Sprinkling.

. 18. And now let these things, Quare ne ritus alius ad sanos, alius ad
infirmos, alius ad pueros, alius ad adultos varietur, sed unus permaneat modus:
expedit ut Sacramenti hujus ministri tutiorem amplexantes modum,
superinfundendo ter baptizent, nisi consuetudo contrarium habeat. Agend.
Eccles. Mogunt. fol. 23.
to name no more, be dispassionately, and unprejudicately considered, and then
say, whether the Church has not, upon grounds of highest prudence as well as
of of justest necessity, laid aside the troublesome, more dangerous, and less
becoming way of Immersion, and assumed the easier, the securer, and more decent
way of Rhantization.

CHAP. XVI. The Institution of Christ not violated by Sprinkling; and the
agreeableness of That, with the primary design of Baptism further manifested.
. 1. BUT perhaps it will be said, that for no necessity, much less convenience
of man, ought there to be any alteration of any Institution of Christ's, much
less such a one as is discordant with the design for which it was instituted.
And therefore Immersion being that way of baptizing which Christ did institute,
that way must stand, and Rhantization must fall.

. 2. To this I shall answer by degrees. And first by way of Concession, I say,
that supposing Immersion to be a way of baptizing of Christ's institution, yet
is it but a way: it is not the way; it is one way, not the only way, that he
did institute. For indeed to speak properly, he did institute baptization, the
thing it self: but neither immersion, nor aspersion, nor affusion, nor any
particular mode, or way of baptizing, exclusive as to all others. When he tied
us to the thing, he left us at liberty as to the manner, as Dr. Whitaker, a man
favorable enough to the way of the Anabaptists, does declare. And what he
asserts, I hope, has been competently vindicated in the foregoing Papers. So
that by aspersion or sprinkling there is no violation made of, no alteration
made in, Christ's supposed Institution: unless Immersion were the one particular
way instituted by him, and exclusively to all others, which I think, I have
disproved.

. 3. But Secondly supposing, yet not granting, the highest that can be
demanded, or desired, that Christ did institute dipping to be the particular
way of baptizing; yet is that Institution but a Ritual one, of a Ceremonial
Action, not of a Moral Duty. And sure no man will say, but that Rites
instituted by God have given (and then why may they not again give) place to
the necessities of man, without his offense; who, so the Substance of his
Institutions be observed, is not rigorously exacting in the Circumstantials
thereof, (especially now in the time of the Gospel) provided there be no
disdainful contempt, nor wilful neglect observable in the case.

. 4. In Genesis 17. we find Circumcision instituted, and as a Covenant, and that
an everlasting one, betwixt God and Abraham, and his Seed after him, and that
under the severe penalty of excision of the Party, in whom the Covenant was not
observed, from off his People. And God said unto Abraham, Thou shall keep my
Covenant therefore, thou and thy Seed after thee in their Generations. This is
my Covenant, which ye shall keep, between me and you, and thy Seed after thee;
every man-child among you shall be circumcised, v. 9, 10. And he that is eight
days old shall be circumcised among you, every man-child in your Generations --
v. 12. And the uncircumcised man-child, whose flesh of his foreskin is not
circumcised, that Soul shall be cut off from his People: he has broken my
Covenant, v. 14. Here is a Rite strictly instituted, as any can be imagined.
And yet this Rite instituted with so much strictness by God, gave way to the
necessity, if not convenience, of Man. For it was not observed for forty years
together, all the while that the Israelites were in the Wilderness, till they
were passed over Jordan, and come into Canaan: and that without any
signification of God's pleasure, that they should omit it, or of his
displeasure for the omission of it. They were in travel, and surrounded with
enemies; they were uncertain in their motions; and continually exposed unto
on-sets: and in such case the observation of that Rite could not but be highly
inconvenient for them, and thereupon it was for the present laid aside, and not
resumed till they had set foot upon, and taken possession of, the promised
Land. Josuah 5.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

. 5. In Levit. 24.5. order is given for making of twelve Cakes, which were to
stand before the Lord from Sabbath to Sabbath, and then to be Aaron's and his
Sons, and to be eaten by them in the most holy place, and as a thing most holy
unto the Lord, and to be observed by a perpetual Statute. So, here is a
positive Rite instituted, by which the Shewbread was to be the Priests for
ever, and to be eaten by none else. Well, David in his flight from Saul comes
hungry with his Men to Nob, 1 Samuel 21.3, 4, 5, 6.
desires some Bread of Abimelech the Priest. He tells him he had none under his
hand but hallowed Bread. David then desires, and takes, and eats of that Bread,
which it was neither lawful for him, nor his to eat, but only for the Priests,
as our Savior says, Matthew. 12.3, 4. And yet neither then, nor after, is any
thing charged upon David for this; no guilt is laid at his door for such a
violation of God's institution. Nay our Savior alleges this very example of
David's, to justify his own Disciples against a charge brought against them by
the Pharisees. Which he had not done, had David been criminous in the case; and
they would not have failed to have replied upon him for it. A plain case that
that Ritual Institution of God's, did give place to the Necessity of David and
his Men; and that God would rather that such a Ritual Institution, though his
own, should be unobserved, than that his Creatures in their necessities should
be unprovided.

. 6. The observation of the Sabbath was most strictly enjoined, as most holy to
the Lord; and whosoever did any work thereon was surely to be put to death: and
this observation was to be successive throughout their Generations for a
perpetual Covenant, Exodus 21.12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. And yet this so severe an
Institution of God's gave place to the necessities of Man. The work of the
Sanctuary (which was laborious enough) not excepted in the Institution, which
forbids all manner of work without exception, was to be done on the Sabbath
days. The Priests therefore satisfied in conscience touching the lawfulness of
doing their Office, though consisting in never so laborious an employment, on
that day, by the necessity there was for it, notwithstanding that strictness of
the Divine Institution to the contrary, go about their business, and are
neither blamed by GOD, nor Man. Have ye not read in the Law (says our Savior)
to the Pharisees; Matthew. 12 5.
how that on the Sabbath days the Priests in the Temple profane the Sabbath,
and are blameless? What they did, as being contrary to the Divine Institution,
was a profanation; but as being done upon necessity, (because otherwise the
service of God requisite on the day could not have been performed) so it was
free from blame. And this our Savior urged in justification of his Disciples,
accused by the Pharisees for doing that which was not lawful on the Sabbath
day, namely plucking ears of corn, and eating of them: in which action, though
in it self repugnant to the Divine Institution, yet because done for a supply
of their present necessity, he pronounces them guiltless, v. 7. Yea how often
does he convince them, even by their own practice, of this truth of the
Sabbaths giving way to the necessity, Matthew. 12.10. Luke 14.5.
not only of Man, but even of Beasts, Sheep, Oxen, Asses, of which, if any fell
in a Ditch on the Sabbath day, they would, for all the divineness of the
Sabbath's Institution, not fail to pluck it out, and were not blamed therein.
Nor indeed could they, as acting therein but according to the will of God, and
that plainly declared by his Prophet, ( Hosea 6.7.) though they understood not
that passage in him, and are therefore bidden to go and learn what it meant,
(Matthew. 9.13.) namely that saying of God, I will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice.
Wherein God declares his preferring acts of Mercy, and Charity, before the
Ceremonies even of his own Ritual Laws, and likes the exhibiting of mercy
toward them that stand in need of it, better than the offering of the richest
Sacrifices to himself. Which if they had understood, our Savior argues thence
in the behalf of his Disciples, they would rather have made a fair construction
of that action of theirs, in plucking the ears of corn to eat for the
satisfaction of their present hunger, which their necessity rendered
justifiable, than under pretense of zeal to the Sabbath, have so falsely charged
the Innocent. And as a determination of the question for the future in all such
cases of mercy or necessity, he tells them ( Mark 2.27.) that the Sabbath was
made for Man, and not Man for the Sabbath: intimating thereby, that the Ritual
observation of that Day was to give place, when the real necessity of Man stood
in competition with it.

. 7. And now the case having been thus under the Laws of God before Christ's
coming, and the deviation from those Laws on grounds of mercy and necessity
justified by our Savior when he was come; Can it be thought it is otherwise
now, under the Evangelical Economy? or that he more severely stands upon the
rigid observation of his own Ritual Institutions, than he did of his Fathers
Ceremonial Laws? Did he become a curse for us, to redeem us from the curse of
the Law, even for non-observance of such things, to bring us under a curse of
the Gospel, for non-observance of the like things? The Gospel has no such curse
in it. And who can think that he, that would have his Sabbath broke, rather
than a Beast should perish in a Ditch, would rather have a Soul perish for want
of Baptism, than not have it dipped, when baptized? As therefore the Sabbath
was made for Man, and not Man for the Sabbath: -- Cumque etiam non bomo propter
Baptismum, sed Baptismus propter bominem factus sit -- Keckerman. System.
Theolog. page 452.
so may we conclude, that Baptism was made for Man, and not Man for Baptism:
and that therefore the observation of a Rite in the one, ought to give place to
the necessity of the other: and that Christ never intended the destruction of
the Body, by that which he instituted for the Salvation of the Soul.

. 8. And what may be said in justification of an omission of a ritual
Institution, may be said, and more strongly, in justification of an alteration
in one: provided the grounds be equally fair and just; and that there be no
contempt, nor contumacy in the case, but the equitable plea of a just
necessity: and provided also that there be no alteration in the substance of
the Institution, but only in some circumstance of it: an omission of the whole
substance being a further remove from its observation, than a change of it in
but some Circumstantial part.

. 9. And that such changes have been, and been without blame, will appear by
instances. In Deuteronomy. 5. express order is given to keep the Passover strictly on
the fourteenth day of the first month: and that Institution established by a
severe menace of excision to him that did not exactly observe it according to
that circumstance of time prescribed, because he brought not the offering of
the Lord in his appointed season. v. 13. And yet notwithstanding, this so
strict Institution gave way to necessity, and even by the Lords own approbation
when consulted in the case, though he had made no provision for it before he
was consulted, as supposing that even the reason of man, without consulting
him, was sufficient to direct and determine it self, as to what was to be done
in a case of necessity. For the man that was unclean by reason of a dead body,
or was in a journey, and so could not keep exact touch with the Ordinance, was
excused from the exact observance of it: yet not so as to vary from it in
substance, but only in circumstance. The thing they must do; no liberty from
that: but they might alter the time, and do on the Fourteenth day of the Second
month, what was to have been done on the Fourteenth day of the First, v. 11. By
which instance it is fairly declared, as if writ with a beam of the Sun, that on
just necessity the most strictly commanded Ritual Institution is alterable in
circumstance, so there be no alteration of it in substance.

. 10. Touching this Institution the excellent Author of the Compassionate
Enquiry has made an Observation, Compass. Enquiry, part. 2. c. 5. page 156.
which I shall beg the favor to borrow from him; namely that the definition of
the most minute circumstances of this great Sacrament, and amongst other, that
they should eat the Passover with staves in their hands, shoes on their feet,
and their loins girt, is a plain intimation (and accordingly by them understood
and practiced) that they should eat it in the posture of standing, and though
it be not (...) expressed in the Law, that they should so eat it, or in the
History that they did so eat it, yet (as Mr. Pool in his Synopsis on the place
from Bochartus tells us) there are several things that persuade to think they
did so eat it (and if so they did, then to be sure they did so, either by a
positive order, or such bright signification of the divine pleasure in the case
as was Tantamount to a Precept.) As first that they were ordered to eat it in
all the circumstances of Travelers in haste upon a journey, with their loins
girded, shoes on their feet, staves in their hands, and expressly to eat it in
haste. Now men in that condition do not use to sit, but stand, at their
victuals, and have a kind of Proverb, which they use in the case, viz. Whilst
we stand we stay not. Secondly, Philo affirms them to have eaten standing.
Nevertheless (says that forenamed Author) it is well known, that when they
were come into the Land of Canaan to settled habitations, they are it sitting,
or lying, according to the usual custom of feasting in those Countries. And
this change continued all along till the times of our Savior, without any
reproof from God; and our Savior himself conforms to them herein, Christus
enim and Apostoli non stantes. sed discumbentes, in signum quietis quam
habebant, comederunt. Jun. and Pisc. ap. Poli Synopsin in loc.
and in the same posture eats the Passover with his Disciples. Now this (says
he further) is the rather observable, because whenas the posture enjoined by
God was symbolical of the haste in which they went out of Egypt, they in the
change aforesaid instituted a Ceremony, which was symbolical too, but quite of
another matter, namely of the rest and peace God had now given them in the good
Land of Canaan. And all this alteration made upon prudential considerations,
and the reason of the thing, without any warrant from God for their direction,
or check for the change.

. 11. Now things being so in the Church before our Saviors time, and in his
time, what wonder if the Church after his time, upon prudential grounds of
necessity, decency, expediency, or charity, have followed the former Churches
example, and either wholly left off, or in some circumstances varied from,
institutions of the ordering of Christ himself, or his Apostles? For where
grounds and reasons of things are the same or equal, it cannot be a wonder if
actings be the same or suitable. And thence proceeded the laying down of the
Feasts of Love; Eucharistiae Sacramentum, and in tempore victus, and omnibus
mandatum a Domino, etiam antelucanis coetibus, nec nisi de manu Praesidentium
sumimus. Tertul. de Corona. c. 3.
the Orders of Widows and of Deaconesses; thence also proceeded the change of
the Time and Manner of celebrating the Eucharist, from Evening and after
Supper, unto Morning and Fasting; and from lying along on beds, to sitting,
standing or kneeling at the receiving of it; and all this notwithstanding our
Saviors having said at the Institution of it, (...), this do, -- Quum Christus
tum Verbi, tum Sacramentorum Author his verbis, Hoc facite, certam veris
Pastoribus regulam sacrarum istarum actienum praescripscrit -- Theod. Beza.
Tract. Theolog. Vol. 3. ep. 8. p. 211.

Nam quis prudens simul ac Ecclesiasticae memoriae peritus dubitet perfundendi
ac mergendi corporis morem praecepto significari? Atqui introducto parvulorum
baptizandorum more; quin ne introducto quidem more, sed, quod semper factum
constat, cum mortis necessitate parvuli baptizarentur; quis sanus dubitet ita
baptizatos, ut sanitatis eorum ratio constaret? Nam and cum primum in Ecclesiis
baptizatum est, necesse fuit ab immersionis ritu, qui in aqua profluente, vel
stante usurpari poterat, discedi. Idque ratione idonea, si vere S. Petrus,
salutis rationem per Baptismum, non in sordium carnis lavacro, sed in sincera
Christianismi professione positam ostendit. Neque enim ad salutem interest, vel
decori in Ecclesia, vel sanitatis ac vitae rationem in administrando Baptismo,
nullam haberi. Herb. Thorndike, de ratione ac jure finiendi Controversias
Ecclesiae, p. 260. Deinde, cui dubium est Apostolos sacram temporum itemque
locorum and personarum rationem in externis ritibus summam habuisse? adeo
quidem ut cosdem ritus per omnia ubique custoditos fuisse non sit probabile,
sicut ex illa Irenaei ad Victorem insigni Epistola satis liquet. Quid quod
quaedam etiam illorum instituta veluti communes illas (...) ipsa necessitas
abolevit? Itaque quicquid ab Apostolis factitatum est, quod ad ritus attinet,
nec statim sine aliqua exceptione, pro regula sequendum existimo. Nec sane
miror veteres illos habita suorum temporum ratione, quaedam illis primis
detraxisse, quaedam adjecisse, quaedam denique immutasse. Theod. Beza. Tract.
Theolog. Vol. 3. ep. 8. ad Edmund Grindal. Ep. Land. p. 210. Etsi Baptismus
proprie significet immersionem, and in veteri Ecclesia per regiones Orientis
non adspersione, sed immersione Baptismus celebrabatur; tamen in regionibus
Christianismi frigidioribus adspersio loco immersionis recepta est, propter
infantes; quia charitas and necessitas dispensant de Ceremoniis, easque (...)
quadam temperant, quaetenus id salva (...) fieri potest. Keckerman. System.
Theolog. l. 3. c. 8. p. 451. Non possumus diffiteri primam institutionem
Baptismi immersione, non vero adspersione constitisse, quod diserte patet ex
cap. 6. Romans ver. 3, 4. Sed quia institutio Baptismi facta est in regione
calidiori, and quia tunc temporis potissimum baptizabantur adulti, ideo de hac
Ceremonia in regionibus frigidioribus, and hoc tempore, quo infantes plerunque,
rarissime adulti baptizantur, potuit Ecclesia dispensare: praesertim cum (...)
significationis maneat, and adspersione illa etiam sordes abluantur; cumque
etiam non homo propter Baptismum, sed Baptismus propter hominem factus sit, ut
propter necessitatem infantum charitas aliquid in ritu illo poterit mutare.
Praesertim cum (...) and (...) sit a verbo (...), quod est a (...) autem non
tantum immergo, sed and aspergo significat. Id. ib. p. 452. In baptismo aliud
est de Essentia, ut ablutio, juxta illud ad Ephesians. 5. ubi Apostolus baptismum
appellat Lavacrum Aquae: aliud vero accidentarium; nempe ut Ablutio hoc vel
illo modo fiat; Dominic. Sot. Distinct. 3. qu. un. Art. 7.


which can refer to nothing less than the whole performance, substance, and
circumstances and all. And thence, to be short, proceeded this change of
dipping in Baptism into Sprinkling; as also that of baptizing naked into
baptizing clothed, which was necessary to be, if the Church would have any
regard either to decency in the Baptism, or to Charity toward the Baptized;
and that notwithstanding the word in our Saviors precept for baptizing dig
signify to dip, and the way of the Jews baptizing in our Saviors time was by
dipping.

. 12. I answer Thirdly, that this supposed alteration in the Institution of
Baptism from Immersion to Aspersion, Affusion, or Pouring on of water (if we
grant it an alteration) is not repugnant to, but well enough comporting with,
the proper end, and primary design of baptism, as a Sacrament.

. 13. If there be any repugnancy in aspersion or affusion of water to the
Institution of Baptism, it is because it represents not the burial and
resurrection of Christ, and that conformity to him in both, which we undertake
and vow in baptism: a lively representation whereof is made by a total
immersion of the baptized into the water, and his emersion, after some short
stay in it, from under it: without which the Symbol is said to be spoiled, and
quite made another thing. But if that be all, things will do well enough, there
will be no cause of quarrel against the Churches way of baptizing. For the
Burial and Resurrection of Christ, and consequently our conformity to him in
both, See Sydenhams Christian Exercitation, chap. 15. p. 139. etc.
is as well represented by pouring of water on the baptized party, as by
putting him into it. For whilst water is poured upon the body, especially as
it lies along, it represents a burial, especially still as the manner of
burying is with us. For we do not dip the body into the earth, when we bury it,
but pour earth upon the body; neither was the body of Christ, when buried,
immersed into loose earth, but laid in a Sepulcher of stone hewn out of a Rock.
And if the pouring on of water represent a burial; then the appearing again
after, and from under that affusion, especially if of a larger quantity of
water, (as in some places of Christendom,) represents also a Resurrection, and
still the better, by how much the affusion is made of the larger quantity of
water. And the Symbol is not spoiled here, nor made any other thing than what
it should be. It was to represent our conformity with Christ in his burial and
resurrection, and that it does. Tertio quoque repetita immersio vel tinctio
typum triduana: domini sepulturae exprimit -- per quam Christo consepulti sumus
in baptismo and cum Christo resurreximus in fide, ut a peccatis abluti, in
sanctitate virtutum vivamus, imitando Christum. Can. Council. Provincial. Colon.
sub Hermanno celebrati anno 1536.
And accordingly in the Provincial Council of Colen, Tinction as well as
Immersion (i. e. Sprinkling as well as dipping) is indifferently spoken of as
expressive of a Type of Christ's three days burial, and our conformity to him
in that, and his resurrection.

. 14. And if the Representation be not altogether so effigiative, In immersione
expressius repraesentatur figura sepulturae Christi, sed in aliis modis
baptizandi repraesentatur aliquo modo, licet non ita express. Nam quocunque
modo fiat ablutio, corpus hominis vel aliqua pars ejus aquae supponitur, sic ut
corpus Christi sub terra fuit positum. Aquin. Sum. 3. q. 66. ad 2. art. 7. Res
ipsa baptismi est aspersio sanguinis Jesu Christi in remissionem omnium
peccatorum, and imputationem justitiae ipsius, quae velut oculis nostris
subjiciuntur adbibito externae aspersionis signo. Theod. Bez. Tract. Theolog.
vol. 1. de S. Sp. c. 4. p. 28. Haec de signo baptismi -- Res ejus in genere est
ipse Christus cum omnibus meritis ac beneficiis suis, speciatim vero hic
proponitur nobis remissio peccatorum in ipsius sanguine, sanctificatio in
ipsius spiritu. etc. Tilen. Syntag. De Baptismo, Disp. 1. These. 10. p. 887.
lively and full, as it is in immersion; yet so it be done in any reasonable
measure, so as that by a person duly instructed in the nature of that Sacrament
it may competently be discerned and apprehended, it is sufficient, (and the
design of no Sacramental action we have, that I can think of, is self-evident
without instruction) that representation being not the primary design and
principal end of Baptism as a Sacrament, but quite another thing. What may that
be? Even our washing and cleansing from the guilt of sin by the sprinkling of
the blood of Christ upon us: which Beza faith is Res ipsa Baptismi, the main or
only thing of Baptism, or the substantial part of it. And Mr. Attersol defining
this Sacrament, says, Baptism is the first Sacrament, wherein, by the outward
washing of the Body with water -- the inward cleansing of the Soul by the blood
of Christ is represented. Treat. of Sacr. l. 2. c. 1. p. 108.

. 15. Now this may as well be represented by any other way of ablution, Verum
quod naturam and germanam Baptismi proprietatem attingit, est emundatio a
peccatis. Vnde in Epistola ad Ephesios Christus dicitur Ecclesiam emundasse
lavacro aquae in verbo, and praedicamur in remissionem peccatorum baptizari.
Haec autem repurgation, sive mergamur, sive perfundamur, sive aspergamur, aut
quocunque modo aquis abluamur, in Baptism appositissime demonstratur. Pet.
Martyr in 1 Cor. 10. fol. 141. a He had said newly before, and in opposition to
which this is added: Scio veteres, quando per atatem and valetudinem licuit,
usos fuisse mersione, quae in veteri Testamento adumbrata fuit, cum Israelitae
mare transmitterent: non tamen est necessaria, neque (and mark it) de illa
praeceptum extat. Cum adhibetur, praeclaram habet significationem: quia cum
mergimur, cum Christo denotamur mori: quando emergimus, demonstramur cum illo
resurrexisse ad vitam aeternam. Caterum significatio istae non est, quemadmodum
diximus, necessaria. Id. ib. Ad hanc ablutionem Sacramentali signo denotandam
satis est aspersio aquae, aeque ac in aquam immersion, cum revera ablutionem ac
purificationem haec arguat aeque ac ista. Dr. Lightfoot. Horae Hebraic. in
Matthew. 3.6. page 49 -- Cum nec minus in aspersione, quam in immersione,
Sacramenti analogia serv^tur. Tilen. Disp. 1. de Baptismo. These. 15. --
Praesertim cum (...) significationis maneat, and adspersione illa sordes
abluantur -- Keckerman. System. Theol. l. 3. c. 8. p. 452.
though it be but that of Aspersion, as by Immersion. Whence pertinently says
Peter Martyr to the purpose. As to what concerns the nature and genuine
property of Baptism, that is the cleansing from sins. Whence in the Epistle to
the Ephesians, Christ is said to have cleansed the Church by the washing of
water with the word: and we are preached to be baptized into the remission of
sins. But this cleansing, whether we be dipped, or have water poured, or
sprinkled on us, or whatever way we are washed with water, is most appositely
shown in Baptism. So he: and to the same purpose speaks our Learned Doctor
Lightfoot, and Tilenus also.

. 16. Nay perhaps somewhat better may it be represented by some other way of
baptizing than by Immersion. For as the Apostle says, (Heb. 9.22.) almost all
things are by the Law purged with blood, and without shedding of blood is no
remission. And indeed in the 19th. Verse before, he had said, that when Moses
had spoken (...), all, or the whole Commandment, every Precept, as we read it,
to all the People according to the Law, he took the blood of Calves, and of
Goats, with water, and scarlet wool, and hyssop, and sprinkled both the book,
and all the People --. Moreover (v. 21.) he sprinkled with the blood both the
Tabernacle, and all the Vessels of Ministry. (which I humbly conceive was done
in order to the purifying them from all legal pollution, that might be adherent
to them, or attracted by them; and consecrating them to that purity which
becomes the service of God.) And as alluding to this sprinkling of that blood,
the blood of Jesus Christ (which is by Jesus Christ himself called the blood of
the New Testament, because by this blood the New Testament was dedicated, as
the old one was by the blood of Calves and Goats) is by the Apostle called (
Heb. 12.24.) (...), the blood of sprinkling. And as having respect to our
purgation, and sanctification by that blood, St. Peter (1 Pet. 1.2.) writes to
Believers in Christ, under the title of Persons Elect according to the
foreknowledge of God the Father, through sanctification of the spirit unto
obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Christ: which, as that beloved bosom
Disciple of Christ, St. John, tells us, cleanses us from all sin, (1 John
1.7.) Whence again he tells us ( Rev. 1.5.) of Christ's having loved us, and
washed us from our sins in his own Blood. But now never is the blood of Christ,
which is several times called the blood of sprinkling (to which expression a
fair allusion is made by baptismal sprinkling, Cui ritui (sc. adspersioni)
favet and vox (...), id est, adspersionis, quae de Sanguine Christi ad
peccatorum nostrorum abolitionem usurpatur, Heb. 9.14. Walaeus, Synops. pur.
Theolog. Disp. 44. These. 19. p. 606.
and especially being that by that sprinkling of water on our Bodies is
peculiarly designed a representation of that which is done by the blood of
Christ to both our Bodies and Souls, even the cleansing them from all sin) I
say, never is the blood of Christ called the blood of dipping; nor are we ever
said to be dipped into Christ's blood, only to be washed and cleansed with it.

. 17. Now the primary design of this Sacrament being to signify our washing
from sin by virtue of the shedding of Christ's blood; and our conformity with
Christ in his Burial and Resurrection being but the secondary; who sees not how
unfitting it is for the primary to give way to the secondary; and that what
more directly signifies the primary, should be omitted, that what signifies the
secondary, may be performed: especially when that which signifies the primary
signifies the secondary also; sufficiently, if not altogether so fully. And not
that only, but something more too. For the pouring out and sprinkling of the
baptismal water upon us, represents not only God's applying of Christ's blood
shed to us, for our justification, but also Christ's shedding of his own blood
for us, that thereby we might be justified; Ac simul ut ex ei^quae
consummabantur in Christo, cognosceremus, post aquae lavacrum, de coelestibus
portis sanctum in nos Spiritum involare, and coelestis nos gratiae unctione
perfundi. D. Hilar. in Matthew. can. 2. p. 253.
and besides that the effusion of the spirit of grace, and infusion of the
grace of the spirit on us, and into us, for our sanctification here, in order
to our glorification hereafter: which effusions I cannot see how they are any
way representable by an immersion into water.

. 18. Well then, not only our washing from sin by the blood of Christ, the
signification of which is the primary design of Baptism as a Sacrament, being
represented by affusion, or conspersion of water, but also the burial and
resurrection of Christ, and our conformity to him in both, which is a secondary
design of it, it follows that no violation is in this respect done to the
Institution of Christ by this alteration of no more but an accidental or
circumstantial Rite in it, Applicatio aquae necessario fuit de essentia
Baptismi: ast applicatio hoc vel illo modo circumstantiam sonat. Dr. Lightfoot.
Hor. Hebra. in Matthew. 3.6. p. 50.
whereby conspersion, affusion, or a partial mersation is put for a total
immersion: the substance of the Sacrament not being varied by a variation of
what is but accidental in it. Ea quae sunt per accidens, non variant
substantiam rei. Per se autem requiritur corporalis ablutio per aquam: unde and
Baptismus lavacrum nominatur secundum illud Ephesians. 5. Mundans came lavacro aquae
in verbo vitae. Sed quod ablutio fiat hoc vel illo modo, accidit Baptismo. Et
ideo talis diversitas non tollit unitatem Baptismi. Aquin. Sum. 3. q. 66. art.
7. ad 1. Nec ad lavacrum necessario requiritur immersio sub aquam. -- Christi
igitur mandatum est, ut in baptismo fiat purificatio seu ablutio per lavacrum
aquae. Quo vero modo ablutio illa fieri debeat, sive mergendo, tingendo,
perfundendo, sive aspergendo, Christus non praescripsit. Nulla igitur in hac re
mutatio fit in Substantialibus Baptismi. Chemnitii Exam. Council. Trid. part. 2.
page 122. Pro ipsa quidem Baptismi Ceremonia quatenus nobis a Christo tradi^a
est, centies potius ad mortem digladiandum, quam ut eam nobis eripi sinamus.
Sed quum in aquae symbolo testimonium habemus tam ablutionis nostrae, quam
novae vitae: quum in aqua velut in speculo sanguinem nobis suum Christus
repraesentat ut munditiem inde nostram petamus; quum docet nos spiritu suo
refingi, ut mortui peccato justitiae vivamus, nihil qued ad Baptismi
Substantiam faciat, deesse nobis certum est. Quare ab initio libere sibi
permisit Ecclesia, extra hanc substantiam, ritus habere paulum dissimiles. Nam
alii ter, alii autem ^emel tantum mergebant. -- Calvin. in Act. Apost. 8.38. p.
244. At enim, inquiunt, jubemur facere quod fecit Dominus; concedo, sed ita ut
in illis quae facienda praecepit, primariam consilii ipsius intentionem, ut
loquuntur, ob oculos semper habeamus, formam autem non temere mutemus, (imo ne
mutemus quidem ullo modo, si praecise mandata sit) nec tamen quod per se non
est necessarium amplius quam par sit, urgeamus. Jussit nos Christus baptizari,
quo verbo certum est significari immersionem. Number igitur male baptizantur, qui
aqua tantum injecta asperguntur? Imo quod est in illa action mere substantiale
(nempe aquae abiutio) recte observatum est ab Ecclesia. Immersio vero pro
aetatis and regionum condition vel retenta est, vel in simplicem aspersionem
nulla cum baptismi imminutione quodammado commutata. Theod. Beza, Tractat.
Theolog. Vol. 3. Ep. 2. page 195, Praeterea non est par ratio, abluendi
rationem mutare, ac totum simul auferre. Quia in iis qui asperguntur, vel
persunduntur, elementum Baptismi, nimirum aqua, conservatur, and suam habet
significationem. P. Martyr, Com. in Romans 10. fol. 141. a -- In Baptismi
administratione alia sunt aut Substantialia, aut Ceremonialia, aut
Accidentalia. Substantialia sunt. Aqua, and illius applicatio, etc.
Ceremonialia sunt reliqua. Ac Substantialia quidem neque possunt, neque debent
praetermitti, vel immutari. At Ceremonialia possunt immutari, etc. Lamb.
Danaeus Isagog. Christ. pars 4. de Sacramentis, c. 29. p. 521. Quamvis autem
immersio usitatior olim fuerit, praesertim in Judaea and aliis regionibus
calidioribus, quam aspersio; tamen cum neque ad baptismi substantiam pertineat
haec circumstantia; nec minus in aspersione, quam in immersiono sacramenti
analogia servetur, etc. Tilen. Disp. 1. de Baptismo These. 15. page 886. Vtrum
autem semel aut ter immergatur, aut si aqua superinfundatur tertio, non variat
Baptismi Essentiam. Agend. Eccles. Moguntinens. fol. 23.


. 19. And if the Institution of Christ do signify a putting of the whole Party
to be baptized under the Water by the Baptizer, (which I apprehend to be the
Anabaptists notion of the word:) and that Institution be violated unless that
order be exactly observed, (and if not, why do they quarrel us?) then the
Anabaptists are guilty of the same thing that they charge us withal. For they
(in strictness of speaking according to this notion of baptizing) never baptize
any at all agreeably to the Institution of Christ. For as they baptize no
Infants at all, which are the most capable subjects of such baptization: so
they baptize no Men, no not even the most adult, so. They do not take Men and
Women that are all out of the Water, and so immerse them wholly into it: but of
Persons that are already in part in the Water, (it may be up to the middle)
they immerse the rest which as yet is not in it. And so the work is divided
betwixt the Baptizer and the Baptized: the Baptized first dipping one half of
himself, by going so deep into the water, and then the Baptizer dipping the
other half (...) possibly might be consistent with Decency of baptizing,
utroque modo baptizari, tamen convenientius, and aptius, and securius est
baptizare immergendo: and si satis est de aqua, totum corpus debet demergi: si
parum, sufficit si sit tantum de aqua, quod immergi possit pars principalis,
etc. Bonavent. lib. 4. did. 3. Art. 2. q. 2. Scias tamen quod licet per
aspersionem vel effusionem aquae possit fieri baptismus, ubi esset talis
consuerudo; laudabilior tamen est consuerudo, ut fiat per immersionem. Lynwood.
Constit. l. 3. c. de Baptismo and ejus effectu. Vas. illud. in Constit. Edmundi.
and safety to the Baptized.

. 3. But I must also be so just as to say, (and I hope too, that I have made it
to appear) that there is much to be said for the way that ye oppose. Ye see it
to be repugnant neither to the Word of Institution, but lying within the circle
of its comprehension; nor yet to the Nature of that Sacrament, but eminently
expressing the Primary Design of it, and competently the Secondary. Ye see it
now practiced in most Churches of the world, and may trace its practice through
all former Ages of the Church. Ye neither find it contradicted by any
Scripture, but countenanced by many; nor condemned by any Council, but left
uncensured by all. Among all the ancient Catalogues of Heresies, ye find not
the Rhantists (as you are pleased to name us) reckoned for any; nor any
Separation made from any Community on account of their being such. Ye find none
of the ancient Fathers disputing against it for its unlawfulness, nor
dissuading from it upon account of its insufficiency. Nor of the many baptized
by Sprinkling in their Sickness, do ye find any, on either of those accounts,
baptized by Dipping after their recovery. Ye find those learned and judicious
Reformers, who threw erroneous Doctrines and Superstitious Practices out of the
Church, continuing this Doctrine, and confirming this Practice in it. And ye
see it still maintained and defended by Persons of greatest eminency both for
Learning and for Judgment in the Reformed Churches. In the Primitive Times the
same effects were observed to be wrought on Persons baptized in Sickness and in
health: Non sicut scorpii and serpents, etc. D. Cyprian. l. 4. ep. 7.
so at this day may ye observe Persons baptized by Sprinkling, as richly
furnished with all spiritual graces as any now, you can tell us of, baptized by
Dipping: In Sacramentis salutaribus, necessitate cogente and deo indulgentiam
suam largiente, totum credentibus conserunt divina compendia. Id. ib.
the great God, that is above means, and is not tied to means, working the like
effect by little as by great means; and as fully and effectually communicating
the graces of baptism by a few drops, as by a whole ocean. It is a way of
kindness to the weak, of mercy to the sick, and of safety to all. It is a way
agreeing with the conditions of all Times, and with the tempers of all seasons.
It suits with the Conveniences of all countries, and with the Necessities of
all places. It complies with the State of all Persons, and with the
Constitution of all Ages. It provides for the Modesties of the bashful, and
prevents unchastities in the Lustful. In a word it is the way which most
Churches in the world, after many hundred years trial of dipping, have at
length in their practice and consequently in their judgments, preferred before
it, having generally laid that down, and as generally taken this up.

. 4. O why then should you persist in a contrariety to that, which is not
contrariant to the word of Institution? Why should you impugn that, which is
not repugnant to the nature of the Sacrament? Why should you quarrel that,
which agrees with the practice of the Catholic Church? Why should you
contradict that, which is not contradicted by any Text of the Sacred
Scriptures? Why should you condemn that, which never yet fell under the Censure
of any Orthodox Council? Why should that be unlawful with you, whose lawfulness
was never questioned by the ancient Fathers? Why should that be a Nullity with
you, which was ever a Reality amongst the Primitive Believers? Why should any
on that account be rebaptized by you, on which never any was rebaptized in any
Community of Catholic Professors? Why should that be turned out of the Church
by you, which was deliberately continued in it by our pious, learned and
judicious Reformers? Why should that be made a Mockery of by you, which has
been sealed by the communication of the graces of Gods Spirit? Why should the
Sentiment of your handful of illegal Conventicles, that can no more pretend to
extraordinary Inspiration than any other Community of Christians, be preferred
before the judgment of so many legally constituted national Churches? Why
should you retrench that liberty which has been estated on the Church of
Christ, by him that was the Lawgiver to it? Why should you deprive weak,
sickly, dying creatures of the benefit of that Mercy, which has been indulged
to them by God the Creator of them? Must no consideration be had of Countries
and Places? no respect to Times and Seasons? no regard to Persons and
Conditions? but your Opinion and Practice be made a Rule and a Measure
universally to all, and in spite of all, not only inconveniences, but even
incapacities, and necessities too? And must all the Churches in the world, and
all the Christians in the world, that consent not to, and concur not with you
therein, be unchurched and unchristned too for this? Is this cause enough for
you to separate your selves from the acknowledgedly best reformed Church upon
earth? Consider, I beseech you, your ways, with the sad consequents of them.

. 5. O how great is the Guilt you contract upon your selves by your running
into, and continuing in a Schism, upon this account: even the guilt of being
carnal and sensual, according to 1 Cor. 3.4. Jude v. 19.
St. Paul, and St. Jude; the guilt of walking contrary both to Hanc Ecclesiae
unitatem qui non tenet, tenere se fidem credit? D. Cyprian. de Unit. Eccles.
Faith and Quam vero dilectionem custodit and cogitat, qui discordiae furore
vesanus Ecclesiam scindit, pacem turbat, charitatem dissipat? D. Cypr. de Unit.
Eccles.
charity according to St. Cyprian; the guilt of a crime as bad as (...). D.
Chrysostom. in ep. ad Ephesians. Ed. Savil. p. 823.
heresy, according to St. Chrysostom; as ill as (...). Dionys. ap. Eusebius. l.
6. c. (...). Pejus hoc crimen est quam quod admisisset lapsi videntur. D. Cypr.
de Unit. Eccles.
Idolatry and Quod in Sacrilegos and parricidam non fecerat, in Schismaticis
fecit. Optat. l. 1. p. 25.
Sacrilege, according to Dionysius, Cyprian, and Optatus; which is Apparet
Antichristos omnes esse quos constet a charitate atque ab unitate Ecclesiae
recessisse. Optat. l. 1. p. 25. Ab Ecclesia separatus, haereticus est, and
Antichristus. Prosper. de Prom. and Praed. implend. c. 5.
Antichristianism, and (...). D. Ignat. ep. ad Smyrn.
Devil-worshipping, according to Optatus, Prosper, and St. Ignatius; a crime so
great Non esse quicquam gravius Sacril gio Schismatis. S. Aug. contr. Parmen.
l. 2. 2.
as scarce has any greater than it self, according to St. Aug. not expiable
even by Tales etsi occisi in confessione nominis fuerint, macula ista nec
sanguine abluitur, inexpiabilis and gravis culpa discordiae nec passione
purgatur. D. Cyprian. de Unit. Eccles. See Dr. Ham. of Schism. c. 1. s. 6.
where these, and several more Sentences out of the Fathers to the same purpose,
are collected.
Martyrdom to him that continues in, and has not repented of, and returned
from it, according to St. Cyprian.

. 6. Again, how great is the Mischief that your Schism either has actually
attending on it, or has a natural tendency unto, and which, without the
intervention of a divine providence, is likely to be consequent unto it. You
cut your selves off from Union with the Church, and from those blessed
advantages of its prayers and Sacraments; and from all those salvifick
influences, which from the Head are by orderly communication derived to all
Members in union with it. You out your selves of its protection; and all
assistances, that as Members of the same Body with it, you might not only in
charity expect, but in justice claim from it. And you expose your selves to
infinite Temptations to forsake the Truth, and to embrace Error. It Is seldom
known but that those that begin in Schism, do end in Heresy. And your Socinian
Brethren might give you a sad document hereof, if no other did.

. 7. And 'twere well for the Church that the Mischief went no further than so.
But, Gangrene like, the Sore spreads. You are impatient of being what you are
only amongst your selves: but are restless to bring in others to your party;
and have your Emissaries abroad whom you send out, by preaching and disputing
to bring in Profelytes; and so involve them in the same guilts, deprive them of
the same advantages, and expose them to the same Temptations with your selves.

. 8. And yet the Mischief stays not here, but extends it self to a greater
latitude. Your Schism, like other Divisions in Christianity, disparages the
Christian Religion, as a way unable to give any solid bottom whereon to fix:
since the Professors of it are not at unity amongst themselves, but slit into
infinite Divisions and Parties, so that Turks, Jews, and Pagans are scandalized
at it, and on that account refuse to embrace it. It discredits particularly the
English Churches Reformation as insufficient, and needing to be new reformed:
so that all turnings from Popery are to no purpose, without still more turning,
even till they come at Anabaptistry: where yet we see there is no stay; but a
further turning still, even from thence to Quakery, and thence round to Popery
again. It weakens the Reformed Interest, and exposes it to be made a Prey to
the Popish Faction, opening another Gap for that Potent and Politic Enemy to
break in at: who when he comes, as he will be so strong, as to bear down all
before him, so he will be so wise, as to leave none to stand besides him. And
as ye will not stand, if we fall; so will ye not escape, if we be destroyed,
but blaze in the same fires, that burn us. To insist no further on this Head of
Discourse, it tends to the ruin of the Kingdom. For Schisms in the Church are
naturally productive of Factions in the State; (as we have, God knows,
sufficiently learnt by our too late, and too sad experience hereof!) and
Divisions at home are invitations to an Invasion from abroad; and even court
its coming. And God grant that neither we, nor you, may ever live to find this
verified in the effect of it. If ever it should, the conquering Sword will know
no difference betwixt Guelph and Gibeline, but harass, ravage, and ruin all.

. 9. And lastly, O how little, or rather no cause at all have you, by your
Schism to draw, either on your selves that Guilt, or on your selves and others
this Mischief?

. 10. If it were demonstrable that in this Point we were in an Error; yet sure
an Error in a Church so nobly reformed as ours is, in so little a matter, as a
small variation in the circumstance of an Institution, and upon Reasons of
great prudence, high charity, and urgent necessity, should not be a sufficient
ground for you to make a Separation from its Society and Communion, and turn
Schismatics. Would ye consult Mr. Hildersham, Lect. 35. on Joh. 4.
a Man sometime the darling of Dissenters from the Church of England, he would
teach you, that those Assemblies, that enjoy the Word and Doctrine of
Salvation, though they have many corruptions remaining in them, are to be
acknowledged the true Churches of God, and such as none of the Faithful may
make Separation from. And he would prove what he taught by the Example of our
Savior himself communicating with the Jews in the then service of God,
notwithstanding all the corruptions that then were both in the Priests, and
People, and Worship.

. 11. But much less is it so, when it is so far from being demonstrable that we
are in an Error, that it is rather demonstrable that we are in the Truth. Poor
I, not worthy to be a hewer of Wood, or a drawer of Water for the Sanctuary of
my God, with my weak Reason and scanty Reading, short Memory and few Books,
little Health and less leisure, have in these Papers made it disputable at
least, whether we be in any Error, or no: if I have not solidly proved it, that
we are in none. Another, probably, that were furnished in better measure with
those things that I want, might put it beyond dispute. And who now, that were
wise, would run themselves upon such a dangerous Rock as Schism is, in a Point
of so nice and thin a speculation as this? (but the mode of applying the
Baptismal water) and when so much may be said on the adverse side, as may on
this.

. 12. But least of all is it so, when, be we never so much in an Error, you are
not obliged to communicate with us in our Error. For however erroneously we
baptize our own People, you are not tied up by us to that way of baptizing.
Whoever of you wants baptism for himself, or for any of his, may have it
performed among us by Dipping. And I do believe, that never any, who desired,
was denied to be so baptized, by any Minister of the Church of England.

. 13. Wherefore, since ye were initiated into Christianity among us, and were
of us, before ye went out from us, I will say to you, as Mr. Brightman, Rev.
3.20.
a Man sometime of great esteem among the Men of your way, said to some that
forsook the Communion of this Church in his time, Redite ad Ecclesiam, qua vos
genuit and aluit, Return to the Church that bred and brought you up: and do not
obstinately continue in that pernicious way of Separation from it. If ye must
be separating, let it be from the company of Schismatical Congregations: and
join your selves to the Society of Catholic Christians. Help to heal the
breach you have made in the Church, by returning to Unity with that Society
from whose community ye brake off; and strengthen those Hands by your
Conjunction, which ye have weakened by your Separation.

. 14. I shall conclude with a good wish, to, and for you. God grant you a right
understanding in this, and all other concerns of Christianity; and especially
in those wherein you dissent from the Church of England: that so you may, with
full Conviction of Judgment, and a clear Satisfaction of Conscience, Reunite
with it again. To this, I think, all Lovers of Truth, and Peace, will say,
Amen: and Lord Jesus, say thou Amen to it also. Amen, and Amen.

FINIS.
A CATALOGUE of BOOKS printed for, and sold by Robert Pawlet at the Sign of the
Bible in Chancery Lane near Fleetstreet.
PRactical Christianity, or an Account of the Holiness which the Gospel
enjoins; with the Motives to it, and the Remedies it proposes against
Temptations, with a Prayer concluding each distinct Head.

Sermons preached by that eminent Divine Henry Hammond, Dr. in Divinity, in
large Folio, to bind with his other Works.

The Golden Remains of that ever memorable Mr. John Hales of Eaton College,
etc. The second Impression with many Additions not before published.

Episcopacy as established by Law in England, not prejudicial to Regal Power,
written by the command of the late King Charles, by Robert Sanderson, late Lord
Bishop of Lincoln.

A Collection of Articles, Injunctions, Canons, Orders, Ordinances and
Constitutions Ecclesiastical, and other public Records of the Church of
England, with a learned Preface: by Anthony Sparrow Lord Bishop of Norwich.

A Rationale on the Book of Common Prayer of the Church of England, with his
Caution to his Diocese against false Doctrines, by Anthony Sparrow, Lord Bishop
of Norwich.

Whole Duty of Man laid down in a plain familiar way for the use of all, but
especially the meanest Reader: Necessary for all Families. With private
Devotions on several Occasions.

Gentleman's Calling, written by the Author of the Whole Duty of Man.

The Causes of the Decay of Christian Piety; or an impartial Survey of the
Ruins of Christian Religion, undermined by unchristian Practice, by the Author
of the whole Duty of Man.

A Scholastical History of the Canon of Holy Scripture, or the certain and
indubitable Books thereof, as they are received in the Church of England, by
Dr. Cousin Lord Bishop of Durham.

An Historical Vindication of the Church of England, as it stands separated
from the Roman, etc. by Sir Roger Twisden Baronet.

Mr. Chillingsworth's Reasons against Popery, persuading his Friend to turn to
his Mother the Church of England, from the Church of Rome.

The Book of Homilies appointed to be read in Churches.

Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical.

Divine Breathings, or, a Pious Soul thirsting after Christ in an Hundred
excellent Meditations.

Hugo Grotius de Rebus Belgicis, or, the Annals and History of the Low Country
Wars, in English.

A Treatise of English Particles: showing much of the variety of their
significations and uses in English, and how to render them into Latin,
according to the propriety and elegancy of that Language, with a Praxis upon
the same; by William Walker, B. D. School master of Grantham.

The Royal Grammar, commonly called Lillies Grammar explained, opening the
meaning of the Rules, with great plainness to the understanding of Children of
the meanest capacity; with choice observations on the same, from the best
Authors by William Walker, B. D. Author of the Treatise of English Particles.

A Catalogue of all the Parliaments or reputed Parliaments from the Year 1640.

A Narrative of some passages, in, or relating to the long Parliament, by a
Person of Honor.

Nemesius, Nature of Man in English, by George Withers, Gent.

Inconveniences of Toleration.

Toleration intolerable.

A Letter about Comprehension.

A Thanksgiving Sermon, preached before the King by J. Dolbin, D. D. Dean of
Westminster.

Bishop Brownrigs Sermons on Gunpowder Treason.

A Narrative of the burning of London, 1666. with an Account of the Losses, and
a most remarkable parallel betwixt it and MOSCO both as to the Plague and Fire.

The Nuns Complaints against the Friars, being the Charge given in the Court of
France by the Nuns of St. Katharines near Provence, against the Father Friars,
their Confessors; showing their abuses in their allowance of undecent Books,
the Love Letters, and Marriages of the Friars and Nuns. Their Frolicks and
Entertainments, etc. several times printed in French, and now faithfully done
into English.

Iter Lusitanicum, or, The Portugal Voyage, with what memorable passages
intervened at the Shipping and Transportation of her Sacred Majesty, Katharine,
Queen of Great Britain from Lisbon to England, by Dr. Samuel Hind.

A Charge given by the most eminent and learned Sir Francis Bacon, at a
Sessions for the Verge, declaring the Jurisdiction thereof, and the Offenses
herein inquirable, as well by the Common Law, as by several Statutes.

Mr. Whites learned Tractates of the Laws of England.

Graphice, or, the Use of Pen and Pencil in Designing, Drawing and Painting, by
Sir William Sanderson Knight.

Pia Desideria, viz. Gemitus Animae Poenitentis, Vota Animae Sanctae, suspira
Animae Amantis. Hermanno Hugo Author.

Collection of Rules and Orders now used in Chancery, etc.

Petavius's History of the World.

Military and Marine Discipline, viz. The exercise of Horse and Foot, with Sir
Francis Veers directions; and a Treatise of Invasion, by Capt. Tho. Venn; the
fortifying Towns with the ways of defending, and offending the same, by the
learned Mathematician Andr. Tacquet; also Sir Samuel Morelands Method of
delineating all manner of Fortifications; together with the Art of Founding
great Ordnance, the making Gunpowder, taking Heights and Distances, with the
manner of Fire works.

Thalia Bediviva: The Pass-Times and Diversions of a Country-Muse, in Choice
Poems on several Occasions, by Henry Vaughan, Silurist: With some learned
Remains of the Eminent Eugenius Philalethes: Never made Public till now.

All sorts of Law Books.


