AN Antichristian Conspiracy DETECTED, AND Satan's Champion DEFEATED: Being a
Reply to an Envious and Scurrilous Libel, without any Name to it, CALLED, WORK
for a COOPER.

Being also a Vindication of my Book, entitled, The Antiquity of the Quakers;
From the Base Insinuations, False Doctrine and False Charge therein contained
against me, my Book, and against God's People called QUAKERS in general.

By me Thomas Win.

Printed in the Year 1679.

Isa. 51.22, 23. Thus says the Lord, the Lord and thy God, that pleads the
Cause of his people; Behold I have taken out of thy hand the Cup of Trembling,
even the Dregs of the Cup of my Fury, thou shall no more drink it again. But I
will put it into the hand of them that afflict thee; which have said to thy
Soul, Bow down, that we may go over; and thou have laid thy Body as the Ground,
and as the Street to them that went over.

Micah. 3.5. Thus says the Lord concerning the Prophets that make my People to
Err, that bite with their Teeth, and cry Peace, and he that puts not into
their Mouths, they even prepare War against him.

Matthew. 10.25. It is enough for the Disciple that he be as his Master, and the
Servant as his Lord; if they have called the Master of the House Beelzebub, how
much more shall they call them of his Household?

1 Cor. 1.27. But God has chosen the Foolish Things of this World to confound
the Wise; and God has chosen the Weak Things of the World to confound the
Things that are Mighty.

TO THE READER
Courteous Reader;
SInce it has fallen to my Lot, for my love to be requited with Hatred; its my
satisfaction that I gave no Cause, but that in Obedience to divine Requirings I
put my Candle on a Candlestick, and my Talent (although but small) to the Bank;
but what Reception into the World it has had, has been such as was foretold
by my dear Lord and Master Jesus Christ, who said to his Disciples, They shall
speak all manner of Evil against you falsely for my Names sake; and its so now
truly come to pass in our day, as in this particular may plainly appear in my
following Reply; wherein I have considered what I conceived to have any seeming
weight against my Book, and in general have vindicated my Book, my Friends, and
the glorious Truth which we profess, from my Adversary's false Charge, who has
dealt with me as the Spanish Inquisitors did by the Protestants, they clothed
them in their Sambenitoes, viz. Garments upon which are painted the shapes of
Devils, that the Dogs might the sooner fasten on them and worry them; even so
has he, as may be seen by the Picture he has put to front his Libel; if he
excuse himself, that he crowned it with a Windmil, which might stave them off;
yet that he was not altogether without a Pattern, is very evident; for if we
look back but until the time of our Master Christ Jesus his Appearance in the
Flesh, we may find how they mocked him, John 19.2. you may see how they plated
a Crown of Thorns, and put it upon his Head; and Pilate (as a fit President for
the Libeller) said, Behold the Man! thus all who are moderate may see how his
Tribe used our dear Lord himself; therefore I may conclude, he has dealt with
me but in imitation of them, and has only showed, that he has not degenerated
from the Nature of his Predecessors; for in imitation of his Patrons, he
blazens it with a Whip and Whipping Post in it, as thou may see in the
second page of his Libel, which were enough of it self to manifest him to all
men to be neither a Christian, nor true Protestant; for Christ would not have
Fire come down from Heaven to destroy Enemies, much less treat his Friends with
such Cruelty, who in pure Love visited the Children of Men, to turn them from
their Evil Ways. My Adversary in this his ungodly Work does not resemble
CHRIST and his FOLLOWERS, but is BONNER and GARDNER like; which had he been in
their time, could hardly have wanted an Office: And certain it is, that this
was not the Method of the true Protestant Reformers; he might then well conceal
his Name, when he would concern himself in so detestable a piece of Absurdity,
since that most of his Matter was Lies made at home, and his Book a Bell to
Ring them abroad; and it will neither in this World, nor that to come, turn to
his Credit, neither to the Priests, nor his other Benefactors, who gathered him
Money to Print it; for at the great Tribunal, Christ Jesus will not fear to
tell them, It was WORK of INIQUITY; for said he, Inasmuch as ye have done it to
one of the least of these my Brethren, ye have done it unto me.

And whereas there is a great deal of Dirt in his Book, which he charge on
Friends as Matter of Fact, which I have not in particular Replied to, they
being Abominable Lies and Slanders; as in page 6. he says, They can, like the
Blasphemous Muggleton, fix Woes or Joys, a Blessing or a Curse Everlastingly
to all Eternity. And in page twelve, among a great many horrid Lies, he tells
of some did endeavor to obtrude, that they could foretell to a Minute the Last
and Dreadful Day of Judgment; and could heal more Diseases than All the World
could possibly need Help for: with very many more Wicked Lies up and down his
Book, which neither he, nor the Most Envious of our Adversaries, can ever prove
against any TRUE QUAKER.

And as for his calling my Friends Vile Wretches and Coxcombs, and many more
ill Names, and me Charon and Ferryman of Hell, and much more Ill Language, I
pass by, knowing that God will rebuke him, and plead the Cause of the Innocent,
therefore I have kept close to what was Matter of Doctrine in it, hoping that
to the meanest Capacity, who will be single, that I have cleared my Self, my
Book, God's Truth and People; and manifested his to be grounded on a Foundation
that is Sandy, and will not stand when our God shall make a full Examine of the
Matter contained in it.

Thomas Win.

An Antichristian Conspiracy Detected, and Satan's Champion Defeated.
CHAP. I. The Introduction of Quaking and Trembling.
THE blessed Truth of God, together with the true Love I bore to my Native
Country North- Wales, induced me to Salute them with the Book, Entitled, The
Antiquity of the Quakers. And after its Publication, for a whole Year, I was
often told sometimes of one Priest Answering it, and sometimes of another; but
at last comes out one, not subscribed by any, called, Work for a Cooper, which
by Gods assistance I now take in hand, and w ll discover to the moderate Reader
of what quality soever he be, that this Man has not done like a Man of God at
all, which certainly had becom'd him to do, especially, being he seems to make
himself to personate so great a Society of People, and to be the Mouth of their
Priests. But instead of so doing, he has not come much short of the worst of
men that ever writ against us, as will appear by his scurrillity, Perversion of
my Words, and of Scripture also, his many Lies and Slanders, Detractions and
unjust Reflections, both upon me and the whole Body of Gods People, called
Quakers, in general.

First, after he has bestowed on me and my Friends, about three or four pages
of abusive Reflection, and casting of Dirt at us, he cul'd out two Testimonies
out of about thirty, which I brought to prove Quaking and Trembling, not to be
Novel among Gods People; and how he undertakes to confute me in those two, you
shall hear anon: But before I make my Reply, I think it convenient to acquaint
my Reader how I came to join my self to those poor despised and abused People
of God called Quakers.

I was Baptized and brought up a Protestant, and having learned the Articles of
their Faith, and the Prayers of the Church, I thought all was well, until I
was about fifteen Years old, and then soon after it happened that I could not
find any such Church as I was baptized into; the Wolf was got among them, who
tore many of them to pieces, and the rest fled: So that go to what Church I
would, I could find neither Bishop, Doctor, Prebend, Vicar nor Curat, to look
after my Soul (viz.) not one of my Protestant Instructers, they were all fled
and left me to the mercy of the Wolf that had worried them; and for many Years
together there were none of them so much as visited me, nor sent me so much as
an Epistle or Collect, nor any comfort or hopes.

But before I was twenty Years of Age I was amazed and astonished to see what
was come to pass, and began to reflect upon my self, and to think what would
become of my poor Soul, For those who pretended to be my guides to Heaven were
fled, and I knew not the way. And my Brethren the Protestants without any more
ado, both great and small, went to hear the Hirelings that were then set up,
unless it were here and there one, and most of these men of low degree, such as
they could get nothing off; and when I saw it thus come to pass, I went also
for company, but found their great matter was to Exclaim against the
Protestants, which hit me upon the Sore: but when I came to inquire strictly
after them, I found they did as the Protestants had done before them, as to
that part called Interest, they had their Peepers into every ones Field, lest
any should give them a little Sheaf for a great one, and were excellently
skilled in Arithmetic; for they could make their Parishoners by a Figure they
then had, and the Priests now have: If there were but five or six Geese
belonging to a House, make them pass for Ten, urging as the Libeller does, page
26, 27. That it was of as much Right to them, as the other five were to the
Owner: They had also the same way for the Piggs, and were as well skilled for
Easter-Reckonings and Midsummer-Dues, as they call them, I thought these did
not quadrate well with those, nor can it be Gospel in the present ones; by this
time I began to question whether any were then to be found in the right or not:
For my Instructers were fled, and the others at best were but miserable
Comforters; for turn to the Right hand or Left I saw Iniquity abound, and then
I began to recollect my self, and consider what my Godfathers and Godmothers
(so called) had promised and vowed for me in my Baptism, as they called it,
(viz.) That I should forsake the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and
Vanities of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh: This
indeed was to forsake all Sin; but how to perform I could not tell, for I had
lost my Guides that so taught: however I inquired of others, whether this might
be performed or not, No, no, said they, none can ever be freed from Sin in this
Life. Then might I well say, it was unreasonable that any should be bound, and
so solemnly as with a Vow to do that which neither they, nor I, nor none in the
World could do. I asked then, Whether any could keep the Christian Faith, and
keep Gods holy Will and Commandments, and walk in them all the days of their
Lives, No, no, said they. I afterward asked both Protestants and Papists the
same, but found them all to agree in this point, That none could be freed from
sin in this life: then began my Sorrow to increase, and to be more then I could
bear; and this was the time, dear Countrymen, that the Almighty God, who is no
Respecter of Persons, did break in upon my Soul by his Everlasting Light, and
discovered to me the emptiness of all those great Professions; who only talked
Largely and Eloquently of God and Christ, and of Religion, as it is at this
day, which was and is verified in their Practices, the many great Pretenses to
Religion was and is but really a pursuing the Error of Balaam (viz.) Gifes and
Rewards. And it was at this time that the Lord raised many Witnesses to
proclaim the Controversy that God had both with Professors and with Profane;
and the Amazing Terrors of God being upon them for sin, made them exceedingly
to Tremble and it was not for fear of the then Powers, nor for fear of Hell,
nor of Punishment, as the Libeller wickedly insinuates in page 11. for the
contrary will appear by their boldness in bearing their Testimony against the
Hirelings, and Powers then in Being, whose Sufferings were so great that much
of them could could not be recorded, which will to all moderate men
sufficiently rescue them from the Libellers false Insinuations in p. 8. That
their Trembling was (or is) from a servile Fear. But hear his Answer, page 4.

If Fear and Trembling were enough to prove a certainty of being beloved of
God, The Libeller, page 4.
then Balaam 's Ass, and the Demoniacks among the Tombs, Faelix the Hypocrite,
and Judas that hanged himself for fear of any more seeing his Innocent and
Righteous Master; yea, the Devils themselves might put in for a share too; for
St James expressly says, that they believe and Tremble.

Reply, Where has this Malicious Perverter read in my Book, or in any others
of the Quakers Writings, That Fear and Trembling is enough to prove a Certainty
of being beloved of God? Nay, Serious Reader, if thou will be but just to both
him and me, thou will find no such Word in my Book, as, That Fear and Trembling
is enough to prove any's being beloved of God.

Upon my arguing on about thirty Testimonies of holy Writ, of which he has
meddled with Two, which indeed were too many to Pervert as he has done; and if
thou will in Moderation read mine, thou will find me only inser from them, That
Quaking and Trembling is no New Thing among God's People; but that it was a
State that all God's People passed through; and that all now must pass through
before ever they can enter God's Kingdom, according to these Scriptures; Sion
shall be redeemed with Judgment, Isa. 1.27. And they shall Mourn for him, as
for an only Son, and be in Bitterness as for a first born, Zach. 12. and must
know God to be as a Resiners Fire, and as Fullers Soap, and must know his Word
of Power to be sharper than a two-edged Sword, to divide between the Joints and
the Marrow. Thus Judgment must be set up in the Heart for Sin, and then the Cry
will be with the Apostle Paul, Oh Wretched Man that I am! who shall deliver me
from this Body of Sin? And this my Adversary must come to have Experience of,
before he be approved of God to come with a Song, as he says in page 4.

And this I do assure him, as one who has known the Terrors of the Lord for
Sin, That this Power will make him Quake and Tremble, as easy a matter as he
now thinks it to get to Heaven.

And as for his saying, That Balaam 's Ass, the Demoniacks, Foelix, Judas, and
the Devils might put in for a share, is very Absurd. For, First, As to Balaam's
Ass, God had not accomplished him with an Immortal Soul to subsist after this
Life; therefore not in a capacity to come in for a share: and as to the rest
its also very Absurd, especially the last, (viz.) the Devils; for although they
had a sense of God's Power, and were terrified thereby, and made to Tremble,
yet it was not possible for them to have acceptance with God, although
believing and Trembling also are acts in his Chi^dren, which are accepted of
him. And if my Adversary do not in this Life come to witness Fear and Trembling
to accompany his believing, he may also, when its too late, know the Addition
of Quaking and Trembling to his Believing, and then his believing nor trembling
will stand him in no more stead, than the Devil's did unto them.

And as for Judas, Faelix, and the rest mentioned by him, in this case I say,
as the Apostle says, God's Will is that all men may know the Truth and be
saved. God said by the Mouth of the Prophet, I have no pleasure in the Death of
the Wicked, but that the Wicked turn from his Evil Way and live. So Judas and
Faelix, and the rest, had a Day or Time of Visitation from God, in which Time
they might have turned to God, and have had a share in his Salvation. And
Judas, and all others, who have no share in the Salvation of God, their
Destruction is of themselves, and the Lord God is clear and just in giving them
their Portion in the Lake of Endless Misery, because, as he says in Proverbs,
Chap. 1. When I called, ye would not answer; when I stretched out my Hand, no
Man regarded; they set at naught all my Counsel, and would have none of my
Reproof, etc. And Christ said unto the Rebellious Jews, Ye will not come to me
that ye might have Life. And he said to Jerusalem, I would have gathered thy
Children together as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings, but ye would
not. And God said unto the Rebellious Jews, O Israel, thou destroyest thy self,
but in me is thy Help. Christ lights every one that comes into the World;
and God does require all men to believe and obey. Christ casted Death for every
man, as says the Apostle. And the Apostle John says He is the Propitiation
for our Sins, and not for our Sins only, but also for the Sins of the whole
World. Judas partook of the Ministry, and by Transgression he Fell.

In opposition to Trembling he goes on, quoting Luke 1. The Libeller, page 4.
That being delivered from the hands of our Enemies, might serve God without
fear in Righteousness and Holiness all the days of our Lives.

Reply, Is it not to be delivered from our Enemies to be delivered from Sin,
which is a cause of Fear and Trembling? And if my Adversary had been really
awakened, as in his Scrullious Welsh Letter he says he is, he might have seen
two States (or Conditions) couched in these words; First, A State of Sin and
Bondage: And Secondly, A State of being delivered from Sin and Bondage. And I
hope he, or at least, all Moderate men will grant, that the Words being
delivered, are words in the Present Tense: So that Deliverance was there
witnessed, which was the cause of his Confidence of serving the Lord without
fear; yet I must tell him; Not without fear of sinning against God, but without
fear of Hell, Devils, Men or Punishment; but this is a state the Priests do
deny, that deliverance from sin is attainable in this Life, and then the other
state of serving God in Righteousness and Holiness cannot be expected. And let
my Adversary know, that God will not call that Righteous and Holy that is mixed
with Sin; neither are any delivered from their Enemies until they be delivered
from Sin; and until then, let the Libeller Fear and Dread coming before the
Lords Presence with a Song, lest the Lord our God turn his Song into Howling,
and his Gladness unto Sorrow and Trembling, which he now puts afar off, as his
Arguments make manifest, yet in one of them he boggles standing to his
Argument. Hear him.

And though till we have mortified our Affections and Lusts, Libeller, p. 4.
we ought to work out our Salvation with Fear and Trembling; yet after a most
hearty and profound Repentance, we humbly hope all our past Unrighteousness is
forgiven, and our sins covered, we may then, doubtless, come before his
Presence with a Song.

Reply, Behold Reader, what Confusion and Contradiction is this! for in his
last words of the same page, in opposition to me, and my making Quaking and
Trembling to be a state that all must pass through before they come to be in
favor with God, he tells of serving God without Fear. And now in Contradiction
to himself, granting me my Argument, he says, Till we have mortified our
Affections and Lusts, we ought to work out our Salvation with Fear and
Trembling. This looks as if the man then immediately had found himself smitten
of God in his own Conscience; but how this will agree with the Priests Faith,
That no man's sin can be wholly mortified in this Life, I leave to the Impartial
to judge. His Confusion is, He has left no room for serving God in Holiness
and Righteousness; for its Protestant Doctrine, that none can be freed from sin
in this Life. If so, they must be mortifying their Lusts during Life; and so by
his own Argument must Fear and Tremble during Life, and so has no place for
his coming before God's Presence with his Song.

Yet in Cotradiction to Protestant Faith, and to his own, as he has stated it,
Libeller, p. 5.
he quotes Paul and David's rejoicing, Rejoice in the Lord always, etc. There
is a Light sprung up for the Righteous, and joyful gladness for such as are
true-hearted.

Reply, It had become him here to have distinguished the Righteous and
True-hearted, and have told me the place where and time when any man comes to
be such, since its the Papist, Doctrine, That men first must go to Purgatory
before they can be such: And the professed Presbyter, Independent and Baptist
say, None can be such in this Life; then since its our Faith, as well as
theirs, that there is no such place of Purgatory after this Life, my Opponent
should have told then positively the place where and time when any is Righteous.

This was the Belief of those Saints who were no Quakers, Libeller p. 5.
however disgusted by those Quakers who are no Saints.

Reply, Is not this to contradict himself again, who confessed Until we have
mortified our Lusts, we ought to work out our Salvation with Fear and
Trembling? It seems as if it were part of his own Belief, else he says, he
ought to do that which is no p^rt of his Belief: This does not make it appear
that the Saints he speaks of were no Quakers, nor the present Quakers no
Saints. He quotes again page 10. Sorrow endures for a Night, Libeller, p. 10.
but Joy comes in the Morning.

Rep. Is not Sin the work of that Night the Prophet speaks of there? and since
that Sorrow must continue during that Night, then sure Quaking and Trembling
may be comprehended in the word Sorrow; then it still maintain^ my Argument:
And what can be more clear then that all must pass through a state of Sorrow
before they come to know true rejoicing? And what is that Joy which comes in
the Morning? Is it not in this Life to witness the Morning Star, Christ Jesus,
to expel all the Deeds of Darkness by his Bright Appearance in the Soul? and
who thus come to witness this Bright and Morning Star to arise in their Hearts,
such come to know the Rejoicing that Paul and David were come to; and great
cause they have, when come truly to experience God's taking the Cup of
Trembling from them, and giving the Cup of Salvation unto them instead thereof.
And that it was thus with Paul and David, that they passed through a great Gulf
of Sorrow and Trembling will further appear by these following Testimonies of
theirs. Acts 9.5, 6. And he said, Lord, what will thou have me to do? I am
Jesus whom thou persecutest, its hard for thee to kick against the Pricks; And
he Trembling and Astonished said, Lord, What will thou have me to do? Romans
7.24. Oh wretched Man that I am! who shall deliver me from this Body of Death?
Read the Chapter thoroughout, and see what Exercises he had in the Warfare with
Sin. 2 Cor. 11. Knowing therefore the Terrors of the Lord, we persuade men:
with many more Testimonies cited in my Book to this purpose.

Now here what the Prophet David says to this matter, Psalm. 38.1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, 8.

2. Thine Arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand presses me sore

3. There is no Soundness in my Flesh because of thine Anger Neither is there
any rest in my Bones because of my Sin.

4. For mine Iniquities is gone over my Head as a heavy burden, they are too
heavy for me.

5. My VVounds stinck and are Corrupt because of my foolishness.

6. I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly, I go Mourning all the Day long.

7. For my Loins are filled with a loathsome Disease, and there is no soundness
in my Flesh.

8. I am feeble and sore broken, I have roared by reason of the disquietness of
my Heart.

Now had Paul and David been in our time, and our Libeller had seen them in
these Exercises, and heard their Cries, their Groans, Roarings and Terrors
because of their Sins, thou may judge by his Book how he would have treated
them.

Hear David a little further, Psalm. 55. Fearfulness and Trembling are come upon
me, and Horror has overwhelmed me. See more of him in my Antiquity of the
Quakers, Job 3.28. My Bowels boiled and rested not, the Day of Affliction
prevented me; I went Mourning without the Sun, I cried in the Congregation, my
Skin is black upon me, my Bones are burnt with heat, my Harp also is turned to
Mourning, and my Organ unto the Voice of them that weep. I might multiply
Testimonies to this, but these may evidence to all who are not given up to a
Reprobate Spirit, that its yet too timely for my Adversary to come with his
Song before the Lord our God. Nay, nay, its my Testimony to all, of what
Persuasion soever, that there is none shall enter God's Kingdom until first they
have passed through a state of Sorrow and great Mourning; yea, Quaking and
Trembling because of sin; and he that gets out of this Furnis, and not purified
in it of his Dross, and purged of his Tin, he will not be current Metal to
pass into the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, but whosoever comes to witness
a passing through this Dispensation of Sorrow, and come to know experimentally
the cause of it taken away, (viz.) To be delivered from their Enemies, Luke 1
such only may approach the Presence of our God with a Song; yea, with a Song of
Deliverance, even the Song of Moses and the Lamb.

Then after he has bespattered us with a great deal of Lies and Dirt in page
5. (as indeed little else is to be found in his Book, except some
Scripture-Quotations) and to pursue him in all his Dirt, were near to
transcribe his Book. In page 6. he begins on one of my Scripture Testimonies.

And this is evidenced by his 4th page, where he observes with a World of Wit,
Libeller, p. 6.
Isaac trembled for having mistaken Jacob for Esau; and then presently infers,
that Isaac was a Quaker: A strong and choice way of arguing by which he makes
him pay dearer for his inadvertance than ever Esau was forced to do.

Rep. This as much shows him a Stranger to the two Seeds, Tipified by Jacob and
Esau, as what he has said before shows him a stranger to the two States,
spoken of before; he could not see how one Misery ushered in another on Esau.
First, He had sold his Birth right for a mess of Pottage; and now by Hunting
had lost the blessing also: And could Isaac be less then in great Sorrow and
Dread to see the sad State that Esau was come unto? And was not Esau's Hunting
a true Figure of his and other men's wandering abroad from the G^ft of God within
them? and Isaac having a true sense of this made him Quake and Tremble; but how
he paid dearer for his Inadvertance than Esau had need to do, is yet for my
Adversary to prove; for Esau could not find a place of Repentance, although he
sought it with Tears: By this any sober man may (endued with heavenly Wisdom)
see the Unsoundness of this his Argument.

Then he goes on thus, Then Isaac it seems was not beyond the possibility of a
mistake, Libeller, p. 6.
which Quakers affirm they are not subject to.

Rep. This is an absolute Forgery, for the Quakers do not attribute to
themselves any privilege above others, but as they are led and guided by the
Unerring Spirit and Power of God within; and because we have by true experience
found it to be the only thing that keeps out of Mistakes, we commend all others
to the Guidance of it.

He tells, That those People mentioned in the 9th of Ezra were the Quakers
Meeting. Libel. p. 7.
Its well he did not say at Holy Well or Cayrwis.

Reply, There Is nothing in all this that does invalid my Testimony with any
sober man, that will read my Quotations; but if I had said it had been at
Hollywell or Caerwis, then I had been like unto him: But it seems the Quakers
Meetings there do seem to trouble him; but he tells nothing of other Meetings
neither at Hollywell nor Caerwis (viz.) on their Sundays at their Service
time, great Meetings of Men and Women, with Fiddlers, to Revel and Roar, Swear,
Dance and Sing, yea, the same up and down the Country, and Morricedances,
Waxe^s, Enterludes, Football, Nine pins and Tennis, etc. And if my Adversary
be William Jones, as many say he is, his Practice (without wronging of him) may
certainly be brought under this Character; and I would advise him (if he do not
think it scorn to take it) not to think that God will be served with such
Rejoicing.

As for his quoting the 6th Verse of Ezra 9. it makes much for me, as any
impartial Reader will find, if he examine mine and his.

Ezra does most evidently acquit himself of the Charge; for he arose, and made
all the Chief Priests and Levites to swear, etc. Hear him further, he says,
Libel, p. 7.
That Ezra was a Quaker; yet he dares not forsooth do what that Quaker did,
though but according to Law: he would persuade us, that all Quakers are guided
by the same Spirit; how then come they so much to disagree? Ezra and all Israel
did Swear; but our Wise Man of Gotham is endued with a greater Light, etc. then
most certain it is, that these Israelites were no true Quakers, nor these
Quakers no true Israelites.

Rep. This still shows the man as ignorant of the two Dispensations, viz. of
the Law and Gospel; as what he said before showed him a Stranger to the two
States and two Seeds spoken of already, and as ignorantly he mentions a
Disagreement between those Israelites, who were true Quakers, that swore then;
and these Israelites after the Spirit, who are true Quakers, but will not Swear
now; for those Israelites were under the Covenant of Circumcision, made their
Offerings with the Blood of Bulls and Goats, etc. and did it by God's
Appointment, and by the Assistance of God's Spirit; but under the
Gospel Dispensation Christ Jesus disannulled all these, and he says, Swear not
at all: and the true Israel, who are Quakers, are guided by God's Eternal
Spirit now not to swear at all: and there is no such disagreement between us and
the Israelites of old, as my Antogonist would fain insinuate; and he might as
well seek to bring us under all the Bondage of the first Priesthood, as under
that of Swearing; for Christ has as strictly forbidden Swearing as he did the
rest of the Shadows and Ceremonies of the Levitical Priesthood, as may appear
plainly Mat. 5. It has been said by them of old, Thou shall not Forswear thy
self, but shall perform to the Lord thine Oaths.

This Text of it self is enough to prove all Swearing to be unlawful under the
Gospel Dispensation, notwithstanding that under the Law an Oath was to end
Strife, yet Christ in his Prohibition did as perfectly forbid this, as he did
the other Points which he treated of in the same Chapter.

The common Objection is, That he only Prohibited Vain Oaths.

Answ. The words themselves fully import, that it was the Oaths allowed of by
the Israelites, Patriarchs and Prophets; for they were the Men which Christ
Jesus quoteth, which of old said, Thou shall not Forswear thy self, but perform
to the Lord thine Oaths. Mark, here was of old an Allowance to Swear and
Perform.

But to all those that say, That the Oaths there mentioned to be performed,
were Needless or Vain Oaths: I answer.

The Oaths there to be performed, were the Oaths which were to be sworn in
Truth, in Righteousness and in Judgment; therefore certainly the Oaths before a
Magistrate, and not Vain Oaths: for it would be Absurdity to say, that Christ
or the holy Ancients did impose vain Oaths to be performed; therefore it was
the Solemn Oaths before the Magistrate, which is clearly proved by these and
other Examples in that Chapter, as one which Christ quote^ from the same Law.
Moses (said he) because of the Hardness of your Hearts, gave a Bill of
Divercement; but I say unto you, that he that puts away his Wife, except for
Adultery. Mark here, he make, an Exception [Except for Adultery] Now if the
Oaths be^ore-mentioned, that he prohibited, had been only vain Oaths, he,
foreseeing what Controversies would arise about them, as well as about putting
away Wives, would cer^a^nly not have left his People in the dark in so
important or weighty a Matter; but would in this Case, as well as in the other
abovesaid, have said, Swear not at all, Except when lawfully called before a
Magistrate. The Apostle is very positive, James 5. Above all things Swear not,
neither by Heaven, Earth nor any other Oath, lest ye fall into Condemnation.
But because we are thought singular in this Point, read the following
Testimonies of Fathers and Protestants, who denied all Oaths as well as we.

Polycarpus, who was said to have been Disciple to John, one of the Apostles,
who at his Death was bid to Swear and Defy Christ, etc. he said, Eusebius.
Eccles. Hist. lib. 4. cap. 14.
Fourscore years have I served him, yet he never offended me in any thing.
Further said, I am a Christian.

Peter Martyr, a famous man, was of his mind, Apol. 2. pro Christianis ad
auten. pium. oper. page 63.

Chrysostom on Genesis Hom. 15.

He being a famous man in the Church says, A Christian must flee Oaths by all
means. Further he says, 'It is not lawful to Swear, neither in a Just nor
Unjust Thing; for to Swear (said he) is of the Devil, seeing Christ said,
Whatsoever is more than yea, yea, nay, nay, comes of Evil. This Chrysostom was
Overseer of the Church at Constantinople.

Augustine de Sermon Domini, Sermon. 28.

It is not lawful for a Christian to Swear, when an Oath is required of him.

The ancient Waldenses, who were Protestants, denied the taking any Oaths; and
Bishop Usher took their part against Papists, who were Swearers. Vid. Baron.
ann. 1310. Jo. Wald. adv. Wickliff and Wald de succes. l. 6.

The Plow-man's Complaint.

Lord, thou gave us a Command of Truth, in bidding us say, Yea, yea, and Nay,
nay; but, Lord, He (Pope) that calls himself thy Vicar on Earth, has broken
the Commandment, so makes a Law to compel men to Swear.

John Wickliff, our famous Countryman, in the time of Edward the 3d and
Richard the 2d, Book Mart. vol. 1. p 554. to 558
was accused among other things for maintaining, That All Oaths made in any
Bargain or Contract between man and man, are unlawful.

William Thorp, an eminent man of the Christian Church, refused to swear upon a
Bible, Because, said he, a Book is nothing else but diverse Creatures of which
it is made, Book Mart v. 1, p. 701.
and such Swearing is ever Unlawful.

Elizabeth Young, at her Examination in Queen Mary's days, before the Catholic
Inquisitors (so called, who commanded her to Swear as follows.

Dr. Martin, Thou shall be racked inch-meal, thou T^aiterly Whore and Heretic;
but thou shall Swear before a Judge before thou go.

Eliz. Young, I understand not what an Oath is, and therefore will take no such
thing.

Dr. Martin, She refused to Swear upon the four Evangelists; Book Mart. vol 3.
page 510.911.
for I my self and Mr. Plussey have had her before us four times, but we cannot
bring her to swear.

Then said the Bishop, Why will thou not swear before a Judge?

Eliz Young, My Lord, I will not Swear that this Hand is mine.

No, said the Bishop; and why?

Eliz. Young, Christ says, that Whatsoever is more than Yea, Yea, or Nay, Nay,
comes of Evil.

The Christian Protestants in the Valley of Piedmo^t, who were cruelly tortured
to Death by the Papists about the year 1655. one Article alleged against them
was, Marol. Hist. p. 217, 218.
That they believed it was not lawful to Swear any thing, be it true or false.

Erasmus in his Commentaries on Matthew. 5. James 5. plainly forbids All Swearing.

There are several Testimonies of John Husse. Jerome of Prague, William
Swinderley, Walter Brute, William Sawtry, William White, who were famous men in
their time, that refused all Swearing.

Behold, Reader how our Protestant Libeller is apostatized from the first
reformed Protestants.

I might have quoted many others of the famous Fathers, and worthy Protestant
Reformers; who gave their Test^mony against all Oaths.

And here is a Superstructure built upon the good Foundation Christ Jesus; and
its in vain for my present Opposer or any other to bring up Circumcision, the
Blood of Beasts, or Oaths, which were allowed in the first Covenant, but
disannulled and prohibited in the second; for no other Foundation can be laid
(that will stand) but that which is laid, even Jesus Christ, whose heavenly
Spirit, which does enlighten everyone that comes into the World, has appeared
in Power and great Glory, which has brought a Remnant so far in Obedience to
his blessed Command, that they dare not Swear at all:

Had he any Ingenuity or Sense, he had never been so silly as to think, that
Quaking and Trembling were enough to denominate a just or good man by,
Libeller, page 9*
yet is so fond of the Conceit, as if there were no other way possible to get
to Heaven but this; and might as well have affirmed, that to be Surly and
Churlish, Ignorant and Singular, Envious and Unmannerly, Dissembling and
Hypocritical, had been the only way to please God, and the certain Character to
know the Inspired and Heavenly-minded by.

Rep. Reader, I showed thee before how he had charged me in p. 4. of his Book
with this Falsity of thinking that Quaking and Trembling was enough to prove a
man's being beloved of God* and now he renews the Charge, though it be a Lie,
and accounts me silly for thinking that which I never did think, nor had he
ground to think I ever did: he farther says, I am so fond of the Conceit, as if
there were no other way possible to get to Heaven. By this it seems he thinks
to get some other way to Heaven, which indeed is a Contradiction to his own
Confession, page 4. for he says there, That till he had mortified his
Affections and Lusts, he ought to work out his Salvation with Fear and
Trembling [A gross Contradiction.] Nay, to contradict himself more grossly, he
adds, That I might have as well affirmed, that to be Surly and Churlish,
Ignorant and Singular, Envious and Unmannerly, Dissembling and Hypocritical,
etc. were the Way to Heaven.

What can be expected from such a wicked man as this, who one while says, That
till he has mortified his Affections and Lusts, he ought to Fear and Tremble:
yet soon after, in contradiction, says, It were as well for me to affirm
Dissembling and Hypocrisy to be the way to Heaven, and the certain Character
to know the Heavenly-Minded and Inspired by. Oh Impious and Wilful Man!

But before I close up this Chapter concerning Quaking and Trembling, with
tenders of pure Love I offer, for further clearing of the Point; these
following Testimonies, besides what I have hinted already.

Job 21.6. When I remember, I am afraid, and Trembling takes hold on my Flesh.

Psalm 2.11. Serve the Lord with Fear, rejoice with Trembling.

Psalm 55.5. Fearfulness and Trembling are come upon me, and Horror has
overwhelmed me.

Psalm 99.1. The Lord Reigns, let the People Tremble.

Psalm 119.20. My Flesh Trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy
Judgments.

Jer. 5.22. Fear ye not me, says the Lord? will ye not Tremble at my Presence?

Ezekiel. 12.18. Son of Man, eat thy Bread with Quaking, and drink thy Drink with
Trembling.

These, with many more, I quoted in my Book, called, The Antiquity of the
Quakers, which in particular he meddled not with, yet in the general
contradicts them, and says, page 6. They are clearly for other Purposes, and
quite of other Meanings, than I intend them for: But if all were true that he
has said then I had missed it indeed; but its his only saying so, for he has
yet not proved either other Purposes or Meanings they have.

Now if Quaking and Trembling were not to be known in the way to Heaven, as he
wickedly insinuates, and that I might as well affirm Dissimulation and
Hypocrisy to be the way; then in vain was all the Quaking and Trembling of
these ^oly Ancients; and what has he done less than Blaspheme in this his
Assertion?

And let him and all his Adherents know, that since man's unhappy fall, Edens
Garden is beset with a flaming Sword, which guards the Tree of Life that none
can come at it, but through Death; and this was the Sword which pierced the
Bowels of all the holy Ancients, and divided between the Joints and the Ma^row;
this was it that made Job to cry out, His Bowels burned, and his Bones were
dried up with Heat; this was it that made David cry and roar until his Skin
was parched upon him, yea, until he was become like a Kettle in the Smoke;
this was it that made Jeremiah to lay his Mouth in the Dust, to see if there
were hopes; this was it the holy Prophets and Apostles could speak
experimentally of; and this is the narrow Way and strait Gate, etc. this was it
that pricked Paul to the Heart, and made him cry out, Oh wretched man that I
am, etc. and this was it which did overtake in an acceptable time these poor
despised People, called Quakers in our Age: And whereas the Libeller in his 11.
and 12. pages, scurrilously tells of their Trances and Distortions, Quaking and
Trembling, comparing them to Conjurers and Bell-Founders, etc.

Rep. That the Holy Ancients passed through such a State, I have proved before;
and when in our day and time the Lord appeared unto us, he appeared in the way
of his Judgment for Sin, and the powerful eternal Word of the Lord (which is
the Sword of the Spirit) pricked many to their Hearts, and I being one among
them, can do no less then give in my Testimony concerning the Operation or
Working of the Heavenly Power, it wounded as a Sword, it smote like a Hammer at
the whole Body of Sin, and in my Bowels it burned like Fire, yea, so dreadfully
it burned, that it made by Bowels boil, it pierced as a Sword, it broke as a
Hammer: And then the Pangs of Death I felt in my Members which did make me to
roar, yea, and to Quake and Tremble: for this Fire, when it burned, it gave
Light, as its the Nature of Fire to do, and it discovered to me and these poor
despised People the great body of Sin and Death, which was indeed terrible to
behold; and not only so, but it discovered the narrowness of the Gate, and that
there was no going in thereat, but by first having all that combustable Body of
Sin and Death destroyed and burnt up, at this time did great Terror and
Amazement fall upon many; and this my Opposer must come experimentally to know
and witness in this Life, or else his latter End will be miserable.

And as for his telling of a great Change within this 12. or 14. Years; I say
there is a Change, Glory to God for the fame, for many are passed from Death to
Life, and do witnes^ the work of Regeneration in them, and can sing the Song of
Sion, even the Song of Moses and the Lamb, to whom by them, and all the Host of
Heaven, be sung Halelujahs for evermore. So here is great alteration indeed,
Life and Immortality brought to Light through the Gospel, them who were dead in
Sins and Trespasses are quickened and made alive; they who were Alians and
Strangers to God, made Fellow-Citizens of the New Jerusalem; and the Prodigal
Son, who had been feeding among the Swine on Husks, brought home into the
Father's House, where there is living Bread enough, yea, and Wine also well
refined; and he says, Ea^ Oh Friends, yea, drink abundantly Oh Beloved.

CHAP. II. of TITHES.
THe Tithes, Li^eller, page 24.
the chief Cause of all his grumbling, are but a Portion which God himself out
of his own Word has given such as minister about holy things.

Reply, We do not read either in the Old or New Testament, that God perpetuated
the Levitical Priesthood to be in force in Gospel Times; and its my Faith in
God, That they who take Tithes, or give Tithes, in Gospel Times, deny Christ
come in the Flesh, and so are of Antichrist; my Reasons are as follows:

First, That the Levitical Priesthood was by it self a distinct Priesthood,
which Christ Jesus, by offering up himself once for all, has ended.

Secondly, That under that Priesthood the Priests were to have but a Part of
the Tithes; for the Poor, the Stranger, the Fatherless and Widows were to be
maintained out of it.

Deuteronomy. 14.28. And at the end of three years thou shall bring forth all the
Tithe of thine Increase the same year, and shall lay it up within thy Gates;
and the Levite, because he has no Inheritance with thee, and the Stranger, and
the Fatherless and Widows, which are within thy Gates, shall come and eat and
be satisfied; that the Lord thy God may bless thee in all the Works of thy
Hands, which thou do.

Mark Reader, the Use of Tithes in their first Institution were for the
Stranger, the Fatherless and Widows, they we^e to eat and be sati^fied of them;
(a very pious Use under that D^spensation) and the Priests had only a share
with them.

Deuteronomy. 18. verse. 1, 2, 3. The Priests, the Levites, and all the Tribe of Levi,
shall have no Inheritance with Israel; they shall eat the Offerings of the Lord
made by Fire, and his Inheritance.

2. Therefore they shall have no Inheritance among their Brethren; the Lord is
their Inheritance, as he has said unto them.

3. And this shall be the Priests due from the People, for them that offer a
Sacrifice, whether it be Ox or Sheep, they shall give unto the Priest the
Sholder, the two Cheeks and the Maw.

Now if these Priests will have it (in these Gospel Days) as it was ordered by
the Levitical Law to the Priests, then this Clause of the Law does tell them
what is their Due, Share or Portion; and what was their Due of the other
Increase, is expressed in the afore-going Text; the Poor, the Fatherless,
Strangers and Widow were to eat and to be satisfied, and then the Priests were
to have their Due or Portion, as is read in Genesis 47.22. and that Portion was
Pharaoh's free Gift, there was no Law to enforce treble Damage, if not paid.

Behold the Zeal of the Libeller for Tithes, which were only due under the
Levitical Priesthood! One would think that so zealous a Son of the Church
should be preferred unto a Benefice, if he have none, as some say he has not;
for he has stood up for Tithes as stoutly as the Presbyterians did in Oliver's
days, who had then a Law to enforce them with treble Damage: but although he
and the Priests hold up Levi's Priesthood, they have changed the course of it;
for in Levi's time it was to be stored up for the Poor, the Stranger, the
Fatherless and Widow, and the Priests were only to have a share of it, and
their share or due was, of an Ox or Sheep they were to have one Sholder, the
two Cheeks and the Maw; but now they have altered their course, they have taken
all the Tithes (they could get) to themselves, and have turned the Poor, the
Stranger, the Fatherless and Widow to beg, not so much as giving them any
share; it had been Charity for them to have allowed them something, if it had
been but the Sholder or two Cheeks, it had been better than nothing: and since
its by Levi's Priesthood the Priests now claim their Tithes, may not the Poor,
the Fatherless and Widows by it lay as good a Claim to it? if not, let the
Priests or this Libeller their Agent show us by the Scriptures of Truth, when
and where they were excluded; if they cannot, all people may see how far the
Piety and Charity of Levi's Priests, in his day and time, did exceed these
Priests of our time; for then the Poor, the Stranger, the Fatherless and Widow
were satisfied of the Tithes; but now the Priests, who pretend their Authority
for taking Tithes from Levi, do allow the Poor no share, though they see them
in great Want, they are every day begging at our Doors. But the Libeller goes
on in the Priests Vindication of having the Tithes.

Remember that our Lord Jesus was both a Bishop and a Priest, and is said by
the Author to the Hebrews, Libeller,
to be a Priest forever after the Order of Melchizedek.

Rep. Its true what the Author to the Hebrews said there; but he does acquit
himself of the Libeller's Charge; for he does not in that Epistle, nor in any
other say, that its lawful for Gospel Ministers to take Tithes; but in the same
Chapter, viz. Hebr. 7.12. in Contradiction to the Libeller, he said, The
Priesthood being changed, (who had command from God to take Tithes) there is
made also a Necessity of the Change of the Law.

But it seems my Opponent has found another Law since then, which grants a
Right to the Priests for Tithes, made in the 9th of Hen. 3. I confess that we
read of that, but for my part, I do not believe he had Power to repeal the Law
of God, which said, The Priesthood was changed, and there was made of Necessity
a Change of the Law. And for his insisting on Christ's being a Bishop and a
Priest; this makes nothing for him (nor them) for Christ did not set up Tithes,
but ended them, neither were his Apostles inducted to any Benefices, one, two
or three apiece; but on the contrary he said, Matthew. 8.20. The Foxes have
Holes, and the Birds have Nests, but the Son of Man has not whereon to lay his
Head. And when he sent forth his Disciples, he did not say to them, that
whatsoever City or Town they entered into, they should settle there, and be
Incombent of that Place, and take their Tithes of them; and if they would not
receive them, then sue them at Law, and take treble Damage: But on the
contrary, said, Freely ye have received, freely give; and eat what is set before
you; and if they will not receive you, shake off the Dust of your Feet for a
Testimony against them. Surely the Libeller missed choosing a Pattern for taking
Tithes; for Christ, although he was a Bishop and Priest, he took no Tithes, nor
his Disciples neither took none, but wrought with their Hands, and ministered to
their own Necessity, and the Necessity of o hers. But after the Apostles days
there was a great Apostasy among the Professed Christians; for some turned to
be Wolv^s (which Christ said would come) and Tore and Devoured them that kept
the Testimony of Jesus, and great striv^ng was among them about their Priests
Maintenance, and for setting up of TITHES, as the Reader may read at large in
Frarcis Howgil's Book, called, THE CREAT CASE OF TITHES; and there may be seen
how in the several Ages since Christ was put to Death, according to the Flesh,
God had a People that bore their Testimony against TITHES.

Soon after the Year 600. Grego^y the first, who was the first Pope of Rome,
soon after sent Augustine the Monk to England, ^ad. Lib. 26.
who, as its said, Converted E helbert King of Kent; but it was but to Popery;
and he and his Clergy for a long time after followed the Example of the
Apostolical Primitive Church, living in common upon the Free-Offerings of their
Converts.

And from that time, until Henry the 3 d no Tithes, as Tithes were generally
paid, but only a Decree made, Ex. in Bad. 663, etc.
that for every twenty Shillings Rent, a Farding a Sunday was to be paid, and
this was given by way of Offering.

From this time until the Year 1200. all that the Priests could do, brought the
People no farther than to pay their Tithes at their own pleasures, which made
Pope Innocent the third send his Decretal Letters to the Bishop of Canterbury,
commanding him to enjoin every man to pay his Temporal Goods to those that
ministered spiritual Things to them; which was enforced by Ecclesiastical
Censure: And this was the first beginning of general parochial Tithes in
England; this the Popes Decertal Epistle was admitted and enjoined by the Law
of the Nation, King and People being then Papists. The Decree of the Pope
receiving all possible Assistance from the Bishops and Priests, on whose behalf
it was made, did not only in a short time take away the Peoples right to give
their Tithes to those that best deserved them, but did also so much corrupt the
Clergy, that in the time of Richard the second, Book Mart.
John Wickliff, our famous Reformer did make a heavy Complaint to the
Parliament in the words following:

Ah Lord God! where this be reason to constrain the poor People to find a
Worldly Priest, some time unable both of Life, and cunning in Pomp and Pride,
Gluttony and Drunkenness, and Letchery, in Symony and Heresy, with fat Horse,
and Jolly and Gay Saddles and Bridles, Ringing by the way, and himself in
costly Clothes, and Pleasures, and suffer their poor Wives and Children, and
poor Neighbors perish for Hunger, Thurst and Cold, and other Mischiefs of the
World. Ah Lord Jesus Christ! s;ith within few Years men paid their Tithes and
Offerings at their own free will to Good Men, and able to great Worship of God,
to pr^fit and fairness of holy Church, fighting on Earth: Why were it lawful
that a Worldly Priest should destroy this holy and approved Custom,
constraining men to leave this Freedom, turning Tithes and Offerings unto
Wicked Uses? Again, hear him.

That Tithes were and are a Free Gift, as among Christians, and only pure Alms;
and the Parishioner may for the Offense of their ^urate detain and keep them
back, Acts, Men. p. 69.
and b^stow them upon others at their own will and pleasures.

This was also maintained by J. Hus, who was burnt for his Testimony at
Constance; take his own words:

That the Clergy are not Lords and Professors of Tithes and other
Ecclesiastical Goods, which are freely given, but only Stewards; Acts and Mon.
page 605.
and after the necessity of the Clergy is once satisfied, they ought to be
transported to the poor; and if the Clergy do abuse the same, they are Thieves
and Robbers, and Sacriledgious persons; and except they do Repent by the
Judgment of God they are to be condemned.

Will Thorp, an Eminent Protestant gave a large Testimony against Tithes,
saying, That those Priests that took Tithes, Book Mart.
deny Christ come in the Flesh; for the Priesthood was changed that gave them.
At which the Bishop said, God's Curse have you, and mine for thus teaching.
Jerome of Prague, William Swinderby, Walter Brute, Rueas Silvi in his Bohem.
History.
the Wicklffiians, Bohemians and Waldences, the first reformed Protestants gave
their positive Testimony against Tithes, as may be found in the Marginal
Histories.

An Estate in Tithes was as truly and justly the Right and Property of every
Incombant, Canonically ordained, instituted and inducted, Libeller, p. 26.
as any thing an Honest Man can call his; all which the holy Apostle justifies
in 1 Cor. 6.11, 12, 14. Have not we, says he, power to forbear working? And if
we have sown to you Spiritual things, is it a great matter if we reap your
Carnal things?

Rep. What the Apostle says here agrees well with what Christ said, when he
sent forth his Disciples to Preach the Gospel, Match. 10. where he bid them
make no Provision for their Journey, freely ye have received, freely give, the
workman is worthy of his Meat, Luke 10.7, 8. Eat such things as are set before
you. In all this Commission here is not one word of taking the Peoples Tithes,
but to eat what was set before them; to this does well agree what the Apostle
says, 1 Cor. 4. Have we not power to Eat? He did not say he had Power to take
Tithe nor justify it, as the Libeller says he did; and its no wonder that he
will belie me, when he dare be so bold with the Apostle: The Apostle only there
informs the Corinthians what Power they had, That they that plant a Vineyard
may eat of the Fruit thereof, or gathers a Flock may eat of the Milk of it; he
does not say they had Power to eat of a Vineyard they had not Planted, nor eat
the Milk of a Flock they had not gathered, much less take away the Tenth of
their Labors; nor did he say they had as much Right and Property to them, as
any honest man has in any thing he has. Nay, the Apostle yet further acquits
himself of the Libellers charge, for in the 12th and 15th Verses, he says, If
others be partakers of this Power, are not we rather: Nevertheless we have not
used this Power, but suffer all things, lest we should hinder the Gospel of
Christ. Again, But I have used none of these things, neither have I written
these things that it should be done unto me; for it were better for me to dye,
than any Man should make my glorying void. Again, the 18th Verse, What is my
reward then, verily that I Preach the Gospel, I make the Gospel of Christ
without Charge. By this any honest Man may see that my Adversary chose a wrong
Pattern, to take his measure by; Pope Innocent the Third did far better suit
his purpose; for Paul did not lay any claim to Tithes, neither does he say he
had any Right to them, but on the contrary, Heb. 7. he said, The Priesthood
being changed, there is made of necessity a change also of the Law.

To conclude this Chapter, I have this to add, that I have been a Sufferer in
this matter of Tithes in Olivers days, and all along ever since I have had
them carried away Yearly; and though he says all my Artillary is against them,
whom he says serves at Gods Altar, and all my grumbling is against Tithes; yet
all this while I have not, nor ever shall use any Artillary against them, but
my downright Testimony, that to give Tithes or take them is an Antichristian
practice; yet I with several Thousands of my dear Friends in England and Wales
do patiently suffer when they are forceably taken away from us; and its my
Faith in God, and not mine only, but the Faith of Thousands, that God will in
his due time remove this great Oppression, and will daily more and more send
forth faithful Laborers into his Work, those who will be content with such
Maintenance as Jesus Christ has appointed for them, whose glorying in him
shall be, that they make the Gospel of Christ without Charge.

CHAP. III. Of SCOLLARSHIP.
ABout which he vapors with such vehemence that he may be compared to Goliath
of Gath, who had a Helmet of Brass upon his Head, and Coat of Male, Sword and
Spear, with which he disdained the Shepherd's Boy with his Sling and Stone:
however, since with his Latin and Greek he has disdained me, and defied the
Host of the living God this day, I will in the Name of the living God withstand
him with my disdained Sling and smooth Stone, which I have found in the Brook
of God.

Libeller, I do verily believe he knows not the meaning of Beatus qui
protelabitur; adding a Phrase in Greek, adding more, That neither I nor any
Quaker living can tell the true meaning thereof.

Rep. Behold, Reader, how he vapors, Goliah-like, with his Latin and Greek,
saying, No Quaker living can tell the true intent and meaning thereof: Does he
not in this seek to limit the great God of Heaven and Earth?

Psalm 25.14. The Secrets of the Lord are with them that fear him.

Mark, this man of God makes no Respect of Persons, nor does he limit God
either to Men's Wisdom or Schollarship.

Luke 8.10. Unto you it is given to know the Mysteries of God's Kingdom, but to
others in Parables.

Mark, the Mysteries of God's Kingdom were revealed to these poor Mechanic
Men, but were hid from Herod and Pilate, and the Chief Priest, with all their
Hebrew, Greek and Latin.

1 Cor. 1.21. The World by Wisdom knew not God.

1 Cor. 2.11. For what man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of a
man which is in him; even so the things of God knows no man, but the Spirit
of God.

Mark people, how Christ and the holy men of God tell you, that its the Spirit
of God that must make you knowing in the things of God.

1 Cor. 1.27. But God has chosen the foolish things of this World to confound
the wise; and God has chosen the weak things of the World to confound the
mighty, and base things of the World, and things which are despised has God
chosen, yea, and things that are not, to bring to naught the things that are,
that no flesh should glory in his Presence.

If so, why was this man so vain in his Imagination, that neither I nor no
Quaker living could tell the meaning of those Scripture words he mentions?
however, if he remain in the same belief all his days, that neither I, nor no
Quaker living, can tell the mean^ng thereof; I can tell him also, that neither
he nor any of the wisest men in the World, with all their Wisdom and
Schollarship, can tell the meaning of them; for they are the things of God, and
none can know them but by the Spirit of God.

I will subjoyn some few Testimonies for confirmation of my Judgment in this
Point; the first is that of Pharaoh's Dreams, Genesis 41. all his Magicians, Wise
Men and Scholars failed, and poor Mechanic Joseph by the Spirit of God made
it known.

Dan. 4.7. You may read there how the King made a large Trial of all the
Scholars and Wise M^^ of Babylon, but there it failed also. Dan. 5 you may
read of the Handwriting that appeared at Belshazer's impious Feast, who
beholding it, his Countenance was changed, and he cried out for the
Astrologers, Magicians and Wise Men, here it failed also. When Christ Jesus was
born of Mary, the Scribes, the Pharisees, the High Priests, with all their
Schollarships, could not find out that he was the Savior, but took him for a
most wicked Impostor: How ^ame it then that they could not find it out, seeing
that they had the Scriptures, that foretold his coming? nay, instead of
knowing him by their Hebrew, Greek and Latin, they persecuted him, and put him
to the most shameful Death; however, many poor illiterate Mechanics had him
revealed unto them. I might bring many Scripture-Testimonies more to my
Defense, but at present do content my self with these, not doubting but such
Hoops as these will make my Vessel hold Water; these following may be used also
if need be.

Bishop Jewel, in his Book against Papists, writ about a hundred years ago,
said thus; The Spirit of God is bound neither to Sharpness of Wit, Bishop ^ewel
against Hard. p. 532.534.
nor to abundance of Learning; oft-times the Unlearned see that which the
Learned cannot see; therefore Epiphanius says, Only to the Children of the
Holy Ghost all the Scriptures are plain and clear; Flesh and Blood is not able
to understand the Holy Will of God, without special Revelation, without the
special Help and Prompting of God's holy Spirit, the Word of God is to the
Reader, be he never so wise and learned, but as the Vision of a fealed Book.

William Dell, It is only the INSPIRATION of GOD that enables a Man to know the
Things of God; William Dell confut Sims. p. 114, 115, 116, 117.
and not man's Study and human Learning.

Dr. Barns Martyr, Burnt for his Faith in King Henry the eighth's days, says,
That Man's Will, Reason, Wisdom, Heart, Soul, or Whatsoever thing is in man,
without the Spirit of God, is but the Wisdom of the Flesh.

Zwinglius, The Scriptures are not to be understood, but by that very same
Spirit by which they were writ. Tom 3. fol. 160.


Peter Martyr, that famous Italian Protestant, teaches us, That the Spirit is
the Abettor, by which we must assure our selves for the understanding of the
Scriptures; Peter Mart. chapter 6.
and that thereby we must discern between the Words of Christ and the Words of
a Stranger.

Erasmus, What Is set forth by man's Device, may be received by Man's Wit; Eras.
on 1 Pet. 1.19 ibid. or 1 Cor. 2.
but the Thing that is set forth by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, requires
an Interpreter inspired with the like Spirit.

Thus, Reader, thou may see who abuses the first Reformers, my Adversary or
I; yet he calls himself a Protestant, but if he be, he is very much apostatized
from the first reformed ones: and for my part, I am a Protestant in this Case
with the aforesaid good men.

And whereas in my Book I did give my Testimony, That none could understand the
Mysteries of God's Kingdom by Human Learning, Arts or Sciences; and he has
said nothing to invalid my Assertion; yet I did not say there, nor was it ever
in my Heart, that Schollarship was not good in its place, (viz.) to translate
any History out of one Language to another, as Hebrew to Greek, Greek to Latin,
Latin to English, English to Welsh, or Welsh to English, etc. in these, and in
Commerce with men by them that travel into strange Countries, and for trading
with them, its of excellent use: But let a man be Master of never so many
Languages, he cannot by them know the true Meaning of the Parable which Christ
spoke, The Kingdom of God may be compared to a Mustard seed; and whoever say
they can, they are in their own Eyes wise; but when they come to the Trial,
they will find it deceitful, as well as Pilate, and the Jews, and many others
did. And John in his Revelations gives in his Judgment in this Case; he says,
The Whore sits upon the Waters; and he says, The Waters are Tongues, Languages
and Peoples.

But may some say, Who is that Whore he there speaks of?

Its plain that a Whore is one that is Adulterated from her Husband; and Christ
Jesus is the Husband of the true Spouse, his Church: but many who have laid
Claim to him for their Husband have adulterated from him in their Lives and
Conversations; and this is that Whore which would make People believe she is an
Honest Wife; she gets the Tongues, and Languages, and Peoples, and upon these
(as John says) she sits (as a Queen) and the Cry now is to all, Come out of
her, my People; partake not of her Sins, lest ye partake of her Plagues.

Pilate and the Jews, who put Christ to Death, had Hebrew, Greek and Latin; for
Pilat wrote a Superscription in Hebrew, Greek and Latin, and set over Christ's
Head when he was Crucified, and the Jews read it, and yet by these Tongues they
knew not Christ.

CHAP. IV. Of his Reflection on me, calling me COOPER, etc.
IN this he spits his Malice at me as much as in any; and indeed, his Book
savours of little else; and in this he thought to Character to Disgrace, by
Reflecting upon my small Original: but I am quite of another mind; for if this
would be so to me, it would certainly be of much more to very many that I could
name, were it not lest any should think I did reflect on them, who are now
Persons of known Repute and Honor in the World, who had smaller Beginnings
than my self: I could bring the Libeller under this Odium also, if he thinks it
be any, if he be the Man he is said to be; but Revenge is none of my Way,
therefore will at present reply to him of this Matter.

He Is fitter to Plant Tobacco, or at b^st to mind hi^ Ax and Saw, Libeller,
page 20.
the Joynter and the Adz, alias, Nedd^, the Criste and the Head-Knife, etc.

Rep. Its known to many now living, in this my Native Country wherein I live,
(and it being also near the place where I was Born) that my genious from a
Child did lead me to Surgery, insomuch that before I was Ten Years old, I
several times overran my School and Home when I heard of any ones being wounded
or hurt, and used all my endeavors, then to see Fractures and Dislocations
reduced, and Wounds dressed, and have been so long missing, that my Parents
thought they had lost me, for which I underwent severe Correction, and the
troublesome Times being then, my Parents sustained great Plunder, and my Father
dyed before I was Eleaven Years old, and my Mother not being then able to
produce so great a Sum of Money as to set me to Chyrurgery, I betook my self to
this honest and necessary Calling he upbraids me with, with several other
things that in those days pleased my mind; yet during all this time, I lost no
opportunity to inform my self in the Practice of Chyrurgery, and continued thus
until I became acquainted with an honest Friend, and good Artist in
Chyrurgery, whose Name was Richard Moore of Salop, who seeing my forwardness to
Chyrurgery, did further me in it, and brought me to Defections in Salop; the
Anotomists being men of known worth in that Practice, whose Names are Dr.
Needham and Dr. Hollins, who at this day are doubtless of deserved Repute in
their Professions (in England) and I being then expert in Drils, and Handy in
Knife and Lancet, and other Inst^uments for that purpose, I set on making a
Skell ton of a man's Bones, which I on^y with the assistance of Richard Moore
performed to their content, at which time they thought me fit to be Licensed
the practice of Chyrurgery, and this is near 20. Years ago, and soon after
^^b^ing taken Prisoner to Denbigh, where I remained a Prisoner near six Years
for the Testimony of Jesus, I then betook my self wholly to the Practice of
Chyrurgery, and God was with me in my undertakings, to him be the Glory
forever; and why then did not my envious Adversary to the abovesaid
Instr^ments, have added tho Plaster Box and Salvatory, the Trafine and the
Head Saw, the Amputation Saw, and the Catling, the Cauterv S^rring and
Catheter, with many more which with Gods assistance I have used with good
success, for the space of near 20. years last past (which was near thrice as
long as I used those he speaks of (...) to the great comfort of many who had
some of them, their Limbs gangrened others Fractured, others Dislocated, others
desperately Wounded by Gun shots, others pierced through with Rapiers, others
with Ulcers and Fistula's, and Cancers, which I exterpated, and by Gods
assistance Cured, yea, many Scores are living Monuments of Gods Mercy to this
day, who were Spectacles of great misery in these respects; And as touching his
R^flection and Detraction, enviously seeking to l^ssen my Reputation in my
present Calling of Chyrurgery, is no more to me then the barking of a Dog; and
though Dogs yelp at the Moon, yet they can not hinder her Light.

I bel^e^e he is Ignorant in his very Trade of quack Chyrurgery, Li^eller, page
2^.
and cannot so much as Enlighten his credulous and very adventerous Patients
with the meaning of the Hip^ and Epigasto^a, the Medulla, Spinolis, and
Piloras, etc.

Rep. Its possible that for all his malign Detraction, that to any whom it may
concern I shall be able to give them such satisfaction, as becomes a
Practitioner in Chyrurgery to do, having for at least 20. Years of great
Industry informed my self in Anatomy, especially that part of it that belongs
to a Chyrurgeon (viz.) of knowing the Structure and Situation of man's Body,
and not only so, but have with painful endeavors informed my self of the best
Authors with the Nature of the Humors, Spi^its and Ferments, and of their
Co-opperation in the Bodies of men, neither have I rested here, but have
acquainted my self with both ancient and modern Institutions, and the Aphorisms
(and Observation) of worthy men; but what my seize are in these
particulars, I think not fit to be mentioned here, nor was it ever in my Heart
to have said thus much, had it not been a force put upon me; however this I
hope I always shall be ready, while God enab^es me (as I have been hitherto)
when called upon to serve my Country, according to my ability, not only in
saying, but doing also, and there is no mark of disgrace which my Adversary
would Characterize me by, to disgrace me with but I would as freely serve my
Country now therein as ever, were I not able to serve them in a better
capacity. I could, if it were needful, bring many Testimonies of famous men in
the practice of Chyrurgery, who were first bred up Mechanics, as Pereas,
Fellix, Worteus, Carranus, Fellopius, Spigellius, Hilldanus and Aquepandente;
nay, Leonard Phycrebeate, a very famous Man, says, Its necessary for Youth to
be so bred up, his Reason is, ^t will make them more handy and dexterous in the
manuel Opperations of Chyrurgery.

Libeller, in page 27. calls me Lay-Preacher, and bids me call my self a Liar
and Fool, for when, said he, did any true Minister of the Church of England
make any fawning Addresses to Richard Cromwell, or bemone the Death of Oliver.

Rep. What I said there concerning the Priests is certainly true; for I said
some of the Priests bemoned the Death of Oliver, and in their Addresses to
Richard, compared Oliver to Moses, and Richard to Joshuah, etc. it therefore
had become him to read the Priests Addresses, before he had charged me with
Liar and Fool, and did it not at this time look too like Revenge, which is none
of my way. I have a Sheet in readiness that I could have produced to my
defense, which if a force be put upon me may come forth, which will show them
in their Colors, and further clear the point; and for my part I heartily wish
we may hear no more of this, except we hear it and see it in the Penetential
Confession of the Offenders.

And although I be a Layman, as he calls me, yet I have a Testimony to bear
for God in this day and time; and since he would exclude such, what makes him
believe the ancient Quakers, who were Laymen, Exodus 3.1. Moses was a Keeper of
Sheep; and was it not this Layman and Quaker that gave record how God created
Man in the Beginning, and the World, and all therein? and did not this Layman
give Testimony of the Flood destroying the old World, and of Noah's being saved
in the Ark, with much more of the Work of God for the D^liverance of his
People, both Patriarchs and Prophets, etc. as may at large be read in his
books? And was not David a Keeper of Sheep, 2 Samuel 7.8. I took thee from the
Sheep-coats, 1 Samuel 24.3. Saul came to the Sheep-coats after David, 1 Kings
19.19. Elisha was a Plowman. Amos 3.4. Amos was a Herds-man. Mat. 4.18. Simon
Peter, and Andrew his Brother were Fishers. John 21. Simon Peter said, I go a
Fishing; they that were with him, said, We go with thee. John ^1.3. He
expresse^ himself after the same manner.

Now you may see how these Preache^^, after they had been preaching to the
Nations, Mat. 10, they fell to their Nets again; and I hope the Libeller dare
not say, but that they were rightly ordained to their Ministry; yet we see that
their way of Livelihood was their Fishing-trade, and not to usurp Authority
over the people; nor were they Incombants to any Places nor inducted to any
Benefice with Right to Tithes of One hundred, or Two Hundred, or Three Hundred
a Year, more or less. Now if Peter or John should have come in their Fishers
Coats to preach the Gospel in our days, would not the Libeller abuse them,
think ye, and bid them mind their Nets and their Fishing-trade, and call them
Lay-Preachers, and scoff at their Fisher's Coats, especially knowing them to be
illiterate men? and did not the great Scholars, (who had the Hebrew, Greek and
Latin in those days) in Derision call Christ a Carpenter's Son, and Blasphemer,
and Devil? thus their Tongues and Languages deceived them; for they knew him
not with all these Tongues, Acts 18.3. Were not Paul, and Pricilla and Aquilla
Tent makers? and were not these true Preachers? sure they were. So all people
that are spiritually awakened may see, how that God in the time of the Prophets
and Apostles made choice of Laymen (as my Adversary hi^ style is) to be his
Minist^rs: but it may be the Libeller thinks that now the Case is altered, and
that God has changed his mind from Laymen to Scholars only; if not, why are
Laymen excluded now adays? is no^ thi^ to limit the Holy One of Israel? who
will not be limited, but is now risen in his Power in a poor and despised
Remnant, to whom he has made known a heavenly Principle, w^^ch is the Spirit
and Light of Christ Jesus, God's Anointed, the Second Adam, who is made a
Quickening Spirit (as says the Apostle) in man; and thi^ was it I bore
Testimony to in my Book, and its not fe lo de se to deny all outward Teaching,
(in the days of the Gospel) that springs not from Christ Jesus, the Anointed of
God, who is enjoyed within by the true Christians in this Age, as was by such
in former Ages. Glory to the Lord God for the same. Christ says, God is a
Spirit, and they who Worship him, they must worship him in the Spirit and in
the Truth.

And this spirit is the true Teacher, which we have believed in, and this is he
whom God has anointed to preach good Tidings to the Poor, even Christ Jesus in
his Children; this is he whom God has sent to bind up the brokenhearted, and
to proclaim Liberty to the Captives, and the opening of the Prison to those
that are bound, and to proclaim the Acceptable Year of the Lord, and the Day of
the Vengeance of our God to all that oppose the Appearance of his Son; yea, and
to comfort all that truly mourn for Sin; yea, and to appoint to all that mourn
in Sion, to give to them Beauty for Ashes, and the Oil of Joy for mourning, and
the Garment of Praise for the Spirit of Heaviness, that they may be called
Trees of Righteousness, the planting of the Lord.

The Conclusion to the Welsh.
Y cymry anwyl cynor yr apostol oedd at bawb yddynt brofi^pob peth a glynu wrth
y peth sydda, ag nid wgf in disyfy dim yngwaneg genych: agos gwnei di velly in
die gydwybod a cymo anwyl a cei di wir far no ba wreiddin y does lythur ar
atebwr.

T. W.

An Epistle to my dear Friends, the People in Derision called Quakers.
MY Everl^stingly Endeared and Beloved Friends, my Soul in a deep sense of the
great Love of God, and of the Mercy of the meek and lowly Jesus, does dearly
salute you all, heartily desiring, that both you and I may spend all the little
remainder of our time with bowed down Souls, in holy Obedience to the holy
Precep^s of the Immaculate Lamb who lives forever, who is now risen in Power
and great Glory, and has revealed his own everlasting Arm of Power to lead us
out of Captivity and Bondage, and has given every one of us in measure of his
blessed eternal Spirit to be our Guide and Conducter to that blessed
Inheritance prepared for us before the World began. Therefore, my dear Friends,
wait diligently, and give Obedience to the pure and holy Motions of the divine
Light, Life, Power and Spirit of God and Christ in you, for the Testimony of
Jesus is upon record, Romans 8.14. that they that are led by the Spirit of God,
are the Children of God. And I desire all the Young-convinced, who have not yet
known what it is to wade through the many Tribul^tions, Not to be daunted with
the Vapors of any Goliath, or Envious Enemy; and let none in the least think
much at this kind of Treatment, which I and my dear Brethren have met with from
this and many other Angry Adversaries; but keep your Eye to Christ Jesus, who
is our Pattern, who said, Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in Heart: And
forever blessed be his Name, I can in truth bear this Testimony, That I have
learnt to forgive Enemies, to bless them that curse me, and to pray for them
that despightfully use me and persecute me. And although the Libeller has
employed his learning, his wit and parts most horridly and despightfully to
abuse you above most that ever I read, yet do I from my Heart desire the Lord,
if it be his Will, to forgive him; and though I have resented his ill behavior
to me and you, and the blessed Truch with just Rebuke, and must do yet again
(if the Lord will) if Cause be given; yet it is in the Love of God, and in the
innocent Nature of his Son.

And dear Friends, Its the desire of my Soul, that every one of you may be true
Witnesses that this Love of God do always predominate in your hearts toward
your Enemies; for nothing has happened to us, but what has abundantly more
happened to our Lord himself; For his Visage was marred more than any man's,
and his Form more than the Sons of men; he has no Form nor Comeliness in him;
he was despised and rejected of men; a Man of Sorrows and acquainted with
Grief: surely he has born our Griefs, and carried our Sorrows; he was wounded
for our Transgressions; he was bruised for our Iniquities; the Chastizement of
our Peace was upon him, and by his Stripes were we healed: all we, like Sheep,
have gone astray, we have turned every one to his own Way, and the Lord laid on
him the Iniquity of us all; he was oppressed, he was afflicted, yet he opened
not his Mouth; he was brought as a Lamb to the Slaughter, and as a Sheep before
the Shearer, dumb, so he opened not his Mouth; he was taken from Prison and
from Judgment; who shall declare his Generation! he was cut off out of the Land
of the Living, and for our Transgression was he stricken. Oh! dear Friends, how
can we but be overcome with such Love as this! for it has none to compare to
it: Oh, that it may be imprinted in every one of our Hearts with so large a
Character, that our great Enemies may be persuaded that the Love of God dwells
abundantly in our Hearts, both toward Priests and People, Professors and
Profane; and that which we desire for them is, that they also may partake of
the same Love of God, which Love will destroy Enmity and Discord, and take away
the ground of war and strife, yea the very ground of all plotting and
contriving hurt to any, either high or low: and this, dear Friends, I know you
have received, and it is the most blessed Treasure; for as every one holds it
fast, they shall know it to be a Bond of Peace, even the Peace of God, which by
his Son Christ Jesus is given unto us, which as we abide faithful in his
blessed Truth, shall never be taken away from us. So in a living Sense of this
undefiled Love of God do I dearly salute you all, where this may come, who am
your Brother in the Fellowship of the Gospel of Peace, who am known to the
World by the Name

Thomas Win.
Caerwis, the 1st Day of the 11th Month, 1678.
Postscript.
THis infamous Libeller in page 2, and 3. lays down his Charge against the
said Thomas Win thus:

Libeller. 1st, He says, That all the Writers of the holy Scriptures, and all
the Saints of God mentioned there, were Quakers, page 11, and 14.

Secondly, That the present Quakers have got the Key of David, with which they
(and they only) can unlock all Mysteries, p. 11.

Thirdly, That all Scholars (especially the Priests) having quite lost this
Key, cannot tell the Meaning of the Scriptures; and that their Hearers have not
so much Discretion as Pharaoh and Nebuchadnezzar bad, p. 12.

Fourthly, That the Ministers of God, the Priests of this Church, and those
that hear them, are all running Headlong to Destruction, p. 14. He further
adds thus, viz.

These are the main Pillars our Quaker superstructs all his Foolary upon, and
most justly deserves for his Pains to be rewarded with a Whipping-post, that by
taking a lawful Dance about that, he might assay also to prove the Antiquity of
a Lancashire Horn Pipe.

Reply, In all these four Particulars, this Libeller does falsely charge the
said T. W. as may be seen in those pages of his Book, which the Libeller
quotes. In p. 14. T.W. says thu^, Oh! you Priests of all sorts, I beseech you
for Christ's sake, do not run thus headlong to Destruction, and draw the poor
blind People after you. Reader, seriously consider how falsely and wickedly this
Libeller has dealt with T. W. For T. W. does not say, That the Ministers of
God, the Priests of this Church, and those that hear them are all running
headlong to Destruction; and therefore this Author has grossly belyed T. W. in
this matter. But more fully to prove that this Libeller has grossly belyed the
said T. W. take T. W. his own words as follows, p. 21, 22. who writing
against the Papists, Protestants, Presbyterians, Independants and Anabaptists,
I know (says he) there are some particular persons of each of you who are come
so far to be led and guided by the holy Principle in them that they dare not
scoff nor jear any, but are troubled to see any others do so, who have showed
their Moderation so much, as they themselves have not escaped being Sharers in
the Reproach of the Quakers. These I distinguish from the rest, and what I
charge the aforementioned with; and I heartily desire that they may witness a
growth in the heavenly Principle, which will further them in holy living, and
make them able to discern who they are that fear God, and who fear him not.
Thus far T. W. word for word. Thus the Libeller is plainly proved to be a
Forger of Lies, and his Pamphlet to be made up of Lies and Scoffing, writ in a
Spirit of Envy, and therefore to be abhorred by all people who come to a sight
or knowledge thereof.

Secondly, The said Libeller charge the said T. VV. with saying, That all
Scholars, especially the Priests, have quite lost this Key, cannot tell the
Meaning of the Scripture: And that their Hearers have not so much discretion as
Pharaoh and Nebuchadnezzar had.

Rep. This is another forged Lie, or rather two Lies; f^^ first T. W. believes
and certainly knows that there are Scholars who have the Key, and know the
meanings of the Scriptures, and he also knows that there are some who hear the
Priests, who have as much discretion as Pharaoh and Nebuchadnezzar had, and
this he shows in what is said before in page 21, 22. of his Book.

Secondly, This Libeller charge the said T. W. with saying, That the present
Quakers have got the Key of David, with which they (and they ONLY) can unlock
all Mysteries.

Rep. The said Libeller has forged and told a Lie in this charge against T. W.
for though T. W. does say, that The Quakers at this day have the Key of David,
which does unlock all the Mysteries of all his Brethrens Writings: Yet T. W.
does not say, that the Quakers only have this Key.

Fourthly, The said Libeller charges the said T. W. with saying (in page 11,
and 14. of his Book) That all the Writers of the holy Scriptures, and all the
Saints of God mentioned there, were Quakers.

Rep. T.W. does not say in the aforesaid pages, That all the Writers of the
holy Scriptures, and all the Saints of God mentioned there were Quakers;
therefore this Libeller has belyed him in this matter: But if T. W. had said,
That all the Writers of the holy Scriptures, and all the Saints of God
mentioned there were Quakers, yet those sayings may be true for any thing this
Libeller knows, or for any thing he has offered in this his Pamphlet to prove
the contrary: The Apostle said, God has concluded all under Sin, that he might
have Mercy upon all. Again, the Apostle said, We have all sinned, and come
short of the Glory of God. Again, We have all been gone astray as Sheep without
a Shepherd, but now we are returned to the Captain of our Salvation, and Bishop
of our souls. And the Apostle exhorted, saying, Work out your Salvation with
Fear and Trembling; for it is God that works in us to will and to do of his
own good pleasure, as says the Apostle. This Libeller in page 4. of his
Pamphlet says, We ought to work out our Salvation with Fear and Trembling. Now
seeing all have sinned as the Apostle said and seeing the Apostle exhorts
People to work out their Salvation with Fear and Trembling: If they take the
Apostles counsel then they must work out their Salvation with Fear and
Trembling; and if (...) do so, then they do Quake or Tremble, and so in a sense
may be called Quakers or Tremblers, the words Quaking and Trembling being of
one and the same Signification. The holy Prophet said, Serve the Lord with
Fear, and rejoice in him with Trembling, etc. And the Lord God said, To this
man will I look, even to him that is poor and of a contrite Spirit, and
Tremblesh at my Word. Again, the Lord says, Hear the Word of the Lord, ye
that Tremble at his Word; your Brethren that hated you, that cast you out for
my Names sake, said, Let the Lord be glorified; but he shall appear to your
Joy, and they shall be ashamed, Isa. 66.2, 5.

Reader, Take notice, that though we own Quaking and Trembling, as the People
of God did both before the Law and under the Law, and also in the days of the
Gospel, yet we have not given our selves that Name Quaker or Quakers, but our
Persecutors and Enemies gave us that Name in Scorn and Envy: But the Names
which God and Christ gives (unto those who truly believe and continue in
obedience) are, Saints, and Servants, Children of God, and Children of the
Light, and Disciples of Christ; and the Apostle called the Believers in Christ,
Christians; the Apostle says, If ye be Reproached for the Name of Christ
happy, are ye; for the Spirit of Glory and of God rests upon you: but let
none of you suffer as a Murderer, or as a Thief, or as an Evil-doer, or as a
busy Body in other men's matters: yet if any Man suffer as a Christian, let him
not be ashamed, but let him glorisie God on this behalf, 1 Pet. 4.15, 16.

Reader, Here note, first, that those who believe in and suffer for Christ, the
Apostle calls them Christians; and this Name we own as proper to us, more
proper then the Name Quaker or Trembler: yet as we have and do Tremble at the
Word of the Lord, as the Prophets and Apostles, and People of God formerly did;
if any in reverence, honor and love to the Power of God, at which we Tremble,
do call us Quakers or Tremblers, this we own; but the Name Quakers, as given us
in envy and scorn by this Libeller and many others, we deny and reject.
Secondly, observe that such who suffer for Murder, Theft, etc. do not suffer
as Christians; for Murderers and Thieves are no true Christians, but are in
the Nature of Heathens.

These four particular Charges this Libeller makes the Foundation of his
scoffing Atheistical Pamphlet, called, Work for a Cooper; and herein they are
all proved False, Lying and Slanderous, and therefore the Devil is the Author
of his said Pamphlet; For he is the Author and Father of all Lies and Liars, as
Christ said.

The said Libeller quotes Rev. 21. where it is said, A^l Liars shall have their
part in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone.

Here this Libeller may read his Portion, and what will be the reward of his
Work, if he do not unfeignedly Repent: but it is his unfeigned Repentance and
Salvation that T.W. and the People in scorn by him called Quakers unfeignedly
desire.

Concerning FEAR.

The aforesaid Libeller, who Scoffs at Fear and Trembling, says, page 10. The
worst of men have commonly the greatest share of Fear.

Rep. If this Libeller had been in that holy Fear of God which is the beginning
of Wisdom, which is as a Fountain of Life, which preserves from the Snares of
Death, and which keeps the Heart clean, as says the Prophet, then he would
have distinguished betwixt Fear and Fear, as Christ and his Apostles have done:
Christ said, I say unto you, my Friends, Be not afraid of them that kill the
Body, and after that have no more that they can do; but I will fore-warn you
whom you shall fear, Fear him which after he has killed, has Power to cast
into Hell; Yea, I say unto you, fear him, Luke 12.4, 5. Mat. 10.28. The Author
to the Hebrews says of Christ, That in the days of his Flesh, when he had
offered up Prayer and Supplication, with strong Crying and Tears, unto him that
was able to save him from Death, and was heard in that he feared, Heb. 5.7.
Take notice of this, that the Man Christ Jesus, who was made of a Woman under
the Law, as the Apostle says, in the days of his Flesh, when ho^ prayed unto
the Father, he was heard in that he feared: Thus the Apostle shows that even
the man Christ Jesus, who sinned not, was not without holy Fear and Reverence
toward the Father. Again, the same Author exhorted the Saints, saying,
Wherefore we receiving a Kingdom which cannot be moved, let us have Grace
whereby we may serve God acceptably with Reverence and GODLY FEAR, Heb. 12.28.
Again, But as he who has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of
Conversation, because it is written, Be ye Holy for I am holy; and if you call
on the Father, who without respect of Persons judges according to every man's
work, pass the time of your sojourning here with FEAR, 1 Pet. 1.15, 16, 17.
Again, he exhorted, saying, If ye suffer for Righteousness sake happy are je;
and be not afraid of their Terror, neither be Troubled, but Sanctify the Lord
God in your Hearts, and be ready always to give answer to every man that
asks you a Reason of the Hope that is in you with Meekness and FEAR, Chap.
3.14, 15. Here the Apostle distinguishes betwixt the Fear of God and the Fear
of Wicked Men; he exhorts them to the holy Fear of God, but forbids them to
Fear wicked Men: And thus the Apostle agrees concerning Fear, with the Command
of Christ, who says, Fear not them which kill the Body, etc. but are not able
to kill the Soul, but Fear him who is able to destroy both Soul and Body in
Hell, Mat. 10.28. Here the Apostle exhorts those that call on the Name of the
Father, to pass the time of their sojourning here with Fear; so that they who
call upon the Name of the Father with acceptance, must not cast off the holy
Fear of God, but must keep and abide in it all the days they live upon Earth,
according to the holy Saying of the Man of God, who said, Blessed is the Man
that Fears at All Times.

In page 4. this Libeller says, Till we have Mortified our sinful Affections
and Lusts, we ought to work out our Salvation with Fear and Trembling.

Rep. It appears by his Envy, Scoffing and Lying, that he has not yet
mortified his sinful Affections and Lusts, and therefore according to his own
Principle he ought to Fear and Tremble before the Lord. But as a Plea for
casting off the holy Fear of God, he quotes the words of Zacharias, which he
spoke concerning the Promise of God, that he would grant unto us, That we being
delivered out of the hands of our Enemies might serve him without Fear in
Holiness and Righteousness, etc. Luke 1.74.75.

Rep. His Lies and Scoffing does show that he is not yet redeemed from under
the Power of his Soul's Enemy; he does not serve God in Holiness and
Righteousness: and he wickedly wrests and perverts Zacharias's words
before-cited, for those who did receive the Promise of God, who were delivered
out of the hands of their Enemies, they served God in Righteousness and
Holiness, without the Fear of their Enemies, but Not without the Fear of God.
For any man to say, That he serves God in Holiness, etc. but does not Fear God;
this man is No True Christian, but a RANTER. Again, this profane Scribler, as
a Plea for casting off the holy Fear of God, quotes Paul's words to Timothy
(thus) For God has not given us the Spirit of Fear, but of Power, of Love and
of a Sound Mind: Thus far he quotes the Apostle's words, but like a Treacherous
man leaves out the next following words, which shows what fear it was that they
were out of; the following words are these, viz. Be not thou therefore ashamed
of the Testimony of our Lord, nor of me his Prisoner; but be thou partaker of
the Afflictions of the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.7, 8. Here the Apostle shows that it
was not the fear of God that they were out of, but the fear of wicked men,
their Persecutors, under whose wicked Power Paul then was a Prisoner. Again,
this profane man, as a Plea for casting off godly Fear, he quotes the Apostle
John's words, who says, Perfect love casts out Fear: But Treacherously or
Ignorantly leaves out the very next Verse to those words he cites, which verse
has only these following words in it, which words show what fear it was that
perfe^^ love cast out, viz. Herein is our Love made perfect, that we may have
boldness in the day of Judgment, because as he is, so are we in this world, 1 John 4.17, 18. Here the Apostle shows that their Establishment in the Truth,
yea, in the God of all Truth, gave them dominion over the Devil, and over the
fear of him, and over Fear of torment and punishment with him; but yet they
retain a godly fear, according to the Command of Christ, who said, I will teach
you whom ye shall fear, Fear not him who kills the Body, but cannot kill the
Soul, but fear him who can cast Soul and Body into Hell. And the Man Christ
Jesus himself, in the days of his flesh, had a fear and reverence toward the
Father, as the Apostle shows, and as I have showed before: And the Apostles and
Prophets lived in Godly fear, and exhorted others unto it, and to continue in
it; and they that do, and teach the contrary, which this vain Scribler does,
they are ungodly men, such as the Apostle speaks of, who do despite unto the
spirit of Grace, who live want only and profanely upon the Earth, such are
Sons of Belial, who live without God and Christ's Yoke, who are like the wild
Bullock unaccustomed to the Yoke, and like the wild Asses Colt in the
Wilderness: And VVo unto such if they Repent not; and if they do not forsake
their Ungodly ways, they must have their portion with the Devil and his Angels
in the Lake of Endless misery, where the worm never dies, neither is the fire
ever quenched. Christ says, Come unto me ye that are weary and heavy laden,
and I will give you rest; come, take my Yoke upon you, and learn of me; for my
Yoke is easy, and my burden is light. They who are heavy laden with their
sins, and weary of their sins, they are invited by him to come unto him; and
they that come unto him, must believe in that spiritual and divine Light,
wherewith he has enlightened them, who lights every man that comes into the
World, according to Joh. 1.9. and Joh. 8.12. and 12.46. Luke 2. and 32. Act.
13. and 47. Joh. 3.19, 20. and see the ^^st Epist. of John 5.7. where the
Apostle says, God is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all. If we walk in
the Light, as he is in the Light, then have we fellowship one with an other,
and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin. And they who
believe in the Light, wherewith Christ has enlightened them, this will let
them see their sins, and lead them to Repent of their sins which are past; so
God will forgive them their sins which are past, and will strengthen them to
resist sin in time to come; such who so do, are the real Disciples of Christ,
who said, he that will be my Disciple must deny himself, he must take up his
Cross daily and follow me. And such come to be baptized by Christ, by his holy
spirit and fire, which burns up and consumes all filthiness of flesh and
spirit; and such come to answer the holy Exhortation of the Apostle, who
exhorted the Saints saying, Having therefore these Promises dearly Beloved) let
us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, perfecting
Holiness in the FEAR of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. Take notice here, that the Apostle
exhorted these believing Corinthians to Perfect Holiness in the fear of God, so
then they were not to cast off godly fear, when they were come to Holiness,
even Perfect Holiness. God says by the Prophet David, O ye Sons of Men! how
long will ye turn my Glory into shame? How long will ye love Vanity and seek
after Leasing? Selah. But know, that the Lord has set apart him that is godly
for himself; stand in awe and sin not, etc. Psalm. 4.2, 3, 4. So all those who
desire to be kept out of sin must keep in the Fear or Awe of God continually;
for as I have showed before, The Fear of the Lord God is as a Fountain of Life,
which preserves from the Snares of Death, etc.

God has promised unto his People, saying, I will give them one Heart and one
Way, that they may FEAR me FOREVER for the good of them and their Children
after them -- I will put my FEAR in their Hearts, that they shall not depart
from me, Jer. 32.39, 40. Here God who cannot Lie has promised, that he will
put his Fear in his Peoples Hearts, and that they shall fear him forever; then
they must NOT cast off Gods fear, or Godly Fear, which the profane and
debauched Ranters and Atheists do, and as this ungodly Scribler does in his
scoffing, lying and malicious Pamphlet, as does largely appear. God has
promised by the Mouth of the Prophet M^lachi, saying, Unto you that fear my
Name shall the Sun of Righteousness arise with healing under his Wings, and ye
shall go forth and grow as Calves in the Stall, Mal. 4.

This Libeller says, page the 10th, That the worst of Men have commonly the
greatest share of Fear.

Rep. That share of Fear which the worst of Men have, is not the Holy Fear of
God, or not Godly fear, but their Fear is of the same kind which the Devils
fear is, of which Fear the Apostle James makes mention of in his Epistle, whose
Words this Libeller quotes, and wickedly wrest to embo^den and encourage People
to cast off Godly Fear, in which all that are Godly do steadfastly abide, and in
their so abiding do enjoy the pure Power and Wisdom of God, by which they a^e
preserved out of Sin, which is the Devils work. God says by the Mouth of the
Prophet Isaiah to his People, Say ye not a confederacy to them to whom this
People shall say a Confederacy, neither fear ye their Fear, nor be afraid;
sanctify the Lord of Host himself, and let him be your FEAR, and let him be
your Dread, Isa. 8.12, 13. Christ Jesus, who is First and Last, which was dead
and is alive, and lives fo^evermore, said unto the Church in Smirna, Fear none
of these things which thou shall suffer; behold the Devil shall cast some of
you into Prison, that you may be tried; and ye shall have Tribulation ten days:
be thou Faithful unto Death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life, Rev. 2.10.

As concerning the Wicked, the Apost^e says, There is NO FEAR of God before
their Eyes, Romans 3.18. and Psalm 36.1. Again, And un^o Man he said, Behold, the
FEAR of the Lord, that is Wisdom; and to depart from Evil, is Understanding,
Job 28 28. Again, The Fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom, Psalm.
111.10. Again, The Fear of the Lord is the beginning of Knowledge; but Fools
despise Wisdom and Instruction, Prove. 1.7. Again, speaking of the Wicked, he
says, They hated Knowledge, and did NOT choose the FEAR of the Lord; they would
none of my Counsel, they would none of my Reproof, therefore shall they eat of
their own Way, and be filled with their own Devices, for the turning away of
the Simple (or Ignorant) shall slay them, and the prosperity of Fools shall
destroy them; but whosoever hearkeneth unto me shall dwell safely, and shall be
quiet from fear of Evil, verse the 29th to the end. Here God speaking by
Solomon, says, The Fear of the Lord is the beginning of Knowledge, verse. 7.
and in verse. 29. he complains of the wicked, saying, They hated Knowledge,
and did not choose the Fear of the Lord. Therefore Misery and Destruction came
upon them; but says God, Whosoever hearkeneth unto me, shall dwell safely, and
shall be quiet from fear of Evil. So those who choose Gods Fear, and take his
Counsel, are kept by his mighty Power, in that which is well pleasing to him;
and such are not terrified with the fear of Evil, for they know God to be their
Keeper, who keeps them out of the Evil that is in the World, and from the wrath
and punishment which he will bring upon the Wicked, who choose not his sear, nor
take his counsel, who says, Be ye Holy, for I the Lord your God am Holy. Here
God distinguishes betwixt Godly Fear, which the Godly do steadfastly abide in,
and the fear of Evil which brings Torment upon the Ungodly: Again, The Fear of
the Lord is a Fountain of Life, to depart out of the Snares of Death, Prove.
14.27. Again, By the Fear of the Lord men depart from Evil, Chap. 16.6. Again,
Better is a little with the Fear of the Lord, than great Treasure and Trouble
therewith, Chap. 15.16. The Apostle Peter exhorted the Saints, saying, Fear
God, 1 Pet. 2.17. Again, the Angel that preached the everlasting Gospel, says,
Fear God and give Glory to him, Rev. 14.7.

Many more Scripture-Testimonies might be brought to confirm this great Truth
(viz.) that Godly Fear is to be continued in by Godly Men and Women unto the
end of their days upon Earth; but what I have already written, does
sufficiently confute the Ranting Doctrines, and Notions of this profane
Scribler: And though I dearly own the Testimony of the holy Scriptures, and
therefore bring them for the confirmation of this great Truth, yet that in
which my greatest assurance lies, is the living experience that I have had
through many Years exercise of the excellency and preciousness of Godly Fear,
or the holy Fear of God, my Heart and Soul is deeply affected therewith,
because of the preciousness and excellency thereof, therefore I commend it unto
all People, as that which is indispensably needful to be come into and kept in,
without which no Man or Woman can come to Peace and Rest with God: And I
tenderly exhort and warn the Sons and Daughters of men, to choose the Fear of
the Lord God, in whose hand their Life is, and to flee from all Ranting
Atheistical Books, Doctrines, Principles and Practices which would keep them
out of, or lead them out of Godly Fear, or the holy Fear of God, and every one
apply your Hearts to the Spirit of Truth which God has sent, which shows you
what is good and what is evil, believe in that, and attend upon it, and be
careful to keep out of that which you know to be Evil, and let your care be to
obey God, in what you know to be your duty; and as you are obedient to him, in
what he has made known unto you to be your duty, that which is further needful
for you to know, which you yet know not, God will freely make it known unto you.

That which is and has been the hurt of many, is their hunting after the
Knowledge of the Secrets and Mysteries of God in their SELF-WILL, while they
have neglected to obey God in that they already knew, and by this means many
have hunted themselves into Ranterism and Atheism, which is lamentable to
behold at this Day.

Others there are who desire not to know any thing, but the following the
foolish fleshly Lusts and vile Affections which War against their Souls, who
giving up themselves thereto, and pursuing the same with a greedy Appetite,
become swallowed up therein, and drowned in Perdition or Destruction thereby;
as the holy Apostles have testified; see 1 Timothy 6.9. and 1 Pet. 2.11. The
Apostle says, The Lord knows how to deliver the Godly out of Temptations,
and to reserve the Unjust unto the day of Judgment to be punished; but chiefly
them that walk after the Flesh, in the Lust of Uncleanness, and despise
Government, presumptuous are they, SELF-WILLED, etc. Such speak Evil of the
things they understand not, and shall utterly Perish in their own Corruption,
having Eyes full of Adultery, and that cannot cease from Sin, beguling unstable
Souls; an Heart they have exercised with Covetous Practices; cursed Children,
which have for saken the right Way; these are Wells without Water, Clouds that
are carried with a Tempest, to whom the Mist of Darkness is reserved forever:
For when they speak great swelling Words of Vanity, they allure through the
Lusts of the Flesh, through much Wantonness those that were CLEAN ESCAPED from
them, who live in Error; while they promise them Liberty, they themselves are
the Servants of Corruption, etc. see 2 Pet. 2. verse 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15. to
the end, read the Chapter through. Again, the Apostle says, This second
Epistle, Beloved, I now write unto you, in both which I stir up your pure
minds, by way of remembrance, that ye may be mindful of the Words which were
spoken before by the holy Prophets, and of the COMMANDMENT of us the Apostles
of the Lord and Savior; knowing this first, that there shall come in the last
days Scoffers, walking after their own Lust, etc. Chap. 3. Verse 1, 2, 3.
Again, Love not the World, neither the things that are in the World: If any man
love the World, the Love of the Father is not in him; for all that is in the
World, the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life, is
not of the Father, but is of the World; and the World passes away, and the
Lust thereof; but he that does the Will of God abides forever, 1 John 2.15,
16, 17. Jude the Servant of Jesus Christ, writing against the false Teachers
and rebellious Apostates, said, They walk after their own Lusts, etc. but said
unto the Believers, Beloved, remember ye the Words which were spoken before of
the Apos^les of our Lord Jesus, how that they told you, there should be Mockers
in the last Times, who should walk after their own ungodly Lusts, Jude 16.17,
18.

Oh Reader! seriously read and ponder these weighty and holy Sayings of the
Apostles of Christ; and flee from those fleshly and ungodly Lusts, which War
against the Soul, and drown those in Destruction who do not unfeignedly Repent
thereof, and turn therefrom while God gives them a Time of Visitation, while he
visits them by his holy Spirit of Grace, Life and Strength, to lead them
thereby to unfeigned Repentance, and to redeem them thereby out of all sinful
and ungodly Lust: O blessed are all they who turn unto him, while he strives
with them to gather them unto himself: but most miserable are those who turn
not unto him, but go on after their own ungodly Lusts, who set at naught all
Gods Counsel, both that which is immediately given them by his Spirit inwardly,
and also that which is given by him through his Instruments, his Prophets,
Apostles, and his faithful Servants, which is witnessed unto by the Light of
Christ Jesus, wherewith every man that comes into the World is lighted,
according to John 1.9. as is showed before. Of this evil Generation the Prophet
complains, they say unto God, Depart from us, for we desire not the Knowledge
of thy Ways: What is the Almighty that we should serve him? and what profit
should we have if we Pray unto him? Job 21.14, 15. and 22.17. The Holy Prophet
said, I sought the Lord, and he heard me, etc. The Angel of the Lord encampeth
round about them that fear him, and delivers them. O! taste and see that the
Lord is good; blessed is the Man that trusts in him. O, fear the Lord, ye his
Saints; for there is no want to them that fear him: The young Lions do lack,
and suffer Hunger; but they that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing.
Come ye Children, hearken unto me, and I will teach you the Fear of the Lord.
What man is he that desires Life, loves Days, that he may see good? Keep thy
Tongue from Evil, and thy Lips from speaking Guile. Depart from Evil, and do
Good; seek Peace and pursue it. The Eyes of the Lord are upon the Righteous,
and his Ears are open unto their Cry. The Face of the Lord is against them that
do Evil, to cut off the remembrance of them; etc. The Righteous cry, and the
Lord hears, and delivers them out of all their Troubles. The Lord is nigh
unto them that are of a broken Heart, and saves such as be of a contrite
Spirit. Many are the Afflictions of the Righteous; but the Lord delivers him
out of them all, Psalm 38.4. to the 19th.

Thus Reader the Psalmist declares of the Mercies and Judgments of the Lord, as
he had seen and experienced them.

The Author of the Scoffing Book, called, Work for a Cooper, would no doubt be
esteemed a Religious man: The Apostle says, If any man among you seem to be
Religious, and bridleth not his Tongue -- this man's Religion is Vain. Pure
Religion and Undefiled before God and the Father, is this, to visit the
Fatherless and Widows in their Affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from
the World, James 1.26, 27. That this man has not a Bridle to his Tongue, and
that his Religion is Vain; take his own Book for proof, which is plentifully
furnished with Lies, Scoffing and Railing, a little of which I may here Collect.

Thomas VVynne is known amongst his Neighbors to be a Sober Honest Man; I have
known him for above Twenty Years last past, and I never knew nor heard other of
him, till this profane Scoffers Pamphlet appeared against him: These are the
Names he gives him, viz. Our second Tom of Bedlam, page 6. Our Cinque and
Cater, page 7. Note here, this vain man speaks here more like a profane Player
at Dice, then a sober Religious man. Again, Our wise man of Gotham* page 8.
Again, speaking of T.W. and his Friends, says, Their Hocuspocus Tricks are now
much laid aside, page 13. Again, speaking of the said People, says, That they
are the most Formal Coxcombs produceable in this Age, page 15. Again, page 1^.
he renders T.W. A beastly Quaker. Again, scoffing at T.W. says, He knows not
what Consanguinity there is betwe^n the Porpos and the VVhale, or the Craw-Fish
and the Lobster, page 21. Again, he call him A Robber upon Gods High Way, page
23. Again, he calls him Wicked Ferry-man of Hell, page 24.

Thus I have collected a few of his bad Words and ill Names he has given to an
Honest Man; by which the Reader may see that his Tongue is not bridled as it
ought to be; and that his Religion is vain.

Now I shall collect a few of his Lies. He says, The Quakers would endeavor
to obtrude that they had been with God, etc. and have received the Spirit of
Prophecy, with the Gift of Miracles, and all other that God had or could
bestow, page 12.

Answ. He names no persons on whom he fastens this his charge, but throws it at
the Quakers in General: I say, it is a Horrid Slander, proceeding from the
Father of Lies; for though we do own that God has given the Manifestion of his
Spirit to profit withal; and some amongst us do prophecy and testify of Christ
and of God in the Spirit, which he has given; yet we never said, That we had
received all other that God had or could bestow; This is an Abominable Slander;
their is none that will believe him herein, but those who are given up to
believe Lies.

Again, That they could to a minute foretell the Last and Dreadful Day of
Judgment.

Answ. This Charge is general against the Quakers, he names no Person or
Persons that said so. I return it as a Lie forged against the People of God,
and I exhort him to Repent of that and the rest of his Wickedness.

Again thus, And heal more Diseases then all the World could possibly need help
for.

Answ. This is another horrid Slander that the Wicked One has in Envy led him
to cast upon us; the Lord Rebuke thee, thou Profane Man.

Again thus, That they and they only were those of whom it was said, They
should lay their hands upon the Sick, and they should recover.

Answ. This is another horrid Slander, proceeding from the Father of Lies, for
which God will bring thee to Judgment.

Again thus, And that God meant them only, when he said, I will pour my Spirit
upon all Flesh.

Answ. This is another horrid Lie; for we believe that he poured forth his
Spirit upon his Prophets and Apostles, his Sons and Daughters and Handmaids,
according to his Promise, in former time; and he is pouring it sorth in this
Day, and we believe he will pour it sorth, according to his Promise, upon all
Flesh; but we do not believe that the People called Quakers are only intended
to be that All Flesh.

Mark, In the compass of nine Lines he has told five Lies in page 12. there
being five in so little compass, Reader, thou may conclude there is a great
many more in the whole Book: These few here may suffice to give thee a taste
and sense of the Wickedness of the man, and to show thee how Wickedly he deals
with the People called Quakers. It is our desire that he may Repent of these
things, and do so no more, that so he may know forgiveness of the same, and may
come to Peace and Rest with God in his Latter-end. God speaking of his People,
said, Surely they are my People, Children that will not Lie; so he was their
Savior, Isa. 63.8. A Faithful Witness will not Lie; but a False VVitness will
utter Lies, Prove. 14.5. Ye are of your Father the Devil, and the Lusts of your
Father you will do; he was a Murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the
Truth; when he speaks a Lie, he speaks of his own, for he is a Liar, and
the Father of it, John 8.44. A False Witness shall not be Unpunished, and he
that speaks Lies shall not escape, Prove. 19.5. They bend their Tongues like
Bows for Lies, but they are not valiant for the Truth, Jer. 9.3.

In this POSTSCRIPT I have showed the Falseness and Wickedness of this Scornful
man, and have rebuked him in the Love and Fear of God; and I unfeignedly desire
his Repentance and Salvation, who am a Lover of Truth and Righteousness, who
desires the Eternal good of all People, but I Hate Lying, Envy, and all
Wickedness.

William Gibson.
London, the 25th of the 8th Month, 1679.
THE END.

