AN ESSAY ON THE Value of the Mines, LATE OF Sir Carbery Price.

By WILLIAM WALLER, Gent. Steward of the said MINES.

Writ for the private Satisfaction of all the Partners.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, MDCXCVIII.

THE Epistle Dedicatory TO Sir HUMPHRY MACKWORTH, CHAIRMAN, And now Standing in
the Place of EDWARD PRICE, Esquire and late of Sir CARBERY PRICE; AND TO The most
Noble, his Grace, the Duke of LEEDS, The Right Honorable the Marquess of
CARMARTHEN, The Right Honorable Pawlet, Earl of BULLINGBROOK, The Right
Honorable James, Lord Viscount LANESBOROUGH, The Right Honorable William,
Lord Digby, The Honorable Sir Humphry Edwin, Knight, Lord Mayor of LONDON, The
Honorable Hatton Compton, Esquire
AND TO The Honored, the Lady Ann Cholmley, Mrs. Mary Cholmley, Mrs. Bridget
Pesball, Mrs. Jane Bickerstaffe, Mrs. Ann Hill, Mrs. Elizabeth Lloyd, Widow,
Mrs. Eliz. Lloyd, Spinster, Mrs. Lucy Wright; AND TO The Honored Sir Thomas
Mackworth, Bart. Sir John Price, Bart. Sir John Morden, Knt. Sir Charles
Bickerstaffe, Knt. Sir Christopher Wren, Knt. Sir Paul Whitchcot, Knt. AND TO
The Honored Edward Price, Esquire Henry Farmer, William Powell, Edward Nicholas,
Bulkley Mackworth, Philip Bickerstaffe, Arthur Moore, Henry Lloyd, John
Meyrick, John Pugh, James Blake, William Freeman, Samuel Trotman, William
Nicholas, Joseph Short, Rich. Stephens, Geo. London, Hen. Simons, Hen. Grove,
and Joh. Wodehouse, Esquires; AND TO Mr. John Oldbury, Thomas Phips, Senior,
Paul Docminique, Whitfield Hayter, Anthony Forty, William Wolley, Thomas Phips,
Junior, Richard Chancy, Richard Curtis, Thomas Frederick, Gabriel Glover, John
Glover, Thomas Jeve, John Thrale, Nathanael Troughton, John Newland, John
Preston, Edward Grace, John Hayword, James Hallet, Merchants, present PARTNERS
of the said MINES.
HAving had the Honor to be employed in the Management of these Mines, of Sir
Carbery Price, for six Years last past, and being much concerned to see so
great a Treasure lie dead and unwrought, merely for want of a Stock, and a
right Constitution for the Management thereof; and finding some of the Partners
unhappily engaged in Differences and Lawsuits amongst themselves, and no
probability of any Reconciliation, or the Works going forward, without the
Assistance of some Publick-spirited Gentleman, who both understood the Art of
Mining, and also composing of Differences; I thought it my Duty and Interest to
make an Enquiry, if possibly I could find out such a Person, who would Purchase
the Shares late of Sir Carbery Price, and heartily Engage for the Public Good.

But when all the Qualifications are considered that were necessary to be found
in one Person, upon this Occasion, I presume your Honors will be much inclined
to believe, that I undertook no very easy Task.

For, when I met with an honest Gentleman, I generally found that he was very
unskilful in Matters of this nature, and either unable, or fearful, to Engage
in so great an Undertaking; and when I met with a Gentleman who had any
Knowledge of these things, I presently perceived that he was for grasping at
all, and, instead of being willing to grant any thing for the public Good, was
still for getting more for his own particular and private Advantage.

So that, upon the whole Matter, I found that some had Money, but no Skill,
others had Skill, but no Money; some again had both Skill and Money, (which was
very rare) but yet wanted that generous and public Spirit that was necessary
in this Case; and wherever I found a Person who was well disposed in the
general, and well qualified in other Respects, yet he either wanted Courage to
venture so great a Sum of Money, or Judgment to understand the present
Constitutions of the Company, and how to amend them for the public Good.

But at last, when I was, in a manner, in Despair, and had given over all hopes
of Success, it was my fortune to Travel to Neath, in Glamorgan-shire, where I
had the favor of being admitted to see the Copper-works and Coal-works of Sir
Humphry Mackworth; and having observed his new Contrivances in the Management
thereof, which were more than I had seen before in any part of this Kingdom;
and taking notice of his Judgment in Matters of Law, and also of his frank and
generous Disposition for the public Good; and that he was by no means of a
covetous or grasping Temper, but took delight in the Advantage he brought to
others, especially the poor Miners and Laborers, as well as in the Gains he
got for himself.

I presently concluded, that he was the fittest Person I knew, to set the
Wheels a going with us in Cardiganshire; and, I humbly conceive, your Honors
would all be of the same Opinion, if it were lawful for me to discover the
several Emprovements I observed at his Works, many of which being yet kept as
Secrets, I must forbear to mention.

But his new Method of Coffering out the Water from his Shafts and
Sinking-pits, and thereby preventing the Charges of Water-engines, and also
recovering a large Vein of Coal by that means, which was in vain attempted by
other Artists; and his new Sailing-waggons, for the cheap Carriage of his Coal
to the Waterside, whereby one Horse does the Work of ten at all times; but
when any Wind is stirring (which is seldom wanting near the Sea) one Man and a
small Sail does the Work of twenty, (which are public,) do sufficiently show
what his Genius is capable of in Matters of that nature.

And, I believe, he is the first Gentleman, in this part of the World, that
has set up Sailing-engines on Land, driven by the Wind, not for any Curiosity,
or vain Applause, but for real Profit, whereby he could not fail of Bishop
Wilkins's Blessing on his Undertakings, in case he were in a Capacity to bestow
it.

But I must beg leave, not only to mention these things, (which (however others
may justly Value) I know he is pleased to esteem but as accidental Trifles that
fell in his way) but also to take notice of his prudent Methods, for reducing
all his Undertakings to a Certainty, free from Hazard; his Copper-men working
by the Tun, and his Colliers by the Weigh, at a certain Price, which is
constantly and punctually Paid; whereby, as no Fraud can happen to himself,
without a Combination of all, so good Encouragement is given to the Workmen, to
be Careful and Industrious, for their own Interest as well as their Masters;
not to mention the convenient Situation of his Copper-work, which is such,
that his Men may run the Coal, with Wheel-barrows, into the very Furnaces, and
bring the Oar by Water within a Stone's cast of the Work; nor his Prudence, in
securing Partners who had quantities of good Copper Oar to be smelted with his
own Coal, before he began his Copper-work, whereby the Necessity of raising a
great Stock, keeping many Agents and Stewards, at great Salaries, in several
Counties, and great Hazards of bad Bargains, and bad Oar, with many other
Inconveniences incident to other Undertakings of that kind, were all
prevented, and not only a great Profit made of the Copper, but also a great
Vent secured for his own Coal, both at home in his own Copper-work, and also
abroad in the West of England, in exchanging Coal for Copper Oar.

In all which, and in many other Respects, which will hereafter appear, such
Management and Conduct may very well be admired, especially in a Gentleman that
was bred up another way.

But I dare not express the Honor and Esteem I have for this Gentleman, for
fear of giving Offense, and therefore I have only hinted at these things at
present, for my own Vindication, that your Lordships and all the Partners may
know the true Motives that induced me to labor for this Revolution, and to
bring in Sir Humphry Mackworth to be so highly concerned in these Works, for
the common Good of all the PARTNERS, as well as my own, and all the Agents
employed under them.

It was for this end I first communicated these Thoughts to Mr. Price, and Mr.
Powel, in the Country, who knowing these things to be true, and being extremely
pleased with my Proposal, ordered me to proceed therein, which accordingly I
did, and having now spent near a Year's Time about it, and at last happily
effected my Design, to the Satisfaction of all Parties.

I humbly hope your Honors are, or in a short time will be of Opinion, when
your Term is lengthened, and your Constitutions settled to your own Content,
that I have not misspent my Time in your Service.

I must confess that nothing ever troubled me so much, as the Misfortunes I
labored under on the account of these Mines: That I should leave my own
Habitation, and so many Works in the North, (in all which I had been fortunate
even beyond expectation) and come so far into a strange Country to lose my
Labor, and when I had got Mines under my Management of so great a Value, my
Hands should be tied up, by unhappy Differences, from either making Profit to
you or my self; and, at last, that it should be recorded in History to all
Posterity, That the richest Mines, of that kind, in these three Kingdoms, and
perhaps in all the Christian World, lay dead and unprofitable, for so many
Years, during my Stewardship; whereas if these Mines had been carried on with a
large Stock, and to the best Advantage, they might by this time have raised the
Fortunes of all the Partners concerned, and been as famous in foreign
Countries, as most other Mines in the World.

When I first viewed these Mines, and undertook this Employment, I freely
offered (for the Encouragement of all the Partners) to take my Salary out of
the clear Profits, but I always apprehended, that I was not to Suffer for any
other Person's Default but my own; and, on that account, I am so far from
repenting of my Bargain, that allowing one Year to put the Works in order, and
assuring me of good Management for the future, I shall be ready (instead of 250
l. per Ann. present Salary) to take 100 l. for every 10000 l. a Year clear
Profits, which shall accrue from these Mines to your Treasury, over and above
all and all manner of Charges and Expenses whatsoever.

My LORDS, I have at my leisure Hours, and for want of an Opportunity of doing
your Lordships and your Partners better Service, considered the Profits, that
are usually made of other Veins, both at home and abroad, especially in the
North of England, where I am best acquainted, and have compared the Charges and
Profits thereof, and of these Mines together, and the vast Advantages these
Mines have above any of them, which I did at first for my own private Use.

But being now advised, that it would be a great Satisfaction to your
Lordships, and all the Partners, to have a more large Account given of these
Mines, and that your Lordships are desirous to know my Reasons for setting the
same at such a Valuation, upon which your Lordships, and all the Partners, may
be capable of being the best Judges of the Value thereof your selves, I have
therefore humbly presumed (though a Person otherwise very unworthy to appear in
Print) to publish this following Essay on the Value of these Mines, for your
Lordships particular and private Satisfaction.

And lest it may be thought I have writ this for any particular Advantage to my
self, or to encourage others to any Undertaking, in which I durst not venture
my own Bottom, as well as theirs; I humbly beg leave hereby to offer to your
Lordships, and all the Partners, that I shall be ready at all times to accept
of Shares for my Salary at the highest Rate that was ever yet given for them.

Provided always that you agree together to settle a good Constitution for the
Management thereof, and to raise a competent Stock proportionable to so great
an Undertaking, to which I am also willing to lay down my Proportion, and stand
or fall by my former and present Valuation.

For though I am sensible the same may seem very high, and almost incredible to
others, who do not know the Advantages of these Mines, or believe that they are
so large as they are described; yet, to my self, who have spent so much Time,
and taken so much Pains to consider of it, and take the exact Measures of them,
I have great reason to believe (taking one thing with another) that I have
rather set them below, than above, the real Value.

For, First, The Price of the raising the Oar, in the great Vein, is set at
fourteen Shillings and Threepence per Tun, in the last Valuation, which is
much higher than it will really cost when the Levels are carried home.

Secondly, The five lesser Veins of Lead are set very much below the real
Value, if managed with a large Stock.

Thirdly, The Copper Veins would employ a much greater number of Men, with
brisk Management: And,

Fourthly, The Profits of the Silver (which may probably amount to the Value of
all the rest) is not computed at all, but only mentioned in general Terms.

And, as to the largness of the Veins, there are several Gentlemen, now in
Town, who have been in that Country (viz.) Dr. Thompson, Minister of
Friday-Church, Mr. Phips, of Clerkenwel-green, Mr. Hoile, in the Still-yard,
Mr. Duckett, in the Strand, near Exeter-Change, and several others.

Who, I suppose, will all own I ever represented, those Veins they took the
trouble to view, (which were only the great Vein, and the Bog Vein) rather less
than greater than they really were; but, at that time, I had not discovered the
two Copper Veins, nor the Richness of the five lesser Lead Veins, which now
make your Honors Interest of double the Value it was in the Year 1693.

And therefore since your Honors are now like to have the Advantage of my
Labors, and new Discoveries; and, since I have been the Instrument (under
Providence) of bringing in a Gentleman to redress your Grievances and increase
your Term, I can never doubt, having Right done me at your Hands, nor the Works
being carried on to the best Advantage.

And, for my part, your Honors shall all find, that I stand upon an honest
Bottom, and That the common Good of all Parties concerned, is all that is
desired, by

Your HONORS Most Obedient and most Humble Servant, WILLIAM WALLER.

A DESCRIPTION of the Silver, Lead and Copper-mines, late of Sir Carbery Price,
lying in Cardiganshire, within four Miles of the Navigable River Dovey, and
from thence a Mile by Water to the Port of Aberdovey, where Vessels of three or
four hundred Tuns may ride with great Safety.
location of veins of copper, silver, and lead

a THe North Vein of Lead-oar, three Foot wide. b The great Lead-vein, eleven
Foot wide. c A Vein of Lead-oar six Foot wide. e A Vein of Lead-oar three Foot
wide. f A Vein of Green Copper-oar, four Foot wide, and yields three Tun of
Copper from twenty Tun of Oar. g The Bog-vein, four Foot wide, all Potter's
Oar. h The Cross Vein of Lead-oar, three Foot wide. i The Cross Vein of Brown
Copper-oar, five Foot wide, and yields five Tun of Copper out of twenty Tun of
Oar k The first great Shaft and Western Boundary. l The East Level. m The
Eastern Boundary. t t t The places where the Cross Veins meet with the other
V^^ which are called by Min (...) (T) of the Veins, and are (...) ^ed the
richest part of them. o The West Level.


Note, All the said Veins are fixed and settled betwixt firm and solid Sides
and rise equally near to the Surface of the Ground* and all (...)

AN ESSAY ON THE Value of the Mines, LATE OF Sir CARBERY PRICE.
WHAT great Advantages have been made from Mines and Minerals in all Ages, is a
thing so well known, that it will be altogether unnecessary to enlarge upon it,
being generally admitted in all Countries abroad, and even at home in this our
own Nation, where many great Families have been raised, or much enriched by
them, besides Artificers and Tradesmen; and where a vast number of poor People
live thereby, the very Women and Children finding Employ therein, as well as
the Men, especially in the Mines of Lead.

The Ingenious Mr. Carew, in his Essay on the State of England, in relation to
its Trade, its Poor, and its Taxes, has this Expression, Viz. Nor is this all
the Product of our Earth, whose Womb being big with Treasure, longs to be
delivered, and after many Throws, brings forth Lead, Tin, Copper, Calamy, Coal,
Culm, Iron, Allom, Copperas and sundry other Minerals; which return us great
Treasure from Foreign Markets, whither they are exported.

And Sir Josiah Child, in his Judicious Discourse of Trade, tells us, That our
Lead and Tin, which are Natives, and by GOD's Blessing, inseparably annexed to
this Kingdom, carry on much of our Trade to Turkey, Italy, Spain and Portugal;
besides great Quantities that are sold to Holland, to France, and to the
Indies, as is well known to all Merchants that trade to those Parts.

But yet many Gentlemen have been much discouraged of late from laying out
their Money upon Mines, by reason of several Disappointments that they have met
withal; some of which were occasioned by the Ignorance of common Workmen,
mistaking the Sprigs of a Vein for the main Body, which yet an experienced
Artist can easily distinguish at first sight. Some by the Knavery of Miners who
have lodged a quantity of Oar in a Shaft or Drift so artificially, as might
deceive an ordinary Spectator. Others again have been defeated in their
Expectations, when they have had a good Vein, either by paying too high a Duty
to the Lord of the Soil, clear off all Charges, or else for want of a
sufficient Stock to carry on their Works; for when the Proprietor is not able
to make a just and punctual Compliance in his Bargains and Payments, and raise
a Stock of Oar beforehand, that Work must needs stop before it is brought to
Perfection, and so like an House unfinished, and without a Cover, must
necessarily fall together into Ruin and Confusion; or at least the Proprietor
must comply to such unprofitable and disadvantagious Bargains, and submit to so
great Expenses for want of convenient Levels to carry off and drain the Water
from the Works, as will render his Designs fruitless, and the richest Treasure
of that kind unprofitable.

And therefore whoever will begin a Work of this nature, must first consider
the necessary Charges of making the Levels, Adits, Shafts, Smelting-houses,
etc. and whether he has a Stock sufficient for all these things; and thereby
to lay a right and sure Foundation for so great an Undertaking: For if he has
not, all his Money expended will be lost, and in a manner thrown away; but on
the other hand, where such large Veins of Lead and Copper-oar are actually
found fixed and settled betwixt their firm and solid Sides, (as these are) the
Lord's Duty bought off, and a competent Stock first raised to carry on the same
with Effect, and to the best Advantage, there the Profit is vastly great, and
as certain as any Estate in the World: No Man living ever finding the Bottom of
such Veins, or failing of great Profit, till the Works are wrought so very low
beneath the Levels (which in this Case must be in the next Age) that the Water
grows too hard for them.

There are in the North of England many rich Mines discovered; but there is
none either in England or Wales, that can pretend to come near the Value of the
famous Mines of Sir Carbery Price: I have not read or heard of such a Mine of
Lead in all the World, as the great Vein, which is eleven Foot wide betwixt its
firm Sides, and seven Foot and a half already in pure Oar, which still
increases downwards; and it is not doubted but at last it will come to be eleven
Foot wide in Oar. And I humbly conceive, I may confidently affirm, That no
History has yet given us an Instance of so many rich Mines, both of Lead and
Copper, lying so near together: And really I cannot but think it is a great
Pity and Loss, not only to the Owner, and to that County, but even to the whole
Nation, that so great a Treasure should lie dead and unwrought, merely for want
of a right Understanding thereof.

And therefore I have undertaken, with all Submission to better Judgment, to
give my Opinion of the VALUE of the same: In doing of which, if I seem to any
Person to exceed beyond the Bounds of a moderate Valuation, yet since I have
wrote nothing but what I firmly believe, and durst venture my own small Fortune
in the World upon it; I humbly hope the candid Reader will not be offended with
me for only offering such Reasons to his Consideration, as by long Practice and
Experience in the Mining-trade, has induced me to be of that Opinion; in which
I desire to be understood aright: And therefore my Valuation does always
presuppose that the Mines are purchased free from any Duty to the Lord of the
Soil, and that a Stock of 20000 l. be raised, whereof some part to be employed
for making the Levels, Adits, Shafts, Smelting-houses, etc. and raising several
Stages or Stelches, for a Number of Men to be employed together (at which time
the Work will be clear of all Obstructions from Water, and two Men by blasting
upwards with Gun-power, will get more Oar, than six can do now with their
Working-tools) and that the Residue thereof be employed in raising a Stock of
Oar beforehand; and also that a Year's time be allowed for putting the Work in
Order, and even then (though a very considerable Profit will be made) yet it is
not pretended, under some Years more, to bring the Works to the highest
Valuation. And this being premised, I observe, First,

That in the Year 1693, before the Copper-mines were discovered, Sir Carbery
Price having recovered his Right from the Patentees of Royal Mines, divided his
Interest therein into 4008 Shares, whereof each Share was valued and sold at 17
l. per Share; and for the other Moiety he was afterward offered 40000 l. by an
eminent Merchant in this City, to be immediately paid down; which he refused
for this Reason, that I had then demonstrated to the said Sir Carbery, and his
Partners, that with a sufficient Stock he would be able, in a few Years, with
six hundred Men, to bring in a clear Profit from one of the said Veins, of
70500 l. per Annum; as by a Paper printed in the Year 1693, may appear, and
herein set forth, as follows, viz.

Six hundred Men employed at the great Work, when the Levels are up, at 8 s 6
d. per Tun, for Getting, Washing, and Making Merchantable, as it is now got,
every two Men must get above a Tun by Week to make them Wages; but at the rate
of one Tun a Week, the six hundred Men will raise three hundred Tuns by Week,
and at fifty Weeks fifteen thousand Tuns by the Year; this Charge of getting is
l. 06375 Carriage to the River Dovey at 5 s. per Tun 03750 12 d. per Tun by
Water, and for Landing it into the Storehouses at the Port of Aberdovey 00750
Fifteen thousand Tuns of Oar will make ten thousand Tuns of Lead, smelting of
this when our Mills are up, at 15 s. per Tun 07500 Charges 18375

Ten Thousand Tuns of Lead, at 9 l. per Tun 90000 Charge of getting, washing,
and smelting 18375 Sinking Shafts, and incident Charges 1125 Clear Profits
70500

Some Gentlemen have condemned me very much for giving in such an Account, as
believing this was a greater Product than can be raised from any Mine in the
World; but, underfavour, this will appear a great Mistake on their side, not
only from a plain Demonstration of the thing, as aforesaid, but from common
Experience in other Mines, both at home and abroad.

Vid. The original Map in Copper, by P. Lee, at the Atlas, in Cheap Side.
As, First in America, The famous Mine of Potozi is a sufficient Instance to the
contrary, and therefore I have here incerted a Map thereof.

Place the Map of Potozi in the Page following.


A Description of the Mine of Potozi.
THis Mine lies in the Country of Chorcas, in a Province of Peru, Seventy
Leagues from the Sea, within the Tropicks, in Twenty one Degrees of South
Latitude, and was discovered in 1546. From this great Vein, which is about Six
Foot wide, does issue out some small Sprigs of little account; and yet here
they Refine Thirty eight Milsions Five Hundred Thousand Pound weight of Silver
yearly, one Pound weight of their Oar yielding one Ounce of fine Silver, at
which rate, they must raise in Oar yearly Two Hundred Fifty six Thousand Two
Hundred Fifty Tuns, before they can answer that Account in Silver; but, by
Gerard Molino's Account, they must raise a great deal more. The great Vein runs
directly North and South, sloping in the Hill: They have made a Level which
they were 22 Years a driving, but, being very crooked and running far under
Ground, they carry up their Oar on their Backs, each Man about The SILVER-MINE
of POTOZI.
a a The Vein. b The Level. c The Smelting Cupilo's. d The Road. E The River of
Plate. F Young Potozi. The Scale is four hundred Yards in an Inch.

Note, This Vein is drawn at one End of the Hill, and the Veins of Sir Carbery
Price are drawn upon the Superficies and Length of the Hill.

bout 50 l. weight, in Wallets, on Ladders made of Neats Hides, three and three
in a row, one of the three having a Candle tied to his right Thumb, to give the
rest light.

This Work employs above Twenty Thousand Miners, and is wrought Night and Day,
above a thousand Yards deep: See Acosta in his Natural History of the Indies,
and the History of the New World, by N. N.

And several Merchants, that have Traveled into those Parts, relate, That this
Mountain, by reason of the numerous Smelting-houses built upon it, does look at
a distance as if it were all on Fire: And, That these Mines have been the
occasion of building of a very fine Town, at the bottom of the Hill, called,
The Town of Potozi.

Thus you see what great things are done at Potozi by the poor Indians; they
can raise Two Hundred Fifty six Thousand Two Hundred Fifty Tuns of Silver Oar
in a Year; and, yet in England, it is thought a Fiction and a Romance, and, by
some, a mere Cheat to draw in Persons, to speak of raising but Fifteen Thousand
Tun of Oar in a Year. I could heartily wish, for my Country's sake, that these
Mines were as rich in Silver as that, I should never doubt, but in a reasonable
time, to equal them in raising Oar, from Veins exceeding them in breadth and
wideness, and in many other Respects, provided there were a Stock
proportionable employed in the working of them; for there that Mine is wrought
a thousand Yards deep, here from the surface of the Ground; there they carry up
the Oar on their Backs, in Wallets, as aforesaid, here with the help of a
Windless, by which two Men can wind up more than twenty Men can carry on their
Backs.

And therefore I hope, in every respect, it will be thought no Vanity to
affirm, That we have as much Art and Ingenuity in England as any of the Workmen
in America; and I doubt not, but in some Years, these Mines in Cardiganshire,
will give occasion for erecting as large a Town as that at Potozi, which may
deservedly be called by the Name of Welsh Potozi; and, one Advantage at least,
these will have above Potoz^ that whereas that Mountain is Seventy Leagues from
the Sea, here the Proprietors, and Minors, for their Encouragement, many have
the delightful Prospect of seeing the Ships failing into the Port of Aberdovey,
to bring them ready Money for their Commodities.

But, to come back into our own Country, there are several Works in the North
that come up to this printed Proposal, considering the difference between the
Veins; for the Right Honorable the Earl of Darwenwater has, or lately had,
Mines of Lead, in Auston-moor, in Cumberland, about Thirty Miles from the Sea,
and made of his Duty (which is a fifth part of the Work) 12000 l. a Year.
Another eminent Lord, in the North, from a small Vein of Lead, three Foot
thick, does, or lately did, clear 17000 l. a Year. Another noble Lord, from a
small Vein, not two Foot thick, and thirty Miles from the Sea, does, or lately
did, clear above 7000 l. a Year, betwixt him and his Farmers, and several more
such Veins there are in the North.

Now if these small Veins, whereof some of them are thirty Fathom deep before
they come to the Oar, and so far from the Sea, can make so great a Profit clear
above all Charges, What must those Mines yield, whereof one Vein is so large as
aforesaid, and the least as big as any of them in the North, especially when
the Levels are made in a cheap Country, and so near the Sea: But the Advantage
of these Works may farther appear, by an Essay on the Value of the Works in the
North, and these compared together, as follows.

A small ESSAY, by a Medium of Prizes, as Oar is got in the North, and in Wales
at Eskirhir, compared together.
THe raising Fifteen thousand Bing of Oar, at 15 s. per Bing, which is the
middle Price between 10 s. and 20 s. per Bing, Note, That two Bing and one half
is one Tun of Oar; but 4 Bing is allowed to make a Tun of Lead.
amounts to l. 11250 The Duty allowed to the Lord is 1/7 Share and a half,
being a Medium betwixt a 10 and a 5 Share, but I Will admit a 7, and that amounts
to 2142 Bings, and 6/7 but I Will admit of one Bing more, which makes 2143 Bings,
which being deducted out of 15000 Bings, there remains 12857 Bings, which, at 4
Bings to a Tun, will yield 3214 Tuns and of smelted Lead. The Charges of
Smelting thereof at 15 s. per Tun, amounts to l. 2410 s. 10 The incident
Charges is accounted one third of raising the Oar, being their Shafts are so
very deep, and at that rate amounts to l. 3750 The middle Price for Carriage to
the Waterside, between 20 s. and 34 s. is 27 s. per Tun, which, for the said
3214 Tun of Lead, will amount to l. 4338 s. 18 Charges 21749 08

Let the Price for Lead, in both Essays, be supposed to be 10 l. which for 3214
Tuns, will amount to l. 32140 Out of which the whole Charge aforesaid being
deducted, there remains clear Profits 10390 12

Now view this Account turned to Eskirhir Account, and charged accordingly at a
middle Price, as Oar is now raised before the Levels are made.

The raising Fifteen thousand Bings of Oar, at 5 s. 8 d. Halfpenny per Bing,
which is 14 s. 3 d. per Tun, which is the middle Price betwixt 8 s. 6 d. and 20
s. per Tun, does amount to l. 4281 s. 5 This Oar will yield Three thousand
seven hundred fifty Tuns, being Five hundred thirty six Tuns more than in the
former Essay, by reason here is no Duty paid out to the Lord. The Charge
thereof for Smelting, at 15 s. per Tun 2812 10 Sinking-Shafts, etc. being it
lies so near the Surface, is one fourth of raising the Oar l. 1070 s. 6 d. 3
The Carriage of Three thousand seven hundred fifty Tuns by Lands, 5 s. and by
Water 1 s. in all 6 s. to the Port Aberdovey 1125. 9. Three thousand seven
hundred fifty Tun of Lead, at the supposed Price of 10 l. per Tun, amounts to
37500 Clear Profits 29335 18 9

NOTE, That in the first Essay of Works in the North, it appears by
Computation, That Seven hundred and fifty Men must be employed for the raising
of the said Fifteen thousand Bings of Oar, allowing 6 s. per Week Wages for
every Workman; now, if the same number of Men, and at the same Wages, be
employed at Eskirhir, they will raise Thirty nine thousand four hundred and
sixteen Bings, by reason the great Vein is so much larger, and the Oar is
raised at so small a Price as 5 s. 8 d. per Bing, which proportionably to the
first Essay, being four Bings to a Tun, makes Nine thousand eight hundred fifty
four Tuns of Lead; but this last Essay cannot be fully perfected, without
showing more at large what Difference it makes, by employing Seven hundred and
fifty at Eskirhir.

Seven hundred and fifty Men must raise Thirty nine thousand four hundred and
sixteen Bings, to make their usual Wages, to every Man, of 6 s. per Week, at 5
s. 8 d. per Bing. This Charge amounts as before to 11250 This Oar will yield
Nine thousand eight hundred fifty four Tuns of Lead, which, at 15 s. per Tun
Smelting, is 7390 10 Carriage by Land 5 s. and by Water 1 s. 2956 4 Sinking
Shafts and incident Charges 1070 6 3 Charges 22667 0 3

Nine thousand eight hundred fifty four Tun of Smelted Lead, at 10 l. per Tun,
is 9854000 Clear Profits 75872 19 9

So that hereby it plainly appears, That the same number of Workmen that bring
in a Profit of 10390 l. 10 s. in the Works of the North, being employed in the
great Vein above described, would bring in a clear Profig of 75872 l. 19 s. 9
d. per Annum.

It is farther objected by some, That so great a number of Men cannot be
employed in any one Work, and though all the other parts of the Calculation
must be allowed to be true, yet it will fail in that Particular.

Ans. That in Arkendale-Works, in Yorkshire, which is a small Vein, about two
Foot wide, At Keswick, in Cumberland, was employed 4000 Men in one Mine.
there was Six hundred Men employed at three Shifts, Two hundred Men at a
Shift, every eight Hours, and only one Man in a Breast, whereas this great Vein
employs six Men in a Breast, on every Stage or Stelch, and more Stages can be
raised there than could be done in Arkendale Works: And in the Work of my Lord
Darwenwater was employed above a Thousand Men. In Cornwall, and some of the Tin
Works, employs above Fifteen hundred Men, and in Germany they employ a greater
number, and so in Sweedland, Hungary, Poland, etc. but in the West Indies Ten
thousand, Windschalht Mine in Hungary, employs 2000 Men. Vid. Browns Travels,
p. 90.
and in some Mines above Twenty thousand Men are employed in a Work, as at
Potozi aforesaid, and even in these very Works, in Eskirhir in ten Yards space,
at three Shifts, every eight Hours, was employed eighteen Men at a Shift, Fifty
four Men in every Twenty four Hours; and, with a reasonable Stock, twenty such
Distances may be made, which will employ, at the same rate, above a Thousand
Men.

But this is a new Discovery, and, consequently, cannot succeed in the first
Adventurers Hands: The Truth is, That the Profit appears so very considerable,
that though there is nothing of any moment to be objected against it, yet the
greatness of the thing makes it seem improbable; For, say they, such a thing
was never heard of in England, therefore it is impossible it should ever
happen: This is the force of the Objection, but, as there is a Reason offered,
so let Reason be opposed, and then the Matter will come to a fair
Determination; for the very same Objection was made against the Project of the
New-river Water, where a Share was said to be valued at first at no more than
100 l. soon after at 500 l. and afterward Thirty six Shares were sold for One
hundred and fifty one thousand Pounds, to Simon Middleton, a Merchant, and the
whole Interest of the New-river Water is valued at this Day at 300000 l. at the
least.

The General and Penny-post Office were at first esteemed as mere Projects, and
slighted in the beginning, and yet came afterward to be of great Value, and
these things, though demonstrated at first, yet were not believed, and no
Reason could be opposed, but only the greatness of the Proposal made them seem
improbable.

And though every new Trade and Voyage, the Merchant contrives, is at first a
Project, and so by consequence, the Trade to the East Indies, Turkey, Africa,
and Hudson's Bay, etc. were mere Projects in the Original, and though the first
beginning of these Mines might be said to be a Project, in some Respect, by
reason of the uncertainty, before they had found the Veins* yet I cannot now
allow, that there is any thing in this Undertaking, that so much as looks like
a Project, since every thing is reduced to a certainty beforehand, the Veins
being long since discovered, fixed and settled betwixt their firm and solid
Sides, many hundred Tuns of Oar got out of them, till the Water grew
troublesome, and the Partners could not agree to raise a sufficient Stock, for
bringing up a Level to drain the Water from them; but if a Man has a thousand
Acres of the richest Meadow-ground, and has no stock of Cattle himself, nor
will buy a stock, or rent the same out to others that have one, all that rich
Land must lie dead and unprofitable, and yet without any Disparagement to the
Goodness of the Land; so if a Man has the richest Mines in the World, even
Potozi itself, and yet is not willing himself to raise a competent Stock to
make Levels, etc. and carry on the Works, nor will part with them to others
that are; he can expect no Profit from them, though ever so rich and profitable
in their own Nature; and this Accident does not lessen the intrinsic Value of
the Mines to Men that have both Stock and Skill to managethem.

And to such it is not doubted, but these Mines, in a few Years, will be worth
above a Million of Money: For, to return, if this great Vein will yield so much
alone, What will all the other Veins yield, which are five in number? Besides
the two Copper Veins, and, taking one with another, more large than any in the
North; but if my Lord Darwenwater received 12000 l. a Year for a fifth Part of
a Work, I hope I may modestly compute every one of the five Veins at 12000 l.
per Annum each, for the whole Interest thereof, (there being no Duty to be paid
to the Lord of the Manor) which in the whole, is 60000 l. per. Ann. more. And
so much for the Leadmines only.

As to the Copper Mines,
IT appears by the Map, that one is four Foot wide, and the other five Foot
wide, betwixt their firm Sides, which are very great Veins of that kind, and
the like scarce known in these Parts; and though they are not carried on to any
deepness, the one being found at three Yards, and the other at fifteen Yards
deep, and are yet mixed with Veinstone, and so not come to the best Oar, which,
by the Course of such Veins, grow much more Rich as they take more Ground upon
them, yet, at present, the one yields three Tuns of Copper out of twenty Tuns
of Oar, which is better than one seventh; the other five Tuns from twenty,
which is one out of four, as by frequent Trials has been experienced; and this
sort of Oar smelts into malleable Copper, in one Furnace, at the first Running,
insomuch that the Profit of these two Veins will be very great, whether sold by
the Tun, or smelted into Copper, which may be computed thus:

A Computation of the Value of the Copper Mines.
THese two Veins, will, in a short time, employ at three several Shifts, every
eight hours, several Hundred Men; Note, In Keswick, in Cumberland, was employed
4000 Men in one Copper Mine. Sir John Pettus, Fodine Regalis, p. 32.
but I will suppose but one hundred Men in each Vein, and the Price of getting
the Oar at 20 s. per Tun, though it may be got for less; when the Levels are
made, these two hundred Men to get their usual Wages, must raise sixty Tun per
Week, which, at fifty Weeks in the Year, is three thousand Tun a Year, and so
the Charge of raising the Oar is l. 3000 This Three thousand Tun of Oar, at one
Fifth and a half, being a Medium between a Seventh and a Fourth, (but to give a
good Allowance, taking one Sixth for the Common Product) will yield Five
hundred Tuns of Copper, which, at 20 l. per Tun, for Smelting and Refining, the
Charges thereof will amount to l. 10000 Carriage of Five hundred Tuns of
Copper, to the Port, at 6 s. per Tun 150 Sinking Shafts, and other incident
Charges 750 The whole Charges 13900

Five hundred Tun of Copper, at 100 l. per. Tun, amounts to 50000 Clear Profits
36100

Object. That the most famous Copper-work in England does not make above two or
three Hundred Tuns of Copper in one Year.

Ans. That in most other Works great part of the Oars there smelted, are
sulphury Oars, and must be run through six or seven Furnaces before they can be
refined into good Copper; but if the Managers of those Works had Plenty of such
Oar as this, which runs into malleable Copper in one Furnace, they would make
five hundred Tun of Copper more easily than they make two hundred Tun now.

Object. That the Charges of Smelting and Refining is too little in this
Calculation.

Ans. That for Smelting and Refining sulphury Oars this may be too little, but
for this too much, this Oar not requiring above one fifth part of the Firing
and Workmanship incident to the other, for the Reasons aforesaid.

Object. That so vast a Product from Copper-mines seems altogether improbable;
that such a thing was never heard of, and that it is a great matter to make
10000 l. per Annum of one Copper-work.

Ans. This is an Objection, but no Reason offered but want of a Precedent,
which may be found in Sweedland, and Hungary and in many places, and when it is
condered, that there is such Oar to be had in Wales, that yields so rich a
proportion of Metal, and nothing can be said why so much Oar may not be raised
every Year, when the Levels are made, which will yield so many Tun of Copper at
such a Price, and when the vast Difference between these sorts of Oar, and the
sulphury Oars is also considered, and how the Price of the latter is raised
considerably of late, so that with the Charges for the sulphury Oar, for great
Land carriage, for great Quantities of Coal, for so many Smelters Wages to
att^nd such a vast number of Furnaces as is used for such Oars, with the
Reparations of the Furnaces, etc. It is well if 20 l. per Tun be got clear from
that Oar; and, from this, 72 l. per Tun will be got clear, by the Owner
thereof, by reason the Charges is so small, in all respects, as aforesaid: And
so upon the whole Matter, the same Person may better make 36100 l. per Ann.
clear of these Oars, presupposing them to be his own, as aforesaid, then 10000
l. per Ann. clear of the sulphury Oars, and buy both Oar and Coal, etc.

Thus much in general.

But here is one thing more particularly to be observed, That whereas six or
seven thousand Pounds are laid out, in bringing up a Level to a single Mine,
perhaps not so large as the least of these; here one Level, that will not cost
near that Sum, by a cross Drift, will serve for most of those Veins, and
thereby save a vast Sum of Money.

Object. That if these Mines were so rich as is pretended, it is not probable
the present Partners, concerned therein, would let them lie dead and unwrought.

Ans. The present Partners want a Stock, and cannot agree in Ways and Means of
raising of it; some are willing, but not able, others are able, but not
willing, though they have frequent general Meetings for that purpose; some want
Money, and yet are loath to part with their Shares under what they cost them;
others have Money, and will not lay it down for those that have none, unless
they can have a great Bargain; some again complain, that they are not right in
their Constitutions, and will lay down no Money till these are rectified, and,
whoever peruses the present Proposals, from the Committee, to Mr. Price, will
see where the Fault lies, and, that neither side labors, at this time, under
the least Apprehensions, that the Mines will not answer their utmost
Expectations, if they had a sufficient Stock to make the Levels, and carry them
on.

Object. Now, upon the whole Matter, the only Objection that seems to be left
is this, That Mines, under Ground, are uncertain things, and, if they should
happen to fail, then all the Money laid out upon them will be lost, and, though
they should yield good Oar, yet they may not last out half the Term.

Ans. The Terror of a Royal Mine has long kept a great part of this Nation in
Ignorance, or else this Objection would never be made; for in Sweedland,
Denmark, Germany, Poland, and Hungary, and even amongst the barbarous Indians,
where the mining Trade is encouraged, it is well known, That Nature is regular
in its Productions under Ground as well as above, inasmuch, as the Knowledge of
these things is become a Science, and many learned Volumes, in several
Languages, by Agricola, and others, have been written on that Subject.

The Inhabitants of Cornwall, Darbyshire, Yorkshire, Cumberland, South Wales,
and about New Castle, can tell how certain and regular Nature is in this Case;
for, although sometimes they meet with Difficulties in the first finding of a
Vein, as when they meet with a small Sprig of a Vein, which often appears and
vanishes again before they come to the main Body, yet, when once they have
found the main Vein, between its firm Sides, they never lose such a Vein,
without an apparent Reason above Ground, (as by some very deep Dingle or
Valley) especially in Lead or Copper Mines, where the Veins lie parpendicular,
or sloping downward; but for Horizontal Veins, as in Cole sometimes, a
perpendicular Rock will cut its Vein in two, and thereupon the Vein may rise or
fall on the other side, which is commonly called a Rise or Dip-dike; but
ingenious Artists seldom fail to recover it again: But in these Mines, Note.
they have been so fully tried from one end of the Hill to the other, in
several Places, that there is no room for that part of the Objection in this
place.

And as to the other part thereof, it was never known, that the bottom of any
fixed Veins of Lead or Copper, especially such large settled Veins, with firm
Sides, was ever found, or the Works left off, till that the same were carried
on as deep as the Water would permit; and any Person that is acquainted with
Mines, can inform us, Vide Brown's Travels to the Mines in Hungary, p. 98.
That it is not possible to work out these Veins with so deep a Level within
the term of twenty one Years, especially since the Veins, still grow richer and
wider as they grow deeper; but if it be considered, that the Mine of Potozi
(not above six Foot wide in any place)
has lasted from the Year 1546, with Twenty or Thirty thousand Men at work,
that Objection must for ever cease.

And now, upon the whole Matter, It is a wonderful thing to consider our
English Merchants, (Persons of great Worth, Judgment, and Experience) what vast
Sums of Money they will venture, view the farthest Countries in the World,
spread their Sails to the uttermost part of the Earth for Traffic; how many
Millions they have laid out in the East India Trade, in building Forts,
Castles, and Garrisons, maintaining Factories and Consuls, building vast Ships,
and exposing all to the greatest Hazard of Pirates, Tempests, and Storms, and
yet are easily diverted from venturing a small Sum at home in their own Nation,
to improve a Trade from the growth of our own Country, though it would yield
double the Profit, and far less of Hazard.

All the rest of the World are striving to engross Trade, and yet this at home
remains neglected. This Trade of Lead and Copper, will, in some Years, be
better known in England, and, its probable, it will hereafter be a Wonder to
the Nation, that so vast a Treasure should be so long forgotten, and, without
doubt, whoever happens to be so fortunate as to look into these things in time,
before they grow too common, will have opportunity of great Bargains, and of
raising vast Estates to their Families, and of bringing a Blessing on their
Undertaking, by introducing and encouraging such a Trade, as will employ many
Thousands of poor People, and shift them from their Dens of Laziness, and, by
hard Labor, fit them for the Service of their King and Country, either in time
of War or Peace.

This Trade would conduce not only to the Advantage of particular Merchants,
Tradesmen, and Laborers, and to the particular Countries, where the Mines lie,
but of the whole Kingdom in a national Profit, by promoting a Foreign Trade to
Holland, France, Spain, Portugal, Italy, Turkey, the Indies, etc. with the
Commodities of our own Country, without exporting our Coin or Bullion out of
the Nation: This would make, Persons concerned therein, Merchants as well as
Miners: And, in short, would make England, not only the most delightful, but
one of the strongest and wealthiest Kingdoms in the whole Christian World.

AN APPENDIX, Concerning the SILVER That may be Extracted out of these MINES.
I Presume, many Persons, especially those that were concerned under the
Society of Royal Mines, may much admire that I have not, in my Essay, said one
word of the Silver that may be extracted out of these Mines, especially, since
so many Trials have been had, in Westminster Hall, about that very Point, and
such Proofs made of the Richness of them in Silver, by great numbers of
Witnesses upon Oath.

I must confess, some part of these Veins do yield Silver, for the great Vein
lies in ridges or rows, like the Plank in a Floor, viz. One ridge of Potters
Oar, (which is the richest of Lead Oar) and another of Silver Oar, which is
poor in Lead, and rich in Silver; and I do not deny, but to the Owner, that has
the Oar for nothing, though it is not rich enough to take it from him, since the
late Act concerning Royal Mines, yet it is so rich, as that a considerable
Profit may be made out of the same.

But, I do not think fit, at present, to enlarge upon this Subject, nor on the
Method of doing thereof, nor disclose the Art of extracting Silver out of Lead,
to the best Advantage, but shall be ready hereafter to communicate my Thoughts
thereof as occasion shall require.

However, I presume, I may, without Prejudice, take notice, That Sir John
Pettus, in his Treatise, called, Fodinae Regalis, p. 10. demonstrates the Value
of Goginian, Coomervin and Darrein Oar, that they yield in Silver per Tun, of
Metal, fourteen Pounds, besides the Lead; but if the said Tun of Metal be made
of the Oar of Coomsumbloch, it yields 20 l. per Tun in Silver; and in page 33.
he tells us That Sir, Hugh Middleton undertook the Silver Mines in
Cardiganshire, paying 400 l. per Ann. Rent to the Society of Royal Mines; and
he cleared Monthly the Sum of 2000 l. and, had he not diverted his Gains to the
making of the New-river from Ware to London, certainly he would have been
Master of a Mass of Wealth; but great Wits and Purses seldom know how to give
Bounds to their Designments, and, by undertaking too many things, fail in all:
And we may farther give Credit to the Beneficiabness of those Mines, when as
Mr. Tho. Bushel, by his Knowledge and Ingenuity, to work them to the best
Advantage, did find Business enough there for a Mint, and, with the Product
thereof, made Provision for the Clothing of the late King's whole Army.

All Persons that know these Mines, will agree, That we can raise more Silver
Oar, from the Mines of Sir Carbery Price, than ever was raised from all the
other Mines in Cardiganshire, and with far less Charges and Expenses; but if
Sir Hugh Middleton alone, with a small Stock, could make 24000 l. per Ann. and
Mr. Bushel cloth a whole Army, What might not the present Partners do, if they
were united, and would heartily join together, and raise a Stock answerable to
so noble an Undertaking, especially since the Art of Extracting and Refining is
much improved of late Years, and may be now done with far less Expense and wast
of Lead? I believe we shall not be opposed by any, in case we should affirm,
That these Mines, taking one part with another, are as rich in Silver as some
of those abovementioned; and though, at this Rate, these Mines would turn to
no Account to the Patentees of Royal Mines, since the Price of the Oar will
amount to more Money than the clear Profits could be made thereof; yet, to the
Propietors of the Mines, and who have bought the same free from any Duty to the
Lord, this Advantage in Silver will make a vast addition to the former
Calculations of the Profit of the Lead only.

But I shall forbear to set it down in Figures, lest I should either raise too
great an expectation on the one side, or frighten the World too much on the
other, with the length of Numbers; for nothing displeases some Persons more
than a Calculation that sounds so large as this would do, upon a modest
Computation, though I cannot see any other Method so secure in order to fix a
right Judgment thereof.

For, though some incident Charges may possibly happen hereafter, by ill
Management that cannot be thought of at present; yet, by this way, you may
demonstrate the true Value so near the Matter, that if reasonable Allowances be
made for such Contingencies, a Man cannot easily be mistaken; but, for this, I
shall not only referr you to what is done in the present Age, at Potozi,
abovementioned, (and I might instance in many other Places) but I will
endeavor to open the Eyes of those that are Strangers to these things, by
letting them also see the Sense of Antiquity on this Matter, and that this is
no new Method.

For, Xenephon, an ancient Greek Author, of undoubted Credit, (lately
Translated by W. M.) and Dedicated to the ingenious Author of the Essay on Ways
and Means, speaking of the Improvement of the Revenue of Athens, and more
particularly on their Silver Mines, goes on thus,

(viz.) Our Silver Mines alone, if rightly managed, besides all the other
Branches of our Revenue, would be an inestimable Treasure to the Public: But,
for the benefit of those who are unskilled in Inquiries of this nature, I
design to premise some general Considerations upon the true State and Value of
our Silver Mines, that the Public, upon a right Information, may proceed to
the taking such Measures and Councels as may improve them to the best Advantage.

No one ever pretended from Tradition, or the earliest Accounts of Time, to
determine when these Mines first began to be wrought, which is a Proof of their
Antiquity; and yet, as ancient as they are, the heaps of Rubbish, which have
been dug out of them, and lie above Ground, bear no Proportion with the vast
Quantities which still remain below, nor does there appear any sensible Decay,
or Diminution in our Mines; but, as we dig on, we still discover fresh Veins of
Silver Oar in all parts, and when we had most Laborers at work in the Mines,
we found that we had still Business for more Hands than were employed.

Nor do I find that the Adventurers in the Mines, retrench the Number of their
Workmen, but purchase as many new Slaves as they can get; for their Gains are
greater or less in proportion to the Number of Hands they employ. And this is
the only Profession I know of, where the Undertakers are never envied, be their
Stock or Profits never so extraordinary, because their Gains never interfere
with those of their Fellow-traders.

Every Husbandman knows how many Yoke of Oxen and Servants are necessary to
Cultivate his Farm, and if he imploys more than he has occasion for, reckons
himself so much a loser; but no Dealer in the Silver Mines ever thought he had
Hands enough to set to work.

For there is the Difference between this and all other Professions, That,
whereas, in other Callings, for instance, Braziers and Blacksmiths, when their
Trades are overstock'd, are undone, because the Price of their Commodities is
lowered of course, by the multitude of Sellers: And, likewise, a good Year of
Corn, and a plentiful Vintage, for the same Reasons, does hurt to the Farmers,
and forces them to quit their Employments, and set up Publick-houses, or turn
Merchants and Bankers.

But here the Case is quite otherwise, for the more Oar is found, and the more
Silver is wrought, and made, the more Adventurers come in, and the more Hands
are employed in our Mines.

A Master of a Family, indeed, when he is well provided with Furniture, and
Houshold-goods, buys no more; but no Man was ever so over-stock'd with Silver,
as not to desire a farther increase: If there are any who have more than their
Occasions require, they hoard up the rest with as much pleasure, as if they
actually made use of it.

And when a Nation is in a flourishing condition, no one is at a loss, how to
employ his Money; the Men lay it out in fine Armor, and in magnificent Houses
and Buildings; Women lay it out in great Equipage, costly Habits, and rich
Clothes.

And, in accidents of War, when our Lands lie fallow and uncultivated, or in a
public Dearth and Scarcity, What Reserve have we left to apply to, but Silver
to purchase Necessaries for our Subsistence, or hire Auxiliaries for our
Defense?

I have insisted the longer upon these general Reflections, to encourage
Adventurers of all kinds, to employ as many Hands as possible in so
advantageous a Trade, from these plain Considerations, That the Mines can never
be exhausted,
nor can Silver ever lose its Value.

But to draw this Discourse more immediately to the Subject of my present
Consideration, which is the Maintenance of our Citizens, I will begin to
propose those Ways and Means, by which the Silver Mines may be improved to the
highest Benefit and Advantage to the Public; nor do I set up for the Vanity of
being admired for an Author of new Discoveries, for that part of my following
Discourse, which relates to the Examples of the present Age, lies obvious to
all the World; as for what is past, it is a Matter of Fact, and every Man might
inform himself, that would be at the pains of enquiring.

It Is very strange, that after so many Precedents of private Citizens of
Athens, who have made their Fortunes by the Mines, the Public should never
think of following their Example; for we who have made inquiry into this
Matter, have heard, That Nicias, the Son of Niceratus, had a thousand Slaves,
employed in the Mines whom he let out to Sosias, the Thracian, upon Condition
to receive an Obolus a Day, clear of all Charges, for every Head, and that the
same Complement of Workmen should be always kept on foot.

In like manner, Hipponicus had six hundred Slaves let out at the same Rate,
which yielded him a Revenue of a Mina a Day; and Philemonides three hundred,
which brought him in half a Mina a Day; and many others made the same
Advantage, in proportion to the number of Slaves they possessed: But what need
we to appeal to Precedents of an elder Date, when, at this Day, we have so many
Instances of the same nature before our Eyes?

Twelve hundred Slaves, when bought, will probably, in five or six Years time,
produce a Revenue sufficient to purchase as many more as will make the number
six thousand. This number, at the rate of an Obolus a Day, a Head, clear of all
Charges, will afford a yearly Revenue of sixty Talents; and if but twenty of
these Talents are laid out in the Purchase of more Slaves, the City may employ
the Overplus as they think convenient, and when the number of Slaves is
increased to ten thousand, it will produce a standing Revenue to the Public,
of A hundred Talents a Year.

To demonstrate, that the Mines would take up a greater proportion of Slaves to
work 'em, I appeal to the Authority of all those living Witnesses, who remember
what numbers of Workmen were employed in them, before the taking of Decelea, by
the Lacedaemonians, and our Silver Mines that have been wrought for so many
Ages, with such numbers of Hands; and continue still so far from being drained
or exhausted that we can discover no visible difference, in their present State
from the Accounts our Ancestors have delivered down to us, are undeniable
Proofs of my Assertion.

And their present Condition, is a good Argument, that there never can be more
Hands at work in the Mines than there is employment for; for we dig on still
without finding any bottom or end of our Mines or decay of the Silver Oar.

And Companies of private Adventurers may carry on the same Trade in a Joint
Stock, nor is there any danger that they and the national Company will
interfere one with another, but, as Confederates, are strengthened by their
mutual assistance to each other; so the more Adventurers of all kinds are
employed in the Mines, so much larger will the Gains and Advantage be to all.

And thus you see that these Calculations of mine are no new things, but very
obvious to the meanest capacity, and commonly practiced in all Ages and
Countries; and there can be no reason to doubt but that these Siver Mines in
Wales might prove as rich as those in Athens or in Hungary, if carried on with
a large Stock, and would not be exhausted in many Ages; The Mine at Chremnitz
in Hungary, has been wrought 950 Years. Brown's Travels.
and one Reason I have (amongst several others) to be of this opinion is this,
That all great Veins of this nature are in some respect like a great large
spreading Oak, and has a great number of Branches, which, like Bows of a Tree,
shoot out from the Body of the Vein, insomuch that when a considerable Sum of
Money is gained out of the same, and many Years spent in the working thereof, so
that Persons would naturally be apt to think that the Vein was almost worked
out, there is still discovered fresh Veins shooting forth from the sides
thereof, which are innumerable and scarce ever to be exhausted. This was the
Case at Athens, Hungary and other places, and would be found the same in Wales,
if enquired into. Nature is the same in all places; and though some accidental
Variations may happen, between Mines in one Country and another, yet they do
not vary in substance; and it is by these Branches that the great Body of the
Vein is fed and brought to so large a Bulk; you may as well see a large Oak
without Roots and Boughs, as a large Mine without these Branches: Small Veins
have many small Twigs, which being too little to work, are passed by without
much notice, as Unprofitable and Useless; but you will find that many Branches
of this great Vein will be as large as most Veins now known in the North of
England: In other Countries they would know how to value such Mines as these,
where they have Pits or Shafts three hundred Yards deep, as Brown, in his
Travels to the Mine-towns in Hungary, informs us, p. 98. where he says, that at
the Mine at Chremnitz, he went down by the Pit called by the Name of the
Emperor Rodolphus's Shaft, gently descending by the turning about of a large
Wheel, to which the Cable is fastened, a hundred and eight Fathoms deep into the
Earth, and after many Hours being in the Mine, was drawn out again by Leopold's
Shaft, straight up, above a hundred and fifty Fathoms; a Height surpassing that
of the Pyramids by a third part. And yet in these Parts we will scarce be
invited to lay out our Money upon a rich Mine, though it appears at the Day upon
the very Surface of the Ground:

The Fortunate have Hours, and those they choose;
The Unfortunate have Minutes, and those they lose.
I shall conclude with the Words of Sir John Pettus, who says, fol. 5. as
follows, viz.

Besides the Enjoyment of the Metals and Minerals dug from the Earth, the
Benefit to the Nation is great; for, in the Book of Rates, we shall find above
two hundred Particulars of ingrown Metals and Minerals, which do afford great
Customs to the Crown, and would do much more, if the Management from their
original Vent were daily inspected. And, in fol. 34. he says, That it might be
added, with submissive Confidence, that with due Care herein, we might give Law
to all Europe, as to all Vtensils of Metals, whether considered Domestic or
Public, Civil or Martial.

And the Advantages being so, we may justly infer, that by the not duly and
carefully managing of this Affair, the Disadvantages are in the same degrees as
much prejudicial to the Interest of this Kingdom, as the due Use of them would
be profitable. For it is clearly demonstrable, that every Year, for many Years
past, this Kingdom has, by Negligence herein, lost a Million of Money, which,
by Vigilance, they might have saved, whereby we want when others abound with
our Natural Store.

CONCLUSION TO All the PARTNERS.
AND thus as I began, so I beg leave to conclude this little Treatise under
your Patronage and Protection.

I must confess, much more might be said on so fruitful a Subject; but you will
consider, that I was brought up a Miner, and not an Orator; my Business is to
demonstrate the Truth in as few Words as I can, not to put a Varnish upon it,
and to Write, not what may be said, but what may be done.

And now, in order to the Accomplishment of what I have Writ, I have but one
thing more to offer to your Considerations, and that is of such a Nature, as I
know will be very pleasing and agreeable to you, viz. That the Poor may have
some small Share with you in so rich a Treasure, especially the poor Miners and
Laborers; That when they have spent their Lives to make you Rich, and are
grown Impotent, and unable to Work, either through Age or Accident, they may
have a comfortable Subsistence provided for them.

This will bring a Blessing from Heaven on your Undertakings, and encourage the
most skilful Miners (and at lower Rates) to resort to that Work, where they
shall be provided for in their old Age, and against all Accidents.

And this will tend to no small Advantage of all the Partners concerned, who
will every Year save more by cheap Bargains, than the Charity will amount unto;
and, in this case, every Miner will have an Interest in the Works, and will be
as careful thereof, as if they were his own. Your Works will never be in want
of able Miners, or in danger of being lost either by Neglect or Treachery; you
may then be truly called the FRIENDLY SOCIETY OF MINERS, and fear no
Combination to destroy your Works.

It Is wonderful to observe how punctual and exact Xenophon was to engage a
Divine Assistance in the like case, whose Words are these:

And if the Public, upon due consideration, think fit to execute these Orders
and Institutions, I would advise them to send Ambassadors to Delphi, and
Dodona, to consult the Gods, whether such a Reformation of our Government would
not turn to the Advantage of the present Age, and the benefit of all Posterity.

And if these Resolutions are ratified by the Divine Approbation, to consult
the Oracle once more, to the protection of what Gods we should recommend the
Success of this Enterprise, and then to propitiate those Gods we are directed
to apply to, in order to engage their Assistance; and, after this solemn
Invocation, to enter boldly upon the Execution of this Design; for it is but
reason that all Undertakings should be attended with more favorable Success,
that are begun, and carried on, under the immediate Care and Protection of
Divine Providence.

Methinks it is great Pity that Xenophon was not a Christian, and as great a
Shame that there should be so many Christians who have not the Devotion of
Xenophon.

Who can admire that Mines are sometimes unsuccessful, when Men presume to dig
out the very Bowels of the Earth, enter into the Secrets of the Deep, and rifle
the choicest Cabinet of Nature, without so much as consecrating the least part
thereof to Pious and Charitable Uses?

And, on the other side, who can doubt Success in any thing Sir Humphry
Mack-worth undertakes? When his Designs appear so generous to his Partners; so
charitable to the Poor, and so much conducing to the Public Good? And it is my
hopes and belief that his Example, and good Success in this Undertaking, will
be a Means to encourage others to do the like, and to follow such a Precedent
as may in time extend to make a Provision for all the Poor of England.

And therefore, that he may not be diverted from so good a Design, but may
receive Encouragement from you to continue steadfast to his former Resolutions,
and labor now for the Poor, who will hereafter labor for you: And that you
may all, not only obtain a Temporal, but an Eternal Treasure, that can never be
exhausted, is, and always shall be, the Prayers of,

Your HONORS Most Obedient, and most Humble Servant to Command, WILLIAM WALLER.


