This Map of THE ISLANDS OF ORKNEY, is Humbly Dedicatid To DR HUTTON the Kings
first Physician by Ia Wallace.


AN ACCOUNT OF THE ISLANDS OF ORKNEY.

By JAMES WALLACE, M. D. And Fellow of the Royal Society.

To which is Added, an ESSAY concerning the Thule of the Ancients.

LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson within Gray's-Inn-Gate, next Gray's-Inn-Lane,
1700.

To the Right Honorable, CHARLES, Earl of Dorset and Middlesex, Knight of the
most Noble Order of the Garter, Ld. Lieutenant of the County of Sussex, and one
of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
My LORD,
THE way to make these Bleak Northern Islands more Temperate, will be your
Lordships taking 'em into your Indulgence and Protection: They are not so
distant as to be unacquainted with your Character, for the Latitude that is so
must not be inhabitable.

Every one that wants 'em feels the Effects of your Lordships good Actions, but
no Body sees you do 'em. Your care and concern for mankind is your own, but
your Fortune is your Friends. Your Wit is the only thing you are not enough
Diffusive off, and what others covet of you most, you your self value least.

In the Ardour to declare the perfections of your Lordships Pen, I forget to
conceal the Imperfections of my own, which are most pardonable when I most
profess to be,

My LORD, Your Lordship's Most Obedient, and most Humble Servant, James Wallace.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THE several Names by which Orkney is called. The Longitude and
Latitude of this Country. An account of a Stone generated in the Air. How this
Country is bounded. Some odd Phenomenon about the Ebbing and Flowing of the
Sea. The number of the Islands; and a short Account of each of them, with their
different Harbors. The chief Products of this Country. Page 1

CHAP. II. Of the Plants growing naturally in Orkney. Of those Beans called the
Molucca Beans thrown in there. A Description of a strange Fish taken in Sanda.
An Account of their Land and Sea-shells. Of their Mines. Of some exotic Fowls
driven in there, and some other effects of violent Storms. Of their Lakes and
Locks. page 15

CHAP. III. Of the Ancient Monuments and Curiosities of this Country. An
Account of the Dwarfie Stone in Hoy. Of the Obelisks and standing Stones in
Stennis. Of the figured Stone Causey near Skeal. Of some Urns and Burial Places
found in several places. An Account of the Finn-men that are sometimes driven
in there. page 51

CHAP. IV. Some peculiar Customs, Manners and Dispositions of the Inhabitants
of this Country. An Account of a Woman that had a Child in the 63d Year of her
Age. An Account of their Diseases and some of their particular Cures. A
particular Language amongst them. Their way of Transporting and Weighing their
Corn. Their custom of Sheep-shearing: And the way they have to catch Sea-Fowls.
And an Account of some Remarkable Accidents that have fallen out here. page 62

CHAP. V. Of the Town of Kirkwall. page 78

CHAP. VI. Of the ancient State of the Church of Orkney. Of the Cathedral
Church at Kirkwall. Bishop Robert Rei's erection of the Chapter. Bishop La's
Transaction with King James IV. page 81

CHAP. VII. Of the Plantation of the Christian Faith in Orkney; and of the
Bishops thereof. page 91

CHAP. VIII. The History of the first Plantation of the Isles of Orkney; and of
the ancient and present Possessors of them. The Pights or Picts the first
Possessors. Of Belus and Ganus Kings of Orkney. When it came to the Possession
of the Kings of Scotland. When the Norwegians got footing, and when they were
expelled. An Account of the Earls of Orkney. Of the Surname of Sinclar. A
double of an ancient Manuscript relating to the Affairs of Orkney; wherein
there is an Account of the first Possessors of that Country, different from the
former, and a full Account of the Earls of Orkney till that time. Of Bothwell
Duke of Orkney. Of the Earls of the Surname of Steward and Douglass. When this
Country was again re-annex'd to the Crown. Of the Stewardry. The several ways
how Orkney has been a Honorary Title. Of the Law-right-men and their Office.
page 105

An Essay concerning the Thule of the Ancients. page 148

The Author not being in Town these following errors are desired to be
corrected.
PAge 15 line 9 locks, read lochs. p. 19 l. 25 chamaeustus r. chamaecistus. p.
25 l. 1 laetifolia r. latifolia. p. 28 l. 26 Cardamini r. Cardamine. p. 33 l. 8
surge r. spurge. p. 37 l. 6 Seols r. Seals. p. 46 l. 19 Foists r. Toists. p. 47
l. 18 Greehead r. Greenhead. p. 51 l. 13 eight feet r. eighteen. p. 64 l. 19
tho we have also sure account r. tho we have no sure account. p. 66 l. 28
Cumfrey r. Comfrey. p. 67 l. 13 They use Arby, the Caryophyllus marinus, Thrift
or much as they call it. r. They use the Caryophyllus marinus Thrift or Arby as
they call it. p. 71 l. 8. lecspound r. leispound. p. 72 l. 2 and l. 10. wrack
r. sea-weed. p. 73 l. 11 Foists r. Toists. p. 73 l. 20 fowl r. fowls. p. 74 l.
17. perhaps some hundred of Fathoms r. perhaps some fifty or sixty Fathoms. p.
101 l. 12 Patreek r. Patrick. p. 101 l. 26 who r. whom. p. 107 l. 6 Twisio r.
Twisco. p. 107 l. 9 Kelders 1. Keldees. p. 118 l. 20 accompany r. carry. p. 120
l. 13 Sheris r. Sheriff. p. 123 l. 13 patefacciones r. patefacciores. p. 133 l.
30 regnirem r. regni. p. 136 l. 11 digne r. digni. p. 145 l. 23 near three
thousand and five hundred pounds r. near three thousand pounds Sterling. p.
153 l. 1. Tu r. Tu. p. 153 l. 25 Caledonio r. Caledonios. p. 155 l. 5 imperva
r. impervia. p. 161 l. 22 maria r. mari. p. 162 l. 15 Agricola r. Agricolae. p.
166 l. 20 Romani r. Roman. p. 173 l. 4 means r. meant. l. 5 had r. has p. 173
l. 21 where the country of the Pights was, add of which the North east part was
our Thule.

Figured Stones

Molocca Beans

Penna Marina

Piscis non scriptus

pecten vide page: 44

A Circle of long stones

Concha Anatifera

Another molucca bean

Urna Sepulchralis

patella articulata cymbi formis

Duarfie Stone

Ember Goose

Obeliscus

Fibua



CHAP. I. The several Names by which Orkney is called. The Longitude and
Latitude of this Country An account of a Stone generated in the Air. How this
Country is bounded. Some odd Phenomenon about the Ebbing and Flowing of the
Sea. The number of the Islands; and a short Account of each of them, with their
different Harbors. The chief Products of this Country.
THIS Country in our English Language is called Orkney; by the Latins, both
Ancient and Modern, it is called Orcades. Pomponius Mela writes it with an
aspiration, Orchades. What reason there is for the Name is not condescended
upon, but it is probable the Latin Name may be from Orcas, which Ptolemy makes
to be a Promontory of Cathnes over against this Country, or from some Colony of
the Picts, who first Planted this Country, and from some Similitude with the
Name whereby they called themselves, might be so called by the Romans. As for
the English name Orkney, it may be derived from some Pictish Prince, as Erick
or Orkenwald, or some other who has been famous in the first Plantation; or
might have got the name from some remarkable Title which the first Planters the
Pights took to themselves; for Picts or Pights (as Verstegan says) in the
Teutonick Tongue signifies Fighters; and Orkney may come from Ear, which
signifies Honor, and Kyn, which signifies on Offspring, as if the name were
intended to show, That they were an Offspring or Generation of Honor.

This Country lies in the Northern temperate Zone and thirteenth Climate; the
Longitude being 22 Degrees and 11 Minutes, and Latitude 59 Degrees and 2
Minutes, the Compass varying eight Degrees; so that the length of the longest
Day is eighteen Hours and some odd Minutes; yet notwithstanding that this
Country is so far removed to the North, the Air is temperate and wholesome,
agreeing well with those Constitutions that can endure a little Cold. At
Midnight it is so clear for a great part of June, that one may read a Letter in
his Chamber; yet it cannot be true what Bleau reports, That from the Hill of
Hoy a Man may see the Sun at Midnight; for it cannot be the true Body of the
Sun that is seen, but the Image of it refracted through some watery Cloud about
the Horizon, seeing it must be as far depressed under our Horizon in June, as
it is elevated above it in December, which is by many Degrees; for from that
Hill the Sun is to be seen in the shortest Day in December above five Hours.

The Air and Clouds here, by the operation of the Sun, do sometimes generate
several things; as some Years since, some Fishermen Fishing half a League from
Land, over against Copinsha, in a fair Day, there fell down from the Air a
Stone about the bigness of a Football, which fell in the middle of the Boat
and sprung a Leake, to the great danger of the Lives of the Men that were in
it, which could be no other than some Substance generated in the Clouds. The
Stone was like condensed or petrefied Clay, and was a long time in the custody
of Captain Andrew Dick, at that time Steward of this Country; and Captain Dick,
who is yet alive, told me he gave it to the late Earl of Glencairn.

Here the Winters are generally more subject to Rain than Snow; nor does the
Frost and Snow continue so long here as in other parts of Scotland, but the
Wind in the mean time will often blow very boisterously, and it Rains sometimes
not by drops but by spouts of Water, as if whole Clouds fell down at once. In
the Year 1680, in the Month of June, after great Thunder, there fell flakes of
Ice near a foot thick.

This Country is wholly surrounded with the Sea, having Pightland-Firth on the
South, the Deucaledonian Ocean on the West, the Sea that divides it from
Zetland on the North, and the German Sea on the East. Zetland stands North-East
and by East from Orkney, and from the Start of Sanda in Orkney to Swinburg Head
the most Southerly Point in Zetland is about eighteen leagues, where there is
nothing but Sea all the way, save Fair Isle, which lies within eight Leagues of
Swinburg-Head.

Pightland-Firth, which divides this Country from Cathnes, is in breadth from
Duncansbay in Cathnes to the nearest point of South-Ronalsha in Orkney about
twelve Miles, in it are a great many different Tides, reckoned to the number of
twenty four, which run with such an impetuous force, that a Ship under sail is
no more able to make way against the Tide, than if it were hindered by a
Remora, which I conceive is the reason why some have said they have found the
Remora in these Seas.

In this Firth, about two Miles from the Coast of Cathnes, lies Stroma, a
little pleasant Island, but because of its vicinity to Cathnes, and its being
still under the Jurisdiction of the Lords of that Country, it is not counted as
one of the Isles of Orkney. On the North-side of this Isle is a part of
Pightland-Firth, called the Swelchie of Stroma, and at the West End of the
Isle, betwixt it and Mey in Cathnes, there is another part of the Firth, called
the Merry Men of Mey, both which are very dangerous to Seamen.

The Sea ebbs and flows here as in other places, yet there are some Phenomenon,
the reason of which cannot so easily be found out; as in the Isle of Sanda, it
flows two hours sooner on the West Side than it does on the Eastside; and in
North Faira (which lies betwixt Eda and Westra) the Sea ebbs nine hours and
flows but three: And at Hammoness in Sanda, both ebb and flood run one way,
except at the be ginning of a quick Stream, when for two or three hours the
flood runs South.

The Sea here is very turbulent in a Storm, and uneasy even to those on Land,
especially in those places of the Country that lie exposed to Pightland-Firth,
and the Western Ocean, for when the Storm beats that way, the Sea dashes with
such violence against the Rocks, that a great deal of the Sea is carried (in
some places near a quarter of a mile) on the Land, and falls like a great
shower of Rain on the Ground, which is very often prejudicial to their Corn at
certain Seasons.

The Tides also are very swift and violent, by reason of the multitude of the
Isles and narrowness of the Passage; for, when all the rest of the Sea is
smooth, these Tides carry their Waves and billows high, and run with such
violence that they cause a contrary motion in the Sea adjoining to the Land,
which they call Easter-birth or Wester-birth, according to its course; yet
notwithstanding of the great rapidity of these Tides and Births, the
Inhabitants, daily almost, travel from Isle to Isle about their several affairs
in their little Cockboats or Yoals, as they call them.

Whatever the Ancients have written of the number of the Islands of Orkney,
it is certain there are but twenty six, at present inhabited, viz.
South-Ronalsha, Swinna, Hoy and Waes, Burra, Lambholm, Flotta, Faira, Cava,
Gramsey, Pomona or Mainland, Copinsha, Shapinsha, Damsey, Inhallo, Stronsa,
Papa-Stronsa, Sanda, North-Ronalsha, Eda, Rousa, Wyre, Gairsa, Eglesha,
North-Faira, Westra, Papa-Westra. The rest of the Islands are called Holms, and
are only used for Pasture; all of them being separated from one another by some
narrow Streights. Most of these Islands names end in a or ey, which in the
Teutonick signifies Water, to show that these Isles are pieces of Land
surrounded with Water.

These Islands are of different Natures, some Sandy, some Marsh, some abounding
in Heath and Moss, and some that have none, some of them Mountainous and some
Plain. Of these some are called the South-Isles, and others the North-Isles,
and that as they stand to the South or North of the greatest Island, called the
Mainland.

South-Ronalsha is the Southermost of these Islands, five Miles long, fertile
in Corn, and abounding with People. To the South-East lie the Pightland
Skerries, dangerous to Seamen; but to the North is St. Margarets Hope, a very
safe Harbor for Ships, which has no difficulty in coming to it, save a Rock in
the middle of the Sound, betwixt this Island and Burra, called Lippa. From
Burwick, in this Isle, is the usual Ferry to Duncansbay in Cathnes.

A little separated from this, to the South-West, lies Swinna, a little Isle,
and only considerable for a part of Pight land-Firth lying a little to the West
of it, called the Wells of Swinna, which are two Whirlpools in the Sea
(occasioned, as is thought, by some Hintus that is in the Earth below) that run
about with such violence, that if any Boat or Ship come within their reach they
will whirl it about and about till it be swallowed up and drowned. They are
only dangerous in a great Calm; for if there be any Wind, and the Boat under
Sail, there is no danger to go over them. If a Boat happen to come near them in
a Calm, by the force of the Tide driving that way, the Boats-men, for their
preservation throw a Barrel or an Oar, or any bulky thing that comes next to
hand, into the Wells, and when it is swallowed up the Sea remains smooth for a
time for any Boat to pass over.

Beyond this, and to the West of South-Ronalsha, lies Waes and Hoy (thought to
be the Dumna of Pliny) which are but one Isle, about twelve Miles in length,
full of high Mountains, and but thinly inhabited, unless in Waes, where the
Ground is very pleasant and fertile. From Snelsetter in Waes is the other Ferry
from this Country to Ham, in Cathnes. Here are several good Harbors, as
Kirk-hope, North-hope, Orehope, and others, but not now much frequented, though
North-hope be one of the best Harbors in this Country, if not in the whole
World, and most proper for those that design a Fishing Trade.

To the North of South-Ronalsha lies Burra, a pleasant little Isle, fruitful in
Corns and abounding in Rabbits. Betwixt Burra and the Mainland is Lambholm, and
to the West, toward Hoymouth, lies Flotta, Faira, Cava, Gramsey, all of them
fruitful and pleasant Islands, though they be not large.

Next to these is the Mainland, called by the Ancients Pomona or Pomonia, about
twenty four Miles in length, and well inhabited. About the middle of this
Island, to the North, stands Kirkwall, the only Town in all this Country. There
are in the Mainland four excellent Harbors for Ships, one at Kirkwall, both
large and safe, without any danger by Shoals or blind Rocks as they come to it,
unless they come from the West by Inhallo and Gairsa: Another Harbor is at
Deirsound, which is a great Bay, and a very safe Road for Ships, having good
anchoring ground, and capable of sheltering the greatest Navies. The third is
at Grahamshall, toward the East Side of this Isle, where there is a convenient
Road; but the Ship that sails to it from the East, would do well to keep
betwixt Lambholm and the Mainland, for the other way betwixt Lambholm and Burra
(which appears to them to be only open) is very shallow and dangerous, even for
small Ships. The fourth is at Kairston, a small Village, at the West end of the
Mainland, where there is a very safe and commodious Harbor, well fenced
against all Winds by two small Holms that stand at the entry.

To the East of the Mainland lies Copinsha, a little Isle, but very conspicuous
to Seamen, as is that Holm to the North-East of it, called the Horse of
Copinsha.

To the North of the Mainland, lie the North-Isles, the first of which is
Shapinsha, about five or six Miles in length, and has a very safe Harbor for
Ships at Elwick.

Of an equal bigness to that toward the South-East lies Stronsa, where there is
two very good Harbors; one at Lingasound, fenced with Lingaholm, the other at
Strynie, fenced with a little pleasant Isle to the North of it, called
Papa-Stronsa.

Beyond these, toward the North, at some distance, lies Sanda, about twelve
Miles long, but very narrow, well inhabited; it has two Roads for Ships, one
at Kitletoft, guarded by a little Holm, called the Holm of Elsnes, the other at
Otterswick, guarded by the most Northern-Island in all this Country, called
North-Ronalsha, which is a little fruitful Isle, but both it and Sanda have no
Moss Ground, but are obliged to bring their Peits and Turfs (which is the only
Fuel they have thorough this whole Country) a great way off, from the next
adjacent Island, Eda.

This Eda lies to the South-East of Sanda, thought to be the Ocetis of
Ptolemy, near five Miles in length, full of Moss and Hills, but thinly
inhabited, unless it be about the skirts of it; it has a safe Road to the
North, called Calf-sound.

Three Miles to the West of Kirkwall, at the bottom of a large Bay, lies a
little Island, called Damsey, with a Holm near it as large as it self.

To the North North-West lies Rousa, about six Miles long, but very hilly and
ill inhabited. Betwixt it and the Mainland lies Inhallo, and toward Kirkwall
lies Wyre and Gairsa, small but profitable Islands.

North from Kirkwall, at eight Miles distance, is Eglesha, near three Miles in
length, very pleasant and fertile, having a safe Road for Ships betwixt it and
Wyre. In this Isle there is a little handsome Church, where, it is said, that
Saint Magnus, the Patron of this Country, lies Buried.

To the North of Eglesha is Westra, seven Miles long, pleasant, fertile and
well inhabited. There is in it a convenient Harbor for Ships, at Piriwa. At
the East of it lies Faira, called for distinction, Faira by North; and to the
North and by East, is Papa-Westra, a pleasant Isle, three Miles in length,
famous in this Country for Saint Fredwell's Chapel and Lake, of which many
ridiculous things are reported by the Vulgar.

All these Islands are indifferently fruitful, well stored with Fields of Corn
and Herds of Cattle, and abound with Rabbits, and the greatest plenty of
Muirfowl and Plover that there is any where, but have no Hares or Partridges.

The chief products of this Country, and which are Exported yearly by the
Merchant, are, Butter, Tallow, Hides, Barley, Malt, Oatmeal, Fish, Salted Beef,
Pork, Rabbit-skins, Otter-skins, white Salt, Stuffs, Stockings, Wool, Hams,
Writing-Pens, Downs, Feathers, etc.

A South-East and North-West Moon causes high Water throughout all this
Country.

CHAP. II. Of the Plants growing naturally in Orkney. Of those Beans called the
Molucca Beans thrown in there. A Description of a strange Fish taken in Sanda.
An Account of their Land and Sea-shells. Of their Mines. Of some exotic Fowls
driven in there, and some other effects of violent Storms. Of their Lakes and
Locks.
I Did not find this Country so well stored with Plants as I expected; as for
instance, I found none of the Malva kind, nor several other Plants that I
thought might have agreed well enough with this Country; but such as I did
find, I thought an account of them might not be unacceptable, though I am far
from pretending this to be so very exact as it should have been; these being
the Names of those only I have by me.

Acetosa pratensis B. P. common Sorrel. Acetosa arvensis Lanceolata B. P.
Sheeps Sorrel. Adianthum album Tab. Ruta muraria B. P. white Maidenhair.
Adianthum nigrum Off. I. B. black Maidenhair. Adianthum aureum majus Ger.
golden Maidenhair. Alchimilla vulgaris B. P. Ladies Mantle. Alchimilla minime
montana Percepier Anglorum Ger. Parsley break-stone. Alliaria B. P. Sauce alone,
or Jack-by-the-Hedge. Alsine media B. P. common Chickweed. Alsine arvensis
hirsuta magno flore I. B. Mouse-ear Chickweed. Alsine plantaginis folio B. P.
Plantainleav'd Chickweed. Alsine sperula dicta major B. P. Spurrey. Alsine
minor multicaulis B. P. fine Chickweed. Alsine palustris portulacae aquaticae
similis J. Ray, small water Chickweed. Alsine Hederulae folio B. P. Ivy-leav'd
Chickweed. Alsine veronicae foliis flosculis cauli adhaerentibus B. P.
speedwell Chickweed. Ambrosia campestris repens, Swines cresses. Anagallis
flore Phoeniceo B. P. Male pimpernell. Anagallis aquatica major folio oblongo
B. P. the greater long-leav'd Brook-lime. Anagallis aquatica minor folio
subrotundo B. P. common Brook-lime or Waterpimpernell. Androsaemum Mathioli
Park. Ascyrum sive Hypericum glabrum bifolium non perforatum B. P. Mathiolus
his Tutsan or elegant St. John's wort not perforate. Angelica Sylvestris B. P.
wild Angelica. Angelica Sylvestris minor sive erratica B. P. Goutweed or
Ashweed. Anthillis maritima B. P. Sea-pimpernel. Aparine vulgaris B. P. common
Goosegrass. Argentina Ger. Argentine or Silverweed. Artemisia vulgaris J. B.
common Mugwort. Arundo vulgaris B. P. common Reed. Asperula Ger. common
white-flower'd Woodroof. Asphodelus minimus luteus palustris Acori folio Lob.
Hist. Oxon. Bastard Asphodel. Atriplex Sylvestris angusto and folio oblongo B.
P. narrow-leav'd wild Arrach. Atriplex marina nostras J. Ray; English
Sea-Arrach. Auricula muris pulchra flore albo J. B. Mouse-ear with a white
Flower. Auricula muris pulchra, flore albo, folio tenuissimo J. B.
fair-flower'd Mouse-ear with cut leaves. Barba Caprae floribus compactis B. P.
Meadow-Sweet or Queen of the Meadow. Bardana major sive Lappa J. B. Burdock.
Bellis major J. B. the greater wild white Daisie. Bellis Sylv. minor B. P.
common small wild Daisie. Buglossum Sylvestre minus B. P. wild or corn Bugloss.
Buglossum Sylvestre minus caulibus procumbentibus B. P. small wild Bugloss.
Bursa Pastoris J. B. Shepherds purse. Bursa Pastoris minor loculis oblongis B.
P. Paronychia vulgaris Ger. Nailwort or whitlow Grass. Calamintha vulgaris
arvensis verticulata B. P. Water Calamint. Caltha Palustris J. B. small marsh
Marigold. Campanula pratensis rotundifolia vulgaris B. P. the lesser round
leaved Bellflower. Campanula pratensis flore conglomerato B. P. little
Throatwort or Canterbury Bells. Carduus vulgatissimus viarum Ger. common-way
Thistle. Carduus nutans J. B. Thistle with a bending head. Carduus lanceatus B.
P. the Spear-thistle. Carduus Polyacanthus primus Ger. Thistle upon Thistle.
Carduus Polyacanthus secundus Lob. walted Thistle with small leaves.
Caryophyllata vulgaris B. P. Avens. Caryophyllus pratensis laciniato flore
simplici B. P. wild Williams or Cuckoc-flowers. Caryophyllus minimus muscosus
nostras Park. Chickweed-breakstone. Caryophyllus montanus minor B. P. Thrift or
Sea Gilliflower or Arby. Chaerephyllum Sylvestre B. P. common wild Chervile.
Chamaeustus flore luteo B. P. Dwarf Cistus or little Sun-flower. Chamaedrys
Sylvestris Ger. wild Germander. Chamaemelum inodorum B. P. Mayweed or Dogs
Chamomel. Chamaemelum inodorum flore pleno, doubleflower'd Mayweed. Cheledonium
minus Ger. lesser Celandine. Chrysanthemum Segetum Ger. Corn Marigold. Cicuta
major B. P. common Hemlock. Cochlearia folio sinuato B. P. common
Sea-Scurvy-grass. Consolida media pratensis B. P. common Bugle. Convolvulus
minor arvensis B. P. small Bindweed. Coronopus Sylvestris hirsutior B. P.
Buckhorn Plantain. Cruciata vulgaris B. P. Crosswort. Cyanus minor segetum B.
P. common blewbottle or Sun-flower. Cynaglossum majus vulgar B. P. common
Hounds-tongue. Daucus nostras, wild Carrot or Birdsnest. Dens leonis B. P.
Dandelyon. Digitalis purpurea folio aspero B. P. purple Fox-gloves. Echium
marinum B. P. Sea-bugloss. Echium scorpoides arvense B. P. Mouse-ear
Scorpion-grass. Echium Scorpoides palustre B. P. water Scorpion-grass.
Equisetum arvense longioribus setis B. P. common Horse-tail. Equisetum palustre
longioribus setis B. P. the greater Marsh Horse-tail. Equisetum palustre
brevioribus setis polyspermon B. P. Female Horse-tail. Equisetum faetidum sub
aqua repens B. P. stinking-water Horse-tail. Equisetum nudum Ger. naked
Horse-tail. Erica baccifera procumbens nigra B. P. Berry bearing Heath. Erica
vulgaris glabra B. P. common Heath or Heather. Erica humilis cortice cineritio
Arbuti flore B. P. fine leaved Heath. Erica ex rubro nigricans Scoparia B. P.
Low-Dutch-Heath or Broom-Heath. Eruca Sylvestris minor luteo parvoque flore J.
B. small water Rocket. Erysimum vulgar B. P. Hedge Mustard. Erysimo Similis
hirsuta non laciniata alba B. P. Hairy-hedge Mustard with uncut leaves.
Eupatorium aquaticum folio integro Park. water Agrimony with undivided leaves.
Euphrasia J. B. Eyebright. Euphrasia pratensis rubra B. P. Eyebright Cow-wheat.
Filix ramosa major pinnulis obtusis non dentatis B. P. common Brakes or female
Fern. Filix non ramosa dentata B. P. male Fern. Fumaria officinarum B. P.
Fumitory. Gallium album J. B. white Ladies Bedstraw. Gallium luteum B. P.
yellow Ladies Bedstraw. Gallium sive Molugo montana minor Gallio albo similis
J. Ray. small Mountain Bastard Madder. Gentianella autumnalis centauri minoris
foliis Park. Dwarf autumnal Gentian. Geranium Batrochoides folio Aconiti B. P.
the lesser Crowfoot Crainsbill. Geranium Cicutae folio inodorum B. P. unsavory
Crainsbill. Geranium Columbinum tenuius laciniatum B. P. Doves-foot with uncut
leaves. Geranium lucidum saxatile B. P. shining rock Crainsbill. Geranium
Robertianum primum B. P. Herb Robert. Glaux Maritima B. P. Sea-Milkwort.
Gnaphalium montanum flore rotundiore B. P. Mountain Cudweed or Catsfoot.
Gnaphalium medium B. P. middle or black headed Cudweed. Gramen Caninum Arvense
B. P. Dogsgrass. Gramen Cristatum J. B. smooth crested grass. Gramen Avenaceum
panicula flavescente locustis parvis J. Ray. Oat-grass with a yellow pannicle.
Gramen aquaticum genicalatum spicatum B. P. spiked flote Grass or water Grass.
Gramen Asperum J. B. rough Grass. Gramen avenaceum dumetorum spica simplici J.
Ray. Single-spiked-hedge Oatgrass. Gramen Cyperoides majus angustifolium Park.
the greater narrow-leav'd Cyperus Grass. Gramen exile duriusculum in muris and
aridis proveniens J. Ray. small hard Grass. Gramen palustre echinatum J. B.
Hedgehog-grass. Gramen pratense paniculatum majus B. P. the greater Meadow
Grass. Gramen pratense paniculatum minus B. P. the lesser Meadow Grass. Gramen
pratense paniculatum molle B. P. soft tufted Meadow Grass. Gramen parvum
praecox spica laxa canescente, J. Ray. Vernal-grass with a soft loose Spike.
Gramen secalinum Ger. Rie-grass. Gramen Sparteum spicatum foliis mucronatis vel
spica secalina B. P. Sea Matweed or Bent. Gramen Tomentosum Ger. Cotton-grass.
Gramen Tremulum J. B. Quaking-grass. Gramen Typhynum majus Ger. the greatest
Cats-tail-grass. Hieracium minus folio subrotundo B. P. small Swines succory.
Hieracium dentis leonis folio obtuso majus B. P. Long-rooted Hawk-weed.
Hieracium Chondrillae folio radice succisa majus B. P. yellow Devils-bit.
Horminum pratense foliis serratis B. P. common wild-clary. Hyoscyamus niger
vulgaris B. P. Blackhenbane. Hypericum vulgar B. P. common St. John 's-wort.
Hypericum Ascyrum dictum caul quadrangulo J. B. common St. Peter 's-wort.
Jacea nigra pratensis laetifolia B. P. Black knap-weed. Jacobaea vulgaris J. B.
common St. James 's-wort. Imperatoriae affinis maritima umbelliferae scotica
Sutherlandi. Scot 's sea Master-wort.
I don't know why some choose rather to call this an Apium, others a Seseli, and
some a Ligusticum; I shall describe the Plant, and take liberty to do it in
Latin, since it runs best that way, and so any may judge whether it has more
the Character of an Apium or Imperatoria. Folia allata sunt ex tribus segmentis
amplis subrotundis, laete virentibus, palmaribus, tripartitis and in ambitu
incisis componuntur. Caulis ad cubitum assurgit, striatus, cavus, geniculis
nonnullis interceptus, in quibus folia adsunt inferioribus long minora. Flores
in umbellam planam and latam disponuntur, rosacei, pentapetali, candidi, cum
calice in duo semina abeunte striata, compressa, and ala foliacea tenuique
cincta. There is no Plant more common by the Sea side on the Rocks, especially
in Waes and Hoy, than this; but it is very frequent in most other places of this
Country.

Iris palustris lutea sive Acorus Adulterinus J. B. yellow water Flagg or
Flower-de-luce. Juncus acutus panicula sparsa B. P. common hard Rush. Juncus
laevis panicula sparsa major B. P. common Rush. Juncus maximus and scirpus
major B. P. Bull Rush. Juncus aquaticus capitulis equiseti major B. P. club
Rush. Juniperus vulgaris B. P. the Juniper Bush. Kali spinosum cochleatum B. P.
prickly Glasswort. Lamium album B. P. white dead Nettle or Archangel. Lamium
rubrum B. P. red dead Nettle or Archangel. Lapathum vulgar folio obtuso J. B.
round leaved Wild Dock. Lapathum folio acuto B. P. sharp-pointed Dock. Lapathum
folio acuto crispo B. P. sharppointed Dock with curled leaves. Lapathum
unctuosum sive Bonus Henricus J. B. common English Mercury. Latuca Sylvestris
costa spinosa B. P. cutleav'd wild Latice. Lens palustris J. B. Duck Meat.
Lichen sive hepatica terrestris B. P. common ground Liverwort. Lichen cinereus
terrestris J. Ray. Ash-colour'd-ground Liverwort. Linaria lutea vulgaris J. B.
common Toadflax. Linum pratense flosculis exiguis B. P. Dwarf wild flax. Lolium
album Ger. Darnel. Lonchitis aspera B. P. great bastard Spleenwort. Lotus sive
Melilotus pentaphyllos minor glabra B. P. Birds-foot trefoil. Lunaria minor
Ger. small Moonwort. Lychnis Sylvestris alba simplex B. P. the white Campion.
Lychnis segetum major B. P. Cockle. Lychnis Sylvestris quae Behen album vulgo
B. P. Spatling Poppy. Lychnis Maritima repens B. P. English Sea Campion.
Lychnis Sylvestris viscosa rubra angustifolia B. P. German Catchflea with white
Flowers. Lysimachia Siliquosa glabra major B. P. the great smooth leaved loose
Strife. Lysimachia Siliquosa galbra minor B. P. the lesser or smooth leaved
loose-Strife. Lysimachia Siliquosa hirsuta parvo flore B. P. hairy-codded
willow Flower. Marubium nigrum faetidum B. P. black Horehound. Melampyrum
luteum common Cow-Wheat. Mentha rotundifolia palustris sive aquatica B. P.
Water Mint. Millefolium vulgar B. P. Yarrow or Millefoil. Millefolium
aquaticum ranunculi flore and capitulo Park. Crowfoot Water-Milfoil. Muscus
terrestris clavatus B. P. Clubmoss. Muscus clavatus foliis cupressi B. P.
Cypress-moss or Heath-moss. Muscus pixiodis terrestris B. P. Cup or
Chalice-moss. Myrrhis Sylvestris seminibus asperis B. P. small Hemlock Chervil.
Myrtillus, Whortle bush or Whorts. Nasturtium pratense magno flore B. P. Ladies
Smock or Cuckoe Flowers. Nasturtium pratense magno flore sive Cardamini flore
albo, Hist. Oxon. Ladies Smock with white Flowers. Nasturtium aquaticum B. P.
common Watercresses. Nasturtium Sylvestre tenuissime divisum B. P. Flixweed.
Nymphaea major alba B. P. the great white water Lily. Oenanthe Apii folio succo
viroso Morisoni, Hemlock Dropwort. Ononis spinis carens purpurea B. P. Purple
Rest-Harrow. Ononis non spinosa flore albo, white flowered Rest-Harrow without
prickles. Ophrys bifolia B. P. two blade. Orchys mus foliis maculatis B. P. the
male Fools Stones. Orchys faemina B. P. the female Fools Stones. Panax Coloni
B. P. Clowns All-heal. Papaver erraticum majus B. P. Corn Poppy. Papaver
corniculatum luteum B. P. yellowflower'd Horn-Poppy. Pedicularis pratensis
lutea B. P. yellow rattle or Cocks-comb. Pedicularis pratensis purpurea B. P.
red rattle Grass. Pedicularis pratensis rubra clatior J. Ray. great red rattle
or Louse-wort. Persicaria mitis maculosa and non maculosa B. P. dead or spotted
Arsmart. Persicaria urens sive Hydropiper B. P. hot Arsmart. Petasites major B.
P. common Butterbur. Pimpinella Saxifraga major umbella candida B. P. great
Burnet Saxifrage. Pimpinella Saxifraga minor B. P. small burnet Saxifrage.
Plantago latifolia sinuata B. P. great Plantain. Plantago angustifolia major B.
P. Ragwort or lesser Plantain. Plantago aquatica latifolia B. P. Waterplantain.
Polygala vulgaris B. P. Blew Milkwort. Polygonum latifolium B. P. common
Knotgrass. Polypodium vulgar B. P. common Polypody Potamogeiton rotundifolium
B. P. round leaved Pondweed. Potamogeiton salicis folio B. P. narrowleav'd
Pondweed. Prunella vulgaris B. P. Self-heal. Ptarmica, Sneezewort. Ranunculus
pratensis repens hirsutus B. P. common Crowfoot. Ranunculus pratensis erectus
acris B. P. upright Meadow Crowfoot. Ranunculus palustris Apii folio laevis B.
P. round leaved marsh Crowfoot. Ranunculus longifolius palustris major B. P.
the great Spearwort. Ranunculus palustris serratus B. P. dented Spearwort.
Ranunculus aquaticus folio rotundo and capillaceo B. P. water Crowfoot with
various leaves. Ranunculus aquaticus Cotyledonis folio B. P. marsh Pennywort.
Raphanus rusticanus B. P. Horseradish. Rapistrum slore luteo B. P. wild
Mustard. Ros solis folio rotundo B. P. Sun-dew. Rosa Sylvestris vulgaris B. P.
the common wild brier bush. Salix pumila repens Ger. small creeping Willow.
Sanicula officinarum B. P. common Sanicle. Sanicula montana slore Calcari
donato B. P. Butterwort. Saxifraga rotundifolia alba B. P. common white
Saxifrage. Saxifraga rotundifolia aurea B. P. Golden Saxifrage. Saxifraga
Anglicafacie seseli pratensis Park. Meadow Saxifrage. Scabiosa pratensis
hirsuta quae officinarum B. P. common Scabious. Scandix semine rostrato sive
pecten Veneris B. P. Venus comb or Shepherds-Needle. Scordium alterum sive
Salvia agrestis B. P. Wood Sage. Scrophularia nodosa foetida B. P. common
Figwort. Scrophularia aquatica major B. P. Water Betony or Figwort. Sedum
parvum acre flore luteo J. B. Stone crop or Wall-pepper. Sedum Tridactylites
tectorum B. P. paronychia folio rutaceo Ger. Rue Whitlow Grass. Senicio minor
vulgaris B. P. common Groundsell. Serpillum vulgar minus B. P. wild Thyme.
Sideritis alsines trissaginis folio B. P. Ironwort with Germander Chickweed
leaves. Sium angustifolium majus B. P. Water-Parsnip. Sium minimum foliis
ferulaceis Hort. Reg. Blessen. minimum Jo. Ray. the least Water-parsnip.
Sonchus laevis laciniatus latifolius B. P. smooth Sow-thistle. Sonchus asper
laciniatus and non laciniatus B. P. prickly Sow-thistle. Soncho affinis
Lampsana Domestica B. P. Nipplewort or Balagan. Sparganium non ramosum B. P.
Bur-reed. Sphondylium vulgar B. P. Cow-parsnip. Succisa sive morsus Diaboli J.
B. Purpleflower'd Devils Bit. Telephium vulgar B. P. common Orpine. Thalictrum
minus B. P. the lesser Meadow Rue. Tithymallus Helioscopius B. P. Sun surge.
Tormentilla Sylvestris B. P. Tormentil. Tragopogon pratense luteum B. P. yellow
Goats beard. Trifolium pratense album B. P. white flowered trefoil. Trifolium
pratense purpureum B. P. Purple flowered trefoil. Trifolium luteum lupulinum
minimum Hist. Oxon. the least hop trefoil. Trifolium palustre B. P. marsh
Trefoil. Tussilago J. B. Coltsfoot. Typha palustris major B. P. Cats-tail.
Valeriana Sylvestris major B. P. great wild Valerian. Valeriana palustris minor
B. P. small wild or marsh Valerian. Verbascum vel primula veris flore simplici
B. P. common Primerose. Veronica mas supina and vulgatissima B. P. the male
Speedwell or Fluellan. Vicia Multislora B. P. tufted Vetch or Birds tears.
Vicia segetum cum siliquis plurimis hirsutis B. P. small wild Tare. Viola
martia inodora Sylvestris B. P. wild or Dogs Violet. Viola tricolor arvensis B.
P. Pansies or Hearts-ease. Virga aurea angustifolia minus serrata B. P. common
golden Rod. Urtica aculeata foliis serratis sive Canabis spuria B. P. Bastard
Hemp. Urtica urens maxima B. P. common Nettle.
There are no Trees any where in all this Country, except some few Ashes Thorn
and Plumb Trees that are in the Bishops Garden in Kirkwal. There are in some
Gentlemen's Gardens in Kirkwal, and several other places of the Country, some
Apple and Cherry-trees, but they seldom bear Fruit that comes to any maturity;
and the Trees grow never higher than the Garden Walls. And, except some few
wild Roses and Juniper that I see in Hoy, and the Myrtillus and Heath, which is
common every where, I don't remember to have seen any Bush or Shrub growing
wild in all the Country. Yet in a great many Gardens they have several very
good Plants both for Use and Ornament; Cabbage, Turnip, Carrot, Parsnip,
Skirret or Crummocks, etc. grow to as great a bigness here as any where; and
Artichokes to a greater than ever I have seen them in any other place.

I do not understand the reason why Trees don't grow here, since in the same
Latitude in Norway, and some degrees more Northerly, Trees thrive very well,
even on small Rocks surrounded by the Sea. I know not whether it be in places
where the Sea makes such a breach as it does in some places of this Country,
where the Seawater, with the violence of the Storm, is carried a great way on
the Land, and blasts all it falls on: This, with the violent Winds that often
blow in this Country, I think, may be one reason why Trees don't prosper so
well; but if they have the same Breaches in Norway, I don't know what to say to
it. Whether Trees have grown here of old; or, what is more probable, if it be
the remains yet of the Flood, but commonly, in their Mosses, they find Trees of
twenty or thirty Foot long.

After Storms of Westerly Wind, amongst the Sea-weed, they find commonly in
places exposed to the Western-Ocean these Phaseoli, that, I know not for what
reason, go under the Name of Molucca Beans. The ingenious Doctor Sloan in the
Philosophical Transactions, Number 222, gives a very satisfactory Account, how
from the West Indies, where they commonly grow, they may be thrown in on
Ireland, the Western parts of Scotland and Orkney. You have the Figures of four
different sorts of them.

Here is good store of Sheep and Cows, which though they be little, yet yield
abundance of Milk. Their Ewes are so fertile, that most of them have two at a
Birth, some three. I my self saw one that had four all living and following the
Dam.

Their Horses are but little, yet strong, and can endure a great deal of
Fatigue, most of which they have from Zetland and are called Shelties. There
are great Herds of Swine and rich Warrens almost in every Isle, well stored
with Rabbits. Frogs are seen but seldom, yet there are some Toads, though, as it
is thought, they are not poisonous, as indeed there are few, if any, poisonous
Animals in all this Country.

Many Ottars and Seols are to be had every where, and often times Spout Whales
and Pellacks run in great number upon the shore and are taken, as in the Year
1691, near Kairston in the Mainland, there run in a Bay no less than a hundred
and fourteen at once.

The Stellae-marinae and Urtica-Marina are often thrown in great plenty. In the
Sea they catch Ling, Keeling, Haddock, Whiting, Mackrel, Turbat, Scate,
Congre-Eels, Sole, Fleuks, etc. and sometimes they catch Sturgeon.

In the Year 1682, in Winter, there was taken a strange but beautiful Fish in
Sanda (where several of them had been taken before) it was about an Ell in
length, deep Breasted, and narrow at the Tail; the Head and Finns, and a stroke
down the Back were all of a deep scarlet color, which made it beautiful to
look on; the rest was of a brownish color, without scales, having several
whitish spots in the Body; the Fish of the half next the Head was like Beef,
and of the other half next the Tail was like Salmon.

Herring swim thorough these Islands in great plenty, but the People are not so
frugal, or have not the way, to catch them. Some Years ago, many Ships from
Fife frequented this Country for the catching of Herrings; but the Seamen
having been in the Year 1645, at the Battle of Kilsyth, they were there almost
all Killed; since which time that Trade failed; though the Hollanders, to our
eternal Reproach, fail not to keep it up to their great advantage.

Sometimes strange Fishes are cast a shore, to which the People give as strange
Names. I see one like a Goose Feather, the Body being like the Quill, and the
Tail like the Feather, of a reddish color. This seems to be what Gesner calls,
Penna Marina Sitardi. As for that strange sleeping Fish that Boethius mentions
in his Description of this Country, I could never hear of it.

I have often observed in the Head of the grayish Snail, those bright white
Stones Doctor Lister mentions in his excellent Book, De Cochleis and Araneis
Angliae, The People here beat them to Powder, and reckon it a Specific for the
Gravel.

As to their Land Shells, I cannot so well describe, since, after I understood
any thing of that part of Natural History, the very short time I staid there
gave me but little opportunity to make so nice an enquiry as I should otherwise
have done; only I observed a great variety of the Cochleae Terrestres, both as
to their Maculae and Fasciae, and that buccinum rupium, etc. which Dr. Lister
describes Tit. 8. De Cochleis Terrestribus. Since there are no Rivers, there
can no River-shells be expected here; but in their small Rivolets the buccinum
exiguum trium spirarum a sinistra in dextram convolutarum was common: And of
the Sea-shells I found the

Buccinum album, laeve, maximum, septem minime spirarum.

Buccinum crassum, rufescens, striatum and undatum.

Buccinum tenue, laeve, striatum and undatum.

Buccinum bilingue, labro propatulo. This Doctor Lister in his Synopsis
Conchyliorum, makes a West India Shell. I found it here common, as I found it
afterward in several other places of Scotland.

Buccinum angustius, tenuiter admodum striatum, octo minimum spirarum.

Buccinum minus, albidum, asperum, intra quinas spiras finitum.

Buccinum minus, ex albo subviride, ore dentato, eoque ex slavo leviter
rufescente.

Buccinum tenue, dense striatum, 12 mininimum spiris donatum.

Cochlea fusca fasciis crebris angustisque praedita.

Cochlea rufescens, fasciis, maculatis, maxim ad imos orbs, distincta.

Nerita ex fusco viridescens, aut ex toto slavescens, modo pallide, modo
intense ad colorem mali aurantii maturi.

Nerita fasciatus, unica lata fascia insignitus, caeterum subfuscus ex viridi.

Nerita reticulatus.

Trochus albidus maculis rubentibus distinctus, sex minimum spirarum.

Trochus crebris striis fuscis and transverse and undatim dispositis donatus.

Trochus minor coerulescens; striatus, umbilicatus, apice brevi.

Concha Veneris exigua, alba, striata. Nuns, called in Orkney, John-a-Groats
buckies.

Echinus marinus, orbicularis, esculentus. The largest of this kind I ever see
any where are in Orkney; I have seen several of them twenty or thirty Inches in
Circumference. The common people reckon the meat of the Sea Urchin or Ivegars
as they call them a great Rarity, and use it often instead of Butter.

Patella ex livido cinera, striata. The Limpet.

Patella fusca, compressa, dense striata.

Patella articulata, cymbiformis. I never see any of this kind any where but
this one; yet Rondeletius has something pretty near it, and I have lately had
one from the West Indies that seems to be of that same kind, but bigger; see
the Figure.

Patella minor, fusca, tenuis, umbone nigro ad extremitatem anteriorem detruso,
tribus inde lineis coeruleis per dorsum decurrentibus pulchre distincta.

Patella ovalis minor, viridis, nigra, fascia in medio donata.

Patella maxima ex albo viridescens, umbone ad partem anteriorem admoduni
dotruso.

Ostreum vulgar maximum. The largest Oysters ever I see any where, are got in
some places of this Country, and the fittest for pickling; I have seen them so
large that they must be cut in two or three pieces before they can be eaten:
But the people are so careless that they have in few places Drags to take them
up as they do elsewhere, but for the most part at a great ebb, go in amongst
the Rocks and cut them off with a Knife.

Concha longa lataque in mediis cardinibus cavitate quadam pyriformi insignita.

Concha quasi rhomboides in medio cardine utrinque circiter tribus exiguis
denticulis donata.

Concha e maximis admodum crassa, rotunda ex nigro rufescens.

Concha tenuis subrotunda, omnium minime cava, cardinis medio sinu and amplo
and pyriformi.

Concha crassa ex altera part compressa ex altera subrotunda.

Concha parva subrotunda ex part interna rubens.

Pecten maximus circiter 14 striis admodum crassis and eminentibus and iisdem
ipsis striatis insignitus. Scallop or Clamshell.

Pecten tenuis, subrufus, maculosus, circiter 20 striis majoribus at laevibus
donatus.

Pecten minimus, angustior, inaequalis fere and asper, sinu ad cardinem
cylindraceo, creberrimis minutissimisque striis donatus.

Pecten minor utrinque aequaliter auritus, profunde striatus, and ex albo and
rubro pulchre variegatus.

I could name a great many more of these kind of Pectines, that are by some
reckoned distinct species, but I think them all of the same kind, and that they
have these accidental Colors, etc. from their being sometime exposed to the
weather, since I could never see any live shells have such Colors or be so
variegated: And though they were I doubt if it be altogether warrantable in this
part of natural History, to distinguish Shells only differing in some
accidental Colors, more than it would be to reckon black and red Hair'd, those
of a large or smaller Stature, different Species or Tribes of men.

I observed in Stroma a little Island that lies in Pightland Firth, and in some
places in Orkney, where there went extraordinary cross and strong Tides, almost
all the thinner sort of Pectines, so twisted and of such an irregular shape,
that I was surprised to see it. I cannot think the odd strange tumbling the
Tides make there, can contribute any thing to that frame; yet after all I never
see them so in any other place. See the Figure of one of them.

Pectunculus maximus at minus concavus, plurimis minutioribus and parum
eminentibus striis donatus, rostro, acuto and minus incurvato.

Pectunculus albus, exiguus, muricibus insigniter exasperatus.

Pectunculus maximus subfuscus valde gravis Listeri, Synop. Conch. Numb. 108.

Pectunculus maximus insigniter echinatus.

Pectunculus vulgaris, albidus, rotundus, circiter 26 strijs majusculis at
planioribus donatus. The Cockle.

Tellina intus ex viola purpurascens, in ambitu serrata. I have a great many
more of these Tellinae of different Colors, and some very beautifully
variegated, but I reckon them on the same score with the Pectines that are so.

Concha laevis, altera tantum part clausilis, apophysi admodum prominente,
lataque praedita.

Solen sive concha tenuis longissimaque ab utraque part naturaliter hians. The
Spout Fish.

Musculus ex coeruleo niger. The common Muscle.

On a Log of wood which has been some time in the Sea, and afterward thrown
upon the shore by some Storm, I have seen thousands of the Balani Rondeletij,
or the Concha Anatifera; and on the Rocks every where the

Balanus cinereus, velut e senis laminis striatis compositus, ipso vertice,
altera testa bisida rhomboide occluso. There is such abundance almost every
where of Shellfish, but especially Cockles, that the whole Country is served
no other way with Lime, but by those Shells burned, which makes a very fair
Lime, and does very well in Plaster, though I doubt whether it be so proper
for Building as stone Lime is.

As to the Crustaceous Fishes, as Lobsters, Crabs, etc. they are in as great
abundance here, as any where.

Here is plenty of tame and wild Fowl; they reckon they have 8 or 9 different
sorts of wild Geese, and of gray Plover, Moorfowl, Wild-Duck, Swans, Teal,
Whaps, or Curlew, etc. there is no place better stored. They have likewise many
Foists and Liars both Sea Fowls very fat and delicious. Sometime the Stock-Owl
and Bittern have been seen in this Country. Eagle and Earns as they call them,
and Gledes or Kites are here in great plenty, and very hurtful to their young
Store: Yea, they have been found to seize upon young Children and carry them a
good way of; and there is yet a Man alive, one John Hay, living now in Sanda,
who was thus carried away by an Eagle, while a young Child in swaddling clothes
(his Mother having left him on the Grass, till she went a little way to carry
somewhat) to her Nest; but was so speedily by the blessing of God prevented
that no harm was done to him. There is a Law in this Country, that if any kill
any of these Earns or Eagles, he is to have a Hen out of every house in the
Parish in which it is killed.

Hawks and Falcons have their Nests in several places of these Islands; as in
the Noup, Swendal, and Rapnes in Westra; at Highberry and Aith-head in Waes; at
Braebrake, Furcarsdale and Rathwick in Hoy; at Halcro, Greehead and Hocksa in
South-Ronalsha; at Bellibrake and Quendal in Rousa; at Rousumhead and Lambhead
in Stronsa, in the calf of Eda; at Gatnip, Gultack, Mulehead, in Dierness,
Copinsha, Blackcraig of Stromnes, Yeskrabie, Birsa, Marwick and Costahead in
the Mainland. The King's Falconer comes every Year, and takes the young, who
has Twenty Pound Sterling in Salary, and a Hen or Dog out of every House in the
Country, except some places that are Privileged.

There are several Mines of Tinn, Lead, and perhaps of other Metals, especially
in the Mainland, South-Ronalsha, Hoy, Stronsa, Sanda, but are neglected, or not
improved, through Poverty or Carelessness. A great deal of Marle is found,
especially in the Mainland, of which the Husbandman makes good use for manor.
In many places are Quarries of excellent free or sand Stone and Slate. Not far
from Birsa at Buckquoy and Swinna are to be found some Veins of Marble and
Alabaster.

On the shore, sometimes, is to be found Sperma Ceti, Ambergreese,
Watersponges, and a great many Cuttle-bones, or Os Sepiae. Sometimes they catch
Exotic Fowls, driven in by the Wind in time of a Storm; as one some time ago
that had along Beak, a large tuft on the Head, in fashion of a Crown, with
speckled Feathers, very pleasant to see, which, I believe, was the Upupa; and
two or three Years ago, in Sanda; there was a very beautiful Bird driven in
there alive; they afterward shot it, and I had it sent me; 'twas something
like a Woodpecker, but of extraordinary lively Colors, especially a light Blue
and a Green. And I have seen the Albardeola, or Shovelaer, driven in there.

Some Years since, the Day being exceeding Stormy, there were found before a
Gentleman's Door in Kirkwal, some little distance from the Sea, seven or eight
Quiths (a Fish something less than a Whiting) half alive, as if they had been
but newly taken; it is like the violent Wind, they swimming on the top of the
Water, had heaved them out of the Sea, and when the strength of the blast was
gone, they had fallen on that place.

But how violently the Wind blows here, and how great is the force of the Sea
breach, may appear from this, That at Cantick-head and Osnua-head in Waes,
there are, by the violence of the Sea and Winds, large Stones thrown up from
the bottom, a great way above the Rock, some so large, That some Men can hardly
move them.

This Country being divided in to small Islands, it cannot be expected there
should be in it any Rivers, yet there is every where a great many Rivulets or
Bourns, as they call them, well replenished with Trouts, both small and great,
some of them like to young Salmon.

There is a large Loch or Lake in the Mainland, called the Loch of Stennis, but
unfruitful. Besides that, there are in every Island some small Lochs, but they
serve for no other use but to afford Water to their Mills and Cattle. There be
also some Lochs that have some remarkable properties, as Saint Tredwell's Loch,
in Papa-Westra, which, they say, is Medicinal; but for what I know not: There
is another Loch in Shapinsha, of which, it is said, that if any wash their feet
in it, they will strike out in Blisters. The Loch of Swanna, in the Mainland,
will have, in some parts, a thick scum, of a Copper Color, upon it, which
makes some think there is some Mine under it.

This Country is most commodious for Navigation, there being every where
excellent Bays and Ports for Shipping, the most remarkable of which I have
given an account of in the last Chapter.

CHAP. III. Of the Ancient Monuments and Curiosities of this Country. An
Account of the Dwarfie Stone in Hoy. Of the Obelisks and standing Stones in
Stennis. Of the figured Stone Causey near Skeal. Of some Urns and Burial Places
found in several places. An Account of the Finn-men that are sometimes driven
in there.
THere is in Hoy, lying betwixt two Hills, a Stone, called the Dwarfie-Stone,
which is one entire Stone, thirty six Foot long, eighteen Foot broad, nine Foot
thick; hallowed within by the Hand of some Mason (for the prints of the Irons
are to be seen on it to this day) with a square hole of about two Foot high for
the entry, and a Stone proportionable standing before it for a Door. Within, at
one end, is a Bed excellently cut out of the Stone, with a Pillow, wherein two
Men may lie together at their full length; at the other end is a Couch, and in
the middle a Hearth for a Fire, with a round hole cut out above for the
Chimney. It stands in a desolate melancholy place, more than a Mile from any
inhabited House, and all the Ground about it nothing but high Heath and
Heather. It Is thought to have been the residence of some melancholy Hermit. See
the Figure of it.

At the West End of this Stone stands on exceeding high Mountain, of a steep
ascent, called the Wart Hill of Hoy; near the top of which, in the Month of
May, June, and July, about Midday, is seen something that shines and sparkles
admirably, and which is often seen a great way off. It has shined more
brightly before than it does now, though many have climbed up the Hill, and
attempted to search for it, yet they could find nothing. The Vulgar talk of it
as some enchanted Carbuncle; but I take it rather to be some Water sliding down
the face of a smooth Rock, which when the Sun at such a time shines upon, the
reflection causes that admirable splendour.

At Stennis, in the Mainland, where the Loch is narrowest, in the middle,
having a Causey of Stones over it for a Bridge, there is, at the South-end of
the Bridge, a Round set about with high smooth Stones or Flags, about twenty
Foot high above ground, six Foot broad, and each a Foot or two thick. Betwixt
that Round and the Bridge are two Stones standing of that same largeness with
the rest, whereof one has a round hole in the midst of it; and at the other
end of the Bridge, about half a Mile removed from it, is a large Round about an
hundred and ten paces in Diameter, set about with such Stones as the former,
but that some of them are fallen down; and at both East and West of this bigger
Round, are two artificial (as is thought) green Mounts; both these Rounds are
ditched about. See the Figure of it.

Some think that these Rounds have been places whereon two opposite Armies have
encamped; but I think it more probable that they have been the high places in
the Pagan times, whereon Sacrifice was offered, and that these two Mounts were
the places where the Ashes of the Sacrifice was flung. And this is the more
probable, because Boethius, in the Life of Mainus, King of Scots, makes mention
of that kind of high Stones, calling them the Temples of the Gods. His words
are these. In Memory of what King Mainus ordained anent the worship of the
Gods, there remains yet, in our days, many huge Stones drawn together in form
of a Circle, named by the People the Ancient Temples of the Gods; and it is no
small admiration to consider by what Art or Strength so many huge Stones have
been brought together. So far Boethius.

There are besides in many other places of this Country, Obelisks, or great
high Stones, set in the Ground like the former, and standing apart (and indeed
they are so very large that none sees them, but wonders by what Engine they
have been erected) which are thought to be set up either as a memorial of some
famous Battle, or as a monument of some remarkable Person that has been buried
there; that way of honoring deserving and valiant Men, being the invention of
King Rentha, as Boethius says.

There is in Rousay, betwixt high Mountains, a place, called the Camp of
Jupiter Fring. The name is strange and would import some notable accident; but
what it was I could not learn.

At the West End of the Mainland, near Skeal, on the top of high Rocks, more
than a quarter of a Mile in length, there is something like a Street all set in
red Clay, with a sort of reddish Stones of several figures and magnitudes;
having the Images and Representations of several things, as it were, engraven
on them; and, which is very strange, a great many of these Stones, when they
are raised up, have that same Image engraven under, which they have above. This
Causey is all along the tops of Rocks, and though they be otherwise of a very
considerable height above the Sea, yet the West Ocean in a Storm leading that
way, does dashwith such violence against the Rocks, that the Sea breaches do
wash the Ground on the tops of the Rocks. If these Stones had not the same
Figure on that side next the ground that they have above, I should think the
Sea washing over them might occasion these different figures, by washing away
the softish parts of the Stone and leaving the harder, and so accordingly give
them these accidental Shapes and Figures. Though there are a great many of them
still remaining, yet the Gentlemen living near that place have taken away those
that had the prettiest Figures to set their Chimnies with, as they use to do in
Holland with painted Bricks and Tiles.

In the Links of Skeal, where the Sand is blown away with the Wind, are found
several places built square, with Stones well cemented together, and a Stone
lying in the mouth, having some black Earth in them. The like of which also are
found in the Links of Rousum in Stronsa; where also, some Years ago, was sound
another remarkable Monument. It was a whole round Stone like a Barrel, hollow
within, sharp edged at the top, having the bottom joined like the bottom of a
Barrel; on the mouth was a round Stone conform to the mouth of the Monument,
and above that a large Stone for the preservation of the whole; within was
nothing but red Clay and burned Bones. See the Figure. It Is like that this and
the other Apiece Monuments have been some of these Urns wherein the
Romans, when they were in this Country, laid up the Ashes of their dead.
Likewise in the Links of Tranabie, in Westra, have been found Graves in the
Sand, in one of which was seen a Man lying with his Sword on the one Hand, and
a Danish Axe on the other; and others that have had Dogs, and Combs and Knives
buried with them, which seems to show the way how the Danes, when they were in
this Country, buried their dead, as the other was of the Romans. Besides in
many places of the Country are found little Hillocks, which may be supposed to
be the Sepulchers of the ancient Pights. For Tacitus tells that it was the way
of the ancient Romans, and Verstegan that it was the way of the ancient Germans
and Saxons, to lay dead Bodies on the ground, and cover them over with turss
and clods of earth, in the fashion of little Hillocks: hence it seems that the
many Houses and Villages in this Country, which are called by the name of
Brogh, and which all of them are built upon, or beside some such rising ground,
have been cemeteries for the burying of the dead in the time of the Pights and
Saxons: For the word Brogh in the Teutonick Language, signifies a burying place.

In one of these hillocks near the circle of high Stones, at the North end of
the Bridge of Stennis, there were found nine Fibulae of Silver of the shape of
a Horse-shooe, but round. See the Figure of one of them.

Moreover in many places of this Country, are to be seen the ruins and vestiges
of great but antique Buildings; most of them now covered over with Earth, and
called in this Country Pights Houses, some of which its like have been the
Forts and Residences of the Pights and Danes, when they possessed this Country.

Among the rest there is one in the Isle of Wyre, called the Castle of
Cubberow, or rather Coppi-row, which in the Teutonick Language, signifies a
Tower of Security from outward violence. It is Trenched about, of it nothing
now remains but the first Floor. It is a perfect Square, the Wall eight foot
thick, strongly built and cemented with Lime, the breadth or length within
Walls not being above ten foot, having a large Door and a slit for the Window.
Of this Cubbirow the Common people report many Idle Fables, not fit to be
inserted here.

In the Parish of Hara in the Mainland, in a Marle-pit as they were digging
Marle for manor to their ground, there was found in the Marle a large piece of
a Hearts horn, as I was credibly informed by a Gentleman who got the Horn from
these men, and had it then by him.

In the Parish of Evie near the Sea are some small hillocks, which frequently
in the night time appear all in a Fire, and the Church of Evie called St.
Nicholas, is often seen full of Light, as if Torches or Candles were burning in
it all night. This amazes the people greatly, but possibly it is nothing else
but some thick glutinous Meteor, that receives that Light in the night time.

At the Noup-head in Westra is a Rock surrounded with the Sea, called Less,
which the inhabitants of that Isle say, has this strange property; that if a
Man go upon it, having any Iron upon him, the Sea will instantly swell in such
a Tempestuous way, that no Boat can come near to take him off, and the Sea will
not be calmed till the Iron be thrown away: I being there to make an experiment
of it, offered Money to a poor fellow, to go upon the Rock, with a piece of
Iron, but he would not do it on any terms.

Sometimes about this Country, are seen these men they call Finn-men. In the
year 1682, one was seen in his little Boat, at the South end of the Isle of
Eda, most of the people of the Isle flocked to see him, and when they
adventured to put out a Boat with Men to see if they could apprehend him, he
presently fled away most swiftly. And in the year 1684, another was seen from
Westra; I must acknowledge it seems a little unaccountable, how these Finn-men
should come on this coast, but they must probably be driven by Storms from
home, and cannot tell when they are any way at Sea, how to make their way home
again; they have this advantage, that be the Seas never so boisterous their
Boat being made of Fish Skins, are so contrived that he can never sink, but is
like a Sea-gull swimming on the top of the Water. His shirt he has is so
fastened to the Boat, that no Water can come into his Boat to do him damage,
except when he pleases to unty it, which he never does but to ease nature, or
when he comes ashore. A full account of these Finn-men, may be had en
L'histoire naturelle and moralle des Antilles Chap. 18. One of their Boats
which was catched in Orkney, was sent from thence to Edinburgh, and is to be
seen in the Physicians Hall, with the Oar and Dart he makes use of for killing
Fish. There is another of their Boats in the Church of Burra in Orkney.

CHAP. IV. Some peculiar Customs, Manners and Dispositions of the Inhabitants
of this Country. An Account of a Woman that had a Child in the 63d Year of her
Age. An Account of their Diseases and some of their particular Cures. A
particular Language amongst them. Their way of Transporting and Weighing their
Corn. Their custom of Sheep-shearing: And the way they have to catch Sea-Fowls.
And an Account of some Remarkable Accidents that have fallen out here.
THE People here are generally civil, sagacious, circumspect and piously
inclined; Though Boethius reports them to be great Drunkards and Maginus says
of them, quod sunt bibacissimi, nunquam tamen inebriantur, yet now it is not
so; for though they use strong Ale and Beer (the nature of the Country
requiring strong Liquor) yet generally they are Sober and Temperate, but withal
much given to Hospitality and Feasting, very civil and liberal in their
entertaining of Strangers, and much inclined to speak ill of those that are
peevishly or niggardly disposed.

Buchanan tells a Story, which is still believed here and talked of as a truth,
though now there be nothing of it. That at Scapa a place about a mile of
Kirkwal to the South, there was kept a large cup, and when any new Bishop
landed there, they filled it with strong Ale, and offered it to him to drink,
and if he happened to drink it of cheerfully, they promised to themselves a
Noble Bishop, and many good years in his time.

In many places the Landlord has his Tenant bound to give him and his
followers, a liberal Entertainment once a year, especially at Christmas (at
which time the People of this Country are generally inclined to Feasting) and
the Tenant wont fail to have good Victuals and strong Ale (which they call
Bummock) in readiness, and will be much offended if the Landlord refuse to make
merry with them.

The People are generally personable, and comely, Polyd. Virgil says of them,
Quod statura sunt procera, semper sano corpore, pariter ac mente, quo fit ut
multo longissimam degant aetatem, etsi piscibus ut plurimum victitant. The
Women are Lovely and of a Beautiful countenance, and very broody and apt for
generation; one Marjory Bimbister in the Parish of Evie, was in the year 1683,
brought to bed of a Male child in the sixty third year of her age, as may be
seen by the following attestation.

We under subscribers testify and declare that Marjory Bimbister in the Parish
of Evie in Orkney, was in September 1683. untimeously delivered of a Male
child; though we have also sure account of her age in our Register of Baptism,
yet many of the Parish who are of sixty four years, and whose age is certainly
known, report that to their knowledge she is as old as they: besides her self
remembers, that in the year 1631, (which was a year of Famine in this Country,
and from which the common People usually reckon) she was keeping Cattle, being
then a Girl, as she thought; about nine or ten Years of Age. In the Year 1660,
she was married to Adam Hourie, to whom, about five Years after, viz. Anno
1665, she had a Child, from which time she was Barren till September 1683, when
she was delivered of a male Child; at which time, it is probably thought, both
by her Neighbors and nearest Relations, that she was at least about Sixty two
or Sixty three Years.

Sic Subscribitur Ja. Grahame, Minister. Will. Ballenden. Edward; Sinclair,
Clerk. Will. Halcro.

By reason of the temperance of their Diet and wholsomness of the Air, the
People usually live to a great Age. A Man in the Parish of Ham dyed not many
Years since, who lived upwards of Fourscore Years with one Wife, in a married
estate. There is also a Gentleman, yet living in Stronsa, who was Begotten of
his Father when he was an hundred Years old, and did live till he saw this same
Man's Children.

Some there be also of an exceeding high Stature, as that young Man, who, for
his height, was usually called, The Mickle Man of Waes, as being a great deal
higher than the common sort of Men. At the Chaple of Clet, in Sanda, is a Grave
to be seen, wherein, they say, a Giant was buried; and indeed the Stone that is
laid upon the Grave is about twelve Foot long; so that, if the Body has been
proportionable to the Grave, it has been exceeding Monstrous.

The more common and general Diseases here are the Scurvy, Agues, Consumptions,
etc. Commonly in the Spring they are troubled with an Aguish Distemper which
they call the Axes, but for this there are Quacks amongst them that pretend an
infallible Cure, by way of Diet-drink, infusing a Hotch-potch of several Plants
(I suppose what are greenest at that time) in an English Gallon of Ale; the
Receipt is this, They take of Buckhorn, Plantain, Water Plantain, Lovage, wild
Daisie, Rocket, Roots of Elecampane, Millefoil, Roots of Spignell, Dandelyon,
Parsley Roots, Wormwood, Cumfrey, Tansey, Thrift or Sea-Pink; Garden Angelica,
and a kind of Masterwort, the Imperatoriae assinis; of all these they take a
like quantity, to wit, about half a handful, and of this Infusion they drink
half a Pint Morning and Evening. This is what they call the Axes Grass, and the
old Women talk wonders of it, pretending there are so many of the Herbs good
for the Liver, so many good for the Head, and so many for the Heart, Spleen,
etc.

In Phthisical Distempers they use Arby, the Caryophyllus Marinus, Thrift or
much as they call it, boiled with sweet Milk.

Instead of a Cupping-glass they have a Horn with a small thin Skin at the
smaller end. The way how they use it is thus: The Surgeon with the point of his
Knife gives three or four small cuts or gashes on the place where he purposes
to set the Horn; and having set the broadest end on the Wounds, he sucks the
small end a little, and then lets it stand till the abundance of Blood it draws
makes it fall off. Some have a way, as they pretend (if they be to Cure any
akeing or inward Pain) to draw out several little Worms out of the part
affected, whereby they remove the Pain. Others there be that use Charms for the
curing of the Rickets, etc. but these are much curbed by their Ministers.

All speak English, after the Scots way, with as good an Accent as any County
in the Kingdom, only some of the common People, amongst themselves, speak a
Language they call Norns; which they have derived to them, either from the
Pights, or some others, who first planted this Country; for by the following
Lord's Prayer, in that Language, it has but little of the Danish or Norwegian
Language, to which I thought it should have had more affinity, considering how
long time they were possessors of this Country.

Favor i ir i chimrie, Helleur ir i nam thite, gilla cosdum thite cumma, veya
thine mota vara gort o yurn sinna gort i chimrie, ga vus da on da dalight brow
vora; Firgive vus sinna vora sin vee Firgive sindara mutha vus, lyv vus ye i
tumtation, min delivera vus fro olt ilt, Amen. Or On sa meteth vera.

Since Gesner, in his Mithridates, nor Bishop Wilkins, in his Real Character,
have nothing like this, I thought this Formula might not be unacceptable.

Anciently, as they are yet in great measure, they were much given to
Superstition, as appears by the many Chapels that are here and there dispersed
through the Country; but the Chapels to which most frequently they made their
Pilgrimage, were to the Chapels of the Brough of Birsa, and to the Chapel of
the Brough at the Mulehead in Deirness; these two Chapels standing at the
furthest extremities of the Mainland East and West; nor to this day are these
Pilgrimages omitted by the common People, who still, for the obtaining of some
good, or deprecating of some evil, do frequent some Chapels they have most
veneration for. Besides, they have this general custom; The day that is
dedicated to the Memory of the Saint who is Patron of the chief Church, where
Sermon is made, is kept Holy by the common People of the whole Parish; so that
they will not Work on that day: And those that live next the smaller Chapels do
moreover keep holy that Day, that is dedicated to the Memory of that Saint,
that Chapel is denominated by.

Here they make no use of Poaks or Sacks, but a sort of Vessel made of Straw,
which they call Cassies, in which they keep and transport their Corn: Nor do
they make use of Peck and Firlot, or any other Measure, for their Grain, as
they use to do thorough the rest of the Kingdom, but weigh all, which they have
a particular way of doing with Bismires for small Weights; and Poundlers, as
they call them, for great Weights. In most it resembles a Stilliard that Money
is weighed on. It is a Beam of Timber marked with different weights, which has
a Stone at one end (which Stone on the Malt Poundler should be a setten weight,
and on the Bear Poundler sixteen Merk) and a Hook at the other end for hanging
up the Cassie in which the Corn or Meal is, and there is a Ring in the middle
near the Sheir that has a Pole thrust thorough it, by which, by the help of a
Man at each end all is supported, that the Cassie may swim fair. The least
weight is called a Merk, which will be eighteen Ounces, twenty four Merks make
a Lecspound or Setten, six Settens make a Meil (equivalent to a Boll) and
eighteen Meils make a Chaldron.

In every Isle they have a Wart-hill, or Ward-hill, which is the most
conspicuous and elevated part of the Isle, on which, in time of War, they keep
Ward; and when they see the Enemies Ships approaching, they put a Fire, thereby
to give notice to the adjacent Isles of the nearness of the Enemy, and to
advertise them to be on their Guard, or to come to their help; this they
distinguish by the number of Fires.

Their Corn Land is every where Parked, and without these enclosures their
Sheep and Swine, and some of their Cattle go at random, without a Herdsman to
keep them. The most ordinary Manor they have for their Land, especially in
places near the Sea, is, Seaweed, Sea-ware, as they call it; and in Bays,
after Storms, when the Wrack is driven in greater plenty, all the People of the
Neighborhood come and divide the Wrack according to the proportion of Land
they have about that place; but methinks it is the greatest slavery in the
World, for the common People, as they do there in Winter, to carry this Wrack
in small Vessels made of Straw or Cassies on their Backs to their Land.

All their Sheep are marked on the Ears or Nose, every man that has Sheep has
his own Mark, whereby his Sheep are distinguished from others: And it is strange
to consider how so madifferent Marks could be invented, as are found cut in so
little room. They use to Fleece their Sheep about the beginning of May, and the
way they take to apprehend them (for they go wild) is both strange and
pleasant. The Bailiff of the Parish, with the Law-right-men which are the
Bailiffs Assessors, and the persons to whom the Sheep belong meet together on a
day appointed, having with them Sheep Dogs, trained up for the Hunting of them,
and when they would have such a Sheep caught, they point him out by the finger
to the Dog, upon which he runs and singles out that Sheep from all the rest,
and never leaves of running till he catch him, which being fleeced or shorn by
the owner, they then go on and hunt for others.

They have also a pleasant way of taking the Sea Fowls when they are young as
Foists, Liars, Kittiwaeks, Gulls etc. which build very thick on shelves of high
Rocks; under the Rock there is a Boat with men having a large Net, which at the
two uppermost corners is fastened with two long Ropes, which are in the hands of
men at the top of the Rock, who hoise up the Net till it be over against the
place where the young Fowl sit, then they that are in the Boat under the Rock,
have a Rattle which makes so frighting a noise, that all the young Fowls take
wing and fly forward into the bosom of the Net where they are caught: Then the
Net is laid down in the Boat and the Prey seized upon, and thus they go from
Rock to Rock taking as many as they can.

Others have this way in taking these Fowls, a Man that is accustomed to the
exercise has a Rope well bound about his middle, with which he is let slide
down the steep Rock, till he be over against the place where the young Fowls
are, of whom he apprehends as many as he is able to carry and then is hoisted
up with his Prey. They use that way also in taking the young Hawks. There are
some Fellows so hardy that go a catching of Sea Fowls without any help, by
tying a Rope about his own middle, and tying the other end to a Stake, which he
drives well in the Ground, and so lets himself go over the Rock (perhaps some
hundred of fathoms) and catches what Fowls he can and then hoises himself up
again.

Several remarkable accidents have fallen out in this Country, besides some
already mentioned. I shall instance in three or four only, whereof the
witnesses are still alive. About the year 1634, when Bishop Grahame was Bishop
of this Country, a young Boy named William Garioch, his Father being dead, had
some little Land, and some small portion of Cattle, left him by his Father in
the Parish of Ham; his Uncle took him in his Service, and having a greedy
desire after the Young man's Possessions, it happened that he stole a Setten of
Barley (which will be about Twenty Eight pound weight) from his Uncle: For
which he pursued him before the Sheriff of the Bishopric, and the Young man,
at that time about Eighteen years of Age, the Theft being proved was Sentenced
to be hanged. When he was at the Gallows he prayed that God would inflict some
visible Judgment on his Uncle, who because of the greedy desire he had to his
little Portion, had for so small a matter procured his Death. It came to pass
that his Uncle walking thorough the Churchyard of Kirkwal, upon the Young man's
Grave, the Bishops Dog seized on him and tore out his Throat, whereby he became
a sad monument of God's wrath, against such impious greedy wretches.

Some years ago, one James Lenay and some others, Fishing in a Boat beside
Auskerie, in a fair day it came to pass, that their leaning all on one side of
the Boat, that it overturned and all were drowned, except the said Lenay, who
by providence got up, and sat on the Keil of the Boat, in which condition he
continued for the space of four days, driven by the Tides, sometime this way,
and sometime that, sometimes to Westra, and back again to Stronsa, till at last
he was seen floating by Spurness in Sanda, where by the careful endeavor of
the Gentleman who was owner of the Ground he was delivered.

There was one John Smith who lived in Stronsa, who, with three others used to
fish not far from Land; their way was to rise early and stay many Hours a
Fishing. This Man having, by several days Fishing, gotten a great plenty of
Fish, his Wife was desirous that he would omit that exercise for a time, and
stay at home to take his rest. He was very unwilling to do so, wherefore next
Morning she rises before him, and being desirous he might take a longer Sleep,
after so many days toil, she stopped the holes and windows of the Room where he
lay that he might sleep the more soundly, and then she went to the Fields to
her work, where, working with her Servants she was surprised with this sad
accident. The three men that used to fish with her Husband, because he came
not, had taken the Boat themselves and gone a Fishing, and suddenly the Boat
overturned (no man knows how) and the men were all drowned. This the Woman and
her Servants seeing startled them greatly, but though she was grieved for their
death, yet she was glad that her Husband (by her Policy) went not to Sea with
them, and thereupon runs hastily to the house to acquaint her Husband with that
sad accident, and to congratulate with him for his preservation: when opening
the door she was surprised with a more sad and astonishing sight, even the
Death of her own husband: For he having risen out of his bed, had fallen with
his head in a large vessel wherein they used to make Urine, where he was choked
and found dead.

Strange are the effects that are here sometimes produced by Thunder and
Lightning, for by it, Anno 1670 the Steeple of the Cathedral Church at Kirkwal
was burned, and sometimes it will seize on low Cottages. In the year 1680 the
Lightning entered a Gentleman's Cow-stall, where were twelve Cows standing side
for side, as they used to be, and killed every other one, that is, it killed
the first, and missed the second; it killed the third, and missed the fourth,
and so of the rest; so that six were killed and six remained alive and
untouched.

CHAP. V. Of the Town of Kirkwall.
THE only remarkable Town in all this Country is Kirkwall, an ancient Borough
long possessed by the Norwegians, by whom it was called Cracoviaca, built upon
a pleasant Oyse or Inlet of the Sea, near the middle of the Mainland; narrow
streeted, and about a mile in length, having a very safe Harbor and road for
Ships. Here is the Seat of Justice, the Steward, Sheriff, Commissary, all of
them keeping their several Courts in this place. Almost all the Houses in this
Town are Slaited, but the most remarkable Edifices in it are the Cathedral
Church and the Bishops Palace. As for the Kings Castle it is new demolished,
but by the Ruins it appears to have been a strong and stately Fort, and
probably built by some of the Bishops of Orkney, as would appear from a
remarkable Stone set in the midst of the Wall, which looks toward the street,
with a Bishops Miter and Arms engraven'd on it. There is here a public School
for the Teaching of Grammar, endowed with a competent Salary, and at the North
end of the Town is a place built by the English in Oliver's time, Ditched
about, with a Breast-work, and some other Fortifications, on which they have
some Cannon planted for the defense of the Harbor.

This Town had been erected into a Royal Borough in the time of the
Norwegians, and Anno 1486, King James the Third gave them a Charter, confirming
their old Erection and Privileges; specifying their antiquity, and giving them
power to hold Borough Courts, to incarcerate and arrest, to make Laws and
Ordinances, and to elect their own Magistrates yearly for the right Government
of the Town, and to have a weekly Market on Tuesday and Friday, and three Fairs
in the Year, one about Palm Sunday, the other at Lammas, and the third at
Martinmas, each to continue three Days; he moreover disponed over to them some
Lands about the Town, with the Customs and shore dues, and the power of a Pit
and Gallows, and all other privileges granted to any Royal Borough within the
Kingdom, exeeming them from sending any Commissioners to Parliament, unless
their own necessities require it. This Charter is dated at Edinburgh the last
of March 1486, and in the Year 1536 February the 8th, King James V. ratified
the former Charter, by a new Charter of Confirmation. And in the Year 1661 King
Charles II. after his Restoration ratified the former Charters, at Whitehall
May 25th, whereupon the Parliament at Edinburgh, August 22d 1670 confirmed all
by their Act, yet with this special provision, That what was granted to them by
that Act, might not prejudice the Interest of the Bishop of Orkney.

This Town is governed by a Provost, Four Bailiffs, and a Common Counsel, as in
other Royal Buroughs.

CHAP. VI. Of the ancient State of the Church of Orkney. Of the Cathedral
Church at Kirkwall. Bishop Robert Reid 's erection of the Chapter. Bishop Law
's Transaction with King James VI.
THE Church of this Country, as also that of Zetland, was under the Government
of one Bishop, styled Bishop of Orkney and Zetland. The Bishop's Revenue was
great before, but at present, it will not amount to much more than Six hundred
Pound Sterling; and now the King's Exchequer, considering how much that Country
has of late been impoverished, Farm it out for Four hundred Pound Sterling.

The Cathedral Church is St. Magnus's Church in Kirkwall; it was founded, as is
thought, by St. Magnus, or rather by Rolland Earl of Orkney, who founded it in
memory of his Cozen St. Magnus, See the double of the Manuscript in the 8th
Chapter; but it has been enlarged by some of the Pious Bishops of that See; for
Bishop Steward enlarged it to the East, all above the Grees, and Bishop Reid
three Pillars to the West. It Is as beautiful and stately a Structure as is in
the Kingdom, and perhaps by much the longest as it is now; for I have measured
it, and, by some Feet, it is longer than that of St. Giles at Edinburgh; it is
built cross-ways, for the most part of Freestone, standing on Pillars, all
most curiously vaulted, and the Steeple elevated to a great height, in which is
a set of as excellent and sweetly chim'd Bells, as are in any Cathedral of the
Kingdom. In the Year 1670, the Pyramid of the Steeple, being covered with Wo^d,
was burned by Thunder; but by the Care of Bishop Mackenzie, and his Liberality,
and some other Charitable Persons, it is again Repaired.

Besides the Cathedral, there are one and thirty Churches more in this Country,
wherein Divine Service is celebrated, as also a great many ancient Chapels,
above an hundred in number, which shows that this Country was no less anciently
than it is at present addicted to Devotion.

This Diocese had its several ancient Dignities and Privileges for a long time;
but these, by the constant trouble this Country was in by the change of
Masters, being lessened and grown worse, Bishop Robert Reid made a new Erection
and Foundation of the Chapter, viz. Seven Dignities, whereof the first was a
Provost or Dean, to whom, under the Bishop, the Correction and oversight of the
Canons, Prebendaries and Chaplains was to belong. He had alloted to him the
Prebend of Holy Trinity, and Vicarage of South-Ronalsha, with the Maintenance
of the Church of Burza. 2. An Archdeacon, who was to Govern the People
according to the disposition of the Canon Law, and to him was allotted the
Archdeacons ancient Rights, the Vicarage of Birsa and Chaplainry of St. Ola,
within the Cathedral Church of Kirkwall, together with the Maintenance of the
Church of Hara. 3. A Precentor who was to rule the Singers in the Quire, in the
elevation or depression of their Songs; and to him was allotted the Prebend of
Orphir and Vicarage of Stennis. 4. A Chancellor, who was to be learned in both
Laws, and bound to read in the Pontifical Law publicly in the Chapter to all
that ought to be present, and to look to the preserving and mending the Books
of the Quire and Register, and to keep the common Seal and Key of the Library;
to him was allotted the Prebend of St. Mary in Sanda, and Vicarage of Sanda. 5.
A Treasurer, who was to keep the Treasure of the Church and Sacred Vestments,
and to have a care of the Bread, Wine, Wax, Oyland Lights, for the Church; to
him was allotted the Rectory of St. Nicholas in Stronsa, and Vicarage of
Stronsa. 6. A Subdean, who was to supply the place of the Provost, in his
absence; to him was allotted the Personage of Hoy, and Vicarage of Waes. 7. A
Subchantor, who was bound to Play on the Organs each Lord's Day and Festivals,
and to supply the place of the Chantor, in his absence; to him was allotted the
Prebend of St. Colm.

Likewise he erected Seven other Canons and Prebendaries, to wit, 1. The
Prebendary of Holy-cross; to him was given the Personage of Crosskirk in Sanda;
he was to be a special keeper of Holy things under the Treasurer, and was to
take care of the Clock and Ringing of the Bells at Hours appointed, and to take
care that the Floor of the Church was cleanly swept. 2. The Prebendary of St.
Mary; to whom was given the Chaplainry of St. Mary and Vicarage of Evie; he was
to have a care of the Roof and Windows of the Cathedral, and to have them
helped if need were. 3. The Prebendary of St. Magnus, to whom was allotted the
Prebend of St. Magnus; he was to be Confessor of the Households of the Bishop,
Provost, Canons and Chaplains, and their Servants in the time of Easter, and to
administer the Eucharist to them. The 4th. Prebendary was to have the
Chaplainry of St. John the Evangelist, in the said Cathedral Church. The 5th.
Prebendary was to have the Chaplainry of St. Lawrence. The 6th. was to have the
Prebend of St. Katharine. And the 7th. Prebendary was to have the Prebend of
St. Duthas. To which seven Dignities and seven Prebendaries, he moreover
assigned and allotted (besides the former Churches and Titles) the Rents and
Revenues of the Personages of St. Colm in Waes, and Holy-cross in Westra; as
also the Vicarages of the Parish Churches of Sandwick and Stromnes, with their
pertinents for their daily Distributions.

Besides these, he erected thirteen Chaplains; to the first was allotted the
Chaplainry of St. Peter, and he was to be Master of the Grammar School: To the
second was allotted the Chaplainry of St. Augustine, and he was to be Master of
the Singing-School: The third was to be Stellarius or the Bishop's Choirister.
The fourth the Provost Choirister. The fifth the Archdeacons. The sixth the
Precentors. The seventh the Chancellors. The eighth the Treasurers. The ninth
the Subdeans. The tenth the Prebendaries of Holy-cross. The eleventh the
Prebendaries of St. Mary. The twelfth the Prebendaries of St. Katharine. The
thirteenth the Chaplains of Holy-cross. Every one of these Choiristers were to
have twenty four Meils of Corn, and ten Merks of Money for their Stipend
yearly, besides their daily distributions; which were to be raised from the
Rents of the Vicarage of the Cathedral Church, and from the foundation of
Thomas Bishop of Orkney, and of the twelve Pounds left by King James III. and
King James IV. Kings of Scotland. To these he added a Sacrist, who was to ring
the Bells, and light the Lamps, and carry in Water and Fire to the Church, and
to go before the Processions with a white Rod, after the manner of a Beadle;
and for this he was to have the accustomed Revenue, together with forty
Shillings from the Bishop yearly.

He moreover ordained six Boys, who were to be Taper-bearers, and to sing the
Responsories and Verses in the Choire, as they were to be ordered by the
Chanter. Of which six Boys, one was to be nominate and maintained by the
Bishop; the second by the Prebendary of St. Magnus; the third by the Prebendary
of St. John; the fourth by the Prebendary of St. Lawrence; the fifth by the
Prebendary of St. Katharine; the sixth by the Prebendary of St. Duthas: And
every one of them was to have, besides their Maintenance, twenty Shillings
Scots a Year. To every one of the foresaid Dignities, Canons, and Prebendaries,
he assigned certain Lands in Kirkwal for their Dwelling Houses.

The Charter of this erection is dated at Kirkwal, October 28. Anno 1544; and
in the following Year it was confirmed by another Charter granted by David
Beaton Cardinal of St. Stephen in Mount Celio, and Archbishop of St. Andrews,
having Authority so to do. It is dated at Stirling, the last of June, and
eleventh Year of Pope Paul the Third; and confirmed by Queen Mary, at
Edinburgh, the last of April, Anno Regni 13.

In this condition the Church stood as long as Popery continued, but the
Reformation coming in, and Robert Steward, Earl of Orkney, having obtained the
Bishopric from Bishop Bothwell, in exchange for the Abbacy of Holyrood-house,
he became Lord of the whole Country, and he and his Son Earl Patrick, who
succeeded him, did in the Church what they pleased.

At last James Law being made Bishop of Orkney, and the Earldom being united to
the Crown (by the death and forefaulture of the foresaid Patrick, Earl of
Orkney, as we shall have occasion to speak more of in the 8th Chapter) he, with
the consent of his Chapter, made a Contract with King James VI. In which they
resign to the King, and his Successors, all their Ecclesiastical Lands and
Possessions, with all Rights and Securities belonging thereto, to be
incorporated and united to the Crown, especially by such as should be thought
necessary to be united to it; and the King gives back and dispones to the
Bishop several Lands in the Parishes of Ham, Orphir, Stromnes, Sandwick,
Shapinsha, Waes, Hoy, St. Ola, and of Evie, Burra, and Flotta, to be a
Patrimony to the Bishop and his Successors for ever; disponing moreover to him
and his Successors the Right of Patronage, to present to all the Vicarages of
Orkney and Zetland, with power to them to present qualified Ministers as often as
any Church should vake. Disponing also to them the heretable and perpetual
Right and Jurisdiction of Sheriffship and Bailiffry within the Bishopric and
Patrimony thereof, exeeming the Inhabitants and Vassals of the Bishopric, in
all Causes, Civil and Criminal, from the Jurisdiction of the Sheriff or Steward
of the Earldom. As also he gave to the Bishop and his Successors the
Commissariot of Orkney and Zetland, with power to constitute and ordain
Commissars or Chancellors, Clerks, and other Members of Court. This contract
was made Anno 1614; and in the Year following, by an act of Platt, dated at
Edinburgh the 22d of November, the several Dignities and Ministers both in the
Bishopric and Earldom, were provided to particular Maintenances (besides what
they were in possession of before) payable by the King and Bishop to the
Ministers in their severl bounds respective. And as it was agreed by that
Contract, and determined by that Act of Platt, so are they provided for at this
present.

CHAP. VII. Of the Plantation of the Christian Faith in Orkney; and of the
Bishops thereof.
NIcephorus writing that Simon Zelotes, after he had preached the Gospel in
several other Kingdoms, came at last ad occidentalem oceanum insulasque
Britannicas (by which Orkney must be especially understood) and there Preached
the Gospel. Whatever truth may be in that, yet it is certain, That the
Christian Faith was greatly promoted in this Country about the beginning of the
Fifth Century (Eugenius II. being then King of Scotland) at which time
Palladius being sent by Pope Celestin to Purge that Kingdom of the Heresy of
Pelagius that had infected it. He Instituted,

1. Servanus (called St. Serf in the Calender) Bishop of Orkney, that he might
instruct the Inhabitants of these Isles in the Faith of Christ, which Polyd.
Virgil says he did very carefully. He was a Man of Eminent Devotion and Piety,
and Master of the famous Kentigern, whom he used to call Mongah (which, in the
Norish Tongue, signifies, Dear Friend) which afterward became the Name by
which he was usually called. From him there has been a continual Succession of
Bishops in this Country; but by reason of the many alterations that fell out in
it, and the loss of ancient Records, his Successors for many years are not
known, yet in History we read of these that follow.

2. William Bishop of Orkney, who lived in the time of King Robert the Third.

3. Thomas who lived in the time of King James the First.

4. William Tulloch, who was Bishop of this Country in the time of King James
the Third; of him we read, that Anno 1468, he was sent, with several other
Noble Persons, to Christiern King of Denmark and Norway, to seek his Daughter,
the Lady Margaret, in Marriage to the said King James. About July they came to
Hafnen in Denmark, where King Christiern then remained, and were of him
joyfully received and well heard concerning their Suit; insomuch, that, by
advice of his Council, he agreed that the Lady Margaret should be given in
Marriage to King James, and that the Isles of Orkney and Zetland should remain
in the Possession of him and his Successors, Kings of Scotland, till either the
said King Christiern or his Successors in Name of Dowry should pay to King
James, or his Successors, the Sum of Fifty thousand Florins of the Rhine. Upon
this the Bishop and the other Ambassadors return with the espoused Lady to
Scotland in November, and in the Abbey Church at Holyrood-house, She was
Married and Crowned Queen. Afterward she was brought to Bed of a Son, called
James (who afterward succeeded to the Crown) whereupon Christiern, to
congratulate the happy Birth of this young Prince, his Grandchild, renounced,
by a Charter under his Great Seal, all the Right, Title and Claim, which he or
the Kings of Denmark might have to the Isles of Orkney and Zetland. This Bishop
was translated from this to the Bishopric of Murray, and continued five Years
Bishop of that See, and there dying was buried in St. Mary's Isle in the
Canonry Church of Elgin.

5. To him succeeded Andrew Bishop of Orkney, who also lived in the Reign of
King James the Third, and was Bishop at that time when the Town of Kirkwall got
their erection into a Royal Borough, confirmed by the said King Anno 1486.

6. After him succeeded Edward Steward, Bishop of Orkney, who lived in the
Reign of King James the Fourth; of him Boethius gives a noble Testimony. He
enlarged the Cathedral Church to the East all above the Grees.

7. To him succeeded Thomas Bishop of Orkney, who Endowed something for the
maintenance of the Choiristers of the Cathedral.

8. After him was Robert Maxwell Bishop of Orkney; he caused to be built the
Stalls that are in the Cathedral; and it was he that caused found and made
those excellent Bells that are in the Steeple of the Cathedral, which, at his
own expenses were founded in the Castle of Edinburgh, in the Year 1528, in the
Reign of King James the Fifth, as their inscription bears. The next Year Anno
1629, May 18. The Earl of Cathnes and the Lord Sinclar came with a great Army
by Sea into Orkney to have taken possession of it, as of a Country to which
they pretended some Right, but the People of the Country, under the command of
Sir James Sinclar (natural Son to Robert Sinclar, the last Earl of Orkney of
that Surname) encounted the Earl with such courage at a place called
Summersdale, that his Army was wholly discomfited; the Earl himself, with 500
of his Men, being killed, and the Lord Sinclar, with all the rest, taken
Prisoners. It is said of this Sir James Sinclar, that presuming on his merits
and the good service he had done the King, by that engagement, begged of King
James the Fifth, then Reigning, the Isles of Sanda and Eda, which he
represented to him then as small Islands, or Holms, only sit for Pasture, and
upon his Request obtained them; which, I conceive, may be the reason why
Buchanan does not reckon any of these, either Sanda or Eda, amongst the Isles
of Orkney, by being deceived with that opinion, that they were but Holms,
whereas they are amongst the most considerable Islands in this Country; but the
King being afterward better informed, and that he had been imposed on by Sir
James, threatened that his Head should pay for it when he came to Orkney; for
fear of which, when he heard of the King's Arrival, he cast himself in the Sea,
in a place called the Gloup of Linksness, and was drowned. The King coming in
Person to this Country to settle the Troubles and Commotions that were in it,
was nobly entertained by the Bishop all the time of his stay, and having put a
Guard in the King's and Bishop's Castles (having first visited some of the
Western Isles) he returned to Edinburgh, taking with him some of the Factious
Gentry. At this time also the Town of Kirkwall gave such demonstrations of
their Affection and Loyalty to their King, that sometime after he ratified
their Erection into a Royal Borough by a new Charter of confirmation Anno 1536

9. To him succeeded Robert Reid Bishop of Orkney, a very deserving, Man, of an
excellent Wit and great Experience. He caused to be built a stately Tower to
the North end of the Bishop's Palace, where his Statue in a stone is as yet
remaining set in the Wall. He greatly enlarged the Cathedral Church, adding
three Pillars to the former Fabric, and decoring the entry with a magnificent
Porch. He moreover built St. Olaus Church in Kirkwal, and a large Court of
Houses to be a College for the instructing the Youth of this Country in Grammar
and Philosophy. He made a new foundation of the Chapter, enlarging the number
of Canons, Prebendaries, and other Officers, and settling large and ample
Provisions on them, as is set down in the former Chapter. In a Book Dedicated
to him by Adam Senior, a Monk of the Cisteroian Order, I find that he had a
right to the Monastries of Beaulie and Kinloss; but whether he had these as
Bishop of Orkney, or only in commendam, I cannot determine.

He was in great credit with his Prince King James the Fifth, who consulted him
in all his weighty Affairs. In his time he performed many Honorable Embassages
to the Credit and Benefit of his Country. Amongst the rest he was one of those
that accompanied the young Queen Mary when she was sent into France to be
Married to the Dolphin (afterward Francis the second King of France) though both
in his going and coming he had bad Fortune; for in his going the Ship he was in
Perished on the Coast of France, near to Bulloigne, the Bishop and the Earl of
Rothes that was with him hardly escaping by the Ship's Boat: And in his return
from the Court of France he died at Diep, the 14th of September 1558; of whom
Ant. Bardol gives us this Epigram.

Quid tentem angusto perstringere carmine lauds
Quas nulla eloquii vis celebrare queat?
Clarus es eloquio; Coelo, dignissime praesul,
Antiqua generis nobilitate viges,
Commissumque gregem pascis relevasque jacentem,
Exemplo ducens ad melioratuo;
Ac, velut exoriens terris sol discutit umbras,
Illustras radiis pectora caeca tuis:
Hortaris tardos, objurgas, corripis omnes
In mala praecipites, quo vetus error agit:
Pauperibus tua tecta patent, tua prompta voluntas
Atque bonis semper dextera larga tua est:
Nemo lupos melius sacris ab ovilibus arcet,
Ni Christi lanient diripiantque gregem.
10. The Reformation being set afoot about this time, there succeeded to him
Adam Bothwel Bishop of Orkney, the first Reformed Bishop of this Country, and
who continued long in his Bishopric notwithstanding of the prejudice that the
Church had then to that Order.

This Bishop was a Man of great employment and action; it was he that Married
the Earl of Bothwel, then made Duke of Orkney, with the Queen in the Palace of
Holyrood-House. To him Queen Mary, when she had resigned the Crown, gave a
Procuration for the inaugurating the Prince her Son; who accordingly, on the
29th of July 1567, Crowned and Anointed him in the Church of Sterling: And in
the Year following, when the Earl of Murray Regent, was to go to England, about
the debate betwixt the King and his Mother (who was detained Prisoner there.)
This Bishop was one of those, who, by the Estates of the Kingdom, were
Commissioned to attend the Regent, and assist him in that debate. And
afterward, at the desire of Queen Elizabeth, Anno 1571, he, with others were
sent into England, for the composing of some differences between the Kingdoms.

He made an exchange of the Bishopric of Orkney, with Robert Steward, natural
Son to King James the Fifth, then Earl of Orkney, for the Abbacy of
Holyrood-House, whereby it came to pass, that the Bishop's Son afterward was
made Lord Holyrood-House, Robert Steward being Earl of Orkney, and also
obtaining the Bishopric of Orkney, as is said, by the exchange of the Abbacy
of Holyrood-House which he before possessed, he and his Son Earl Patrick who
succeeded him, uplifted the Rents of the Bishopric as their own Hereditary
Patrimony. The Church of Orkney in the mean time (according to the custom then
received in Scotland) being governed by a Superintendant, with Episcopal Power
to direct all Church Censures, and Ordain Ministers.

11. This Superintendant was Mr. James Annan, at that time Minister of the
Churches of Sanda and Westra.

But Anno 1606, King James the Sixth, by consent of his Parliament and assembly
of the Church, having restored the Estates of Bishops in Scotland.

12. James Law was made Bishop of Orkney, and though for some time he was
deprived of the Temporalities of his Bishopric, by the Oppression of Patreek
Earl of Orkney, yet after his death he enjoyed them peaceably. Considering, the
many and great Quarrels and Mischiefs that had always been between the former
Earls and Bishops of Orkney, and their several Vassals, because their Lands did
lie mixed thorough other; therefore he made that Transaction and Contract with
King James the Sixth, of which, in the last Chapter, you have had an Account;
whereby the Bishopric is separated from the Earldom, and the Bishop is made
sole Judge within his own bounds. He was a Person who King James did much
respect, and often employ in several important Matters. After his Election to
the Bishopric, he was, with some other Prelates, sent for by the King to
Court, to advise with them about settling the State of the Church in Scotland.
And the next Year we find him presiding in the Convocation or Assembly at
Linlithgow. He had a chief hand in the Trial of those Oppressions and
Treasonable Acts, for which Patrick Earl of Orkney was Executed. After he had
sat Bishop nine Years, he was translated from this See to the Archbishopric of
Glasgow.

13. To him succeeded George Graham Bishop of Dumblane, who sat Bishop of Orkney
twenty three Years; but in the Year 1638, at the Assembly at Glasgow, he
resigned his Bishopric.

14. After Bishop Graham had been divested of the Bishopric, King Charles the
First did promote Robert Barron, Doctor and Professor of Divinity in the
Marishal College of Aberdeen to the Bishopric of this Country; but he being
forced to fly to Berwick, he there died before his Consecration. In the
Interval of Presbytery the Rents of the Bishopric were granted to the City of
Edinburgh till the Year 1662.

15. In which Year Episcopacy being again restored Thomas St. Serf (who seems
to have his name from Servanus, the first Bishop of Orkney, commonly called St.
Serf) formerly Bishop of Galloway, and the only old Bishop who was then alive,
was made Bishop of Orkney; he lived two years after his Installment, and died
at Edinburgh.

16. To him, Anno 1664, succeeded Andrew Honyman, Archdeacon of St. Andrews, a
Godly and Learned Prelate, the Author of The Seasonable Case and Survey of
Napthalie; he repaired the Church of Sandwick, and did many other works of
Charity. Anno 1669, being at Edinburgh, and going into the Archbishop of St.
Andrew's Coach with him, he was shot thorough the Arm with a poisoned Ball,
which by the Phanaticks was designed for the Archbishop; this so weakened him
that he lived not many years after, for he died in February 1676, in great
peace, and with great resignation, contrary to what is asserted in a late
scandalous Pamphlet, as is ready to be attested, if need were, by several
Gentlemen of untainted Reputation, Witnesses when he died.

17. To him succeeded Murdoch Mackenzie, Bishop of Murray, translated from that
See to this, Anno 1677, a most worthy Bishop, and greatly beloved of all for
his Hospitality, Peaceableness, Piety, and prudent Government; he did on his
own Charges repair the Lady Church in Shapinsha. He lived to a good Age, being
near an hundred Years, and yet great was his vigor of Body and Vivacity of
Judgment, even to his Death; but to the regret of all that knew him, and the
loss of the whole Country. He died February 1688.

18. To him Anno 1688, succeeded Andrew Bruce, formerly Bishop of Dunkeld. He
died last March.

CHAP. VIII.
The History of the first Plantation of the Isles of Orkney; and of the ancient
and present Possessors of them. The Pights or Picts the first Possessors. Of
Belus and Ganus Kings of Orkney. When it came to the Possession of the Kings of
Scotland. When the Norwegians got footing, and when they were expelled. An
Account of the Earls of Orkney. Of the Surname of Sinclar. A double of an
ancient Manuscript relating to the Affairs of Orkney; wherein there is an
Account of the first Possessors of that Country, different from the former, and
a full Account of the Earls of Orkney till that time. Of Bothwell Duke of
Orkney. Of the Earls of the Surname of Steward and Douglass. When this Country
was again re-annex'd to the Crown. Of the Stewardry. The several ways how
Orkney has been a Honorary Title. Of the Law-right-men and their Office.

THE first Planters and Possessors of this Country were the Pights, as the
generality of our Historians do affirm, who call Orkney, Antiquum Pictorum
regnum. There are yet in this Country several strange Antique Houses, many of
which are now overgrown with Earth, which are still by the Inhabitants called
Pights Houses; and the Firth that runs betwixt this Country and Cathnes, is
still from them called Pightland-Firth, i. e. the Firth that runs by the Land
of the Pights. Though Buchanan, to establish his opinion, would rather have it
called, Fretum Penthlandicum, from Penthus, a Man of his making.

These Verses of the Poet Claudian.

-- Maduerunt Saxone fuso
Orcades; incaluit pictorum Sanguine Thule,
do evidently prove that the Pights, or some other Colony of the German Nation,
particularly the Saxons, at that time were the Possessors and Inhabitants of
these Northern Isles: And to this Day many of the Inhabitants use the Norns,
which has yet the greatest affinity with the old Gothic Language, not much
differing from the Teutonick, which is supposed to be the Language the Pights
used. Besides the Sirnames of the ancient Inhabitants of this Country are of a
German Original, as the Seaters are so called from Seater, one of the old
German Idols, which they worshipped for Saturn; the Taits from Twitsh, i. e.
the Dutch who got that name from Twisio, the Son of Noe and Tythea, the famous
Progenitors of the Germans; the Keldas, from the ancient Culdees or Kelders,
who (as Spotswood thinks) were the ancient Priests or Ministers of the
Christian Religion amongst the Pights, so called because they lived in Cells;
the Backies from some small running Water, which, in the ancient Teutonick, is
called Backie: So the names that end in stane, which are very frequent in this
Country, as Hourstane, Corstane, Yorstane, Beistane, etc. which is a Pictish or
Teutonick termination of Surname, signifying the superlative degree of
comparison; and many more reasons might be added, if it were needful, to show
that the Pictish Blood is, as yet, in this Country, and that that People were
the first Possessors of it.

These Pights, as is generally acknowledged, were of a German descent, coming,
at first, from that part of Germany that borders on the Baltic Sea, where, at
present,, are the Dukedoms of Meckleburgh and Pomerania. They were so called
because they were notable Warriors and Fighters; their true Name (as Verstegan
says) being Phightian; that is, Phighters or Fighters. They were by the Romans
called Picts, though some of them called them Pictavi, and might have been so
called of them, either from some resemblance of that name of Phightian that
they took to themselves, or from their singular Beauty and comely Form, as if
they had been a painted People; and so Boethius, in his character of them, puts
both these properties together, saying of them, Quod erant corporibus
robustissimis candidisque;. The like says Verstegan of them, That they were
tall and strong of Body, and of a very fair Complexion; and so it is to this
day; there being no People in Scotland that more resemble the Pights in these
qualities, than the generality of the Orkney Men and Women do, being generally
strongly built, and very beautiful and lovely. Or the Romans might have called
them Picts, because, being a People much delighting in Wars, they had their
Sheilds painted with diverse colors, for Alex. ab Alex. Lib. 2. genesis dierum
Cap. 22. observes, That it was the way of the German Nation so to do, saying,
Germani scuta lectissimis coloribus distinxere: Though I think it more probable
they were called so, because to make themselves more terrible to their Enemies,
they used to paint their Bodies with the Images of different Beasts, or imprint
them on their Flesh with some Iron Instruments, which has given occasion to
Claudian to say of them.

-- Ferroque not at as
Perlegit exanimes Picto moriente Figuras.
But at what time these Pights first planted these Isles is somewhat
controverted by our Historians. Some say that in the Year of the World 4867,
the Pights having left their native Country, to seek out some new Habitation to
themselves, came first to Orkney, where they left a Colony to plant the
Country, and then with their main body Ferrying over Pightland-Firth, and
passing thorough Cathnes, Ross, Murray, Mar and Angus, at last settled
themselves in Fife and Lothian, which, from them, by our Writers, is called
Pictlandia. Others think that the Pights did not settle here till the time of
Reuther King of Scots; at which time the Scots by an intestine division warring
upon one another, each party being assisted by considerable numbers of the
Pights; they fought so desperately, that besides Gethus King of the Pights, the
greatest number of both the Scots and Pictish Nobility were killed, together
with many thousands of the Commons of both Nations; which great slaughter, with
the Invasion of the Britains at that time, constrained the Pights (who
perceived themselves unable to resist them) to fly to the more Northern parts
of the Kingdom, and so to Orkney, where they abode for a time, and made Gothus,
the Brother of the foresaid Gethus, their King; and after some years having
left some few of their number to People and Plant this Country, they returned
to Lothian, and having expelled the Britains, settled themselves again in their
ancient Possessions.

This Country being thus planted, the People grew and multiplied, and, for a
long time, were governed by Kings of their own, after the manner of the Pights
and other Nations. There is still a place in this Country, that by reason of
its name and antique Form would seem to be the residence of some of these
Kings; it is called Coninsgar, or the King's House; it is in the Parish of
Sandwick in the Mainland; but the memory and actions of these Kings are, by the
injury of Time and carelessness of our Writers, buried in silence; so that only
we find mention made of these two, Belus King of Orkney; Holinshed calls him
Bladus, and Boethius Balus; but it is more probable he was called Belus; for
there is at this time still remaining a Stone in the Church of Birsa (where
probably the King had his principal residence, as to this day one of the Earls
chiefest Palaces is remaining) having this name Belus engraven on it in very
odd ancient characters, which has probably been taken from some ancient
Buildings thereabouts. This Prince, upon what provocation is not recorded,
levied an Army, and crossing Pightland-Firth, Invaded Cathnes and Ross, making
Prey of all he met with; but Ewen the second being at that time King of
Scotland, hearing of this Invasion, came with his Army so unexpectedly upon
him, and assaulted him so vigorously, that he put his Soldiers to flight, a
great many escaping by Boat, but Belus himself was put to that strait that he
slew himself, lest he should fall into his Enemies hands.

After him we read of another King of Orkney, called Ganus, in the time of
Caratacus King of Scots; and of him it is reported, by Boethius, that he, with
his Wife and Children, were carried Captives to Rome by Claudius Caesar when he
went from Britain; and Hermannus Shedel in his general History of the several
Ages of the world, speaking of the Emperor Claudius, says, Quod insulas
Orchades Romano adjecit imperio; sexto quo profectus erat mense Romam rediit
and triumphavit maximo apparatu. This Juvenal takes notice of when he says in
his second Satyr,

Littora Juvernae promovimus, and modo (captas
Orcadas, and minima contentos nocte Britannos.
A little after this the Romans had not such cause to triumph over Orkney; for
when Agricola was their General in Britain Anno Christi 87, as Henry Isaacson
computes it in his Chronological Tables; he sent a Navy to sail about Britain,
to discover the largeness of it, and whether it was an Island or not; and after
they had coasted many days toward the North, they came at last in sight of
Orkney (which Tacitus, for want of better information, imagines to be unknown
before that time) but fearing to pass thorough Pightland-Firth for fear of
Shallows, they seized some of the Country People that lived in the next
Islands, constraining them to go aboard and pilot them thorough the Firth; but
they suspecting that the Romans had a hostile design on their Country, not
caring for their own Lives, they entered the Strait at such an inconvenient
time, that the Ships were born with the violence of the stream against Rocks
and Shelves in such a manner, that they were all almost torn, broke and lost
without recovery, only some few of the Navy that were not so hasty to follow,
perceiving the sad loss of their fellows, returned by the same way they came
and reported these lamentable Tidings to Agricola: And indeed there is a place
in Shapinsha, over against which are impetuous Tides and dangerous Shallows at
this day, called Agricola; but whether it got that name from this accident I am
not able to determine.

But yet it seems that Orkney was a considerable thing in the Eyes of the
Romans: For Polyd. Virgil. lib. 3. Ang. Historiae, speaking of the division of
the Empire among the Sons of Constantine the Great, reckons Orkney amongst the
famous Kingdoms that fell to the share of his Son Constantine; says he, Huic
sort evenit Britannia cum Gallia, Hispania and Orchadibus.

This Country it is like continued thus under the Government of their own
Princes, till the fatal Ruin and Subversion of the Pictish Kingdom in
Scotland, in the Year 839; at which time Keneth the second, that Martial King
of Scots having in many Battles overthrown the Picts, at last expelled them out
of all Scotland, seizing on Fife and Lothian, and the other large Territories
that they had therein; he pursued them to Orkney, vanquishing these Isles and
adding them to his other Dominions.

Orkney being thus annexed to the Crown of Scotland, it continued many years
under the Government of the Scottish Kings and their Lieutenants, till about
the Year 1099, at which time Donald Bain, Lord of the Isles, having usurped the
Crown, and caused himself to be proclaimed King of Scotland; and being
thereupon hardly put to it by the injured Heir and discontented Nobility, that
he might not lose what he had unjustly usurped, he invited Magnus King of
Norway to come to his assistance, with an offer of the Isles for his pains; who
coming with his Navy Invaded Orkney and the Western Isles, putting Garrisons in
all convenient places.

By this means the Norwegians got possession of this Country, who held it for
the space of 164 years, when they came to lose all again upon this occasion:
Anno 1263, Alexander the Third being then King of Scotland, Atho (by some
called Hagin) King of Norway, hoping from the divisions that were then in the
Kingdom, and the Famine that was then sore pressing the Land, to make some
further conquest in Scotland, he comes with a great Navy and Army of Danes and
Norwegians to the West Isles, and conquers Arran and Bute (which were the only
Isles at that time under the dominion of the Scots) and from this success
hoping for greater matters, he lands on the Continent and takes in the Town and
Castle of Air. But King Alexander having assembled a great Army, assaults him
in Battle at Largis, kills his Nephew, a Man of great Renown, and after a great
Slaughter of his Soldiers (to the number of twenty four thousand) puts the
remainder to flight. Immediately upon this defeat King Acho hears of another
sad loss; namely, That his Fleet by a Storm were all cast away and broken
against the Rocks, except four in which he presently embarked and fled away to
Orkney; being come thither, he sent to Norway and Denmark for a new Army and
Fleet, with an intention again to Invade Scotland the next Summer; but he died
the beginning of the following Year, January 22, Anno 1264, and was buried in
that place where the Cathedral now stands, under a Marble Stone which is seen
to this day, and goes under the name of his Monument.

After his death King Alexander Invaded the Isle of Man, and the Western Isles,
which, after some opposition, he recovered, and intending to make the like
attempt for the recovery of Orkney and Zetland; there came Ambassadors to him
from Magnus King of Norway and Denmark, who succeeded Acho in these Kingdoms;
after several Treaties it was at last condescended upon that King Alexander
should pay to the King of Norway the Sum of 4000 Merks Sterling, with the Sum
of 100 Merks by year; and that for this Magnus King of Norway should quit all
Right that he might pretend to the Isles of Orkney and Zetland, and the other
Isles of Scotland, which accordingly he did, by Letters under his Great Seal,
renouncing and giving over all Right and Claim that he had or might have both
for him and his Successors to these and all the other Isles of Scotland; and,
for the better confirmation hereof, a Marriage was agreed upon betwixt the Lady
Margaret, Daughter to Alexander and Hangonanus (or Haningo or Aquin as others
call him) Son to King Magnus, both Children, to be completed when they came to
a Marriagable Estate.

Orkney being in this manner recovered from the hands of the Danes and
Norwegians, it continued ever after annexed to the Crown of Scotland; King
Alexander giving the property of it to a Nobleman surnamed Speire, Earl of
Cathnes, whose Son Magnus Speire Earl of Cathnes, Orkney and Zetland, was in
great repute in the days of King Robert Bruce.

But he dying without Heirs Male, his Daughter Elizabeth Speire succeeded him
in the Estate, and was Married to Sir William Sinclar, who accompanied Sir
James Douglass when he went to accompany the Bruces Heart to Jerusalem. He was
great Grandchild to Willielmus de Sancto claro, second Son to Valdosius Earl of
Saint Claire in France. This Sir William Sinclar, by his Wife Elizabeth Speire,
had a Son called William also, who was made Earl of Orkney and Zetland by King
David Bruce. He was first Married to Florentina, Daughter to the King of
Denmark, and after her death was Married to Jane Halyburton, Daughter to Walter
Lord Dirleton.

To him succeeded Henry Sinclar, usually called Prince of Orkney; he was also
made Duke of Oldenburgh by Christiern the first King of Denmark. He Married
Geils or Egidia Dowglass Daughter to William Dowglass Lord of Niddisdale, and
of Geils Stewart Daughter to King Robert the Second. So much was he favored by
King Robert the Third, that when he was to send his Son Prince James (afterward
King James the First) to France, he appointed this Henry, Prince of Orkney, to
be his Governor, who taking Ship with him at the Bass, came as far as
Flamburgh-head, but by reason of the Sickness and Indisposition of the young
Prince, they were necessitated to land, and so were both detained Prisoners by
the English. He had a Daughter called Beatrix Sinclar, who was Married to James
the gross Earl of Douglass: And in the Inscription that is on her Tomb at
Douglass, her Father, the Earl of Orkney, is styled Lord of the Isles, and Lord
Sinclar.

To him succeeded his Son William Sinclar, Earl of Orkney and Zetland; he
Married Elizabeth Douglass, Daughter to Archibald Earl of Douglass, surnamed
Fineman, by whom he had a Daughter that afterward was Married to Alexander
Duke of Albany, second Son to King James the Second. In the Douglass History we
find a Note of this Earl's Titles, viz. Prince of Orkney, Duke of Oldenburgh,
Earl of Cathnes, Lord Sinclar, Lord of Niddisdale, with the Valleys of Neth,
Sheris of Dumfreis, great Admiral of Scotland, Warden of the Marches, great
Justice General, Baron of Erkefoord, Caverton, Cousland, Rosline, Pentland,
Harbartshire, Dysart, and Newburgh in Buchan. He was questionless a Man of
great power and eminence, and very intimate with King James the Second, whom he
followed and assisted in all his difficulties, and by him was made Lord
Chancellor of the Kingdom and Lieutenant after that Office was taken from the
Earl of Douglass. And from that same King he got a confirmation of the Earldom
of Cathnes united into a Baronry with his Lands of Orkney, in compensation of
his claim to the Lordship of Niddisdale, and of other Offices and Pensions that
he pretended to as being Son to Geils Douglass Daughter to William Douglass
Lord of Niddisdale, and of Geils Stewart Daughter to King Robert the Second, by
his Wife Elizabeth Muir. This confirmation is dated April 29, Anno 1436.

The following Paper I transcribed from an ancient Manuscript, now in the hands
of the Reverend Mr. Robert Norry Minister of Dundee. By the Characters and way
of Writing it seemed to be of the Age it relates to, viz. 1403, though in some
things it differs from the Account you have had before; yet because this may be
more likely, and that it gives a better Account of the Earls of this Country, I
thought it might not be unacceptable to the curious.

Quoniam inter ceteras hujus fluctuantis seculi curas and solicitudines,
pensata temporum, morum ac hominum in hac lacrimarum valle, labilitate and
brevitate, testante venerabili illo Cronographo Martino, Domini nostri pape
Penetentiario and Capellano, necesse videtur de congruo extrahere progenitorum,
regum, principum and aliorum preclarorum genelogias per quas mundus iste
transitorius regitur, Reges regnant and principes gubernant signantque in
deduccionem and agniccionem veritatis, quo ad eorundem successionem
veresimiliter evenire speratur. Illustri ergo and excellentissimo Domino
nostro, principi supremo, Norwegie regi, suisque successoribus, satrapis,
patriciis, consulibus and proceribus dicti regni, Thomas Dei and Apostolice
sedis gracia Episcopus Orcadie and Zetlandie, Canonici Ecclesie Cathedralis
sancti magni Martyris gloriosissimi, legifer, ceterique proceres, nobiles
populus ac communitas ejusdem, gracia, pax, caritas, gaudium lonagnimitas,
misericordia a Deo Patre omnipotente and a Jesu Christo in spiritu sancto. In
omnibus vobis per quem reges regnant and in cujus manu corda sunt regum cum
omni subjectione, humilitate and obediencia prompti and parati vestram in Jesu
Christi visceribus zelantes and ficientes salutem in caritate non ficta.
Requirentes ut in dicendis in nostra simplicitate vestra suppleat regia
sublimitas, and quia scimus firmiter and longi temporis spacio, efficax rerum
magistra, nos experientia docuit, quod in dubium non revocamus qualiter erga
Comites Orcadie regalis ipsa sublimitas, zelum semper exuberantem exercuit,
Quamobrem firmam spem gerimus, plenamque fiduciam obtinemus quod illa regia
majestas verba nostra benegne recipiat, diligenter intelligat and effective
prosequatur, ut infra pectoris claustrum solicit considerare convenit ipsa
regia sinceritas and diligenter attendere, quod adulatorium vestre serenitati
aliquid non scribimus, quod secundum Petrum Blessensem in suo prologo canentem,
Olei venditores esse non intendimus, sed patefacciones veritatis.

Ergo arbitramur pium esse and meritorium, testimonium perhibere veritati ne
veritas occultetur, presertim illa per quam innocenti possit prejudicium
generari, and cum uterque reus est qui veritatem occultat and mendacium dicit,
quia ille prodesse non iste nocere desiderat quod a nobis Deus avertat,
potissime cum in dicendis per quondam recolende memory Erici vestri
predecessoris regis nostri admoniti patentes literas fuissemus testimonium
perhibere veritati prout lacius in sequentibus patebit. Hinc est quod nos
Thomas Episcopus, Capitulum, Cononici, Legifer, ceterique proceres, nobiles,
populus, communitas sive plebei antedicti, coram Deo in fide ac fidelitate
quibus vestre regie Majestati tenemur astricti fideliter attestamur and ad
perpetuam rei memoriam deducimus fidemque facimus vobis and omnibus presentibus
and futuris. Jesu Christi fidelibus sancte matris ecclesie filiis in forma and
effectu subsequentibus. Coram nobis congregatus, comparens magnificus and
praepotens Dominus, Dominus Willielmus de Sancto Claro Comes Orcadie Dominus le
Sinclar in ecclesia sancti magni martyris in Orcadia proposuit in hunc modum;
supposuit enim quod nobis been and ad plenum cognita res fuisset, quo modo
magnis retroactis temporibus antecessores sui and progenitores ac ipsi Orcadie
comites just ac juridice, inconcusse, linialiter and gradatim jure hereditario
comitatui Orcadie superdicto successerant ac illam per tempora magna and
longeva nulla aliena generatione interveniente, quietissime possederant. Et
qualiter diverse carte, evidencie, instrumenta, libri censuales and alia
diversa probacionum genera fuerant igne consumpta, deperdita and alienata,
hostilitatis tempore and guerrarum, emulorum inimicorumque nonnullorum, defectu
and carencia firmissime domus seu municionis inexpugnabilis ubi hujusmodi
collocarentur; subjunxit idem Dominus Comes quod habuit literas quondam supremi
Domini nostri Regis Erici illustris, Patentes, quas nobis ostendit and perlegi
fecit, precepta continentes subsequencia, scilicet quod si quis nostrum
habuerit vel qui habuerint aliquas cartas, evidencias, cirographa, instrumenta,
munimenta, codicillos, acta vel privilegiorum literas ad progenitores,
antecessores vel ad se spectantes, dictumque suum comitatum concernentes, quod
indilate and sine mora aut contradictione seu obstaculo quibuscunque eidem
Domino comiti deliberaret vel deliberarent, secundum quod ipsius Domini nostri
Regis evitare velimus indignacionem. Virtute quarum literarum sicut eadem
comitis continebat proposicio nos requisivit ut si de hujusmodi antedictis
munimentis, aliqua habuissemus in nostris scriniis, Apothecariis, Thecis,
Cistis, Archivis seu cartophilaciis, quod ipsam sibi deliberaremus and in casu
quo non habuerimus, sed sciremus ab aliis ea haberi quod sibi intimaremus and
revelaremus. Et si nec unum nec reliquum sciremus, tunc nos requisivit earundem
literarum autoritate, quatenus nos Deum, justitiam and equitatem pre oculis
habentes in declaracionem veritatis velimus sagaciter and studiose mature
digestis iterim iterim ac tertio perscrutari scripturas, cronicas, autenticas
and approbatas que faciunt fidem illas perlegere, diligenter inspicere, sane
concipere and intelligere, ac naturas infeodacionis and ecclesiarum fundaciones
perspicue intendere, quibus sic mature rimatis and ad plenum discussis velimus
supremo Domino nostro manifestare per genealogias accronicas, autenticas, per
quos and a quibus lineater and gradatim idem Willielmus Comes processit and per
quanta tempora, legitime, just, been and inconcusse predecessores sui and ipse
gavisi sunt dicto comitatu cum universis and singulis suis insulis,
commoditatibus and justis suis pertinenciis, ne hujusmodi successio ultra
debitam procelaretur hominum memoriam. His omnibus sic propositis, avisatis,
discussis, digestis mature and ad plenum conceptis and intellectis, habitis
prius diversis and singulis hinc inde tractatibus, ad honorem Dei omnipotentis,
manifestationem veritatis and obedienciam and reverenciam supremi Domini nostri
Regis tanquam filii obediencie preceptarii mandatarii prout decet in his quae
audivimus a senioribus nostris, deinde que legibus intelleximus and concepimus
and ad plenum sano effectu degessimus per libros Scripturas, cronicas regnorum
utrorumque Scocie and Norwegie and progenitorum eorundem; sic quod singulariter
singuli and universaliter universi, uno animo, una fide, unico consensu and
assensu respondemus fidem ut prefertur and testimonium veritatis facientes
universis superscriptis. Quod universa genera munimentorum, cartarum,
evidenciarum and aliarum probacionum species que apud nos erant ob reverentiam
supremi Domini nostri dicto Domino Comiti deliberavimus and exhibuimus ante
dictum comitatum concernencia. Sed verum est and in veritate attestamur ex
relatione fide dignorum antecessorum and progenitorum nostrorum quod
principulus and precipuus mansus sive manerium Dominorum Comitum Orcadie fuit
diversis temporibus igne combustis and ad nihilum redactus and funditus
destructus and patria tota depredata and vastata per emulos nostros and
inimicos per quas depredaciones, consumpciones and destrucciones firmiter
credimus quod principales evidencie, carte and alie patentes, diverse litere
fuerunt and sunt alienate and consumpte spectantes and concernentes ad
antecessores and progenitores dicti Domini Comitis defectu unius castri in quo
tutissime ipse evidencie, and carte, and alia patrie jocalia firmissime
poterant collocare. Ast quantum ad linealem progressum and gradum successionis
dicti Domini Comitis and suorum antecessorum seu progenitorum Comitum Orcadie,
nos prenominati superius expressatis, justa nostrum ingenium, sensum and
intellectum perscrutati sumus and mature avisati lucidissime per diversa
linquarum genera, Scripturas autenticas and approbatas cronicas scilicet in
linqua latina and Norwegica per quas reperimus infeodaciones ecclesiarum
nostrarum, genealogias nostras and antecessorum nostrorum, cartis and
evidenciis ipsorum and nostrorum manifestantibus and claro stili eloquio
testimonium perhibentibus ac fidem facientibus; in quibusdam Cronicis, libris,
cartis ac aliis autenticis Scripturis reperimus nomina diversorum comitum
Orcadie tempora in feudacionum ipsorum juxta modum and formam sequentem, sed de
eorum strenuis and notabilibus operacionibus, gestis, nominibus filiorum
siliarumque suarum, de modo migrandi ab hac luce, de divisione seu unione
hereditatis ipsorum, de incremento vel decremento possessionum suarum pro
presenti brevitatis causa pretermittimus; and nos ad antiquas, cronicas and
genealogias autenticas and approbatas referimus.

Reperimus itaque imprimis quod tempore Haraldi Comati primi Regis norwegie qui
gavisus est per totum Regnum suum, haec terra sive insularum patria Orcadie
fuit inhabitata and culta duabus nacionibus scilicet Peti and Pape que due
genera naciones fuerant destructe radicitus ac penitus per norwegenses de
stirpe sive de tribu strenuissimi principis Rognaldi, qui sic sunt ipsias
naciones aggressi quod posteritas ipsarum nacionum Peti and Pape non remansit.
Sed verum est quod tunc non denominabatur Orcadia sed terra Petorum sicut clare
verificatur hodie adhuc cronica attestante, per mare dividens Scociam and
Orcadiam quod usque ad hodiernum diem mare Petlandicum appellatur and sicut
pulchre subjungitur in ijsdem cronicis Rex iste Haraldus Comatus primo
applicuit in Zetlandiam cum class sua and consequenter in Orcadia and contulit
illam Orcadiam and Zetlandiam antedicto principi Rognaldo robusto ex cujus
stirpe ut prefertur prefate due naciones, fuerant everse and destructe sicut
cronice nostre clare demonstrant a quo quidem Rognaldo processerunt linealiter
and gradatim omnes Comites Orcadie and possederunt temporibus suis dictum
Comitatum libere sine quacunque exaccione quocunque Canone seu sensu, excepto
obsequio prestando regibus Norwegie tributi racione, sicut in clausula sequenti
lacius patebit que in Cronica de verbo in verbum continetur. Revera enim usque
hodie illorum posteritatis dominio subjacent excepto quod jure tributario
Norwegie regibus deserviunt, Qui quidem princeps Rognaldus strenuissimus
hujusmodi comitatum libere and jure donavit cuidam fratri suo Swardo nomine,
qui Comes Swardus procreavit quendam filium Gothornum nomine, qui comes
Gothornus possedebat dictum Comitatum per unum annum and decessit sinc herede
legittimo and sic reversus est dictus Comitatus dicto principi Rognaldo, qui
pure and libere illum contulit cuidam filio suo Eyward nomine qui postea
cognominabatur Turffeid, qui quidem per long a tempora possedebat dictum
Comitatum and habundavit opibus and plenus fuit divicijs. Cui successit filius
ejus Thurwider Gedclevar cui successit filius ejus Itlanderver cui successit
filius ejus Comes Swardus robustus ac corpolentus, magnus and strenuissimus
bellifer, Adhuc tamen non fuit regeneratus sacri baptismatis lavacro neque alij
Comites prenominati. In cujus quidem Comitis Swardi diebus supervenit Olaus
Thurgonus Rex illustrissimus de occidentalium partium guerris, cujus induccione
comes ille Swardus una cum gente Orcadie devenerunt, Christiani gentilitatis
relinquentes errorem. Cui Comiti Swardo successit filius ejus comes Thurfinus
procreatus ex filia quondam excellentissimi Principis Malcomi Regis Scotorum
illustris. Qui quidem Rex contulit dicto Thurfino terras de Cathnes and
Sutherland sub unica denominatione comitatus in Scocia and illis gavisus est
una cum comitatu Orcadie Zetlandie and pluribus alijs dominijs in Scocie Regno
jacentibus and vixerat diu and strenuissimus erat in campis post cujus quidem
Comitis Thurfini obitum successit sibi ejus filius Comes Erlinus primus and
iste Erlinus primus genuit Comitem Paulum and Erlinum Secundum qui Paulus Comes
genuit Comitem Hacoin Comes Erlinus Secundus procreavit Comitem Magnum
gloriosissimum Martyrem patronum Orcadie qui sanctissime abijt ab hac luce
virgo and martyr. Post cujus quidem Magni martiris decessum and post obitum
Comitis Hacoin successit Comes Rolandus qui primo fundavit Ecclesiam Sancti
Magni Martiris, illamque magnis possessionibus divicijs and redditibus dotavit,
predictus virque Sapiencia and virtute pollebat per plura bona pietatis opera
famabatur venerabaturque and reputabatur pro sancto viro. Post cujus quidem
obitum successit ejus frater Ericus comitatui Cui successit Comes Haraldus Cui
successit comes Joannes filius ejus, Cui Joanni successit comes magnus Secundus
a quo Alexander Scotorum Rex cepit comitatum de Sutherland Cui Magno comiti
secundo successit comes Gilbertus primus, cui successit Comes Gilbertus
secundus ejus filius qui gavisus est comitatibus Orcadie and Cathnes in Scocia.
Qui quidem Gilbertus secundus procreavit Magnum tertium and quandam filiam
Matildam nomine Iste Comes Magnus filius Gilberti secundi genuit Comitem Magnum
quartum and quondam Joannem and ille Magnus comes quartus ab hac luce abijt
sine prole, cui successit Joannes ejus frater in antedictis comitatibus Orcadie
and Cathnes Joannes iste genuit quendam magnum Comitem quintum. Cui Magno
quinto jure Successionis linealiter successit Dominus Malisius comes de
Stratherne in Scocia tanquam here is ligittimus Jure hereditario ad utrosque
comitatus Orcadie and Cathnes sicut clarissime manifestant munimenta, evidencie
and carte utrorumque regnorum Scocie and Norwegie. Qui quidem Comes Malisius
revera primo desponsavit filiam Comitis de Monteith in Scocia and ex ea genuit
filiam Matildam nomine post cujus quidam prime uxoris obitum desponsavit filiam
quandum quondam Hugonis Comitis de Rosse and ex ea procreavit quatuor filias
and decessit sine masculis sicque ejus dominia terrae and possessiones fuerant
divise inter illas filiam vero antiquiorem ex prima uxore procreatam Matildam
scilicet duxit in uxorem Welandus de Ard qui ex ea procreavit quendam filium
Alexandrum de Ard qui Alexander Jure Regni Scocie and consuetudine hereditaria
successit Comiti Malisio de Strathern in principali manerio sive manso ratione
sue matris Comitatus de Cathania and possedebat jure and appellacione Comitis
and eadem ratione and eodem jure gavisus est certa perticata sive quantitate
terrarum Orcadie and gerebat se pro Balivo and Capitaneo gentis Orcadie
Norwegie Regis ex part Idemque Alexander de Ard tempore suo vendidit and
alienavit quondam recolende menmorie Domino Roberto Stewart primo Scotorum Regi
dictum comitatum de Cathnes mansum sive manerium principale and omnia alia jura
spectancia seu concernencia ad se ratione matris ejus tanquam ad antiquiorem
sororem jure and consuetudiene regnirem Scocie cum denominacione comitatus sive
Comitis Iste vero Alexander finialiter decessit sine herede de sua corpore
quocunque legittimo procreato. Nunc vero vertamus stylum ad quatuor filias ex
secunda uxore procreatas, quarum una desponsata erat cum Domino Willielmo de
Sancto Claro Domino le Sinclar qui Dominus Willielmus ex ea genuit Dominum
Henricum de Sancto Claro qui Dominus Henricus desponsavit Jonnetam filiam
Domini Walteri de Haliburton Domini de Dirletoun and ex ea procreavit Dominum
Henricum de Sancto Claro secundum qui ultimo decessit comes Orcadie indubitatus
qui in uxorem habuit venerabilem Dominam Dominam Egidiam filiam filij antedicti
quondam Domini Roberti Scotorum regis illustris filiamque quandam strenuissimi
Domini Willielmi de Douglas Domini de nydysdale and ex ea procreavit presentem
Dominum Wilielmum de Sancto Claro comitem Orcadie, Dominum le Sinclare. Quedam
alia filia secunde uxoris desponsata fuit cum quodam milite denominato Here
Ginsill de Swethrick partibus oriundo, qui vero miles in Orcadie partibus venit
and jure ac ratione sue uxoris gavisus est quadam part terrarum Orcadie que
quidem uxor ab hac luce sine herede migravit ligittimo ex suo corpore
procreato. Tertia vero filia secunde uxoris fuit nupta cum quodam Gothredo
nomine Gothorno le Spear qui ex ea procreavit quendam filium Dominum Malisium
le Spear militem qui tandem decessit sine herede ligittimo de suo corpore
genito similiter and quarta filia decessit sine herede ex suo corpore ligittime
procreato Verum iste Dominus Henricus, primus Dominus le Sinclare, ejus matre,
Alexandro de Ard and domino Malisio Spear adhuc viventibus ad Dominum nostrum
supremum regem Norwegie adivit Hacoin nomine cum quo rege certas fecit
pacciones, condiciones and appunctuamenta per quas reversus est ad Orcadie
parts illisque gavisus est usque ad extremum vite sue comesque Orcadie obijt
and pro defensione patrie inibi crudeliter ab inimicis peremptus est. Et post
decessum istius Henrici comitis primi in Orcadie partibus supervenit dicti
Comitis Henrici primi matter filia Domini Malisij Comitis prenominati and ibi
fix remansit usque post obitum filij ejus Henrici Comitis primi and
supervixerat post obitum omnium sororum suarum, filiorum filiarumque suorum sic
quod ipsius antedicti quondam Comitis Henrici primi matter successit omnibus
sororibus ejus eorundemque filijs and filiabus tanquam unica and legittima
here is comitatus Orcadie and terrarum de Cathnes sibi tanquam uni sorori
debitarum part duntaxat and porcione exceptis sororis sue antiquioris de
terris de Cathnes sub denominacione and appellacione comitatus sive Comitis
quam partim ut superius dictum est alienavit and vendidit ipse quondam
Alexander de Ard regi Scocie prenominato Hujusque rei testes sunt adhuc
viventes fide digne qui ipsum matrem Henrici primi oculis viderunt labijsque
sunt locuti cum ea communicantes ad plenum Cui successit ejus nepos Henricus
Secundus filius primi Henrici, cui Henrico Secundo successit presens and
superstes Dominus Wilielmus comes modernus Dominus le Sinclar.

Excellentissime Princeps ut premissimus in principio it a fine protestamur
quod vestra serenissima regia sublimitas ac ipsius benignissima majestas Justa
ingenij nostri modulum and sensuum capacitatem nos linqua (...) naturam
incultam nebulis ignorancie multipliciter obfuscatam velit rudes indoctos a
Rhetorica sciencia alienas in fecunda facundia ignaros habere excusatos quamvis
barbarico more non poetice locucionis, modo grosso loquamur, quia Insulares
sumus a literarum sciencia penitus alieni, imo quod condecenti rethorice
locucionis stilo sive Scriptura non referimus vestre regie majestatis ea and
nos submittimus correctioni. Sed verum est ut attestamur quod more nostro
barbarico omnia que superius vestre majestati scribimus vera sunt, quia ex
antiquis libris, scripturis autenticis, cronicis approbatis and relacionibus
fide dignorum antecessorum nostrorum, ac infeodacionibus nostris ecclesiarum
nostrarum ista extruximus and compilavimus. Et si opus esset plura quam in
presenti epistola vestre celsitudini lacius manifestare sciremus ipsamque in
premissis informare, sed quia longa solent sperni, hec pauca sufficient pro
presenti Et ut hec nostra epistola taliter qualiter compilata vestre regie
majestati ac dominis vestri consistorij and palacij circa latera vestra
existentibus majorem fidem ac roboris firmitatem faciat animos vestros ad
plenum informet ac inter archana (...) vestrorum radicem emittat veritatis
firmam and ceteros Christi fideles sancta matris Ecclesie filios instruat ad
Deum and sacrosancta dei evangelia per nos corporaliter tacta juramus quod
premissa modo quo super relata deponimus ad Dei honorem vestreque celsitudinis,
predecessoris mandatum and non alias nec prece nec precio, odio, amore vel
favore vel sub spe cujuscunque muneris presentis vel futuri sed pro veritate
duntaxat dicenda. In quorum omnium and singulorum fidem and testimonium
premissorum sigilla Thome Episcopi, Canonicorum and Capituli antedictorum,
totiusque populi and communitatis patrie nostre Orcadie quod dicitur sigillum
commune and mei Henrici Randale legiferi in nostra publica and generali
sessione non sine magna maturitate and plena digestione presentibus sunt
appensa apud Kirkwaw mensis maij die quarto Anno Domini millesima
quadringentesimo tertio.

To this William Sinclar Earl of Orkney, succeeded his Son Robert Sinclar, Earl
of Orkney; but he being, as I am informed, forefaulted for non compearance to
the Parliament, the Earldom of Orkney and Lordship of Zetland was again annexed
to the Crown; and so it continued till the Reign of Queen Mary.

At which time James Hepburn, Earl of Bothwell, was, by her, made Duke of
Orkney, by that Dignity to make him the more worthy to be a Husband for her
self; who were Married by Adam Bothwell Bishop of Orkney in the Palace of
Holyrood-House, after the manner of the Reformed Church, on the 15th of May
1567. He perceiving how much he would be envied by the Nobility for that
Marriage, and for a suspicion they had that he was the Murderer of her former
Husband, he caused to be built a strong Castle in Westra in Orkney, called the
Castle of Noutland, to be a place of retreat in case a storm should fall. And
so it came to pass; for being deserted by the Queen at Carberry Hill and
pursued by the Lords of the Congregation, he made to Sea with two or three
Ships which he had prepared before hand for that purpose and came to Orkney;
but being denied entrance into the Castle of Kirkwall (the Castle of Noutland
not being fully finished) by Gilbert Balfaur the Keeper of it, he betook
himself again to Sea, playing the Pirate, and making Prey of all Ships that he
could master and seize upon; till at last he was driven from this Country by
William Kirkaldie of Grange, and so flying from this to Zetland, and from
thence to Norway, he was there apprehended and convoyed to Denmark, where he
was put into a vile Prison, in which, after the space of ten years, he made a
base end, answerable to the wicked life he had lived.

After the death of James Hepburn, Duke of Orkney, the Lord Robert Stuart,
natural Son to King James the Fifth, was made Earl of Orkney in August Anno
1581; and being before provided to the Abbacy of Holyrood House, he made an
exchange of that with Adam Bothwell for the Bishopric of Orkney, and so became
sole Lord of the whole Country. He built or repaired the Palace of Birsa, the
chief Residence of the Earls of Orkney, having this Inscription above the Gate:
Dominus Robertus Stuartus Filius Jacobi quinti Rex Scotorum hoc opus instruxit.
Which Inscription, together with the Motto he took above his Coat of Arms, Sic
fuit, est. and erit, I am informed did militate something against his Son when
he was tried for his Life. In his time King James the Sixth was married to
Queen Anne the King of Denmark's Sister; at which time there was a new
Renunciation of the Right that the Kings of Denmark might pretend to these
Isles of Orkney and Zetland.

To him succeeded his Son Patrick Stuart Earl of Orkney. He was a great
Oppressor of the Country: Spotswood's character of him is in these words. This
Nobleman (says he) having undone his Estate by Riot and Prodigality, did seek,
by unlawful Shifts, to repair the same; making unjust Acts in his Courts, and
exacting Penalties for the breach thereof; if any Man was tried to have
concealed any thing that might infer a pecuniary mulct, and bring profit to the
Earl, his Lands and Goods were declared confiscated; or if any Person did sue
for justice before any other Judge than his Deputies, his Goods were escheated;
or if they went forth of the Isles without his License, or his Deputies, upon
whatsoever occasion, they should forefault their Movables; and, which of all
his acts were most inhumane, he ordained, That if any Man was tried to supply
or give Relief unto Ships, or any Vessels distressed by tempest, the same
should be punished in his Person, and fined at the Earl's Pleasure. So far
Spotswood.

These Acts produceed by the Complainers and confessed by the Earl himself,
were by the King's Privy Council discerned unlawful, and the practice thereof
prohibited in all times.

These Oppressions moved King James the Sixth, that he might deliver these
injured People from so great a Tyranny, to purchase Sir John Arnot's Right, to
whom the Earl had given the Morgage of his Estate, and so he took the Country
into his own hand, sending Sir James Stuart to it, whom he made Chamberlain and
Sheriff of the Country, who came and took possession of the Castles of Kirkwall
and Birsa in the King's Name.

The Earl at this time being Prisoner in the Castle of Dumbarton, sent his
natural Son Robert Stuart with an express Command to retake these Houses again;
who accordingly did so. But the Earl of Cathnes being commissioned by the King
to be Lieutenant in these bounds, with Order to recover these Castles and
pacify the Country: Shortly after his coming, he took in the Castle of
Kirkwall, which he demolished, and in it seized on the said Robert Stuart, with
some of the Earl's Servants, whom he sent to Edinburgh, where shortly after
they were hanged. And the next Year, being February the 6th 1614, the Earl
himself, for several treasonable Acts and Oppressions proven against him (being
brought from Dumbarton to Edinburgh) was there Beheaded. He was a Man of
profuse spending, and the Builder of that beautiful Fabric, which afterward
was appropriated to be the Manse of the Bishops of Orkney. The King by these
means being fully possessed of this Country, he made Sir James Stuart Lord
Ochiltrie Chamberlain and Sheriff, as is said. After whom others succeeded to
be Governors in it, till the Year 1647; at what time William Douglass Earl of
Morton got a Wadset or Morgage of this Country from King Charles I.

To him succeeded his Son Robert Douglass Earl of Morton, Anno 1649; in which
Year the Marquess of Montrose came to this Country, from Holland, with several
Commanders and some Companies of Foreign Soldiers; and having staid some few
Months in Kirkwall, he there raised some Forces, most of which were either
killed or taken Prisoners at that unfortunate encounter of Carbersdale.

To him succeeded, in the possession of Orkney and Zetland, his Son William
Douglass Earl of Morton. Anno 1664, or thereabouts, in the first Dutch Wars,
there was a great Ship, called The Carmelan of Amsterdam, cast away at Zetland,
in which Ship (as was said) were some Chests of Coined Gold, which were seized
on by some who acted for the Earl; whereupon the Lords of the Treasury called
the Earl to an Account, and so redeemed the Morgage of Orkney and Zetland, and
obtained a Decree of Declarator against him; and in the Year 1669, these
Countries of Orkney and Zetland, thus redeemed from the Earl of Morton, were
(excepting the Bishops interest) re-annexed to the Crown, and erected into a
Stewardry by Act of Parliament.

Thus Orkney has been a Honourary Title several ways, to several: Belus and
Ganus (as we have read) were Kings of Orkney, Henry and William Sinclars were
styled Princes of Orkney, Bothwel, by Patent from Queen Mary, was made Duke of
Orkney, and the Lords of this Country of the Surname of Sinclar and Stuart were
entitled Earls of Orkney, as were the Earls of Morton when they had possession
of this Country, and at present the Right Honorable George Earl of Orkney,
Brother to his Grace the Duke of Hamilton, has the honourary Title of this
Country, but they have ever since the Year 1669, when these Countries were
again adjoined to the Crown, been governed by those they call Stewards of
Orkney. The Kings Exchequer gives a Lease to any that gives highest for it at a
Roup. The present Farmers and Taxmen have it for Eighteen hundred Pounds
Sterling; so low by the oppression and changing of Taxmen has this Country
fallen, being reckoned, in the Earl of Morton's time, to near three thousand
and five hundred Pounds; when the Taxmens Lease is out, which is commonly in
three or five Years, the Lords of the Treasury Roup it of new, and he that bids
most is Taxman and Steward for the Lease of Years he takes it for.

The Government of the Steward is in the King's bounds, the manner and
procedure of his Jurisdiction is after the form of Sheriffship, the Title only
differing. The Bishops part is governed by a Sheriff, both he and the Kings
Steward have one and the same manner of punishing of Delinquents, and
administration of Justice, and that according to the custom and practice of
other Shires in the Kingdom; Both their seats of Justice is at Kirkwal.

Under the Sheriff and Steward, are some Judges of their Creation and
Appointment called Baliffs. In every Parish and Isle there is one. Their Office
is to oversee the manners of the Inhabitants, to hold Courts, and to decern in
civil petty matters to the value of ten Pounds Scots, but if the matter be
above that, it is referred to the Sheriff or Steward, or their Deputies under
and subservient to these Bailiffs, are six or seven of the most honest and
intelligent persons, within the Parish called Lawrightmen. These in their
respective bounds, have the oversight of the People, in the fashion of
Constables, and delate to the Bailiff such enormities as occasionally fall out,
which the Bailiffs punish according to the importance and circumstances of the
Fault, and if it be above his limits or extent of his Power, he sends the
delinquent to the seat of Justice, either to the Steward or Sheriff respective.

These Lawrightmen have a privilege inherent to their Office, by the custom of
the Country, which is not usual elsewhere: and it is this, if there be at any
time any suspicion of Theft, they take some of their Neighbors with them,
under the silence of the night and make search for the Theft, (which is called
Ransalling) they search every house they come to, and if the Theft be found,
they seize upon him with whom it is found and bring him to the seat of Justice
for Punishment.

An Essay concerning the Thule of the Ancients.
THere is no place oftener mentioned by the Ancients than Thule, and yet it is
much controverted what place it was; some have attempted the discovery of it,
but have gone wide of the marks the Ancients left concerning it; yet they seem
all to agree that it was some place toward the North, and very many make it to
be one of the British Isles, and since Conradus Celtes says it is encompassed
with the Orkney Isles. It will not be amiss to subjoyn to the description of
Orkney, this Essay concerning it.

Some derive the name Thule from the Arabic word Tule, which signifies far
off, and as it were with allusion to this the Poets usually call it, ultima
Thule, but I rather prefer the reason of the name given by the learned
Bochartus, who makes the same to be Phaenician, and affirms that it
signifies Darkness in that language. Chanaan lib. 1. Cap. 40. Thule proprie
Syris umbrae sunt, hinc translata significatione, Thule pro tenebris passim
sumitur; itaque Gezirat Thule erat insula tenebrarum, quod idem est ac
tenebricosa, quod nomen insulae ad extremum septentrionem sitae quam congruat
nemo non videt.

Hence Tibullus panigyrico ad Messalam speaking of the frigid Zone has this:

Illic and densa tellus absconditur umbrae. And these places of Homer Odyss. 1.
verse. 25. (...) ad caliginem; and lib. 3. verse. 1190 (...) neque enim scimus
ubi sit caligo, is by Strabo interpreted, nesoimus ubi sit septentrio, Lib. 1.
page 34. and lib. 10. page 454 and 455. And agreeing to this Statius lib. 3 ad
Claudiam uxorem.

Vel super Hesperiae vada caligantia
Thules, and lib. 4 ad Marcellum.
-- Aut nigrae littora Thules.
And indeed this derivation of the word carries more reason than any other they
give it, and is an evident proof that the ancients agreed in placing their
Thule toward the North: we shall see next what Northern Country they pitched
on for it.

The ancients seem most to agree that Thule was one of these Isles that are
called British. Strabo one of the most ancient and the best of Geographers
extant says, Pythias Massiliensis, circa Thulen Britannicarum insularum
septentrionalissimam ultima ait esse. Yet he himself makes it nearer than
Pythias did; Ego autem illum septentrionalem finem multo propius meridiem
versus existimo, qui enim hodie terras perlustrant ultra Hyberniam nihil
possunt refer, quae non long versus septentrionem ante Britannicam jacet
plane ferorum hominum domicilium and propter frigus male incolentium, ibi ergo
finem constituendum censeo.

Catullus, Carmine ad Furium seems to be of this mind in these Verses.

Sive trans altas
Gradietur Alps,
Caesaris visens
Monumenta magni,
Gallicum Rhenum
Horribilesque et
Ultimosque Britannos.
And Horace carm. lib. 1. Ode 35.

Serves iturum Caesarem
In ultimos orbis Britannos.
And Silius Italicus lib. 1 in these Verses,

Coerulus haud aliter cum demicat Incola Thules
Agmina falcifero circumvenit acta covino.
For it appears from Caesar's Commentaries that the bluish Color and the
fighting out of the hooked Chariots were in use with the inhabitants in
Britain. Pliny likewise seems to be of this opinion, for he treats of Thule in
the same Chapter where he treats of the British Isles, and Tacitus, vita
Agricolae says when the Roman Navy sailed about Britain, despecta est and
Thule.

Ireland properly so called was probably the first of the British Isles that
got the name Thule, as being the first the Carthaginians met with steering
their course from Cadiz to the West. And hence it is we find Statius, Sylva
tertia ad Claudiam uxorem calls Thule, Hesperia.

-- Et si gelidas irem mansurus ad Arctos,
Vel super Hesperiae vada caligantia Thules.
And seems to be the same said by Aristotle to have been discovered by the
Carthaginians, lib. de mirabil. auscultat. where he says, extra a columnas
Herculis aiunt in mari a Carthaginensibus insulam fertilem desertamque
inventam, ut quae tam sylvarum copia, quam fluminibus navigationi idoneis
abundet, cum reliquis fructibus flore at vehementer, distans a continente
plurimum Dierum itinere, etc. And Bochartus confirms this by what he observes
that the ancient writer Antonius Diogenes, who wrote twenty four Books of the
strange things related of Thale, not long after the time of Alexander the
great, had his History from the Cypress Tables dug at Tyrus out of the Tombs
of Mantima and Dercelis, who had gone from Tyrus to Thule, and had staid some
time there.

But though this be the first Thule discovered by the Carthaginians, yet it is
not that mentioned by the Roman writers, for they speak of the Thule in which
the Romans were and made conquest of; but it is certain they were never in
Ireland properly so called. That they were in Thule appears from these Verses
in Statius lib. 5. protreptico ad Crispinum.

Tu disce patrem quantusque nigrantem
Fluctibus occiduis fessoque Hiperione Thule
Intrarit, mandata gerens.
Now the Father of Crispinus to whom he writes was Bolanus, the same Vectius
Bolanus who was Governor of Britain under Vitellius (as Tacitus informs us)
which is yet more clearly proved by the following Verses, of the same Poet.

Quod si te magno tellus fraenata parente Accipiat.
Quanta Caledonios attollet gloria campos
Cum tibi longaevus referet trucis incola terrae,
Hic suetus dare Jura parens, hoc cespite turmas
Affari nitidas, speculas, castellaque long
Aspicis ille dedit, cinxitque haec maenia fessa
Belligeris; haec dona Deis, haec tela dicavit.
Cernis adhuc titulos: hunc ipse vacantibus armis
Induit hunc Regi rapuit thoraca Britanno.
The words Caledonio and Trucis Incola terrae do show that by Thule, is meant
the North part of Britain which was then possessed by the Pights designed by
the name Caledonios, and the Scots designed by Trucis incola terrae. The same
Epither Claudian gives to the Scots in these Verses,

Venit and extremis legio praetenta Britannis,
Quae Scoto dat fraena truci.
And of this North part of Britain, that Verse of Juvenal is likewise to be
understood.

De conducendo loquitur jam Rhetore Thule.
The best exposition of which is taken from Tacitus, vita Agricolae. Jam vero
principum filios, liberalibus artibus erudire and ingenia Britannorune, studijs
Gallorum anteferre, ut qui modo linguam Romanam abnuebant, eloquentiam
concupiscerent.

Claudian does yet more particularly give the name of Thule to the North part
of Britain, while he speaks Carm. de 3o Consul. Honorij, of the great exploits
done there by Theodosius, the Father of Theodosius the Emperor and Grandfather
of Arcadius and Honorius.

Facta tui numeravit avi quem Littus adustae.
Horrescit libyae; ratibusque imperva Thule,
Ille leves Mauros, nec falso nomine pictos
Edomuit, Scotumque vago mucrone secutus,
Fregit Hyperboreas remis audacibus undas
Et geminis fulgens utroque sub axe trophaeis
Tithyos alternae refluas calcavit arenas.
And in these lines

Ille Caledonios posuit qui castra pruinis,
Qui medio libyae sub casside pertulit aestus
Terribilis Mauro, debellatorque Britanut
Littoris, ac pariter Boreae vastator and austri.
Quid rigor aeternus coeli? quid sidera prosunt?
Ignotumque fraetum? Maduerunt Saxone fuso
Orcades, incaluit pictorum Sanguine Thule
Scotorum cumulos flevit glacialis Ierne.
Where by placing the Moors and Britains as the remotest People then known, and
condescending upon the Scots and Pights, as the Inhabitants of Thule and Ierne,
he demonstrateth clearly that Thule is the North part of the Isle of Britain
inhabited by the Scots and Pights, for this Ierne or as some read it Hyberne,
can no ways be understood of Ireland, properly so called, first because Ireland
can never deserve the Epithet Glacialis; since by the Testimony of the Irish
writers, the Snow and Ice don't continue any time there: Secondly the Romans
were never in Ireland, properly so called, while as it appears by the
forementioned Verses, that Theodosius past our Firths of Forth and Clide,
called by him Hyperboreae undae, and entered Strathern which to this day bears
the name Ierne, in which Roman Medals are found, and the Roman Camps and viae
militares yet are extant, the Vestiges of their being there beyond all dispute,
and therefore is so to be understood in the same Poets lines, upon Stilico
employed in the British Wars.

Me quoque vicinis pereuntem gentibus inquit
Munivit Stilico, totam cum Scotus Iernam
Movit, and infesto spumavit remige Thetis
Illius effectum curis, ne bella timerem
Scotica, nec Pictum tremerem.
Now Thetis in these Verses and the undae Hyperboreae in the Verses before
mentioned cannot be understood of the Sea between Scotland and Ireland; for
Ireland lies to the South of the Roman Province; and the Situation of the
Scots and Pights Country is to the North of it: for it was separate by the two
Firths of Forth and Clide from the Roman Province, which does clearly show it
was to be understood of them, which is also imported by the words Hyperboreas
undas and Remis, which cannot be understood of the Irish Sea which is to the
South of the Roman Province, and is very tempestuous and cannot so well be past
by Oars as the Firths of Forth and Clide; but the same Poet has put this
without all doubt in these Verses,

Venit and extremis legio praetenta Britannis
Quae Scoto dat fraena truci, ferroque notatas
Prelegit exanimes Picto moriente Figuras.
For were it to be understood of the Irish Sea, then the Wall and the
Praetenturae should have been placed upon the Scottish shore that was over
against Ireland, whereas they were placed over against that Country which is
called Strathern now, and is the true Ierne, not only mentioned by Claudian,
but likewise by Juvenal, in these Verses,

-- Arma quid ultra
Littora Juvernae promovimus and modo captas
Orcades, and minima contentos nocte Britannos.
Where he directs us to the Situation of the Country of the Scots and Pights,
Juverna being the Country of the Scots which had been overrun in part by
Julius Agricola Governor of Britain under Domitian the Emperor, who first
entered the Orcades and as Tacitus observes, Despecta est Thule, they saw the
North part of the Country beyond Ierne the Country of the Pights which lies to
the North of the Firth of Forth and upon the German Sea, and is designed in
these words, minima contentos nocte Britannos; all which particularly relate to
Ross and Cathnes. And the Inhabitants of this Juberna and Thule are the very
same the Panegyrist Eumenius speaks of in his Oration to Constantine the great;
where he says that the Nation of Britain in the time of Caesar, was rudis and
soli Britanni Pictis modo, and Hibernis assueta hostibus Seminudis: They had
not been in use of War, but with these half naked people of the British Soil,
the Pights and the Irish, who for their loose and short Garments may to this
day be called half naked.

They were called Hyberni as being at first a Colony from Ireland, and as
possessing that tract of the Isle of Britain which is called by the ancient
writers Ierne glacialis and Ierne simply and by the writers of the middle age
Hybernia as may be seen in the Roman Martyrology, Martyrol. Roman. Sexto december.
Sanctus Beanus Episcopus Abredoniae in Hybernia. Now never any Irish writer yet
could say that in Ireland properly so called there ever was a Town or Bishops
See called Aberdeen or a River called Don.

And that this part of Britain then possessed by the Scots, was called
Hybernia, is clear from the testimony of venerable Bede Ecclesiast. hist. lib.
4. cap. 26. who names it Hybernia in the beginning of the Chapter and in the
next page calls the same Country Scotia.

It Is certain that as the Wall betwixt Tyne and Solway Firth, called Murus
Picticus, was built to exclude the Pights, so was that betwixt Edinburgh and
Dumbarton Firth to exclude the Scots highlanders, and was designed first by
Agricola, as appears from Tacitus vita Agricolae where he says, nam Glotta and
Bodotria diversi maris aestu per immensum revecti, angusto terrarum spatio
dirimuntur, quod tum praesidiis firmabatur: atque omnis propior sinus
tenebatur; summotis velut in aliam insulam hostibus: That is, for Clide and
Forth two arms of two contrary Seas shooting mightily into the Land, were only
divided asunder by a narrow Partition of Ground, which passage was guarded and
fortified then with Garrisons and Castles, so that the Romans were absolute
Lords of all on this side having cast out the enemies as it were into another
Island; and indeed as Tacitus remarks, inventus in ipsa Britannia terminus; so
the Romans made this indeed the outmost limit of their province, and gave the
name Britain to that part of the Island within the Roman Wall which was built
on this narrow neck of Ground between the two Firths.

And hence it is that the venerable Bede calls those people that dwell beyond
the Wall, Transmarinae gentes, but explaineth himself thus lib. 1. cap. 12.
Transmarinas autem dicimus has gentes, non quod extra Britanniam sunt positae,
sed quia a part Britonum erant remotae, duobus sinubus maris interjacentibus,
quorum unus ab orientali maria alter ab occidentali, Britanniae terras long
lateque irrumpit: And a little before this he tells who these Transmarinae
gentes were, viz. Scotorum a Circio, that is, the Scots from the Northwest, and
Pictorum ab Aquilone, and the Picts from the North: Which Firths relate to that
part of the Isle without the Roman Province; but Ireland properly so called
cannot be said to lie to the North-West of the Roman Province.

Now we will endeavor to show that what Juvenal says in the Verse, -- Arma
quod ultra
Littora Juvernae promovimus, etc.
is to be meant of that part, which is now called Strathern and the rest of
Perthshire and the West Highlands, the Country of the Scots, designed by Bid,
a Circio, which are truly so situated in respect to the Roman Province; and
this we will make out from what we meet with in Tacitus, vita Agricola, for
first he says, Tertius expeditionum annus novas gentes aperuit, vastatis usque
ad Taum (aestuario nomen est) nationibus. The third years expedition discovered
people they were not before acquainted with, having overrun all those that
were on this side Tay, which he describes to be a Firth. It appears by this
they were other people than these he had to do with before, because they are
called novae gentes. In the next place he says the fourth Summer was spent in
taking possession of what they had overrun, and he observes in that expedition
the small Isthmus, or neck of Land that keeps Clyde and Forth from meeting, and
this was so secured by Garrisons, Summotis velut in aliam insulam hostibus,
that the enemy by these means were removed as it were into another Isle. Now if
we will compare what we observed out of Bid of the Gentes Transmarinae beyond
these two Firths, we will see clearly that these novae gentes were the Scots
and Pights; the Scots in the Country toward the North-West, and the Pights in
the Country North-East: but this is yet more confirmed by the account, that is
given by Tacitus of the Action in the sixth Summer of Agricola's Government;
Ampla civitate trans Bodotriam sita, being informed of a great people, that
dwelt beyond Forth; and civitate being in the singular makes it to be
understood of the people that lie nearest, that is the Scots, and quia motus
universarum ultra gentium and infesta hostili exercitu itinera timebantur,
because he apprehended that all the people beyond Forth would rise against him,
and for that he feared that in his passage he might be attaqued by the Enemies
Army, he tried their Havens with his Fleet, where by the by there is a pretty
description of the nature and quality of the Country in these words ac modo
Sylvarum and montium profunda, modo tempestatum ac fluctuum adversa, hinc terra
and hostis, hinc auctus oceanus militari Jactantia comparentur: Which very well
agrees to the Woody and Mountainous Country mixed with Valleys that lies to
the North of this Firth and to the roughness of these Firths when agitated with
winds, and a little below this he says ad manus and arma conversi Caledoniam
incolentes populi, where he gives an account of a bloody Battle they had with
the Romans where Agricola was put to it to make use of all his force and art.

What is meant by Caledonia, he has told us where he speaks of the figure of
Britain, that what the Ancients said of it, agreed to that part upon this side
of Caledonia; sed immensum and enorme spatium procurrentium extremo jam littore
terrarum, velut in cuneum tenuatur, by which he makes Caledonia to contain all
the rest of Britain, to the North of these Firths. And that they were
different people that were possessors of it, is clear by the words Caledoniam
incolentes populi. By the Caledonij simply the Romans understood the Pights,
that inhabited the country that lay upon the German Sea; but as he mentions
several people here, so he gives you afterward the Horesti, that is the
Highlanders, the name of old given to the ancient Scots, and kept by their
descendants even to this day. And after that he had given an account of the
great preparations, he relates the battle he fought with these people the last
summer of his Government, where he tells us that he marched up the Grampian
hills, where the Enemy were encamped on, and the way of their Fighting, and the
description he makes Galgacus their Commander in chief give of them, may
clearly see that they were different People, and no other than those that
Claudian and other Authors call Scots and Pights.

But because it is controverted by some late writers, whether they were Natives
of Britain, or Irishes who from Ireland properly so called then invaded
Britain, we shall bring some arguments Tacitus furnishes us with, to prove that
they were Natives of the British Soil; for in the account even in this last
expedition, he says, Nam Britanni nihil fracti pugnae prioris eventu, and
ultionem aut servitium expectantes, tandemque docti commune periculum concordia
propulsandum legationibus and foederibus omnium civitatum vires excitaverant
jamque supra trig inta millia armatorum aspiciebantur, and adhuc affluebat
omnis Juventus, and quibus cruda and viridis senectus, clari bello, ac sua
quisque decora gestantes. Where it is observable that although he called them
before novae gentes, yet here he calls them Britanni, which was the name the
Romani gave to all that inhabited this Island, but it was never given by any of
the Roman Authors to the inhabitants of Ireland, the words legationibus and
foederibus omnium civitatum vires exciverant shows how the Scots and Pights
were united and composed one Army, for the Britons spoken of here are the
inhabitants of Caledonia, and so it is that Tacitus says Galgacus designed them
in these words Ostendamus, quos sibi Caledonia viros seposuerit. We find
likewise in our Author, several marks of destinction, first they are Gentes,
now the Critics have observed that Gens is a more general name, and so
Universim Britanni Gens Britannorum appellantur; Natio is a particular people a
part comprehended under the general name Gens: so the Caledonij, the Silures,
and the rest mentioned by Ptolemee in his Map of Britain are nationes
Britannicae. Our Author also speaks of Civitates which are not Towns, but
Gentes, people, and the Clans that composed them, which lived under the command
of their chiefs: so Galgacus is described here, inter plures duces virtute and
genere praestans. And these same names we find in Ptolemee, are certainly the
Ancient names of the Clans; but Ptolemee has been deficient, in that he has not
set down the general names, the people designed themselves by, which in this
part of the Island was Albanich and Peaghts, that is Albanenses and Picti,
which two names prove them to be the ancient and first inhabitants of Britain,
whom Caesar designs in these words, Interior pars ab ijs incolitur qui se natos
in insula dicunt, which Galgacus owns here speaking to his Army, he calls them
Nobilissimi totius Britanniae, eoque in ipsis penetralibus siti. It is worth
the observing that that part of the Island which lay to the North of Humber,
was by the confession of the learned of the British Historians (as priceus
defen. hist. Britan. page 60. Ranulph. Higden. polychronic. lib. 1. Luddus
Fragment.) called Albania, and a part of the country still carries the name of
Broad Albine.

And to clear that, the same people he designed Caledoniam incolentes populi,
were the same called novae gentes, appears from this that follows, that when
because of the summers being much spent, spargi bellum nequibat, in sines
Horestorum exercitum deducit, and a little after, ipse peditem atque equites
lento itinere, quo novarum gentium animi ipsa transitus mora terrerentur, in
Hybernis locavit; where they are called by the same name novae gentes, for
Tacitus here relates, that because the Summer was spent, and that the War could
not be extended against the Pights and Scots both, he marched with his to the
borders of the Scots whom he calls Horesti, that is (...), Montani,
Highlanders, and indeed I have seen Roman Medals that were found in
Argileshire, and a great many have been found in several parts of Pearthshire,
besides a great many Roman camps are still to be seen there. And in the Sixth
year of Agricola's Government, some of these camps had been attacqued, by some
of those that dwelt in Caledonia, for he says, Castella adorti metum ut
provocantes addiderant, and a little after it is said of these same people,
Universi nonam legionem ut maxim invalidam nocte aggressi inter somnum ac
trepidationem, caesis vigilijs irrupere jamque in ipsis castris pugnabant. This
camp seems to be the very same which is yet extant near to Airdoch, and the
reason I take it to have been one of Agricola's camps is, for that our Author
has observed before, Adnotabant periti non alium ducem opportunitates locorum
sapientius legisse, nullum ab Agricola positum castellum aut vi hostium
expugnatum, aut pactione aut fuga desertum; for if we will consider this same
Camp, we will find it has all the advantages, Vigetius de re militari lib. 1.
cap. 22. says a Camp should have Castella munienda sunt loco tuto, ubi and
lignorum, and pabuli, and aquae suppetit copia; and si diutius commorandum sit,
loci salubritas eligenda est, cavendum autem ne mons sit vicinus altior, qui ab
adversarijs captus possit officere; considerandumque ne torrentibus inundari
consueverit campus. This is upon a heath in a slooping ground; it has the
water of Kneck running close by it, whose banks are so high, that it could not
overflow, and there is wood near to it, and more has been about it, there is no
Mountain nor considerable height so near, as that they could from thence annoy
it. The same Vegetius adds, haec castella saepe structa instar oppidorum and in
finibus imperij, and ubi perpetuae stationes and praetenturae contra hostem;
and the largeness of this Camp and its Situation upon the Fronteirs, makes this
to be a Praetentura.

The Praetorium, or the Generals quarter is a large square, about a hundred
paces every way, around it are five or six Aggeres or Dykes, and as many Valla
or Ditches, the deepness of a man's height, there are Ports to the four quarters
of the World, and to the East there are several larger Squares, with their
circumvallations continued for a good deal of way. To the West is the bank of
the water of Kneck, and five or six miles to the North-East of this by the
water of Earn near to Inch Pasery is a lesser camp, the Castrum exploratorum,
the camp for the advance guard, and a little to the Eastward of this, begins
the Roman via militaris, called by the common people The street-way, this in
some places is raised from the ground almost a man's height, and is so broad
that Coaches may pass by other with ease upon it, and this runs toward the
River of Tay, the length of which Agricola's devastations reached, as our
Author Tacitus tell us. Tertius expeditionum annus novas gentes aperuit,
vastatis usque ad Taum (aestuario nomen est) nationibus: And the Grampian hills
toward which he marched, when he fought the last Battle in the last year of
his Government, ad montem Grampium pervenit, quem jam hosts insiderant, are
but a few miles distant from these Camps.

There was a stone with this inscription DIS MANIBUS AMMONIUS DAMIONIS COH I
HISPANORUM STIPENDIORUM XXVII HEREDES F. C. lately taken up out of the
Praetorium of the Praetentura, below which are some Caves, out of which some
pieces of a Shield were taken up, and several Medals, have been taken up
thereabouts. I have seen one in Silver of Antoninus pius found there. The
people that live thereabouts, report there was a large Roman Medal of Gold
found there, and great quantity of Silver ones have been found near to the
water of Earn, amongst which I have seen some of Domitian, some of Trajan and
some of Marcus Aurelius. And whereas it is said, that this man for whom this
Sepulcral inscription was made, was cohortis primae Hispanorum, if we will look
to the notitia Imperij Romani we will find amongst the Troops placed Secundum
lineam valli, this cohors prima Hispanorum was one. And it would seem the Poet
Claudian had this very same praetentura in his view in these Verses,

Venit and extremis legio praetenta Britannis,
Quae Scoto dat fraena truci, etc.
And so without all question the Glacialis Ierne is means of this very Country,
which had now the name of Strathiern, where all these vestiges of the Roman
exploits are found; and these called Scoti by Claudian, are the very same
people Eumenius calls Hyberni soli Britanni the Irish of the British Soil:
and Tacitus calls Horesti, Highland men or Braemen, the name some of their
descendants yet bear, while on the other side all Authors both ancient and
modern agree, that the Romans were never in Ireland properly so called, and
there are no Roman Camps, viae militares, nor Roman Coins to be found there.

It remains now that we show where the Country of the Pights was, who in the
Verse last cited are joined with the Scots and were not far from this same
Praetentura, since the Poet immediately subjoyns to

-- Quae Scoto dat fraena truci
-- Ferroque notatas,
Perlegit exanimes picto moriente figuras.
That this Thule was a part of Britain the Roman writers seem to be very clear,
especially Silius Italicus lib. 17. in these Verses,

Cerulus haud aliter cum dimicat incola Thules
Agmina falcifero circumvenit acta covino.
For Silius here seems to have in his view what Caesar in his Commentaries
has delivered of the Britons fighting in Essedis, and Pomponius Mela lib. 3.
cap. 6. where he speaks of the Britons says Dimicant non equitatu modo, aut
pedite, verum and bigis and curribus Gallice armati covinos vocant, quorum
falcatis axibus utuntur. And our Author Tacitus tells us, that in the Battle
fought with our Countrymen at the Grampian hills, media covinarius and eques
strepitu ac discursu complebat; and a little below that, Covinarij peditum se
praelio miscuere, and quanquam recentem terrorem intulerant, densis tamen
hostium agminibus and inaequalibus locis haerebant. These Covinarij are called
by Caesar, Essedarij, so I believe no Body will doubt but that Silius the Poet
by Cerulus incola Thules meant the Britons. We also find an appellation of the
same nature given to one of the Tribes of the Scots, by Seneca in ludo, in
these Verses,

Ille Britannos
Ultra noti
Littora ponti
Et ceruleos
Scoto Brigantas
Dare Romuleis
Colla Catenis
Jussit.
For so it is read by Joseph Scaliger and by Salmasius, exercitat. Plini. in
Solinum page 189. upon these words, Gelones Agathirsi collimitantur cerulo
picti: and sane Pictos sive Agathirsos, haud aliter interpretare liceat, quam
aliquo color fucatos, sic picti Scotobrigrantes Senecae, and Picti, populi
Britanniae ab eadem ratione dicti. And it would seem by these Verses,

Et ceruleos
Scoto Brigantas
Dare Romuleis
Colla catenis
Jussit.
That Seneca who was Contemporary with Claudius, had in his View the Victory
which Ostorius under Claudius the Emperor Governor of Britain obtained over
Caratacus King of Scots, whose History may be seen elegantly done by Tacitus in
the 12th Book of his Annals where he shows us that Caratacus being brought
before Claudius in Chains, he made a brave discourse to him, and amongst other
things tells him, neque dedignatus esses, claris majoribus ortum, pluribus
gentibus imperantem foedere pacis accipere; and without doubt besides the
Silures mentioned there by Tacitus, these Scoto-brigantes were of the number of
these gentes he commanded. Claudius was so well pleased with his manly
behavior (says Tacitus) Caesar veniam ipsique and conjugi and fratribus
tribuit, atque illi vinculis exsoluti, etc.

But to make it appear, which part of Britain the Thule mentioned by the Romans
was, it will be fit to see to which part of Britain the Epithets attributed by
the Authors to Thule do agree best. First then it was a remote part, Ultima
Thule, as this is the remotest part of Britain, and as Tacitus brings in
Galgacus expressing it, nos terrarum ac libertatis extremos recessus; ipse ac
sinus famae in hunc diem defendit. Then Thule was toward the North, and so is
this Country in respect of the Roman Province: And then thirdly it might
deserve the name Thule, because of its obscure and dark aspect: it being then
all overgrown with Woods. Fourthly the length of the day is attribute to Thule,
and upon this Account it must be the Country to the North and to the East of
Ierne by these Verses of Juvenal,

-- Arma quid ultra
Littora promovimus Juvernae and modo captas
Orcades, and minima contentos nocte Britannos.
For it is of the North and East parts of Britain the Panegyrist says,
Panegiri Constantino Constantij filio Constantij dicti; O! fortunata and nunc
omnibus beatior terris Britannia. And a little below, Certe quod propter vitam
diliguntur longissimi dies, and nullae sine aliqua luce noctes, dum illa
littorum extrema planities non attollit umbras, noctisque metam coeli and
siderum transit aspectus, ut sol ipse qui nobi videtur occidere, ibi appareat
praeterire, this same is applied to the Northmost part of Britain by Tacitus,
where he says of it, Dierum spatia ultra nostri orbis mensuram, nox and clara
and extrema Britanniae part brevis ut sinem atque initium lucis exiguo
discrimine internoscas, quod si nubes non officiant, aspici per noctem solis
fulgorem nec occidere and exsurgere, sed transire affirmant. And Lesly in his
History observes that in Ross and Cathnes the nights for two Months are so
clear that one may read distinctly. The like we have before observed of Orkney.

Another property of Thule given by Tacitus is, that about it Mare pigrum and
grave remigantibus perhibent, which agrees indeed to the Sea upon the
North-East part of Scotland, but not for the reason Tacitus gives, for want of
Winds, but because of the contrary Tides, which drive several ways, and stop
not only Boats with Oars, but Ships under sail that if any where it may be
there said of the Sea,

Nunc spumis candentibus astra lacessit
Et nunc Tartareis subsidet in ima Barathris.
But Thule is most expressly described to be this very same Country we treat of
by Conradus Celtes, itinere Baltico,

-- Orcadibus qua cincta suis Tyle and glacialis Insula.
The same Epithet Claudian gives to Ierne where he calls it Glaciales Ierne,
and this Thule he makes to be encompassed suis Orcadibus, which Isles lie
overagainst it; and a little after he gives the like Epithet to mare pigrum:

Et jam sub septem spectant vaga rostra Triones
Qua Tyle est rigidis insula cincta vadis.
And afterward he makes the Orcades to lie over against this Thule, and seems
to have in his view the Rocks and Weels in Pightland Firth in these Lines,

Est locus Arctoo qua se Germania tractu,
Claudit, and in rigidis Tyli ubi surgit aquis,
Quam juxta infames scopuli and petrosa vorago
Asperat undisonis saxa pudenda vadis,
Orcades has memorant dictas a nomine Graeco.
By all which I think it appears sufficiently that the North-East part of
Scotland, which Severus the Emperor and Theodosius the Great infested with
their Armies, and in which as Boethius observes Roman Medals were found, is
undoubtedly the Thule mentioned by the Roman writers, and which if we will
believe the learned Angrimus Jonas, Specimen Island. Hist. was meant by
Ptolemee, where he says, ubi nec omittendum; quod parallelo xxi per Thulen
ducto ab ipso Ptolemaeo, latitudo respondeat 55 gr. and 36. So that our Country
in these ancient times past under the name of Hybernia and Thule, and the
Hyberni and Picti Incolae Thules, are the same people who were afterward
called Scots.

It seems indeed the name Scot at first was only proper to some tribes of those
people who called themselves Albanich, such as the Scoto. Brigantes mentioned
by Seneca, and the Scottodeni in Ptolemee, which by the corruption of the
copies is now read Ottodeni; but they it seems were never called Scots
generally, nor their country Scotia, till after Keneth the Second, King of
Scotland, who subdued the Pights and incorporated them into one nation with our
Ancestors. Yet Wernerus Ralwingius, fasciculo temp. says, edente Lino papa,
Scotica gens oritur ex Pictis and Hybernis in Albania, quae est pars Angliae;
which confirms very much what we have been proving all along, but makes the
name to have been used generally sooner than it appears to us from our
Historians.

I shall only add one remark more, and that is, that we need not have recourse,
for the rise of the name Scot, to the fabulous account of the Monks, who will
needs have it from one Scota, Pharaoh's daughter married to Gathalus; since
without that strain, if it be granted that the Country was once called Thule,
which in the Phoenician language signifies darkness; we have a very clear
reason for the name Scotia, which signifies the same in the Greek tongue, and
it is very well known that it was usual with the Greeks (who next to the
Phoenicians were the Famousest Navigators) not only to retain the Phoenician
name of the place, but likewise to give one in their own Language of the same
import: And since the learned Brochartus has very ingeniously deduced the Greek
name of the whole Island (...) from Barat anac and Bratanack in the Phoenician
tongue, which signifies a Land of Tinn, which the Greeks not only inflected to
their own termination, but likewise called the British Isles (...) that is
Lands of Tinn, which is the signification of the Phoenician and Greek names; we
make take the same liberty to derive the Greek name Scotia from the Phoenician
Thule.

FINIS.

