A Letter from Major General Sir Hardress Waller, and the Council of Officers
at Dublin to Lieutenant General LUDLOVV.
Sir,
WE have recieved a Letter from Lt. Col. Puckle Governor of Ross, and in it one
from you to him, dated at Duncannon; wherein you require him to preserve ^^^
Garrison for the Parliament: He had done that before he had any Orders from you
to do it. We wish you had rather sent Orders of that nature to your Sub^^^tute
Col. Jones, when he so long and so openly acted against the Parliaments
Authority; than to Lt. Col. Puckle, who, you could not but know, had ^^^gether
with us declared for it. When you were in this Bay, you recieved an Assurance
under all our hands, That we had declared (as in duty bound) for ^^^
Parliament, whose commands both concerning you and our selves, we would
cheerfully and punctually obey; But you write to Lt. Col. Puckle, That we had
set up for o^^^selves; We will not say, that you have set up for your self,
though your staying, if not acting, amongst those who had set up for themselves
at London; your never declaring ^^ the Parliament, when most of the Army here
had declared against them; your poasting from the Parliament, when you your
self write they were to fit within a day or two; a^^ your now casting your self
into that only place, in this Nation, which has not, together with us,
declared for the Parliament: might, we say, give us a juster rise to belie^^
you had set up for your self, than our Actings or Letters have given you cause
so untruly to report of us. If you have assumed that belief concerning us,
because of our not a^^mitting you here, we hope whatever you your self are
pleased to believe, all unbyassed persons will, with us, judge, it was not
consistent with our duty to admit to the command of the Parliaments Army here,
(till their pleasure was signified) a person that had ever since their
interruption resided among, and (we more than doubt) acted with their Enemies;
that would not stay two or three days for their sitting, to bring their
commands with him; and who stands now accused before them with several Articles
of Hig^ Treason.

Truly Sir, your Actings have made our suspicions but too strong. You went
declaredly from hence with an Address from this Army to the Parliament; and to
settle according to their commands, the Forces in this Nation: But though you
met at Conway the news of their being by force kept from sitting, whereby the
end you proposed by yo^^ journey, was cut off even in the beginning of it; yet
you went on to those who had offered that sinful violence. It Is true you say,
That by a Letter you recieved from the factious Party, which had been guilty
thereof, they intimated unto you, that a stop for the present was only put
upon their sitting, and consequently, a door of hope was opene^ to you to bring
them to their duty: but let all rational men judge, Whether it had not been a
much more probable way conducing to that end, for you to have returned to the
Army, and accompanied your persuasions with a Declaration, That if those were
not listened unto, the Forces of this Nation should be employed by you to bring
them to the obedience, which fair means could not effect. We doubt you had too
good an opinion of such men, or of the force of your own reasons, to believe
that those who would n^^ listen to the Authority and Commands of a Parliament,
would be brought to their duties by the prevalencie of your particular arguings
or desires. Had worthy General M^^ been possessed with the like thoughts, and
employed only his Arguments and Entreaties to reduce them, putting his person
also at the same time in their power, it is to be fear'^ we had recieved our
Laws from Wallingford-house, and not from the Parliament, who only can make
and repeal them. But allow you could be so much mistaken in them a^^ in your
self, why did you not forthwith return to your duty here, when you found
experimentally the unsuccessfulness of your endeavors there; it being then too
manifes^ That the Council of Officers at Wallingford-house, were so far from
restoring the Parliament, that they voted the calling a New one, with a Senate,
and one and twenty Co^^servators with power in several particulars above both
Senate and Parliament: And when also Col. Jones (who you entrusted with the
Army here) did openly send out Orde^ for the election of two out of each
Regiment to compose that Meeting at London, which was to introduce this new
Government, and vigorously contributed, what in him la^ to promote
Subscriptions to an Agreement, as opposite and destructive to the restoration
of the Parliament, as even those forementioned Elections were designed to be:
f^^ which Elections we hope you have not forgot, how by particular Letters to
several Officers here (ready to be produced) you did appear but too Active and
Encouraging. B^^ least you might not remember the Contents of Letters to
private persons and of an antienter date, we shall mind you of one written to a
public Person, viz. Col. John Jon^^ and of a fresher date, viz. the 17. of
December last, wherein you use these very words: We seem to be necessitated to
look toward the Long Parliament; it is to be feared they will ^^ very high, in
case they should be brought in without Conditions. Let all that hear this, judge
how fit that person is to command an Army of the Parliaments, that includes
himse^^ amongst those who not out of willingness, but necessity, seem to be
looking toward the restoration of the Parliament; and who expresses a fear
they would be very high, ^^ not bound up by Conditions before their admittance.
Your duty had been the contrary to what your fears are; and we would gladly
know, who you judged fit to put Conditions upon the Parliament. But since you
fear the Actings of the Parliament, unless brought in by Conditions; you teach
us thereby to keep you from the Head of one of the Parliaments Armies, least
you should make use of their Forces, to secure you, and those like minded with
you, from your fears: For our parts, we desired no earthly thing more than
their restoration, and bless God, both our duties and innocence makes us not
fear, but desire they should fit as a Parliament, that is, without any previous
Conditions pu^ upon them. You that could fear the Parliament would be very
high, in case they should be admitted without Conditions, and have associated
your self of late with those, the moderatest of which were guilty of that
Apprehension, may be suspected to have been pleased with, if not consenting to
the Interruption of that Authority, whose high acting^ are confessedly feared
by you.

We shall not much dwell upon the Title that you give Col. Jones, of Dear
Friend, in the said Letter; though in it we cannot but observe, That it is not
probable you would call him by that name, if you thought he had falsified the
trust you had reposed in him; and yet that he has publicly acted against the
Authority of Parliament, and their Laws could not be unknown unto you, were it
only in reference to that particular Subscription promoted, of owning the Lord
Fleetwood Commander in chief of the Armies of this Commonwealth, contrary to an
express Act in that behalf, whereby from your Substitute, he became my Lord
Fleetwoods; and you from Lieutenant General under the Parliament, to become Lt.
General under their Enemies. If you approved of this Action, why should we
recieve you? if you disapproved it, why do you give the chief promoter of it
the Title of your Dear Friend? In the same Letter also you have these words,
viz. I hope ere this the Commissions for the setting of Civil justice on the
wheels in Ireland, i^ come unto your hands; which Commissions being sent by the
power of those who had violated the Parliaments Authority, we might expect
would rather have had your discountenance, than your hope that they would come
safely unto his hands. And though we love to have the wheels of Civil Justice
moving: yet we as much desire to have those wheels recieve their motion from
that Authority only which legally can give it to them: and we heartily wish
you had the like Principle.

That you could have come from London hither, when your mentioned hopes failed
you, and when your Substitute Col. Jones had so egregiously acted against the
Parliament and with their Enemies, is evident, by your being now able to come
into Ireland; and therefore your declining thereof so long, proves the fault
lay more in your want of Inclination, than in your want of Power; and if you
had appeared active at London for the restoration of the Parliament, or
earnest against those here which had neglected their duty therein: it is not
over probable you would have been permitted to have come for Ireland, which (as
your own Letter imports) was well known at London before your departure thence,
to have declared for the Parliament; unless those that permitted you to come
for this Country, had believed your actings here (if reciev'd) would prove
more advantageous to them than to the Parliaments service. You went to London
to represent things to the Parliament, and slayd there all the while that by
force they were kept from sitting; and as soon as ever (through Providence)
they were restored to sit, you hasten away hither, without any application to
them. This being the matter of Fact, we leave it to all sober men to make the
inference; We cannot indeed but admire, that having assured you under all our
hands, whatever the Parliaments commands were concerning you, when your case
was heard by them, they should be cheerfully and readily obeyed; That you would
rather elect to put things into extremes, as much as in you lay, than patiently
waiting a little time, to have them recieve a legal and quiet issue. If your
Actings have not incapacitated you to sit in the Parliament, doubtless it had
been more proportionate to you, to have gone to London, and there have acted
what you went over for, than to put your self up into Duncannon, the only
place that has not (together with in) declared for the Authority of the
Parliament. Some possibly from thence may infer, That you think it a more
hopeful and more expeditious way to attain the command of this Army, from so
small a beginning thereunto as Duncannon, than to acquire that end by any hopes
you have of reviving the Parliaments Commission for it: We have upon all these
Considerations thought it our duty to the Parliament, to send Forces for the
blocking up Duncannon; of all which we thought fit to send you notice, and
remain

Dated at Dublin, Jan. 10: 1659. Your humble Servants, Har. Waller. Eliah
Green. John Warren. Barry Foulk. Broghill. Hen. Owen. John Maunsel Io. Franck.
Cha. Coote. Ben. Lucas. I, Ieonar. Ri. Stephens. W. Caulfield. Rich. Lehunt.
Rod. Mansell. Ioh. Reding. Theo. Jones. Sol. Cambie. Io. Harrison. Simon
Garstin. I. King. Sampson Towgood. Percival Heart. R. Shield.


