Dr. WALLIS OF INFANT BAPTISM.

A DEFENSE OF Infant Baptism.

In ANSWER to a LETTER (here Recited) from an Anti-Paedo-Baptist.

BY JOHN WALLIS, D. D. And Professor of Geometry in the University of OXFORD.

OXFORD: Printed by Leon. Lichfield, for Henry Clements, 1697.

Advertisement.
THis Letter in Defense of Infant Baptism (though written some while since,)
falling lately into my hands; and being Recommended by some knowing Persons; I
thought fit to Publish it. (with the Author's good leave) for the Benefit of
others; omitting the Name of him, who proposed the Question; because I do not
know, whether or no he be willing to have it made public.

A LETTER FROM AN Anti-Paedo-Baptist, TO DOCTOR WALLIS.
Reverend SIR,
I Have read the First Part of your Discourse concerning the Christian Sabbath,
and liked it so well, that I was very eager to get the Second: In reading
whereof, I could not but admire at the large Measure of Understanding, which
the Lord, out of his Goodness, has been pleased to bestow upon you, above many
other Pious and Learned Men, that have formerly Treated of the Sabbath, and
disputed against the Jewish Sabbath, with so much Weakness, that the
Sabbatarians have been greatly thereby encouraged in their Error. And coming
in page 91. to these words of yours, You would have had -- so much modesty, as
to think, the mistake may possibly be on your side, rather than on the whole
Body of Christians (some very few excepted) who religiously observed the Lord's
Day; I did reflect on my self, who am persuaded, that Believers Infants are not
to be Baptized in their Infancy, contrary to the Opinion of so many Learned
Paedo-Baptists in Christendom, yea the Generality of Christians; and it made me
to think, the Mistake might possibly be on my side, rather than on the Body of
Christians (some few excepted) who Conscientiously maintain Infant Baptism. And
supposing you, Worthy SIR, by your Communion, to maintain Paedo-Baptism, I took
courage and boldness, to write unto your self, for to know your Grounds from
Scripture, on which you satisfy your Conscience in that Point.

The main Reason, which satisfies me against Paedo-Baptism, is, because I can
find no where in Scripture, either in express Terms, or by any natural or
necessary Consequence, that it is the Will of God, that Believers Infants are
to be Baptized in their Infancy: I cannot find any Precept to Baptize them, nor
so much that ever John the Baptist, or Christ, or his Disciples (that appears)
did Baptize any of them.

I know indeed, what Dr. Hammond, Dr. Light-foot, and the Athenian Society
presume (as to an Institution) from a Custom among the Jews, of their Baptizing
the Infants of Proselytes, as if Christ out of Condescension to the Jews, to
win them, did include Infants in his Precept of Baptizing all Nations, Children
being a part of them. But I cannot find in Holy Writ any such Custom recorded,
or that it had a Divine Institution. And if those Writings from whence they
would prove, that there was such a Custom in our Savior's time amongst them,
were of undoubted Authority, yet I cannot see any reason to conclude, that
Christ would institute Infant Baptism to gratify Infidel Jews, who were but the
least part of all Nations, (if intended there by Nations.) As John's Baptism
was from Heaven, and was so singular a thing, that the Jews, Ioh. 1. 25.
wondering at it, asked him, Why baptizest thou then, if etc. So the Baptism
Christ instituted, was not from any Jewish Tradition, or Rudiment of the Jewish
World, but from Heaven, and differing from any Jewish Baptism. That John
Baptist, and our Lord first made Disciples, and then Baptized those Disciples,
I think is plain from Ioh. 4. 1. But I cannot find, that they also Baptized the
Children of those Disciples, as if they had been the Children of New
Proselytes. As our Lord did thus among the Jews, by his Apostles, so he did by
them among the Nations; and I can no where in Scripture find, that Believing
Gentiles were counted and called Proselytes, because Christians, and that their
Children were Baptized for that reason. The Doctor doubtless can certify me,
whether or no it was a Custom among the Jews and other Nations, for great
Masters to initiate their Disciples by Baptism; and if so, there would be more
probability, that Christ instituted Baptism from that Custom, if from any, and
that as they did not Baptize the Children of those Disciples too, until
themselves became Disciples, so the Children of the Disciples of Christ, the
great Prophet of God, and our Master, are not to be Baptized, until themselves
also become Disciples. Go ye, and teach all Nations, is explained, Mar. 16. 15.
Go ye into all the World, and preach the Gospel to every Creature; and thus it
is by several of the Fathers understood. And by Baptizing them, viz. all
Nations, there is no necessity to understand it of Baptizing all Persons
absolutely, for we have the words [all Nations] in other Texts of Scripture,
where they do not mean all Persons absolutely, but of a capable Condition, as
Adorate eum omnes gentes, and Psallitate Deo omnes Nationes, etc. And if
Baptism was the way of Discipling Persons, as some would have it, then the
Apostles needed not have first required of them Repentance and Faith, as
previous Dispositions and Qualifications for Baptism, but rather have Exhorted
them to be Baptized, in order to their being taught Faith and Repentance, with
other things commanded by Christ to his Apostles. But as it plainly appears
from other Scriptures, that our Savior here excludes from being Baptized,
those Persons of all Nations, that are not yet qualified for it, i. e. Not yet
become Disciples, or Repenting Believers, though capable of Faith and Repentance;
so it does not appear to me, that Infants Disciples are here included, though
neither qualified nor capable, as Disciples should be.

Thus when, Col. 2. the Apostle tells Gentile Believers, that they were
complete in Christ, seeing they were Circumcised in him by his Circumcision,
and Buried and Risen with him in Baptism, etc. Some will from hence assert,
that Circumcision came in the room of Baptism, Perhaps he meant to say, Baptism
came in the room of Circumcision.
and consequently that Infants are to be Baptized, as before they were to be
Circumcised, which I can no ways see: Nor was ever any such thing pleaded by
the Apostles, against the Christian Jews, that were Zealous for Circumcision.
John, and Christ by his Apostle, administered Baptism among the Jews, while
Circumcision was still a Duty to the Jews and their Children. I grant, that it
may be proved from hence, that Circumcision was a Figure of the Circumcision
made without Hands, in the putting off the Body of the Sins of the Flesh, but
not that Circumcision figured Baptism: Which if it could be proved from hence,
yet there does not necessarily follow a necessity of observing this
Circumstance of Age, any more than many other Circumstances of the Type, as
that of the eighth day, of the male sex only, etc. But the Analogy will hold
thus more properly: As Infants in the latter were Circumcised, so spiritual
Infants or Babes in Christ, that are become like one of these little Ones,
shall be Baptized. Therefore that Argument from the Circumstance of Age, being
but a mere Conjecture, proves nothing.

The Argument which is taken from the Action of Christ's blessing Infants, does
not prove to me, that it is the Will of God, that Infants are to be Baptized,
but rather the contrary, in as much as we cannot learn, but that Christ
dismissed them without Baptism.

As for that saying of Christ, Except a man be born again, etc. it does no more
infer a necessity of Infant's Baptism, than that other of his, Except ye eat
the flesh of the Son of Man, etc. does infer a necessity of their partaking at
the Lord's Table. The Gospel speaks to Persons of Years and Discretion, and it
is they whom it ties to Baptism for their Salvation, and the Baptism which
saves them, is the answer of a good Conscience toward God in their Obedience
to the Gospel-requirings, which Infants are incapable to discharge. And for the
Salvation of Infants, God is able still to bestow saving Mercies upon Infants
now immediately, as he did before the Institution, either of Circumcision or
Baptism. Even as it is in the case of Faith, He that believes not, shall be
damned: Now, because Children are no more able to give assent to the Gospel,
than to dissent therefrom, shall we from thence infer their Damnation? And if
the want of Faith does not Damn them till they are capable of Faith, then much
more the want of Baptism will not Damn them, till then, and may therefore be
rationally deferred till then.

As to the Promise of the Holy Ghost to the Jews and their Children, I cannot
understand it, but Conditionally, viz. To them, if they should Repent and be
Baptized, (according to Peter's Exhortation to them,) and also to their Sons
and Daughters, of the same Capacity to receive the Holy Spirit's Effects on
their Natural Faculties, upon their Repentance and Obedience of Faith: For, as
the word [ Children] in Scripture, does not always mean Infants, else it would
follow, that there were no Adult Persons in all Israel; so I see no necessity
to take it here of Infants.

As for the Holiness of the Children of a Believer, spoken of 1 Cor. 7. 14.
(whatever that Holiness be) it does no more necessarily prove, that Infants of
Believers are for that reason to be Baptized, than the Holiness of the
Unbelieving Parent there spoken of, will prove, that such an Infidel is for
that reason to be Baptized. For, that Holiness of the Children, is derived to
them from their Believing Parent, as it is to the Unbelieving Parent, and not
from the Gift of the Holy Ghost.

And whereas for an Apostolical Precedent, there is one pretended from
Baptizing of Stephanas's Household, it is but a bare Conjecture, first, that
there were little Babes in the Family, and secondly, that they were Baptized.
It is said of the Ruler at Capernaum, that He believed, and all his House, but
it does not thence follow, that there were Infants in his House, and that they
believed as well as he. One seems just as probable as the other.

Now, Good SIR, seeing I can find no Certainty or Domonstration, and I may say,
no Probability, in these Arguments, that are usually brought from Scripture for
Infant Baptism; if you can produce any Arguments that carry more Weight and
Demonstration in them, for that which you believe to be the Truth, and against
that which you believe to be an Error, and I (at present) a Truth, I do
earnestly and humbly entreat you, for my Soul's sake, and as you are in
Christian Duty and Conscience bound to God, to be so Good as to impart them to
me, for to save my Soul from such an Error. And as your so doing may make
much, not only for my Spiritual, but also for my Temporal Benefit, so you will
thereby greatly Oblige,

Reverend SIR, London, Feb. 25. 1696. Your very Humble, And Affectionate
Servant, C. C..........
Pray Sir, will you be pleased to favor me with some Lines, and to direct your
Letter for me, to be left with Mr. -- at the -- in St. Paul's Churchyard, and
there I will call for it, Three Weeks hence, and pay for it. Vale.

To the Reverend John Wallis, D. D. and Professor of Geometry in the University
of Oxford.


AN ANSWER To the Foregoing LETTER.
SIR, Oxford, Feb. 28. 1695/6
I Received last Night, from I know not whom, a Letter (concerning
Infant Baptism) Dated Feb. 25. and Signed C. C.......... Whether this be a true
Name, or but a feigned one, I am not certain. But guess it to be the latter;
because I do not remember that I have ever heard of any Man of that Name.

And, as I do not know from whom; so, neither do I know, how qualified: Whether
with a modest Desire to be informed; or a captious Humor, to quarrel or cavil
at a received Truth, as being prepossessed with a Prejudice to the contrary.

If the latter; I might answer as the Apostle does in a like Case; If any man
list to be Contentious, we have no such custom, nor the Churches of God. And
the Scripture seems to me to be written in such a style, not as to gratify the
nicely Captious, but to give a reasonable Satisfaction to such as are modestly
willing to be taught. If any man will do his Will, he shall know of the
Doctrine, whether it be of God. And, The meek he will teach his way. And I do
not find that Christ thought fit to comply with those who would be curiously
inquisitive for a Sign from Heaven (when and in what manner they pleased) to
confirm his Doctrine: Or, with the Rich Glutton, who would have one sent from
the Dead to warn his Brethren: But would take his own time, and his own way, to
satisfy those who were willing to be taught. And, in Matters of Fact, we must
content our selves with a Moral Certainty, though we have not always a
Mathematical Demonstration. And if, then, any doubt remain, as to Matter of
Fact, we must content our selves with such reasonable Satisfaction, as God
thinks fit to give us, what is most likely to be true.

But I am willing to understand the Writer in the other Sense; as content
(without cavilling) with a reasonable Satisfaction.

And then, as to this Question, concerning Matter of Fact; Whether Christ and
his Apostles, or the Church in their time, did Baptize Infants: It Is clear, on
the one hand, that we cannot be certain that they did not, (there being no
intimation to that purpose;) and it is much more reasonable to think they did;
and to practice accordingly.

I shall parallel this with another Question of like Nature. Whether Women did
then, and ought now, to partake of the other Sacrament.

If it be objected; that Christ at first did celebrate it with Men only, (the
Twelve Apostles;) and the Apostle directs, Let a Man (not Woman or Child)
examine himself, (not her self) and so let him (not her) eat of that Bread, and
drink of that Cup. Nor do we any where, in Scripture, find any express mention
of Women receiving it.

Yet I am satisfied, notwithstanding this Objection, (and so, I hope, are you)
that they did then, and ought now to receive it. Because there is no intimation
of the contrary; and there seems to be the same reason for the Women, as for
the Men, and the like benefit to each; And Women were Baptized (though not
formerly Circumcised;) and did (as we have reason to presume, though I do not
remember that it is expressly said so) eat of the Passover (notwithstanding it
be expressly said Exodus 12. 48. No Uncircumcised Person shall eat thereof;) The
words House and Household being reasonably supposed to include Women and
Children also; and that the whole Family is to be reputed as a Circumcised
Family, wherein all the Males are Circumcised. And, the Practice of the Church,
(which is a great Presumption) has been always consonant, to admit Women, as
well as Men, to the Lord's Table.

And, in many other cases, particular Circumstances may be presumed to be
supplied (from the Reasonableness of the thing, and parallel Cases,) though not
distinctly expressed in the History of the Fact; as may be amply showed, if
that were necessary.

Now (to apply this to the present Case) we are first to consider, what Baptism
is. It is a solemn Rite, appointed by Christ, for the solemn Admission or
Incorporation, of the Person Baptized, into the Christian Church; (as
Circumcision was, into that of the Jews;) and, a Consecration or Dedication of
the Person Baptized, to the Service or Worship of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost. And consequently, those who have right to be so admitted, and so
dedicated, have right to the solemn Rite of such Admission, and Dedication.

Next we are to consider, that the Children of Christians now, have as well a
right to be reputed Members of the Christian Church, as the Children of Jews,
of the Jewish Church; and consequently to be solemnly received into it: that
is, into God's visible Church, both of them; and both a like Obligation to be
offered or dedicated to the Service of the True God.

And it is not reasonably to be supposed, that God would so often, and so
emphatically make Promises to the Righteous, and their seed, if there was not
somewhat of peculiar Preference intended them, beyond those of the Wicked, or
those that are out of God's Visible Church.

For if no more be intended, than such a Conditional Promise, If they repent
and believe; this is equally true of the Children of the most Profligate; and
of Heathens, as of Jews or Christians. How great that is, I will not now
dispute; but what Preference did then belong to the Jews, I think is now common
to Christians.

Otherwise, Christ's Coming would render the Condition of Children, worse than
before. And particularly, those very Children, who in the Jewish Church were
Members of the visible Church of God, must have ceased to be so, when the
Christian Church took place.

Contrary to what Christ seems to intimate, in that of, Suffer little Children
to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven.
Which intimates a Capacity in Children of an Interest in Heaven hereafter, and
in the visible Church here; (especially if by Kingdom of Heaven, be here meant,
the Gospel Church.)

As likewise to that of, Else were your Children unclean, but now are they
holy. Which implies a certain Holiness, as to the Children of One, though not
of both, Believing Parents; which they would not have, if neither of the
Parents were Believers. Which seems to me so clear an Evidence, of some
relative Holiness, or Interest in the visible Church, or Dedication to the
Service of God; as is not easy to be avoided.

And that slight Evasion, as if it were meant as to Bastardy, is so weak, as
(with me) bears no weight at all. For, though both Parents were Heathen, the
Child would not be a Bastard.

And it is to be considered, that, in all Religions, the Children are reputed
as of the same Religion with the Parents (while under their Care) till they do
by some act of their own manifest the contrary. The Child of a Jew is reputed a
Jew; of a Christian, a Christian; of a Heathen, a Heathen; of a Papist, a
Papist; and so of others.

Now what belongs to a Church, as a Church, does equally belong to the Jewish
and Christian Church, and needs no new Institution: And consequently, that of
having their Children in the visible Church Communion with themselves; and the
Blessing appertaining to that visible Communion; as that of, I will be a God of
thee, and of thy Seed: And this Blessing of Abraham, is come upon the Gentiles
also.

And though it is true, that this does not presently entitle them to Heaven
(unless their Life be answerable, as neither did that of being the Seed of
Abraham,) yet it is to be reputed a real Advantage, as putting them into a
fairer Prospect of Heaven, and in a greater Probability of obtaining saving
Grace, than if out of the Church.

And this Advantage of the Jew above the Gentiles which they then had; the
Apostle tells us, is much every way: (Yet not so, but that a Believer, though
not a Jew, might be saved by Faith; and an Unbeliever, though a Jew, would be
damned without it.) And what Advantage was then to the Jews, (as God's visible
Church,) is now common to the Gentiles also.

So that the Right of Believers Children, to be within the Church, is not a new
Institution, (as if we should now look for a distinct Institution of
Infant Baptism, beside that of Baptism;) but as old as Adam, for ought I know;
But the solemn Rite of Admission into this Church, (to which the Child has a
Right to be admitted) is a new Institution; then by Circumcision, appointed to
Abraham; and now, by Baptism, upon a new Institution, appointed by Christ.

By being Believers Children, they have Ius ad rem; and by being Baptized, they
have Ius in re; whatever be the Privilege of being within the Pale and Promise
of the visible Church. And so long as, by our fault, we debar them from
Baptism; we do, so much as in us lies, debar them of that Advantage, whatever
it be.

Nor is it only a Privilege of the Children (to be thus early admitted into
the visible Church, with the Benefits thereto appertaining, and thus dedicated
to the Service and Worship of God;) but a Duty of Parents, and other Superiors,
thus to dedicate them, and (so far as in them lies) give them up to God. And
we need not doubt, but that the Parent has a natural Right over the Child of
so doing.

And we do not know how soon the Effect of such Dedication (upon God's
acceptance) may operate. Samson, before he was born, was devoted by Manoah, to
be a Nazarite. And Samuel was, by his Mother, vowed before he was born, and
after presented while an Infant, to the special Service of God: Jeremy is said
to be sanctified from his mothers womb; and Paul likewise; and John the
Baptist, while yet unborn; and Timothy, from a Child.

And we have no reason to doubt, but many Children very early, and even before
their Birth, may have the habits of Grace infused into them, by which they are
saved, though dying before the Years of Discretion. My meaning is, That God
may, by his Grace, so pre-dispose the Soul, to an aptness for Good; as (by our
natural Corruption) we are supposed to be Habitually inclined to Evil, though
not yet in a Capacity to act either.

For as the habits of Corruption, which we call Original Sin, by Propagation;
so may the habits of Grace, by Infusion, be inherent in the Soul, long before
(for want of the use of Reason) we are in Capacity to act either; as is also
the rational Faculty, before we are in a Capacity to act Reason.

And we may have Encouragement to expect, or hope for, such Work from God on
the Heart of a Child, from our early devoting him to God's Service. And the
proper way, by Christ appointed, for thus devoting, or offering up persons to
God, is Baptism, into the Name, and to the Service of the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost.

I am loath to charge it, as a just Judgment of God, for such neglect; when we
see the unbaptized Children, of Faulty Parents, prove lewd and debauched
Persons; though we have reason to fear, it may be an Effect of not devoting
them to God by Baptism, and a neglect of suitable Education. For as we find
Corruption does, so (through God's Blessing) Grace may begin to act very early;
And if we may do it, certainly we ought to do it.

And as Persons, when they be come to Age, ought themselves, to give up
themselves, and (as it were) enter into a sacred Covenant with God; (and renew
it, from time to time;) so may the Parents (and ought to do it, so far as in
them lies) give up their Children to God, and engage them in such a Covenant
with him.

We know, amongst our selves, a Child by his Guardians, or his Parents, may be
put into the Possession of an Estate, and engaged to the Homage and Fealty
thereunto appertaining, before himself do understand what is done.

And in such a Covenant we find the Israelites to enter (Deuteronomy. 29. 10. etc.) in
the Name of themselves, their Wives, and their little ones, and even of those
then present, and those not present at that Day. And of a like Tenor we
suppose to be those mentioned of Joshua, Asa, Iehojada, Josiah, That God should
be a God to them, and they a People to him. Which is the same, for Substance,
which a Person of Age makes for himself, and the Parent for the Child in
Baptism.

And if Children be thus capable, or their Parents for them, of entering thus
into Covenant with God; why not of receiving the Seal of such Covenant? And why
not that of Baptism now, as well as of Circumcision before? For the Child is
passive in both.

And, if Capable, you admit it to be a Duty. For your Exception is, that it is
to be understood of Persons in a capable Condition. Now, that Infants are
capable of being admitted Members of God's Visible Church; and capable of being
dedicated to God's Service, I think is no Question; which are the Business of
Baptism.

I know it is objected, that it is said Matthew. 28. 19. Go teach all Nations,
Baptizing them etc. and therefore they are first to be Taught (which Child^en
cannot be) before they are Baptized. And others (who put a greater force upon
the word (...)) chose rather to render it, Go make Disciples all Nations,
baptizing them etc. and therefore (say they) they are to be made Disciples (by
Faith and Repentance) before they are Baptized.

Now I can well enough admit, that (...) may there be rendered by make
Disciples (and perhaps better than Teach;) But their Inference from thence, is
a great Mistake.

For, Go make Disciples by Faith and Repentance; will not be good Sense. For
Faith and Repentance are to be Works of the Persons Baptized, not of the
Baptizer.

And it is preposterous to think Faith and Repentance intended in the word
Matheteusate. For Christ is here speaking to his Apostles; instructing them,
what They are to do in Planting a Christian Church. (Not what each respective
Christian is to do in a Church thus planted: For that is to come-in after,
amongst the things that are to be taught.)

And the words lie plainly thus; Go, Disciple all Nations, (that is, Gather
Disciples of all Nations, or indifferently of any Nation, Jews or Gentiles, all
the World over,) Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost; Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have
commanded you.

Or thus, (those who are here called Disciples, being after called Christians;
The Disciples were called Christians first in Antioch, Act. 11. 26.) Make
Christians of all Nations, Baptizing them -- and Teaching them --. And, (if we
would lay stress upon the order of the Words, Baptizing is to go before
Teaching.)

The word (...) (make Disciples) is here a Verb Imperative, or Preceptive; and
(...) (Baptizing and Teaching) are Participles, Exegetical or Declarative, how
that Precept is to be discharged.

And it is in a like Form as this, (if the Founder of a Free School should thus
give Instructions to him that he makes Schoolmaster,) Make Latinists of any
Parish in London, taking them into the School, and there teaching them the
Latin Tongue. Or, in the Language of the University (to the Governors there)
Make Scholars, or Learned Men, of any County in England, admitting them into
the University, or a College, and teaching them what is to be there learned.
Or, in the Language of the City (to the Governors, suppose, of the Merchants
Company) Make Merchants of any Country; taking Apprentices; and teaching them
the Trade. (For (...), a Disciple, signifies the same as a Scholar, a Learner,
an Apprentice.)

Would any Man now think, that the Boy must first be a Latinist, before he may
be taken into the School? Or, the Academick must be a Philosopher, or Learned
Man, before he may be admitted in the University? Or, the Citizen a skilful
Merchant, before he may be bound Apprentice? No; but the quite contrary. So
here, he is to be entered a Scholar in Christ's School, in order to be farther
instructed in the Christian Religion, according to the capacity wherein he is.

But, whether one do put himself an Apprentice (if a Man, and at his own
Disposal) or be put an Apprentice by his Parents or Guardians (at whose
Disposal he is) if a Child, is all one, as to learning a Trade: And it is all
one, whether (before he be thus put an Apprentice) he have some little Skill in
the Trade, or none at all. And so here; whether he be of such Years (if not the
Child of a Christian, or have been before neglected) as to have been taught
somewhat of Christianity; or yet an Infant, and to know nothing of it. And
whether (as in the former case) he offer himself to Baptism; or (as in the
latter) he be tendered to it by his Parents; he is to be Baptized, and to be
Instructed, each according to the capacity wherein he is.

But why it should be neglected, when it may be had sooner, I see no reason; at
least if it be allowed to be a thing desirable, and advantageous.

Now this, for the most part, was the case of the Apostles, when they converted
Jews or Heathens to the Christian Faith. It was not to be expected, that Men at
Age, and at their own Disposal, and brought up in another Religion, would be
willing to declare themselves Christians, and be Baptized as such, before they
knew somewhat of it; (And therefore I would not lay so much stress upon the
Order of Words, as if a Person Unbaptized might not be taught, if capable of
it.)

But when they were so persuaded as to themselves, they did (with themselves)
bring in those who were under their Power. As Lydia, and all her Household; the
Iaylor, and all his; the Household of Stephanas, Cornelius, and all his; and the
like, I suppose, of others.

And to this purpose I understand that of Act. 2. Repent, and be Baptized every
one of you, whether Jews or Gentiles, (this being a mixture of many Nations)
for the remission of sins, -- For the promise is to you, and to your Children,
(as well as to Abraham, and his Children,) and to as many as our Lord shall
call, (and to their Children; for this I suppose to be understood.)

For, though I know that Children does not always signify Infants; yet, if no
more were meant of their Children, than of all the World beside, there was no
occasion of Naming Children, but the Sense had been as full without it.

Now it cannot reasonably be supposed, but that there were Children in some of
those Houses; (at least it is more likely that there were in some, than that
there were none in any of them;) and therefore that Children were then
Baptized, as well as others; especially when there is no Intimation to the
contrary.

And in such Cases, where there is a silence in matter of Fact; it is
reasonable to think, it was so, as was most likely to be; especially when
nothing appears to the contrary, and great Presumptions of it.

I know there is sometime mention of Faith, in order to being Baptized; but it
is of grown Persons.

Nor is it always meant of saving Faith, and a cordial Conversion; but a
Profession of Faith, or a professed willingness to be Baptized, and declaring
themselves Christians.

For it is said, Simon himself believed also, and was baptized: Which cannot be
meant of saving Faith, and a real Conversion; for we find him afterward, in the
gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity.

And when so many Thousands were Baptized in one Day, we cannot think they were
all singly Examined, so as to give (at least a probable) Evidence of saving
Grace: But, their willingness to be Baptized, was a sufficient Evidence of
their declaring themselves Christians, or professing Christianity.

And when all Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the region about Jordan (that
is, great Multitudes from all those Parts,) went out to John Baptist, and were
baptized of him, confessing their sins; it cannot be supposed that such
Multitudes were all singly Examined, and made particular Confessions of their
Sins; But, the Verbal Expressions of many, with the silent Consent of the rest,
and the concurrent Actings of all, was an evident Declaration of their common
Sentiments.

And it can hardly be thought, that they did not (many of them) bring Children
with them; since we know they had then an Opinion, that Children were capable
of Benefit from the Benediction of Prophets, and Persons extraordinary; as
appears by their bringing of little Children to Christ, (such as to be taken up
in Arms) for him to lay his hands on them and bless them.

Now if each of these Considerations be not, singly, convictive: Yet so many
together, of which each is highly probable, and when as nothing (so much as
probable) does appear to the contrary: It seems to me so great an Evidence (in
Matter of Fact,) that Children were then Baptized; that I do not at all doubt,
but that we are rather to think, that Infants were then Baptized, than that
they were not.

To which we may add, the continual concurrence of the Churches Practice, for
near Sixteen Hundred Years; which, in Matter of Fact, is a great Evidence.

For I do not know, that in any Age of the Church, it was ever so much as
questioned, or at all doubted, (but that the Children of Christians might be
lawfully Baptized,) till that about 100 Years since (in our Grandfathers time)
the Anabaptists in Germany did (amongst many other extravagant Notions) begin
to cavil at it. When as, in all the former Ages of the Church, nearer to the
Apostles time, I do not know that any History does mention, that it was ever
questioned.

Whereas a thing of such Daily Practice, if at any time, in any part of the
Christian Church, it had received any considerable Opposition; it could not be,
but that some History would have taken notice of it.

And, in such a Case, a constant Silence is, to me, a sufficient Evidence, that
it has been a constant Practice (even from the Apostles time) without any
Opposition. And, if so, no doubt, but by them also. And I do not know of any
thing alleged, with any show of Evidence, why we should think the contrary.

If any (who were not the Children of Christians, but converted from
Heathenism) have deferred their Baptism too long; I think they were faulty in so
doing.

But if any will obstinately think, that Paul and Peter had not, each of them,
Two Hands, and on each Hand Five Fingers, because it is no where in Scripture
(that I know of) said that they had so: And, that therefore, we are rather to
think they had not, than that they had; I cannot help it.

These are my Thoughts, hastily drawn up; and I pray God they may (through his
Blessing) be effectual to your Satisfaction.

Yours, John Wallis.
For Mr. C -- to be left with Mr. -- at the -- in St. Paul's Churchyard, till
it be called for.

