THE DOCTRINE OF THE Blessed Trinity Briefly Explained, In a Letter to a Friend.
SIR,
THE Doctrine of the Arrians, Socinians, or Anti-Trinitarians, (call them as
you please, provided you call them not Orthodox Christians) in opposition to
those who believe (according to the Word of God), That the Sacred Trinity, of
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are so distinguished each from other, as that the
Father is not the Son, or Holy Ghost; the Son not the Father, or Holy Ghost;
the Holy Ghost not the Father, or Son; yet so United, as that they are all One
God; (which, in the Athanasian Creed, is called Trinity in Unity, and Unity in
Trinity; or, in common speaking, Three Persons and One God;) is what you were
lately discoursing with me, and of which I shall give you some of my present
Thoughts.

The Scripture tells us plainly, There are Three that bear record in Heaven;
the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost: and these Three are One, 1 John 5. 7.
And the Form of Baptism (Matt. 28. 19.) is, In the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

And the Christian Church, from the time of Christ and his Apostles downwards
hitherto, as well before as since the Council of Nice, have ever held the
Divinity of those Three Persons (as they are commonly called;) and that these
Three are but One God. And, that they have so held, has been, by diverse,
sufficiently proved from the most ancient christian Writers, which are now
extant. Which, therefore, I take for granted, as sufficiently proved by others,
without spending time, at present, to prove it anew.

That these are Three, distinguished each from other, is manifest: And, that
this Distinction amongst themselves, is wont to be called Personality. By which
word, we mean, that Distinction (what ever it be) whereby they are
distinguished each from other, and thence called Three Persons.

If the word Person do not please, we need not be fond of Words, so the Thing
be agreed: Yet is it a good Word, and warranted by Scripture, Heb. 1. 3. where
the Son is called, the express image of his Father's Person: (For so we render
the Word Hypostasis, which is there used; and mean by it, what I think to be
there meant) And we have no reason to wave the Word, since we know no better to
put in the Place of it.

If it be asked, what these Personalities or Characteristicks are, whereby each
Person is distinguished from other; I think we have little more thereof in
Scripture, than that the Father is said to Beget; the Son, to be Begotten; and
the Holy Ghost, to Proceed.

If it be further asked, what is the full import of these Words (which are but
Metaphorical), and what is the adequate Meaning of them) I think we need not
trouble our selves about it: For, since it is a matter purely of Revelation
(not of natural Knowledge,) and we know no more of it than what is revealed in
Scripture, where the Scripture is silent, we may be content to be ignorant. And
we who know so little of the Essence of any thing, especially of Spiritual
Beings, though finite, need not think it strange that we are not able to
comprehend all the Particularities of what concerns that of God, and the
Blessed Trinity.

I know that the Fathers, and Schoolmen, and some after them, have employed
their Wits to find out some faint Resemblances, from natural things, whereby to
express their imperfect Conceptions of the Sacred Trinity: But they do not
pretend to give an adequate Account of it; but only some conjectural
Hypotheses, rather of what May be, than of what certainly Is. Nor need we be
concerned, to be curiously inquisitive into it, beyond what God has been
pleased to reveal concerning it.

That the Three Persons are distinguished, is evident; (though we do not
perfectly understand what those Distinctions are:) That to each of these, the
Scripture ascribes Divinity, is abundantly showed by those who have written on
this Subject: That there is but One God, is agreed on all hands: That the
Father is said to Beget; the Son, to be Begotten; and the Holy Ghost, to
Proceed; is agreed also; though we do not perfectly understand the full Import
of these Words.

And here we might quietly acquiesce (without troubling our selves further,)
did not the clamorous Socinians importunely suggest the Impossibility and
Inconsistence of these things, insomuch as to tell us, That, how clear soever
the Expressions of Scripture be, or can be, to this purpose, they will not
believe it, as being inconsistent with natural Reason. And therefore, though
they do not yet think fit to give us a barefaced Rejection of Scripture; yet
they do (and must, they tell us,) put such a forced Sense on the words of it
(be they never so plain) as to make them signify somewhat else.

There is, therefore, in this Doctrine of the Trinity, as in that of the
Resurrection from the Dead, a double Inquiry: First, whether it be Possible;
and then, whether it be True. And these to be argued (in both Cases) from a
very different Topic: The one from Natural Reason; the other from Revelation.
Yet so, that this latter does certainly conclude the former, if rightly
understood. And though we should not be able to solve all Difficulties; yet
must we believe the thing, if revealed; unless we will deny the Authority of
such Revelation.

Thus our Savior, against the Sadducees, who denied the Resurrection, Matthew.
22. 29. Ye err (says he) not knowing the Scriptures, nor the Power of God.
The Power of God, if rightly understood, was enough (from the Light of Reason)
to prove it not impossible: But, whether or no it will be so (which natural
Reason could not determine,) was to be argued from Scripture-Revelation.

In like manner, St. Paul before Agrippa, Act. 26. first argues the Possibility
of it; Why should it be thought a thing incredible with you, that God should
raise the Dead? ver. 8. For if Agrippa did believe the Creation of the World,
(as many even of the Heathen did, from the light of Nature) he could not think
it Impossible for that God (who had at first made all things of nothing) to
recollect, out of its Dust or Ashes, a Body which once had been. But whether or
no he would do so, depended upon another Question, to be after asked, ver. 27.
King Agrippa, believe thou the Prophets? For this was purely matter of
Revelation, and could not otherwise be known: For, as to the Immortality of the
Sou^, and a future state hereafter, many of the Heathens went very far, by the
Light of Nature; but as to the Resurrection of the Body, I do not find they had
any Sentiments about it (or but very faint, if any:) And if they had, it may
well be supposed to be the remainder of some ancient Tradition from the Jews,
or their Predecessors. Nor do I see any foundation in Nature, which should make
them think of it (before it was revealed) any more, than of the Redemption of
Mankind by Christ, (which we should never have thought of, had not God himself
contrived and declared it to us.) But, when that of the Resurrection was once
suggested, there was no pretense of Reason to think it a thing Impossible, and
therefore no reason to doubt the Truth of it, when Declared, if we believe the
Scriptures, wherein it is revealed; especially those of the New Testament.

It is much the same as to the Doctrine of the Trinity. It is a thing we should
not have thought of, if it had not been suggested by Divine Writers; but, when
suggested, there is nothing in natural Reason (that we know of, or can know of)
why it should be thought Impossible; but whether or no it be so, depends only
upon Revelation.

And in this case the Revelation seems so clear (to those who believe the
Scriptures) that we have not reason to doubt of it, unless the thing be found
to be really Impossible, and inconsistent with Reason. Nor do the
Anti-Trinitarians insist on any other ground why they deny it, save only, That
it seems to them absolutely Impossible; and therefore think themselves bound to
put another Sense on all Places of Scripture (how clear soever they be, or can
be) which prove or favor it.

So that the Controversy is now reduced to this single Point, Whether it be
Possible or not Possible: Whether it be consistent or inconsistent with Natural
Light or Reason. (And to that point therefore I shall confine my Discourse.)
For it seems agreed on all hands (as to those who believe the Scriptures) that,
if it be not Impossible, it is sufficiently revealed.

Now for us who understand so little of God's infinite Essence, and which it is
impossible for us fully to comprehend, who are our selves but finite, and
mostly conversant with material Objects; in so much that we cannot pretend to
understand the Essence of our own Souls; and, when we attempt to explain it,
must do it rather by saying what it is not, than what it is; (so hard a matter
is it for us to fix in our Mind or Fancy, a Notion, Idea, or Conception of a
spiritual Being, which falls not under our Senses:) It Is hard, I say, for us
(who understand so little of a Spirit) to determine (of what God is pleased to
reveal) that it is Impossible, or inconsistent with his Essence, which Essence
we cannot understand.

But what is it that is thus pretended to be Impossible? It Is but this, That
there be Three Somewhats, which are but One God: (and these Somewhats we
commonly call Persons.) Now what Inconsistence is there in all this? That
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are Three, is manifest; and are in
Scripture Language distinguished. That there is but One God is manifest also,
and all those Three are this God: That the name Person is no incongruous Word,
is evident from Heb. 1. 3. where it is used. If it be said, It does not agree
to them exactly in the same Sense in which it is commonly used amongst men; we
say so too, nor does any Word, when applied to God, signify just the same as
when applied to men, but only somewhat analogous thereunto.

What kind or degree of Distinction (according to our Metaphysics) this is, we
need not be very sollicitous to enquire; or, whether in our Metaphysics
(accommodated to our Notions of Finite Beings) there be any Name for it: It Is
enough for us if these Three may truly be so distinguished, as that one be not
the other, and yet all but One God.

Now, that there is no Inconsistence or Impossibility, that, what in one regard
are Three, may in another regard be One, is very manifest from many Instances
that may be given even in Finite Beings, such as we converse with; which,
though they do not adequately agree with this of the Sacred Trinity, (nor is it
to be expected that they should; Finite, with what is Infinite;) yet there is
enough in them to show, there is no such Inconsistence as is pretended.

I shall spare to instance in many Resemblances which have been given long
since by Fathers and Schoolmen, or by later Writers. Which though they are not
pretended to be adequately the same with that of the Sacred Trinity, (as
neither will any thing else be that we can take from finite Beings;) yet are
they sufficient to show that there is no Inconsistence in it. (Which is all
that is here incumbent on us to prove.) I shall only name a few.

I will begin with what concerns the most gross of Finite Beings, that is,
Material Bodies.

Suppose we then a Cubical Body, (which what it is, every one knows, that knows
a Die.) In this are Three Dimensions, (Length, Breadth, and Height) and yet but
One Cube. Its Length (suppose between East and West) A. B. Its Breadth (suppose
between North and South) C. D. Its Height (between Bottom and Top) E. F. Here
are Three Local Dimensions, truly Distinguished each from other, (not only
imaginarily:) The distance between East and West (whether we think or think not
of it) is not that between North and South; nor be either of these that between
Top and Bottom. The Length is not the Breadth, or Height; the Breadth is not
the Length, or Height; and the Height is not the Length, or Breadth: But they
are Three Divisions, truly distinct each from other: Yet are all these but One
Cube: And if any one of the Three were wanting it were not a Cube. There is no
Inconsistence therefore, that what in one regard are Three (three Dimensions)
may, in another regard, be so united as to be but One, (one Cube.) And if it
may be so in Corporeals, much more in Spirituals.

Suppose we further, Each of these Dimensions infinitely continued; the Length
infinitely Eastward and Westward, the Breadth infinitely Northward and
Southward, the Height infinitely Upward and Downward: Here are Three infinite
Dimensions, and but One infinite Cube; and these Three Dimensions (though
distinct) are equal each to other (else it were not a Cube;) and though we
should allow, that a Cube cannot be infinite (because a Body, and therefore a
finite Creature:) Yet a Spirit may; such as is the Infinite God. And therefore
no Inconsistence; that there be Three Personalities (each infinite, and all
equal), and yet but One Infinite God, essentially the same with those Three
Persons.

I add further, That such Infinite Cube, can therefore be but One, and those
Three Dimensions can be but Three, (not more nor fewer:) For, if Infinite as to
its Length (Eastward and Westward), and as to its Breadth (Northward and
Southward), and as to its Height (Upward and Downward); it will take up all
imaginary space possible, and leave no room either for more Cubes or more
Dimensions: And if this infinite Cube were (and shall be) Eternally so, its
Dimensions also must be Infinite and Coeternal.

I say further, If in this (supposed) Cube, (we suppose in Order, not in Time)
its first Dimension, that of Length, as A. B., and to this Length be given an
equal Breadth (which is the true generation of a Square) as C. D., which
compleats the square Basis of this Cube; and to this Basis (of Length and
Breadth) be given (as by a further Procession from Both) an equal Height E.
F., which compleats the Cube; and all this eternally, (for such is the Cube
supposed to be,) here is a fair Resemblance (if we may parvis componere magna)
of the Father, (as the Fountain or Original;) of the Son, (as generated of him
from all Eternity;) and of the Holy Ghost, (as eternally Proceeding from Both:)
And all this without any Inconsistence. This longum, latum, profundum, (Long,
Broad, and Tall,) is but One Cube; of Three Dimensions, and yet but One Body:
And this Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; Three Persons, and yet but One God. And
as, there, the Dimensions are not (in the Abstract) predicated or affirmed each
of other, or the Cube of either, (the Length is not the Breadth or Height, nor
either of these a Cube;) but (in the Concrete) Cube is affirmed of all; this
longum, latum, profundum, is a Cube, and the same Cube: So here, (in the
Abstract) the Personality of the Father is not that of the Son, nor either of
these that of the Holy Ghost, nor the Deity or Godhead any of these; but (in
the Concrete) though the Personalities are not, yet the Persons are, each of
them God and the same God.

If it be objected, that those Concretes are Affirmed or Predicated each of
other; (that longum is also latum and profundum, (this Long is Broad and Tall;)
but not so here, the Father is not the Son or Holy Ghost: I answer, That, if
the words be rightly considered, the Analogy holds here also: For when we say,
this Long is Broad and Tall (where Cube or Body is understood) the full meaning
is plainly thus; This Body, which, as to one Dimension (that of Length), is
said to be a long Body, is the same Body, which, as to another Dimension (that
of Breadth), is said to be a broad Body, and which, as to a third Dimension
(that of Height), is said to be a tall Body. So here, That God, which (as to
one Personality) is God the Father, is the same God, which (as to another
Personality) is God the Son, and which (as to a third Personality) is God the
Holy Ghost. So the Analogy holds every way, nor is there any Inconsistence in
either Case.

I proceed to the Consideration of somewhat more Spiritual, and less Material
than that of a Body locally extended.

Suppose we then a Created Angel, or Humane Soul: at least if those who deny
the Blessed Trinity will allow that there are such Beings; but if they be
Sadducees, who do not acknowledge either Angel or Spirit, or that the Holy
Scriptures are the word of God, which testify both, (which I doubt is the case
of some of them) let them speak out, that so we may know whom we have to deal
with; and not pretend to nibble only at the Athanasian Creed, or some
Expressions therein, while the quarrel is indeed at somewhat higher, (though,
ad amoliendam invidiam, they think fit to dissemble it,) and that they do but
faintly believe (if at all) that the Holy Scriptures) are the Word of God, or
the Doctrines therein contained to be such. And we have reason to suspect it,
when they spare not to let us know, that, were this Doctrine of the Trinity
therein delivered in Words as express as could be, they would not believe it.

But suppose we, (what they would seem to grant, and what I am so charitable as
to think diverse of them do believe) That there are Spiritual Beings, such as
Angels and the Souls of Men; and that these Spiritual Beings are endued with
Knowledge (or Wisdom) and Force (or an executive Power) to act according to
that Knowledge. That there is some such thing, at least in Man, (whether Body
or Soul) they cannot but acknowledge; for themselves be, and know, and do. And
though we cannot fully comprehend, much less express in Words, how all this is
so; (for we are here at a loss, as well as in higher things:) Yet, that it is,
they cannot deny, though they do not know How.

Now, to Be, and to Know, and to Do, are certainly distinct each from other,
(though perhaps we are not all agreed, of what kind, or in what degree this
Distinction is:) To be is not the same as to know, for that may be were this is
not; and to do is (for the same reason) somewhat different from both those, for
a Man may Be and may Know what he does not Do; yet it is one and the same Soul
(at least one and the same Man) which Is, and Knows, and Does. There is
therefore no Impossibility or Inconsistence in it, That what in one regard are
Three, may in another regard be One. Thus in the Sacred Trinity, if we conceive
of the Father as the Original or First Person, who begets the Son; the Son as
the Wisdom of the Father, begotten of Him; and the Holy Ghost as the Spirit of
the Father and the Son, as proceeding from Both, and yet the same God with
both; (or what other Distinction there may be of these Three Persons, who are
but One God, that we do not know;) there is no Inconsistence in it, that these
Three may be One; Three in one regard, and One in another.

I might show the same as to the Understanding, Will, and Meaning, which are
all the same Soul: And the known Metaphysical Terms of Unum, Verum, Bonum,
which are all but the same Ens. And many other Instances of like Nature.

But we hold (it will be said) a greater Distinction (than that of Unum, Verum,
Bonum) between the Three Persons in the Sacred Trinity. Be it so. (But what
that greater Distinction is, we do not pretend to comprehend.) However, it is
from all these Instances evident, that there is no Impossibility, or
Inconsistence with Reason, that what in one regard are Three, may in another
Regard be One. Which is what we undertook to show.

It Is true, that not any, nor all of these Instances, nor any of those given by
other Learned Mendo adequately express the Distinction and Unity of the Persons
in the Sacred Trinity, (for neither has God distinctly declared it to us, nor
are we able fully to comprehend it, nor is it necessary for us to know.) But
because we do not know Eccles. 11* 5.
How the bones grow in the womb of her that is with child, shall we therefore
say they do not grow there? Or, because Job 11. 7.
We cannot by searching find out God, because we cannot find out the Almighty
to perfection, shall we therefore say, things cannot be, when God says they
are, only because we know not How? If God say, 1 John 5. 7.
These Three are One? shall we say, they are not? If God say, Joh. 1. 1, 14.
The word was God, and, The word was made Flesh, shall we say, Not so, only
becaue we cannot tell How? It is safer to say It is, when God says It is,
though we know not (in particular) How it is. Especially when there be so many
Instances in Nature, to show it not to be Impossible or Inconsistent with
Reason. The thing is sufficiently revealed to those who are willing to be
taught, and 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10.
receive the truth in the love of it. (Nor is it denied, by those who gainsay
it, but that, if the thing be possible, it is sufficiently revealed; there
being no other Exception made, as to the Revelation, but the Impossibility of
the thing.) 1 Cor. 11. 16. Romans 2. 8.
But if any man list to be contentious, and to 2 Timothy 6. 4. Tit. 3. 9.
quarrel about words, it is no wonder if Act. 28. 28. Matthew. 13. 13.
hearing they do hear and not understand; and that God 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11. Romans
1. 21, 28.
give them over to believe a lie, who do not love the truth. But Psalm. 25. 9.
the humble he will teach his way. And, while we be so, we be safe.

August 11. 1690. Yours, John Wallis.


