A Second CHRISTIAN WARNING-PIECE; wherein is showed the first and chief Cause
of England's present Misery, proved to be the Chief Magistrate's Neglect, in
not fully doing that Work God has commanded, that must be yet done, because
God has said it, before this Nation can expect Deliverance. Humbly presented
to the PARLIAMENT.
Right Honorable,
THe most wise God, who uses the Ministry of his glorious Angels in the
Government of the World, has also ordained some Men to be Governors in the
Nations: in which weighty Work that wise King Solomon had some of the
prudentest Men in his Kingdom, to give counsel in times of greatest danger, for
the Preservation and Peace of his People.

2. Your Honors, by the Providence of a gracious God, are the King's Majesty's
most grave Counselors in Parliament, gathered together at such a time when
this, if not three Protestant Nations, are in most apparent danger of
Desolation, not only by the many Judgments of Plagues and Fires already come,
but many more threatened; by reason whereof the Nation, as it is a Body
Politic, its whole Head is sick, and Heart faint, so that from head to foot
there is nothing but Wounds, and Bruises, and putrified Sores, full of
Corruption; which in the eye of Reason cannot be cured only by cutting off some
dead fleshly Traitors, and so think thereby to heal the Nation's Wound; when as
the chief Cause has not yet been looked into, not known, and so cannot be
removed, therefore it still breaks out afresh, more dangerous than at former
times; as has been proved by many years woeful experience. Therefore it is the
opinion of the ablest Physicians, when a Body is desperately diseased, the
Cause must be enquired into; and, when known, the Means ordained of God used
for removing it, before there can be a Cure either in the Body of a Man, or a
Nation.

3. The truth of this your Honors may see in Holy Writ, that the Lord, in the
days of David King of Israel, sent a sore Judgment on that Land of three years
Famine; and so long it continued until the Cause was inquired into by the King
and his Council, and when it was known to be for the sin of King Readiness bloody
house, for destroying the Gibeonites his Subjects, whom by Oath, according to
the Covenant made with them by Joshua and all Israel, before the Lord, he ought
to have defended and preserved: But so soon as King David gave order that
Judgment should be executed, God was immediately entreated for the Land. O that
this may be well minded by your Honors.

4. Because the Lord sends not his sore Judgments, either of Famine, Sword or
Pestilence on a Nation, especially on his own People, without a just Cause, as
is proved by another President: When God commanded King Saul utterly to destroy
Amaleck, because he murdered the Lord's People, when weary and faint in the
Wilderness, as they journied to the promised Land: and for the negl^ct hereof
God suffered an Amalekite to kill King Saul: and also, by reason the Lord's
Work was done so negligently, the whole People of the Jews in King Ahasuerus
his Country were near to be destroyed in a day by the Plottings and
Contrivances of that wicked Haman, the seed of Agag the King of Amaleck, had
not the Lord marvelously prevented it. And whether these things, in a figure,
are not the cause of the present Misery and Danger this Nation is in, let your
Honors be Judges.

5. Because the Lord having commanded the Kings of the Earth, especi^lly
Protestant Kings, to hate the Whore, to wit, of Rome, utterly to make her
desolate, according to Rev. 17. because she, as a second and spiritual Amaleck,
murdered the Lord's People, making her self drunk with the Blood of Saints, as
they are traveling in the Wilderness of this World toward their everlasting
Rest; so that because a part of this Work was done by King Henry the Eighth K.
Edward the Sixth, and Q. Elizabeth of happy memory, (when they abolished out of
this Nation the Lord Abbots, Cardinals, Jesuits, with some other of her
Abominations) and is not fully finished, but neglected by the King and his
Parliament, God had almost suffered the Kings Majesty (whom God preserve) to be
murdered by four Ruffians, the seed of the spiritual Whore; because all the
Romish Inventions, either in Ministry, or other of her yet remaining
Abominations imposed by Law of oversight on the Consciences of the King's
Subjects in Protestant Churches, is not abolished, and for this same Neglect,
whether the whole Nation is not in as much danger to be destroyed (as the Jews
were in Mordiea's days) by the Plottings and Contrivances of the wicked Hamans
of that Popish bloodthirsty Generation, your Honors can best judge.

Lastly, Because the King's Majesty, together with your Honors, will not bear
with such an affront from any foreign Princes or States, to impose upon you
some of their Laws and Officers to be joined with yours in any of the Offices,
Customs or Orders in Government of the Nation: No more will the Lord Jesus have
imposed on him in the spiritual affairs of his Church, any of the Offices or
Traditions of the Popes, Prelates, or any other not warranted by the Word of
God, without incurring his high displeasure. And for Confirmation hereof, I
shall make bold to lay before your Honors these four Reasons.

1. As light and darkness can have no communion together, no more (says the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 6.) can Christ and Belial; that is, Christ in his Ordinances,
and the Pope or his Prelates in their Traditions and Inventions, joined in
Worship together; but as the Lord destroyed them that set the Ark of God and
Dagon together, and consumed his own People in his Anger, that (says the Lord,
Ezekiel. 43. 8.) set my Threshold and theirs, Me and Them, mine Ordinances and
their Abominations together in Worship: How can Protestants for these things
think to fare any better than those Idolaters aforementioned, let the wise in
heart judge.

2. If God made the Canaanites as thorns in the eyes and sides of the Children
of Israel, because they defiled themselves with their Abominations, and made a
breach in the Covenant made between the Lord and them, who commanded them not
to meddle with their Inventions in Worship, nor make Marriages with them: May
it not be even so with these Nations, because Protestants have defiled
themselves with many Popish Inventions in Worship, and also because many do
make Marriages with the Papists; has not God, since the Reformation began,
even for these things, made the Papists as thorns in the eyes and sides of this
Protestant Nation, I leave to your Honors to judge.

3. If the Lord did vex the Children of Israel with all Adversity, so that
there was no peace to him that went out, nor to him that came in, because they
worshipped God with another Ministry, and Inventions of King Jeroboam's making:
and because they kept the Statutes of Omri, and the manner of the house of
Ahab, walking in their Counsels in Worship, contrary to the Law of God given by
the hand of Moses, for which the Lord threatened to make them desolate: how
shall such Protestants believe any other, that worship God by a Ministry of
Man's making, with many Popish Inventions also, but for it God will still vex
this Land with all Adversity, as by woeful experience is seen this day; and, if
we be not warned, in the end the Lord may justly make this Land desolate: as
when no means would cause Israel to return to the Lord's true Worship, the Land
did spue them out.

4. Because the Lord's People of old, by Covenant made between him and them,
were his espoused Wife, and he their Husband: and the fellowship and communion
they spiritually had together, was as in a Bed of Love, so long as she, as an
obedient Wife, yielded obedience in all things that appertained to his Worship,
and to no others Commands and Directions, either in Ministry, Ordinances, Time
or Order: but when Judah did defile her self with the Babylonish Inventions in
Worship, the Babylonians were said to come in to her into the Bed of Love,
Ezekiel. 23. 17. for which God threatened them, as a Woman that brake Wedlock, to
give them into the hands of the Babylonians her Lovers: Even so under the
Gospel, the Lord's People by the Covenant of the Gospel are espoused or married
to one Husband Christ Jesus, who is the Head of the Body his Church; and so
long as she obeys the Commands of her Lord, the only Archbishop and Pastor of
his Flock, she is said, in the performance of his holy Ordinances, to have
fellowship together with him as in a Bed of Love. But when those Protestants
that so account of themselves that they are the Lord's People by Covenant, and
Christ their Head and Husband, do yield obedience to the Commands of Popes,
Prelates, or any other mortal men, in the Worship of God, she (as an Harlot) is
said, with Antichrist, to take their fill of Love together, as in a Bed; Prove.
7. 18. Now if no honest Man will endure that his Wife should yield obedience in
Marriage-duties to another Man, because Jealousy is as the Rage of a Man, that
he will not spare in the day of his Anger, how then shall the Lord? because
Marriage is honorable, and the Bed undefiled, but Whoremongers and Adulterers
God will judge; so that the Lord will not spare in the day of his Anger. O that
these things might be well minded by all good Protestants!

Now, Right Honorable and Noble Patriots, seeing for the Evils aforesaid,
first, for the King's Majesty, together with the Parliament's neglect to obey
the Commands of God, in making the Whore (to wit, of Rome) desolate, in
abolishing all and every thing that has but the smell, scent, or taste of
Popery, either in Place of Trust in the Nation, or in Place and Office, with
their Traditions in Worship, set up by former Kings by Law of oversight in
Protestant Churches, for which the Lord is angry not only with the King, and
your Honors, but also with the whole Nation. And for the doing of this
glorious Work, that there be no erring on the right hand nor on the left, I
humbly beg leave to lay before your Honors these three Observations.

1. The wise God has given the King's Majesty, together with his Honorable
Council, most perfect Directions in this his Work of Reformation about the
Worship of God, by example of the Godly Kings of Judah, who had no power by
their Civil or Kingly Authority to add to, or diminish from the Worship of God,
but to remember the Law of Moses, as a most perfect Direction for all things in
Worship; so that when any King, by the counsel of false Prophets and Teachers
together, or in his own heart, did devise or set up in Worship to God, or to
the worship of Idols, any thing either by way of a false Ministry, or Altars,
or Sacrifice, or any other thing aforesaid, contrary to God's Law, the Godly
Kings of Judah, Asa, Jehosaphat, Hezekiah, and Josiah, by the Command of God
did demolish it, and destroy it out of their Dominions, and did call the Lord's
People by all loving means to the Service and Worship of God, according as it
was found written in the Law of Moses. And thus they were (as God had promised
Kings should be) Nursing Fathers: not such Nurses, to give the Lord's Children
Milk, the sincere doctrine of his Word (as is the Ministers work) the Breasts
of his Church for Consolation; but, as Nurses, that look after with care, to
defend and preserve the Church from all enemies at home or abroad, that
(Dragon-like) are ready to devour her Children, which the Church in her painful
Ministry and Preaching, travelleth in pain till Christ be formed in them,
begotten by the seed of the immortal Word; that so as the Psalmist, Prophet,
and others say, this and that Man was born in her; Psalm. 87. Isa. 66. Rev. 12.
Gal. 4. And this is still the duty of Christian Kings under the Gospel; not to
add or diminish, but to preserve the Church while she follows her Head and
Husband CHRIST in all his Directions in Worship, and to demolish all Images,
and false Inventions and Traditions set up by other Kings in Worship to God;
that so the Romish Whore may be made desolate, and the Anger of the Lord turned
away from this Nation, as it was when the good Kings of Judah did the same
work, from that Nation. For what a shame is it to see in the Cathedrals in
England how the Clergy bow and cringe themselves to a wooden Altar, Papist-like!

2. There is no King, nor other mortal Man, has power over the Conscience of
any of his Subjects in spiritual things: as says the Apostle, -- we have no
dominion over your Faith. Therefore when Joshua conquered part of Canaan, and
the Nations became tributary to Israel, as their Subjects and Servants, they
forced them not to be of their Religion; because they, and all Kings should
know that it is a work belonging to God only, to persuade Japhet (or the
Gentiles) to dwell in the Tents of Shem: so that to force any man after that
persecuting manner (as do the Pope and his Prelates) to worship, before they
have faith, or be born again, is to force blind men to the Kingdom they see
not, and to make a Church of Hypocrites, bringing men into a snare even to
their Condemnation, to devour that which is holy, and after that (says
Solomon) they must with sorrow enough make enquiry what they have done.
Therefore the work of Kings is only to take off all the yoke of Popish Bondage,
so that their Subjects may be free, seeing (says the Prophet) every Nation
will walk in the name of his God; that so Protestants, as true Christians, may
walk in the Name of the Lord their God, whose Name is his Law, the Gospel; that
so as Christians, they may do their duty to God, and love their Brethren, doing
to all as they would be done unto; and in this is the whole duty of Man
comprehended.

3. Seeing God has showed unto man what is good, Mic. 6. 8. and then
especially unto Kings, the Lord's Lieutenants, who, with their great Council in
Parliament, are, (1.) to do justly (2.) love mercy, (3.) and to walk humbly
with God. This will be, 1. when the Romish Whore is by Act of Parliament
abolished out of this Land; not in destroying the lives of the Papists that
transgress not the Laws, but live peaceably as loyal Subjects to the Government
in all Civil things, as well as other Persuasions, but to destroy all Popish
Abominations out of Protestant Churches. 2. In loving Mercy, when the King's
Majesty with his Parliament shall make an Act, That no Protestant, or any other
living peaceably, of what Nation soever they are, shall not be imprisoned for
Conscience sake in things spiritual; especially in the matter of Tithes,
considering how many are daily cast into Prison because they cannot in
conscience pay them, for these Reasons: (1.) Because Tithe was an heave
Offering under the Law, abolished by Christ, who was the end of the Ceremonial
Law for Righteousness to all that believe. The Priesthood being changed, so of
necessity the Law, Heb. 7. (2dly.) Tithes were never payable but in the Land of
Canaan, so never commanded of the Gentile Churches. (3.) Tithes were not paid
by any Christians for eight hundred years after Christ, as ancient Writers say,
and then Pope Pascalis appointed Tithes should be paid to his Priests.
Therefore in paying Tithes, Christ is denied to be faithful in his House, as
Moses was, to appoint a Ministry, and not their Wages; and the Pope made equal
with Christ, in giving Laws to his Church. O that your Honors would find out a
way to remedy this great evil, and take off this yoke from the necks of all
Protestant Subjects; seeing Solomon says, To punish the Just is not good, etc.
Prove. 17. 26. Then the 3d thing God requires is, That both King, Parliament,
and all the King's Christian Subjects walk humbly with God; and this will be
when they shall worship him in Spirit and in Truth, according to his directions
in his last Will and Testament: That so Christ Jesus may in all things
spiritual reign in his Church: which was and is the true foundation of all
promised Peace to the Lord's People. As for example, under the Law: So long as
Israel worshipped the Lord as he commanded them by his Servant Moses, in
Ministry, Ordinances, Time and Order, God promised that they should dwell in
the Land in confident safety, Lev. 25. And when all Israel's Males went three
times a Year to Jerusalem to worship, and left none to guard their Dwellings
but very aged Men and young Children, the Lord was a Wall of Fire about them,
Zech. 2. in making their enemies to be at peace with them. And so long as the
primitive Christians feared the Lord, and worshipped him, as Christ Jesus had
appointed in his Testament, the Churches had rest throughout all Judea, Galile,
and Samaria. And thus, when the Lord gives quietness, who can make trouble?
but when be hides his face (for the reasons aforesaid) who can behold him?
whether it be done against a Nation, or a Man only.

Thus I have discharged my humble duty, first, unto his Majesty, and next unto
your Honors, and, lastly, to all the Nation (though the unfittest of many) in
a work of this nature; beseeching your Honors not to despise it coming from so
unworthy an Instrument, but remember that there were many wise Men in the City
Abel, (for renown termed, a Mother in Israel) who despised not a Woman's
Counsel, when it was for the preservation of that City, and this of a whole
Nation, if God so bless it.

And because the Work your Honors are herein moved to do; is but what the Lord
commands to be done, though great and glorious, in removing all Popish
Rubbish out of Protestant Churches, that a throrow-Reformation may be made,
that so the Anger of the Lord may be turned from this Nation: Therefore let not
ten to two discourage you, (who have God's Promise on your side, that the Whore
must be made desolate) that the Canaanites or Popish Walls are strong, and that
your Opposers are powerful as Giants: Neither let the opposition of the
Tobiass*s and Sanballats of the Times hinder the Work, seeing God opened the
King of Assyria's heart to strengthen the hand of the Lord's People in the
figurative Work of the Lord's Building. And what has the Lord done less on the
heart of his Majesty, (and we are bound to believe it is real) that has
encouraged your Honors to take care of the Protestant Religion? and what care
can be like that, to cleanse it from all Popish Inventions either in the
Ministry, or Service, or any other thing whatsoever in Worship, which is not
found agreeable to the Rules of Christ's Testament: which God has appointed in
the Work of Reformation from Antichrist's Apostasy, the Golden Reed of God's
Word to measure the Spiritual Altars, Temple, and Worshippers therein. For so
long as the forbidden thing hid in the Camp of Israel, remained in Achan's
Tent, Israel could not stand before their Enemies: how then shall this Nation,
so long as the forbidden thing of Popish Abominations is retained in the Camp
or Tents of Protestant Churches, stand before their Enemies, which the Doctrine
of the Gospel forbids all Christians not to taste, touch, or handle in
Worship? The neglect of this glorious Work commanded of God, in not making the
Romish Whore utterly desolate in the Nation, has been the chief cause God is
angry with us, in not only suffering so many Plots to be contrived to the utter
ruin thereof, because there is still retained so many Popish Abominations in
Ministry and Traditions as aforesaid, the Fire of which has kindled in the
Bosom of Protestant Churches at this day all the Contentions in Religion, to
the dividing Protestants one from the other into so many diversities of
opinions. Also it has given strong confidence to the Papists to believe that
such Protestants as can without scruple of conscience adhere to, and embrace
again so many Popish Abominations in Worship, which they once vomited up, shall
in God's just Judgment be made, either by fraud or by force, to embrace all the
rest of the Popish Abominations which our former Governors abolished, to wit,
the Lord Abbots, Cardinals, Jesuits, Friars, and all other Relics expelled
with them, seeing the Meat is not worse than the Broth; that so the head and
tail of that beastly Clergy may be joined together, when they are united to
their younger Brethren the Arch and Lord Bishops, as the Proverb is, Birds of a
feather will not rest in their motion till they come together: and then the
deadly wound of the Beast will be again healed, to the Scorpion-like tormenting
Plague (Rev. 9.) of all true Protestants, if the King, with your Honors, be
not the Physicians in God's hand to prevent it.

Now, Right Honorable, if something of this nature be not done for preventing
the shedding of innocent Blood, that if the Papists within us should rise, or
their Accomplices invade us from without, the King's Majesty with your Honors,
would be pleased to make an Act, that all Protestants now (as was granted to
the Jews in the days of K. Ahasuerus) may without offense stand in their own
defense in the preservation of the lives of themselves and their families, in
what manner your Honors shall think fit. And this by God's Blessing will break
the hearts of all Popish Plotters in their wicked designs; who for madness,
instead of destroying Protestants, like the enemies of Jehoshaphat, will
destroy one another.

O therefore that his Majesty, with your Honors, would remember to follow the
Example of that wise and good King Solomon, who first built the Lord's House
before he built his own. And K. David was grieved that himself should dwell in
an House of Cedar, when the Ark of God remained under Curtains. Nehemiah could
have no joy (tho the Kings Cupbearer) to see the City of Jerusalem lie waste.
If then the King's Majesty, with your Honors, would imitate these worthy
Patrio's herein, in seeking first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness,
then all smaller things of Temporal Deliverances, and outward Benefits shall be
added. Which God will still make good to all true Protestants, if they prefer
the Heavenly Jerusalem before their chiefest joy, Psalm. 137. as was made good
to Israel of old, who were a Nation in the midst of Idolatrous Nations, as the
true Churches of God are now, Holy Nations in the midst of the Nations: And so
long as Christians now, as God's People of old, do faithfully walk wi^h God in
his true Faith and Worship, they are said to dwell alone, in respect of their
Faith and Worship among the Nations, Number. 34. 24. The want of these things now,
amongst Protestant Churches, is proved by holy Scripture to be the same cause
God is testifying to us, as to Judah of old, I have forsaken my House, I have
left my Heritage, I have given the dearly beloved of my soul into the hands of
her enemies: Read Jer. 12 13. If there be not a speedy turning to the straight
path of the Lord, in executing Judgment, and seeks the Truth, Jer. 5. 1. The
deep sense of which, may with the Prophet Jeremiah, cause every true Christian
to say, O that my head were water, and eyes a fountain of tears, to weep day
and night for the slain of the daughter of my people; and that he had in the
Wilderness a lodging-place, that he might not behold the Sins* bounding, or the
Judgments coming on the Land: O then, before it be too late, that the King's
Majesty, with your Honors; and also the whole Nation, would lay these things
to heart. Seeing how unwilling the Lord is to destroy this Nation, not only by
discovering the Plots, but also the Cause why God suffers them. Now, shall a
Trumpet be blown in the City, and the people not be warned? Or is there any
evil in a City (to wit, of punishment) and I have not done it, says the Lord?
Hos. 3. 6. Be wise therefore, O ye Kings, be instructed, ye Judges of the
Earth; kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye erish from the way* For he is the
Prince of the Kings of the Earth, who can only crown you with Glory; which the
Lord in his Mercy will bestow, as he has promised, on all that love him, and
keep his Commandments.

Your Honors humble Servant in all Christian Duties, THO. WALL.


