AN Explication and Vindication OF THE Athanasian Creed. IN A Third LETTER,
Pursuant of Two former, Concerning the Sacred Trinity.

TOGETHER With a POSTSCRIPT, in Answer to another LETTER.

By JOHN WALLIS, D. D.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns, in
Cheapside, 1691.

AN EXPLICATION and VINDICATION OF THE Athanasian Creed.
SIR,
IN pursuance of what I have said in a former Letter, concerning (what we
commonly call) the Athanasian Creed; it may not be amiss to express it a little
more distinctly.

We call it commonly the Athanasian Creed, not that we are certain it was
penned (just in this form) by Athanasius himself; (for, of this, I find that
learned men are doubtful,) but it was penned either by himself, or by some
other about that time, according to the mind and doctrine of Athanasius. In
like manner as what we call the Apostles Creed, we take to be penned (very
anciently) according to what Doctrine the Apostles had taught them, though not
perhaps in those very words.

But whoever was the Compiler (whether Athanasius himself, or some other) of
the Athanasian Creed, I suppose, the Damnatory Sentences (as they are called)
therein, were not by him intended to be understood with that Rigor that some
would now insinuate, (who, because perhaps they do not like the main Doctrines
of that Creed, are willing to disparage it, by representing it to the greatest
disadvantage they can,) as if it were intended, That whoever does not
explicitly and distinctly know, and understand, and assent to, all and every
clause and syllable therein, could not be saved. (Which, I suppose, neither the
Author did intend, nor any other sober person would affirm.) But, that the
Doctrine therein delivered (concerning God and Christ) is sound and true
Doctrine in it self, and ought, as to the substance of it, to be believed as
such, by all persons (of Age, and Capacity, and who have opportunity of being
well informed in it,) who do expect salvation by Christ; at least so far as not
to disbelieve the substance of it, when understood. There being no other
ordinary way to be saved, (that we know of) than that by the Knowledge and
Faith of God in Christ.

But what measures God will take in cases extraordinary, (as of Infancy,
Incapacity, Invincible Ignorance, or the like,) is not the thing there intended
to be declared; nor is it necessary for us to know; but to leave it rather to
the Wisdom and Counsel of God, whose Judgments are unsearchable, and his Ways
past finding out, Romans 11. 33.

Much less do I suppose, that he intended to extend the necessity of such
explicit Knowledge, to the Ages before Christ. For many things may be
requisite to be explicitly Known and Believed by us to whom the Gospel is
revealed, which was not so to them, before the Veil was taken away from Moses
face, and Immortality brought to light through the Gospel, 2 Cor. 3. 13, 14. 2 Timothy 1. 10.

Nor are we always to press words according to the utmost rigor that they are
possibly capable of; but according to such equitable sense as we use to allow
to other Homiletical Discourses, and which we have reason to believe to have
been the true meaning of him whose words they are.

And I have the more reason to press for such equitable construction, because I
observe those hard Clauses (as they are thought to be) annexed only to some
Generals; and not to be extended (as I conceive) to every Particular, in the
Explication of those Generals.

It begins thus; Whosoever will be saved; before all things, it is necessary,
that he hold the Catholic Faith. Where, before all things, is as much as
Imprimis; importing, that it is mainly necessary, or a principal requisite, to
Believe aright; especially, concerning God, and Christ.

Which, as to persons of Years, and Discretion, and who have the opportunity of
being duly Instructed, I think is generally allowed by all of us, to be
necessary (as to the Substantials of Religion) in the ordinary way of
salvation, without disputing, what God may do in extraordinary Cases, or how
far God may be pleased, upon a general Repentance, as of Sins unknown, to
pardon some culpable Misbelief.

It follows; Which Faith, except every one do keep whole and undefiled, ((...))
without doubt he shall perish everlastingly. That is, (as I conceive) Unless a
person (so qualified and so capacitated, as I before expressed) do keep it
whole or sound, as to the Substantials of it (though possibly he may be
ignorant of some Particulars of the true Faith;) and undefiled, or intemerate,
(without adding thereunto, or putting such a sense upon such Substantials, as
shall be destructive thereof,) shall (except he repent) perish everlastingly.
Which, I think, is no more than that of Mar. 16. 16. He that Believes not,
shall be Damned. And what Limitations or Mitigations are there to be allowed,
are (by the same equity) to be allowed in the present Clause before us. Which
therefore may (in this true sense) be safely admitted.

And here I think fit to observe, That whereas there may be an ambiguity in the
English word whole, which sometime signifies totus, and sometime sanus or
salvus, it is here certainly to be understood in the latter sense, as answering
to the Greek (...). It is not (...) totam, but (...) sanam or salvam. And
(...), to keep the Faith salvam and intemeratam, which is translated whole and
undefiled, might (to the same sense) be rendered safe and sound. Now a man may
well be said to be safe and sound, notwithstanding a Wart or a Wen, or even a
Hurt or Maim, so long as the Vitals be not endangered. And so, of the Catholic
Faith, or Christian Doctrine, so long as there is nothing destructive of the
main Substantials or Fundamentals of it, though possibly there may be an
Ignorance or Mistake, as to some particulars of lesser moment.

After this Preface (between it and the Conclusion, or Epilogue) there follows
indeed a large Exposition of (what he declares to be) the Catholic Faith;
(That is; to be some Part of it: For I take the whole Scripture to be the
Catholic Faith; whereof this Collection is but a part.) beginning with, The
Catholic Faith is this: And Ending with, This is the Catholic Faith.

But it is not said, That except a man Know and Believe every particular of
that Explication, he shall perish eternally; but only, Except he keep the
Catholic Faith (as to the Substantials of it) safe and sound.

For doubtless there may be many Particulars of Catholic Faith (contained in
the Word of God) which a man may be ignorant of, and yet be saved. It is True,
That the Name of our Savior's Mother was Mary; and the Name of the Judge who
condemned him was Pontius Pilate: and both these are put into (what we call)
the Apostles Creed; and are part of the Catholic Faith; and which (supposing
that we know them to be declared in Scripture) we ought to Believe. But I see
not why it should be thought (of it self) more necessary to salvation (if he do
not know it to be declared in Scripture) for a man to know that her Name was
Mary, than that the Name of Adam's Wife was Eve, or Abraham's Wife Sarah, or
that one of Job's Daughters was called Iemima; (for all these are declared in
Scripture; and, supposing that we know them so to be, ought to be believed as
part of the Catholic Faith.) Nor do I know, that it is (of it self) more
necessary to know that the Name of the Judge who condemned our Savior was
Pontius Pilate, than that the Name of the High Priest was Caiaphus. And though
one of these, and not the other, be put into the Apostles Creed, whereby we are
more likely to know that than the other: yet both of them being True, and
declared in Scripture; they are, both of them, parts of the Catholic Faith,
and to be believed: but neither of them (I think) with such necessity, as that,
who knows them not, cannot be saved.

And what I say of this General Preface in the beginning, is in like manner to
be understood of the General Conclusion in the end; which (Catholic Faith)
except a man believe faithfully, he cannot be saved. Of which I shall say more
anon.

After the General Preface, (concerning the necessity of holding the Catholic
Faith,) he proceeds to two main Branches of it, (that of the Trinity, and that
of the Incarnation, with the Consequents thereof;) which he declares likewise,
as what ought to be believed.

That of the Trinity, he declares thus in General; And the Catholic Faith is
this; (that is, this is one main part of the Catholic Faith;) namely, That we
worship One God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity; Neither Confounding the
Persons, nor Dividing the Substance. Which is what we commonly say, There be
Three Persons, yet but One God. And this General (which, after some particular
Explications, he does resume) is what he declares ought to be believed. But he
does not lay such stress upon each Particular of that Explication, though True.

He thus explains himself; For there is one Person of the Father, another of
the Son, and another of the Holy Ghost. (Which Persons therefore are not to be
confounded.) But the Godhead of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, is all One. That is, one Substance, one God. (Which is what he said of
not Dividing the Substance, as if the Three Persons should be Three Substances,
or Three Gods.) According as Christ says of Himself and the Father, John 10.
30. I and the Father are One: (...), (not (...),) that is, one Thing, one
Substance, one God, not one Person. And 1 John 5. 7. These Three are One;
((...)) Hi Ires sunt Unum, not Unus. These three Who Is, are one What. They are
one Thing, one Substance, one God, though Three Persons.

And as their Godhead, or Substance undivided, is all one; so it follows, The
Glory equal, the Majesty coeternal. Such as the Father is, (as to the common
Godhead) such is the Son, and such is the Holy Ghost. The Father uncreate, the
Son uncreate, and the Holy Ghost uncreate. The Father incomprehensible, the Son
incomprehensible, and the Holy Ghost incomprehensible. The Father eternal, the
Son eternal, and the Holy Ghost eternal. For all these are Attributes of the
common Deity, which is the same of All. And yet they are not Three Eternals,
but One Eternal. Not Three Eternal Gods, (though Three Persons) but One Eternal
God. As also there are not three Incomprehensibles, nor three Uncreated; but
one Uncreated, and one Incomprehensible. One and the same Substance or Deity,
uncreated and incomprehensible. So likewise the Father is Almighty, the Son
Almighty, and the Holy Ghost Almighty; and yet there are not Three Almighties,
but One Almighty. So the Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is
God; and yet there are not Three Gods, but One God. So likewise the Father is
Lord, ((...), the word by which the Greeks do express the Hebrew Name Jehovah,
the proper incommunicable Name of God,) the Son Lord, and the Holy Ghost Lord;
and yet not Three Lords, but One Lord. (Not three Iehovahs, but one Jehovah.)
For like as we are compelled by the Christian Verity to acknowledge every
Person by himself to be God and Lord, so are we forbidden by the Catholic
Religion, to say, There be Three Gods, or Three Lords. Which are so many
particular Explications or Illustrations of what was before said in general of
not Confounding the Persons, nor Dividing the Substance. Which Explications,
though they be all true, (and necessary Consequents of what was before said in
general;) yet to none of them is annexed such Sanction, as that whosoever does
not Believe or not Understand these Illustrations, cannot be saved. It Is enough
to Salvation, if they hold the true Faith, as to the substance of it, though in
some other form of words, or though they had never heard the Athanasian Creed.

Nor is any such Sanction annexed to the Personal Properties, which next
follow; The Father is made of none; neither Created, nor Begotten. The Son is
of the Father alone; not Made, nor Created, but Begotten. The Holy Ghost is of
the Father, and of the Son; neither Made, nor Begotten, but Proceeding.

Where, by the way, here is no Anathematization of the Greek Church, (of which
those who would, for other reasons, disparage this Creed, make so loud an
outcry.) It Is said indeed He does proceed, (and so say they,) but not that he
does proceed from the Father and the Son. And it is said, He is Of the Father
and Of the Son ((...)) some way or other; (and even this, I suppose, they would
not deny;) but whether by procession from both, or (if so) whether in the same
manner, it is not said; but warily avoided. (Though indeed it seems to favor
what I think to be the truth, and what in the Nicene Creed is said expressly,
that he does proceed from both; and, for ought we know, in the same manner;
which yet we do not determine) Nor do I see any reason, why, on this account,
we should be said to Anathematize the Greek Church, or they to Anathematize us,
even though we should not exactly agree, in what sense he may be said to be Of
the Father, and in what Of the Son. And those who are better acquainted with
the Doctrine and the Languages, of the present Greek Churches, than most of us
are, do assure us, that the differences between them and us are rather in some
forms of expressions, than in the thing it self. However, those who would make
so great a matter of this, should rather quarrel at the Nicene Creed, than the
Athanasian: where it is expressly said of the Holy Ghost, that he proceeds
from the Father and from the Son. It Is not therefore for the phrase Filioque,
that they are so ready to quarrel at this Creed rather than the Nicene, but
from some other reason, and, most likely, because the Doctrine of the Trinity
is here more fully expressed than in that, at which the Socinian is most
offended.

I observe also, That these Personal Properties are expressed just by the
Scripture words, Beget, Begotten, Proceeding, without affixing any sense of our
own upon them; but leaving them to be understood in such sense as in the
Scripture they are to be understood. Agreeable to that modest Caution, which is
proper in such Mysteries.

It follows; So there is One Father, not three Fathers; One Son, not three
Sons; One Holy Ghost, not three Holy Ghosts. And in this Trinity, none is before
or after other. (That is, not in Time, though in Order.) None is greater or
less than another: But the whole three Persons are coeternal together, and
coequal. (...). The three ((...)) are ((...)) truly persons, or properly
persons, and coeternal each with other, and coequal.

Having thus finished these particular Explications, or Illustrations,
concerning the Trinity, (without any condemning Clause of those who think
otherwise, other than what is there included; namely, that if this be True, the
contrary must be an Error:) He then resumes the General, (as after a long
Parenthesis,) So that in all things (as is aforesaid) the Unity in Trinity, and
the Trinity in Unity, is to be Worshipped. And to this General, annexeth this
Ratification, He therefore that will he saved, must thus think of the Trinity:
or, thus ought to think of the Trinity, or, Let him thus think of the Trinity,
(...). And to this, I suppose, we do all agree, who believe the Doctrine of the
Trinity to be true. For, if the thing be true, those who would be saved, ought
to believe it.

He then proceeds to the Doctrine of the Incarnation. Which he declares in
general as necessary to salvation. Furthermore, it is necessary to everlasting
salvation, that he also believe rightly the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Which is no more than that of John 3. 36. He that believes not the
Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him. And therefore we
may safely say this also: There being no other Name under Heaven whereby we
must be saved, neither is there Salvation in any other, Acts 4. 12.

After this (as before he had done of the Doctrine of the Trinity) he gives
first a general Assertion of his being God and Man; and then a particular
Illustration of his Incarnation. For the right Faith is, that we believe and
confess, That our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, is God and Man.

What follows, is a further Explication of this General. God, of the substance
of the Father, begotten before the Worlds. And Man, of the substance of his
Mother, born in the World. Perfect God, and perfect Man; of a reasonable Soul
and humane Flesh subsisting. Equal to the Father, as touching his Godhead; and
Inferior to the Father, as touching his Manhood. Who, although he be God and
Man, yet he is not Two, but One Christ. One, not by conversion of the Godhead
into Flesh, but by taking of the Manhood into God. One altogether, not by
Confusion of Substance, but by Unity of Person. For as the reasonable Soul and
Flesh is one Man, so God and Man is One Christ.

And thus far, as to the Description of Christ's Person and Natures. The
Particulars of which I take to be all true; and therefore such as ought to be
believed, when understood. But such (many of them) as persons of ordinary
capacities, and not acquainted with School Terms, may not perhaps understand.
Nor was it, I presume, the meaning of the Penman of this Creed, that it should
be thought necessary to Salvation, that every one should particularly
understand all this: but, at most, that, when understood, it should not be
disbelieved. That in the general, being most material, That Jesus Christ, the
Son of God, is God and Man: the rest being but Explicatory of this. Which
Explications, though they be all true, are not attended with any such clause,
as if, without the explicit knowledge of all these, a man could not be saved.

He then proceeds to what Christ has done for our Salvation, and what he is to
do further at the last Judgment, with the Consequents thereof. Who Suffered for
our Salvation, Descended into Hell, Rose again the third day from the Dead.

That Clause of descending into Hell, or Hades, ((...),) which we meet with
here, and in the Apostles Creed, as it is now read, is not in the Nicene Creed;
nor was it anciently (as learned Men seem to be agreed) in what we call the
Apostles Creed. When or how it first came in, I cannot well tell: Nor will I
undertake here to determine the sense of it.

The Hebrew word Sheol, and the Greek Hades, which here we translate Hell, (by
which word we nowadays use to denote the Place of the Damned,) was anciently
used to signify, sometime the Grave, sometime, the Place, State, or Condition
of the Dead, whether good or bad. And when Job prays ( Job 14. 13.) O that thou
would hide me in Sheol (as in the Hebrew;) or in Hades, (as in the Greek
Septuagint;) certainly he did not desire to be in what we now call Hell; but
rather (as we there translate it) in the Grave, or the condition of those that
are Dead.

But what it should signify here, is not well agreed among learned Men. The
Papists generally (because that is subservient to some of their beloved
Tenants) would have it here to signify the Place of the Damned; and would have
it thought, that the Soul of Christ, during the time his Body lay in the Grave,
was amongst the Devils and Damned Souls in Hell. Others do, with more
likelihood, take it for the Grave, or condition of the Dead: and take this of
Christ's descending into Hades, to be the same with his being Buried, or lying
in the Grave. The rather, because in the Nicene Creed, where is mention of his
being Buried, there is no mention of his descent into Hell, or Hades: And here,
in the Athanasian Creed, where mention is made of this, there is no mention of
his being Buried; as if the same were meant by both phrases, which therefore
need not be repeated. And though in the Apostles Creed there be now mention of
both, yet anciently it was not so; that of his descent into Hell, being not to
be sound in ancient Copies of the Apostles Creed. If it signify any thing more
than his being Buried, it seems most likely to import his Continuance in the
Grave, or the State and Condition of the Dead, for some time. And the words
which follow, (...), say nothing of his coming out of Hell, but only of his
rising from the Dead.

But the words here stand undetermined to any particular sense; and so they do
in the Apostles Creed; and are so also in the Articles of our Church. Where it
is only said, (because in the Creed it stands so,) That we are to believe, That
he descended into Hell, without affixing any particular sense to it.

The words, doubtless, have respect to that of Acts 2. 27. where, Thou will not
leave my Soul in Hell, (or Hades) nor suffer thine Holy One to see Corruption,
is applied to Christ, (cited out of Psalm. 16. 10. where the same had before
been spoken of David.) And his not being left in Hades, seems to suppose his
having been (for some time) in Hades, whatever by Hades is there meant. And
Verse 31. his being not so left, is expressly expounded of his Resurrection. And
so again in Acts 13. 35. Now, as we have no reason to think, that David's being
in Hell, or Sheol, (though not to be left there) can signify, his being in
Hell among the Devils and damned Spirits, but rather in the Grave, or the
Condition of the Dead; so neither that Christ's being in Hell, or Hades, (which
is the Greek word answering to the Hebrew Sheol) should signify any other than
His being in the Grave, or condition of the Dead; from whence, by his
Resurrection, he was delivered. And to this purpose seems that whole Discourse
of Peter, Acts 2. 24, -- 32. and of Paul, Acts 13. 30, -- 37.

But, without determining it to any particular sense, the Creed leaves the word
Hell indefinitely here to be understood, in the same sense what ever it be, in
which it is to be understood, Acts 2. 27, 31. and Psalm. 16. 10. And so far we
are safe.

It follows; H^ ^scended into Heaven; He sits on the right hand of the
Father, God Almighty. From whence he shall come to judge the quick and the
dead. At whose coming all men shall rise again with their Bodies; and shall
give account for their own Works. And they that have done Good, shall go into
Life everlasting: and they that have done Evil, into everlasting Fire. (Of all
which, there is no doubt but that it ought to be believed.) Ending with, This
is the Catholic Faith. That is, this is true and sound Doctrine, and such as
every true Christian ought to believe.

And, as he had begun all with a general Preface, so now he closes all with a
general Conclusion: Which (Catholic Faith) except a man believe faithfully, he
cannot be saved. That is, the Doctrine here delivered is true, (and so I think
it is in all the parts of it,) and is (part of) the Catholic Faith: (The whole
of which Faith, is the whole Word of God.) That is, part of that Faith, which
all true Christians do, and ought to Believe. Which Catholic Faith, (the whole
of which is the whole Word of God) except a man (so qualified as I before
expressed) do believe faithfully, (that is, except he truly believe it) as to
the Substantials of it, (though possibly he may be ignorant of many particulars
therein) he cannot (without such Repentance as God shall accept of) be saved.
Which, so limited, (as it ought to be) I take to be sound Doctrine, and
agreeable to that of John 3. 16. He that believes not, is condemned already;
because he has not believed on the Name of the only begotten Son of God: And
Ver. 36. He that believes not the Son, shall not see life; but the wrath of
God abides on him: That is, (according to the words of this Creed) he that
believes not aright (of God and Christ) cannot be saved.

Which words of Christ, we may safely interpret both with an aspect on the
Doctrine of the Trinity (because of those words, the only Begotten Son of God;)
and to that of the Incarnation of Christ, and the Consequents thereof; (because
of those words in the beginning of the Discourse, Ver. 16, 17, God so loved the
World, that he Gave his only Begotten Son, etc. and God sent his Son into the
world -- that the world through him might be saved:) Which are the two main
Points insisted on in the Athanasian Creed. And he who does not Believe on the
Name of this only Begotton Son of God, and thus sent into the world, (the Text
tells us) shall not see life; but the wrath of God abides on him. Which fully
agrees with what is here said, Except a man believe the Catholic Faith, (of
which the Doctrine of the Trinity, and of the Incarnation, are there intimated,
and are here expressed, to be considerable Branches) he cannot be saved. And
what Limitations or Mitigations are to be understood in the one place, are
reasonably to be allowed as understood in the other. And, consequently, those
Damnatory Clauses (as they are called) in the Athanasian Creed (rightly
understood) are not so formidable (as some would pretend) as if, because of
them, the whole Creed ought to be laid aside.

For, in brief, it is but thus; The Preface and the Epilogue tell us, That
whosoever would be saved, it is necessary, or ((...)) he ought to hold the
Catholic Faith. Which Faith, except he keep whole and undefiled, or ((...))
safe and inviolate, he shall perish everlastingly; or, which except he believe
faithfully, he cannot be saved. Which is no more severe, than that of our
Savior, Mark 16. 16. He that believes not, shall be damned.

He then inserts a large Declaration of the Catholic Faith, especially as to
two main Points of it; that of the Trinity, and that of the Incarnation. And if
all he there declares be true, (as I think it is,) we have then no reason to
quarrel with it upon that account. But he does not say, That a man cannot be
saved, who does not Know or Understand every particular thereof.

Of the First, he says but this, He that would be saved, ought thus to think,
or ((...)) let him thus think of the Trinity; namely, That the Unity in
Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, ought to be Worshipped.

Of the Second, what he says is this, Furthermore it is necessary to Eternal
Salvation, That he believe aright the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ:
Which is no more severe than that of our Savior, He that believes not the
Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him; because he has
not believed on the Name of the only begotten Son of God, whom God has sent
into the world, that the world through him might be saved, John 3. 17, 18, 36.

Beside these, there are no Damnatory Clauses in the whole. All the rest are
but Declaratory. And, if what he declares be true, we have no reason to find
fault with such Declaration.

Now as to those two Points; that of the Trinity, and that of the Incarnation,
(which are the only Points in question,) there is a double Inquiry, (as I have
elsewhere showed,) Whether the things be Possible; and whether they be True.
The Possibility may be argued from Principles of Reason: The Truth of them from
Revelation only. And it is not much questioned, but that the Revelation, in
both Points, is clear enough, if the things be not impossible.

As to that of the Trinity; I have already showed, (in a former Letter) That
there is therein no Impossibility, but that what in one consideration are
Three, (which we commonly call three Persons,) may yet (in another
consideration) be One God.

I shall now proceed to show, That neither is there any Impossibility, as to
the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Now this consists of two Branches; That of his being born of a Virgin; and
that of the Hypostatical Union (as it is commonly called) of the Humane Nature
with the Second Person of the Sacred Trinity.

As to the former of the two, there can be no pretense of Impossibility. For
the same God who did at first make Adam of the Dust of the Earth, without
either Father or Mother, and who made Eve of Adam's Rib, (without a Mother at
least, however Adam may be fansied as a Father,) and who shall at the last day
recall the Dead out of the Dust, may doubtless, if he so please, cause a Woman,
without the help of Man, to conceive a child. There is certainly no
Impossibility in nature, why it may not, by an Omnipotent Agent, be brought to
pass. And when the Scripture declares it so to be, there is no reason (if we
believe the Scripture) to disbelieve the Thing.

It is no more than when Christ cured the blind man's eyes with day and
spittle: Or Joh. 9. 6.
when he said, Lazarus, come forth, and Joh. 11. 43. 44.
he did so. Or when God said, Let Genesis 1. 3.
there be Light, and there was Light: And, of the whole Creation; He spoke,
Psalm. 33. 9.
and it was done, he commanded, and it stood fast. No more than when he made
Aaron's Rod (a dry Stick) to bud Numb. 17. 8.
and blossom, and yield Almonds: Or what is implied in that, Let not the Eunuch
Isai. 56. 3.
say, I am a dry tree. And not much more than when God gave Abraham Genesis 18.
11, 12.
a Son in his old age; and, notwithstanding Romans 4. 19.
the deadness of Sarah's womb.

I was about to say, (and it is not much amiss if I do) it is not much more
than what (pretty often) (happens amongst men, when God gives both Sexes to the
same person, (such there are, and have been; and I think there is one yet
living, who was first as a Woman married to a Man, and is since as a Man
married to a Woman;) and what hinders then, but that God, if he please, may
mingle the Effects of both these Sexes in the Same Body? A little alteration in
the structure of the Vessels would do it. For when there is in the same body,
and so near, Semen virile and muliebre, what hinders but there might be a
passage for them to mix? And Plants, we know, do propagate without a fellow,
though it be otherwise in Animals. And whereas this is said to be by the Holy
Ghost coming upon her, Luke. 1. 35.
and the Power of the Highest over shadowing the Blessed Virgin; it is not much
unlike that of the Spirit of God's Incubation, or moving upon the face of the
Waters. So that, as to this Point, Genesis 1. 2.
here is nothing Impossible, nothing Incredible.

The other Particular, as to the Hypostatical Union; How God and Man can be
united in one Person, may seem more difficult for us to apprehend, because we
understand so little of the Divine Essence, and consequently are less able to
determine, what is, and what is not, consistent with it. And, when all is done,
if we be never so certain, that there is such an Union, yet it will be hard to
say How it is.

But we have no reason from thence to conclude the thing Impossible because we
know not How it is done. Because there be many other things in nature, which we
are sure to Be; of which we are almost at as great a loss as to the manner How
they be, as in the present case.

Solomon, as wise as lie was, and how well so ever skilled in Natural
Philosophy, does yet acknowledge himself, in many things to be at a loss, when
he would search out the bottom of Natural things, and even when he made it his
Business so to do. When (says he) I applied my heart to know wisdom, and to see
the business that is done upon the earth: Then I beheld all the work of God;
that a man cannot find out the work of God that is done under the sun: Because
though a man labor to seek it out, yet he shall not find it. Yea further,
though a wise man seek to know it, yet shall he not be able to find it, Eccles.
8. 16, 17. And shall we then say, of the deep things of God, The 1 Cor. 2. 10,
11.
thing is impossible, because we cannot find it out? And if we consider how
many puzzling Questions God puts to Job, in the 37, 38, 39, 40, 41. Chapters of
Job, even in natural things, we may very well (as Job did) abhor our selves in
dust and ashes, and be ashamed of our ignorant curiosity; and confess (as he
does) I have uttered what I understood not; things too wonful for me which I
know not: when he found he had talked like a fool, while he thought to Romans 1.
22.
be wise, and would measure the Power and Wisdom of God by the narrow limits of
our understanding: And might come to Job's Resolution (when he had well weighed
the matter) I know that thou can do every thing, and that no thought can be
withholden from thee, Job 42. 2, 3, 6.

The wind blows where it lists, (not where you please to appoint it,) thou
hear the sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, Joh. 3. 8, 12.
or whither it goes, (says Christ to Nicodemus:) But shall we therefore
conclude, The Wind does not blow, because we know not how or whence it blows?
Or, that God cannot command the Winds, because we cannot? We should rather
conclude, The Wind does certainly Blow, (because we hear the sound of it,)
though we know neither How, nor Whence: And, though they do not Mat. 8. 26, 27.
obey us, yet the Wind and the Seas obey him. Now (as he there further argues)
If, when he tells us of earthly things, we do not apprehend it, how much more
if he tell us of Heavenly things? of the deep things of God?

But (to come a little nearer to the business) consider we a little the Union
of our own Soul and Body. It Is hardly accountable, nor perhaps conceivable by
us, (who are mostly conversant with material things,) How a Spiritual
Immaterial Being (such as our Souls are) and capable of a separate existence of
its own, should inform, actuate, and manage a material substance, such as is
that of our Body, and be so firmly United as to be One Person with it. By what
handle can a Spirit Intangible take hold of a Tangible Material Body, and give
Motion to it? Especially if we should admit Lucretius's Notion; Tangere vel
Tangi, nisi Corpus, nulla potest res: (which he repeats almost as often as
Homer does his (...)) who does thence repute it impossible for an Immaterial
Being to move a Body. But we who believe the Soul to be a a Spirit, know it to
be possible. Much more is it possible for God (though a Being infinitely Act.
17, 25, 27, 28. more pure) who gives to all, Life and Breath and All things;
and in whom we Live and Move and have our Being; and who is not far from every
one of us. It would be hard for us to give an intelligible account, either how
God moves all things, or how our Soul moves the Body; yet we are sure it is so.
That a Body may move a Body, seems not so strange to apprehend, (for we see one
Engine move another;) But, by what Mechanism, shall a Spirit give Motion to a
Body when at rest? or, Stop it when in Motion? or, Direct its Motions this way
or that way? It would be thought strange, that a Thought of ours should Move a
stone: And it is as hard to conceive (did we not see it daily) How a Thought
should put our Body in Motion, and another Thought stop it again. Yet this we
see done every day, though we know not How. And it is almost the same thing in
other Animals. And more yet, when an Angel assumes a Body. There are none of
these things we know, How; and yet we know, they are done.

I shall press this a little farther. Our Soul (we all believe) does (after
Death) continue to exist, in a separate condition from the Body. And, I think,
we have reason to believe also, that it will continue to Act as an Intellectual
Agent, (not to remain in a stupid senseless (...)) Else I see not why Paul
should desire to depart, or to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is
far better; Phil. 1. 21, 23, 24.
rather than to abide in Flesh. For while he abides in the Flesh, he has some
enjoyment of Christ, (as well as an opportunity of doing some Service) which is
more desirable, if when he is departed, he have none at all. And, how can he
then say, That to Dye is gain? Whether the Soul thus separated shall be said to
have a Subsistence as well as an Existence; Or, whether it may be properly said
then, to be an entire Person; (as the Soul and Body are, before Death, and
after the Resurrection) I will not Dispute, because, that were to contend about
Words, and such Words so signify, as we please to define them, and bear such a
Sense, as we please to put upon them. But it is (as the Angels are) an
Intellectual, Spiritual Agent; and we use to say, Actiones sunt Suppositorum;
and Suppositum Rationale, is either a Person, or so near a Person, that it
would be so if men please to call it so. And the Spiritual Being, which does
now separately Exist, shall at the Resurrection, resume a Body into the same
Personality with it self, and shall with it become one Person, as before Death
it had been.

Now if a Spiritual Immaterial Intellectual Being, separately existent by it
self, and separately acting as an Intellectual Agent, may, at the Resurrection,
assume or reassume a Material Corporeal Being (Heterogeneous to it self) into
the same Personality with it self, or so as to become one Person with it, while
yet it self remains Spiritual as before: What should hinder (for it is but one
step further) but that a Divine Person, may assume Humanity, into the same
personality with it self, without ceasing to be a Divine Person as before it
was? If it be said, That Person and Personality in the Sacred Trinity, are not
just the same as what we so call in other cases: It is granted; and by these
words (which are but Metaphorical) we mean no more, but somewhat analogous
thereunto; and which, (because of such analogy) we so call, as knowing no
better words to use instead thereof: According as we use the words, Father,
Son, generate, beget, and the like, in a metaphorical sense, when applied to
God. For no words, borrowed from Created Beings, can signify just the same
when applied to God, as when they were applied to Men, but somewhat analogous
thereunto. And if the Soul (though we know not How) may and do (at the
Resurrection) assume a Body so as to become the same Person with it self
(though neither the Body be thereby made a Soul, nor the Soul a Body; but
remain as before, that a Body, and this a Soul, though now united into one
Person:) Why may not a Divine Person assume Humanity, so to be what is
analogous to what we call a Person; the Humanity remaining Humanity, and the
Divinity remaining Divinity, though both united in One Christ; though we do not
particularly know How?

We should be at a great loss, if (to answer an Atheist, or one who does not
believe the Scriptures) we were put to it, to tell him, How God made the World?
Of what Matter? With what Tools or Engines? or, How a Pure Spirit could produce
Matter where none was? He would tell us perhaps, Ex nihilo nihil, in nihilum
nil posse reverti; Where nothing is, nothing can be made: and what once is,
(though it may be changed) can never become Nothing: And will never believe the
World was made, (but rather was from all Eternity) except we can tell him, How
it was made. Now, if in this case, we may satisfy our selves (though perhaps
it will not satisfy him) by saying, God made it, but we know not How: The same
must satisfy us here; That Christ was Incarnate, (God and Man) we are certain,
(for so the Scripture does assure us, as well as, That God made the World;)
But, How God made the World; or, How the Son of God assumed Humanity, we cannot
tell. Nor indeed is it fit for us to enquire, farther than God is pleased to
make known to us. All further than this, are but the subtle Cob-webs of our
Brain: Fine, but not Strong. Witty Conjectures, How it may be; rather than a
clear Resolution, How it is.

Another Objection I have met with: to which the Objecters must be contented
with the same Answer; We know it Is, but we know not How. It would be endless
for us, and too great a Curiosity, to think our selves able fully to explicate
all the Hidden things of God. The Objection is this: Since the Three Persons
cannot be Divided; How is it possible, that One of them can Assume Humanity,
and not the other? And why the Second Person, and not the First or Third?

As to the Question, Why? I say, It is so, because so it pleased God; And he
gives not account of his Matters; He is Job 33. 13.
not accountable to us, why he so wills.

As to the Question, How is it Possible? I see no difficulty in that at all.
The Persons are Distinguished, though not Divided. As in the Divine Attributes,
God's Justice and Mercy are Distinguishable; though in God they cannot be
Divided. And accordingly, some things are said to be Effects of his Justice,
others of his Mercy. So the Power and Will of God (both which are Individual
from himself:) But when we say God is Omnipotent, we do not say he is
Omnivolent. He wills indeed All things that Are, (else they could not be) but
he does not will all things Possible. And the like of other Attributes.

If therefore we do but allow as great a Distinction between the Persons, as
between the Attributes, (and certainly it is not less, but somewhat more,)
there is no incongruity in ascribing the Incarnation to One of the Persons, and
not to the rest.

It Is asked further, How I can accommodate this to my former Similitude, of a
Cube and its Three Dimensions; representing a Possibility of Three Persons, in
one Deity. I say, Very easily. For it is very possible, for one Face of a Cube,
suppose the Base, (by which I there represented the Second Person, as Generated
of the Father,) to admit a Foil, or Dark Color, while the Rest of the Cube is
Transparent; without destroying the Figure of the Cube, or the Distinction of
its Three Dimensions, which Color is adventitious to the Cube. For the Cube
was perfect without it, and is not destroyed by it. Which may some way
represent Christ's Humiliation. Who being Equal with God, was made Like unto
Us, and took upon him the Form of a Servant, Phil. 2. 6, 7.

So that, upon the whole Matter, there is no Impossibility in the Doctrine of
the Incarnation, any more than in that of the Trinity. And, supposing them to
be not Impossible; it is not denied but that they are, both of them,
sufficiently Revealed; and therefore to be Believed, if we believe the
Scripture. And of the other Articles in the Athanasian Creed, there is as
little reason to doubt.

There is therefore no just Exception, as to the Declarative part of the
Athanasian Creed. And, as to the Damnatory part; we have before showed, that it
is no more severe, than other passages in Scripture to the same purpose; and to
be understood with the like Mitigations as those are. And, consequently, that
whole Creed, as hitherto, may justly be received.

It Is true, there be some Expressions in it, which, if I were now to Pen a
Creed, I should perhaps choose to leave out: But, being in, they are to be
understood according to such sense as we may reasonably suppose to be intended,
and according to the Language of those times When they did use to Anathematize
great Errors, which they apprehended to be Destructive of the Christian Faith,
as things of themselves Damnable, if not Repented of. And, I suppose, no more
is here intended; nor of any other Errors, than such as are Destructive of
Fundamentals.

Oxford, October. 28. 1690. Yours, John Wallis.

POSTSCRIPT. November 15. 1690.
WHen this Third Letter was Printed, and ready to come abroad, I stopped it a
little for this Postscript; occasioned by a small Treatise which came to my
hands, with this Title, Dr. Wallis' s Letter, touching the Doctrine of the
Blessed Trinity, answered by his Friend. It seems, I have more Friends abroad
than I am aware of. But, Who this Friend is, or whether he be a Friend, I do
not know. It is to let me understand, that a Neighbor of his, reputed a
Socinian, is not convinced by it: But names some Socinian Authors, who
endeavor to elude Scriptures alleged for the Trinity, by putting some other
sense upon them. He might have named as many, if he pleased, who have (to
better purpose) written against those Authors, in vindication of the True
sense. And if he should Repeat what Those have said on the one side; and I, say
over again, what Those have said on the other side; we should make a long work
of it.

But he knows very well, That was not the business of my Letter, to discourse
the whole Controversy at large, (either as to the Evidence, or as to the
Antiquity, of the Doctrine.) For this I had set aside at first, (as done by
others, to whom I did refer:) and confined my Discourse to this single Point,
That there is no Impossibility (which is the Socinians great Objection) but
that What in one consideration is Three, may in another consideration be One.
And if I have sufficiently evinced this, (as I think I have; and I do not find
that he denies it;) I have then done what I there undertook. And, in so doing,
have removed the great Objection, which the Socinians would cast in our way:
and, because of which, they think themselves obliged to shuffle off other
Arguments on this pretense. Now (whether he please to call this a Metaphysick,
or Mathematick Lecture,) certain it is, that there are Three distinct
Dimensions (Length, Breadth, and Thickness) in One Cube. And, if it be so in
Corporeals, there is no pretense of reason, why in Spirituals (...) should be
thought Impossible, that there be ^^ree Somewhat's which are but One God. And
these Somewhat's, till he can furnish us with a better name, we are content to
call Persons, (which is the Scripture word, Heb. 1. 3.) Which word we own to be
but Metaphorical, (not signifying just the same here, as when applied to men,)
as also are the words, Father, Son, Generate, Begot, etc. when applied to God.
And more than this need not be said, to justify what there I undertook to
defend.

Now it is easy for him (if he so please) to burlesque this, or turn it to
ridicule, (as it is, any the most Sacred things of God;) but not so safe,
Ludere cum Sacris. The Sacred Trinity (be it as it will) should by us be used
with more Reverence, than to make Sport of it.

I might here end, without saying more. But because he is pleased to make some
Excursions, beside the Business which I undertook to prove, (and which he does
not deny;) I will follow him in some of them.

He finds fault with the Similitude I brought, (though very proper to prove
what it was brought for,) as too high a Speculation for the poor Laborers in
the Country, and the Tankard-bearers in London. And therefore (having a mind to
be pleasant) he advises rather (as a more familiar Parallel) to put it thus, I
Mary, take thee Peter James and John for my wedded Husband, etc. (thinking
this, I suppose, to be Witty.) And truly (supposing Peter, James, and John, to
be the same Man,) it is not much amiss. But I could tell him, with a little
alteration, (if their Majesty's will give me leave to make as bold with their
Names, as he does with the Names of Christ's Mother, and of his three Disciples
which were with him in the Mount at his Transfiguration, Matthew. 17. 1.) it were
not absurd to say, I Mary, take thee Henry William Nassaw; without making him
to be three Men, or three Husbands; and without putting her upon any difficulty
(as is suggested) How to dispose of her Conjugal Affection. And, when the Lords
and Commons declared Him to be King of England, France, and Ireland; they did
not intend, by alotting him three distinct Kingdoms, to make him three Men. And
when, for our Chancellor, we made choice of James, Duke, Marquess and Earl of
Ormond; though he had three distinct Dignities, he was not therefore three Men,
nor three Chancellors. And when Tully says 2 de Orat.
, Sustineo unus tres personas; meam, adversarii, judicis; which is in English,
(that the Tankard-bearer may understand it,) I being one and the same Man, do
sustain Three Persons; that of Myself, that of my Adversary, and that of the
Judge: He did not become three Men, by sustaining three Persons. And (in this
Answer to my Letter) the Friend and his Neighbor, may (for ought I know) be
the same Man, though he sustain Two Persons. And, I hope, some of these
Resemblances, may be so plain, and so familiar, as that He and his
Tankard-bearer may apprehend them: and thence perceive, It is not Impossible
that Three may be One. For if (among us) one Man may sustain three Persons,
(without being three Men,) Why should it be thought incredible, that three
Divine Persons may be one God? (as well as those three other Persons be one
Man?) Nor need he the less believe it for having (as this Answerer suggests)
been taught it in his Catechism, or (as Timothy did the Scriptures) know it
from a Child. But I would not have him then to tell me, the Father is a Duke,
the Son a Marquess, the Holy Ghost an Earl, (according as he is pleased to
prevaricate upon the Length, Breadth and Thickness of a Cube;) but thus rather,
That, God the Creator, God the Redeemer, and God the Sanctifier, are the same
God. That God the Creator is Omnipotent and Allsufficient; that God the
Redeemer is so too; and God the Sanctifier likewise. That God the Creator is to
be Loved with all our Heart; and so God the Redemer, and God the Sanctifier.
And then there will be no Absurdity in all this.

As to what he says, that All people that have reason enough to understand
Numbers, know the difference between One, and More than one; I might reply,
That all people who can tell Money, know that Three Groats are but One Shilling,
and Three Nobles are One Pound; and what in one consideration is Three, may in
another consideration be but One. Which, if it look like a slight Answer, is
yet sufficient to such an Argument.

He tells me somewhat of Dr. Sherlock, (wherein I am not concerned,) and
somewhat of the Brief History of the Unitarians, (of which his Neighbor gives
the Friend a Copy;) But he does not tell me, as he might, (and therefore I tell
him) that Dr. Sherlock has confuted that History. But Dr. Sherlock says
nothing contrary to what I defend. For if there be such Distinction (between
the three Persons) as he assigns, then at least, there is a Distinction (which
is what I affirm, without saying how great it is;). Nor does he any where deny
them to be one God.

He tells me a story of somebody, who, in a public Disputation at Oxford,
maintaining a Thesis against the Socinians, was baffled by his Opponent. Whom,
or when, he means, I do not know; and so say nothing to it: But, that I may not
be in his debt for a story, I shall tell him another, which will be at least as
much to the purpose as his. It is, of their great friend, Christophorus
Christophori Sandius, a diligent promoter of the Socinian Cause. He printed a
Latin Thesis or Discourse against the Divinity of the Holy Ghost, which he
calls Problema Paradoxum de Spiritu Sancto, with a general Challenge to this
purpose, Ut siquis in toto Orb eruditorum forte sit, qui doctrina magis
polleat, quam quibuscum hactenus sit collocutus, ea legate quae a se public
sint edita argumenta, seque errare moneat, ac rectius sentire doceat. Hereupon,
Wittichius accepts the Challenge, and writes against Sandius. To which Sandius
answers, (taking in another as a partner with him in the Disputation.) And
Wittichius replies. And that with so good success, that Sandius and his
partner, acknowledged themselves to be convinced by it, and to change their
Opinion. This happening but a little before Sandius his death; His Partner
(surviving) published to the World an Account hereof, (and of Sandius
declaring, before his death, that he was so convinced,) in a Letter of Thanks
to Wittichius for it. What Sandius would have done further, if he had lived a
little longer, we cannot tell. That of Wittichius bears this Title, Causa
Spiritus Sancti, Personae Divinae, ejusdem cum Patre and Filio essentiae,
(contra C. C. S. Problema Paradoxum,) asserta and defensa, a Christophoro
Wittichio. Lugduni Batavorum apud Arnoldum Doude, 1678. The Letter of Thanks
bears this Title, Epistola ad D. Christophorum Gittichium Professorem
Lugdunensem; Qua gratiae ei habentur pro eruditissimis ipsius in Problema de
Spiritu Sancto Animadversionibus: Scripta a Socio Authoris Problematis
Paradoxi: Per quas errores suos rejicere coactus est. Coloniae, apud Ioannem
Nicolai.

He takes it unkindly, that I charge it upon some of the Socinians that though
they do not think fit directly to reject the Scriptures, yet think themselves
obliged to put such a forced sense upon them, as to make them signify somewhat
else. And tells me of some Socinians, who have so great a respect for the
Scriptures, as to say that the Scripture contains nothing that is repugnant to
manifest Reason; and that what does not agree with Reason, has no place in
Divinity, etc. But this is still in order to this Inference; That therefore
what they think not agreeable to Reason, must not be thought to be the sense of
Scripture: and therefore that they must put such a Force upon the Words, how
great soever, as to make them comply with their sense. If he except against the
words, how great a Force soever, as too hard an Expression of mine: They are
Socinus's own words, (in his Epistle to Balcerovius, of January 30. 1581.)
Certe contraria sententia adeo mihi and absurda and perniciosa (pace Augustini,
etc. dixerim) esse videtur, ut Quantacunque Vis potius Pauli verbis sit
adhibenda, quam ea admittenda. That is, The contrary Opinion (with Augustin's
leave, and others of his mind) seems to me so absurd and pernicious, that we
must rather put a Force, how great soever, upon Paul's words, than admit it.

And, as to the suspicion I had of some of their Sentiments, as to Spiritual
Subsistences, (that it may not appear to be groundless) He does (in his Epist.
5. ad Volkelium) absolutely deny, that the Soul after death does subsist; and
adds expressly, Ostendi me sentiresnon ita vivere post hominis ipsius mortem, ut
per se praemiorum poenarumve capax sit: that is, that the Soul after death does
not subsist; nor is in a capacity of being, by it self, rewarded or punished.
And how he can then think it an Intelligent Being, I do not see. St. Paul, it
seems, was of another mind, when he had a desire to be dissolved (or depart
hence) and to be with Christ, as being far better for him, than to abide in the
flesh, Phil. 1. 23, 24. And willing rather to be absent from the body, and
present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5. 8. Now I do not understand the advantage of
his being with Christ, or being present with the Lord; if he were then to be in
a senseless condition, not capable of pain or pleasure, punishment or reward.

In Epist. 3. ad Dudithium, we have these words, Unusquisque sacrae Scripturae
ex suo ipsius sensu Interpres: eaque quae sibi sic Arrident pro veris admittere
de bet ac tenere, licet universus terrarum Orbis in alia omnia iret. That is,
Every one is to interpret Scripture accerding to his own sense: and what so
seems Pleasing to him, he is to imbrance and maintain, though all the World be
against it.

Socinus, in his Tract, de Ecclesia, page 344. says thus, Non attendendum quid
homines doceant sentiantve, vel antehac docuerint aut senserint, quicunque illi
tandem, aut quotcunque, sint aut fuerint. Which is pretty plain. I am not (says
he) to regard what other men do teach or think, or have before now taught or
thought, whosoever, or how many soever, they be or have been. And if his
whosoever are not here to be extended to the Sacred Writers; he tells us of
them elsewhere, Ego quidem, etiamsi non semel, sed saepe, id in sacris
monimentis scriptum extaret, non idcirco tamen ita rem prorsus se habere
crederem. Soc. de Jesu Christo servatore, Par. 3. cap. 6. Operum Tom. 2. p.
204. As for me (says he) though it were to be found written in the Sacred
Moniments, not once, but many times, I would not yet for all that believe it so
to be. And a little before, in the same Chapter, (having before told us, that
he thought the thing Impossible,) he adds, Cum ea quae fieri non posse aperte
constat, divinis etiam oraculis ea facta fuisse in speciem diserte
attestantibus, nequaquam admittantur; and idcirco sacra verba, in alium sensum
quam ipsa sonant, per inusitatos etiam tropos quandoque explicantur. That is,
When it does plainly appear, (or when he thinks so, whatever all the World
think beside) that the thing cannot be; then, though the Divine Oracles do seem
expressly to attest it, it must not be admitted: and therefore the Sacred Words
are, even by unusual Tropes, to be interpreted to another sense than what they
speak. Which Sayings are, I think, full as much as I had charged him with.

And if these Instances be not enough, I could give him more of like nature.
But I shall conclude this with one of a later date: at a Public Disputation at
Franeker, October. 8. 1686. where (amongst others) this Thesis was maintained;
Scripturae divinitatem non aliunde quam ex Ratione adstrui posse; Eosque
Errare, qui asserere sustinent, Si Ratio aliud quid nobis dictaret quam
Scriptura, huic potius esse credendum. And when Ulricus Huberus (because it was
not publicly censured, as he thought it deserved to be) did oppose it in Word
and Writing; the same was further asserted, in Public Disputations, and in
Print, by two other Professors in Franeker, in Vindication of that former
Thesis; that, If Reason do dictate to us any thing otherwise than the Scripture
does; It is an Error to say, that, in such case, we are rather to believe the
Scripture. An account of the whole is to be seen at large in a Treatise
entitled, Ulrici Huberi, Supremae Frisiorum Curiae ex-senatoris, De concursu
Rationis and Scripturae Liber. Franakerae apud Hen. Amama and Zachar. Taedama,
1687. And a Breviate of it in the Lipsick Transactions for the Month of August,
1687. And, after this, I hope this Answerer will not think me too severe in
charging such Notions on some of the Socinians, while yet (I said) I was so
charitable as to think diverse of them were better minded.

But what should make him so angry at what I said of Guessing, I cannot
imagine. That there is a Distinction between the Three, we are sure; (this I
had said before, and the Answerer now says, It is so.) But not such as to make
three Gods; (this I had said also, and the Answerer says so too.) That the
Father is said to Beget, the Son to be Begotten, and the Holy Ghost to Proceed,
I had said also, (and I suppose he will not deny,) because thus the Scripture
tells us. (And whatever else the Scripture tells us concerning it, I readily
accept.) But if it be further asked, (beyond what the Scripture teaches,) as,
for instance, What this Begetting is, or, How the Father does Beget his only
begotten Son; This, I say, we do not know, (at least I do not) because this, I
think, the Scripture does not tell us; (and of this therefore I hope this
Gentleman will give me leave to be ignorant:) Certainly it is not so as when
one Man begets another; but How it is, I cannot tell. And if I should set my
thoughts awork, (as some others have done, and each according to his own
imagination) to Guess or Conjecture, How perhaps it may be; I would not be
Positive, That just so it is: Because I can but Guess or Conjecture, I cannot
be sure of it. (For I think it is much the same as if a man born Blind, and who
had never seen, should employ his Fancy to think, What kind of thing is Light
or Color: of which it would be hard for him to have a clear and certain Idea.)
And if this Gentleman please to look over it again, I suppose he will see, that
he had no cause to be so angry, that I said, We can but Guess herein, at what
the Scripture does not teach us.

That the Socinians have set their Wits awork to find out other Subsidiary
Arguments and Evasions against the Trinity, beside that of its Inconsistence
with Reason, I do not deny: But That is the Foundation, and the rest are but
Props. And if they admit, that there is in it no Inconsistence with Reason;
they would easily answer all the other Arguments themselves.

I thought not to meddle with any of the Texts on either side, because it is
beside the Scope which I proposed, when I confined my Discourse to that single
Point, of its not being Impossible or Inconsistent with Reason: and did
therefore set aside other Considerations, as having been sufficiently argued by
others, for more than an Hundred Years last past. But having already followed
him in some of his Excursions, I shall briefly consider the two signal places
which he singles out as so mainly clear.

In the former of them, John 17. 3. This is life eternal, that they might know
thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent; he puts a Fallacy
upon us: which perhaps he did not see himself, or at least hoped we would not
see it. And therefore I desire him to consider, that it is not said Thee only
to be the true God; but Thee, the only true God. And so in the Greek; it is not
(...), but (...). The Restrictive (...), only, is not annexed to Thee, but to
God. To know Thee to be the only true God; that is, to be that God, beside
which God, there is no other true God. And We say the like also, That the
Father is that God, beside which there is no other true God: and say, the Son
is also (not another God, but) the same only true God. And if those words,
(...); should be thus expounded, To know Thee to be the only true God; and whom
thou have sent, Jesus Christ, (to be the same only true God;) repeating (...),
those words (...) he would not like that interpretation; but both the Words and
the Sense will very well bear it, (without such Force as they are fain to put
upon many other places.) Or if, without such repetition, we take this to be the
scope of the place; To set forth the two great Points of the Christian
Religion, or Way to Eternal Life; That there is but one true God (though in
that Godhead there be three Persons, as elsewhere appears,) in opposition to
the many Gods of the Heathen: and the Doctrine of Redemption, by Jesus Christ,
whom God has sent, (of which the Heathen were not aware:) the sense is very
plain. And nothing in it so clear, as he would have us think, against the
Trinity; but all very consistent with it.

And the same Answer serves to his other place, 1 Cor. 8. 6. But to us there is
but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him, (or for him:)
and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him. For here also
One God may be referred (...), both to the Father (if here taken as a distinct
person) and to the Lord Jesus Christ: Or, without that, it is manifest, that
One God is here put in opposition (not to the plurality of Persons, as we call
them, in One Deity; but) to the many Gods amongst the Heathen: and our one
Savior, against their many Saviors. As is manifest, if we take the whole
context together; We know that an Idol is nothing in the World: and that there
is no other God but one. For though there be that are called Gods, whether in
Heaven or in Earth, (as there be Gods many, and Lords many:) But to us there is
but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him, Ver. 4, 5, 6. Where it is
evident, that the scope of the place is, not to show either how the Persons (as
we call them) or how the Attributes of that One God are distinguished amongst
themselves: But to set our One God (who is the Father or Maker of all things,)
in opposition to the Many Gods of the Idolatrous World: and our One Savior or
Redeemer, against their Many Saviors. Indeed, if we should set up our Jesus
Christ to be another God, the Text would be against us: but not when we own him
for the same God. So that here is nothing clear in either place (as he
pretends) against Christ's being the same God with the Father.

But in that other place of John 1. (which he labors to elude) the evidence
for it does so stare him in the face, that if he were not (as he speaks)
Wilfully blind, (or did Wink very hard) he must needs see it. In the beginning
was the Word; and the Word was with God; and the Word was God. The same was in
the beginning with God. All things were made by him; and without him was not
any thing made that was made. In him was life, and the life was the light of
men, (Ver. 1, 2, 3, 4.) He was in the World; and the World was made by him; and
the World knew him not. He came unto his own, and his own received him not. But
to as many as received him, he gave power (or right, or privilege,) to become
the sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name, (Ver. 10, 11, 12.) And
the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us; and we beheld his glory, the glory
as of the only begotten of the Father; full of grace and truth, (Ver. 14.) Why
he should not think this very clear, is very strange, if he were not strangely
prepossessed. Unless he think nothing clear, but such as no man can cavil
against. But there can hardly be any thing said so clearly, but that some or
other (if they list to be contentious) may cavil at it, or put a forced sense
upon it. For thus the whole Doctrine of Christ, when himself spoke it, (and he
spoke as clearly, as he thought fit to speak,) was cavilled at. And himself
tells us the reason of it, Matthew. 13. 14, 15. and Ioh. 12. 37, 38, 39, 40. and
after him St. Paul, Acts 28. 26. and Romans 11. 8. Not for want of clear Light,
but because they shut their eyes. In John 12. it is thus, But though he had
done so many miracles before them, yet they believed not on him: That the
saying of Esaias the Prophet might be fulfilled, which he spoke; Lord, who has
believed our report? and to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed?
Therefore they could not believe, because Esaias said again, He has blinded
their eyes and hardened their heart, that they should not see with their eyes,
nor understand with their heart, and be converted, and I should heal them.
These things said Esaias, when he saw his glory and spoke of him. And thus in
Matthew 13. Hearing ye shall hear and shall not understand, and seeing ye shall
see and shall not perceive. For this peoples heart is waxed gross, and their
ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes they have closed; lest at any time
they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with
their heart, and should be converted, and I should heal them. So that it is no
argument of a place or doctrine's not being clear, because prejudiced persons
are able to pick cavils at it, or put a forced sense upon it.

But let us see what these cavils are. This I confess (says he) were to the
purpose, if by the term Word could be meant (he should rather have said, be
meant) nothing else but a pre-existing person; and, by the term God, nothing
but God Almighty the Creator of Heaven and Earth; and if taking those terms in
those senses did not make St. John write Nonsense.

Now in reply to this, I first take exception to that phrase, if it could be
meant of nothing else. For if his meaning be this* If no Caviller can start up
another sense, right or wrong: this is no fair play. For hardly can any thing
be so plain, but that somebody may find a pretense to cavil at it. It is enough
for us therefore, if it be thus meant, without saying, it is impossible to put
a forced sense upon it. But this would have spoiled his design, in mustering up
a great many forced senses; not that he thinks them to be true, (for surely
they be not all true; and I think none of them are) nor telling us which he
will stick to; but only that he may cast a mist; and then tell us (which is all
that he concludes upon it) the place is abscure, he knows not what to make of
it.

But when the Mist is blown off, and we look upon the Words themselves, they
seem plain enough, as to all the Points he mentions. The Word which was with
God, and was God, and by whom the World was made, and which was made flesh and
dwelt amongst us, and we saw his glory, and of whom John bare witness; must
needs be a Person; and can be no other than our Lord Jesus Christ, who was born
of the Virgin Mary. And this Word, which was in the beginning, and by whom the
World was made, must needs have been preexistent before he was so born. And
this Word, which was with God (the true God) and was God, and by whom the World
was made, and who is one with the Father, (Joh. 10. 30.) and What we render who
is, (in Romans 9. 5.) is in the Greek, not (...), but (...), ( he that Is,) which
in Rev. 1. 4. ((...), etc.) and elsewhere, is used as a peculiar Name or Title
proper to God Almighty; and answers to I AM, Exodus 3. 14. I AM has sent me
unto you (Of the same import with Iah and Jehovah.) And what is said of God
indefinitely, (without respect to this or that Person in the Godhead) at Rev.
1. 4. (for Christ in particular is contradistinguished, Ver. 5.) (...), ( from
him that Is, and was, and is to come,) is at Ver. 8. applied in particular to
Christ, I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, says the Lord, which
IS, and was, and is to come, the Almighty. Which closes the description of
Christ, that begins at Ver. 5. And that, by the Lord, is here meant Christ, is
evident from the whole context, Ver. 11, 13, 17, 18, and the whole Second and
Third Chapters. And so the description of Christ, Romans 9. 5. (...), in its full
Emphasis, is thus, that BEING over all, (or, the Supreme Being) God blessed for
ever, (or the ever blessed God) Amen. And there will be need of Socinus's
Expedient, ( quantacunque Vis Pauli verbis adhibenda) to make it signify any
other God, than God Almighty, the Creator of Heaven and Earth.
who is over all, God blessed for ever, (Romans 9. 5.) is no other God than God
Almighty, Creator of Heaven and Earth.) And this plain sense the words bear,
without any force put upon them: Without any Incoherence, Inconsistence, or
Contradiction; s^^e that they do not agree with the Socinian Doctrine. And
there is no other way to avoid it, but what Socinus advises in another case,
Quantacunque Vis verbis adhibenda; putting a Force upon the words, no matter
how great, to make them, not to signify, what they plainly do. Or else to say,
(which is his last refuge) that St. John writes Nonsense.

But let him then consider, Whether this do savor of that respect which he
would have us think they have for the Holy Scripture; and whether we have not
reason to susp^^t the contrary of some of them. And, Whether we have not reason
to complain of their putting a forced sense upon plain words, to make them
comply with their Doctrine. And lastly, Whether it be not manifest, that the
true Bottom of their aversion from the Trinity (whatever other subsidiary
Reasons they may allege) is, because they think it Nonsense, or not agreeable
with their Reason. (For, set this aside, and all the rest is plain enough; but,
because of this, they scruple not to put the greatest force upon Scripture.)
Nor is there any other pretense of Nonsense in the whole Discourse, save that
he thinks the Doctrine of the Trinity to be Nonsense. So that the whole
Controversy with him, turns upon this single Point, Whether there be such
Impossibility or Inconsistence, as is pretended.

That of 1 John 5. 7. There be three that bear record in Heaven, the Father,
the Word, and the Holy Ghost; and these Three are One: is wanting, he says, in
some Copies. And it is so; (and so are some whole Epistles wanting in some
Copies.) But we will not for that quit the place. For we have great reason to
think it genuine. If this difference of Copies happened at first by chance
(upon an oversight in the Transcriber) in some one Copy, (and thereupon in all
that were transcribed from thence;) it is much more likely for a Transcriber to
leave out a line or two which is in his Copy, than to put in a line or two
which is not. And if it were upon design, it is much more likely that the
Arians should purposely leave it out, (in some of their Copies) than the
Orthodox foist it in. Nor was there need of such falsification; since (...),
concludes as strongly, as to a Plurality of persons, (and of the Son in
particular, which was the chief controversy with the Arians;) as (...) does as
to all the Three. And, I think, it is cited by Cyprian, in his Book De unitate
Ecclesiae, before the Arian Controversy was on foot. And therefore, if it were
done designedly (and not by chance) it seems rather to be razed out by the
Arians, than thrust in by the Orthodox. And the Language of this in the
Epistle, suits so well with that of the same Author in his Gospel, that it is a
strong presumption, that they are both from the same Pen. The Word, in 1 John
5. 7. agrees so well with the Word in John 1. (and is peculiar to St. John:)
and (...), in 1 John 5. 7. with (...) in John 10. 30. ( these three are One,
with I and the Father are One) that I do not at all doubt its being genuine.
And that Evasion of his, these three are one, that is, one in testimony, will
have no pretense in the other place, where there is no discourse of Testimony
at all: but I and the Father are One, (unum sumus) must be One Thing, One in
Being, One in Essence. For so Adjectives in the Neuter Gender, put without a
Substantive, do usually signify both in Greek and Latin: and there must be
some manifest reason to the contrary, that should induce us to put another
sense upon them.

The other place, Matthew. 28. 19. Baptizing them in (or into) the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; is not so slight an evidence as
he would make it. For whether (...), (not (...)) be rendered in the Name, and
taken to denote the joint Authority of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, admitting
the person baptized into the Christian Church: Or, into the Name, (which this
Answerer seems to like better) and taken to denote the Dedication of the person
baptized to the joint Service or Worship of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost;
(Baptism it self being also a part of Divine Worship:) They are all conjoined;
either, as in joint Authority; or as joint Objects of the same Religious
Worship; and, for ought appears, in the same Degree. And Socinus himself does
allow, the Son to be Worshipped with Religious Worship; as Adoration, and
Invocation; as Lawful at least, if not Necessary. Now when this Answerer tells
us of the First Commandment, Thou shall have no other God but me, (the God of
Israel;) He might as well have remembered that of Christ, Matthew. 4. 10. Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. And therefore
since Socinus (and other of his followers) do allow Christ to be Worshipped,
they must allow him to be God, even the God of Israel. And I am mistaken if he
be not expressly called, the Lord God of Israel. Luke 1. 16. Many of the
children of Israel shall he (John the Baptist) turn to the Lord their God; for
he shall go before Him in the spirit and power of Elias, etc. Now he before
whom John the Baptist was to go in the spirit and power of Elias, is agreed to
be our Lord Jesus Christ; it is therefore He that is here called the Lord God of
Israel. And we who own him so to be, Worship no other God in Worshipping him.
It is those, who do not own him so to be, and do yet Worship him, that are to
be charged with Worshipping another God. Now when here we find Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, all joined in the same Worship, we have reason to take them all for
the same God; and, that these Three are One. And do say, (as willingly as he)
Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God is One God. Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are
but One God: As God the Creator, God the Redeemer, and God the Sanctifier, are
One God. And what in the Old Testament are said of God, indefinitely, without
taking notice of this or that of the three Persons; are, in the New Testament,
attributed some to one, some to another, of the three Persons.

That which makes these Expressions seem harsh to some of these men, is because
they have used themselves to fancy that notion only of the word Person,
according to which Three Men are accounted to be Three Persons, and these Three
Persons to be Three Men. But he may consider, that there is another notion of
the word Person, and in common use too, wherein the same Man may be said to
sustain diverse Persons, and those Persons to be the same Man, That is the same
Man as sustaining diverse Capacities. As was said but now of Tully, Tres
Personas Unus sustineo. And then it will seem no more harsh to say, The three
Persons, Father, Son and Holy Ghost are one God; than to say, God the Creator,
God the Redeemer, and God the Sanctifier are one God; which, I suppose, even to
this Answerer would not seem harsh, or be thought Nonsense. It is much the same
thing, whether of the two Forms we use. And, all the Cavils he uses, may be
equally applied to either. What answer therefore he would give to one who
should thus object against the latter form, will serve us as well to what he
objects against the former.

If therefore the Gentleman please to consider it calmly; he will find, that,
even amongst men, though another person do many times denote another man, (and
thereupon the words are sometimes used promiscuously,) yet not always; nor does
the word Person necessarily imply it. A King and a Husband (though they imply
very different Notions, different Capacities, different Relations, or different
Personalities,) yet may both concur in the same Man. (Or, in that sense wherein
Person is put for Man, in the same Person.) So a King and a Father, a King and
a Brother, and the like. And this Gentleman, though (in the Dialogue) he
sustain two Persons; that of an Opponent, and that of an Answerer; or that of a
Friend, and that of an Adversary; (that so, while one gives ill Language, the
other may give up the Cause;) yet they do not act each their own part so
covertly, but that sometime the vizard falls off, and discovers the Man to be
the same. For though my Letter be answered by a Friend, page 1. yet it is the
Neighbor that is weary of Writing, p. 13.

Now, if Person, in a Proper sense, when applied to Men, do not imply, that
different Persons must needs be so many different Men: much less should it be
thought Nonsense, when (in a Metaphorical sense) it is applied to God, that
different Persons in the Deity, should not imply so many Gods: Or, that three
Somewhat's (which we call Persons) may be One God. Which is what I undertook to
prove.

And, having made this good, I need not trouble my self to name more Texts
(though many more there be which give concurrent evidence to this truth) or
discourse the whole Controversy at large, (which was not the design of my
Letter.) For himself has reduced it to this single Point; When St. John says,
The Word was with God, and the Word was God; if by the Word, be meant Christ,
and by God, the true God; Whether, in so saying, St. John do not speak
Nonsense? And if I evince this not to be Nonsense, (as I think I have done) he
grants the place is to the purpose. Which quite destroys the Foundation of the
Socinian Doctrine. Without being obliged to prove, that these Persons are just
such Persons, and so distinct, as what we sometime call Persons amongst Men,
(but with such Distinction only as is agreeable to the Divine Nature, and not
such as to make them Three Gods.) Like as when God the Father is said to Beget
the Son; not so as one man Begets another, (nor is the Son so a Son as what we
call Son amongst Men:) but so as suits with the Divine Nature: which How it is,
we do not perfectly comprehend.

I have now done with him. But I have one thing to note upon what I have before
said, of the Athanasian Creed. I there read it, (...) because I so find it in
the Copy I used; which is that at the end of the Greek Testament in Octavo,
Printed at London by John Bill, 1622; with Robert Stephan's, Joseph Scaliger's
and Isaac Casaubon's Annotations. But in Whitaker's Greek Testament, reprinted
by this Copy, 1633, I since find it is (...). (Which Edition, I suppose, is
followed by some others.) I take the former to be the better reading, (as
giving a clearer sense;) and that the Correcter of the Press, had put (...) for
(...), intending thereby to mend the Greek Syntax, (because (...) follows,) but
does (I think) impair the sense. But, as to the Doctrine, it is much one
whether we read (...) or (...). And what I have said of that whole Creed, is
chiefly intended for those who do believe the Doctrine of the Trinity, and of
Christ's Incarnation; that there is no reason (in my opinion) why they should
not allow of that Creed. But such as do not believe those Points, cannot (I
grant) approve the Creed. And it is these, I suppose, who would fain have
others to dislike it also.

FINIS.

