A DEFENSE Of the Royal Society, And the Philosophical Transactions,
Particularly those of July, 1670. In Answer to the Cavils of Dr. WILLIAM HOLDER.

By JOHN WALLIS, D. D. Professor of Geometry in Oxford, and Fellow of the ROYAL
SOCIETY. In a Letter to the Right Honorable, WILLIAM Lord Viscount BROUNCKER.

LONDON, Printed by T. S. for Thomas Moore, at the Maidenhead over against St.
Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street. 1678.

To the Right Honorable, WILLIAM LORD VISCOUNT BROUNCKER.
March 6. 1677/8. My LORD.
IN the Printed Paper of Dr. Holder, which your Lordship showed me when I was
last in London, about a fortnight since, (which, till that time, I had not
seen) I find great complaints of the Royal Society; Of the Philosophical
Transactions; (particularly that of July, 1670.) Of the Publisher thereof, Mr.
Oldenburg, (who deserved better things;) Of Dr. Plot; and of some others,
(whom, because he did forbear to name in particular, I shall forbear it too;)
but, most of all, of my self.

He complains (page 1, 2.) of subtle Contrivances, and subtle Practices; to
abuse the Reader with false Shows, somewhat resembling Truth. And they be so
subtle, and so resembling Truth, or rather so perfectly true, that there is not
one Sentence or Clause in what he finds fault with, which (notwithstanding all
his displeasure) he does so much as charge with untruth. Whereas his Paper is
full of gross mistakes.

That in the year 1659/60 (or at any other time) at Bletchington near Oxford,
(or any where else) Dr. William Holder, (or Mr. William Holder) did teach
Alexander Popham Esquire to speak, (as page 1.) If it be true, is more than I
yet know: that he did attempt it, I know very well; but that he did effect it,
I never yet heard any body say but himself.

What there follows, That I saw and perfectly knew this; that I resorted to
Blechington, to see and hear Mr. Popham, is a very great mistake. I never (to
my knowledge) saw Mr. Popham, (either at Blechington, or any where else) till
that very day when his Mother, the Lady Wharton, brought him to me at Oxford
(in the year 1662) to stay with me, and learn to speak. Much less had I heard
him speak; and least of all had seen Dr. Holder teach him.

Who were those many, page 1, 5. (or those few, if any) who did, on purpose,
resort to Blechington on that account, (or, what they found there) I cannot
tell; sure I am, that I was none of them.

It Is true, I then lived at Oxford, (that is, I had an habitation there) and
have (both before and since the time mentioned) had conversation with Dr.
Holder, and had (before that time, but, I think, not since) been sometimes with
him at his house in Blechington. But sure I am, that I was not with him there
at any time when Mr. Popham was with him: For, had I been so, and on an account
so remarkable, it is not possible that in so short a time (as two years, or
less) I should so perfectly forget it, as then to take Mr. Popham for a strange
person, whom I had never seen before; and, that (from that time to this) I
should never (by any circumstance) call it to mind that I had before seen him.

It is much more possible, that Dr. Holder's memory may fail him, who, having
diverse times, before, seen me at Blechington, might think one of those times to
have been, while Mr. Popham was with him: if at least it be true, that so very
many did resort thither, on purpose, upon that occasion, as page 1, 5.

When Mr. Popham came to me, in the year 1662. (which was the first time that I
ever saw him) he had (as Dr. Holder words it, page 3, 5.) begun to loose what
he had been taught: That is, he had so perfectly forgot (if at all taught) that
I found him not able to pronounce one word or syllable.

Now, if so lately, as in the year 1660, he had learned to speak so well, (as
page 6.) to pronounce plainly and distinctly, and with a good and graceful
Tone, whatever words were shown him, in Print or writing; or, represented to
him by several ways; or, as he had occasion to ask for, etc. (as page 5.) it is
very strange it should so perfectly be forgotten within two years.

And if (as page 1. 5.) so many did then, from Oxford, resort to Blechington,
to see and hear him; if it was then so publicly taken notice of, and known
(not only to those eminent Persons there named, but) generally in Oxford; and
that, from thence, so very many did resort thither, on purpose to satisfy
their curiosity, and have a particular knowledge of what they had received by
report. It is very much that there be now (as page 3.) so very few (if any) in
Oxford, who know or think otherwise, but that it was the effect of my skill,
not of his.

Habits so well acquired, do not use to be so quickly lost; and matters of
fact, so remarkable, so public, so generally known, so particularly inquired
into, and by so very many, who did hear and see it, and did on purpose resort
thither for that end, are not wont to be so suddenly forgotten, by the same
persons, and in the same place.

However, if I have never challenged it, (as page 3.) I have, at least, done
him no wrong, ('it is, at most, but, not being not so kind to him as he could
have wished) to say nothing of it. And if all people give me the credit of it
without my claiming it; surely they must therein be very kind, or there was
some ground for their so doing.

What he adds, page 5. That I had discourse with him on that occasion diverse
times, when we happened to meet at Oxford, is but a mistake like the rest; for I
do not remember that then he and I had ever discoursed this in Oxford at all,
much less diverse times.

And, it may be, he will begin to think so too, when he shall remember, (what
perhaps he did not so well consider when he wrote this) that Dr. Wilkins (at
whose Lodgings, in Wadham College, it was, that he and I did use to meet in
Oxford, and but accidentally) was in the year mentioned (1659) Master of
Trinity College in Cambridge. And though he did, for some part of that year,
retain his Title to Wadham College, yet he was but little there, in that year,
save when he came to resign, and carry away his Goods. And if I did at that
time chance to meet him there once, it is more than I do remember; much less do
I remember that I had then discourse on this occasion.

But, if his 1659. page 4. be the same with his 1659/60 page 1. the thing is
past dispute. For Dr. Wilkins was gone from Oxford before that time; and the
Meetings, page 4. (which he makes the Foundation of the Royal Society) had been
there disused long before, and were then held at Gresham-Colledge in London.

Not but that ingenious persons in Oxford, as they met occasionally, (whether
in those Lodgings, or elsewhere) did often discourse of Philosophical affairs:
But the Set Meetings for such purpose (which had before been there) were then
dis-used, and had been for a good while. And, what was of this nature at Oxford
(about Experimental Philosophy) in those days, was rather at Mr. Boyl's
Lodgings, than at Wadham-Colledge.

Nor does he pretend that, from any such meetings this was commended to him,
but from Dr. Ward, Dr. Wilkins, and Dr. Bathurst, or at least some of them,
(the same persons from whom Mr. Popham was afterward commended to me, when Dr.
Holder had given it over:) Nor, that at any such meetings it was discoursed of,
or that to any such meeting it was known. But only that it might serve the
ends of that worthy Company before mentioned, and was known to those eminent
persons abovenamed. (So warily are his words penned.) Nor is it pretended,
that I was privy to that recommending, or was beforehand acquainted with that
undertaking: but only, that, afterward, upon my resorting to Blechington to
satisfy my curiosity (which never was) some afterdiscourses were had upon that
occasion, page 5.

Or if his 1659 be not the same with his 1659/60 it comes much to the same
purpose. For, though it might at some time in 1659 (without my privity) be
commended to him (as page 4.) yet, if not before 1659/60 (as page 1.) he did
teach, or had taught. My pretended resort to Blechington upon the report
thereof, would come too late to usher in those many discourses on that occasion
in the Lodgings of Dr. Wilkins. For, in Summer 1659, Dr. Wilkins was gone, and
Dr. Blandford then Warden of Wadham-Colledge; and 1659/60 must at least be
later than the Christmas following.

If at any time before this undertaking (which I do not remember) he and I
might chance to discourse of the Possibility of teaching a Deaf man to speak;
it may be as fairly supposed, that I might tell him I thought it fesible, (for
I never thought otherwise) as that he might tell it me. And, if we came to
discourse of Means how this might be effected; he may as well be supposed to
learn of me, as I of him. Especially considering, that my Treatise De Loquela,
printed 1653. (at which he is now so much troubled) had then been public for
many years, and known to him. When his Elements of Speech were neither printed,
nor written, nor (I suppose) thought of; and which (I believe) had it not been
for that of mine, had never been thought of till this day.

If of late years he and I have had any such Discourse, (which has not been
much) it is nothing to the present purpose. For I am here charged with what I
saw and perfectly knew, before my Letter of March 14. 1661.

And truly, if he did not teach till 1659/60 (as page 1.) and did in March
1659/60 go to London, and, that Summer, to Ely, as page 5. (before which time
Mr. Popham and he were parted) and Dr. Wilkins long before to Cambridge: I know
not well when (within that compass) he supposes those diverse times should be,
that he and I happened to meet at Oxford, there to discourse on that occasion; of
my resorting to Blechington on purpose to satisfy my curiosity, and have a
particular knowledge of what I had received by report, page 5. or to see and
hear Mr. Popham speak, page 1. For the thing we must suppose to be Done before
it was Reported; and Reported, before I Heard it; and this, before my Resort to
Blechington; and this also, before those After-discourses on this occasion.

Besides this, I was my self very little at Oxford all that time, (and, much of
it, my Family was also absent, in London, Kent, Essex, and Cambridge) Good part
of November and December 1659 I was in London; in January I went again: and
from that time till toward Michaelmas, I was hardly a fortnight together at
home, and scarce a month in all; (partly upon occasion of my own affairs,
partly upon those of the University, and some other concerns) which perhaps
your Lordship may in part remember, if you call to mind what passed that year,
both before and after His Majesty's Return, and how much, during that time, I
was with your Lordship.

However, let us a little consider his story, p. 1, 4, 5. In that time, viz. in
the year 1659. diverse ingenious persons in Oxford, used to meet at the Lodgings
of Dr. Wilkins then Warden of Wadham- College, where they diligently conferred
about Researches and Experiments in Nature, and indeed laid the first Ground
and Foundation of the Royal Society. And ( at the instance of the said Bishop
Wilkins, etc.) Alexander Popham Esquire being deprived of Hearing, and consequently
of Speaking, was recommended to the care of Dr. Holder; Who, desirous to serve
the ends and contribute something to the design of that worthy Company, viz.
Improvement of Natural Knowledge, and Public Benefit; Did, in a short time,
teach the said Mr. Popham, to Speak Well, to Pronounce Plainly and Distinctly,
and with a Good and Graceful Tone, whatsoever Words were shown or represented
to him, or as he had occasion to ask for. This was publicly taken notice of,
and known (not only to those eminent Persons, but) generally in Oxford. Whence
very many resorted to Blechington, etc. Amongst whom, Dr. Wallis was one; with
whom Dr. Holder had discourse, on that occasion, diverse times, when they happened
to meet in Oxford.

How far this Narrative differs from the Truth of Fact, may appear in part from
what is already said.

But we must not be so severe, as to consider this Narrative according to the
strict Rules of History, (where the Writer should affirm nothing but what he
knows to be true, or at least thinks so to be) but rather as a Chancery-Bill,
for Discovery; where the Plaintiff (being in the dark) sets forth, not what he
knows to be true, but whatever he thinks possible, that would be to his
advantage if true; in order to make discovery (from the Defendants Answer) of
what he did not before know. Yet is not such Bill to be charged with falsehood,
though the things affirmed chance not to be true. For, though the things so set
forth be (as to the Grammar) Indicative, (direct Affirmatives or Negatives:)
yet, as to common intendment, they are to be considered as Interrogatories, to
which he would have the Defendant Answer. And the same Latitude I am willing to
allow this Writer, if he be contented so to be understood.

In Answer therefore to his Bill of Complaint; I do acknowledge, that, some
years before (but not immediately before) His Majesty's happy Restoration, such
Meetings had been at those Lodgings, (though not at that time, viz. in the year
1659.) and that those Meetings might be somewhat conducing to that of the Royal
Society which now is: But (without disparagement to Bishop Wilkins) not, that
the first Ground and Foundation of the Royal Society was there laid. Which I
take to be much earlier than those Meetings there.

I take its first Ground and Foundation to have been in London, about the year
1645. (if not sooner) when the same Dr. Wilkins (then Chaplain to the Prince
Elector Palatine, in London) Dr. Jonathan Goddard, Dr. Ent, (now Sir George
Ent) Dr. Glisson, Dr. Scarbrough, (now Sir Charles Scarbrough) Dr. Merit, with
my self and some others, met weekly, (sometimes at Dr. Goddards Lodgings,
sometimes at the Mitre in Wood-street hard by) at a certain day and hour, under
a certain Penalty, and a weekly Contribution for the Charge of Experiments,
with certain Rules agreed upon amongst us. Where (to avoid diversion to other
discourses, and for some other reasons) we barred all Discourses of Divinity,
of State Affairs, and of News, (other than what concerned our business of
Philosophy) confining our selves to Philosophical Inquiries, and such as
related thereunto; as Physic, Anatomy, Geometry, Astronomy, Navigation,
Staticks, Mechanics, and Natural Experiments. We there discoursed the
Circulation of the Blood, the Valves in the Veins, the Copernican Hypothesis,
the Nature of Comets and new (...), the Attendants on Jupiter, the Oval shape
of Saturn, the Inequalities and Se^enography of the Moon, the several Phases of
Venus and Mercury, the Improvement of Telescopes, and grinding of Glasses for
that purpose, (wherein Dr. Goddard was particularly engaged, and did maintain
an Operator in his house for that purpose) the weight of the Air, the
Possibility or Impossibility of Vacuities, and Natures abhorrence thereof, the
Torricellian Experiment in Quicksilver, the Descent of Heavy Bodies, and the
Degrees of Acceleration therein; with others of like nature. Some of which were
then but new Discoveries, and others not so generally known and embraced as now
they are.

These Meetings we removed, soon after, to the Bull-head in Cheap Side; and (in
Term-time) to Gresham-Colledge, where we met weekly at Mr. Foster's Lecture,
(then Astronomy-Professor there) and, after the Lecture ended: repaired,
sometimes to Mr. Foster's Lodgings, sometimes to some other place not far
distant, where we continued such Inquiries; and our numbers increased.

About the years 1648, 1649. some of our Company were removed to Oxford;
(first, Dr. Wilkins, then I, and soon after, Dr. Goddard;) whereupon our
Company divided. Those at London, (and we, when we had occasion to be there)
met as before. Those of us at Oxford, with Dr. Ward, (now Bishop of Salisbury)
Dr. Petty, (now Sir William Petty) Dr. Bathurst, Dr. Willis, and many others
of the most inquisitive Persons in Oxford, met weekly (for some years) at Dr.
Petty's Lodgings on the like account; (to wit, so long as Dr. Petty continued
in Oxford, and for some while after;) because of the conveniences we had
there, (being the House of an Apothecary) to view, and make use, of Drugs and
other like matters, as there was occasion.

Our Meetings there, were very numerous, and very considerable. For, beside the
diligence of Persons, studiously Inquisitive, the Novelty of the Design made
many to resort thither; who, when it ceased to be new, began to grow more
remiss, or did pursue such Inquiries at Home.

We did afterward (Dr. Petty being gone for Ireland, and our numbers growing
less,) remove thence. And, (some years before His Majesty's Return) did meet,
(as Dr. Holder observes) at Dr. VVilkin's Lodgings, in VVadham-Colledge.

But, before the time he mentions, those set Meetings ceased in Oxford, and
were held at London. Where (after the death of Mr. Foster) we continued to meet
at Gresham-Colledge (as before,) at Mr. Rook's Lecture, (who succeeded Mr.
Foster,) and from thence repaired to some convenient place, in or near that
College: And so onward; till the Fire of London, caused our removal to
Arundel-house; from whence we are since returned to Gresham-Colledge again.

In the mean while; our Company at Gresham-Colledge, being much again
increased, by the accession of diverse Eminent and Noble Persons upon His
Majesty's Return; we were (about the beginning of the Year 1662) by His
Majesty's Grace and Favor, Incorporated by the Name of The Royal Society, etc.

All this while, Dr. VVilkins and Dr. Goddard, through all these changes,
continued those Meetings, (and had a great influence on them,) from the first
Original, till the days of their death; and some others of us, to this day.

This Digression, though somewhat long, is not altogether impertinent, to
rectify what by Dr. Holder was so imperfectly reported, concerning those
Philosophical Meetings. Which yet do not concern Dr. Holder's business, nor
were at all interressed in it. Though (if I may use his words, page 11.) with
subtilty of contrivance, he speaks like Truth so artificially, that his Reader
is to believe more than is true, (that from those Meetings it was commended to
him, and to those Meetings it had been made known) else, to what purpose are
those Meetings named.

By what particular Persons, or on what Account, that business was commended to
him, I cannot tell, nor was at all privy to it. Nor do I know who those many
(or any) were, that resorted to Blechington on that account; only, that I was
none of them. Nor had I those diverse discourses with him at Oxford on that
occasion, which he suggesteth to have then happened.

But now, what is all this to the business of Mr. VVhaly? and to my Letter of
March 14. 1661? Was it not as lawful for me to undertake Mr. Whaly, as for him
to undertake Mr. Popham? Had he, before that time, obtained a Patent for the
sole-teaching of Dumb persons to speak? Or, was it a crime (because he had
failed of his enterprise on Mr. Popham) for me to undertake Mr. VVhaly with
better success?

Mr. VVhaly (whom he calls the young Gentleman, page 2.) was then about 26
years of age; with some of whose Relations I had been acquainted for 20 years
before, and more, (though not with him, nor with his condition.) About a year
or two before he came to me, an Uncle of his (yet living, and with whom I had
been long acquainted) bewailing to me the sadness of his condition; and
finding, by my discourse thereupon, that I thought he might yet recover the use
of Speech, was very desirous that I should undertake him; which, a good while
after, was brought to pass. Whether it were before or after Dr. Holder's
attempt on Mr. Popham, that this Uncle did first desire it of me, I do not well
remember; but I think it much about the same time, or before. Sure I am, it was
a long time before I had ever seen Mr. Popham, or heard him speak.

When Mr. VVhaly had been some while with me, and I began to find the business
succeed, I wrote to Mr. Boil (then at London) that Letter of March 14. 1661.
(of which there is now so great a complaint) in Answer to some of his, desiring
that account from me; (as appears in the Body of that Letter, though Dr. Holder
think fit to dissemble that matter.)

Dr. Holder had, at this time, given over his attempt on Mr. Popham; that
Design being then deserted. Whether because Dr. Holder himself was weary of the
business, (I cannot tell) or rather (which I take to be the true cause) because
Mr. Popham's Friends saw so little of success, and to so little (...), that
they did not think fit to pursue the design further. (...) (...) Dr. Holder's
removal to Ely (intimated page 5.) should be the only cause, seems not likely.
For Mr. Popham might as well, at Ely, be taught to speak, as at Blechington,
And, that his Friends were willing to have pursued the design, if they had seen
a likelihood of any considerable success; we may judge, by their sending him to
me in 1662. on the same account.

The great offense which is now taken, at the Letter which was then written, is
not, because any thing therein was not True, or not Rationally said; but rather
because it was (as he speaks) so subtly contrived, that there is nothing in
it for him to cavil at. And therefore he cavils at what is not in it, viz. That
amongst the Considerations which induced me to undertake Mr. VVhaly, I said
nothing of Dr. Holder and Mr. Popham, p. 2, 13.

The truth is, to the rest of those Considerations, I might have added, Nor am
I discouraged from this undertaking by Mr. Holders unsuccessful attempt on Mr.
Popham, etc. but I thought it more civil to say nothing of it.

He would now have it thought, p. 8. a mocking of Mr. Boil (to tell him in that
Letter, How far, and upon what Considerations, and by what ways, I thought it
Possible, or Fesible) when as I certainly knew it possible, having already
given Proof of it on Mr. VVhaly.

It Is true, I had then given a Proof of it on Mr. VVhaly, (having at that time
performed more on Mr. VVhaly, than ever Dr. Holder did on Mr. Popham;) and, in
that Letter, I told him of such Proof.

But Mr. Boil did not think it a mockery to be so used, having in two Letters*
of Jan. 5. and Febr. 26. desired it of me; and in another of April 5. he
thanked me for that excellent Paper.) Nor did those of the Society at
Gresham-Colledge, to whom he did impart it, and before whom (in May following)
Mr. VVhaly was heard to speak. And nothing is more common, than (of things
unusual) to show, How far, and upon what Considerations, Others should not
think strange or incredible, what we certainly know to be True and Fesible.

Yet Mr. Boil did, in those days, live at Oxford, as well as Dr. Wallis; and*
within as few miles of Blechington; and, was as well acquainted at
VVadham-Colledge. And, if Dr. Holden's performance were so generally known in
Oxford, (as p. 5.) and in particular to those eminent Persons with whom Mr.
Boil was so well acquainted: he had the same opportunity, of being made
acquainted with it, as I had.

And those at Gresham-Colledge did not want means of being dis-abused, if I had
designed to impose them: since those eminent Persons which he speaks of, were
of that number, and some of them then present: and (it seems) Dr. Holder
himself was there also, and saw this, p. 6.

He might therefore as well, (if things had been as he now represents) have let
that Company hear Mr. Popham speak, as I Mr. VVhaly, (and they would as well
have been pleased to hear it) especially if Mr. Popham spoke so much better
than Mr. VVhaly; the one but some words, and with a harsh ill Tone; the other
spoke well, with a Good and Graceful Tone, and did pronounce plainly and
distinctly, whatever words, etc. p. 5, 6.) 'Twould certainly have been much
more to their satisfaction, to have seen Mr. Whaly so much outdone by Mr.
Popham. And Dr. Holder, who was so desirous to serve the Ends, and contribute
somewhat to the Design, of that worthy Company, (p. 4, 5.) should not have
denied them this satisfaction, if he could have showed it.

But the truth is, he could not show it; (and that is the grief.) For, when Mr.
Popham, the same year, (within a few months) was brought to me to learn, I saw
no footsteps of those effects, nor that he was able to speak one word or
syllable. 'Twas therefore wise in him, not to produce him; as well as civil in
me to say nothing of it.

However, If Dr. Holder had caused this of Mr. Popham to be publicly known; to
many Persons of all Degrees; at London, at Westminster, at the Anatomy-Lecture;
(as well as to those eminent Persons abovenamed, and generally in Oxford:) and
went with him to London and Westminster, that those, on this occasion, might
satisfy themselves, in hearing Mr. Popham, (as p. 5.) Why might not, as well,
Mr. VVhaly go with me to Gresham-Colledge and White Hall, that others might be
satisfied in hearing him, p. 6. without so much clamor of my being greedy to
spread my own Fame? especially when himself allows it, p. 10. to be very
considerable and worthy to be known. And, if he may tell us, p. 5. that he
taught Mr. Popham, by such means as are, since, by him made public (in 1669)
why might not I as well say (in my Letter of 1661.) That I taught Mr. Whaly, by
such as I had, before, made public, (in 1653.)

But the mockery of this Letter, would (I suppose) have been excused, had it
not been published in the Transactions, eight years after. (For that is the
complaint, These Considerations did not see light till eight years after, p. 3.)

I confess, it might have been Printed sooner, (if I had been as greedy and
industrious as he would have it thought, p. 3. to spread my own Fame.) For
there is nothing in it why it might not have been Printed the next day. (But
not in the Transactions; for Mr. Oldenburg did not begin to write Transactions,
till 1665.) But 'twas not too late in 1670.

However, 'twas written sooner; and Published, (though not in Print.) And it is
well it was so. For, if Printing an old Letter make so great a clamor; what
would have been, if I had at that time written a new Piece (to the same
purpose) and published that?

But the great complaint is, that in the Postscript (yes, and in the Letter
too) mention is made of my Treatise De Loquela, published in 1653. And that it
is there commended, (which troubles him much; and he does, at least six times,
complain of it; p. 8, 9, 10, 13, 14.) That is, It is there said, (but it is so
said in the Letter also) that, in this Treatise of Speech, I do very distinctly
lay down the manner of Forming all sounds of Letters usual in Speech: And that,
in confidence and pursuance of this, (which the Letter also mentions) I did
undertake that difficult task. And why might not all this be said? Would he
have had me say, that I did (in 1661.) pursue his Elements of Speech, (which
were not published till 1669 and which I have never yet seen,) rather than my
own, published in 1653?

But (which troubles him yet more) the Writer of that Postscript says also,
That he thinks this to be the first Book that was ever published in this kind.
(True, and I think so too. It Is at least elder than his of 1669. Nor does Dr.
Holder tell us of any precedent than that of mine.) And all this, without
determining that his (of 1669.) is performed with more judgment and accuracy* p
8, 10, 13. And this is the great fault.

He was (it seems) not willing, that it should be at all remembered, that any
had written of that Subject before him. At lest, if he were not the First, he
would be thought to have done it Best. And he hopes (though I will not
determine against my self) that the impartial Reader will so determine, p. 10.
Yet Bishop VVilkins, who (as Dr. Holder tells us, p. 7.) in his Universal
Character, p. 357. mentions the Papers of Dr. Holder; does not do it with any
preference to those of mine. But (having there named a great Many, and some of
them Great Men, who had written of the Doctrine of Letters,) he concludes, that
amongst all that he had seen published, Dr. Wallis seemed to him, with
greatest accurateness and subtilty, to have considered the Philosophy of
Articulate Sounds.

Had not this Treatise of mine been remembered, He hoped to have passed for the
First Author in that kind. For, that his should be thought earlier than that of
Bishop VVilkins, he had provided, by what he tells us ( p. 7.) that some Papers
of Dr. Holders were communicated to the Bishop, and by him mentioned; (which we
must suppose to be these;) and that those Papers were lost in the Bishops
Study, (together with all his own) in the dreadful Fire of London, 1666. (and,
therefore, must at least have been so ancient; and none but mine, of 1653. may
pretend to precedence.)

That some of the Bishops Papers, (that is, so much of the Fair Copy of his
Universal Character as was then unprinted,) were lost in the Fire of London, is
true: But, not in the Bishops Study, (as is here pretended) but, at the
Printing House, (as the Bishop himself, and Mr. Gillibrand, for whom it was
printing, did both tell me) where Dr. Holder's Papers are not pretended to have
been. Nor were the Bishop's Own Papers All lost, (as is here affirmed.) But, of
what was printed, Two Copies were preserved. And, out of his Foul Papers, (as
himself told me) which were preserved also, he did retrieve what of the Fair
Copy was lost. Nor is it likely, (the Fire having burnt for some days, before
it came thither) that Himself, (if at home) and those about him, should be All
so negligent, as that no care was taken of any of his Papers, but that they
should be All lost. (Which, though it do not much concern the present business,
yet it shows how apt he is to Trip in matters of Fact.) Whether Dr. Holder's
Papers were then lost, or where they were lost, I know not: And I as little
know whether, and by whom, Dr. Holder was importuned to renew those Papers, as
we are told, p. 7.

However, Those Elements of Speech, with its Appendix, may (for ought I know)
be an excellent Piece; (and, for ought I know, it may be the contrary.) I never
read either the One or the Other. Nor do I know that I ever saw it; at least,
not so as to read a Line of it. (It Is possible I may have seen the Book lying
on a Table, or standing on a Shelf in a Book-seller's Shop, or the like; but
without knowing the particular contents of it. Nor do I know (otherwise than as
he now tells me) whether any one word therein do concern Me, or Mr. Popham, or
the Business in hand. So far was I from being startled (as p. 7.) at the
contents of it, or contriving to counterplot it.

Nor do I think my self concerned, on this occasion, to seek it out. If there
be any thing in it of like import with what he does now publish; or which does
otherwise need an Answer: it is unknown to me; and may (I suppose) without more
ado, receive its Answer from hence.

The same Postscript says also, (and it says True;) that Mr. VVhaly is not the
only person on whom I have showed the effect of my skill; But I have since
done the like for another, meaning Mr. Popham. And Dr. Holder himself, p. 10,
11. cannot deny it to be all true. But it is not true (he tells us, p. 11.)
that either Mr. Oldenburg or Dr. Plot did Know or Write any thing of these
matters, but what was put into their hands by me. (And he would have the like
to be thought of all other Authors by whom I have been commended, p. 3. that
they are but large Characters of my own Graving: that so he may at once destroy
all the good things that any body has said of me; or, shall say.)

As to Dr. Plot, I shall speak by and by. Mr. Oldenburg is dead; and cannot now
be asked, What he Knew, or VVrote; nor answer for himself. (I shall therefore
do it for him.) The best is, there is nothing there said, which is not True, or
which he did not Know, (and a great many more beside him) or which was not
Fitting for him to say: Nothing which he did not say Wittingly and Willingly;
and nothing (I suppose) which he would Un-say were he now alive. And strange it
is that Dr. Holder should persuade us, that Mr. Oldenburg knew nothing of all
this. He did Know, that I had taught Mr. Whaly to speak; and that Mr. Whaly was
at Gresham-Colledge, and was heard to speak there; and what was thereupon the
sense of those present: (For himself was one of them, and did See him, and Hear
him speak there; and heard what the company did express as their sense of it.)
He knew, that this was there Registered: (For himself did it, as being then the
Secretary of that Society.) He knew (from his own Register and Memorials, not
from me) that this was on May 21. 1662. As to what is said to have been done at
Whitehall and my own house; He knew them from the Notoreity of the Fact, and
from the Relation of Persons present, whom he had no reason to disbelieve. He
knew then (and many years before) my English Grammar, and my Treatise of Speech
(prefixed thereunto,) which (the Title Page tells him) was Printed in the year
1653. He knew also, that of Bishop Wilkins's Universal Character (published in
1668.) and that of Dr. Holder's Elements of Speech, published in 1669. (and
gives a particular account of Both: The one, in his Transactions of May, 1668.
The other, in that of May, 1669;) and, that Both those, were since mine of
1653. And, if he did not think fit, to deliver an Opinion, Whether theirs or
mine were Better; He knew this also. And he could not but know, That the way to
Teach a Deaf person, to speak; must be, by teaching How to apply the
Instruments of Speech to Form such Sounds; which is the professed design of
that Treatise of mine. And, That, in teaching Mr. Whaly, I pursued that
Treatise, and did in that Letter refer to it; he knew also, (for he saw it
there.) And all these things, which he did thus Know, if he had not also been
willing to say: He would not have there inserted. Nor would he have said, It
was a difficult task; or, that it was ingeniously and successfully Begun; or,
that he thought that Treatise of mine to be the first Book that was ever
published in that kind; if he had not Thought so. (And he could not but Know,
he did thus Think: And Dr. Holder, I suppose, Thinks so too.) Now, if he did
Know, and Think all this: Why was it unfit for him to say it? And, with what
ingenuity does Dr. Holder then insinuate, as if Mr. Oldenburg know nothing of
all these matters; but did merely take it upon trust from me?

He knew also, what he says further (which Dr. Holder seems most displeased
at,) That this was not the only person, on whom the said Doctor has showed
the effect of his skill, but he has since done the like for another; (meaning
Mr. Popham:) For this of Mr. Popham, was at that time as Notorious and well
Known, as that of Mr. Whaly. And I know not well how he could express it more
softly, then by saying, that on him also I had showed some effect of my skill.
That the thing said, is true; Dr. Holder himself is so kind to me as not to
deny; but says freely, ( p. 10.) that what I performed on those two Gentlemen
(Mr. Whaly and Mr. Popham;) he esteems very Considerable; and Worthy to be
Known and Valued. And if, by doing the like for him, I mean no more but, that I
so taught him to speak as I had done for Mr. VVhaly; he allows that to be true
also, p. 11. And, if my Teaching Dumb Persons, be meant but of Two such,
meaning these two;) he does there affirm it. That is, He allows All to be True
that is there said of me: And Mr. Oldenburg knew it so to be.

But he excepts, p. 8. That this is added by way of Comment on the Letter; and
that Mr. Popham's name is (wisely) omitted.

I confess, some part of it may be called a Comment on that Letter; (for it
tells, what is the Name of the Person which the Letter mentions; and, in what
Year, the Treatise of Speech, and the English Grammar, there mentioned, were
Printed.) But, as to the rest, I should rather have called it a Narrative of
what happened after the Letter was written. And it was but necessary: For it
might be well supposed, that those who should find, in the Letter, What had
been undertaken, would be willing to know, with what success. (And, of that,
there could not well have been less said than is.) And, my teaching Mr. Popham,
being at that time as much known, if not more, that than of Mr. Whaly; it would
not have been congruous to Mr. Oldenburg's design in publishing his
Transactions, not to take any notice of him at all.

As for that of not naming Mr. Popham. It is true, his Name is omitted; and (I
think) not unwisely. For it is possible, that He, or his Relations, (being
Persons of Quality,) would not care to have that infirmity of his, so publicly
exposed by Name. (And, whether they will think it more kindly done of Mr.
Oldenburg in sparing to name him; or of Dr. Holder who thus proclaims it, and
brings his Name upon the Stage: is for them to judge rather than me.) But, why
Dr. Holder should be concerned for not naming Mr. Popham; or what Prejudice to
himself he apprehends by it; or, what Plot he fancies in it, I cannot tell.

How far I might be concerned in Penning that Postscript, (which is the thing
with which Dr. Holder labors so often to reproach me; twelve times at least, p.
3, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14.) I do not at present so well remember. Some of it,
it is like, Mr. Oldenburg had from me, (because it relates to what was done in
my Family:) and some of it certainly was his own; which relates to his own
Register; (for it is, what I could not have told without him:) and the whole
(which is not much) is what he knew, and what he was willing to say: And then,
it is not much material who did write it; (Himself, his Clerk, or I:) nor do I
think it any fault at all in Him or Me. There is nothing more usual, than for
one to Draw that Writing, which another is to Sign; (a Secretary, for his Lord;
a Clerk, for his Master; a Lawyer, for his Client; and, one Friend, for
another:) and, in men of much Business it must needs be so. And, when it is so,
it must be writ in such a Phrase as is proper for him to use (not who Pens it,
but) whose Act it is to be; and by whom it is to be allowed and owned before it
becomes his Act. And Dr. Holder himself (who would have it thought a crime in
me) does not deny but that his Narrative, p. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. was of his own
Penning, (but, as in Mr. Oldenburg's Name,) and was by him put into Mr.
Oldenburg's hand, (p. 9.) desiring to have it inserted in the Transactions,
(and complains, greatly, that it was not so done.) And I have reason to
believe, that what is said of Dr. Holder, and his Elements, and Appendix, in
the Transactions of May, 1669; was of his Own Penning also, but in Mr.
Oldenburg's name. In the present case, (who ever wrote it,) I do not find any
Clause, or Word, therein; which is not proper enough for Me to Write, or Him to
say, or what he did not actually approve and own. However, (if that will do him
any pleasure) I will give him leave to change the style; and, what is said Of
me, in the Third Person, to read as said By me, in the First Person; (leaving
out the word Ingenuously, if he do not think it belong to me:) and I will then
be answerable for it all: (the rather, because Mr. Oldenburg is not now alive
to answer for it.)

That which Dr. Holder is troubled at herein, is but an Omission. Not, that any
thing of this is Untrue, or Unfit: (he is rather troubled, that nothing is so:)
But, that somewhat else is not said. Somewhat he had a mind should be said,
which I could not say; (and, I am afraid, no body else:) That Dr. Holder had
taught Mr. Popham to Speak Well; to Pronounce Plainly and Distinctly, with a
Good and Graceful Tone, whatsoever Words, etc. which he does not there find.

Hinc illae lachrymae! Mr. Oldenburg in his Transactions of July 1670. tells,
what was done by Me; without saying (at the same time) What was done by Dr.
Holder: like as, in those of May, 1669. he had said, What was done by Dr.
Holder; without saying, what (of that kind) had been done by Me. And he does,
in the one place, Commend my Treatise of Speech, (published in 1653.) without
commending his Elements of Speech, (published in 1669.) like as, in the other
place, he had commended His, without taking notice of Mine, (which had been
published 16 years before.)

As for me, (so far as I may be concerned in it;) I knew that, to touch upon
this, was, to touch him in a sore place. I could not speak to his Satisfaction;
and I was not desirous to Disoblige him: and therefore (as he phraseth it)
silently passed it over; and left it for them to say who knew it. I do not
know, that I have ever been heard to say, That he did, or, That he did not. The
first I could not say (knowingly;) the other I was loath to say.

The case is this. In the year 1653. I published (together with my English
Grammar) a Treatise of Speech: showing therein, with what Organs, in what
Positions, and by what Motions, all Sounds used in Speech are Formed: and that,
upon such Positions and Motions, such Sounds will certainly follow, (whether he
that Speaks, do Hear himself or not.) This (my Letter says, as well as the
Postscript) I think to be the first attempt in that kind.

And there, to the commonly received Organs of Speech,

Instrument a novem, sunt, Guttur, Lingua, Palatum,
Quatuor and Dentes, and duo Libra simul;
I add, one more, (and, I think, I am the first that do so) that is, the
Nostrils; on the Closure and different Appertures, of which, (by help of the
Uvula) the sole Difference in the Articulation of diverse Letters depends: as of
P, B, M; and of T, D, N; and diverse others. Which (I think) no body, before me,
had taken notice of. But I am since followed by others.

Some years after; Mr. George Dalgarno, at Oxford, applied himself to write a
Treatise concerning an Universal Character; (which he published in the year
1660, entitled, Ars Signorum:) concerning which he consulted Me, (as he did
also Dr. Wilkins, Dr. Ward, and others.)

I told him my sense of it, (as I did also to Dr. Wilkins) That the thing was
certainly fesible in Nature, (upon such Considerations as that Letter of March
14. 1661, mentions:) But that I did not think it likely to obtain in Practice.
Because this Universal Character, must be in the nature of a New Language.
(Which he was so apprehensive to be true, that, having once contrived his
Universal Character, he did, upon this suggestion, accommodate thereunto his
Universal Language, to make his Character Effable: as is there seen.) So that,
For all Persons, to Learn his Character, and to have all Books, Written in it;
is the same thing as to Translate all Books into One Language, and to have this
Language learned by All. Which if it cannot be hoped, of any of the Languages
now in being, (which have the advantage of being already understood, by more
than ever are like to learn that other:) much less is it to be hoped for, of a
New Language, now to be contrived. And, in case men should be willing, to
change the way of Writing, from Vocal to Real Characters: there would soon
arise a like Variety of Real Characters, (each fansying his own way the best,)
as now there is of Vocal Languages. Nor is it to be expected, That a general
Law should be made, to confine All to the same Characters; any more than
(amongst our selves) All Writers of Shorthand be confined to the same way and
method of Brachy-graphy, or Short-writing: (which we find to multiply,
according to the variety of Teachers.) And Specious Arithmetic, (which, as to
so much, is a kind of Real Character,) has not, in all Writers, the same
Characters: but very different, as different Writers.

This Enterprise of Mr. Dolgarro, gave occasion to Dr. Wilkins (the late Bishop
of Chester) to pursue the same Design (as himself intimates in his Epistle;)
both as to a Real Character, as he calls it, (or Characters of Things instead
of Words;) and the expressing those Characters by Vocal Sounds; (which he calls
his Philosophical Language;) in his Essay of a Real Character and Philosophical
Language, published in the year 1668. which is the Result of his Thoughts on
that Subject, for diverse years before; with the concurrence of Dr. Seth Ward
(now Bishop of Salisbury,) and Dr. William Lloyd, (now Dean of Bangor,) and
others; (as himself mentions;) with whom he had frequent conference about that
Affair. And it would have been published somewhat sooner, if not interrupted by
the Fire of London, in the year 1666. Not that he did expect, this Real
Character of his, and his Philosophical Language, should universally obtain;
and all Books be translated into it: But, to show the thing to be fesible; and
diverse Advantages which might arise thence, if it could so obtain. And, to
demonstrate the thing it self to be Practicable; He was pleased (when his Book
was newly made public) to write a Letter to me, in his Real Character; to
which I returned an Answer in his Philosophical Language: And we did perfectly
understand one another, as if written in our own Language.

In order to this Design; he found it expedient (for reasons by him expressed)
to consider, the Formation of Sounds in Speech; and to engraft (in his Essay) a
particular Discourse thereof (in Chap. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. of his Third Part.)
And, (because I had particularly considered that Subject, and published a
Treatise of it,) he was pleased more particularly to discourse that part with
me: which we did at diverse Meetings on that occasion. (There being scarce any
part, in all that Discourse, wherein I was not advised with.)

In some things; he was pleased, on those Discourses, to alter his former
Thoughts for reasons which I suggested. As for instance. Some Vowels he judged
to be of their own nature Long, and could not be pronounced Short, (as o in
Boat, oo in Food, u^ in Lute, etc.) Others, in their own nature Short, and not
capable of being produced; (as the French e Feminine, in je, ne, etc. and the
English u^, in cut, but, etc. Contrary to which, I suggested, that, in good,
good; wood, wooed; full, fool; pull, pool; wool, wool; hood, hoo'd; etc.
there is a manifest distinction of the same sound (of the Vowel) pronounced
Long, and Short. And in recubo, tetubo, etc. we in England pronounce Short, the
same sound of u, which in cubo, tubo, etc. we pronounce Long. So in gula,
regula, etc. And the like of o, in potent, impotent; dolent, indolent,
redolent; solens, insolens; vola, evola, benevola: etc. And that, in Music,
the words cut, put, may be sung as a Brief, or Sembrief, as well as a Crotchet
or Quaver, (which depends only upon the Short or Long sounding of that Vowel;
those Consonants c, b, t, not being capable of production, but the Vowel
only:) and the like of the French e Feminine. And, contrariwise, to, too, tu,
may be a Crotchet or Quaver, as well as a Brief or Sembrief. Whereupon he
agreed with me; that all Vowels (and some Consonants) are capable of Production
and Contraction; but that some Vowels are, for the most part, produced in
common Speech; others, mostly Contracted.

So the English Vowel i, in Bite, Smile, etc. he first took to be a Simple
sound (not compounded,) But afterward agreed with me, that it was a Compound,
of the Feminine e, with the Subjunctive i or y: as in the Greek Dipthong ei,
and the English word ey; (which differs not in sound from I.)

And these are some of those things, about which (he tells us, p. 365.) he had,
upon new Considerations and Suggestions, changed his former thoughts.

In some others; he continued to differ from me, as in the French feminine e
and the English short u^. Which Letters he accounts to be the same: but I take
to be different, (that of u^ being a broader sound than the other;) differing
as e and u in our English pronunciation of fer, fur; iter, itur; terris,
turris; ter ter, turtur; p^rperam, purpuram; etc.

He takes also the sound of the Consonants y, and w, to be the same with that
of the Vowels ee, and oo rapidly pronounced: (and the words ye, woo, in page
371. he writes u, **.) And, consequently, the Latin i, u, Vowels; would not
differ at all from j, v, Consonants. For the Latin i, j; u, v; had the same
sounds with our ee, y; oo, w. Which I take to be different Letters; Because, in
pronouncing the words, ye, woo, there is a manifest motion of the mouth in
passing from the sound of y to ee; and of w to oo; (which is yet more manifest,
if the words be several times repeated, ye ye, woo woo. This would not be,
were there not a different Position required, to form those Sounds. Yet he
chose to retain his opinion; and I, mine.

He makes also some Letters whispered, to be distinct from the same spokenout:
calling the one Sonorous, the other Mute. Thus M, N, L, R, etc. as commonly
spoken, he calls Sonorous; but if only whispered, he calls them Mute, and
writes them hM, hN, hL, hR, etc. Whereas I take this not to make a New Letter,
(because not a new Articulation,) but refer it to the common Affections, which
respect the whole Tenor of Speech, not the Formation of particular Letters: of
which there be diverse. Thus the word And may, with the same Articulation, be
sung in Gam-ut, or in E-la, (Base or Treble;) though with a different Tone: And
may be a Sembrief or Crotchet; though with a different Time: And may be spoken
Softly or Aloud, with a different Strength: So it may, with the same
Articulation, though with a different Noise, be Spoken-out or Whispered; (in
the former of which, there is a Roughness of the Sound from the concussion of
the Larynx; whereas in whispering, though pretty Loud, there is a Smoothness
for want of that concussion. Thus in these words, [ The roving Winds may blaze]
every Letter has a different Noise when Whispered, from what it has when
Spoken-out: but, the same Articulation. And therefore we do not reckon the word
And when whispered, to be spelled with other Letters than when it is spoken-out.

Much less is this (as he makes it) the difference between V, F, or D, T, or B,
P, etc. that the one is (in this sense) Sonorous, the other Mute. For we may
Whisper the words Ved, Bed, without saying Fet, Pet.

Nor do I think the difference between V and F, to lie in this; that F is
formed by the two Lips; but the Consonant V is formed between either Lip and
the opposite Teeth, p. 360. (he should rather have said, between the Nether
Lip and the opposite Teeth;) for each of those Letters may be formed in either
place: the difference of those Sounds, lying (not in the Lips, nor in the
Larynx, but) in the Nostrils.

And, in the Formation of diverse Letters, he gives several particular
directions, which I choose rather to omit, as being but accidental, and not
Essential to those Letters, (with, or without which, those Letters may be
formed:) And it is our custom in Mathematics, so to form our Definitions, as
to contain just so much as is necessary to determine the Subject, and no more.

And these (I suppose) are some of those things, wherein (he tells us, p. 362,
365, 383.) he dares not be over-peremptory, or dogmatical, (but only, that he
does thus judge at present,) having formerly, upon new considerations and
suggestions, so often changed his thoughts in this inquiry.

But, in most things, we agree, without any considerable difference of opinion
in him, from what I had before published: And, in what we do differ, (which is
not much) I might modestly enough (notwithstanding Dr. Holder's rebuke, p. 8,
10, 13.) leave it to the Reader to judge, without determining against my self:
having not yet seen cause to vary therein, from what was my former opinion. Nor
do I mean to concern my self (upon this challenge of Dr. Holder) to write
against Bishop Wilkins.

It seems: Dr. Wilkins had conference with Dr. Holder also (as well as others)
on that Subject: and (in the year 1668.) had seen some Papers of his written on
that occasion. But those Papers of his, it is not pretended that I ever saw:
nor have I yet read those which are since Printed in 1669. (And therefore, as
to those, I have no reason yet to determine against my self.) Nor does he
pretend, that I learned from thence, what I had before published in 1653.

It is more likely; That, what I had before written on that subject, gave
occasion to Dr. Wilkins next, and after him to Dr. Holder, to consider the
formation of Sounds, and teaching of Deaf persons to do it: And, that Dr.
Holder was not the first that thought of it.

However; that which I know of his business, is this; That in the year 1659/60,
Dr. Holder did attempt teaching Mr. Popham to Speak; but, soon after, gave it
over: (for what reasons, he knows best.) As to teaching him to understand a
Language, I do not find him pretending to it; (so that, as to this, he will
allow the work to be mine.) Nor does he pretend to any thing as to Mr. Whaly;
(so far therefore the Coast is clear.) What he pretends to, is, that he taught
Mr. Popham to pronounce some words, (which, by somewhat of Rhetorical
Amplification, is now called, Speaking Well, and Pronouncing Plainly and
Distinctly, and with a Good and Graceful Tone, Whatever Words were Represented
to him, as he had Occasion to ask for.) In order to this, I have been told) he
did direct Mr. Popham to those Painful Positions and Motions of the Mouth and
Face, which used to make him sweat so as to Drop: (a Method which I have never
had occasion to make use of with those I have taught; putting them to no more
of bodily pain, than we put our selves to in speaking:) But, whatwas the effect
of that Pain and Sweat, I do not know. This, whatsoever it were, was in the
year 1662, quite forgot. And Mr. Popham (after I had ingood measure taught Mr.
VVhaly) was brought to me to Learn.

Whether any thing of Disgust were in it, (that I should Venture upon what he
had Given over,) I cannot tell. But, because such things often happen, I was the
less willing to undertake it; and did, on that account, at first decline it, as
not willing to take another Work out of his hand; (which Dr. Bathurst, I
presume, may still remember, who did once and a second time recommend that
business to me from the Lady Wharton:) till Dr. Bathurst did assure me, that
no more was to be expected from Dr. Holder, nor intended by him; and that no
offense should be taken on that account.

When Mr. Popham (by that Lady his Mother) was brought to me; I found no
appearance of those fine things which are now said to have been done by Dr.
Holder. (And the stories, of My having Seen and Heard him, before, at
Blechington, etc. but Fancies.) I thought it best, therefore, to say nothing of
it; rather than to say, That, What Dr. Holder had Attempted, but Given over; I
had undertaken with Success: (Which would have looked like Insultation in me,
and a Reproaching of him.) If any other who knew more than I did, could say of
him all that which he now says of himself; it was free for him, or them, to
have said it if they so pleased. But from me, who knew it not (nor do yet,) it
could not, in reason, be expected.

And, for the same Reason, I said nothing of the Constable of Castil's Son.
What Pablo Bonnet says of him, I know not, (having never seen the Book:) nor
what is said of him by Sir Kenelm Digby, (as not having read that.) I have
heard, it is said of him; That, Only by Seeing another Speak, (himself being
Deaf,) though Distant from him the Breadth of a large Room; he was able to
repeat perfectly what ever was said, though in Welsh, or Irish, or any other
Language of which he had no knowledge at all, and which had never been spoken
to him. Which seems to me, very Unlikely, if not Impossible, Concerning which
thing, I have also delivered my opinion in that Letter of March 14. (that I
might not be thought to pretend to Impossibilities:) But, without naming any
persons; in pursuance of the old Rules, Parcere nominibus, etc.

I know very well, (for I have seen it in those that I have taught,) That Words
of such unknown Languages may, by a Deaf man, be pronounced. But he must then
be otherwise directed, what Sound, or Letters, he is to Form: He cannot do it
barely by Seeing another speak.

I know also, (for the same reason,) That a Deaf person, by Seeing another
Speak, may sometimes Guess shrewdly at what is said. But it must be in such
Words and Sentences as he has been acquainted with: not in a strange Language,
of which he knows neither the Sense nor the Words.

For certain it is, that the Formation of diverse Sounds in Speech, is performed
so inwardly in the Mouth, Throat, and Nostrils; and, the distinction of Sounds
therein so very Nice; that it is not possible to be discerned by the Eye of a
By-stander. But, in known Words, by Seeing the Formation of some Letters,
(especially the Labials,) he may Guess at the rest (as we do, when, in a Word,
we find a Letter or two mis-written, or left-out; but, from the rest, may
easily know what it should be.) And, in known Sentences, having thus discerned
some Words, he may, by them, Guess at the rest of the Sentence, or at least at
the Sense of it.

And, when this very particular was, at Gresham-Colledge, discoursed, upon the
occasion of Mr. Whaly's being there, it was then affirmed, by a Gentleman there
present, That himself (Beyond Sea) had seen this Constable of Castil's Son; and
(having heard of these reports before) did the more curiously observe him; and
found those about him to discourse with him by Signs and Gestures, in the same
manner as is usual with other Deaf persons. Which (as he well observed) would
not have been, if he, by seeing them speak, could tell what they said, and
could himself, by speaking, give them an answer. So that there must needs be
something of Amplification in that Story.

Since therefore I could add nothing (from my own knowledge) to what by others
had been said of him: and (though I did suspect somewhat of Hyperbole in the
case) would not concern my self to contradict it: I thought best to say nothing
of it, (but leave the Report as I found it, upon the credit of the Reporters.)
without going about to extenuate another performance.

And if any one else had, of his own Knowledge, affirmed as much of Dr.
Holder's performance (without bespattering another;) it is like (whatsoever were
my own sentiments of it) I should have as little concerned my self to
contradict that, as I did the other. But should choose rather (if I might be
permitted so to do) to say nothing of either.

Another great complaint there is, concerning a Book of Dr. Plott. (It seems,
he is very much concerned for every one that speaks favorably of me, p. 3, 4,
9, 11, 14.) All that was past, might (it seems) have been pardoned, (as p. 4,
7, 9.) had it not been for this fresh occasion. The fault is this, That Dr.
Plott, in his Natural History of Oxfordshire, has said (it seems) somewhat of
my teaching Dumb persons to speak, and of my Treatise De Loquela; as p. 9, 11.

Yet Dr. Plott he can Forgive (in hopes of a Reformation, p. 11.) But Dr.
Wallis must be doubly charged. 'Twas I (he says) gave this fresh occasion, p.
4. 'Twas my subtle contrivance, p. 2. I practiced it; I caused it to be
published; it is I that penned, and spread my own fame in several Authors works,
(and in this amongst the rest) they be large Characters engraven by my self, p.
3. 'Twas I (he says) thrust my self into Dr. Plott's work; I imposed upon that
worthy person; that I therein renew the challenge; that I passed it into the
Book; that those three whole Paragraphs (or the greatest part of them) were
Certainly of my Penning; and that it may be justly thought, All the rest was so
too; that I imposed upon the good Doctor, and penned it my self, p. 9. that I
put upon him that great abuse, p. 10. that he has indeed put it upon Record,
but did not Know or Write any of those matters, but what was put into his
hands by me; that I imposed upon him, and prevailed him to say it as from
himself, p. 11. that I do there explain my self, p. 13. with much more to that
purpose.

Not, that Dr. Holder knows this to be True: But because it is fit matter for a
Chancery-Bill.

That Dr. Plott did sometimes advise with me, while that Book was Writing and
Printing; is very true: And that I was free to give him my Opinion and Advise
when he desired it: and he as free to take it or leave it, as he saw cause.
(Nor was it a fault in either of us, so to do.) But I did not use to Pen whole
Paragraphs for him; or thrust him upon saying what he had not a mind to say
himself.

What is in those three Paragraphs; I cannot tell, (nor is the Book at hand to
look,) and therefore cannot say, whether I am or am not concerned therein. But,
if any thing be there (or any where else in that whole Book) which concerns the
business in hand: sure I am that I penned it not. Nor did I so much as know
that he had therein said any one word of that whole Affair; till he told me
(after the Book was published) that, Dr. Holder was offended at it. (Nor do I
yet know, what it is he has said of it. But have reason to think, there is
nothing therein said, but what was fit enough for him to say.) So that, if Dr.
Holder could find in his heart to pass by all the rest (as he intimates, p. 4,
9.) as to this last, I may plead Innocence.

And so I may, as to that his great Aggravation, p. 9. That I knew this affair
then to lie before the Royal Society. For this I knew not: (nor, perhaps, was
he desirous I should.)

I know indeed, That (he and I with Mr. Oldenburg coming together one night
from Arundel-house,) he made great complaint of us both, (but without any just
cause in either;) Threatening, that in case Mr. Oldenburg did not Retract that
in the Transactions; he would himself publish somewhat against us. And, to the
same purpose, when at another time he and I with Sir Christopher Wren came
together from Sir William Petty's house. And said, That he did forbear coming
to the Royal Society, till he should in this be vindicated. (So great a crime
it was, to have it said, That Mr. Whaly was not the only Person on whom I had
showed the effect of my skill, but I had done the like for another; meaning Mr.
Popham.)

My Answer was, The thing said was Truth; That neither of us in so saying had
done him wrong, or given him any just cause of complaint; That if himself had a
mind to publish what concerned himself without wronging others, 'twas free for
him so to do; If he did it with any unhandsome Reflections on me, I should
(when I found it abroad) either Answer it, or Neglect it, as I should see
cause; That, as to Mr. Oldenburg's publishing any thing to satisfy his
clamor, I would advise nothing one way or other (as being a person concerned)
but leave Mr. Oldenburg to his discretion. (And I then told him, as now I do,
that his story of my resorting to Blechington, etc. was a mistake.) Nor do I
remember that (from that day to this) any word has since passed between Mr.
Oldenburg and me touching that affair, or that I have ever concerned my self
about it.

I now find, from what Dr. Holder tells us, p. 9, 10. (which before I did not
know,) That a Paper of his own penning, but in Mr. Oldenburg's name, Dr. Holder
desired to have Licensed by the Counsel of the Royal Society; but, that they
refused to do it. (And, I think, with good reason; if it were what he now tells
us. By whose License it is since come out, I do not know.) This he means when
he says, That affair did then lie before the Royal Society, p. 9, 10.

Of this therefore, though there were enough to be said in Justification, if it
had been True: Yet (because I must answer punctually to his Chancery-Bill) I
must plead Not-guilty. I know not that any such thing did lie before the Royal
Society; (And can but Thank them, for doing me that Justice, without giving me
the trouble to make a Defense.) Nor did I Pen, or Croud-in, what of this matter
is said by Dr. Plott. And Dr. Plott (who yet survives, and to whom Dr. Holder
applies himself, p. 11.) will, I doubt not, be my Compurgator in this point.

But Mr. Popham also is yet surviving; (and of Age, able to answer for himself:
(And knows as well as any, Who it was that Taught him. If he be asked, Whether
Dr. Holder taught him to speak? He will answer, No. If, Whether Dr. Wallis? He
will answer, I. For I have been present, when he has been asked Both Qustions,
and given Those Answers: (without being prompted so to do.)

The Bottom of the Business seems to be this. Dr. Holder having Attempted, what
he soon Gave-over, concerning Mr. Popham (in 1660;) was a little concerned that
I should (the next year) undertake Mr. Whaly with better success. (Had I then
proceeded with Mr. Popham, it would have been but to Go-on where he Left; and
he might have been pretended to have done the Hardest part of the work: But, on
Mr. Whaly, it could not be denied but to be all my own.)

And he could not then, (though he saw this, and was troubled at it, p. 6.)
show the like effect of his skill on Mr. Popham* (Because he had either
Not-Learned, or had Forgot it.)

And he was yet more concerned; when, upon this Success on Mr. Whaly, Mr.
Popham also (whom he had quitted) was brought to me.

And, seeing me to have a like Success on Mr. Popham, as before on Mr. Whaly;
He would now (play an After-game, and) have it thought, That it was He, not I,
that taught Mr. Popham to speak: and that, what he now has, was learned from
Dr. Holder; without allowing, that Dr. Wallis had any share in it. And cannot
be content to say, He had taught Mr. Popham somewhat, and leave it to some of
his Friends who knew it (for I do not) to say How much: But makes it a crime to
say, That I have since showed any effect of my skill on Mr. Popham. (For this
is all he has to cavil at. And yet he allows it to be true, p. 10.)

And then imagins Plots, and Practices, Designs, and Subtle Contrivances, And a
great many more Fancies of his own Brain; which never came into my Thoughts.
(With which I am charged above twenty times at least, p. 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 13, 14.)

He first imagins, that I had a long aching Tooth, to join to my other Trophies,
what was performed by Dr. Holder. (He should rather have said, To have the
credit of Performing, what Dr. Holder did Attempt, but gave-over without
performing, and so it came to nothing.)

Then; That, in order to this, I had recourse to a long train of subtle
Contrivances. First, to meet with Mr. VVhaly, who being Deaf (from a Child) was
consequently Dumb. ('It Is well I am not charged, to have contrived, twenty years
before, that he should be Deaf, and consequently Dumb: but, that this should be
unknown to me for twenty years; that I might then meet with him in an happy
hour; and teach him to speak, two years after Dr. Holder had quitted his
attempt on Mr. Popham.

Next; That I should Contrive, to have this known at Court, at
Gresham-Colledge: (as he had before contrived to have his Attempt on Mr. Popham
to be publicly taken notice of, and known generally in Oxford, at London,
Westminster, the Anatomy-Lecture, to Persons of all Degrees, etc. p. 5.)

Then; That I Contrived to have this Entered into the Iournal of the Royal
Society, and there Registered: (as though they had not used to Register what
there passed, without my Contrivance:) and there reaped great Praise for this
Atchievment.

That then I contrived, (for this is the main part of the Plot,) That the Fame
of this should bring Mr. Popham to me; who was now gone home to his Friends,
and had forgot what he had been taught, p. 2, 3, 5.) He should rather have
said, for that would have been the more subtle contrivance, That I had
Contrived, that Dr. Holder should in vain Attempt, and then Quit this attempt,
on Mr. Popham; and Mr. Popham should either Not-Learn, or loose what he had
been taught by Dr. Holder; as Mr. VVhaly had lost what he had been taught by
his Nurse, p. 11. that, when what Dr. Holder pretends to have done, was come to
nothing, I might equally begin upon a new score with Both.)

He should here have added another Contrivance, (as subtle as some of the
rest,) That I Contrived, not to begin first with Mr. Popham, (lest I might be
thought only to go on, where Dr. Holder left;) But, first to begin with Mr.
VVhaly (to whom Dr. Holder could not pretend,) Contriving always to have it
believed, that I could teach a Dumb Person, without the help of Dr. Holder.

He fancies next, That I contrived and practiced with so much industry and
effect, to have Dr. Holder's attempt, (which was, before, so publicly taken
notice of, and generally known, as he tells us, p. 5.) to be so quite
Forgotten, that Few (or none) do now so much as Know or Think, that Dr. Holder
had done those fine Feats he now talks of.

Then; That I contrived, a subtle Letter to Mr. Boil, of March 14. 1661,
(before I had ever seen or known Mr. Popham; and before Dr. Holder's Elements
of Speech were written; lest it might be thought to be written on that
occasion;) giving Mr. Boil an account, of what I had undertaken, and upon what
Considerations, concerning Mr. VVhaly.

But, that I contrived further, though this Letter were then communicated to
those of the Royal Society; yet, not to have it published in the Transactions,
till a great while after. (He should rather have said, That I contrived, that
Mr. Oldenburg should not begin to write Transactions before the year 1665; that
my Letter of 1661 might not presently be there inserted. For this Contrivance
is as true as the rest.)

Then; That I compassed to have my small Treatise of Speech, in a subtle
Postscript, to be commended and magnified by Mr. Oldenburg first, and then by
Dr. Plot. (He should rather have said, That I contrived to publish an English
Grammar, to which I subtly prefixed my Treatise of Speech, in 1653, thereby
to Undermine by Anticipation, p. 10. Dr. Holder's Elements, which were
afterward to be published in 1669: and then contrived to have it printed again
and again, at Oxford, and Hamburg, a second, third, and fourth time, that it
might not be forgotten: and compassed to have it commended, by Bishop VVilkins
in his Universal Character 1668, when Dr. Holder's Elements were not yet
extant: and, after that, by Mr. Oldenburg, etc.)

Then; That I was startled at his Elements of Speech with its Appendix,
published in 1669. A Book which I never yet saw; nor did I know (otherwise than
as he now tells me) that I was at all concerned therein. But do now guess,
there is something in it, which he thinks I ought to take amiss. Otherwise, he
would not have been thus jealous for nothing.

I would advise him, on the next occasion, (since he finds some of his
Conjectures to be Mis-adventures,) unto these Contrivances, to add two or three
more. That I subtly contrived, Not to be made acquainted beforehand, with Dr.
Holder's undertaking. And then, Not to resort to Blechington (as is pretended;)
lest I should there have seen and heard Mr. Popham. And, Not to be much at
Oxford all that year; lest it might be thought I had so Resorted. And, Not to
be in company with Dr. Holder, all the while Mr. Popham was with him; lest I
might be thought to have had Discourses with him on that occasion. And, that
Dr. VVilkins should, before that time, have left Oxford; lest we might happen
to meet at his Lodgings. And, Not to have seen his Elements of Speech to this
day; that I might not be startled at them. And, Never to enquire, What
Applications Dr. Holder made to the Royal Society; that I might not know of any
such matter lying before them. And, That I never concerned my self to oppose
him in it; that I might be charged to have contrived, that they should refuse
to License his Paper. And, That I subtly contrived, That Dr. Plot should say
what he did say concerning this business, without consulting me at all therein,
or letting me know that he said any thing of it; lest I might be thought (as is
pretended) to have penned it my self, and crowded it into his Book. For all
this is as proper matter for a Chancery-Bill, as what he suggests. And the
matter of it is true; without this, that the said Doctor did contrive, etc.

Now, if I had a mind to Recriminate, or put in a Cross Bill; It were easy thus
to do it in his own Form and Language.

In the years 1651, 1652, (as p. 1, 4,) and some years before and after; Diverse
ingenious persons in Oxford, used to meet at the lodgings of Dr. Petty, (now
Sr. William Petty;) Where they diligently conferred about Researches and
Experiments in Nature. Which Meetings were some Ground and Foundation of the
Royal Society. (Not indeed the First Ground and Foundation; But earlier than
those latter Meetings at Wadham College.)

In that time, viz. In the year 1652. John Wallis, then Professer of Geometry
in Oxford, near Blechington; Having. (as p. 4, 7.) Communicated to the then
Provost of Queens College, some Papers, wherein he did describe and discover,
How all sounds used in speech are formed, and may be produced, (whether, the
Person so forming them, do hear himself speak or not;) Was desired and
Encouraged (I should have said Importuned, as p. 7.) By that excellent person,
and zealous Promoter of Learning Dr. Gerard Langbain, late Provost of Queens
College in Oxford; the Learned and Industrious Mr. Patrick Young, then in
Oxford; approved also by the Incomparable Dr. James Usher, then Archbishop of
Armagh, and Lord Primate of Ireland; with whom he had the honor, soon after,
to be conversant in the lodgings of the said Provost in Queens College; and by
diverse other Persons, members of that Worthy company before mentioned, to Print
those Papers. (Not perhaps by any set Meeting of that Company: Nor was Dr.
Holder, by any such Meeting of the Royal Society, Importuned to Review his
Papers, p. 7. nor by any such Meeting at Wadham-Colledg, had the business of
Mr. Popham, commended to him, p. 4.)

He thereupon (as p. 7.) in the year 1653; Desirous (as p. 5.) to serve the
ends, and contribute something to the design, of that worthy company, (viz. The
Improvement of Natural Knowledge, and Public Benefit;) Published his English
Grammar, with his Treatise of speech prefixed.

This (as p. 5.) was publicly taken Notice of, and Known (not only to those
eminent Persons above mentioned, but) Generally in Oxford. Where very many
Students, on purpose to satisfy their Curiosity, and have a Particular Knowledge
of what they had received by Report; Bought the Book, and Read it.

Dr. William Holder (as p. 2, 5.) then lived at Blechington; saw and perfectly
Knew this; was Conversant with Dr. Wallis; was one of those who Bought (or
borrowed) that Book* did see and Read it; and had discourse with Dr. Wallis on
that occasion diverse times when they happened to meet at Oxford.

Now Dr. Holder having a long aching tooth (as p. 2.) to do something to be
talked of, and get himself a Trophy; had recourse to subtle Contrivances.
Having learned therefore from Pablo Bonnet (as p. 6.) that the Constable of
Castile's Son, when Deaf, had been taught to speak: And having learned, from
Dr. Wallis's Treatise of speech, How every sound in speech is formed: He
thought it might prove (and there was reason so to think, if well managed,) a
successeful way of teaching Deaf and Dumb persons to speak, by teaching them so
to Form sounds as Dr. Wallis had directed. Not doubting (as p. 5.) but that a
Dumb person, Dumb only in Consequence of being Deaf, might be capable of being
instructed so to apply (as is there taught) the motions of his Tongue and other
Instruments of speech; And knowing it (as another might have done) to be both
Possible and Fesible, from an Example in that kind seen and heard by his late
Majesty in Spain.

And he meets in a happy hour, with a young Gentleman (as p. 2, 4) Mr.
Alexander Popham; deprived of Hearing, and consequently of Speaking. Resolving
therefore to assume to himself this experiment; On him he would make the first
Attempt (whatever be the Success,) that is remembered to have been made in
England, (whatever had been done elsewhere.) And (as p. 3. Having got a hint
(for which he always lay in wait) of a new Invention so considerable, (from a
small Treatise of Dr. Wallis on that subject;) would (by putting himself into
the Practice, of what Dr. Wallis had taught,) Entitle himself to the experiment.

All possible Noise is presently made of it; It is showed (as p. ^, 5.) at
London at Westminster; to Persons of all Degrees; published at the Anatomy
Lecture; an express Relation made of it, nameing also the Persons concerned in
this experiment, so far as served his turn, (but not a word of Dr. Wallis in
the cause:) And (if we may believe him (p. 1. 5.) a multitude of Students
Resort from Oxford to Bletchington to See and Hear it. (Magnis tamen excidit
ausis.)

I confess, I was out of the Noise; and heard very little of it, (save what I
have from his Paper; in which I find very great Mis-takes:) And was far from
Oxford, the greatest part of that time.

But the Cry did not last long. This (he tells us p. 1. 5.) was in March
1659/60; and (within a few Months after) the Summer following, he quitted that
undertaking: Mr. Popham went home to his friends; the labor lost; and the Cry
ceased. So that there are at this day very few in Oxford (if any) who Know or
think, that Dr. Holder taught Mr. Popham to speak. p. 3.

The year following (notwithstanding this mis-adventure of Dr. Holder;) Dr.
Wallis (thereunto induced by the Considerations mentioned in his Letter of
March 14, 1661/2; and in confidence of his Treatise De Loquela therein
mentioned; as p. 2, 8, 12, 13,) undertook another Person concerning whom Dr.
Holder cannot pretend to any thing) Mr. Daniel Whaly; who having lost his
Hearing while a child, was consequently Dumb, p. 2, (and had so continued for
Twenty years more.) Him he taught (without any help or direction from Dr.
Holder) not only to pronounce some words (which Dr. Holder had Attempted on Mr.
Popham;) but, in good measure, to understand a Language also; (which Dr. Holder
does not pretend to; and, without which, to speak, is but like a Parrot.) of
which, in a Letter of December. 24. 1661, he gave a short Account to Mr. Boil,
and (in answer to two of his, of January 4, and Feb. 26. desiring it) a Fuller
Account in that of March 14. 1661; Which Mr. Boil imparted to diverse of the
Society; (I do not say, to the Royal Society; because I doubt whether the
Patent which makes them such, were then actually sealed; though, I think, it
bears Date a little before that time.) And (upon a further solicitation from
him and them, by letters of Apr. 5, and May 8, to satisfy their Curiosity, and
have a particular Knowledge of what they had received by Report, as Dr. Holder
Speaks p. 5.) In May 1662, Mr. Whaly came up to London with Dr. Wallis; was
Seen, and Heard at Court, and by the Royal Society at Grasham College, 'twas
entered into the Iournal of the Royal Society, and there registered; Dr. Wallis
reaped great praise for this Achievement, as Dr. Holder speaks, p. 1, 2, 5, 6.

Yet did not the Doctor Impose upon the Society; or Confidently show and Boast
it, (as p. 12.) as the First assay that had ever been in this kind. For they
Knew well, (and did at that time discourse,) what had been said of the
Constable of Castiles Son, and his being heard by the late King; And had then a
particular Relation from one of themselves, who had seen the Person. And some
of Dr. Holder's particular Friends were then present, who might (if they had
thought it considerable) have acquainted the rest, what they knew of Dr.
Holder's Attempt on Mr. Popham. And Dr. Holder himself, who (it seems) was a
witness of all this, and saw it, (as he tells us p. 6) had the opportunity, if
there were occasion, to assert his own right; And might have had it registered
with the rest; if the company had thought it had deserved it.

Dr. Holder, who saw this, p. 6, was concerned at it. As to Mr. Whaly, he could
pretend nothing. Mr. Popham had lost what he is said to have learned. The
Stories of Dr. Wallis's Resorting to Bletchington, and discourses with Dr.
Holder on that occasion, were mistakes; and that whole scene ill laid. And
should he have then pretended to have done the like for Mr. Popham; (hic
Rhodus, hic saltus:) the company would have been glad to have seen that too
(which was not to be done.)

But he was more concerned, when (as he tells as p. 2.) the Fame of Mr. Whaly
had brought (to Dr. Wallis) Mr. Popham also; and that on him (whom Dr. Holder
had given over,) he had (as p. 10) performed somewhat very considerable; that
is (as p. 13.) had done the like for him, as before for Mr. Whaly.

He had, however, a Design, (by playing an after-game) to make the world
believe in time; what he could not do, while things were fresh in memory and
knowledge, in and about Oxford. And therefore (that we may still follow his own
language ( he had recourse to subtle contrivances, and subtle practices (as p.
1, 2.) Practicing, from thence-forth to assume Mr. Popham's speaking wholly to
himself (p. 3.) and not allow Dr. Wallis so much as to have showed any effect
of his skill on Mr. Popham, p. 13.

To this end, (that Dr. Holder might not be thought to have learned any of his
skill from Dr. Wallis's Treatise concerning the Formation of sounds in) speech;
he contrives to write some Papers of his own (as he tells us) about that
subject, p. 7. These Papers, he compasses to have mentioned (p. 8, 9, in the
Bishop of Chester's Book, of the Universal Character, page 357. In the year
1668. But he tells us further, that in the year 1666, they were lost in the
Bishops study, together with all his own, in the dreadful Fire of London, (that
we may at least think them to be so old.) These Papers, (the Bishop tells us,)
did concern the Doctrine of Letters: Dr. Holder tells us, they were to describe
and discover the Method he had used in bringing Mr. Popham to speak, p. 7.
(This, it seems, was what He aimed at: All the rest served but to hedge this in.)

So considerable he would have us think these Papers were, that he was
Importuned to renew them (like another Phaenix out of its own Ashes:) And a
little Importunity (we may think,) served the turn. He then contrives further,
to have the new Phaenix, His Elements of speech (which we must now suppose to
be those Papers) presented to the Royal Society, 1669; and to get their order
to print it; and (as he speaks p. 6.) had it Registered, to perpetuat the
Memory of his Achievement.

But Dr. Holder had a farther Design in it. For these elements were to Usher-in
a subtle Appendix, concerning Persons Deaf and Dumb: and, in a few subtle
lines, (which was his chief Design,) to hedge-in what concerned Mr. Popham;
describing but (wisely) not nameing him: Assuming Mr. Popham's speaking solely
to himself. To which the other were only subservient; to make a noise, while
this slipt-in. Having therein made mention of his success upon a Deaf and Dumb
Person, in tending Mr. Popham: As he tells us p. 7.

These Elements (as p. 8, 9, 10,) he Contrives and Compasses to have Commended
and Magnified, (as in Mr. Oldenburg's name, but, I suppose, of his own Penning,
in the Philosophical Transactions, of May 1669 as a Well-considered and Useful
Tract: Concluding, with Magnifying its Usefulness, for instructing Persons Deaf
and Dumb; as being by this Author, Excellently applied thereunto: (Modestly
said of himself!) Avouching therein His own Practice. Without taking the least
notice of any thing Written by Dr. Wallis, and others (about the Formation of
Sounds;) or the Practice ( of Teaching Dumb Persons) by any other.

And here (as p. 9.) he is secure to gain this Point; That in a Book which
swill come into the hands of all curious Persons, Dr. Holder's fame is spread
orth to all; and Few (he hopes) will ever happen to know, that Dr. Wallis (in
his Treatise of speech 1653) had showed him the way; (that being a Small
Treatise; and written in Latin; and a great while since; and but annexed to
another Book, intended principally for Forraigners desiring to learn English:)
or, that Dr. Wallis had done any thing of that nature, either to Mr. Popham, or
to Mr. Whaly; (there being nothing at that time said thereof any-where in
Print; so little was the Industry, or rather so great was the Negligence, of
Wallis, in spreading his own Fame, p. 3.)

And all this he does, under Countenance of an Order of the Royal Society by
him procured for the Printing of it, p. 7. as if they had been privy to this
Design.) Which would have been yet more advanced, if he could have gotten their
License for this his New Paper penned by himself, in Mr. Oldenburg's name) put
by him into Mr. Oldenburg's hand to be published in the Transactions, (as
himself tells us p. 9. making the Transactions, his market (as p. 3.) and a
Fair for this Merchant of Glory; if he could have found way and leave to crowd
himself in.

For who should now believe (when every body else is silent) that ever any one
thought of a Treatise of Speech, or the Formation of Sounds, before Dr. Holder
made this Essay, in his Elements of Speech? (For, that they must be thought
elder than that of Dr. Wilkins, he had subtly contrived already, by getting him
to mention some Papers of Dr. Holder, which might now be thought to be these
Elements: and the small Treatise of Dr. Wallis, it is hoped will be forgotten,
or known to few.) And who can believe, that any one but Dr. Holder, did Teach,
or attempt to Teach, a Deaf man to speak; or ever thought of such a Thing, (so
long as Dr. Wallis is silent;) there being no body then, in Print, pretending
to it?

And thus he hopes to bear it out (as p. 9, 11.) with subtilty of contrivance;
speaking like Truth so artificially, that the Reader is to believe more than is
True: and it serves him to impose on those (Mr. Oldenburg, and the Royal
Society) whose name and credit he borrows to commend him, who innocently suffer
a demur Truth of his own penning, unwittingly to pass into the Transactions,
suffering themselves (as p. 3.) to be imposed upon, to publish the Fame and
Praise of Dr. Holder, in large Characters engraven by himself. (For that of p.
4, 5, 6, 7, 8. is certainly of his own Penning, though in Mr. Oldenburg's name:
And if, as p. 9. we may, by that guess at the rest: and for some other reasons:
it may be justly thought, That in the Transactions of May 1669. is so; at least
of his superviding) Desiring and Designing (as p. 11.) the World would be so
kind as to be cajoled into such a belief, when he prevailed with Mr. Oldenburg
so say as from himself, what Dr. Holder imposed upon him. (and very much
concerned he is, that this subtle contrivance takes no better.)

Dr. Wallis was so ignorant of this Contrivance, and so unsuspicious of a
Design upon him, and so unconcerned for what is said in those Elements and
Appendix; that he never yet read the One or the Other.

But so it happened the year following, that this Mine was sprung unawares,
and, played otherwise than was intended. Mr. Oldenburg in the Transactions of
July 1670, published a Letter of Dr. Wallis to Mr. Boil, of March 14. 1661.
And, as he had, the year before given a large account of Dr. Holders Elements
of Speech (published in 1669.) and how this was by him applied to the
Instruction of Dumb persons; Without taking notice of what Dr. Wallis had Writ
or Done: So now, (without saying the same again of Dr. Holder) he gives a Brief
account of Dr. Wallis's Treatise of Speech (published in 1653.) and what, in
pursuance of this, was done by him.

Dr. Holder (who thought he had put himself in sole possession of the Repute of
this Experiment,) was startled, as p. 7. (or rather Nettled) for he does Winch
and Fling like Hudibras's Horse in such a condition, without any apparent
cause*) as appears by his printed Paper. He falls foul upon Dr. Wallis, Mr.
Oldenburg, the Royal Society, Dr. Plot: and Dreams of Subtleties, Practices,
Contrivances, Designs, etc.; no body can see why; (who does not see the Nettle,
or know of the sore Place.)

That Dr. Wallis had, in the year 1653. published a Treatise, De Loquela; and,
that he had, in pursuance of what is there delivered, taught Mr. Whaly to
speak, and, had since done the like for Mr. Popham, are things True, and Known,
and Notorious; nor does he deny it. And why might not all this be said, without
making such a Clutter?

Dr. Holder, it seems, (for so his Paper tells us, p. 7.) had, in his Elements
of Speech, made mention of his success upon a Deaf and Dumb person, intending
Mr. Popham, (which yet Dr. Wallis knew not of, till he saw it in this Paper, as
having never read that Book, nor does yet know what is there said; nor, how
truly:) and Mr. Oldenburg had given a large account of that Book and the
Contents of it, in the Transactions of May, 1669. (without saying any thing of
Dr. Wallis:) and no offense was taken. But when, in July 1670. he gave a short
account of Dr. Wallis, and his Treatise; without speaking (there) of Dr.
Holder and his Elements, (as having done it a year before:) a great Outcry is
made, of Wrongs and Injuries, of Plots, Designs, Contrivances, and subtle
Practices, and a great deal more of such Rif-Raf: As if every Body were bound
everywhere, and at all times, to magnify his Elements of Speech, etc.

But it seems, (as p. 10, 11.) he could not help what was in his Nature, or
else Habitual to him; and could not conceal his Particular Emulation. He
Desired, and had Designed it, that the world would be so kind as to be cajoled
into such a Belief, that he was the First that had considered the Formation of
Sounds; and, the only Person, who attempted to teach Dumb Persons to Speak.
(For, if he designed any thing less than this, there was nothing there said to
contradict him.)

Yet he himself knew full well (as p. 14) Dr. VVallis's Treatise of Speech; and
what he had done for Mr. VVhaly, and Mr. Popham: But, the Reader must not know
of that. The disclosing of this marred his Market.

He knew full well, That Dr. Wallis had taught Dumb Persons: (and he says it
expressly, p. 11. So he did, for Two were his Scholars, Mr. Popham, and Mr.
Whaly.) And, (if we admit what he there says; That they had, formerly Owed
somewhat, the one to his Nurse, and the other to Dr. Holder: Yet, if they had
equally Forgotten, (which is the case) the one and the other (whatever it
were;) and, what now they have, they have from Dr. Wallis, (which, though
True, Dr. Holder would not have Known;) and Mr. Pepham, one no more to Dr.
Holder, than Mr. VVhaly to his Nurse: It might very well be said without
offense, (that Mr. Whaly is not the only Person on whom Dr. Wallis has showed
the effect of his skill; but he has since done the like for another; meaning
Mr. Popham) were there not some Nettle that stings, but is not seen; or some
sore Place wringed, which does not Appear, but must not be Touched.

'Twas nothing therefore, but being disappointed in this his great Design,
which made him thus outrageous. And (persons faulty being mostly jealous) he
being conscious to himself of such petty contrivances; made him fancy, that
others were employed in like Plots. And Knowing, it seems, (though I knew it
not,) that he had done what I had no reason to take kindly; he fancied me to be
studying Revenge, of what I never knew.

Now all this (as p. 1.) if being but nakedly exposed to light, in such a
Narrative, do seem severe, it must be imputed to the Matter it self. And, if
the Language seem hard, he must not quarrel at it, (like the Blacksmith who
threw away the Looking-Glass, because it showed him an Ugly face;) since it is
his own.

But I shall forbear thus to charge him, (though there be much more of truth
therein, than in what he fancies of me; and the Language is his own.) Yet it is
not amiss, to let him judge, by hearing it; how well it does become him to use
such language.

As to what he Complains of; the sum of what I say, is this.

That it was as lawful for me, to Write and Publish, a Treatise concerning the
Formation of Sounds, in 1653; as for him to do the like, in 1669.

That it was as lawful for me, to Teach Mr. Whaly, to speak a Language, and
understand it, as for him to Attempt, some what of this, (on Mr. Popham,)
without Success.

That it was as lawful for me to say, that what I did was in pursuance of what
I had, Before made public (in 1653;) as for him to say, What he did, was in
pursuance of what he has, was Since made public, (in 1669.)

That it was lawful also, (when he had, two years before, given-over Mr.
Popham, and all that he did Attempt or Perform on him was come to nothing;) for
me to do the like for Mr. Popham, as I had before done for Mr. Whaly.

That it was as lawful for Mr. Oldenburg, to say, What he Knew of me and my
Book, in the Transactions of July 1670, (without repeating, there, what he had
before said of Dr. Holder;) as in that of May 1669, to say, what he Thought of
Dr. Holder, and his Book, (without saying any thing of me.)

That it was lawful for Dr. Plot, to say, that he so found it said, in the
place by him cited. (Especially when himself knew the Substance of it to be
true; and had not cause to dis-believe the Circumstances.)

That when I could not say my Own Thoughts; without derogating somewhat from
what others had said of the Constable of Castiles Son; and what Dr. Holder says
of himself: it was neither Uncivil, nor Dis-ingenuous in me, to be Silent in
it; and let it rest upon the credit of those who do, or can say it.

And, consequently, that Dr. Holder has no cause to Complain of all, or any of
this; much less to Write, Print, or Suggest a Paper, full of so many Great
Mis-takes in matter of Fact; and so many groundless Surmises of Designs.

And lastly, that the Counsel of the Royal Society acted with very good reason;
when they Refused to License that Paper.

I have now done with this unpleasing Task (For I take no pleasure in quarrels,
or blemishing another man's Reputation.)

I had thoughts at first, to have neglected his Paper without making any Reply,
(because any indifferent Reader would easily discern, that there is, in it,
much more of Passion, than of Reason.) But I find others of opinion, that it
was fit somewhat should be said to it; because so many are concerned in it as
well as my self. I find, he does mis-remember many matters of fact; and
mis-times diverse others; and fancies things of mere accident, to be matters of
Design (a thing very incident to persons that are a little uneasy.)

He had attempted (I know) the Teaching Mr. Popham to speak. But (for what
reasons he knows best) quickly gave it over; and Mr. Popham forgot all. What
success he had in the mean time, I cannot tell. I saw nothing of it. (And
therefore he made an ill choice, in calling me to be his Voucher.) If any who
knew more of it than I did, have said any thing of him advantagiously; I have
never concerned my self to contradict it. That I did teach Mr. VVhaly, with
better success, and without his Assistance; he knows very well. And, that I
taught Mr. Popham too; he knows also: And that I did not seek the Employment,
or take Mr. Popham out of his hands; but, two years after he had given over the
attempt when Mr. Popham (whatever it was he had learned) had forgot all. This
though perhaps it might cause somewhat of regret; that another should succeed
in what he had given over;) yet is no just cause of complaint. Nor do I find
any thing in the Transactions of July 1670, which can administer just occasion
to find fault with it; but if he will needs be angry, because I cannot Affirm,
what I do not Know: Or, will needs go about to persuade me, and tell all the
World, that I did See and Hear those things which I did neither see nor Hear: I
cannot help it.

If, in giving your Lordship this trouble; I have already been too tedious: I
shall now add no more to it, but subscribe my self,

My Lord, Your Lordships very humble Servant, John Wallis.

FINIS.

