An EXACT ACCOUNT OF The Late Action AT THE Town of DUNDALK, AGAINST The IRISH,
by Their MAJESTY'S FORCES, Commanded by Sir JOHN LANIER. TOGETHER, With the
ARTICLES of the Surrender of MOSS-TOWN.
Lisbourne the 10th of February, 1689/90.
ON Friday his Grace received an Express, that the Forces he sent from Antrim
to Charlemont, had Burnt many of their Boats, and Fired the Bridge, half of
which was Burnt down before the Enemy could extinguish it; and a very hot
Dispute happened, in which we lost a French Captain in the Regiment of Cukimott,
and five or six private Soldiers, with the loss of many on the Enemies side,
and some Prisoners.

The same Evening his Grace received an Express from the Newry, that there were
six Regiments of the Enemies Horse, and five Regiments of Foot arrived at
Dundalk, and that five Regiments more of Foot were coming to them; and that
several Gabbard (or Lighters) Loads of Hay and Oats were arrived there from
Droghedah.

And yestarday another Express from the Newry, That there were come to Dundalk
13 or 14 Gabbards more from Droghedah, laden with Bacon, Cheese, Butter, and
the like.

Upon which his Grace has sent Expresses to Col. Stewart and Col. Pursell, to
direct them in the better securing the Newry, and adjacent Passages, and
another to the Captain of the Man of War in Carrickfergus Road (as is thought)
to dispatch some Persons to burn the Hay, Oats, Gabbards, etc.

And also by a Messenger arrived here four days since, he has sent for the
Danes to hasten thither; and to Morrow designs toward the Newry himself.

Febr. 13. On Tuesday the General set out from hence toward the Newry, having
first given Orders for all our Forces to dispatch from all Parts toward him,
and given out 6000 Arms to the Country to defend themselves in their absence;
and accordingly our Forces were on their march.

But this Morning his Grace sent an Express from Drummore, that the whole Noise
was a false Alarm; and ordered Directions to be sent to all Regiments to stop
their march, and return to their Quarters.

In my last I told you, our General was gone toward Newry, but by the Road
receiving an Account, which contradicted his former, of the Enem^^ speedy
approaches toward our Fronti^^s on that Quarter; his Grace went no farther
than Drummore, eight Miles from this place, where he ^ave Orders for all the
Forces on their March to those parts, to return to their Quarters, excepting
500 Foot, and 500 Horse and Dragoons, who were detached out of several
Regiments, and Commanded by Sir John Lanier, to Dundalk, where they arrived on
Friday Morning the 14th. before day, and passed the River a Mile above the
Town, near Bellews-Castle, where being a Garrison of the Enemy, as our Men
approached, the Enemy fired briskly, and ours as briskly advanced upon them;
the Enemy fled from the Walls into the Castle, and upon this briskly fired from
the Battlements; however, our Men, like Lions eager for a Prey, could not be
daunted or restrained, but ran up to the Gate, which being only Barricadoed
within, was soon forced open, and our Men soon got into the lower part of the
House, and fell to firing up through the Floor, by which they wounded one Man,
and threatening to burn the House, the Enemy from above hung down a white
Handkerchief, and desired leave to march out with their Arms; but being denied
that, were forced to accept of Quarter, and surrender themselves up Prisoners,
of which there is in all about twenty of their Army, and ten Country Fellows,
who are now (...) Road coming hither under a Guard (...) the Castle, another
Party advanced (...) the Enemy's side of the Town (...) the South East part,
where our chief Works formerly were, and without Opposition burnt all the
Houses on that Quarter to the Gate, where a strong Party being got, opposed our
further Progress, till in the Attempt we lost one Lieutenant, and two private
Men, and killed one of the Enemy, and then retired.

There were other ways which with difficulty our Forces might have (yet not
without great difficulty) attempted to enter the Town; but there being 3000 of
the Enemy within, and several strong Castles and Houses; and not knowing but a
stronger Party might advance from Atherdee, where some of their Horse lies, it
was thought advisable to retire, which accordingly our Men did, to the Fields
and adjacent Mountains, from whence they brought 1500 Head of Cattle, without
the least opposition from the Enemy; which at the Newry is to be divided among
the whole Party.

All the Houses they burnt were full of Provisions, so that it is believed, and
the Prisoners report that the Town is full also: Our Men discerned four
Gibbards, in the River of Dundalk, and a Ship of ours lying at the Harbors
mouth, who, it is said, have burnt four others there laden with Forage from
Dublin. Our Out-Scouts lie constantly within four Miles of Dundalk.

The General returned hither on Saturday, and at Night received Colonel
Wolsely's Letter, and which Action will undoubtedly much frustrate the Enemies
designed Expectations, and retard their intentions of Attacking us in our
Quarters, as without all-doubt they intended by all these great Preparations.

I have herewith sent you the Articles on which the brave Lady therein
mentioned, surrendered up her House to the Brigadeer Nugent, who, we are told,
is mortally wounded in that brave Action on the 11th Instant, by 1000
Inniskilling English and French, Commanded by the famous Col. Woosely, in which
they fought 4000 chosen Irish, under the Command of the Duke of Berwick at
Cavan, whom they routed twice, killed 300, took many Prisoners, etc. of which
you will have the full Particulars this Post from another hand.

I am yours, J. W.

Conditions granted by the Honorable William Nugent, one of his Majesty's
Brigadeers, and Lord Lieutenant of the County of Longford; To all Persons
residing in Moss-Town, upon the Surrender of the said House, Firearms, and
Ammunition.
I. That Sarah Lady Newcomen be at her Choice, either to stay in her own House,
and there peaceably and quietly to enjoy all the Goods now in her Possession
belonging to Herself, Children, or Relations; or else to remove Herself,
Family, and the aforesaid Goods, to whatever place her Ladyship shall appoint
and that the said Lady shall be permitted to keep her Chaplain Mr. John Wilson,
to officiate for her in her own House, if her Ladyship stays there, or in her
Journey if she removes.

II. That the said House of Moss Town shall not be burnt by any Party of Men to
be placed there.

III. That all Persons now in the House, or formerly belonging to it, who are
so inclined, have liberty to March safely from thence, with their Lives,
carrying all Swords and Horses not Serviceable, and Goods now in their
Possession, to Inniskilling, or to whatever place the said Persons belonging to
the said House, shall think convenient, with a safe Convoy under the Command of
Captain Francis Nangle, and Captain Bryan Mac Mahone, to defend the said Lady
Newcomen, and all Persons belonging to the said House, from the Injury of all
Persons in their Journey.

IV. That all Persons imprisoned either for being in this House, or coming
hither, that are now in Longford, be Released, and have leave to march with the
rest of the Party, to the place they shall appoint.

V. That Persons who have deserted His Majesty's Army, and are now in the said
House, particularly Charles Deanes, shall have Liberty to March with their
Lives and Goods with the rest of the Men.

VI. That the Lady Newcomen, and all other Persons in the said House, have
Liberty to carry what Provisions they think convenient with them, and also
liberty to dispose of all the rest of their Provisions, Corn, and Goods, as
they think fit.

VII. That all such as are inclined to stay in the Country, or elsewhere, shall
have free and full Pardon for all past Crimes; and a Protection for them and
Goods for the future against all Persons: and that protected Persons shall have
liberty to carry their Goods to their respective Habitations.

VIII. That the Convoy shall be ready at 24 hours warning, under the Command of
the aforementioned Person, to Convoy the said Lady, and all Persons in her
House, to the place where they shall appoint.

And that these abovementioned Conditions be justly performed, I do hereby
Oblige my self, under my Hand and Seal, this 13th. of January, 1689.

William Nugent.
I Do hereby empower all Officers and Soldiers to Press in this Journey for
all such belonging to the said House of Moss-town, as will pay 12 d. per day
for each Horse so Pressed, to carry them, their Children, and Goods. And I do
hereby Promise to take no Advantage of any Error committed in the wording of
the said Conditions, but admit them to be taken in the largest sense, to the
Advantage and Assurance of those to whom they appertain. As Witness my Hand
this 13th. of January, 1689.

William Nugent.


Licensd, March 1. 1690.
LONDON: Printed for R. Greenhill, near the Exchange. 1690.


