THE NECESSITY OF REGENERATION: In Two SERMONS To the UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD.

By JOHN WALLIS D.D. Professor of Geometry in that University; One of His
MAJESTY'S Chaplains in Ordinary; and a Member of the Royal Society.

LONDON, Printed for Will. Rogers at the Sign of the Sun in Fleet Street, over
against St. Dunstan's Church, 1682.

To the Right Honorable JOHN, Lord ROBERTS, Earl of RADNOR: Lord President of
His MAJESTY'S most Honorable Privy Council.
May it please Your Lordship,
THE ensuing Sermons (Preached, in my ordinary turns, to the University,) were
not intended to be more public than that Auditory: But (being made acquainted
that they would not be unacceptable to your Lordship;) I have presumed to
Publish them under your Lordships Patronage. I have therein purposely waved (as
I always do) all nice disputes of Speculative Subtilties in Controversal
Points (wherein those may possibly differ, who yet agree in the settled Doctrine
of the Church of England;) as more tending to disturb the peace of the Church,
than to promote Piety. The design of them is, to show the Necessity of Habitual
Grace in our Hearts with the Practice of it in our Lives; and the need we have
of God's Assistance to both. And I therein keep close to the Doctrine of our
own Church (which I judge, in the whole, to be Sound and Orthodox,) and as near
as may be, in her own Words. If any shall please themselves with thoughts of
Doing good, without Being so; or, contrariwise, of a good Heart, without a good
Life; or, that he is of himself sufficient for One or Both of these (so as to
please God) without the Divine Assistance: I am sure he is, therein, no true
Son of the Church of England. Thus far, I hope we do all agree. And, being to
speak to many of those, whose Function calls them to speak to others; I thought
it seasonable to inculcate these Necessary Truths: Whereof they cannot be
Ignorant, and of which I would not have them Unmindful, in their great Work of
saving Souls. And I heartily wish there were more Zeal for these Great Truths,
and less Animosities about little things, which unhappily Divide good Men,
Break our Peace, and Gratify those who seek our Ruin. I am

My LORD, Your Honors very humble Servant JOHN WALLIS.

The Necessity of REGENERATION. A SERMON Preached before the UNIVERSITY of
OXFORD AT CHRIST CHURCH, September 10th. 1676.
JOHN iij. 3. Jesus answered and said unto him, Verily verily I say unto thee,
Except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.


THE words are Christ's to Nicodemus, a great man among the Jews: A Pharisee; a
Ruler of the Jews; a Master in Israel: (for so we find him styled ver. 1. and
10.) Yet did not understand the Doctrine of Regeneration. As appears by his
questions ver. 4, and 9. How can these things be? How can a man be born when he
is old? Can he enter a second time into his Mothers womb? etc. And by Christ's
Expostulation, ver. 10. Art thou a Master in Israel and know not these
things? Much like that of the Apostle to those Heb. 5.12. who, when for the
time they ought to be Teachers, had need themselves to be taught again the
first principles of the oracles of God; and had need of Milk, not of strong
Meat.

The Pharisees, we know, though great pretenders to Religion, and a strain of
Devotion beyond others, and to a great exactness to the modes and formalities
of the Jewish Worship then in practice: yet were no great friends to Christ, or
to his Doctrine.

This made Nicodemus, being one of them, not willing at first to own it openly,
(that he might not give a public scandal to those of his own party,) till he
should be better informed of the truth of it: And therefore, in a private way,
(to avoid offense,) came to Jesus by night.

For, being an inquisitive person, willing to satisfy himself, and not
(relying only upon others judgments) to go blindfold as the crowd carried him;
and suspecting, there might be somewhat more, than men were commonly aware of,
in this despised Doctrine: He resolved first to know what it was, before he
would condemn it. And therefore made this address to Christ, as best able to
inform him.

And he came not, as at some other times the Pharisees did, to Tempt him, to
Deride him, to Cavil at him, to Blaspheme him, to Ensnare him, seeking how they
might Destroy him: But, with an honest intention, to be Informed.

As appears by that his respectfull address, ver. 2. Rabbi, we know that thou
art a Teacher come from God; for no man can do those miracles that thou do,
except God be with him.

And Christ, being as willing to Teach, as he was to Learn; sets him first this
Lesson, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.

Not as being the most Easy to learn, (for, we see, to Nicodemus it seemed at
first very strange:) But as being one of the most Necessary and Fundamental
Doctrines in Religion.

And that which is Christ's Doctrine in the Text, shall be my Doctrine at
present; whereof (through God's assistance) I now purpose to speak: The
Necessity of Regeneration, or a New Birth, Except a man be born again, he
cannot see the Kingdom of God.

It is a Doctrine, which perhaps may seem as strange to some in this age, as it
did to Nicodemus then.

There being those, who do not only (as perhaps at first he did) Doubt of it;
but Scoff and Reproach it, who make but a Jest of it at the best; if not a
subject of Burlesk and Drollery, and such like unsavory discourse, unbeseeming
a Christians Mouth and Ears.

But we shall find it, first or last, to be a Serious thing: Not so Needless,
nor yet so very Easy, as profane persons persuade themselves.

As to the truth of this Doctrine; it will need no great Proof; being the very
words of the Text. And those who, upon the evidence of this one Text, will not
believe it; would perhaps as little believe it, if I should produce many more.

It will rather need Explication, than Confirmation.

And two things there are to be explained: What is here meant by seeing the
Kingdom of God; and, what by being born again.

First, What is meant by seeing the Kingdom of God.

The word Kingdom, in its first and proper signification, imports, that State,
Dignity, and Power, which Earthly Kings and Princes, have over their People and
Subjects; with the Greatness, Splendor, and other Appurtenances to such
Dominion.

But is here to be understood in a Figurative sense; for something Great,
Splendid and Excellent; as Kingdoms are, or be thought to be.

For it is not meant, that those who are here said to be born again, shall be
Kings and Princes, such as on Earth are so called,

But, that they shall enjoy a condition, as Great, as Glorious, as Excellent;
as that of Kings and Princes: Yea, much more than so.

And thus much is employed in that Addition, when it is called the Kingdom of
God.

Which is partly a Note of Distinction, partly a Note of Eminence.

It Is usual in Scripture, when a word of ordinary use for Natural and Earthly
things, is Metaphorically applied to signify somewhat that is Spiritual; to
add some Epithete for Distinction.

As when Christ is called the True Vine, the True Shepherd, the Bread of Life,
the Bread that came down from Heaven, the Spiritual Rock, etc. by way of
distinction, from Bread, a Rock, a Vine, a Shepherd, in the proper acceptance
of the words.

But they do, withal, imply an Eminency, or Greater Excellency, of the things
so Metaphorically described; then of that which the words in their proper sense
do signify.

For the meaning is not, that Christ is Truly a Vine, or Truly a Shepherd,
etc. in the proper sense of those words:

But, somewhat that is thereby resembled, more Excellent than it.

That he is so Fruitful, so Pleasant, so Comfortable; as that the Fruitfulness
of the Vine, the Pleasantness of the Grape, the Comfortableness of the Wine,
(which makes glad the heart of man,) is but a faint Shadow and Resemblance, of
what he is in Truth.

That he is so Kind, so Tender, so Careful of his; as that the Kindness, the
Tenderness, the Care of a Shepherd, toward his Flock, does but faintly
Resemble, what he is in Truth.

So here: The Kingdom of God, or (as elsewhere) the Kingdom of Heaven, the
Heavenly Kingdom, (with the like expressions;) do import; not such as what
Men, on Earth, call a Kingdom: But, somewhat else, thereby resembled; and
somewhat more Excellent; which God vouchsafes to call by that name: as much
surpassing that of Men, as Heaven is above the Earth.

Heb. 12.28. A Kingdom that cannot be shaken. 1 Pet. 1.4. An Inheritance
Incorruptible, and Undefiled, and which fades not away, reserved in Heaven for
us. 1 Pet. 5.4. A Crown of Righteousness, which fades not away. 2 Timothy 4.8. A
Crown of Righteousness, laid up for us; which God the Righteous Judge shall
give us in that day. Mat. 25.34. A Kingdom prepared for us from the beginning
of the world.

By the Kingdom of God, therefore, we are to understand, that Glory, that
Happiness, that Blessed Condition, (whatever it is) which the Children of God,
(those that are born again,) do seek after, and shall enjoy: Partly in this
life, where it is called the Kingdom of Grace; and partly hereafter, which is
the Kingdom of Glory.

And thus we are to understand it in Mat. 6.33. Seek first the Kingdom of God
and his righteousness. And 1. Cor. 6.9. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall
not inherit the Kingdom of God? Gal. 5.19 -- 21. The works of the flesh are
manifest, adultery, fornication, uncleanness, etc. (with a large Catalogue of
such others; which concludes with this) They which do such things shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God. But, Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is
the Kingdom of God: Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness
sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of God, Mat. 5.3, 10.

Now, this Blessedness of the Children of God, (here and hereafter,) is called
by the name of a Kingdom: Not as if this did fully express the nature of it:
But because (as the saying is) Nihil est in intellectu, quod non fuit prius in
sensu; We cannot easily apprehend Intellectual objects, otherwise than by some
resemblance of things to Sense.

And therefore, there being a want of Words, and of Notions too, which might
adequately express the nature of this Spiritual and Heavenly Happiness: we are
fain to make use of sensible things, some way to Resemble them, though not
perfectly to Express them by.

And all those things, which are looked upon here, as the most Excellent, the
most Desirable, in any kind; are made use of to this purpose.

It Is called Life; and Life Eternal. It Is called a Treasure, laid up in Heaven;
and Durable Riches. It Is called Fullness of Joy and Pleasures for evermore. It Is
called a Royal Feast; a Marriage Supper; a Feast of fat things. It Is called a
Reward; a glorious Inheritance; Everlasting Mansions; an House not made with
hands; and the like. It Is called, a Crown of Glory; a Crown of Righteousness; a
Heavenly Kingdom; the Kingdom of Heaven; and (as here) the Kingdom of God.

Not as if any, or all of those, did adequately express its worth: But, these
being the great Desirable things of the World; and which our Senses are carried
away with: They are all made use of, to represent a Condition, which has as
much, and more, of Happiness, than all that of Riches and Honors, Profits and
Pleasures, Gladness and Feasting, Houses and Lands, Treasures and Inheritances,
Crowns and Kingdoms, yea and Life it self.

And, when we have fancied all that is Great and Glorious, in all these
Sensible Objects; we must then conceive, there is somewhat yet more Excellent,
than all that we can fancy. 1 Cor. 2.9. For Eye has not seen, nor has Ear
heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man to conceive, what God has
prepared for them that love him. And such is that Kingdom of God, which the
Text speaks of.

Now, what it is to see this Kingdom of God; is not hard to understand.

It is not, to see it afar off, so as to have no concernment in it; as the Rich
Glutton, Luke 16.23. in the Parable, might See Lazarus in Abraham's bosom; but
without any possibility of coming there.

But so to see, as to Enjoy it, and bear a part in it. So to see, as when
Christ says Mat. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.
Or as Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 3.18. So to see the Glory of God, as to be changed
into the same image, from glory to glory. Or as St. John, 1 John 3.2. Behold we
are now the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be: But, when
he shall appear, (or, as the words may as well be rendered, when it shall
appear,) we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is. An Operative
sight, not merely Speculative.

So here To see it, is To enjoy it: or (as Christ explains himself ver. 5.) To
enter into it. For, what is here said, He cannot See the Kingdom of God; is
there, He cannot Enter into the Kingdom of God. Or to Inherit it: As 1 Cor.
15.50. Flesh and blood cannot Inherit the Kingdom of God.

To See the Kingdom of God, therefore, is to Enjoy, to Enter into, and to
Inherit, that Glory, that Happy and Blessed Condition, which God has designed
for those that he makes his Children.

But those who are to Enjoy this Happiness, must first be Born again. For so we
heard but now, Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God. And, as the
Text has it, Except a man be born again he cannot see the Kingdom of God.

We are therefore, in the second place to consider, what it is, To be Born
again; or, as the Margin reads it, To be Born from Above.

And it is not much material which way we read it.

For (...), is but ((...)) the same with (...), which is properly enough
rendered Born again: And answers to that of (...), Tit 3.5. which is there
rendered Regeneration. The word (...), in composition, importing the same with
(...). and answering to the Latin Re. As in that place just now cited Tit.
3.5. where (...) is Renovatio. (...). By the washing of Regeneration, and
Renewing of the Holy Ghost.

Or, if we please to put a greater Emphasis on the word (...), as signifying
from above: (like as also (...), in composition, often times signifies Up; as
when (...) and (...) signify Ascension and Descension; (...) and (...), in
composition, answering to the Adverbs (...) and (...).) The meaning will be
still the same: Save that, here will be further imported, the Principle whence
this New Birth proceeds.

The former of these seems to be favored in the 4 th. verse, where it is
explained by (...), (and so, it seems, Nicodemus understood it,) can a man
enter a second time into his Mothers Womb, and be Born?

The Latter in 5 th. verse; where what was before said (...), is now expressed
by (...); Except a man be born of Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into
the Kingdom of God.

But, either way, the thing will be the same. For there must be a Second Birth:
and it must be, by a Power from Above.

For the better understanding of which, we are to consider, that what was
before said of the word Kingdom, is here applicable to this, of being Born
again: That is, that Spiritual things are, Figuratively, expressed, by words
importing things Natural.

Now for as much as, our first Birth or Generation, is the Rise or Origin of
our Natural Being; as Reasonable Creatures, and the Children of Men: That
therefore which gives us our Spiritual Being; as New Creatures, and the
Children of God, is, by Analogy thereunto, styled Regeneration, our second
Birth, or being Born again.

If any would be so nice, as to object, That a Child, before it be Born, is
endued with a Reasonable Soul; and therefore his Birth, not the first Origin
of his Rational Nature:

This alters not the case at all. For we are not here to take the word Birth so
strictly, as respecting that Moment only of coming into the world, (as we use
to speak:) But with a Retrospection as far backward as to the first Conception;
as being of the same import with Generation, (and might have been so rendered,)
answering to the Greek words (...). As in Matthew. 1. (...), The Book of the
Generation of Jesus Christ. And (...), which we render, Abraham begat Isaac.
And (in Tit. 3.5.) (...) is as well rendered by Regeneration, as if it had been
rendered a New Birth, or being Born again. And 1 Pet. 1.3. (...) is rendered,
Who has begotten us again unto a lively hope. Yet of the same import with that
of the Text, (...), which we here render, Born again; but may as fitly be
rendered by Regenitus as by Renatus. And both words are indifferently used, as
relating to the whole time from the Conception to the Birth.

To be Regenerated therefore or Born again, (take which word you please,) is;
to have a New Nature wrought in us; whereby we become New Creatures, and have a
Spiritual Being; as, by our Generation or first Birth, we become Reasonable
Creatures; and have our Natural Being. This being called Flesh; and that,
Spirit; in the following Explication, ver. 6. That which is born of the Flesh,
is Flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit.

That is; Like as by our Fleshly, Carnal, or Natural Generation, (or first
Birth,) from our Natural Parents; we are made Flesh and Blood, (endued with a
Reasonable Soul, and Natural Life, as Humane Creatures, and the Children of
Men:) So, by our Regeneration, (or being Born again,) by the Spirit; we become
Spiritual, or New Creatures; endued with a Spiritual Life and Vigor; are made
Partakers of the Divine Nature, and become the Sons of God, 2 Pet. 1.4.

But (as to this Antithesis of Flesh and Spirit) we are to consider further,
That the term Flesh (as it is here called,) or Flesh and Blood (as elsewhere,)
are words of a middle Signification; but Sonantia in malum: Words not evil in
themselves; but most frequently used in the worst sense.

And therefore though Flesh and Blood, as it imports only Humane Nature, and
what appertains to Man as Man, imply nothing Evil in it self: Yet, since the
Pollution of our Nature by the Fall of Adam, there is, not only a Guilt derived
to us from him; But a Depravation of Nature; which I will not take upon me to
describe otherwise, than in the words of our Church, in her ninth Art.

This our Church there calls Original Sin; and declares it to be, the Fault and
Corruption of the Nature of every man, that naturally is engendered of the
Offspring of Adam; Whereby man is far gone from Original Righteousness, and is
of his own nature inclined to evil; So that the Flesh lusts always contrary
to the Spirit. And therefore, in every person born into this world, it
deserves God's Wrath and Damnation.

And though this Infection of Nature (as our Church calls it) be indeed
Proeternatural, as to the Essentials of Humane Nature: Yet, being so far spread
over all, as to become Universal; we now, by Nature, do commonly mean, Corrupt
Nature; (not as God made it, but as we have made it;) And, by Flesh, or Flesh
and Blood, (especially when contradistinguished to the Spirit,) is commonly
meant, not humane Nature simply considered; but Humane Nature thus Corrupted,
or sinful Flesh.

And in this sense it is, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of
God, 1 Cor. 15.50. That is; not while it remains Sinful Flesh and Blood. But
when it shall be purged from Sin; Flesh and Blood, thus purged from Corruption,
(the Essentials of Humane Nature remaining,) shall (after the Resurrection of
the Body) inherit this Kingdom of God.

The meaning therefore, of the Text and Doctrine, is this: The nature of Man,
though at first made Pure and Righteous, (and thereby fitted for communion with
God;) is, by the Fall so depraved, as that he is now become naturally prone to
Sin, and averse to Righteousness; and this natural Propension, is further
improved by Sinful Practices; (and so more and more daily, while this
Propension lasts;) which does unfit us for such Communion: So that, before we
can be in a capacity to inherit the Kingdom of God; there must be a New Nature
wrought in us, and those Propensions changed for better; a new Principle must
be instilled, which shall render us inclinable to Righteousness, as before we
were to Sin. And this is that which the Text calls, A being born again.

Nor is this so harsh a Trope, or uncouth Form of Speech, as at first view it
may seem to be: But very usual (with some little alteration) in all Languages.

For denuo nasci, or de novo nasci, (to be born again, or born anew,) is all
one as, to have novam naturam, a new nature; (Natura, being but a Verbal of
Nascor; Like as (...), is of (...).) And we know it is very usual, to speak of
Good natures, Better natures, New natures, etc. when we intend only different
Qualities, or habitual Propensions and Inclinations; though without an
Essential diversity.

It Is not indeed so obvious, to observe that Equivalency, in our own Language;
because the Noun and Verb are not Conjugates, as in the Greek and Latin. The
word Nature coming by a French Extraction from Nascor: But, to Bear, and to be
Born, by a Saxon, from Pario. But both are words of the same import. For Nascor
does but supply the Passive voice of Pario: And they are so rendered in
English: Pario, to Bear; and Nascor, to be Born.

So that, to be born again, or born anew, is the same as to have another
nature; a new nature; to become (as we use to say) another Kind of Man, (for
kind or kin, is from (...), and that from (...) Nascor;) to become a better
natured Man: And, to be born of God, is but what we say in another Phrase, to
be made partakers of the Divine Nature; (which the Greeks would not scruple to
express by (...), or (...)) So, to be born of the Spirit, is, to have a
spiritual Nature: Born of the Flesh; a fleshly Nature.

All the difference is this; That what, according to the common Idioms, is
expressed by Natura; is, according to the Idiom of the Hebrews, expressed by
Natus; (a Son, a Child, or being Born) which Idiom, the Writers of the New
Testament do frequently follow; as being much conversant with the Jews; and
accustomed to their forms of Speech.

Thus John 8.39. If ye were the Children of Abraham, ye would do the works of
Abraham; is as much as to say, If ye had Abraham's nature, ye would do
Abraham's works. And again ver. 42, 45. If God were your Father, ye would love
me; because I came from God: But ye are of your Father the Devil; and the lusts
of your Father ye will do. That is; If ye were of a Godly nature, ye would
love him that comes from God; But because your nature is Devilish, your designs
are so too.

Thus, Mat. 12.34. Sons of Belial; a generation of Vipers; Isa. 1.4. A seed of
Evildoers; 1 Samuel 20.30. Thou Son of the Perverse Woman; Ezekiel. 16.3. Thy
Father was an Amorite, and thy Mother an Hittite; (with the like expressions;)
import, such a Nature, such a Disposition, as that of those whose Children they
are said to be.

And all, upon that general Notion, That the Offspring or Progeny are
frequently observed, to Imitate those from whom they proceed.

Whence that of St. Paul, Ephesians. 5.1. Be ye followers of God as dear Children.

But, for the better understanding of this Phrase, We are to consider further,
That we are, in Scripture, called the Children of God, or Sons of God, in at
least a twofold acceptance. Sons of God by Adoption: And, Sons of God by
Regeneration.

Which, though they both belong to the same Persons, yet in a very different
Notion. The one imports a Relative change: The other, a Real. That relates to
the business of Justification: This, to that of Sanctification.

Adoption is a Forensick word; and implies an act of Grace, or Favor; by which
those that by nature are not Sons, come to be so Reputed, and are put into a
like condition, as if they were Sons; and are thereby entitled to the
Inheritance.

It implies therefore a change of State, not a change of Nature; a Relative,
not a Real, change: It does, without conferring a new Nature, create at least a
new Relation.

But a Son by Birth, receives from his Parent, not a Relation only, but his
very Nature and Being.

And the Scripture, in calling us the Sons of God, has respect to both these
notions.

That of Adoption, we have in Gal. 4.4, 5, 7. In the fullness of time, God sent
his Son made of a Woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the
Law, that we might receive the Adoption of Sons; wherefore thou art no more a
servant, but a Son: And, if a Son, then an Heir, etc. And Ephesians. 1.5. Having
proedestinated us to the adoption of Children. And, if Children, then heirs;
heirs of God; and joint-heirs with Christ; as in Romans 8.17.

And this, (I take it) is the same which by some Divines is called Positive
Justification; relating to what they call Christ's Active Obedience: Which they
do contradistinguish, to what they call Negative Justification; which they
refer to the Passive Obedience of Christ.

What Christ has done and suffered for us, considered as a satisfaction to
Divine Justice, (which they call his Passive Obedience,) does Ransom us from
the Curse of the Law done to us for Sin; and puts us in a condition of Not
guilty; (which they call Negative Justification, or Absolution.) And by this we
are excused from Hell.

But what he has done or suffered, by way of Purchase; Meriting a Reward for
us; (which they call, his Active Obedience,) gives us a title to Heaven, or as
it is called Ephesians. 1.14.) the Inheritance, of that Purchased Possession. And
this they call Possitive Justification; and is in Scripture language, called
Adoption.

Which yet need not be so understood, as if some parts of Christ's Obedience,
were only Satisfactory, and not Meritorious; others, Meritorious only, and not
Satisfactory: But the same obedience, may sustain both Considerations.
Considered as Satisfactory, it Frees us from Hell: Considered as Meritorious,
it Entitles us to Heaven.

Now it is one thing, for a Prince to Acquit a Traitor, of all Crimes, as well
of Omission, as of Commission; which Absolves him from Punishment: Another
thing to Adopt him moreover as a Prince, and entitle him to a Crown. And though
both be coincident on the same Person; yet under a different notion: The one,
as an act of Pardon; the other, of Bounty.

And if a third person, by what he does or suffers, procure Both for him:
It Is as to the one, a Satisfaction; as to the other, a Purchase.

Now, Whether we call That, Negative Justification; and This Possitive
Justification: Or call That, Justification; and This, Adoption: Is but a
difference of Words, the Notions are still the same.

But neither of these, (whether that of Justification, or that of Adoption,) do
properly import, in the Object, a Real Change, but only a Relative. For the
Traitor, thus Pardoned, and thus Advanced; may yet remain a Wicked Person, and
as very an Enemy to his Sovereign as he was before; if there be not a change
wrought in his Mind, as well as in his Relative state. Nor is this the Sonship,
which the Text speaks of.

But, beside this Sonship by Adoption; there is also a Sonship by Regeneration;
which the Text mentions, as Necessary to those who shall See the Kingdom of
God.

And this implies, (as was said before,) not so much a Relative change, of the
State; as a Real change, of the Person. Except a man be born again, (and
thereby have a New Nature, as well as a New Relation,) he cannot See the
Kingdom of God.

It Is vain, to think of being the Sons of God by Adoption; unless we be his
Sons by Regeneration also. The one never goes without the other.

For, like as it is a Vain thing, to talk of Saving Faith, which is not (as
occasion serves) attended with Good Works: And a Vain thing to talk of being
Justified, without being Sanctified also: So it is a Vain thing to talk of
Adoption, without Regeneration. For, though the Notions be Different; the
Things always go together. And are commonly so mentioned in Scripture.

Thus; 1 John.12, 13. To as many as Received him, that is, to as many as
believed on his name, (as it is there explained,) he gave Power, ((...)) a
Right or Privilege, (as the Margin renders it,) to be the Sons of God, to wit,
by Adoption: But it then follows); which were Born, (to wit, by Regeneration)
not of the will of Man but of God. Those that are the Sons of God, by Adoption;
must be Born again, by Regeneration.

So Gal. 4, 5, 6. When he had said, God sent his Son, etc. that we might
receive the Adoption of Sons; he adds, And because ye are Sons, God has sent
the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba Father: That is, the
Spirit of Regeneration; the same Spirit by which the Text says, we must be Born
again. Except a man be born of Water and of the Spirit, (ver. 5.) he cannot
enter into the Kingdom of God.

And again Romans 8.15, 16. We have not received the spirit of Bondage again, to
Fear; but we have received the spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba,
Father: The Spirit it self bearing witness with our Spirits, that we are the
Sons of God. But how does he thus bear witness to our Adoption? He tells us
(ver. 14.) For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of
God: By being a Spirit of Regeneration, it bears witness of our Adoption.

For, like as no man can know, that he is Elected; till he know, that he is
Justified and Sanctified: So neither can we know, that we are Adopted; till we
first know that we are Regenerate.

Whom he did Foreknow, (says St. Paul, Romans 8.28.) he did also Predestinate
to be conformed to the Image of his Son; that is, whom he designed to be Happy,
he designed to be Holy: And whom he did thus Predestinate; them he Called; them
he Justified; and them he Glorified.

But, till we find by the Effect, we were designed to be Holy; we can never
know, that we are designed to be Happy. And, in like manner, Till we find that
we are led by the Spirit, of Regeneration; we can never know that we are the
Sons of God, by Adoption.

And our Text, says the same, though in other words: Except a man be born
again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God; that is, Except he be born again, by
Regeneration; he cannot pretend a title to the Kingdom of God, by Adoption.

Till they be born again; they cannot be Children of the Kingdom; as the
Phrase is, Mat. 13.38.

Adoption, and Regeneration, always go together.

Now as, being the Sons of God by Adoption, is the Completing of our
Justification: So, To become the Sons of God by Regeneration, is the Beginning
of our Sanctification. For what, in the Origin or Beginning, we call
Regeneration, or a New Birth; that, in the Progress, we call Sanctification or
a New Life.

And it is called, in Scripture, by many other Names, to the same purpose.

It Is called, A dying to Sin, and being alive to God, Romans 6.4, 11. that we may
thenceforth Walk in newness of Life.

It Is called Conversion; or, a turning from darkness, to light; from the power
of Satan unto God, Act. 26.18. That they may receive forgiveness of Sins, and
Inheritance among those that are Sanctified. Where you see Conversion, attended
with Justification (or the Forgiveness of Sins,) and Adoption, to the
Inheritanc^; but it is, amongst those that are sanctified.

And again, Mat. 18.3. Except ye be Converted, and become as little children;
ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Where, being Converted, is the
same with what the Text calls, being Born again.

It Is, becoming a new Creature, Gal. 5.17. If any man be in Christ he is a new
Creature: Old things are passed away, and all things are become new, 2 Cor.
5.17.

A new Heart; a new Spirit; Ezekiel. 36.26. that is, A new Frame and Temper of
Mind; new Principles, new Propensions and Inclinations.

To be renewed in the spirit of our Minds; Ephesians. 4.23.

To be created in Christ Jesus unto good works, (Ephesians. 2.10.) which God has
before ordained that we should walk therein: that is (according to our present
Idiom,) wherein God has before appointed that we should walk.

It Is a repairing of God's Image, in us; which, by the Fall was Obliterated and
Defaced.

A putting off the Old man with his deeds; and putting on the New man, which is
renewed after the Image of him that created him, Col. 3.9, 10.

A putting off the Old man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful Lusts;
and putting on the New man which after God is created in Righteousness and true
Holiness, Ephesians. 4.22, 24.

With many other Expressions of like import. For, in expressing Spiritual
things by Metaphors taken from things Sensible: it is frequent in Scripture,
(because no one can adequately reach it,) to make use of many, some-way to
Resemble the thing intended.

The Result of all tends to this: That there must be a Change of Nature
wrought; in those who are to Inherit the Kingdom of God. Not, as to the
Essentials of humane Nature; but, as to the perverse inclinations of corrupt
Nature. Whence those who by Nature, (as now Corrupted,) are prone to Evil; may,
from a new Principle, become in Love with God. And that, in order thereunto, we
must have, not only a Principle of Reason, (from our First Birth) to act as
Men; but a Principle of Grace also (from our new Birth) to act as Good Men. For
an Evil Tree, Heb. 12.15. or (a Root of Bitterness,) will never, Mat. 7.17.
bring forth good Fruit: But the Tree must be made good, Mat. 12.33. that the
Fruit may be so also. There must be a New Nature, to bring forth a New Life.

I have now done with the Explication of the Text and Doctrine.

There be two things yet remaining; which (if there had been time for it) were
proper enough to have been here discussed.

1. From whence it is, that this necessity of a New Birth proceeds.

2. By what Power it must be wrought.

The first of them we have touched by the way, in showing, It is not Humane
Nature* as God made it; but Corrupt Nature, that makes this work necessary. For
if we had not Degenerated from what God at first made us; there would not have
been that need of being Regenerated, which now there is.

The latter, is intimated, partly by the word (...) in the Text; and partly in
Christ's further Explication (ver. 5.) Except a man be born of Water, and of
the Spirit. For that which is born of the Flesh, is but Flesh: It Is that which
is born of the Spirit, is Spirit.

But these (the time not permitting) I must either Omit altogether; or at least
reserve till another season.

The Necessity of REGENERATION. A SERMON Preached before the UNIVERSITY of
OXFORD AT St. Mary's Oxon. October 9th. 1681.
JOHN iij. 3. Jesus answered and said unto him, Verily verily I say unto thee,
Except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.


I Have heretofore begun the handling of this Text; and (through God's
assistance) hope now to finish it.

By the Kingdom of God, is meant, all that happy estate which the Children of
God (those that are born of him) do enjoy, as well here, as hereafter.

This the Scripture does usually set forth by Metaphors taken from all those
things which, amongst men, are accounted excellent, or desirable; either as
Necessary, as Pleasant, as Profitable, as Glorious, or on what other
consideration soever, (as being much more desirable than all these put
together) and, amongst the rest, by that of a Kingdom.

It Is called here the Kingdom of God, and the Kingdom of Heaven, elsewhere;
by way of Eminence, and of Contradistinction, to those on Earth, those of Men;
as much surpassing them as Heaven is high above the Earth.

This Kingdom, is commonly distinguished into that of Grace, and that of
Glory. And they are both here intended in the word Kingdom. But especially the
latter: Those of Grace, being included in the former words, Except a man be
born again; except he do here attain the Kingdom of Grace, he cannot hope
hereafter to see that of Glory.

To see this Kingdom, is not, so to see it as the Rich Glutton saw Lazarus in
Abraham's bosom, Luke 16.23. (to see it a far off, without being the better
for it:) But, so as when Christ says, Mat. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart,
for they shall see God; and Saint Paul, Heb. 12.14. Without Holiness no man
shall see the Lord: That is, to see it, as to Enjoy it, and have a share in it.

And he that would thus See the Kingdom of God, must (the Text tells us) be
born again: That is, he must have a New Nature, a new Nativity. He must by
Regeneration, or his First Birth, or a Second Birth, become a Child of God, a
Child of Grace, as, by Generation, or his First Birth, he is a Child of Man, a
Child of Sin.

Now we are, in Scripture, called the Children of God, in a double sense:
Children of God by Adoption, and Children of God by Regeneration. Which, though
they both belong to the same Persons; yet in a very different Notion.

The one implies a change of State or Condition: As when a Person who, by
nature, is not a Son; is, by Adoption put into such a condition as if he were a
Son; and entitled to the Inheritance.

The other implies a change of Nature or Disposition: As when a Lion becomes as
a Lamb; when a Fierce nature becomes Meek and Gentle; when a Wicked man becomes
Holy.

Like as, it is one thing for a Prince to Pardon a Malefactor (and put him into
a condition of Not-guilty:) Another thing, to make him an Honest man, and not
inclinable to the like offense again.

The former of these, relates to Justification; the other, to Sanctification.
Adoption, being the completing of Justification; as Regeneration, is the
beginning of Sanctification. And it is the latter of these, that the Text means
in being born again.

But, though the Notions be different; the Things do always go both together.
And so the Text tells us, Except a man be Born again, he cannot See the
Kingdom of God. We cannot expect to be the Sons of God by Adoption, and so
entitled to the Kingdom of God; unless we be first the Sons of God by
Regeneration, and so made partakers of the Divine Nature.

And this is the Result of what we discoursed more fully the last time: To show
the necessity of this Change of Nature, in those who shall see the Kingdom of
God.

There remain yet two things to be (as we then said) considered. 1. From whence
it is that this Necessity of a new Birth proceeds. And 2. By what Power it must
be wrought. And, after that, to make Application.

As to the First of these; the Ground of this Necessity: We are to consider of
Man, in a double capacity: First as God made him; and secondly, as he made
himself. God made man upright (says Solomon) but he has found out many
Inventions, Eccles. 7.29.

God, at first, created man after his own Image, Genesis 1.26, 27. In Knowledge,
Righteousness and true Holiness, Ephesians. 4.24. Col. 3.10. Void of all Sin,
Habitual, or Actual. And, had we continued in such a state as wherein God made
us; there would have been no necessity of this change of Nature. We had then,
without it, continued Holy, and Happy. Had there been no Sin, there had been no
need of a New Birth. Had there not been a Degeneration, from what God made us
at first, there had been no need of a Regeneration, to reestate us in it.

But Man, by Sin, having lost his Holiness; lost his Happiness also. As by One
man Sin came upon All: So, Death, or Misery, the Effect of Sin.

Romans 5.12. By one man Sin entered into the World; and Death by Sin: And Death
passed upon all men, for that all have sinned: Or (as the Margin reads it) in
whom all have sinned. (And so Grotius renders it (...), per quem; By whom.)
Ver. 14. Even upon them who had not sinned after the similitude of Adam's
transgression: That is, (as it is commonly understood,) even on Children, who
had not sinned by imitation, or as Adam did. And so Grotius, etiam pueros
nullius commissi reos, v. 13. From whence St. Paul there infers, that there is
Sin, even in such: As without which they would not been subject to Death.

And David tells us of himself, Psalm. 51.5. I was shapen in iniquity, and in
sin did my mother conceive me.

And St. Paul likewise Romans 7.18. I know that in me, (that is, in my flesh,)
dwells no good thing. Ver. 19. The Good that I would do, I do not; but the
Evil which I would not do, that I do. Ver. 22. I delight in the Law of God
after the Inward man: Ver. 23. But I see another Law in my Members, warring
against the Law of my Mind; and bringing me into captivity to the Law of Sin.

Nor need we here dispute the point, whether St. Paul speak this of himself as
in his Regenerate condition; or, in his Unregenerate: For, either way, it
serves our purpose well enough; That there is in man, at least before his
Regeneration, such Habitual Corruption, as makes him thus Prone to Sin, and
Averse to Good. How much of it remains afterward, (because that we are
Sanctified but in part,) is, to our present purpose, not necessary. But, that
there is too much of it, even those that are the most Sanctified, find cause to
bewail.

This Depravation of Nature, or, as our Church calls it, Infection of Nature,
she has so well described in her 9 th. Article, that I will not take upon me
to mend it. She calls it, there, Original Sin; and declares it to be The Fault
and Corruption of the Nature of every man, that naturally is engendered of the
Offspring of Adam: Whereby man is far gone from Original Righteousness; and
is, of his own Nature, Inclined to Evil: So that the Flesh lusts always
against the Spirit. And therefore, in every person born into this world, it
deserves God's Wrath and Damnation. With more to the same purpose.

I do not intend here, to enter into a nice discourse of Original Sin; What it
is, or By what means it comes to be derived upon us. It is enough, for our
present purpose, which our Church says explicitly; That such a thing there
is; That by this we are Inclined to Evil; That it is Universal to all naturally
descended from Adam; That it sticks so close to us as to be called Our own
Nature; and That it deserves God's Wrath and Damnation.

Now, this being our Nature, as we proceed from Adam; there will be need of
another Nature, before we can be accepted of God.

Which I do not mean, of a Physical change; as to the Essentials of Humane
Nature: But, of a Moral change; as to the Propensions and Inclinations of it.

And this Change of Nature is that which the Text means by being Born again.
For (though our English-Tongue do not so much favor it) Nova Natura, and de
novo Nasci, are all one. A new Nativity, is, a new Nature.

And it is the Hebrews common form of Speech, (which the Greek in the New
Testament does use to follow,) to call men the Sons of such, whose Natures they
imitate. (Upon a common presumption, that Animals are of the same nature with
those from which they descend.)

Thus, A Generation of Vipers; A seed of Evil doers; Children of Belial; Ye are
of your Father the Devil; and the like; imply as much, as a Viperous, Wicked
and Devilish Nature. And, contrariwise, to be Born of God, on the Child of God,
is, to be like God, to be made partaker of a Divine Nature. And Christ to the
Pharisees Joh. 8.39. If ye were the Children of Abraham, ye would do the works
of Abraham: v. 44. But ye are of your Father the Devil, and the Lusts of your
Father ye will do. That is; If you had Abraham's Nature, you would Act like
Abraham: But, being of a Devilish Nature, you Act accordingly.

And thus much for the Ground or Reason of this Necessity. It is the Corruption
of our own Nature, that makes it necessary to have a new Nature; before we can
see the Kingdom of God; where no unclean thing may enter; Ephesians. 4.22. We must
put off the Old man, which is Corrupt according to the deceitful lusts: v. 23.
And be Renewed in the spirit of our Minds: v. 24. And put on the New man, which
after God is created in Righteousness and true Holiness.

We are next to consider, By what Power it is, that this Change of Nature must
be wrought.

And this, Christ tells, (Joh. 3.5) must be by the Spirit. Except a man be born
of Water and of the Spirit. It Is not enough that a man be washed with Water,
(such as were many of the Jewish Cleansings, and Initiations; but insufficient
to wash away Sin:) He must be born of the Spirit also; and by that be cleansed
from the pollutions of Nature; if ever he see the Kingdom of God. Ver. 6. For
that which is born of the Flesh is but Flesh; it is that which is born of the
Spirit, that is Spirit.

To be born of the Flesh, is enough to give us a Fleshly Nature; that of a
Reasonable creature, or a Sinful creature: And to be washed with Water, may
take away the Filth of the Body; But it must be a Spiritual birth, that gives
us a Spiritual nature: and it must be the Laver of Regeneration, and the
Renewing of the holy Ghost, Tit. 3.5. that washes away the Filth of Sin.

No man comes to me, says Christ, Joh. 6.44. except the Father who sent me
draw him. It Is according to his Divine Power (says Peter, 2 Pet. 1.3.) that we
are made partakers of the Divine Nature, v. 4. It Is by the spirit of his Son,
(says St. Paul, Gal. 4.6.) which God sends into our hearts, whereby we are
enabled to cry Abba Father. Those to whom there is no condemnation, (Romans 8.1.)
are they who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit: Those who have
another principle of Life, and Action, by Spiritual Regeneration; than that of
the Flesh, by Carnal Generation. Ver. 5. For they that are after the Flesh, do
mind the things of the Flesh; but they that are after the Spirit, the things of
the Spirit. Ver. 6. For to be carnally minded ((...)) is Death; but ((...)) to
be Spiritually minded, is Life and Peace: v. 7. Because the carnal mind ((...))
is Enmity against God; for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed
can be. Ver. 8. So then, they that are in the Flesh, cannot Please God. V. 9.
But ye are not in the Flesh, but in the Spirit; if so be that the Spirit of God
dwell in you. Now, if any have not the Spirit of Christ; he is none of his.
Ver. 13. For, if ye live after the Flesh; ye shall dye: but if ye, through the
Spirit, do mortify the deeds of the Body; ye shall Live. Ver. 14. For as many
as are led by the Spirit of God; they are the Sons of God. With much more there
to the same purpose.

I know very well, that the name of the Spirit, in this loose age, is made
matter of Burlesk and Drollery. But so are all the sacred things of God: His
Being, and Providence; Heaven, and Hell: and the day of Judgment. Yet we must
not therefore be Drolled out of our Religion. The Truths of God, will still be
the Truths of God, notwithstanding the Follies of men.

Those Admonitions of Quench not the Spirit, 1 These. 4.19. Grieve not the
Spirit, Ephesians. 4.30. Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of
the Flesh, Gal. 5.16. were intended for serious Advice. And why should we
Grieve that Spirit; which is to be our Comforter, Joh. 14.26. and 15.26. by
whom we are sealed to the day of Redemption? Ephesians. 1.13. and 4.30.

And David prays, in good earnest, Psalm. 51.10. Create in me a clean Heart, O
God, and renew a right Spirit within me: v. 11. Take not thy holy Spirit from
me: v. 12. Uphold me with thy free Spirit.

Nor did God mock us, when he promised to pour his Spirit upon all flesh, Joel
2.28. Nor Christ, when he says His Father will give his holy Spirit to them
that ask, Luke 11.13.

And the Threatenings of God are very severe, against those that do despite to
the Spirit of Grace, Heb. 10.29. and who Blaspheme or speak against the holy
Spirit, Mat. 12.31, 32.

Nor will the Follies of some, (who may pretend to what they have not,) Excuse
the Malice of others, who make a Mock of Holy things.

But, to return: This Change of Nature must, I say, be wrought by the Spirit of
God.

Not but that we must be Active also; in a diligent use of the Means of Grace,
whereby God's Spirit does ordinarily work Grace in us; as Praying, Hearing and
Reading the Word of God, keeping his Sabbaths; and other of his Ordinances. For
God has appointed them for that very end: that the Spirit of God may, by them,
work Grace in us.

But we are so to use them, as yet to look beyond them; and wait for a work of
God by his Spirit upon our hearts, in concurrence with them, to make them
effectual to us.

I have Planted (says Paul, 1 Cor. 3.6.) and Apollo Watered; but God gave the
Increase. Ver. 7. So then, neither is he that Planteth any thing, neither he
that Waters; (that is, nothing in comparison:) But God that gives the
Increase.

Hence it is, that under the same Means of Grace, and the same Arguments used
to persuade us, one is taken and another left, Mat. 24.40, 41. (as Christ
speaks in a like case:) one converted, and another remains obdurate: And, to
the same person, there be some Mollia tempora fandi; those Arguments at one
time prevail, which at another time do not. And, when they do, it is not
without a special concurrence of God with them; and not merely from other
Circumstantials, or a power of our own without it.

And our Church says the same, (in her Tenth Article,) in the words: The
Condition of Man, after the Fall of Adam, is such, that he cannot turn or
prepare himself, by his own natural strength and good works, to Faith and
Calling upon God: Wherefore we have no power to do good works pleasant and
acceptable to God, without the Grace of God by Christ, Preventing us, that we
may have a good will; and Working with us, when we have that good will.

If any shall yet inquire, as Nicodemus here, How can these things be? Joh.
3.10. How is it, that God, or his Spirit, can thus work upon our hearts, Man
being a free Agent; or How this is consistent with the Freedom of Man's will;
or the like:

I do not know, that we are obliged to trouble our selves with those nice
Inquiries. Sure it is, that, when we act, we act Freely; not against our wills,
Certum est, August.
nos velle cum volumus; sed Deus facit ut velimus: is a known saying in the
case. When we will, it is voluntary; but it is God makes us thus to will. And St.
Paul long before, It is God which works in us, both to Will and to Do, of his
good pleasure, Phil. 2.13.

As to the Manner of it; If we say, God works we know not how; it does not
therefore follow, that he does not work. If we do not know, How the bones grow
in the womb of her that is with child, Eccles. 11.5. (which yet, we know, do
grow;) we may, as likely, be ignorant, How God works in the New Birth.

We have in Job 38. a great many hard Questions, concerning Natural things,
which God himself puts to Job, (to check his curiosity in higher matters,)
which would trouble any of us to answer, as to the particular manner; and yet,
in general, that the things be so, we cannot deny.

St. Paul, Romans 9.19 to such captious Questions, Why does he yet complain? for
who has resisted his will? makes this grave Reply, v. 20. Nay but, O Man, who
art thou that disputest against God? It Is hard for us to set bounds to the
Almighty; to say, what he does; or what he may do. Modesty becomes us herein.
Vain man (says Zophar in Job, Job 11.12.) would needs be wise: though man be
born like a wild Asses Colt. Nor is it for us to give Law to the Almighty, or
say unto him, What do thou?

And here, if ever, that counsel of Solomon is seasonble, Eccl. 5.2. Be not
rash with thy mouth, and let not thy heart be hasty, to utter any thing before
God; for God is in heaven and thou upon earth; therefore let thy words be few.

And our Savior here to Nicodemus, from our Ignorance in Earthly things,
pleads for a modest Submission in things of a higher nature: Joh. 3.8. The Wind
blows where it lists; thou hear the sound thereof, but can not tell
whence it comes, and whither it goes: So is every one that is born of the
Spirit. Ver. 12. And, if in Earthly things, we are at a loss, how much more in
Heavenly.

And Solomon, to the same purpose (in the place before cited,) Eccl. 11.5. As
thou know not what is the way of the Spirit, nor how the bones grow in the
womb of her that is with child: Even so thou know not the works of God, who
makes all.

It Is commonly, either from a vain Curiosity, or proud Arrogance, that makes
men over Confident in such things.

I find, the Church of God, in the first Ages of the World, did for a long time
(for ought we see) rest satisfied with that first general promise, That the
Seed of the Woman should break the Serpents head, Genesis 3.25. That God would, by
some born of a Woman, find a way (they knew not how) to deliver us from that
wretched condition, which by the Serpents malice and subtilty was brought upon
us: Without being over inquisitive, When, or How, or By whom it should be
brought about: Till God saw fit, in his own time, upon the coming of our
Savior, to declare it more plainly and fully.

And in like manner, when God promises, to circumcise our heart, Deuteronomy. 6.30. to
give us a new heart, and put a new spirit within us, Ezekiel. 36.26. to take away
the heart of stone and give us a heart of flesh, Ezekiel. 11.19. to put his Law in
our inward parts, and write it in our hearts, Jer. 31.33. to put his fear in
our hearts, that we shall not depart from him, Jer. 32.40. We may well rest
satisfied, that he who has said it, can do it; without cavilling, or nice
inquiring, How can these things be?

And the like, when God threatens to harden Pharaoh's heart, Exodus 4.21. and
7.3. or, to make the heart of the people fat; that hearing they may hear, but
not understand, Isai. 6.9, 10. and seeing they may see, but not perceive, Mat.
13.14, 15. To wit, by leaving them to their natural hardness and blindness;
without correcting it by his Spirit. Now that which hereby we prove, is this,
Not, that God forces us to will against our wills; (for that in sensu composito
as to the Elicite Act, is impossible, as implying a contradiction in the terms;
for, as to what we will, we are so far willing:) But, that, by the Spirit we
are born again; that is, that God, by his Spirit, works in us a new Nativity, a
new Nature; that is, a new Habit of Grace; whereby we are inclined to Love and
Delight in Good, as, by the habitual Corruption of our Nature, we are inclined
to Evil.

And this is the concurrent doctrine of the Schools; Who (I think) do generally
allow, that our Souls are capable of Infused Habits, as well as acquired.

And if, by derivation from our first parents, we be capable of habitual
Corruption; I see not why we should doubt, but that we are alike capable of
habitual Grace.

And of this, for ought I know, as early as of that. For like as there may be
habitual Corruption, before we be in a capacity (for want of the use of Reason,
to commit Actual Sin: So may God, as early, put into our hearts the Seeds of
Grace; which may afterward, when occasion shall serve, bring forth the Fruits
of good living. He may, I say, when he please; not, that he always so does.

We read of Isaiah, that he was called from the womb, Isai. 49.1. and of
Jeremiah, Jer. 1.5. Before thou came out of the womb, I Sanctified thee: and
of John the Baptist, that he should be filled with the holy Ghost, even from
his mothers womb, Luke 1.15.

And our Church presumes, of Infants, that they be, at least some of them
Regenerate when Baptized. And therefore. For as much as all men are conceived
and born in Sin; Public Baptism of Infants.
and that our Savior Jesus Christ says, None can enter into the Kingdom of
God, except he be Regenerate and Born anew, of Water and of the holy Ghost:
does direct us to call upon God the Father, through our Lord Jesus Christ, that
of his bounteous mercy, he will grant to this Child, that thing which by Nature
he cannot have: And does pray accordingly, that God will Wash him and Sanctify
him with the holy Ghost: And that he may receive remission of Sins by Spiritual
Regeneration.

Nor is the Holy Ghost less able to work effectually afterward. Else, why are
we taught to pray to God, to grant us true repentance, Absolution.
and his holy Spirit, that the things may please him which we do at present,
and that the rest of our life hereafter, may be pure and holy: That all our
doings may be ordered by his Government, Third Collect.
to do always that which is righteous in his sight.

And, for the King's Majesty, That God will replenish him with the grace of his
Spirit, that he may always incline to God's will, Prayer for the King.
and walk in his ways: and to endue him plenteously with heavenly Gifts.

And, for the Royal Family, Royal Family.
That God will endue them with his holy Spirit, and enrich them with his
heavenly Grace.

And for the Clergy, Clergy.
That God will send upon our Bishops and Curates, and all Congregations
committed to their charge, the healthful Spirit of his Grace.

And for our selves, That being Regenerate and made his Children by Adoption,
Christmas.
and Grace, we may be daily renewed by his holy Spirit.

That, as, by his special Grace Preventing us, he puts into our minds good
Desires; Easter day.
so, by his continual Help, we may bring the same to good Effect.

That, by his holy Inspiration, we may Think those things that be good; 5.
Sunday after Easter.
and, by his merciful Guiding, we may Perform the same.

That, God, who did teach the hearts of his faithful people, Whitsunday.
by sending them the light of his holy Spirit; will grant us, by the same
Spirit, to have a right judgment in all things.

That, because, by the weakness of our mortal nature, 1. Sunday after Trinity.
we can do no good thing without him; he will grant us the help of his Grace;
that in keeping his commandments we may please him, both in Will and Deed.

That, God, who is the Author and Giver of all good things, 7. Sunday.
will graft in our heart the Love of his Name.

That he will Grant us the Spirit, to Think and Do always such things as be
rightful, 9. Sunday.
that we who cannot do any thing without him, may by him be enabled to live
according to his will.

That, because the frailty of Man, without him, cannot but fall; 15. Sunday.
he will keep us ever by his help.

That, 17. Sunday.
his Grace may always Prevent and Follow us; and make us continually to be
given to all good works.

That, Almighty God, will cleanse the Thoughts of our Hearts, Before the
Commandments.
by the inspiration of his holy Spirit; that we may perfectly love him, and
worthily magnify his holy Name. With much more, in the Prayers of our Church,
to the same purpose.

All which implies, that there is a power in God, to work in our Souls, by his
Spirit, such a gracious frame and temper of Heart, (inclining it to Good, as
before it was to Evil,) as, without it, would not have been.

And truly if we do allow, that the Wisdom of man, by moral Arguments and
rational Discourse, may (without doing violence to his Will) persuade another
to Think otherwise, than before he did; and to Do, what otherwise he would not
have done; (which yet, when he does, he does Freely:) Nay more, if a Glass of
Wine, (though taken moderately, and without excess,) may give a man that Life,
Vigor and Alacrity, as to make him almost another man; to Speak, Think, and
Do, what else he would not, or at least not in such a Manner and to such a
Degree: Surely we may allow the Wisdom of God, and the Efficacy of his Spirit,
(without intrenching upon our Freedom,) to do as much, or more than so: And,
either without, or in concurrence with, such moral Swasions, to put that Warmth
into our hearts, as to act beyond what, without it, we should have done.

Nor is there any reason to fear, that such Inclination to Good, from the
Spirit of God, should prejudice the Freedom of our Will; any more, if so much,
as the Inclination to Evil from our own Corruption, or the Temptations of
Satan.

Especially, since that the Blessed Angels, and the Glorified Saints in Heaven
(where Sorrow and Sin shall be no more) shall, as Freely, Love God, and Praise
him, as we on Earth can do: Notwithstanding that they shall be then, not only
Inclined to, but Confirmed in Good, and not in a capacity to Sin: Not, for want
of Freedom; but, as having no Inclination to Evil.

All which is not said, to encourage any man in Sloth or Idleness (in doing
what is his Duty,) upon pretense of waiting on the Spirit of God to do all for
him: But rather, to a diligent use of all the Means of Grace, in hope of his
concurrence; and to Implore withal the Divine Goodness, to Assist us
mercifully; To Prevent us in all our doings, Communion Collects.
with his most gracious Favor, and further us with his continual help; that in
all our Works Begun, Continued and Ended in him, we may have his blessing on
them. According to Solomon's advice in a like case, Eccl. 11.6. In the Morning
sow thy Seed, and in Evening withold not thy hand: For thou know not whether
shall prosper, either this, or that; or whether they shall both be alike Good.
And St. Paul makes the like Inference from the same Premises, Phil. 2.12, 13.
Work out your own salvation with Fear and Trembling; For it is God that works
in you both to Will and to Do, of his good pleasure. And, if we be not failing
on our part; we have great encouragement to believe, that God (though a Free
Agent) will not be wanting to give his holy Spirit to those that ask him, Luke
11.13.

Now (for Application) this Doctrine (concerning the Necessity of Regeneration,
in those who shall see the Kingdom of God) does vindicate our Church (whose
Doctrine it is) from the Reproach and Calumny cast upon her Doctrine: As if,
when she says, that we are Justified by Faith only, she taught a Loose and Easy
way of coming to Heaven, without Regeneration, Sanctification; or, Good Works,
the Effect of both.

It Is very true, she says in her 11 th. Article, We are accounted Righteous
before God, only for the Merit of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ by Faith;
and not for our own Good Works or Deservings. Wherefore, That we are Justified
by Faith only, is a most Wholesome Doctrine and very Comfortable. (And more, to
the same purpose in the Homily to which that Article refers.)

But, though she say We are Justified by Faith only; she does not say, there is
nothing more, requisite to Salvation. For we must be Sanctified, as well as
Justified, if ever we be Saved.

And therefore, that we may not possibly mistake her Doctrine (unless wilfully)
she adds in the Next words (which are her Twelfth Article) Albeit that Good
Works, which are the fruits of Faith, and follow after Justification, cannot
put away our Sins, and endure the severity of God's Judgment: Yet are they
pleasing and acceptable to God in Christ; and do spring out necessarily of a
true and lively Faith: In so much as, by them, a lively Faith may be evidently
known, as a Tree discerned by the Fruit.

But (which is her Tirteenth Article) Works done before the Grace of Christ,
and the Inspiration of his Spirit, are not pleasant to God: Forasmuch as they
spring not from Faith in Jesus Christ. Neither do they make man Meet to receive
Grace, or (as the School Authors say) Deserve Grace of Congruity.

Our Church therefore, in teaching Justification by Faith only; does not teach
us, That we need no more to carry us to Heaven, but only a Sanguine Belief that
we shall come there; and may thenceforth live as we list, without Holiness, or
a Godly, Righteous and sober Life. For she makes this Necessary to bring us to
Heaven, as well as Faith, or Justification it self. And a pretense of Faith
without this, she does not own for Faith, but Presumption. She owns none for a
true and lively Faith, but what is attended herewith, as the Necessary Fruit
thereof, only she does distinguish, what of this belongs to Justification, and
what to Sanctification: Which others labor studiously to Confound.

If any please to Cavil, That, if we be Justified by Faith only, then there
need no more to Save us; because God Saves all that he Justifies:

I say, This Cavil, might seem to have some weight in it; if God did Justify
any, whom he does not Sanctify also.

A Prince, I confess, may sometimes Pardon a Male-factour, (and so Justify him,
or put him in^o a Condition of Not-guilty,) without making him an Honest Man:
But God never Justifies any, whom he does not also Sanctify. And therefore
it is, here, the same thing to infer, That a man may be Sanctified without
Holiness; as, That he may be Saved without it; if Justified by Faith only.

But if any indeed there be (I confess I know none, except the Papist,) that
hold, a man may be Justified and Saved; without being Sanctified: I have
nothing to say in the defense of such. Nor is this the Doctrine of our Church,
when she says, We are Justified by Faith only. And, for any to load her
Doctrine, with such Consequences, is great Ignorance; or, somewhat Worse. But I
proceed.

The two great Enemies to the Doctrine before us (the necessity of Regeneration
and Sanctification, in order to Salvation, and, consequently, of Good Works,
the effect thereof;) are, the Atheist, and the Papist: With whom we may join
those who Symbolise with either, so far as they so do.

With the Atheist (who thinks there is no God,) I join the Profane Debauched
Person, who so lives as if there were none: Such as Profess that they know God;
but, in Works, Deny him: being Abominable, and Disobedient, and, to every good
Work, Reprobate, Tit. 1, 16.

These men have as little veneration for Heaven and Holiness; as the Papists
have for the Word of God: Which they can make use of, as a Nose of Wax (as they
Phrase it) to serve a present turn; so far as it makes for them: but, as to
much of it, Albertus Pighius.
they had rather it were not at all: And, therefore, care not how little it be
known: And, when it is, they would have it Truckle under their Churches
Interpretation, as if Insignificant without it.

And, in like manner, the Profane Atheist, as to a Holy Life, and a Future
State. He could wish perhaps, with Balaam, to Dye the Death of the Righteous;
and that his latter end might be like his, Number. 32.10. But, finding so little
Hopes of that, does rather Wish, there were no such thing: And Thinks it his
great Unhappiness, That he is not a Beast: That, since he Lives like a Beast,
he cannot Dye like a Beast too; without Hopes or Fears of Heaven or Hell. For,
since he so Lives as to have Little hopes of Heaven; he heartily Wishes there
were no fear of Hell.

With such as these, if any man presses for Regeneration, Sanctification, and
a holy Life: He was to pass, heretofore, for a Puritan; then, a Roundhead; and,
now, for a Damned Fanatic.

Nor shall he escape this Censure, though never so great a Churchman, and do
exactly Conform to the Church as now Established. For it is Holiness they hate,
more than Nonconformity.

To these men, I shall say little more at present, than to Repeat these words
of Christ, Joh. 3.3, 5. Except a man be born again, of Water and of the Spirit;
He cannot enter into the Kingdom of God: And that of the Apostle, Heb. 12.14.
Without Holiness no man shall see the Lord. (A Wicked Life, will never bring us
to Heaven.) And then, what is like to be their condition, themselves may judge.

The other Enemy to this Doctrine, is the Papist. For though they talk much of
Good Works, yea Works of Supererogation, (Works better than they need to be:)
Yet are they no friends to the doctrine of Sanctification, and a holy Life.

Their first Artifice, is, to confound Justification, and Sanctification. For
so they do when they tell us, we are Justified by Inherent Righteousness. Now,
what is Inherent Righteousness, but Holiness and a Good Life.

Next; this Holiness, or Inherent Righteousness, does silently pass into the
term of Good Works. And, here, the Opus operatum (as they call it) shall serve
the turn, without much troubling themselves about the Habit of Grace or
Holiness, from whence these Good Works should proceed; and, without which (our
Church tells us) Good Works (Works materially good) cannot be acceptable unto
God.

And it is craftily done, to annex Justification to Good Works: Else there would
be no need, for those who have no Good Works of their own, to purchase out of
the Churches treasury, the Good Works of other men: and so the Market of
Indulgences would fail.

Next, these Good Works are Signally (though not only) to be understood of
Alms-deeds: And these, principally to the Church; that is, to their Priests or
other Ecclesiastics (as they be contradistinguished from the Laics) or to
some of their Religious Orders. For Alms-deeds will hardly pass for
meritorious; unless to some of these.

Then; these Good Works, are to be commuted, for Penance, and the Priests
Absolution. For though they have nothing of Good Works at all; nay, though they
be guilty of very great Immoralities: Yet if they Confess to a Priest, and
receive Absolution (which may be had at an easy rate,) they are then declared
as Innocent as the Child that is Newborn.

Especially, if they perform the Penance imposed; that is (for the most part)
if they say so many Paternosters, and so many Ave-Maries, or (if it be for a
great Offense) say over the seven Penetential Psalms, (for that is a great
Penance) or at least get some body to say it for them.

Nor is it necessary, to this Absolution, that they should be Contrite, or
heartily sorry; For Attrition, with Auricular Confession, shall pass in stead
of Contrition: That is, in effect, if they be but sorry for the Penance, though
they be not sorry for the Sin.

Or, if all this should fail; it is but being at the charge of an Indulgence,
or Popes Pardon: That is, to purchase so many penyworth of other men's Merits
(having none of their own) out of that Surplusage which those others have had
to spare (more than to serve their own turn) which remain Stored up in the
Churches Treasury, to be dispensed at the Popes pleasure, to those who will
give so much Money for them.

Or lastly, if they leave a Legacy at their Death, or their Friends will be at
that Charge when they are gone, to purchase so many Masses to be said for them,
as shall be thought necessary to deliver their Souls out of Purgatory. And, in
case they purchase more than are necessary for that occasion; the Surplusage
shall remain in the Churches Treasury, for the Benefit of others; to be
dispensed, as was aforesaid.

And this is what they require, by way of Commutation, in stead of
Regeneration, Sanctification, Holiness and a Godly Life.

But I shall leave them. And Exhort those of our Own Communion, (who desire
truly to please God,) to seek after real Holiness in their Hearts, and the
Practice of it in their Lives.

First, I say, Real Holiness in the Heart.

Mat. 7.16. Men do not gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of Thistles. Ver. 18. A
good Tree cannot bring forth Evil fruit; nor a corrupt Tree, Good fruit. Mat.
12.33. Therefore make the Tree good, that the Fruit may be good also. Ver. 34.
O generation of Vipers (says Christ) how can ye, being Evil, speak Good
things? For out of the abundance of the Heart, the Mouth speaks. It Is not
enough to lop off some of the Branches in practice, so long as there remains a
Root of Bitterness in the Heart, Heb. 12.15.

My Son, give me thy Heart, says Solomon, Pro. 23.26. And it is out of the good
treasure of the Heart, that the Good man brings forth Good things, Mat.
12.35. 'Twas Hezekiah's great Comfort, that he had walked before God in Truth
and with a perfect Heart, 2 King. 20.3. And, contrariwise, a Blemish on
Amaziah's Good Actions; that he did what was Right in the sight of the Lord,
but not with a perfect Heart, 2 Chronicles. 25.2. Without which, Bodily exercise
profits little, 1 Timothy 4.8.

'Twas for want of this, that God complains of the Solemn Services of his own
people: Isai. 1.11. To what purpose is the multitude of your Sacrifices? I am
full of your Burnt-offerings of Rams; and the Fat of fed Beasts. I delight not
in the blood of Bullocks, or of Lambs, or of He goats. Ver. 13. Bring no more
vain Oblations: Incense is an Abomination to me. Ver. 14. Your New Moons, and
your appointed Feasts, my Soul hates: They are a Trouble to me: I am Weary to
bear them. Because, though these were Good Things, they were Ill done. And God
will not accept of Outward Services, in lieu of Holiness.

I know, it is a Fancy that some have taken up; That, of those before Christ,
God required only Outward Services; And therefore promised only Temporal
Rewards: Whereas, say they, if he had required Spiritual Services, the Rewards
promised would have been suitable thereunto.

But sure, as to the Services, David was of another mind. Psalm. 51.16. Thou
delightest not in Sacrifice, else would I give it: Thou delightest not in
Burnt-Offerings, (that is, comparatively:) Ver. 17. But the Sacrifices of God,
are a Broken Spirit: A Broken and a Contrite Heart, O God, thou will not
despise. Ver. 19. Then shall thou be pleased with Sacrifices of Righteousness;
with Burnt-Offering, and whole Burnt-Offering: But not till then.

And, as to the Rewards promised; our Church is positive, (in her Seventh
Article:) The Old Testament is not contrary to the New: For, both in the Old
and New Testament, Everlasting Life is offered to Mankind by Christ: who is the
only Mediator between God and Man; being both God, and Man. Wherefore they are
not to be heard, who feign, that the Old Fathers looked only for Transitory
Promises.

And truly they might as well say; That, when God Threatens, In the day that
thou Eatest thereof, thou shall Dye the Death, Genesis 2.17. 'twas meant only of a
Temporal Death; (and how comes he then to Punish with Hell?) As, That, when he
Promises, The man that does them, Lev. 18.5. Ezekiel. 20.11. Romans 10.5. Gal. 3.12.
shall Live in them; it is meant only of Temporal Life. If the Promises be but
of things Temporal; how come the Threatenings to be, of things Eternal?

But they are indeed, Both of them, of things Eternal, as well as Temporal: And
the Services required, are Spiritual as well as Bodily: And that of the Spirit
principally and in the first place.

Yet it is not of the Heart only; but Secondly, of the Life also, that God
requires. It Is in vain to talk of a Good Heart toward God; with a Wicked Life,
in the face of the World. Mat. 7.17. If the Tree be Good; the Fruit will be so
too. A Wicked Life, is a certain sign of a Naughty Heart.

And this Obedience, must be Uniform, and Universal. Psalm. 119.6. Then shall I
not be ashamed, says David, when I have respect to all thy Commandments.

We are not to Pick and Choose, what to Obey, and what not. As if a double
Diligence in some One particular, (wherein our own Interest prompts us,) would
Expiate for a supine Negligence in all the rest.

It was suspicious in Jehu; who was very Zealous, against the Worship and
Priests of Baal (set up by Ahab and Jezabel;) 2 King. 10.25, 28.
the better to secure his Interest against the House of Ahab, and the Adherents
thereof: Ver. 29. But adhered to the sins of Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, and the
Golden Calves which he set up in Dan and Bethel: And, otherwise, (as it is
expressly noted,) ver. 31. took no heed to walk in the Law of the Lord God of
Israel with all his Heart.

And Christ taxes the Pharisees; who quarrelled with his Disciples, for
transgressing the Tradition of the Elders, Mat. 15.2, 3, 6. Mar. 7.5, 8, 9, 13.
in Eating with Unwashed Hands; while themselves made void the Law of God, by
their Traditions: As men Zealous in small Punctilio's, of Tithing Mint, Annise
and Cummin, while they Neglected the Weightier matters of the Law, Mat. 23.23.
And straining at a Gnat, while they swallow a Camel; Ver. 24. And making clean
the Outside of the Cup and Platter, while their Inward part was full of
Wickedness, Luke 11.39. And, while they made New Sins, which God never made;
were very Remiss, as to those that were Notorious, and Undeniably so.

But, if we would indeed approve our selves to God; we must take heed to Duties
of all sorts: Of a Chaste, Temperate and Sober life, as to Our selves; Of
Loyalty, Obedience and due Submission, to our Superiors, in Church and State;
Of Charity, Equity and Just dealing, to Inferiors, Equals, and all Men; Of
Religion, Piety and Devotion, to God: And all this, Out of a Pure Heart, and of
a Good Conscience, and of Faith Unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1.5.

For all which, because we are of our selves Insufficient, without the
Assistance of God's Spirit; we are to call in That to our Aid: As the Text
directs us; And the Collect for the Day, (with which I will conclude;)

O God, Forasmuch as, Without Thee, we are not able to Please Thee: Mercifully
grant, 19. Sunday after Trinity.
That thy Holy Spirit may, in all things, Direct and Rule our Hearts through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

To whom, with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be Honor and Praise, Now and
for Ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 4. l. penult. press. p. 6. l. 27. to things of sense. p. 9. l. 8. for
(...) r. (...). p. 15. l. ult. for done r. due. p. 20 l. 22. for God r. Good.
p. 24. l. 19. for Those r. That. l. 29. so to see. l. ult. dele or his first
birth. p. 32. l. 6. these words. p. 40. l. 17. needs.


