A SERMON PREACHED In CHRIST-CHURCH BEFORE His Excellency the Lord Deputy, AND
THE Honorable House of Peers; October the 8th. 1695.

Being the Day Appointed for a Solemn Thanksgiving for the Taking the Strong
Citadel of NAMUR,

And for the other happy Successes of His Majesty's Forces, and those of His
Allies in Flanders this Campaign,

By EDWARD, Lord Bishop of Down and Connor.

DUBLIN, Printed for William Norman, Eliphal Dobson, and Patrick Campbell,
Booksellers. 1695.

Thursday, the 10th of October, 1695. By the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in
Parliament Assembled. Ordered,
That the Earl of Droghedah, and the Lord Viscount Bless^nton, do give the
Thanks of this House to the Lord Bishop of Down for his Sermon Preached before
this House at Christ-Church on Tuesday last, being the Day appointed for a
General Thanksgiving for his Majesty's, and his Allies, so great Success in
Taking the Town and Castle of Namur, and preserving His Majesty's sacred Person
from the many dangers to which he was so frequently exposed during the Siege;
and that his Lordship be desired to cause his Sermon to be Printed.

Gerard Bor. Cler. Parliamentor.

A SERMON* PREACHED In Christ-Church, etc.
Psalm. 135. later part of the 20th Verse. Ye that fear the Lord, Bless the
Lord.
THE Psalm out of which I have chosen these words, is a Hymn of Praise; and it
is observable in the manner, or style of these Hymns, that the Composer
generally calls upon all around him, upon irrational, and inanimate things,
sometimes, as well as upon persons, to join with him, in the Encomium of the
great person whom he celebrates; and the holy Psalmist, who very well
understood all the Schemes and Elegancies of Poesy, sometimes does the like,
as when he calls upon every thing that has breath, upon the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, the Mountains and Rivers, to praise the Lord. But in this Psalm he calls
upon those who are under a more strict and peculiar obligation, as well as
acted by a more Zealous, and ready Disposition, to praise him* The Servants of
the Lord, such as stand in the house of the Lord, in the Courts of the house of
his God. Then he goes on to describe the great and mighty things, that God had
done for his People, the Tokens and Wonders, the Mercies and Deliverances, the
Victories and Successes over their numerous, and powerful Enemies: From thence
he proceeds to despise, and deride the silly Idols of the Heathens, and to show
that it is the greatest folly and stupidity in the World, to expect any thing
like these from them; That those that make 'em, are like unto 'em, and so are
all they that put their trust in 'em. And at last he calls upon those who were
the remarkable Objects, as well as the living Monuments of God's goodness and
mercy, to join with him. That the whole House of Israel, especially the House
of Levi, would bless the Lord: That all that fear him, that is every one, that
has a true Sense of Piety, would show it, in the Exercise of this great Duty of
public worship, invocation, and praise of his most holy Name, for his goodness
and mercy. Ye that fear the Lord, Bless the Lord.

Where we are not to understand by fear, that awful, uneasy passion of dread,
and terror, which is apt to arise from a conception of the divine Justice and
Vengeance, but we are to take it in a larger Sense, for a certain habit, or
disposition of mind, that inclines men to a Religious Reverence of the divine
Essence and Attributes. The holy Scripture understand's sometimes, by the fear
of the Lord, the whole of Religion, Genesis 20. 11. Surely the fear of God, is not
in this place. These are the words of Abraham, who was afraid that the men of
Gerar would slay him upon the account of his Wife, because they had no sense of
Religion amongst 'em; The wise man tells us, that the fear of the Lord is the
beginning of Knowledge: and the Psalmist calls men to him, that he may teach
them the Fear of the Lord, that is, that he may instruct 'em in the duties of
Religion, nay sometimes the holy Writers expess by the fear of the Lord, some
acts of the mind, that are exclusive of that passion: Prove. 14. 26. In the fear
of the Lord, is strong Confidence, and Act. 9. 31. We are told of walking in
the Fear of the Lord, and Comfort. Now Comfort, and Confidence, having nothing
to do with Fear, according to the usual strict Sense of the word: by the fear
of the Lord in these places must needs be meant a habit of Piety, or that
Religious Respect, and Reverence that is due to God.

And as we are not to take fear in this place, in the strict Sense of the word;
So neither are we to understand by blessing the Lord, the bare act of praising
his holy Name with our lips only, which is a thing may possibly be done when
our hearts are far from him, but a firm settled habit of thankfulness for all
his Favors, which upon fit and proper occasions, shall break out into such
acts as denote our honor, and esteem of him before men, and our Zeal for his
Glory; such as public declarations of our gratitude, for his general favors
toward us, and our solemn praises and thanksgivings, for his more immediate
and extroardinary Mercies, and Deliverances.

The Words being thus understood, offer to our consideration these two things,
1st here is a duty enjoined, to Bless the Lord. 2dly. Here is a certain habit
or disposition of mind, which they are supposed to have, that are called upon
to this duty, and that is The Fear of the Lord. Now because this last is but
supposed here only, and the former is looked upon as a consequent of it, I
shall begin with the later; That habit of Religious Worship and Reverence
toward God, which is the foundation of the devotional part of Religion,
concerning which, I shall inquire 1st, what are the seeds from whence it grows,
or what are the considerations from whence sober and thinking men reason
themselves into this habit of Piety and Devotion toward God.

2dly, I shall consider the duty it self, of Blessing God, and in what it
consists; and when this is done, I shall in the 3d place endeavor to show you
that they who thus fear the Lord, are the fittest persons in the World to bless
and praise him.

1st. Then, I look upon this habit of fearing God to be a dictate of the Law of
Nature, as much as any part of the moral Law whatsoever, if we suppose the
being of a God, which must be supposed, as the Foundation of all certain
Truths, as well as of all Religion.

Now, as to the being of a God, the constant Sense, and practice of every Age,
and Nation of the World, that we can have any manner of account of in story, do
abundantly confirm this, insomuch as if here and there, an Atheist, or
Anti-religionist be mentioned, he seems to stand upon Record, as some
monstrous, and uncouth production, for which humane Nature, is not accountable,
but it may be said perhaps that this sense of a Deity, and the pious regards,
that have been constantly paid to it, is a notion invented, and instilled, into
the minds of men, by cunning Politicians, who found it difficult to Govern the
World without it; I confess indeed, that to Govern the World without it, is not
only difficult, but impossible, which is no disparagment, but a great honor to
Religion, and a great Argument of the truth of it, but it does not therefore
follow that it was contrived by Politicians; for besides that, it is very hard
to conceive, that all the Politicians of every Age and Nation in the world
should so luckily hit upon the same State Maxim, who differ almost in every
thing in the world besides. I think it is sufficiently unaccountable, how the
most rude and barbarous Nations, and such amongst 'em, as never conversed with
a Politician in their lives, should, upon the first dawning of Reason, discover
this Notion in their minds, and express it in their practice.

It remains therefore, that Piety and Devotion toward God, and the necessity
of our Addresses to him, which is the thing here expressed by the Fear of the
Lord, is a dictate of the Law of Nature, and is indeed a Consequence easily
deducible from our sense of our own wants, and of the divine goodness, and
Power to redress 'em. And that these wants are great, and this goodness, and
Power (to which we apply our selves for relief) infinite, are two of the first,
and principal truths to which the humane understanding does clearly and
distinctly attain.

But we Christians, whose understandings are assisted by an additional, and
greater light, the Revelation of the will of God, made to us in his holy Word,
are not only distinctly informed of this matter in general, but the nature of
our wants, the several kinds, degrees, and occasions of 'em, the misery of our
Condition, if they be not redress't, the infinite power, and unspeakable
mercies of God, the great and signal instances of his favor to sinful men, his
kind, and gracious invitations of those who have provoked him, and his promise
of receiving 'em, as often as they make their applications in the way that he has
prescribed, are all reval'd to us in Scripture, and every one of these, is a
clear, and forcible Argument upon us, to fix in our minds this Fear of the
Lord, this habit of Reverence, and this resolution of waiting upon him in his
holy Ordinances, for a supply and continuance of his benefits.

If we look into our wants, they are such, as either relate to our Spiritual,
or Temporal Conditions.

Our Spiritual Condition is very deplorable by the fall of our first Parents,
and by that fomes peccati, as the Schoolmen call it, which they have
communicated to our Natures. It has like a strong disease, corrupted our whole
mass, and spead it is ill influence through all the faculties of our souls. It has
blinded our understandings with error and prejudice, and perverted our wills,
with our lusts and passions, insomuch that scarce our most holy duties, are
free from some or other ill consequence of this unhappy State. This is the
cause, why, when we are about to do good, evil is present with us, this is the
War in our members, this is the Carnal lust that resists the Spirit, and is at
Enmity with God. A set of Expressions, that do extremely well represent the
great power that this pollution of our Natures has upon us, and seem to
intimate, that our slavery under it, is so great, that it comes near to
destroy, even the freedom of our wills: In short, this is it which in our
Prayers, deads our Faith, our fervency, our trust, and affiance in God, and our
close attention upon that holy duty. This is it that casts in impertinent
thoughts, loose desires, wrong ends, and the like, which are as so many
blemishes in our Sacrifice. This is it that in our hearing, or reading the
divine truths, possesses our minds with prejudice, inadvertency,
misapplication, and sometimes with downright Infidelity, which makes it a
Savor not of Life unto Life, but of Death unto Death, to minds so fatally
corrupted. In fine, this is it that in our most serious meditations upon our
great eternal concern, make us light, and unsettl'd, driving to no point, or
issue, fixing no firm, immovable Resolution of a sincere uniforn obedience to
the will of God.

Against this deplorable condition, we have no relief, but by our applications
and addresses to the Throne of Grace, zealous, and frequent acts of which, make
up this habit of Piety, or fear of the Lord, which makes us acquainted with his
great and glorious Attributes, as that his infinite power makes him able, and
his infinite goodness willing to relieve us, which he does by sending the
Comforter, the blessed Spirit of Grace, by whose assistance and influence, we
have full redress of all our wants, and hardships. This powerful influence of
the Spirit of God, like a good medicine, diffuses its virtue every where,
applys it self to every disaffected part: It bears down before it the dullness,
and prejudice of our understandings, with the strength and clearness of the
divine truths, and with a sweet and endearing violence, it sets upon our wills*
and unruly affections, and subdues 'em to the obedience of Faith. This efficacy
of the Spirit of God upon the minds of men, is called by the Prophet Jeremiah,
the writing the Law in the heart, and putting it into the inward parts: It is
called by our Savior, the Father's teaching, the holy Spirit's convincing men,
of sin, of righteousness, and judgment: and the Apostle St. Paul calls it, the
spiritual revelation of Wisdom, out of the Word, unto the Conscience. And thus
I have showed you the reasonableness and necessity of Piety, or the devotional
part of Religion, which is here called the Fear of the Lord, with regard to our
spiritual wants, and the way of redressing 'em.

Our temporal wants will be considered, either as we are single persons, or as
we are united into a Body-Politick, under the same common Laws and Government.

As to our temporal wants, which concern us, as we are single persons, they are
such as make us to depend upon providence, for the smallest things we enjoy.
The very preservation of our Beings, is but a continued creation, which makes
infinite providence as necessary to preserve, as infinite power to create us.
The common accidents of humane life, are so obvious, and yet so unavoidable,
that no man living can either by his wisdom foresee, or by his power and
greatness prevent 'em. The health and vigor of the strong, the plenty of the
rich, and the honors of the great and powerful, are such, as the possessors of
'em cannot command their stay; nay, whilst they do enjoy 'em, they generally
have those cares, and anxieties to attend 'em, that usually embitter the
sweetest of 'em. We have read indeed of a certain perfect happiness, which a
wise man was to create within himself, even in this world, without any regard
to any thing without him, or above him: to arrive at which, did sufficiently
exercise the wits, and expose the follies of some of the ancient Philosophers,
amongst whom, some were to feel no pain in a fit of the Gout or Stone; nor to
know any difference between Phalaris's Bull, and a cool Grotto: All which was
but a mere notion, that never came to any more than a few empty words: For some
of the great pretenders to it have showed themselves but men, and weak ones
too, in some of the ordinary hardships and calamities of humane life:
Contentment with our condition, (tho a thing much talked of by many, and tho
many specious Rules are laid down for the attainment of it) being scarce ever
known on this side Heaven, insomuch that nothing can possibly make any
condition of life easy, or supportable to any man, that has not an eye to
something that can ease him of the difficulties that attend the acquisition*
and of the griefs and anxieties that follow the loss of these worldly
enjoyments; and that must be no other, than that great and glorious Being who
commands 'em all, and disposes of 'em as seems best to his Godly Wisdom. And
whosoever fixes this Principle in his mind, and acts in pursuance of it, that
creat's case, and satisfaction to himself, from the knowledge and contemplation
of this Wise and Almighty Being, and from an entire trust, and dependence upon
him, who has commanded him to make his addresses to him, and has promised to
answer 'em; that is the wise man; that is he, that observes and considers well,
what God commands by the mouth of the Prophet Jeremiah: Let not the wise man
glory in his Wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might; let not the
rich man glory in his Riches, but let him that glory's, glory in this, That he
understands, and knows me, that I am the Lord, which exercise
Loving Kindness, Judgment, and Righteousness in the Earth.

Neither do we stand less in need of the goodness, mercy, and bounty of God, as
we are united into Societies, and bodies politic, under the same common Laws,
and Government, than as we are single persons. Peace, plenty, trade, and
commerce, fidelity, justice, amity, union of interests and affections amongst
our selves, a hearty zealous concern for the publick-weal, success of our
negotiations with our Allies and Friends, and victory over our Enemies, being
all the Blessings of Heaven; and as needful for the support of a Kingdom, or
Commonwealth, as food, raiment, health of body, and tranquillity of mind for
the behoof of any single person. To whom then are we to apply our selves for
all or any of these, but to that great and glorious Being, who has perfect
knowledge, and wisdom to understand our wants, unspeakeable love, and goodness
to incline him, and Almighty power to enable him to relieve us. Perfect
Knowledge, for his understanding is infinite, unspeakable love, and goodness;
for he has told us that his mercy is over all his works, that he is the helper
of the friendless, and though our Father and Mother forsake us, yet will not he;
and Almighty Power, because we are assured that all power belongs to God, that
the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength, and whatsoever he pleases he does,
both in Heaven, and Earth, and in the Sea, and in all deep places.

And these are the reasons, directions, and encouragements to this great duty,
of fearing the Lord, or that habit of Devotion, or Piety to God, which is here
supposed in those who are called upon to bless the Lord. We have discovered it
to be a dictate of the Law of Nature, and that it is founded upon the sense of
our own wants, both spiritual and temporal, and the wisdom, power and goodness
of God to redress 'em.

I come now to consider the Duty it self, of Blessing God. Concerning which, I
shall show you first, wherein it consists. And then I shall show you, that they
that fear the Lord, are the only persons rightly qualified for the performance
of this duty.

By Blessing the Lord then, We understand in this place, our doing him all
possible Honor in our thoughts, words and actions, and zealously endeavoring,
every one in his station, that others may do him honor.

The ingredients of honor, are Love and Fear, and its object is goodness and
Power united. Goodness without Power beget's Love only; and Power without
Goodness beget's nothing but a slavish Fear, but both together, beget a certain
affectionate Reverence and Esteem, which we call honor. If this regard be
confined to the thoughts only, it is no other, than a high estimation of those
Excellencies and Perfections, with which he is so eminently endowed, as to
deserve our Love and Reverence. If it break out into words, it becomes either
praise, or thanks, and these denote our design to let others know the esteem we
have for the person whom we honor, together with the grateful sense we have of
his past Favors, and our readiness to make the best returns we can for any
other, that he shall from time to time vouchsafe to confer upon us; but when it
proceeds from Words to Actions, then it shows that we are in earnest, then we
show the truth and sincerity both of our hearts and words, and that we are
resolved to omit no occasion, of demonstrating to the World, the value we have
for him whom we honor: And this is what is expected even by mortal men, to
whom we pay this regard, and consequently cannot be denied to God, in a more
eminent manner, that is, in due proportion to his infinite power, and goodness.
And tho that honor that is confined to the thoughts (being no more than a due
estimation of those Excellencies, and Perfections that are in God, especially
his goodness and power) does at first appear to be an act of the Judgment only,
and proceeding from a faculty that is not free, does not seem to deserve the
name of a duty, can claim no praise, nor expect a reward, yet such is the
connection of the will, and the understanding, and such is their dependence, one
upon another, in their operations, that they frequently partake of the virtues,
and defects of each other, and not only the understanding guides the will, but
the will inclines and disposes the understanding, to good, as well as to evil
acts, or else why should infidelity be a Sin, and Faith a Virtue, but that they
are so, is certain: For the Scripture plainly declares 'em to be such; and the
reason is plain, for as a docile and tractable disposition of mind; humility,
the Love of Truth, and a hearty endeavor to attain it, do beget Faith; So
Pride and ill Nature, a Stupid Sloth, Obstinacy, Prejudice, and a resolution
to indulge out lusts and passions, are the Parents of Infidelity. We are not
therefore to look upon that estimation of the Judgment, by which we honor God
in our thoughts, to be without value, for it is an excellent indication, of a
mind rightly disposed to the Love, and Fear of God, and the foundation or
beginning of all the true Piety in the World. These honorable thoughts of the
divine power, and goodness, have a vast and unbounded Subject to employ 'em. We
can cast our eye upon nothing, whether in Heaven or Earth, or in the great
deep, we can contemplate none of the great and amazing works of Art, or Nature,
but they give us occasion to admire and adore him, and what Hypothesis, or
System of the World have we seen that could give any tolerable account of the
smallest appearance in Nature, without a God at the bottom of it? neither is
his power and greatness less visible, in the moral, than in the natural World.
The great and extraordinary* occurrences, which have sometimes happened, contrary
to the hopes and expectations of the most discerning men, such as as have
defeated the power, and baffled the Councels, of the Wise and Mighty, and have
had such demonstrations of an over* ruling providence, as sufficiently showed*
the hand from whence they came. These cannot but employ the thoughts, of those
who honor God, and who must from hence reason themselves into this conclusion,
that the Lord is great and powerful, that his Works are Wonderful, and that
there is no end of his Greatness. Small and common matter, may pass unregarded,
but when the Arm of the Lord is made bare, as the Prophet Isaia expresses it,
when it is lift up, and stretched out, who can but see it, and know it to be
his? when these extraordinary works, of providence, are such only, as denote
his power, and greatness, then indeed the people ought to hear, and fear, and
do no more presumptiously: But when they are instances of his love and kindness
too, this add's to our fear and reverence such a proportion of Love and
gratitude, as beget's the highest honor, and esteem of him, and warms our
affections toward him, to that degree, that we count all things dross in
comparison of him*

The hloy Scripture gives us such an Idea of his power, and greatness, and of
his mercy, and goodness, that it is an argument* of the most strange stupidity
in the world, not to be affected with it. Who can but fear and reverence the
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who is glorious in holiness, fearful in
praises, doing wonders: Who rules over all the Kingdoms of the Earth, and in
whose hand is such power, and might, that none is able to withstand him; the
Lord God, to whom belongs Greatness, and Power, and Glory, and Victory, and
Majesty, the Great, and Mighty, and Terrible God, who brings Princes to
nothing, and makes the Judges of the Earth as Vanity; who takes the Wise in
their own craftiness, so that the counsel of the froward is carried headlong;
who scatters his Enemies with a strong Arm; who can make the worm Jacob to
thrash the Mountains, and beat 'em small, and make the Hills as chaff; who
commands the Sun, and it rises not, and seals up the Stars: Who is the only
true and living God, and everlasting King; at whose wrath, the Earth does
tremble; the Nations are not able to abide his Indignation. Who, I say, can be
so stupid, as not to have his mind constantly affected with the thoughts of
such power and greatness; and who can be of so base and degenerate a frame of
spirit, as not to be thoroughly affected likewise with a sense of his infinite
goodness and mercy; to whom we owe our being, preservation, and all the
benefits we enjoy, all the necessaries, conveniences, and pleasures of this
life, we have received from his bountiful hand: neither has he stopped here, but
given us the reasonable tenders, and well grounded hopes of a better life; who
is not only merciful, and gracious, but liberal, and munificent: He not only
pardons our sins, that makes us unworthy of his mercies, but upon our
repentance, and amendment, he powers out his favors with a plentiful hand,
gives freely, and upbraids no man, but keeps Covenant, and Mercy, and will
never forsake them that seek him; who fills our hearts with food and gladness;
who is the hope of Israel, and his Savior, in the time of trouble; who has
redeemed us from the power of the Sword; and who will deliver us in six
troubles, yea in seven, that no evil shall touch us.

When these exalted and affectionate thoughts concerning God do break out into
words (as they undoubtedly will do, if the heart be truly affected with the
divine Favors) they become that which we call Praise and Thanksgiving; Praise
for his Power, and Greatness; and Thanksgiving for his Mercy, and Goodness; and
these are the most noble and perfect parts of Divine Worship; for they are the
employment of the blessed in Heaven, in which they spend Eternity. So that they
who desire to go thither, methinks should take a great deal of care and delight
to habituate themselves to that way of spending their time, which is to last
with them for ever; for want of which, I am persuaded it is, that we generally
see those who do not accustom themselves to this duty, nor take any pleasure in
the performance of it, are so immersed in this world, so burdened either with
the pleasures, or the toyls of it, that as they seem to think of none but this
world, so neither is it probable that they desire there should be any other:
But they that fear the Lord (who have thoroughly considered his power and
goodness, and that his promise of happiness cannot be made good to 'em in this
life, where the greatest Riches, and Honors, have their troubles, and where
the most refined pleasures do cloy and surfeit, those that most eagerly pursue
'em) have their minds employed in the search of more uoble, and exalted
divertisements, and therefore they endeavor to have a taste of heaven, before
they come there, which cannot be better done, than by imitation (as far as is
possible) of those that wait upon the Throne of God, singing hallelujahs to him
that sit's upon the Throne, and to the Lamb, for ever and ever: hence it is
that in all well constituted Churches, Psalms, and Hymns of praise and
thanksgiving, are a great and principal part of the public worship, the decent
and Solemn performance of which, gives the minds of the Congregation, such
exalted notions of God, and has such an Air of Zealous piety in the manner of
expressing 'em that they generally make the deepest impressions upon the
imagination, and memory of any part of divine service.

This shows the necessity and reasonableness of public praise, and the great
and astonishing mercies that we have had at the hand of God, both Spirirtual,
and Temporal, both private and public, do engage us to thanksgiving, which to
an ingenuous mind is the most pleasant of all duties. To hide the rigteousness
of God in his heart, and to conceal his loving kindness, and truth from the
great Congregation, is what the Royal Psalmist would not do; no, he would
publish it with the voice of thanksgiving, and tell of all his wondrous works,
he was resolved to sing of the mercies of the Lord for ever, and with his mouth
would he make known his faithfulness to all generations, he would praise the
name of God with a Song, and magnify him with thanksgiving. To which duty no
Nation upon the Earth has had more reasonable, and frequent calls, than we. If
Peace, Plenty, Liberty, and the most excellent constitution of Government in
the world, both Civil, and Ecclesiastical, are Blessings, what Nation under
Heaven has such reason as we have to adore and praise the divine goodness?

If when our crying sins, had justly provoked God to turn his face away from
us, he was pleased to turn again and revive us with the light of his
Countenance. When Arbitrary Power (with a Jesuit in the prime Ministry to
advise and direct it) was just ready to lay its Iron hands upon our Persons and
Properties, and Popery with all its nonsense and contradictions, seemed
prepared and authorized, to debauch, or force our Consciences: Then, for God to
give us a King in his mercy, to protect us against these worst of evils: A
King, whose hereditary Right to our Monarchy made him dear to the Loyal; and
his Wisdom and Courage, formidable to the Turbulent, and Disaffected. A King,
who seemed framed by Heaven on purpose for this great Emergeney; for we may be
sure, that the right hand which has the preeminence; that right hand of the
Lord, that brings mighty things to pass, will choose the fittest Instruments. A
King who has answered this great design and call of Providence, by the most
wise and effectual methods that we could wish or imagine, and restored us to
Peace and Order, and the comforts of our wise and happy Government both Civil
and Ecclesiastical, these are such marks of the Divine Favor, that we have
reason to believe our selves the peculiar care of Heaven. If to preserve the
Breath of our Nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord from the secret practices, and
attempts, as well as from the open assaults of his, and our Enemies: If to
cover his Head in the day of battle: If to teach his hands to war, and his
fingers to fight, so, as to give him victory over the fiercest of 'em, if to
give him the conduct, and courage to attack and defeat the boldest of their
Troop, (as he has lately done) within their Walls and Retrenchments, be a mark
of the divine favor; surely it is not only a reasonable, and necessary, but it
is a pleasant thing to give thanks. He that can pretend to contain the sense of
such mercies in his mind, without any public demonstrations of 'em, mucst
needs have but very slight touches of the Fear of the Lord, and but very weak
and unactive notions of the Operations of his hands.

I hope none that hear me this day are so regardless of these mercies as not to
consider from whose hands they come, how jealous he is of his honor, and how
highly he will resent so black an ingratitude, as that of refusing to own 'em
in public; for a true and pious sense of these, can never be buried in the
mind, but must show it self in the congregation, in the voice of praise and
thanksgiving to our great and glorious Benefactor.

But as we are to bless the Lord in our thoughts and words, we must do it
likewise in our actions, which is but to tell you in other word, that there is
a moral as well as a devotional part of Religion, by which we do not only
glorify God our selves, but we take care, that others seeing our good works,
may glorify our Father which is in Heaven, for if we consider God, as the
Almighty Monarch, and wise Governor of the World, a sincere uniform practice of
subjection to his will, and obedience to his known Laws, is the most natural
expression of our honor to him, and the most acceptable; For,

Let us suppose a Courtier trained up in all the most exquisite Arts of Court
Ceremony, and demeanor; so observant of every look, and motion of his Prince,
as to do him all the services of attendance, and address that may be, never
failing to attend his rising, and lying down, and so obsequious as never to
miss any public appearance that may do him Honor; and yet, at the same time,
does many extravagant, and illegal things, by oppression of his
fellow subjects, by extortion, bribery, or cruelty, to the disparagement and
obloquie of the King and his Government. Such a person will never be so much
loved, and valued by a wise Prince, as he that lives peaceably, justly and
honestly in his station, observes the Laws of his Country, and promotes the
observance of 'em by others, tho he do not always attend the King's presence,
nor pay his Court so constantly, and obsequiously as the other. Our Savior
tells us of those, that have made long Prayers, but have devoured Widows
Houses, and we have heard of some, who when they went to seek the Lord, in a
manner more solemn than ordinary, had always some great mischief to do: Such
are so far from blessing, and glorifying God, that they bring a disgrace upon
his Worship; they are so far from being friends to his Interest, that they make
his Enemies to blaspheme him. Solomon tells us, that he that oppresses the
poor, reproaches God; but that he honor's God, who has mercy upon the poor.
The wise Son of Syrach tells us, that he that keeps the Law, brings Offering
enough; and he that takes heed to the Commandment, brings a Peace Offering; he
that requites a good turn, offers fine Flower; and he that gives Alms,
sacrifices Praise; and that to forsake unrighteousness, is a propitiation.

And as this way of men's glorifying God by their Actions, is the sure way of
making others to glorify him, so it is never more remarkably effectual, than
when men in eminent Station and Authority, are exemplary for their Virtue and
Piety. Their light is set upon a high Candlestick, and shines a great way,
whilst that which is not set up, but lies low, is either not seen, or not
regarded. When our Lawgivers and Magistrates shall hear, and obey that call of
the Royal Prophet; Give unto the Lord O ye mighty I Give unto the Lord Glory,
and Strength, Give unto the Lord the honor due unto his Name; then will
inferior Persons quickly see, that there is a God, to whom they owe the same
homage, which their superiors so readily pay him; but when not only the good
Lives but the good Laws, of our Magistrates, do manifestly tend to the Glory of
God, and the promotion of Piety, then have we reason to believe, that God is in
the midst of us, that he presides in our councels, and will influence all our
actions, for the pulick good. I do not pretend to prescribe here, neither am I
able to instruct the united wisdom of this Nation, in any of the Political part
of their duty: all that I shall take upon me to say, is this, that there are
two things very dear to God, his Ministers, and his Worship; and I doubt not,
but those whose business it is to settle affairs upon the best and and surest
foundations, will take care of these in a peculiar manner.

And thus I have showed you what it is to bless the Lord, it is to do him all
possible honor our selves, in our thoughts, words and actions, and to
endeavor, every one in his station that others may do him honor.

I come now to show that they that Fcar the Lord, are the only persons fit to
perform this duty; For a fool (that is in the Scripture Language a wicked man)
does not understand this, an unwise man does not consider it, he has said in
his heart, there is no God, and therefore is certainly very unfit to honor
him; he that would rob him of his Being, will pay but little deference to his
Attributes: Nay, tho he were convinced of the being of a God, yet in doing him
honor, he is so out of his element, all the principal acts of Piety lie so odd
and untoward to his genius, and inclination, that we can expect from him but
very low and worthless performances in this kind: for this thing being such as
must not only deeply affect the thoughts, but show it self in men's words and
actions, no man must think to do it, in a slight or perfunctory manner; for it
is one of the grand and principal businesses of human Life, and must be
performed with all imaginable Zeal, and application. A hypocrite may for some
by-ends, or to gain the reputation of Piety, attend the time, and place of
public praise and thanksgiving, but his heart being rotten, that vitiates all,
and (tho it may deceive men) is of no value with God. A sensual libertine being
perhaps tired in the pursuit of his pleasures, or cloyed with the enjoyment of
'em, may at his leisur^ hours look inward a little, and by the light of Nature,
(that witness of himself, which God has set up in the heart of every man) form
some honorable thoughts of God; but these seldom break out into any acts of
pure, and sincere devotion, much less into the spiritual and exalted ones of
Praise and Thanksgiving. As for the sordid worldling, who by fraud, and
cruelty, and by grinding the face of the poor, has made have to be rich, he can
have but little respect for the true God, having another God of his own: for
the Scripture says he is an Idolater; he calls Justice, and Charity, but ill
management, and the Service of God, loss of time; so that there is no sort of
habitual impenitent sinner that can be any ways fitted for this duty. None but
those that Fear the Lord, none but those that have fixed in their minds true
and genuine notions of his power and goodness. These are they whose mouths will
show forth his righteousness and salvation all the day long, and will say as we
all have reason to do for his signal and repeated mercies, Blessed be the Lord
our God who only does wondrous things, and blessed be his glorious Name for
ever: And let the whole Earth be filled with his Glory.

Amen, Amen.
FINIS.

