A DEFENSE OF THE Christian Sabbath.

In Answer to A TREATISE of Mr. Tho. Bampfield Pleading for SATURDAY-SABBATH.

BY JOHN WALLIS, D. D. And Professor of Geometry in the University of OXFORD.

OXFORD, Printed by L. Lichfield, and are to be Sold by Chr. Coningsby, at the
Golden Turks-Head over against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street, LONDON.
1692.

Imprimatur,

IONATH. EDWARDS, Vice-Can. OXON.
Sep. 17t. 1692.
A DISCOURSE Concerning The Christian Sabbath.
SIR, June 12. 1692.
I Had a while since a Book sent me by the Carrier (I know not well from whom)
of Mr. Thomas Bampfield, which in the Title Page, is said to be Printed for the
Author -- 1692. It is Concerning the Sabbath. Which he thinks should rather be
Observed on what we call Saturday, than on what we call Sunday.

I should not, on this Account, give any Disturbance to the Peace or Practice
of the Church where I live, so that a Sabbath be duly Observed as to the
Substantials of it, though perhaps not upon what day I should choose.

For I do not know* and I believe no man living can tell me, whether what we
now call Sunday, be a First, a Second, a Third, or a Seventh day, in a
continued Circulation of Weeks from the Creation. And what it is impossible for
me to know, I think will be no Crime to be Ignorant of. Nor has this Author
any other way than common Tradition, (on which he is not willing that we should
lay weight,) whereby to guess, which is the First, or which is the Seventh day,
in such a Circulation of Weeks, either from the Creation, or even from Christ's
Time.

I am sufficiently satisfied that we ought to keep a Sabbath, that is, a day of
Holy Rest, after Six days of ordinary Labor, according to the Fourth
Commandment: and this in a continued Course or Circulation: But I am not
certain, nor can I be, which is a First, or a Seventh day in such a Circulation
of Weeks from the Creation. And therefore shall content my self to observe that
day which I find observed in the Church where I live. In Old England I observe
the Sabbath which here I find: And if I were in New England, I would observe
the Sabbath which I find observed there. Though I think it may be disputable
whether they and we may be said to observe the same day, (the First Meridian
passing between them and us.) And yet I would not advise to have it changed in
either.

Now I can hardly think, that God has laid the great stress of so weighty a
Point (as whereon the main of Gods public Worship does much depend) on such a
Circumstance as is impossible for us to know, and of which we may be modestly
ignorant.

I should rather think that what Christ says of the Place, Ioh. 4. 21, 23, The
hour comes when ye shall neither in this Mountain nor in Jerusalem worship the
Father, but the true worshipers shall worship the Father in Spirit and in
Truth, is in good measure true of the Time also; And, as it is not so material
whether in this or that Place, God be Worshipped, so he be Worshipped Aright: so
neither is it so material, whether on this, or that day; as, that a Sabbath or
day of Holy Rest be duly kept. The public Worship of God, was then in great
measure confined to the Temple; not indifferently, in any place within thy
Gates, but in the place which the Lord thy God shall choose, to put his name
there, Deuteronomy. 16. 6, 11, 15, 16. For which any other place may now be as well
assigned; that men pray every where lifting up holy hands, etc. 1 Timothy 2. 8.
(Privately in private places, and Publicly in places appointed for the
public*) And I do not think we are now more confined to the Jewish Sabbath,
than to the Jewish Temple.

This premised, I can agree with this Author in many things by him discussed.

I agree, that Our Lord Jesus Christ (according to his Divinity) was God (and
is so) the true God, the God that made Heaven and Earth, the God who delivered
the Law upon Mount Sinai. For though we do acknowledge, in the Godhead, a
Trinity of Persons; Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, (whereof Christ according to
his Divinity is called the Second Person, the Son of God, or God the Son;) yet
those Three Persons are but One God. Nor do I know any other true God but One,
The God that made Heaven and Earth, The Lord Jehovah, The God of Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob, The Lord God of Israel, The Lord their God who brought them out of
the Land of Egypt, out of the House of Bondage, and besides whom we are to have
no Other God, The God who delivered the Law to them on Mount Sinai; And I do
agree that Our Lord Jesus Christ, is (as to his Divinity) this God, the True
God, the only true God, and that he was so before his Incarnation. How far
each of those Actions are to be ascribed to this or that Person of the Trinity,
we need not be over solicitous. What in the New Testament is more peculiarly
ascribed to this or that of the Three Persons, is in the Old Testament wont to
be ascribed to God indefinitely, without such particular application; the
doctrine of the Trinity being then not so distinctly discovered. But I cannot
agree that Christ as God and Man (in contradistinction to the Father and Holy
Ghost) did all those things; for he was not then Man.

I agree with him also, that God who made the World in Six days, Rested the
Seventh day, Genesis 2. 23. Exodus 20. 11. And that he Blessed the Sabbath day and
Hallowed it. And that accordingly he has appointed after Six days of ordinary
Labor, Man should observe a Seventh day of Holy Rest, and this in a continued
succession.

But I should rather say, that our Lord Jesus Christ is (according to his
Divinity) that God who Blessed the Seventh day Genesis 2. than that the God who
Blessed the Sabbath day, is the Lord Jesus Christ; (as he does p. 64. and
elsewhere very often, seeming to lay great stress upon it.) For he was not then
the Lord Christ (God and Man) nor did he bless it as Christ, but as God; in
Union with the Father and Holy Ghost, not as contradistinguished from them.

I agree also, that the Law of the Sabbath is one of the Decalogue or Ten
Commandments delivered to Israel on Mount Sinai. Ex. 20.

But I am willing to think it was a Law before. Not only because we find it
observed, Exodus 16. (before the giving of the Law on Mount Sinai, Ex. 20.) but
especially because of that in Genesis 2. 3. God blessed the Seventh day and
Sanctified it, because in it he rested from all his Work. And those who are
most averse to the Morality (as it is wont to be called) or the Perpetuity of
the Sabbath, or Day of Holy Rest, and are yet very zealous for the Holiness of
Places, would be very fond of it if they could find so clear a Testimony, and
so ancient, for the holiness of Place, as here is for that of Time.

I agree also that the Law of the Decalogue or Ten Commandments, though then
given peculiarly to Israel, is Obligatory to Us also. For though some Clauses
therein do peculiarly respect them; as that who brought thee out of the land of
Egypt out of the house of bondage, and that thy days may be long in the land
which the Lord thy God gives thee, (which I think is there said with a
particular respect to the land of Canaan, which God gave to Israel, not to us;)
yet the Body of that Law and the preceptive part of it, I take to be Obligatory
to others also, and to Us in particular; the Decalogue being Declarative of
what was (I think) a Law before (however neglected or forgotten,) and is by
Christ and his Apostles frequently cited as such, even to Gentiles as well as
Jews.

Nor will I dispute it with him, whether the Sabbath were observed from the
Creation to the Flood. For I am willing to think that if it were not, it should
have been; though, in the short History that Moses gives us of that time, there
be no mention made of such Observation. But I doubt it was not universally so
observed, if at all. For when all flesh had corrupted their ways, I doubt the
Sabbath day and the worship of that day were by them not much regarded. Nor do
I find ( Genesis 2. 3.) any express Command (such as he demands for the First days
Sabbath) that it should be observed thenceforth by Men, every Seventh day of
the Week for ever. How far the words he blessed and sanctified it may extend I
will not dispute. It may be a strong Intimation (and I think it is,) But it is
not expressly said, that, All Mankind must, for ever after, observe every
Seventh day, in every Week, of days, reckoned continually from the first
Creation. Nor do I think it necessary to have been so recorded by Moses, (any
more, than the Law for Sacrifices,) if it did otherwise appear to have been the
Will of God. And therefore I would not have him lay too great a stress, on what
he says, that there is no express Commandment, Recorded in the New Testament,
for observing the First day: It is enough if we there find sufficient
Intimation for us to judge that God was pleased to have it observed.

I say the like as to the time from the Flood to that of Abraham, and from
thence to the coming of Israel out of Egypt. For I do not find any mention of
their observing a Sabbath (either in the Writings of Moses, or the Book of Job)
earlier than that of Exodus 16. after Isreal's coming out of Egypt, and after the
time that God is said to have made a statute and ordinance for them, at Marah,
Ex. 15. 25. What that Statute and Ordinance was, we cannot tell. The Jewish
Writers think (or some of them) that it was that of the Sabbath; and perhaps it
might, or this be some part of it. It was perhaps a Revival of what had been
before disused. Nor is it likely that their Taskmasters in Egypt would suffer
them to be Idle, and neglect their Work, one whole day in Seven.

Nor do I find any footsteps in History that any other Nation but the Jews did
(for many Ages after this time) so much as measure out their time by Weeks.

I know that many Learned and Pious men have been searching to that purpose and
willing to lay hold on any thing that might seem to look that way. And I should
be well enough pleased to see it made out. But I have not seen any thing
convictive to give me satisfaction therein.

I have consulted Clemens Alexandrinus, and what he cites in the Fifth Book of
his Stromata, who has I believe made the best search of any into Heathen
Writers for that purpose. His design in that Book is to show that the Heathens
had stolen or borrowed much of their Philosophy from what he calls Philosophia
Barbara, or Barbarorum, meaning thereby the Jewish Learning; (for, with the
Greeks, all but themselves were Barbarians.) And amongst many other things, he
takes notice of the number Seven sometimes mentioned in Heathen Writers, as
with some veneration; which he thinks to be occasioned from that number often
mentioned in the Sacred Writers, and particularly from that of their Sabbath,
and measuring their time by Weeks. But he does not at all intimate as if
himself did think the Heathens so to have divided their time, or to keep that
Sabbath, but only that they were acquainted with the Jewish Learning, and
borrowed much of theirs from thence.

That which therein seemed to me the most promising (and by others also is often
alleged) was that Cited from Hesiod, (...) ( the Seventh a Sacred day.) But
when I consulted the place in Hesiod, in his (...), (in the latter part of
which he treats of Days) I find nothing there of Weeks, or days of the Week,
but only days of the Month. For it is this he there proposes to speak of,
(...), ( the Thirty days of the Month,) on which he makes diverse Remarks; as,
which of them were to be accounted Good days, and which Bad days, and, for what
purposes. And begins with these,

(...)
( Begin we with the First, and the Fourth, and the Seventh, a Sacred day,
Because that on this day Apollo who has the Golden Sword was born of Latona.)
So that (it seems) the Seventh day (not the First) was then Sunday. (For Apollo
with his Gold Sword, is but another name for the Sun.) But it was the Seventh
day of the Month, not the Seventh day of the Week, (for of Weeks he there says
nothing.) And he then goes on to speak of the Eighth and Ninth days; then of
the Eleventh and Twelfth, next of the Thirteenth, and so of other days of the
Month; showing which of them were accounted Lucky days, and which Unlucky, and
for what Affairs. But nothing of Weeks at all.

However, Hesiod himself, though one of the Oldest of the Heathen Writers, is
but young as to the times we speak of; who is reckoned to have lived about the
time of King Uzziah, Seven Hundred years after the time we are now considering,
upon the coming of Israel out of Egypt. Nor does Clemens Alexandrinus think,
when they name Seven, it was from any Old Tradition (from Adam or Noah) but
from what acquaintance they then had with the Jewish Writers of later time.

Nor do I find any thing that is more to the purpose, in all there Cited by
Clemens Alexandrinus than this of Hesiod. But if any where he could have found,
that the Heathens divided their Time by Weeks; no doubt but he would have
mentioned this as borrowed from the Jewish Learning; (which was the thing he
was there inquiring after.) And, when he says nothing of it, we may be sure he
could not find it. I find indeed that, some of the Heathens (as Iuvenal and
Lucian) do laugh or jeer at the Jewish Sabbath ( recutitaque Sabbata pallent)
and therefore did know of the Jewish Sabbath; But not that they did observe it,
or so much as divide their Time by Weeks.

Now if we should admit, that in some Families (where the true Worship of God
was preserved) there be a strong presumption (for it is no more) that they did
observe a Sabbath; that is, a Seventh day of Holy Rest after Six days of
ordinary Labor; yet it is a question, whether that were just the Seventh day in
a continual succession of Weeks from the Creation.

And if at any time there chance to be an intermission, and the day forgotten,
it is impossible (without a Miracle or a new Revelation) that it can be
restored again. And if from thenceforth they would again keep a Sabbath (as we
find the Passover was revived by Hezekiah and Josiah which had been long
intermitted 2 Kings 23. and 2 Chr. 25.) they must begin at adventure, and
thence continue it.

Now if we consider, that the true Worship of God was often reduced to some one
family, as in the time of Noah, and perhaps of Abraham; and even that Family
sometimes corrupt enough, (as was that of Nahor, from whence Abraham for that
reason was removed; and that of Laban where Jacob sojourned; and how often also
the like happened, we cannot tell) It was very possible the Sabbath might be
neglected; as himself observes p. 63, it had been before and under the
Captivity for a long time, and made a Market Day, as well as any other day of
the Week; like as the Temple was become a Marketplace, Mat. 21. 12, 13. Ioh.
2. 14. 16. As was also the Passover in great measure from the time of Samuel
till that of Josiah, 2 Chr. 35. 18. And the Feast of Tabernacles, from the days
of Ioshuah to Nehemiah, Neh. 8. 17. And Circumcision, for Forty years together
in the Wilderness, Josh. 5. 5.

Now if Circumcision and the Passover and the Feast of Tabernacles were thus
neglected when they were at Liberty; how much more the Sabbath, when they were
Bondmen in Egypt; of which we have not the least mention from God's keeping a
Sabbath, Genesis 2. 3. till after Isreal's coming out of Egypt, Exodus 16.

Nor is there the least mention (as I showed but now) in any History Sacred or
Profane, so much as of dividing their time by Weeks, all that time; nor, except
that of Israel, for many Ages after.

And though the Sun, Moon and Stars ( Genesis 1. 14.) are said to be for Signs and
for Seasons, for Days and for Years, yet not a word is there of Weeks. Nor
could they indeed, by their Motions, distinguish Weeks, as they do Months and
Years. And therefore though I find Years and Months to have been observed all
the World over long ago; yet Weeks no where (that I know) of ancient times, but
by the Nation of the Jews only, nor by them before their coming out of Egypt.

So that, though, I am willing to think, the Sabbath ought to have been
observed all that while, yet there is too much reason to doubt it was not; or,
if at all, not without frequent intermissions, which would, in this case, be
fatal.

Now to argue as he does, that Abel, and Enoch, and Noah, and Abraham, were
good men, and are (some of them) said to walk with God, and to keep his
Commandments, and therefore may be presumed to have kept a Sabbath, is but a
weak argument as to matter of Fact, and, to beg the Question. For we are not
to think them so good as to be guilty of no failings or omissions.

The Law of Marriage is certainly as Old, if not Older than that of the
Sabbath, the tenor of which was (he tells us p. 62.) that they Two should be
one flesh; not, they Three, Four or Five: yet he tells us also, that Polygamy,
or having many Wives, was frequently practiced, from Lamech to Malachi, even by
some eminent in the Church at that time, and by them (he supposes) held to be
lawful. And it may as well be thought, the Law for the Sabbath might sometime
within that Two Thousand Five Hundred Years) be neglected and forgotten; as
that of Marriage; In a time when there was no writing (that we know of) to
preserve it. And, if once forgotten, it could never (as to that Seventh day) be
recovered.

And I would ask that Gentleman, In case the day should chance to have been
sometime forgotten, (as is very possible and not unlikely,) and that after such
time (upon finding the Book of the Law, as in Iosiah's time 2 Kings 22. 8.
which had been lost) it did appear that a Sabbath should have been kept, but
was not, (as was there the case of the Passover, Chap. 23. 21.) What does this
Gentleman think (in such case) should be done? Must they never Restore the
Sabbath because they do not know the day? Or must they begin upon a New
Account? I should think this latter; (and that it would be warranted by the
Fourth Commandment;) notwithstanding his Objection, No other day (but the
Seventh from the Creation) is Commanded; No Promise to the Observance of any
other; nor Threatening for the Omission.

Indeed in our days when so great a part of the World reckon by Weeks, and we
be stored with Astronomical Tables adjusted to the Motions of the Sun, Moon and
Stars, and many Celestial Observations, (as for Instance, that such a Year,
such a Day of such a Month there was an Eclipse on Monday morning or the like)
'twere more easy to rectify such an intermission. But in those days, when there
was nothing of all this, nor so much as the use of Writing (that we know of)
older than Moses; There was no way to rectify an interrupted Tradition.

All which is not said to disparage the Observation of the Sabbath day (for
which I have as great Veneration as he that pleads for the Saturday Sabbath,)
But only to show, that we can be at no Certainty, (and scarce a Conjecture,)
which is the First, Second, or Seventh day of the Week in a continued
Circulation of Weeks from the Creation. And consequently I cannot think that
the great stress of the Fourth Commandment is to be understood of just that
Seventh day in every such Week from the Creation (which I doubt cannot be
known) But rather that there should be a Weekly Sabbath; that is, after Six
days of Work, the Seventh should be a Holy Rest, and then, after another Six
days of Work, the Seventh should be again a Holy Rest; and so continually;
which is as truly observed in the Sunday-Sabbath, as in that of Saturday.

As when God requires the Tenth of our Increase; it is not meant of the Tenth
in Order (for it should rather be the First in Order, for he requires the
First Fruits) but the Tenth in Proportion; So here the Seventh.

And this Author knows very well, that it is signally noted by Expositors on
the Fourth Commandment, and other Writers about the Sabbath, That this
Commandment begins with Remember to keep Holy the Sabbath Day, or the day of
Rest, (not the Seventh day; much less the Seventh day of the Week from the
first Creation;) And what is that day of Rest, the next Words tell us, Six days
shall thou labor, but the Seventh is the Sabbath, etc. That is, after Six days
of Labor, the Seventh shall be a day of Rest. And in the close of that
Commandment ( Ex. 20. 11.) our Bibles have it wherefore the Lord blessed the
Sabbath Day (not as we commonly repeat it, the Seventh day) and hallowed it.
The Reason given to enforce it is, For in Six days the Lord made Heaven and
Earth etc. and rested the Seventh day, and accordingly should we, after Six
days of Work have a Seventh day of Rest, and so onward.

If he thinks that to make a difference, that we now reckon our Weeks to begin
with the day of Rest, and after that, Six Working days (which in a continued
Circulation comes all to one,) I will allow that Gentleman (if that will please
him better) to begin the Week on Monday, and then Sunday will be the Seventh.
The Commandment says nothing of the Seventh day of the Week in a continued
Succession from the Creation; but the Seventh day after Six days of Labor.

And whereas he observes (and would lay great weight upon it) that it is
(hashebigni) the Seventh (the article ha answering to our the) not a Seventh.
It Is very true, and very proper so to be. For the meaning is not that, after
Six days of Labor, there should be a Seventh for Rest no matter when; but the
Seventh day, that is, the next day after those Six. But it is not said the
Seventh in Course from the Creation. Just as when it is said, a Male-Child is
to be Circumcised the Eighth day, it is not meant of an Eighth day in Course
from the Creation; but, the Eighth day from the Birth. And in like manner Ex.
12. 16. In the Seventh day there shall be a Holy Convocation; it is not meant
of the Seventh day of the Week from the Creation; but on the Seventh day of the
Feast of unleavened Bread, what ever day of the Week that happen to be. And
Exodus 16. 5, 25. The Sixth and Seventh day there mentioned, seem plainly to be,
not the Sixth and Seventh in course from the Creation (which I doubt was not
then known) but from the first raining of Manna, ver. 4, 5.

He Will say perhaps, The Jews observed such Seventh day from the Creation, and
that was their Sabbath. But that is more than he or I know, or any man living.
They had I grant, a Circulation of Seven days, but from what Epoch we cannot
tell. And when Moses tells them (on the Sixth day) Ex. 16. 23. Tomorrow is the
Rest of the Holy Sabbath. It seems to be the fixing of a new Epoch (from the
first raining of Manna) and then all his Arguments, from the continual
Observation of the Seventh day from the Creation till that time, are at an end.
Whether this (from the first raining of Manna) be the same with that from the
Creation; no man can tell. And there is Six to One odds that it is not.

Now, that there is a new Course of Sabbath (from a new beginning) whereof this
Seventh day from the first raining of Manna is the First, and not a
continuation of a former Course hitherto observed without interruption; seems
farther evident from this consideration, Because, if this were but a
continuation of that uninterrupted Course of Sabbaths, then the next Seventh
day before it, would have been a Sabbath also, and to have been in like manner
observed; that is, the next day before the first raining of Manna. But, on that
day we find ( Exodus 16. 12, 13.) the Quails came up and covered the Camp,
without any Prohibition to gather them. If therefore they might not (now)
gather Manna, because it was the Sabbath; but might (before) gather Quails; it
should seem, that was not a Sabbath.

And if it be not allowed, upon occasion, to fix a new Epoch; then if the
Circulation of Weeks from the beginning of the World (which was then about 2500
years old) did ever chance to have been interrupted, and the day forgotten, (as
in all likelihood it might be in Egypt, if not long before) or if ever after it
should chance so to be (as in the days of Josiah when the Book of the Law was
lost, and the Passover forgotten;) men must never keep a Sabbath thenceforth.
For then all his own Arguments return upon him; No other day is Commanded ('it is
Will Worship,) no Promise to the Observance, no Threatening for the Neglect.

I should rather think, if that day were unknown (as I believe it is) Any day
were better than None at all. For Gods Commands do more respect the Substance
of the Duty than the Circumstance of Time, especially if they cannot both be
had.

Circumcision was to be Administered on the Eighth day, according to the
Institution, (I do not mean the Eighth day of the Week, but the Eighth day of
the Child's Age; and therefore on the same day of the Week on which the Child
was Born.) But if by Accident or Default it were omitted, it might be done any
day after, rather than not at all. Abraham we know was 99 years old, and Ismael
13 when they were Circumcised, (and what was the Age of other Males in
Abraham's Family, we cannot tell;) and a Proselyte, at any Age, was to be
Circumcised; (though perhaps it were not remembered on what day of the Week he
was Born;) and those who were born in the Wilderness for Forty years together,
were all Circumcised at once, Josh. 5. 4, 5, 9. (though not all born on the
same day of the Week.)

The Passover was appointed to be eaten standing, with their Loins girt, their
Shoes on their feet, and their Staffs in their hand, as in have to be gone Ex.
12. Yet our Savior seems to have Eaten it Sitting, or rather Lying. And none
of them were to stir out of doors till morning, Ex. 12. 22. Yet Christ and his
Disciples went out the same night to the mount of Olives, and thence to
Gethsemane, Mat. 26. 30, 36.

The Shewbread was to be eaten by the Priests only: yet our Savior observes
that David did eat of it (on a special occasion) without blaming him for so
doing.

The Rechabites are commended Ier. 31. for obeying the Command of Jonathan
their Father, not to drink Wine, nor build Houses, but to dwell in Tents etc.
Yet did they, upon Nebuchadnezzar's Invasion, quit their Tents and repair to
Jerusalem; nor is it reputed a Disobedience.

The Paschal Lamb was to be killed the Fourteenth day of the First Month at
Evening: Yet if we consider how little knowledge they had in those days, of the
Sun and Moons motions, and if we consider what the Jewish Writers tell us of
their very uncertain Method of judging, which was the First Month, and which
the Fourteenth day of that Month we shall find they were at great
uncertainties, as to the just day; yet was not the Service thereof to be
neglected, upon pretense there was danger of missing the right day.

For they had not Almanacks in those days, as we have now, to tell us before
hand when will be a New Moon. But (if we may believe the Jewish Writers) their
manner was, about the time when they expected a New Mood, to send men to watch
for it on the Top of some Hill or high Place; and he who could first discover a
New Mood, was to tell the Priest, and he to blow the Trumpet to give the People
notice that there was a New Mood, (much like our Custom at Oxford, at the time
of the Assizes, to set some on St. Mary's Steeple to watch when the Judges are
coming, and then to Ring the Great Bell to give notice to those concerned, that
the Judges are at hand;) But, in case of Cloudy Weather, if in three days time
from their first Expectation no man could see a New Moon, they did then venture
(but not before) to blow the Trumpet without seeing it, which must needs cause
a great uncertainty; and the same Moon sooner seen at one place than at
another, and the Passover kept accordingly. And it is manifest in the Story of
our Saviors last Passover, that he kept it on one day and the Jews on another
(perhaps he about a Fortnight before, might see a New Mood, a day sooner than
they did.) So great uncertainty there was at that time, as to the particular
day, though the Institution was punctual for the Fourteenth day of the First
Month. And the like uncertainty there was as to all their Feasts of New Mons.

And even in our days, when the Motions of the Sun and Moon are much better
known than at that time they were, we are far from being exact in point of
time. Our Rule for Easter is much the same with theirs for the Passover; The
Rule in general is this, The Sunday next after the Fourteenth day of the First
Month, is to be Easter day. But when we come to make particular application, we
do strangely miss of our Rule. And our Paschal Tables which should direct us,
do put us farther out than if we had none at all.

For (by reason that we take the length of our common year a little too long,
by about Eleven minutes of an hour, and the length of our Months too long
also;) since the time that those Tables were made, it is well known that the
beginning of our Ecclesiastical First Month, is Ten or Eleven days later than
that of the Heavens; and our Ecclesiastical New Mons and Full-Moons, is later
by Four or Five days than those of the Heavens. Whereby we do very often
mistake the Month, and yet oftener the true Week, for keeping of Easter. And
though Pope Gregory the Eighth, did (somewhat more than an Hundred years ago)
somewhat rectify the Calendar, yet both Papists and Protestants do observe,
some the Newer Gregorian, and some the Older Julian account, and (in the United
Provinces of the Netherlands) one Town observes one account, and the next the
other account, and accordingly keep their Easters (if at all) at Three, Four or
Five Weeks distance,

And so for Christmas Day. It Is not agreed amongst Chronologers either what
Year, or what Month, much less what day of that Month, our Savior was born,
yet we keep December 25th. in memory of his Birth, as supposing him to have
been then born. Yea we are at so great uncertainty, that we reckon the year
1692 from his Circumcision, to begin the First of January; but the same year as
from his Conception, not till the 25th of March next following; as if his Birth
and Circumcision had been a quarter of a year before his Conception.

And if we be now at so great an uncertainty, in so short a Period as from the
Birth of Christ, I do not think the Jews could be punctual, as to a day, in
observing their Passover; and much less, as to a day from the Creation of the
World.

He Will say perhaps, that Easter and Christmas being of humane Institution, it is
not much matter though we miss the day, nor much matter perhaps whether it be
kept or no. Be it so; But the Passover was of Divine Institution; yet were
they at a great uncertainty, and might chance to miss more than a day or two;
yet was not the Duty to be therefore neglected. The mistake of a Day, was of
much less concernment than the neglect of the Duty; As was the Tithing of Mint
and Annise, than the weightier things of the Law. These little Circumstances
are but Shaddows, in comparison of the Substance, as the Comparison is Col. 2.
17.

Which is not said to encourage any one to violate the Laws of God, even in
little things, (for we find God sometimes very severe even in such; as in the
Case of Uzzah's touching the Ark, and Nadab and Ahihu's offering strange Fire;
for Reasons best known to himself, of which we are not aware.) But only to
show that the Substantials of a Duty are to be regarded more than
Circumstantials; and these upon occasion to give way to those. And in such
Cases (if it were a fault) the Prayer of Hezekiah (2 Chr. 30. 18.) is to take
place, The good Lord pardon every one that prepares his heart to seek God,
though he be not cleansed according to the Purification of the Sanctuary. And
his Service was accepted, though (as it is expressly noted) they did eat the
Passover otherwise than as it was written: And, in the Second Month, in stead
of the First.

And doubtless in the present case, If we do not know (as certainly we do not)
which is the First or Seventh day in a continual Circulation from the Creation,
it is much better to keep a Weekly Sabbath on any day of the Week whatever,
than to keep none at all, and much more agreeable to the true meaning of the
Fourth Commandment.

All which is said, partly by way of Caution, not to be forward, upon slight
grounds, to disturb the Peace and settled practice of the whole Christian
Church at this day.

Partly to take off what he would have to be admitted but cannot be proved,
that the Seventh day in a continued Circulation of Weeks from the first
Creation, was observed as the Weekly Sabbath, from the Creation to the Flood;
from thence to Abraham; from thence to Isreal's coming out of Egypt; and from
thence till after the Resurrection of Christ. Which I think is impossible for
any man to know.

And partly to satisfy what he objects from the Fourth Commandment. Which says
indeed that there is to be a Rest on the Seventh day after Six days of Labor,
but not a Word of its being such Seventh day in a continual Circulation of
Weeks from the Creation. And therefore we are safe hitherto, for ought I see.

But I Will come up a little nearer to him. He may perhaps tell us (though I do
not find he does) that the Jews did certainly keep their Weekly Sabbath (at the
time of our Saviors death) on what they called the Seventh day. If not on the
Seventh day of the Week from the Creation (of which we can have no certainty)
at lest on the Seventh day of the Week, as the Weeks were then reckoned; (which
I readily grant him) and that they had so done for a long time before, and
perhaps from the time of giving the Law on Mount Sinai. (And it may be so, for
ought I know, but we cannot be certain.) And what was then called the First day
of the Week, was another day from what they called the Seventh (which I admit
also.) And that, what they called the Seventh day, is now what we call
Saturday, and what they called the First day is what we now call Sunday. But
this, I say, is more than he or I know. He may think so; and so do I; but I am
not sure of it.

The reason why I think so, is, because I think that Christ or his Apostles
(according to Christ's direction) did remove the observation of the Sabbath,
from the Seventh to the First day of the Week, and that we have ever since kept
the Sabbath as they did, (for I do not know that it has been since altered,)
and as we now keep it on Sunday, so I believe they did; and therefore think
that our Sunday is what they called the First day.

And if the Apostles did then remove it from their Seventh day to their First
day, I presume they had direction from Christ so to do, who after his
Resurrection, showed himself to them for Forty days, giving Commandments to
his Apostles speaking to them of things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, Acts
1. 2, 3. And therefore, what they did afterward in settling the Christian
Church, they did (we are to presume) according to such Directions and
Commandments of Christ, and this in particular of so removing the Observation
of the Sabbath day, if they did remove it, (as I think was done) by his
Authority who was Lord of the Sabbath day. Matthew. 12. 8. Luke 6. 5.

But if they did not so remove it; I do not know that it has since been
changed. For I think we keep the same Sabbath which they did: and that the
Christian Church has ever since so done; and does pretend so to have done, by
a constant Tradition ever since. And we therefore think our Sunday to be their
First day of the Week, because we think their Sabbath so to have been. But if
we mistake in that Tradition, we are (For ought I know) accordingly mistaken in
thinking Sunday to be their First day; (For we have nothing but Tradition for
either.) And then for ought he can show (by better than Tradition) to the
Contrary, our Sunday may be their Seventh day. And then he has no pretense to
quarrel with it.

If he say the Jews do at this day keep Saturday as their Seventh day. I
confess they do. But they do no more know which is the Seventh day; than we,
which is the First day. And because they find that Christians generally take
Sunday to be what was before called the First day, they do accordingly take
Saturday to be their Seventh day. But their Tradition is of no greater
Authority than ours. All depending upon this, that our Sunday being that
Sabbath which we think Christ or his Appostles did appoint, we take it to be
the First day, because Christ or his Apostles (by Christ's directions) did
remove the observation of the Sabbath to that day.

He Will say perhaps; I do not my self think our Sunday to be their Seventh day.
And then, why should not our Sabbath be on Saturday as theirs was?

It Is true, I do not think our Sunday to be their Seventh day. And I have told
you the reason why I do not think it; Because I think Christ or his Apostles
did change the day, and for that reason only. And for the same reason I think
our Sabbath should be as now it is, and as I think it has been ever since. But
if I be mistaken in it, I may be mistaken in the other also: But, either way,
Sunday is yet to be our Sabbath.

He says, It is no where expressly said in Scripture, that the Apostles did thus
change it. True, and it is no where said in Scripture, that our Sunday is not
their Seventh day. It may be the same for ought I know, (and for ought he
knows) if it were not then changed. Though, because I think the day was then
changed, I do therefore think it is not the same. And if it were not changed,
then all the difference is, that what they called the Seventh day of their
Week, we call the First day of our Week. Which, if the Author do not like, he
may call Monday the First day, and then Sunday will be the Seventh, as it was
before.

But I say further; There be many things, even as to the Worship of God, which
we may reasonably think to have been done, though it be not expressly said so;
but only to be collected by consequence from what is said.

It Is no where said expressly, that, after the First Sabbath of God himself, (
Genesis 2. 2.) any other Sabbath was ever kept before that in Exodus 16. which was
above Two Thousand and Five Hundred Years after. Yet this Author would have us
think it was observed all that while; and that it was commanded so to be, which
yet is no where said expressly. But a slight presumption, it seems, may serve
his turn, but not ours.

It Is known that God was Worshipped by Sacrifices very early; at least as early,
as that of Cain and Abel; and that this Worship was accepted of God, at least
that of Abel. And therefore I suppose this Author would have us think it was
Commanded. (not a mere Will Worship, without any Direction or Institution from
God.) Yet we are no where told, of any such Command or Institution.

We may say the like of Jacob's consecrating a Pillar, by pouring Oil upon it,
Genesis 28. 18. though we do not find mention, before that time, of any direction
for any such Consecration (of things or persons) by Anointing, or Pouring on of
Oil.

We have also reason to think there was some Command from God, that the Fire
for Incense should be taken from the Altar, (or somewhat of like nature;) else
Nadab and Abihu would not have been destroyed for Offering strange Fire. Yet we
are no where told expressly of any such Command.

We have no particular Command (that I know of) for Baptizing of Infants, nor
any particular mention in Scripture of any such Baptized. Yet I do not know
that this Author would have us thence infer, that none such were baptized, or
that they ought not so to be.

Nor have we any express mention of Women's receiving the other Sacrament; nor
any express Command for their so doing (any more than for Females being
Circumcised) yet I know not any who does therefore think they ought not.

We know that Children were reputed Members of the Church of God before
Christ's coming; and we have no reason to think that Christ did put them out
(and make them in a worse condition than they were before) but rather would
have them continue so to be; and seems to favor it, by that of suffer little
Children to come to me and forbid them not; for of such is the Kingdom of
Heaven Mar. 10. 14. and did accordingly embrace them as such. And therefore, as
( before) they were Circumcised, (which was then the Sacrament of Admission;)
So they should ( now) be Baptized which is our Sacrament of Admission.) And
when we find whole Families to be Baptized, we cannot think but that there
might be little Children in some of them; (and more likely so than otherwise.)
And we are, in such cases, to practice according to what we may judge by what
we find. We find also that Women were Baptized (though not Circumcised in the
Jewish Church,) yet we have no Command for so doing. And because there seems to
be the same reason for Women's receiving the other Sacrament as for Men, (and we
find nothing to the contrary,) therefore we do now practice it (as the most
likely to be God's Will, according to the Light we now have) though we find in
Scripture neither express Precept nor Example for it.

In like manner it is no Argument that Christ or his Apostles did not make such
a change, because in Scripture it is not expressly said so. It Is enough if we
there find so much as that we may thence reasonably Judge they did so; and more
likely so than not.

Now I meet with so much there to that purpose, as makes (...) judge they did.
And so much as (I believe) would make this Gentleman so to think, if he were
not otherwise prepossessed with prejudice; and with a great fondness to find
out somewhat wherewith to find fault.

I find that Christ, on the very day of his Resurrection (which was the First
day of their Week) did not only appear to the good Women at the Sepulcher (who
sought him there) and declare to them the Resurrection (which was then to
Preach a new Doctrine, of which they were not before aware) and bid them tell
it to his Disciples: But did also the same day himself declare it to Two of
them going to Emmaus ( Luke 24.) Preaching to them, from Moses and the Prophets
ver. 25, 26, 27* the Doctrine of his Death and Resurrection (which was to them
a new Doctrine, which till then they did not understand,) or (as the Phrase
there is) did Expound to them in all the Scriptures the things concerning
himself ver. 27. which I think, was Preaching, and did open to them the
Scriptures (ver. 31.) concerning those points; (which was a Sabbath Days
exercise, though perhaps they did not at first so apprehend it) and did, I take
it, celebrate with them the Sacrament of the Lords Supper (and perhaps the
first time after the first Institution) for so much seems to be employed in
those words, (ver. 30.) he took bread and blessed it, and brake, and gave to
them, and (ver. 35.) he was known to them by breaking of Bread, (for that
Sacrament used to be designed by breaking of Bread.) And if our Author could
but show so much as this, once done, in the first 2500 years from the Creation,
on the Seventh day, it would be a better proof for the Celebration of the
Seventh-day Sabbath in that time, than all that he offers at to that purpose.
And the Effect of this Preaching was on them so much, that their eyes were
opened, and their heart did burn within them, while he talked with them by the
way, and opened to them the Scriptures, ver. 31, 32. and they returned
presently (the same hour) to Jerusalem, to acquaint the Disciples (who were
there assembled) with this good news.

If he tell us that this Journey from Jerusalem to Emmaus (being about
Threescore Furlongs, near Eight of our Miles) and back again, was more than a
Sabbath Days Journey; I confess it was (unless upon an urgent occasion) if they
had known it to be a Sabbath Day, when they undertook the Journey; but this
then they knew not; nor was it therefore, on this occasion, a breach of the
Sabbath so to do.

If he say, Christ knew it (though they did not) if it were now a Sabbath. It Is
true; he did so. But Christ, I presume, in that estate (after his Resurrection)
could Travel without Pain, and therefore without breaking the Sabbath. Or if it
were painful; he tells us Mat. 12. 5, that the Priests in the Temple profane
the Sabbath and are blameless; that is, they take as much pains or labor in
killing, dressing, and offering the Sacrifices, as a Butcher would do in
killing and dressing his meat; which would in the Butcher be a culpable
Profanation of the Sabbath; but is not so in the Priests, because theirs is
Religious Service. Nor does this Author think that in Preaching, though it be a
Labor, the Minister does thereby break the Sabbath. And such was Christ's
employment here. And, then, whether he Preach Standing, or Preach Walking, it is
all one.

And if he say farther, that the Disciples at Jerusalem (not then knowing this)
could not be thought then to have met upon a Sabbatical account: I grant this
also, that their then meeting was Providential (as was that of the Two other
meeting Christ in their Journey,) yet they might before they parted (as did
those others) know more of it than at their first coming together. And Christ
knew before what he meant to do, though they did not, and did accordingly so
order it by his Providence. And though they did not know that it was
thenceforth to be kept as a Sabbath, yet may they well be supposed to be
employed on Religious Work, upon what Tidings the Women had before brought them
(of Christ's being Risen) waiting for what directions they should farther
receive from Christ.

To this purpose let us consider what was further done at this meeting. While
these Two were telling the rest what had happened to them; As they thus spoke
(ver. 36.) Jesus himself stood in the midst of them, and said Peace be unto
you: And did ( by showing them his hands, and feet, and their handling of them,
and seeing him eat before them) convince them that he was indeed Risen from the
Dead, and that it was not only a Spirit that appeared to them ( ver. 37, 38,
39, 40, 41, 42.) And did again, to them, Preach the same Doctrine which he had
before preached to the Two; That it was what he had told them while he was yet
with them (though they did not understand it,) That this was but what was
written in the Law of Moses, and the Prophets, and the Psalms concerning him;
and opened their understanding that they might understand the Scriptures; That
it was thus written, that it behoved Christ to suffer and to rise from the dead
the Third day; and that Repentance and Remission of Sins was to be Preached in
his Name among all Nations; whereof they were to be his Witnesses, and Apostles
(ver. 44, 45, 46, 47, 48.) And did renew his Promise of sending the Holy Ghost,
and Power from on high ( v. 49.) He did moreover at the same meeting, not only
upbraid them for their unbelief, (Mark 16. 14.) but did Authorize them with a
solemn Commission for the Work they were to be sent abqut, to Go into all the
World, and Preach the Gospel to every Creature; that he who believes and is
baptized shall be saved, but he who believes not shall be damned, (ver. 15,
16,) and a Power to work Miracles (ver. 17, 18,) in confirmation of that
Doctrine.

And to the same purpose, John 20* 19. The same day at Evening (in which he
before appeared to Mary Magdalen and the rest) being the First day of the Week
(the very day of his Resurrection) where the Disciples were assembled (at a
private meeting) for fear of the Jews (the door being shut) Jesus came and
stood in the midst of them, and gave them his Solemn Benediction, saying unto
them, Peace be unto you; And in Confirmation of his Resurrection, showed them
his hands and his side; (ver. 20.) And then a Second time gives them his Solemn
Blessing together with his Ordination or Commission for Preaching the Gospel,
and Planting the Christian Church, Jesus says to them Again, Peace be unto
you; As my Father has sent me, even so send I you. And when he had said this,
he breathed upon them and said unto them, Receive the Holy Ghost: Who Is soever
Sins ye remit, they are remitted to them; and who is soever Sins ye retain, they
are retained, ver. 21, 22, 23.

All which being put together, seems to me very like the Celebration (if not
the Consecration) of a Christian Sabbath, or day of Holy Rest and Religious
Service. It Is all of it Sabbatical Work, and there is a great deal of it.

It Is not indeed expressly said, That he did bid them thus to meet on such other
First day of the Week, (as neither is it expressly said, Genesis 2. 3. that God did
then bid Adam and Eve to keep a Weekly Sabbath, or that he did bid them to
offer Sacrifice;) but it is very likely Christ might so order it (and more
likely than that he did not.) For, that they did so meet we are sure; and
therefore it is very likely (if not a strong presumption) that they were bid so
to do. For so we find it Ioh. 20. 26. After Eight days (that is, as we commonly
speak in English, on that day Sennight) his Disciples were again within, and
Thomas with them (who before was absent) the door being shut; then Jesus came
and stood in the midst and said Peace be unto you, (as he had done the Week
before,) and satisfied Thomas, who before doubted.

So that we have here Two Solemn meetings of the Disciples, Two Weeks together
(the Two first after his Resurrection) on the First day of the Week; and Christ
with them on both. (And I am sure we have not more for the First Sabbath, Genesis
2. 3.) On how many more such Sabbaths he so met with them, I cannot tell. That
he often appeared to them (during the Forty days of his abode on Earth after his
Resurrection) we cannot doubt, and its like it might be on these days.

The Cavil which here he makes to this place, is so weak, that I am sorry to
see it from one who would seem to be serious. As if Eight days after, or after
Eight days, were not the same as what we would say a Week after or that day
Sennight after; For he must needs know, that it is not only the Common Scripture
Language, but the general Language of Latin and Greek Writers, to reckon
Inclusively; that is, to take in both the extremes; and so it is even at this
day (I think) in most Languages except English. What we call a Sennight, the
French call huict jours (Eight days) and what we say a Fortnight, is with them
Quinze jours (Fifteen days;) and so in all manner of reckoning. A Fourth, a
Fifth, an Eighth, a Fifteenth, and other Intervals in Music are always so
reckoned. What we call a Third-day-Ague, the Latins call a Quartan; and what we
call every other day, they call a Tertian. So they call Secundo Calendas (i. e.
Secundo die ante Calendas) what we would say one day (not two days) before the
Calends; and they call tertio Calendas, what is with us two days (not three
days) before the Calends. So nudius tertius is what we would say two days ago;
and nudius quartus is in our Language Three days ago (not Four.) So Mark 8. 31.
where Christ speaks of himself, that the Son of Man should be killed and After
three days rise again, that is, on the Third day after (inclusively taken) or
after the Third day is come; whereas, according to the sense this Author would
put upon the words, it should rather have been said after one day (for there
was but one day between his Death and Resurrection;) And it is the same in
sense, with what he says Ioh. 2. 19. Destroy this Temple, (speaking of his
Body) And in Three days I will raise it up, (...), or as Mat. 26. 61. (...),
that is, the Third day after (inclusively.) And Mat. 27. 63. they tell Pilate,
This Deceiver said, After Three days I will rise again, (...) (meaning thereby
the Third day after, inclusively,) and therefore they pray, that the Sepulcher
may be made sure till the Third day. Whereas, if (as our Author would reckon
upon his fingers) by after Three days; were to be understood, when Three whole
days after that should be past, they need not set their Watch before the Fourth
or Fifth day. Thus Christ's Ascension is said to be Forty days after his
Resurrection, (speaking of a Scripture Computation, in Scripture Language,)
which in our ordinary manner of Speech is but Nine and Thirty. For
Ascension-Thursday (if Easter Day be not reckoned for one) is but 39 days after
Easter. Upon a like Account that Christ tells us Mat. 12. 40. that as Jonas was
three days and three nights in the Whales Belly, so shall the Son of Man be
three days and three nights in the heart of the Earth. Not Three whole days,
and Three whole nights; but, till the Third was begun. For by day and night is
here understood the (...), or what we now call the Artificial day, consisting
of 24 hours, day and night: and till such Third day (or (...)) was begun,
Christ rested in the Grave; otherwise, though he were in the Grave (part of)
Three days, yet but Two nights.

So Luke 2. 21. When Eight days were accomplished ( for the Circumcision of the
Child) they called his name Jesus; that is, upon the Eighth day, inclusively;
reckoning the day of Birth for the first, and the day of Circumcision for the
last (of the Eight days) which with Six whole days between make Eight.
(Whereas, if Eight whole days had been fully past, Christ had been Circumcised
the Tenth day.) The Sense being the same with that concerning John the Baptist,
Luke 1. 59. On the Eighth day they came to Circumcise the Child. So here, After
Eight days, that is on the Eighth day, or after the Eighth day was come. And
this, I think, is the constant Language of Scripture every where. And his
Objection needs no other Answer, but, that St. John did not speak English.

And I cannot but think (however he please thus to object) that himself does
believe this, after Eight days, to be here meant of the First day of the next
Week, (and he should have been so candid as to own it.) And that post Octo dies
is the same in sense with Octo post diebus, that is, the Eighth day after, (
reckoning the present day for one,) and that it is so to be understood in this
place. We should not, in a serious Enquiry, press what possibly might be, but
what we truly think is the meaning. A Lawyer at the Bar may fairly propose For
his Client, what possibly may be the Sense of such or such a Clause. But a
Judge on the Bench (and a Counselor, To his Client,) is to consider what
really Is the Sense of Words in question. I dare appeal to himself, whether (in
his own thoughts) he do not think after Eight days, here to signify the same,
as after Eight days were accomplished, Luke 2. 21. And, if so, then this is
rather to Wrangle, than to Dispute fairly.

Before I dismiss this place, it is not amiss to take more particular notice
about what time it was that Mary Magdalen and the other Women came to the
Sepulcher on the day of Christ's Resurrection. It Is said Luke 23. 55, 56. When
they beheld the Sepulcher and how the body was laid, (on the sixth day day at
night whereon he was Crucified) they returned and prepared Spices and
Ointments, and rested the Sabbath day according to the Commandment. And in the
next words Luke 24. 1. Now upon the First day of the Week, very early in the
morning, they came to the Sepulcher bringing the Spices which they had
prepared. In Mat. 28. 1. In the end of the Sabbath when it began to dawn toward
the First day of the Week. In Mark 14. 15. When the Sabbath was past, very
early in the morning the First day of the Week, they came to the Sepulcher at
the rising of the Sun, or by Sunrising. And Ioh. 20. 1. The First day of the
Week, early, when it was yet dark, they came to the Sepulcher. (Perhaps all the
Women did not come just at the same time, but were all there by Sunrising.)
But the Body was raised before they came, as is agreed by all the Evangelists.

Where I observe First that the Sabbath, according to their Account, did not
end till toward the morning of the next day. The end of the Sabbath, or when
the Sabbath was past, was early in the morning, before the Sunrising, while
the day did begin to dawn, and while it was yet dark. Very early indeed in the
morning, but yet not till morning, (not in the Evening over night.) And
therefore (without disputing how the day was reputed to begin in the time of
Moses) it is manifest that, at this time, as well the Sabbath as other days was
by them reckoned not from (the beginning of) the Evening to (the beginning of)
the Evening, but rather (according to the Romans account) from Midnight to
Midnight.

For it is manifest that it was toward Evening of the Sixth day before the
Crucifixion was over; For it was some while after the Ninth hour (that is,
after our Three a Clock) that he cried with a loud voice and gave up the Ghost,
Mark 15. 34, 37. And it was yet later, when they brake the Legs of the two
Thieves, (that they might not remain on the Cross upon the Sabbath) but only
pierced his side, because he was already dead, Joh. 19. 31, 32, 33, 34. And
later yet when Joseph of Arimathea begged his Body and buried it. For it is
expressly said, When Even was come there came a rich man of Arimathea, named
Joseph, and begged the body of Jesus, and when he had taken the Body* he
wrapped it in a clean linen Cloth and buried it in his own new Tomb, Mat. 27.
57, 58, 59, 60. Mark 15. 42, 43, 44, 45, 46. Luk 23. 51, 52, 53.

But, though Even were come before this time, yet the Sabbath was not begun;
for so it follows, Luke 23. 54. that day was the Preparation and the Sabbath
drew on.

And after this, ver. 55, 56. the Women who beheld the Sepulcher, and how the
Body was laid, returned and prepared Spices and Ointments (the same night) but
rested the Sabbath day according to the Commandment; And by this time it must
needs be pretty late at night; while yet the Sabbath was not begun. That is, I
suppose not till Midnight of the Sixth day.

Nor was the Sabbath ended when Evening began on the Seventh day. For if so,
the Women might that night have brought and applied their Spices and Ointments
which they had prepared the night before. For they had as much time so to do,
after the Evening was begun that night (if the Sabbath were now ended) as they
had, to do what was done the night before; after that Evening was then begun.
Nothing hindered them but because the Sabbath was not yet done, and they were
to rest the Sabbath day according to the Commandment. But, so soon as well they
could, when the Sabbath was ended, they came early, the next morning, while it
was yet dark. And might as well have come the night before, if the Sabbath had
ended when the evening began.

I add farther, If the Sabbath had ended at the evening of the Seventh day, and
the First day of the Week had then begun (as this Author would have it,) Christ
might have risen that night (for it would then have been the Third day,) and
not have stayed in the grave (for the third day) till the next morning, which
yet we know he did.

It Is manifest therefore that the First day of the Week did begin from the
middle of the night, not from the First Evening of the Seventh day. And that
Christ was risen very early in the morning of that First day while it was yet
dark.

We are next to Consider how long that First day lasted. After Christ was risen
early in the morning while it was yet dark, (how early that was, we cannot
tell, but it was in the Morning, not over night;) he appeared first to Mary
Magdalen, and the Women who went to the Sepulcher; they, as they were directed,
carried news of it to the Disciples; and when they were going, (Mat. 28. 11.)
the Watch came into the City and showed to the Highpriests the things which
were done; who, calling a Council, gave the Soldiers Money to say, His
Disciples came and stole him away while they were asleep; undertaking to secure
them in case the Governor should come to hear it.

Upon this news being brought by the Women to the Disciples, Two of them, from
the rest, went to the Sepulcher to enquire into the business; and brought an
account of it to the rest, who were Astonished at it.

And all this happened before the Two Disciples began their Journey to Emmaus;
for they discoursed of it by the way, and told it to Jesus who fell into their
Company, Luk 24. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Now their Journey from Jerusalem to
Emmaus, was about Threescore Furlongs, ver. 13. which our Author rightly
computes to be about Seven miles and an half, of our miles; which they
Traveled on foot, for it is said they walked, (Mark 16. 12.) and Jesus in their
company, Preaching to them (out of Moses and the Prophets) the Doctrine of
Christ's Death and Resurrection.

When they came near to Emmaus it was toward Evening, and the day far spent,
(Luke 24. 29.) they did there abide for some time, and Jesus with them,
continuing to Preach on the same Subject, and was at length known to them by
breaking of Bread, ver. 30. 35. After which they returned to Jerusalem and told
these things to the Disciples then gathered together, ver. 33. By which time
(having now walked another Seven miles and an half) we may reasonably suppose
it to be pretty late at night; For, when they first approached to Emmaus it was
then so late, as that it was not thought convenient (unless upon some such
great occasion) to Travel further, ver. 28.

Yet, after they were come back to Jerusalem, Christ then appeared himself to
the Disciples, blessing them, reproaching their unbelief, confirming their
Faith, giving them Instructions, and Commission for Preaching the Gospel, and
Planting the Christian Church. And it was yet but the same day at evening,
being the First day of the Week, (Joh. 20. 19.) on which he rose: but, now late
at night, when the doors were shut; that is, (if I mistake not) so late as that
it was time to shut up doors as men use to do toward bedtime. Not as if
Christ came in through the Keyhole (any more than did the Two Disciples that
came from Emmaus) or did Penetrate the doors, (as the Papists would have us
think in favor of their Transubstantiation;) For they were not so shut but
that they could, be opened again (upon occasion) to let him in (as they had
been to let in those Two that came from Emmaus)* as well as to let in Peter
(late at night) Act. 12. 16.

So that from very early in the Morning while it was dark, till very late night
and about Midnight, was the same day, the first day of the Week. It Is manifest
therefore that about our Saviors time, according to the Computation of the New
Testament, both the Jews and the Four Evangelists did reckon their days from
midnight to midnight. And if they did not so reckon* Christ could not be said
( Mat. 12. 40.) to be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.
For it was Evening, when* Joseph begged the Body of Jesus, and later yet before
he had buried it, and yet this must be reckoned part of the Sixth day, olse he
had not been three days in the Grave, or heart of the earth.

And I think they were so reckoned in the times of the Old Testament also.
Which though it be not so much to the present purpose, yet (if you will pardon
this digression) I will tell you why I think so. It is I know an Opinion taken
up by some (and I find it is grown pretty current even amongst Learned men)
that the Jews in the time of the Old Testament did reckon their days from
Evening to Evening (whether they mean from Sunset to Sunset, or from Six a
Clock to Six a Clock, I cannot tell, nor perhaps are they all agreed as to that
point.) But I take it to be a mistake; which being at first taken up without
sufficient ground has since passed (without further examination) from hand to
hand.

We find Exodus 12. 6. the Passover was to be killed in the First month, on the
Fourteenth day in the Evening; which I think is agreed by all to be the Evening
at the end of the Fourteenth day, (not that at the end of the Thirteenth,) for
the next morning was the Fifteenth day; which evening therefore belonged to the
Fourteenth day.

But it is noted in the Margin of our Bibles, that it is, in the Hebrew,
between the two Evening*s. You Will ask perhaps, what are those two Evenings: I Will
tell you what I think they are.

The word Day, you know, is taken in a double sense. Sometimes for (what we
call) the Natural day (as it is contradistinguished to night) from Sunrising
to Sunsetting: sometimes for (what we call) the Artificial day (or (...)) so
as to take in both day and night. Our Savior tells us there are Twelve hours
in the day; meaning the Natural day. But in the Artificial day (of which we are
now speaking) there be Four and Twenty hours. Some please to call that the
Natural day, which I call the Artificial (for all do not use the words in the
same sense) But that matters not, so long as we understand one another.

Now by the word Evening is understood the end of the day. Which, as to the
Natural day, is at Sunset; but as to the Artificial day, it is (I think) at
Midnight. And consequently, between the two Evenings, is as much as to say,
after Sunset, and before Midnight. And this is what, in our Language, we
commonly call the Evening, which is in the Hebrew between the two Evenings,
(that is, between the end of the Natural day, and the end of the Artificial
day:) and within this time was the Passover to be Killed, Roasted and Eaten;
Nothing of it was to remain till the Morning; that is, not after Midnight; for
as soon as Midnight is past Morning begins. And within this time all Leaven
was to be put away; that is before the Midnight of the Fourteenth day. Which
is so fair an account of it, as that we need not scruple to embrace it. And it
was the Fifteenth day, that was the first day of the Feast of Unlevened bread;
(all Leven being put away before Midnight,) and this Fifteenth day was to be
kept as a Sabbath, and a Holy Feast to the Lord, ver. 14. (on what ever day of
the Week it chanced to fall.) And so was the One and Twentieth day, which was
the last of those Seven days: Seven days shall ye eat Unleavened bread; even
the first day ye shall put away (or shall have put away) leaven out of your
house. And in the First day there shall be an Holy Convocation, and in the
Seventh day there shall be an Holy Convocation; no manner of Work shall be done
in them, save that which every man shall eat; (that is they are to be kept as a
Sabbath or day of Holy Rest;) ver. 15, 16. From the Fourteenth day at evening
till the One and Twentieth day at evening, ver. 18. that is, from the
Fourteenth day at Midnight, till the One and Twentieth at Midnight. And in
like manner, Lev. 23. 32. from Even to Even, or Night to Night, that is, from
Midnight to Midnight; or from the end of one Evening to the end of the next
Evening. So in Levit. 23. 5. and Numb. 28. 16, 17. In the Fourteenth day of the
First month is the Passover of the Lord; and in the fifteenth day of this
month is the feast; Seven days shall unleavened bread be eaten, etc. Where it
is manifest that the fourteenth day which is the Lords Passover, is another
day from the fifteenth which is the first day of the Feast. For I will pass
through the land of Egypt (says God) this night; (that is the night of the
Fourteenth day) and will smite all the first born in the land of Egypt, Ex. 12.
12. And what time of the night it was, we are told ver. 28. And it came to pass
at Midnight the Lord smote all the first born of the land of Egypt. And to the
same purpose Moses tells Pharaoh, chap. 11. 4, 5, 6, 7, Thus says the Lord,
About Midnight will I go out into the midst of Egypt, And the first born of
the land of Egypt shall die, from the first born of Pharaoh, etc. that ye may
know that the Lord has put a difference between the Egyptians and Israel. So
that the fourteenth day, which was the Lords Passover continued till the
Midnight of that day; and then began the fifteenth day which was the first day
of the Feast. Than which I think nothing can be more clear. And Number. 33. 3. The
fifteenth day of the first month is the morrow after the Passover. In like
manner, Deuteronomy. 16. 6. Thou shall Sacrifice the Passover at even, at the going
down of the Sun, (that is, after the going down of the Sun, or when the Sun is
gone down) at the season that thou came forth out of Egypt, which was about
Midnight, Ex. 12. 21. Ex. 11. 4.

What he offers from Genesis 1. 5. is easily answered. The evening and the morning
were the first day, (and so of the other days;) Whence he would have it
thought, that the day is to begin at the beginning of the Evening. Or (as the
Margin tells us it is in the Hebrew) the evening was, and the morning was, the
first day. Or, there was evening, and there was morning, day one, (for in such
order the words stand in the Hebrew.) Or, and was evening, and was morning, day
one. That is, there was in the first day, (and so in the rest) evening and
morning; or darkness and light; And the Dark is put first, because (beginning
the day from Midnight) the dark is before the Light. And by day one, is meant
the first day.

And it was moreover very agreeable so to reckon. For, supposing Paradise the
principal seat of Action; the Sun may reasonably be supposed to be Created (in
the middle of the Fourth day, Genesis 1. 16.) in the Meridian of that place, (as
in its greatest Splendour) or, if not in the Meridian of that place, it must
needs be in the Meridian of some place: and wherever that be, the day (of 24
hours) being there half past, it must have begun at Midnight foregoing. And I
doubt not but a Child born on Saturday night at Ten a Clock, was to be
Circumcised the next Saturday (as being the Eighth day,) not on the Sunday
after.

I have insisted the longer on this, because I find him afterward moving
another question about what time the Sabbath is to begin and end, and lays
great stress upon it, as we shall see anon.

Of which I think we need not be further solicitous than to begin and end this
day, according as other days are accounted to begin and end in the places where
we live. I do not think the Fourth Commandment to descend to these Punctilio's.

But, if he think it necessary to be more curious in it; I take it to be very
plain from what I have said, that at the time of Christ's Death and
Resurrection, it was accounted to begin very early in the morning, while it was
dark, and continue till very late at night, according as we now account our
days, from Midnight to Midnight. But I go on.

We have now found our Saviors Example, as to the two First Sundays from his
Resurrection (if at least their first day of the Week be our Sunday) employing
the day in Religious Exercises and Sabbatical Affairs with his Disciples. How
many more Sundays he so spent with them we cannot tell. Which Examples of his
Two first, with their Imitation of him in others after, (of which we are to
speak by and by,) and the Churches practice ever since, looks so like the
Celebration and Institution of a Christian Sabbath, or day of Holy Rest and
Religious Exercise, as that we may warrantably do the like. I am sure it is
more than he can show for the Saturday Sabbath in Genesis 2. 3. Save that men are
apt to think a small thing an Institution and Ius Divinum for what they fansy;
but, as to what they do not, nothing will serve but Full Express Words.

We have next clear Evidence, of a like Practice (consonant to this Example) in
Act. 20. 7. On the first day of the Week* when the Disciples came together to
break bread, Paul Preached unto them ready to depart on the morrow, and
continued his Speech until Midnight. Which is so plain that he is much put to
his shifts to avoid it. That here is a Religious Assembly of the Disciples, he
does not deny; Paul was Preaching very late, even till Midnight, and they met
to break bread, which I think is generally agreed by Interpreters, to signify
the Celebration of the Lords Supper; and I know not well what clearer Character
we need demand of a Religious meeting for Worship, suitable to the Work of a
Sabbath or Holy Rest. And it was (...), which I think he will not deny (though
he seem to cavil at it) to signify, on the first day of the Week. But he
excepts, that the word (...) here translated Preached, is elsewhere rendered
Reasoned or Discoursed. Be it so, and if that word will please him better, let
it be so here; he reasoned, discoursed, treated, or did hold forth; that I
think will not alter the case; and he continued, or held on ((...)) this
Discourse, this Speech, this Sermon, ((...) Sermonem) till Midnight; (he held
on this holding forth till Midnight) which I take to be the same with what we
now call Preaching, (or very like it;) 'twas a long continued discourse to a
Congregation met together on a Religious account for the Service of God. But
let it be called (if he please) a Religious Discourse of the Holy Apostle to a
Congregation of Christians met together for such a purpose.

He would then have it thought a favor or condescension to admit this breaking
of bread, to be meant of the Lords Supper; and not barely a Common eating. But
since he does not deny it, we will accept the favor and take it so to be;
(...), The Disciples being congregated or assembled to break Bread* It Is (...),
The Disciples; (not (...) some of them:) and they were (perhaps not every one
but the generality of them, as at other meetings) (...) congregated or
assembled; and it seems to be a good full Congregation, by Eutychus's being
mounted to the third loft (whatever he meant by that third loft, though but the
third scaffold,) so high that by a fall from thence he was in great danger of
being killed. Now it is not likely that such a Congregation of Christians were
thus assembled for common eating.

He says, Paul was to go away on the Morrow. True; But it is not said they came
together to take leave of Paul; but, came together to Break Bread. Paul's going
away on the Morrow, might be the reason (and I believe was) why they continued
there so long: but the End for which they came together, was to Break Bread:
and the occasion of their so coming, because it was the first day of the Week:
On which, it should seem, they were wont so to do for that end. And if he
heartily* consider it, methinks* it should seem so to him. Paul came to them at
Troas in five days, where he abode seven days: And on the first day of the week
when the Disciples came together to break Bread, Paul preachea to them. Does
not the fair prospect of the place import thus much, that they were then met to
break Bread, as being the first day of the week? What other occasion was there
of mentioning what day of the Week it was? It had been otherwise a fairer
transition to have said, He staid there Seven days, and on the Seventh day (or
the last of those Seven) the Disciples came together to take leave of Paul and
Sup with him over night, who was to depart on the morrow. Now if it had been
said on the Seventh day (though meaning but the last of those Seven) it would
no doubt have been urged as a great argument of Paul's keeping a Seventh day
Sabbath, and the Disciples with him; not as a Jewish but as a Christiam
Assembly; for breaking of bread (which was a Christian not a Jewish Service;)
For then, breaking of bread, would certainly have been the Lords Supper: (But
because it was on the first day of the Week) it must now be but common eating,
to take leave of Paul* and to Sup with him; as (he tells us p. 57.) Friends
commonly do (when a Minister or any other special Acquaintance intends to take
a Journey in the morning) to sup with him over night. But if he thinks this to
be all which is there meant by the Disciples coming together on the first day
of the Week to Break Bread; he must excuse me if I cannot be of his Opinion.

But because he is content to admit (upon some terms) their meeting might be
upon a Religious account, for the Lords Supper (as no doubt it was) I shall
press him no further therein: but accept of his condescension.

When he tells us, that (...) is Greek for one, and therefore (...) may as well
be rendered One day of the Week, as the First day of the Week: Surely he is not
in earnest. Such trifling does more hurt than help his cause. No doubt, but,
when ever they met* it was one day of the Week, we need not be told it; nor
need the word Week be added, he might as well have said one day; nor need he
have said so much* But this Author cannot think (nor does he) that (...) does
any where signify other than the first day of the Week. In the whole story of
Christ's Resurrection, and what followed on that day in all the Four
Evangelists, we have no other word for it but (...), nor have we any other word
for it (that I know of) there or any where else. I do not know that it is any
where called (...). Such shifting does not look well.

It Is somewhat like the Story of a man who bought a Horse for Five Pounds to be
paid the next day. And accordingly on the next day he sent Five Pounds of
Candles. Perhaps (in the Bargain) it was not said expressly (in words at length)
Five Pounds of Lawful Money of England. But, by common intendment, it must be
so understood. (And an honest English Jury* upon a Trial, would so Find it.)

The Latin word Pridie, is a Derivative (or Compound rather) from prae, prior;
and Postridie from post, posterior; and accordingly (in Latin) pridie
Calendarum, and postridie Calendarum must signify a day before, and a day after
the Calends. But can any man think it is meant of any day? No, but the next day
before, and the next day after.

So if we say, Christ was Crucified one day before the Sabbath, and Rose again
one day after the Sabbath. This one day is the next day. And so any man who
has not a mind to Cavil, will understand it. And so (...), one day after the
Sabbath, must needs be understood of the next day after the Sabbath: Nor is it
ever used in any other sense. If it were to be understood of any indefinitely,
it should be (...) some day after the Sabbath, not (...) one day after.

But the most pleasant shift of all, is, when he would have us think that this
Evening (which is called the first day of the Week) was the Evening after the
Seventh day, that is Saturday night; and the next morning (when Paul was to go
away) was Sunday morning (and he to travel that Sunday:) And that the Evening
of Saturday was the beginning of Sunday, and was therefore called the First day
of the Week. Because it is said Genesis 1. the evening and the morning was the
First day, (and so of the rest,) and therefore the evening was the beginning of
every day. See what* shift a man will make, rather than quit an Opinion he has
once taken up.

We are taught that on the Fourteenth day of the first month at even the
Passover was to be killed. Does he think that this Fourteenth day at even was
the end of the Thirteenth day, the Fourteenth day then beginning? I think every
body else takes it to be the evening at the end of the fourteenth day, and the
Fifteenth day (on the morrow) was the first day of the Feast of Unleavened
Bread. For though it were the fourteenth day at evening, yet it was the
fourteenth day, not the fifteenth.

And Luke 23. 54. the evening after our Saviors Crucifixion, on the sixth day,
when it was late at night (as was showed before, and must be, according to the
story of what had been done before that time) was yet but the preparation, not
the Sabbath, the Seventh day being not yet begun. For so we have it, it was the
preparation, and the Sabbath drew on. And the Women were then preparing their
Spices and Ointments, yet rested the Sabbath day according to the Commandment;
So that the Sabbath day was not yet begun; nor was it ended when the evening of
the next day began, but on the morning of the day following* as was showed
above.

And (as we showed at large before) the first day of the Week (on which Christ
rose) began very early in the morning while it was dark, and continued (the
same day) till very late at night. And this is the constant Language of the New
Testament every where.

So that when the Congregation of Christians, Acts 20. 7. did on the first day
of the week assemble to break Bread, and Paul Preached to them, continuing his
Sermon till Midnight; this must needs be on what we call Sunday; and the
morning following was Monday morning; not Sunday morning as this Author would
have it.

It Is manifest therefore, that there was a Religious Assembly, of the Christian
Congregation at Troas, on the First day of the Week, for celebration of the
Lords Supper, and Preaching; and Paul with them. Which I take to be the
celebration of a Christian Sabbath.

However, this (he says) is but One Instance. True, this is but one. (But we
have heard of more before, and shall hear of more by and by.) But this one is
more than he can show for more than Two Thousand Five Hundred Years (from God's
resting on the Seventh day Genesis 2. 3. till after Israel was come out of Egypt
Ex. 16.) during which time he would have us think the Seventhday Sabbath was
constantly observed. And if he could show any one such instance (of Enoch,
Noah, Abraham, or other,) where such a Religious Assembly, for the Worship of
God, was held on the seventh day in course from the Creation; he would think
his point well proved, though no more were said of it than is of this.

Whereas now as to the time from thence to the Flood, he brings no other proof,
but that Abel, and Enoch, and Noah were good men (as no doubt they were) and
therefore it is to be presumed they kept a Sabbath; and that upon the seventh
day. Which is to beg the question, not to prove it.

From thence till Isreal's going into Egypt, all that he brings to prove this
matter of fact is but that of Genesis 13. 6. where (speaking of Abram and Lot,
with the multitude of their Cattle) it is said, the land was not able to bear
them that they might Dwell together; for their substance was great so that they
could not Dwell together; and there was a strife between the Herd-men of Abrams
Cattle, and the Herd-men of Lots Cattle, etc. They could not Dwell together,
that is (says he) they could not Rest together, that is, they could not keep a
Sabbath together; therefore (he concludes) they did use to keep a sabbath; and
that Sabbath was the seventh day in course from the Creation. And is not this a
goodly proof? I should think (if he would put a stress on the word Rest) it
should rather signify, they could not live quietly together without their
herd-mens quarrelling about their Pasture; for so it follows in the next words,
there was a strife between their herds-men.

From thence till after their coming out of Egypt, he brings no other proof but
that of Ex. 5. 4, 5. Where, when Moses and Aaron had been pressing Pharaoh to
let Israel go three days Journey into the Wilderness, to keep a Feast and
Sacrifice to the Lord their God; Pharaoh replies, Wherefore do ye Let (or
hinder) the People from their Work; you make them rest from their Burdens, or
you take them off from their Work; that is, says he, you make them keep a
Sabbath. For the Word or Verb there Translated you make them Rest is, (he tells
us) a derivative from another Verb which signifies to Rest, from which Verb the
word Sabbath is also derived: They did therefore Rest (says he) that is keep a
Sabbath, and that Sabbath was every Week, and it was on the seventh day in
course from the Creation.

Alas! how little do either or both of these places prove, of what he would
have to be granted him thence! He tells us sometimes there were other Sabbaths,
besides that of the seventh day; I am sure there were other Restings.

If Moses and Aaron had desired Pharaoh to excuse them from their Work one day
in seven, that on such day they might serve the Lord their God; it would have
looked like an Argument. But when it is, to go three days into the Wilderness
to keep a Feast to the Lord; what is this to a Weekly Sabbath?

This Seventh-day sabbath, so runs in the mind of this Author, that if any
where he can lay hold of the word Rest, it must presently prove a
Seventh-day Sabbath. Else who would have thought, that because Abram and Lot
could not dwell quietly together; therefore they must needs keep a Sabbath, and
that upon the seventh day, and in course from the Creation? And the like of the
Israelites in Egypt, because Moses and Aaron are said to hinder them from their
work; Therefore they did constantly keep a weekly Sabbath, and that upon the
seventh day, in course from the Creation.

He might have to better purpose, alleged Pharaoh's seven fat kine and seven
lean ones, and the seven full Ears of Corn, and seven empty; for here we have
the number seven signalized; only these were Seven Years, not Seven Days; and
the like of Nebuchadnezzar's being seven years turned out to the Beasts of the
field, Dan. 4. 25, 32, 33. Or that of the Clean Beasts and Fowls coming into
the Ark by sevens, Genesis 7. 2, 3.

But, what is more to his purpose (and which he should not have missed) is that
of Genesis 7. 4. and Genesis 8. 10, 12. where we have the interval of seven days
particularly mentioned; For yet seven days, and I will cause it to rain upon
the Earth, etc. (Chap. 7. 4.) where God gives to Noah just a Weeks warning of
the time when the Flood should begin, during which interval (if those days were
Sabbath days) he might remove himself and what was necessary into the Ark
before the next Sabbath. And, toward the end of the Flood, Noah sends out the
Dove, Chap. 8. 8. And he staid seven days, and again sent forth the Dove, ver.
10. And he staid yet other seven days, and sent forth the Dove, etc. ver. 12.
Where we have the Dove sent out three times, just at seven days distance. And
how do we know but that these three days were three Sabbath days? Which though
it be not a conclusive Argument, is better than any that he brings. For here we
have three Intervals of seven days, in these two Chapters.

But if a Weekly Sabbath were then kept, it is very strange that we should have
no intimation of any such thing in the books of Moses (before Israel's coming
out of Egypt.) And much more, that there is nothing of it in the Book of Job.
And, that none of his friends (amongst the many charges they bring against him)
should never object his Neglect of the Sabbath, or want of due observance
thereof. Which being so plausible an objection, it seems more likely, that a
Sabbath was not then wont to be observed: for which he has so very little to
show. And by what we have Job 1. 4. It should seem that Job's Seven Sons kept
Feasting (each in his own day) for Seven days together; without any mention of
a Sabbath intervening. Nor was it a Religious Feast but a Feast of mirth and
jollity, such as made Job suspicious lest they might sin and curse God in their
heart, v. 5. And therefore he offered propitiatory Sacrifices for them
continually, or (as the Margin tells us it is in the Hebrew) all the days, that
is every of these Seven days.

As little a matter will serve his turn to prove ( p. 43.) that Christ's
Ascension was, and his coming to Judgment is to be, on a Saturday, or
Seventh-day Sabbath: Because it is said Acts 1. 12. that Mount Olivet (whence
he ascended) is, from Jerusalem, a Sabbath Days Journey.

But he tells us that by no account that he can make* can he assign the
Ascension on the First day, (No more can I.) But what then?

Well! But why upon a Saturday rather than a Sunday? Because he observes, that
after Christ's Ascension from Mount Olivet, it is said, Then they returned to
Jerusalem, from Mount Olivet, which is from Jerusalem a Sabbath Days Journey.
Well! what of this? He cannot see why it was expressly said, that it was but a
Sabbath Days Journey from Jerusalem, but because it was the Sabbath Day.

Perhaps I may show him another reason as likely as it. If the word then do not
there signify the same day (but only at large, after his Ascension*) this is
nothing to the purpose. But admitting that by then be meant the same day; the
connection runs fairly thus, After his Ascension they returned from thence to
Jerusalem the same day, for it was ((...)) but a little way off, about a
Sabbath days Journey. Which, I think, is a fair account of the place*
Especially since we know otherwise, that it was not upon (...) Account (as he
speaks) will serve as well for the one as for the other. But, indeed, for
neither.

But how does this concern his Coming to Judgment? Yes, Because it is there
said ( ver. 11.) He shall come in like manner ((...)) as ye have seen him go
into Heaven. And (because this Author fancies) he did Ascend on a Sabbath day,
therefore (he fancies also) he shall on a Sabbath day come again. I see a Weak
Argument, with a strong Fansy will go far.

But to prove his Ascension to be on the Sabbath (besides this, of a
Sabbath Days Journey) he adds further, That Christ and his Disciples were then
Assembled, and that Christ Preached. Well! And why may we not as well conclude
that the day of his Resurrection was also a Sabbath? For Christ and his
Disciples were then assembled, (first at Emmaus, and then at Jerusalem,) and
Christ did then also (at both places) Preach to them, and the substance of his
Preaching was much the same, (as will appear by comparing Luk 24. with Acts 1.)
and did then also Celebrate the Lords Supper. And eight days after, Christ was
again Assembled with the Disciples, and Preached to them, on the same day of
the Week. If Christ's Presence and Preaching will prove the Ascension day to be
a Sabbath, why should it not as well prove the Resurrection day to be a
Sabbath? the only difference is, That (he thinks) serves his turn, But this
makes against him.

And why should it not also be thought a Sabbath, Acts 20. For Paul and the
Disciples were then Assembled; and they were assembled to break Bread; and Paul
there Preached to them. And all these Assemblies were on the first day of the
Week. And they seem to me a much stronger proof of the First day, (the day of
his Resurrection) being a Sabbath, than that the Ascension day was so.

And the Preaching which our Author here mentions as on the day of Ascension,
seems to me rather to have been on that of the Resurrection. For St. Luke in
the beginning of this Chapter of Acts 1. seems to give a short repetition of
what himself had delivered more at large Luke 24. And gives an account not only
of what happened on the day of Ascension, (though he close with it) but of what
happened during the forty days from his Resurrection to that time. And this
Preaching, I take to be that mentioned Luke 24. on the day of his Resurrection.

But (after all) this is but a Whimsey, (what he tells us of Christ's Ascension
on a Seventh-day Sabbath.) For it is very plain that his Ascension was neither
on a seventh day, nor on a first, but on a fifth day of the Week. For it is
plainly said, Acts 1. 3. That he showed himself alive after his Passion, being
seen of them Forty days, (that is, he was seen of them at times, not
constantly, for the space of Forty days) whereof that of his Resurrection was
the first, and that of his Ascension was the last. And if that were Sunday,
this must be Thursday. He may tell it upon his fingers (as he speaks p. 5.) if
he please.

But though our Saviors Ascension was not on the seventh day of the Week (in
observance of the Seventh-day Sabbath, or in confirmation thereof:) Yet the
mission of the Holy Ghost (according as on the First day of the Week, the day
of his Resurrection, he had promised. Luk 24. 49.) was on the first day of the
Week fulfilled also, as appears Acts 2. When the day of Pentecost was fully
come, that is, the Fiftieth day (for so Pentecost signifies in Greek) they
were all with one accord in one place (that is, they were unanimously
assembled) and suddenly there came a sound from Heaven, as of a rushing mighty
Wind, and filled the house, where they were sitting; And there appeared to them
cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them (that is, at
least, upon each of the Apostles,) and they were all filled with the Holy
Ghost, and began to speak with other Tongues as the Spirit gave them utterance.
Which I take to be a further instance, (if our Author will not allow it to be
called a Sabbath) at lest of a Religious Assembly for the Worship of God; (And
if it had been on the seventh day, how great a proof would this have been with
him for a Seventh-day Sabbath.) This I take to be a Christian Sabbath, and
within the prospect of the Fourth Commandment. And though it be not expressly
called a Sabbath (to avoid confusion or ambiguity, because the word Sabbath in
common speech was then appropriated to the Jewish Sabbath,) yet it is the same
thing.

And if he doubt whether the Feast of Pentecost were on the First day of the
Week, as was that of the Resurrection; he may be satisfied from Levit. 23. 15.
where that Feast is appointed. After mention made of the Passover, (ver. 5.
etc.) Moses proceeds to that of the Wave-offering, v. 10, 11. When ye be come
into the land which I give unto you, and shall reap the harvest thereof; then
shall ye bring a sheaf of the first fruits of your harvest unto the Priest, and
he shall Wave the sheaf before the Lord to be accepted for you; on the morrow
after the Sabbath the Priest shall wave it.

Whether by the Sabbath here mentioned be meant the Weekly Sabbath, or the
first day of the Feast of Unleavened-Bread, is not material; because, in that
year whereof we are speaking, this first day of the Feast was on the Weekly
Sabbath, (as is manifest from the story of Christ's Crucifixion, which was on
the Sixth day of the Week, and the next day (being the Seventh day) was the
Feast of the Passover) and the morrow after this Sabbath, was the day of
Christ's Resurrection, as well as of the Wave-offering. And then he proceeds,
ver. 15, 16, to the Feast of Pentecost, or the Feast of Weeks. Ye shall count
unto you from the morrow after the Sabbath, from the day that ye brought the
sheaf of the Waveoffering, seven Sabbaths, shall be complete, even unto the
morrow after the seventh Sabbath, shall ye number Fifty days* (inclusively
taken, as the manner is in Scripture reckoning, and must needs be so here.) It
was called the Feast of Pentecost, or the Feast of Weeks (as Deuteronomy. 16. 9, 10.)
which Feast of Pentecost was the morrow after the Sabbath; on a first day of
the Week.

And on this first day of the Week, ( the morrow after the seventh day Sabbath)
here was a solemn Assembly for Religious Worship, and a very large one, both of
Jews and Gentiles out of every nation under Heaven, Parthians, Medes, Elamites,
etc. And this solemnized by a Miraculous Effusion of the Holy Ghost, in the
gift of Tongues* For we all hear (say those of that great assembly) every one
in our own Tongue where in we were born the wonderful Works of God, ver. 6, 7,
8, 9, 10, 11, 12. With a long Sermon of Peter's on that occasion* Which I take
to be another celebration of the First day Sabbath; and a very eminent one.

We are to observe also, that in some of the places alleged to this purpose,
though but single instances, there is an intimation of a frequent usage. As in
that Act. 20. ^. On the first day of the week, the disciples being assembled to
break bread, Paul preached, etc. Is a fair intimation, that on the first day
they did use so to assemble.

If it were said amongst us, About six a clock; when they were come together
(in the College-Hall) to supper, such a thing happened: Any (unprejudiced)
person would take it for a fair intimation, that they used to suppe about six a
clock. And if this Author could any where find, in the book of Job, that On the
seventh day of the week (from the Creation) when Job and his friends were
assembled for the joint service of God* Bildad spoke thus, etc. He would take
this for a strong proof, that the seventh-day Sabbath was then wont to be
observed. Much stronger than what he allegeth to that purpose; Abram and Lot
had each of them so many Cattle, that they could not dwell or rest) together,
without quarrellings amongst their servants. And that of what Pharaoh said to
Moses and Aaron, Why do you Hinder their work, you make the people Rest from
their burdens?

A like place is that of 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. Nov concerning the Collection for the
Saints, as I have given order to the Churches of Galatia, even so do ye (and
what that was, we are told in the next words,) Upon the first day of the week,
let every one of you lay by him in store as God has prospered him; that there
be no gatherings when I come. (If it had been so said (to (...), to (...), or
to Job, Upon the Seventh day of the week do this or thus) what a strong proof
would this have been for the Observation of a seventh day Sabbath!)

I think it is plain from hence, that the First day of the week, was weekly
observed, and was wont to be so observed, both by the Church of Corinth, and by
the Churches of Galatia. For So Paul does not here advise it, but suppose it,
or take it for granted.

What that order was to the Churches of Galatia our Author says he cannot tell.
(...) thought it had been plain enough: he bids the Corinthians do, as he had
bid the Galatians, that is, on the First day of the Week, etc. What further
order, he had given the Galatians, it is not as to this point necessary for us
to know.

But says he, if they must on that day lay by as God has blessed them, then
they must on that day cast up their accounts, tell their money, reckon their
stock, compute their Expenses, etc. which are not Sabbath Day Works. A wise
objection* As though all this could not as well be done before (so far as is
necessary) and, on Sunday, put so much into the poor man's box (or give to the
Deacons or Collectors) as (upon such account) they should have found fit; like
as is now done in our Churches when there is occasion for such Collections.

Why does he not make the same exception to that of Deuteronomy. 16. 10. concerning
the Feast of Pentecost? where they are to bring a tribute of a
free-will-offering, which (says he) thou shall give unto the Lord thy God, etc.
according as the Lord thy God has blessed thee; Does he think that on the day
of Pentecost (which was to be strictly observed as a Sabbath, a holy
Convocation and no servile work to be done, Lev. 23, 1.) they must cast up
their accounts, tell their money, etc. because they were to offer according as
the Lord has blessed them? I think not*

But here comes in again his former trifling objection of (...), whether it
signify, the first day of the Week? Yet I am very confident, himself does
really believe it does here so signify, and (as to his own thoughts) does not
doubt of it. But perhaps thinks it a piece of wit, or skill in Greek, thus to
object against his own judgment. Yet since he will have it so, (and we must
come again to Child's play,) I will say some what to it.

Whether (...) be good Greek or no, as to the common analogy of that Tongue;
or, what is the reason of that Syntax; I need not trouble my self to enquire,
(because it is nothing to the purpose; for we are not inquiring whether it be
good Greek, but what it here signifies.) There are I presume in all Languages
(by negligence or corruption) some harsh expressions, as to the analogy of the
Language, which yet are allowable by common usage, and well enough understood.

He would think it perhaps a little harsh to say in Greek (...), (that is in
Latin, tres and decimum, quatuor and decimum,) for what we say in English
thirteenth, fourteenth; yet so they speak. And somewhat harsh (...) Rev. 2. 26.
Rev. 3. 21. and (...), Rev. 3. 12. (instead of (...)) yet so it is. And (...),
yet so we find it Rev. 1. 4. And many such may be showed.

In Latin, idcirco, quocirca, posthac, quapropter, controvertor,
paterfamilias, omne genus homines, Aethiops albus dentes, pridie catendas, and
many more, are scarce to be accounted for as regular, save that they are so
used; but, because they are so used; they are accounted elegant enough.

In English; Methinks (for I think,) three pound ten shillings, (for three
pounds, etc.) three foot nine inches, many a one, a few Pottage, and the like,
are scarce regular; yet are so used. When a Merchant marks his Parcels (and so
calls them) number one, number two, etc. he means first and second. So, in the
Year of our Lord one thousand six hundred and ninety one, One thousand six
hundred ninety two, is commonly said; when yet we mean ninety first, ninety
second; so one a clock, two a clock, for the first and second hour after
Twelve. And other the like cases, where the Cardinal number is put for the
Ordinal. As it is also in Genesis 1. The evening, and morning were ( jom echad)
day one; which the Septuagint renders (...), and (...) does there signify
(...). Yet no wise man will cavil as to the sense of such expressions, (what
ever they may do as to the Grammatical construction,) when we know what is
meant by them.

So here; it is true (...) does properly signify one in common construction: but
(...) does never signify other than the first of the week, (either in the New
Testament or any where else,) not any day of the week, any more than one a
clock does signify any other hour than the first after twelve. When a thing is
said to be done at one a clock; he that shall object, this may be any hour, for
every hour is one; would be laughed at. And when a Merchant bids his Prentice
bring him number one, if he bring him what else he pleases (because every
number, is number one, or one number) he deserves to be knocked.

Now when every one knows (who understands any thing of this nature,) that
(...) is the proper name of that day which is next after the Jewish Sabbath, as
much as one a clock is the proper name of that hour which is next after Twelve:
it must either be great ignorance, or somewhat worse so to object. I appeal to
himself, whether ever he met with that name (in any Author) in any other sense.

He seems to take it very unkindly, page 66. of those who should think that, by
son of man should be meant an ordinary Man, in Mar. 2. 27, 28. The Sabbath was
made for Man, and not Man for the Sabbath; Therefore the Son of Man is Lord
also of the Sabbath. Where I think it is plain, that in the former verse ( the
Sabbath was made for Man, etc.) it is manifestly spoken of ordinary Men. And
though in the latter verse, ( the Son of Man is Lord also of the Sabbath,) by
Son of Man I suppose is meant Christ; yet is that Title given also to ordinary
Men, elsewhere, very often. As Job, 25. 6. How much less Man who is a Worm, and
the Son of Man which is a Worm? And Isai. 51. 12. Who art thou that should be
afraid of a Man that shall die, and of the Son of Man which shall be made as
Grass. So Ps. 8. 4. What is Man, that thou art mindful of him, and the Son of
Man that thou visitest him? And to the same purpose, Ps. 144. 3. And (to name
no more) in the Book of Ezekiel, the Prophet Ezekiel is, in that one Book,
called Son of Man, oftener than Christ is so called in the whole Bible. And if
we would argue as he does, we might plausiby object, It might be so meant here;
though I think it is not. But he cannot show that ever the Jewish Sabbath was
called the Lords day (however he thinks it might have been;) nor (though (...)
be Greek for One) that (...) is ever used for other than the first day of the
week, or the next after the Jewish Sabbath. Nor does he think it. Such trifling
(to give it no harder name) may do well enough in Drollery or Burlesque, but
not in a plain honest Enquiry.

But if he would be curious as to the Phrase; it is plain enough that (...) is
not properly the Genitive case governed of (...) For then it should have been
(...) because (...) is of the Neuter Gender. (And it is a mistake therefore when
p. 58. he renders it by One of the Sabbaths, as if it had been (...).) But it is
governed rather of some Praeposition or Particle understood, (as (...) or the
like,) and then, as in Latin pridie calendas (that is, p^io^ dies ante
calendas) is the next day before the Calends. so is (...) (or (...)) the next
day after the Sabbath: The full construction is (...), (the word (...) being
understood in the word (...), and (...) understood in the word (...),) That is
one day after the Sabbath; which being the proper Name of a day, cannot be
meant of any other but the Next day after.

It Is certain therefore that ((...)) the first day of the Week, or the first
day after the Jewish Sabbath, was from the Resurrection of Christ and after,
eminently signalized, as a day of special Observation; 'Twas honored with
Christ's Resurrection on that day; with his first appearance to Mary Magdalen
and the other Women; then, to the Two Disciples going to Emmaus, and his
Religious Assembling with them there; after that, to the Disciples at Jerusalem
and assembling with them the same day; and the whole time of those Assemblings
employed in Religious Exercises, (Preaching, Celebrating the Sacrament,
Instructing and Blessing his Disciples, and giving them Commission for
Preaching the Gospel and Planting the Christian Church.) And again with the
same Disciples on that day sen-night, assembled with them, and in like manner
employed. It was specially signalized also by the Miraculous Effusion of the
Holy Ghost on that day, in a great assembly of Jews and Gentiles on the day of
Pentecost; and the day employed in Preaching and other Religious exercises. It
was observed in like manner at Troas, in preaching the Word, Celebrating the
Sacrament, and other Religious Communion, as things there usual on that day. It
was observed at Corinth, not once only, but as a thing of course; and so
presumed by the Apostle when he gives particular Instructions concerning a
Collection for the Saints to be made weekly on that day. And in like manner in
the Churches of Galatia, with a like direction to them. (And we have no reason
to suspect but that in other Churches also, there was a like custom of
observing that day) And it is the only day of the week (unless the
Seventh-day, in order to the Jewish Sabbath) that is so much as Mentioned by
name after the Resurrection of Christ. (At least I do not at present remember
the Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth, or Sixth day of the week by name so
mentioned.) Now what we have reason to believe was so generally observed after
the Resurrection, by Christ himself (more than once,) by his Apostles, and by
the Christian Churches in their days; we have reason to believe was according
to Christ's direction. For we know very well, that Christ did after his
resurrection give commandments to the Apostles, about things pertaining to the
kingdom of God, and ^^^^ling the Christian Church. What those Commandments
were in particular, we cannot tell; but are to presume that what they did
therein, was pursuant of those commands; and this in particular about observing
the first day of the week, which we call the Christian Sabbath; And which (in
contradistinction to the Jewish Sabbath) is called the Lords day; Rev. 1. 10.
And has accordingly been so called, and so observed ever since. Which being so
practiced by the Apostles, and so continued ever since, I take to be a good
warrant for us to continue it, as a thing agreeable to the Will of God.

As to what he so often objects, that there is no express command thereof
recorded: that is, not such a command as our Author demands. We are not to
prescribe to God in what terms he shall make known his Will, (any more than the
Pharisees, Mat. 16. 4. were to prescribe to Christ what kind of signs he was to
show to testify his authority;) it is sufficient if God do in his own way
intimate what is his Will, though it be it not with the formality of Be it
Enacted. And those who are willing to be taught of God, will be content so to
understand his meaning. An approved Practice in the Worship of God, frequently
Repeated, attested by Miracles, encouraged by Christ's own Example, and that of
the Apostles and the Christian Churches then, and continued in the Christian
Church ever since: Is to me great evidence of the will of God; and that there
was a command for it, though it be not recorded. (Like as I believe that there
was, very early, a command from God, to worship him by Sacrifice, though that
Command be not recorded.

But (to that of its being so observed ever since) he objects, we have nothing
but Tradition, either that the Christian Sabbath has been so observed, or that
it is called the Lord's Day. And Tradition is what he takes great pleasure to
exclaim against; If that be admitted (says he) where shall we stop?

Very well! I am not over fond of laying too great a weight upon Traditions; at
least not on all things that are pretended so to be. But I pray, How can he
tell, otherwise than by Tradition, whether our Saturday or our Sunday, be the
Seventh day in course from the Creation? Or, (if that be too hard a question)
whether of the two is the Seventh day of the Jewish week? I know nothing but
Tradition for it. I cannot remember so long: Nor have I so long kept so strict
account of days as to be sure of it. I trust to the common Computation of the
world, that our Sabbath is a continuation of that Sabbath which the Apostles
kept. And if so, I am safe. If not, I cannot help it. And because I think the
Apostles Sabbath was on the first day of the Jewish week, therefore I think
ours to be so. But if theirs was not, neither is ours.

He would not have that of St. John, Revel. 1. 10. I was in the spirit on the
Lord's Day to be understood of our Sabbath. And why not? He tells us, 1. Some
think it to be Christmass-day; 2. Some think it to be Easter Day; and 3. Some
think it to be the Day of Judgment. And long Discourses we have upon all these.
Well! But does he think it to be meant of any of these? No. Then, to what
purpose are these alleged, in disparagement of the Christian Sabbath?

But he seems to have so great displeasure against the Christian Sabbath, that
whatever he can think of to be Objected (though he do not think it to be true)
he will be sure to Object, (that he may disparage the Day, or perplex the
Argument) as if he were more concerned to beat down the Christian Sabbath, than
to set up the Jewish. Not considering, that, by all this, he is doing their
Work who would have none at all. For they know well that the Jewish Sabbath
has been long since laid aside (without any great fear of returning;) and if
they can but throw off the Christian Sabbath also, it is what they would have.
And it is of a like import what he argues ( p. 84) for coming to the public but
once a day, (not twice as our manner is;) For those who care not to come at
all, if he dispense with them as to the One, they will dispense with themselves
as to the Other meeting.

I should rather think, that, the whole day being due to the Service of God
(public and private) it is to be parcelled out, as to the number and times of
public meeting; as might (according to Christian Prudence) be judged most
conducing (in this or that place) to those ends, and to common Edification; and
that, to make such little Circumstances (otherwise than as they conduce to
those general ends) a matter of Religious Observation, or Divine Institution,
is a like extravagance as that of the Pharisees in laying like weight on their
Traditions, and that of the Papists on their numerous Superstitious Ceremonies.
And is as properly superstition, as these.

I do not know this Author, (who thus argues against observing the Christian
Sabbath, and against public meeting on that day more than once;) And therefore
am not willing to judge hardly. But the natural result of what he argues, is as
I told you.

He does not think that John, was (on the Lords day Rev. 1. 10.) keeping the
Anniversary of Christ's Incarnation; nor of his Resurrection. (No more do I.)
But why not? Because (says he) he may say as in the case of Moses's dead body,
No man knows of his Sepulcher to this day. Now as to the Incarnation, I am apt
to think, that no man does At this day know certainly, either on what day of
the Year, or what day of the Week Christ was born (nor is it any matter whether
we do or no.) But I should rather say, no man knows At this day, than (as he)
no man knows To this day, (as if no man hitherto had known it:) for certainly
there have been those who knew it heretofore (while he was alive) though it be
now forgotten, and at this day no man knows it. But will he say so as to the
Resurrection? I think it is plain, that Christ was Crucified on the fourteenth
day, lay in the Grave the fifteenth, and rose again the sixteenth day, of the
first month. And that he rose on the first day of the week, no man doubts. He
should rather have put it thus, As no man knows To this day, where is the Body
of Moses, (that it might not be worshipped,) So no man knows At this day, which
is the Seventh in course from the Creation; that we might not contend about it.

However, I am contented to admit, (if that will please him) that the Lords day
there mentioned was neither meant of Christmass-day, nor Easter Day, nor
Whit-sunday, nor the day of Judgment; but think it to be meant of the first day
of the week, which is the Christian Sabbath. Not, of any of those other days
mentioned; nor of the Jewish Sabbath, as he would have it.

It Is, I think, a new notion of his own (at least I know none other of his
mind) that it should be meant of the Jewish Sabbath. He grants there is nothing
from the Circumstances of the place to determine it to this day. Nor does he
pretend to show that the Jewish Sabbath was ever so called. But he thinks it
might have been so called. For he says God blessed and sanctified the seventh
day (that is, the Seventh day after Six days of Labor) therefore it might have
been called the Lords day: and so may as well the Christian Sabbath as the Jews
Sabbath. That the Son of Man is Lord also of the Sabbath day; And so he is of
every day in the Week; and of the Christian Sabbath (when that is the Sabbath)
as well as of the Jewish. That the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord our
God; that is, the Seventh day after Six days of Labor, but whether the Seventh
day in course from the Creation, is no where said. That Isai. 58. 13. The
Sabbath is called my holy day: True, on what ever day the Sabbath be: First or
Seventh of the Week; or whatever day God appoints to be kept Holy; As for
instance, the first and seventh day of the Feast of Unleavened bread, Ex. 12.
16. The First day shall be a Holy Convocation; and the Seventh day shall be a
Holy Convocation; and each of them was the Lords Holy day, on what ever day of
the week they happened. And the like for other days. So Levit. 23. 2, 4, 7, 8,
21, 24, 25, 27, 28, 30, 32, 35, 36, 39. and Number. 28. 18, 25, 26. Number. 29. 1, 7,
12, 35. All the days here mentioned are the Lords Holy days, yet I do not take
any of them to be (...) And all he can pretend to from these or whatever he
produces, is no more but that the Jewish Sabbath (while it was the Sabbath)
might have been so called, (...) the Lords day; he does not pretend to show
that ever it was so called.

Now I would desire this Gentleman (if he can but a little while lay aside his
prejudice) to consider, first that the Lords day was the proper name of a day;
whereby it might be known as distinguished from other days; (else to what
purpose is it said I was in the spirit on the Lords day;) whereas the proper
name of the Jewish Sabbath (and of that only as he would have us think p. 64.)
was the Sabbath day; and there is no appearance of reason, why, if he meant
that day, he should not rather have said I was in the spirit on the Sabbath
day, or the seventh day. This therefore must needs be meant of some other day,
known by another name.

2. I would have him next consider, that the Lord in the Old Testament is the
usual name of God indefinitely; without particularizing this or that of the
Three persons; and the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, does not appropriate it to
the second Person more than to the first and third. And though I do not deny,
that our Christ was the God who gave the Ten Commandments (for all the three
Persons are the same God,) yet I do not think it to be Christ only, as
contradistinguished to the other two. And when it is said, I am the Lord thy
God, thou shall have no other God but me; the meaning is not, I the second
Person, am so the Lord thy God, that thou shall own no other Person for thy God
beside me the second Person. But (...) the Lord, in the New Testament, is for
the most part applied peculiarly to our Lord Christ (God and Man.) and is
understood (...) of him. (As he is called elsewhere (...) the Son of Man.) And
accordingly (...) must be a day peculiarly appropriate ((...)) to our Lord
Christ; which the Jewish Sabbath was not, nor that of the Fourth Commandment;
which is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, that is of God indefinitely; for it is
in that notion that God speaks in the Ten Commandments, not as one person
contradistinct to the other two.

It is (...) the Lords day in a like sense as (...) the Lords Supper, 1 Cor.
11. 20. and (...), the Cup of the Lord, the Table of the Lord, 1 Cor. 10. 21,
22. 1 Cor. 11. 27. In all which, by the Lord is meant the Lord Christ, God and
Man. And because, there being a double Sabbath then in use, (the Jewish
Sabbath, and the Christian Sabbath,) and the word Sabbath indefinitely having
been a long time applied to the Jewish Sabbath, and would be apt to be
understood of it; therefore (by way of distinction) that of the Christians
(though a Sabbath also, within the sense of the Fourth Commandment) was called
the Lords day, as being the Day or Sabbath appropriate to our Lord Jesus
Christ. And therefore when he tells us, so often, the World was made by our
Lord Jesus Christ, and the Law given on Mount Sinai by our Lord Jesus Christ,
(upon which Notions he seems to lay great stress, though it be nothing to the
purpose,) I think it is a mistake. For our Lord Jesus Christ is God and Man,
but he was not God and Man when the World was made, or the Law given, but only
God. It Is true Christ as God, (according to his Divine Nature) is the same God
who made the World, and gave the Law, (for we have no other God but one) but
not as God and Man. For Man he was not at that time, but in the fullness of time
became Man. The Sabbath of the Lord our God (in the fourth Commandment, with
equal respect to all the Three Persons) does not signify the same as, The
Sabbath of our Lord Jesus Christ (God and Man.) The Lord our God there, not the
same with our Lord Jesus Christ, in the New Testament. But (...) ( the Lords
Supper) is the Supper of our Lord Jesus Christ (God and Man) the Founder of our
Christian Religion: And accordingly (...) ( the Lords day) is the day of our
Lord Jesus Christ, a day appointed by him.

3. I would have him consider further, that the Lords day, ( dominica, or dies
dominicus,) has been all along, in all ages of the Christian Church, used as
the proper name of what we otherwise call the Christian Sabbath; and not for
the proper name of any other day; and therefore, till somewhat do appear to the
contrary, I shall take it to be the same with what is called the Lords day in
Scripture.

There is, in the New Testament, a place called Rome; and there is at this day
a place in Italy called Rome, and which has been so called all along ever
since; neither do I know of any other eminent place of called. Therefore (till
somewhat do appear to the contrary) I shall presume our Rome to be the same
place with that which in the New Testament is called Rome.

We find in scripture there is an Island of the Mediterranean Sea called Melita
or Malta (where St. Paul suffered Shipwreck) not far from another Island
called Crete: Now we know also there is in the Mediterranean Sea an Island
called Malta at this day, and another not far from thence called Crete or
Candy, and we do not know of any other Islands so called, then, or at any time
since; and therefore we may safely presume (till somewhat do appear to the
contrary) that those Islands now so called, are the same Islands with those
which were then so called.

And in like manner, that Day which has been ever since called the Lord's Day
as by its proper name, we may and ought to presume to be the same day which was
by St. John so called (as by its proper name) in Rev. 1. 10. when he wrote the
Book of the Revelation; till it can be showed that he did by that name mean
some other day.

And we have the more reason so to presume, because we find it so called by
others, very soon after St. John's time; and by those whom we have great reason
to believe to have been well acquainted with St. John's meaning and his manner
of speech.

The first I shall name is St. Ignatius, who was not only Contemporary with
St. John, but was a Disciple or Scholar of St. John. Now St. John (according to
the best account we can have from Chronology) wrote his Revelation in Patmos
(whither he was banished by Domitian,) in or about the year of our Lord 96;
(after which he wrote his Gospel, upon his return from Patmos to Ephesus:) And
Died in the Year 98 or 99 under Trajanus. And Ignatius died a Martyr under the
same Emperor Trajan, in the Year of our Lord 107. So that there is no great
distance in time. (And if we should miss a year or two it is not material.) How
long before his death Ignatius wrote his Epistle to the Magnesians, we are not
sure (nor is it material;) Now in that his Epistle to the Magnesians, even
according to the genuine Edition published by Bishop Usher out of an ancient
Manuscript (not that which is justly suspected to be interpolated,) he does
earnestly exhort them not to Iudaize, but to live as Christians; (Si enim usque
nunc secundum Iudaismum vivimus; confitemur gratiam non recepisse.) And as to
the Sabbath in particular, Non amplius Sabbatizantes, sed secundum Dominicam
viventes, in qua and vita nostra orta est*) Not any longer observing the Jewish
Sabbath, but the Lords Day on which Christ our Life (...) is manifest
therefore, that within 8 or 10 years after (...) writing, the Lords day did not
signify the Jewish Sabbath, but the first day of the week, on which our Savior
Rose again; and that it was then observed in contradistinction to the Jewish
Sabbath. I forbear to mention his Epistle ad Trallianos (where again we have
(...) applied to the first day of the week on which Christ rose again) because
it is in that Edition which is suspected to be Interpolated.

I might to this add the Testimony of Polycarp, who was also a Disciple of St.
John, and collected and published these Epistles of Ignatius, and may be
presumed to understand what St. John meant by the Lords day.

But I shall add in the next place that of Justin Martyr; whom though I cannot
call a Disciple of St. John, (because he was not converted to the Christian
Religion till about the Year of our Lord 129, about Thirty years after St.
John's Death,) yet he lived so soon after, that he could not be ignorant of the
Christians Practice, and what they understood St. John to mean by the Lords
Day. And how that day was observed in Iustin's time, he tells us in (what is
called) his Second Apology, (...), and a little after (...). On that day
commonly called Sunday, there is held a Congregation or a general Meeting
together, of all Inhabitants whether of City or Country, and there are
publicly read the Memorials or Monuments of the Apostles, or the Writings of
the Prophets, etc. And again, The day called Sunday we do all in common make
(...) the Meeting-day; for that the First Day is it on which God from Darkness
and Matter made the World, and our Savior Jesus Christ did on the same day
rise from the dead. In which places though it be not called dominica, but dies
solis, yet how it was then solemnly observed, in memory of our Lord Christ's
Resurrection, is evident.

It Is manifest therefore that the Lords day ((...), Dominica, or Dies
Dominicus,) was the known name of a day so called when St. John wrote his
Revelation; That it was a day of Religious Worship contradistinguished to that
of the Jewish Sabbath, so observed and so called by (St. John's Disciple)
Ignatius within 8 or 10 years at most after St. John's writing that Book;
(Which he would not have done if he had not thought it to be so meant by his
Master St. John.) (...) manner it was observed (in their solemn religious
assemblies) Justin Martyr tells us within ^0 years after that; and that it was
otherwise called ((...)) Sunday. And that Dominica or Dies Dominicus; has been
so used not only by the Ancient Christian Writers, Ignatius, Clemens,
Irenaeus, Origin, Tertullian, etc. but by the Councils and Church History all
along; has been so often showed by diverse, and is to be seen by any who please
to consult them, as is not to be doubted by any; unless we would (under the
notion of Tradition) deny all History; which in a plain matter of Fact were
very unreasonable. Nor can he show that the name of the Lords day ever was
(however it might have been as he thinks) attributed to the Jewish Sabbath. And
therefore to tell us that this name is stolen from the Jewish Sabbath to be
applied to ours* is such a Fansy as may be laughed at, but does not deserve a
serious Answer. Sure we are that the Christian Sabbath has been long in
possession of that Name; but, that ever the Jewish Sabbath was so, there is no
evidence: Therefore the Theft must be on his side, who steals it from us to
give it to the Jewish Sabbath.

But he tells us, that our Savior himself observed the Jewish Sabbath. (And I
suppose he did so* And, that he was Circumcised also, and did observe the
Ceremonial Law*) But it was before his Death and Resurrection. I do not find
that he observed it afterward.

But he says, after Christ's Death when he had said It is finished, he kept the
Sabbath in the Grave. Be it so (if that were keeping a Sabbath.) And the good
Women rested on that day according to the Commandment. And why not? Since
Christ was not yet risen; nor was the day yet changed, or pretended so to be.
This therefore is but Whimsey and nothing to the purpose. We all agree; that,
till the Resurrection of Christ, the Jews observed the Jewish Sabbath, on what
they called the Seventh-day of their Week. But whether or no it were a Seventh
from the Creation, we cannot tell.

It Is more to the purpose what he tells us, that Paul and other Christians did
after Christ's Resurrection seem to observe the Jewish Sabbath; Going to the
Temple and to the Synagogues on the Sabbath Day; meaning thereby the Jewish
Sabbath. And it is true; They did so go. But I answer;

1. So they did on other days as well as on the Sabbath, and in other places,
as well as in the Synagogue and the Temple, Act 5. 42. Daily in the Temple, and
in every house, or from house to house ((...) (...) they ceased not to preach
Jesus Christ. And Act. 2. 46. they continued daily (...) with one accord in the
Temple, (...), and breaking bread at home, or from house to house. As to such
duties of Worship as were common to them with the Jews, they took the
opportunity of joining therein with them; whether on their Sabbath, or on any
other day; but as to what was peculiarly Christian, this they performed in
separate meetings from them; breaking their Bread at home, (...), or from house
to house; The Sacrament of the Lords Supper (being peculiarly a Christian
service) they did celebrate in their houses, or separate places of meeting. And
so we find it at Troas; and, on the first day of the week; Act. 20. 7. on the
first day of the week, when the Disciples were met to break bread, Paul
preached, etc. Their meeting for this Christian service, was in a separate
place, and on another day, from that of the Jewish service. And Paul at Athens.
Act. 17. 17. he disputed in the Synagogue with the Jews, and with the devout
persons, and in the Market, Daily, ((...),) He took the opportunity of public
meetings, whether in the Synagogues or elsewhere, whether on the Sabbath or any
other day, to preach Christ to them, whether Jews or Greeks. Which does not
prove that they did then take the seventh day to be the Christian Sabbath* any
more than our going to Hear or Preach a Weekday Lecture, suppose on Thursday,
would prove, that we take Thursday to be our Sabbath* or Paul's Preaching on
Mars-hill, or in the Marketplace, would prove that he took these places to be
the Temple or Synagogue. He knew these to be Times and Places of concourse, and
therefore took the opportunity of Preaching Then and There; and would so have
done at any other time and place as there was occasion: In season or out of
season, as he advises Timothy, 2 Timothy 4. 2.

He does not deny, p. 122. but that Paul did keep the Feast (of the Passover)
after the Resurrection of Christ; Because of what we have Act. 18. 21. He bids
them farewell (at Ephesus) saying, I must by all means keep this Feast that
comes, at Jerusalem; but I will return again unto you, if God will. Which
Feast he thinks to be that of the Passover, though it be not named. But
whether that or whatever Feast of the Jews it be, it is all one as to our
business. How great a proof would this have been for the Seventhday-Sabbath, if
it had been said I must by all means keep the Sabbath! It Is said indeed, he did
on the Sabbath Day go into the Synagogue (but so he did on other days,) but not
that he kept the Sabbath Day; much less that he must by all means Keep it. Or
that he must by all means take a journey from Ephesus to Jerusalem rather than
not keep it, though he were to return thither again. Yet this Author does not,
for all this think, the Law for the Jewish Passover to be then in force. But
only that Paul took occasion to be there at that public great concourse of
People, to preach Christ to the multitude. For, that the Apostles were under no
obligation to keep that feast of the Passover, after the death of Christ, is
to him (he says) past doubt. And why may not we say the same of his going into
the Synagogue on the Sabbath day (rather than miss such an opportunity of a
public concourse) which was a less journey than from Ephesus to Jerusalem?
though under no obligation to keep the Jewish Sabbath, more than to keep the
Jews Passover.

2. But I answer further. The Jews who were not Christians, did yet continue to
observe the Jewish Sabbath as a matter of duty. And there was no reason why
they should not. For, while they did not acknowledge our Christ to be the
Messiah, nor the Mosaic Law to be at an end, but Circumcision and the Jewish
Economy yet in force, there was no reason why they should not think themselves
obliged to the Jewish Sabbath. And many of the Christian Jews, who were not yet
satisfied of the Abolition of the Mosaic Law, did comply with them therein.
For knowing this to have been a law once, and not yet being fully satisfied
that it was expired, they were content still to observe it. (And if our
Gentleman be of that mind, I would not hinder him, if a Jew, from so doing; but
neither would I encourage him.) And I find the Apostles willing to connive at
it, and even to countenance it. Not as a thing necessary, but at least
allowable.

And though they did not think fit to bring a new Yoke upon the Gentiles, who
had not before been obliged to the Jewish Law, (and therefore would not allow
the Gentiles to be Circumcised; as appears by S. Paul's Epistle to the
Galatians, and the Decrees of the Synod at Jerusalem, Act. 15.) yet he allowed
the Jews to practice it (to whom it had once been a Law) and accordingly
Circumcised Timothy Act. 16. because, though his Father were a Greek, yet his
Mother was a Jew: (but he did not Circumcise Titus, Gal. 2. 3. for whom there
was not the same reason.)

And he did himself comply with the Jewish ceremonies; As Act. 18. 18. Having
shorn his head in Canchrea; For he had a vow. And those of Purification Act.
21. Not that he thought those Laws now obliging; but, because many of the
believing Jews were yet zealous of the Law, and thought themselves obliged by
it, he would not give offense to them. For he was satisfied as to himself, that
Circumcision avails nothing, nor Uncircumcision, 1 Cor. 7. 19. Gal. 6. 15.
But was content (till by time and further instruction they should be better
satisfied) that each one should be gratified, as to their own practice,
according to their own sentiments, as to things yet disputable.

And accordingly, as to eating or not eating things forbidden by Moses's Law,
his advise was, to the Romans, (many of whom were Jews) Romans 14. 17. Let not
him that eats not, judge him that eats, (as breaking a Law which he thinks
to be yet in force,) nor let him that eats, despise him that eats not, (as
a fool that does not understand his own liberty) for the kingdom of God is not
meat and drink, etc.

And in like manner those at Jerusalem Act. 15. though they did not think fit
to bring a new Yoke of Circumcision upon the Gentiles (to whom before it had
not been a Law) yet do advise them to forbear things strangled and blood,
because this had once been a Law to all the Sons of Noah, Genesis 9. 4.

Not but that this was even now antiquated, but (to avoid offense) because it
had once been a Law. For I take even those things to fall under these Generals,
The kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness and peace and joy
in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17. and every creature of God is good, 1 Timothy 4. 4.
I know, and am persuaded that there is nothing unclean of it self: But All
things indeed are pure, Romans 14. 14, 20. Tit. 1. 15. Meat commends us not to
God; for neither if we eat, are we the better (as making use of our lawful
liberty) neither if we eat not (in compliance with those who be unsatisfied)
are we the worse, 2 Cor. 8. 8.

So that the Practice of the Apostles or of the Church at that time, in
compliance with the Jews, as to what had before been a Law, but now was not; is
no argument that the thing was then obligatory, as before it had been, but
only an argument of their condescension in things of a middle nature, rather
than to give offense to those who were therein unsatisfied; according to that
principle of his All things are lawful for me but all things are not expedient,
1 Cor. 10. 23. To give no offense either to Jew or Gentile, or to the Church of
God, ver. 32, 33. To the Jews I became as a Jew; To the weak I became as weak;
I am made all things to all men; 1. Cor. 9. 19. In so much that even in those
things which he knew to be lawful, yet, rather than give offense to a weak
brother, he would forbear, If meat make my brother to offend, (or, be an
offense to a brother) I will eat no flesh while the world stands, left I ma^^
my Brother to offend.

And the like I suppose as to the Jewish Sabbath* He that regards a day
regards it to the Lord; and he that regards not the day, to the Lord he
does not regard it. He that eats, eats to the Lord, for he gives God
thanks; and he that eats not, to the Lord he eats not, and gives God
thanks, Rom, 14. 6. Where it is manifest that he does parallel the observing or
not observing a day than questionable; with the abstaining from meats
disputable; that is, from such as before were unlawful, but now ceased so to
be, though all were not yet therein satisfied.

And though it be not expressly said, what was the Day thus in question; yet it
is most likely to be that of the Jewish Sabbath; For, that the first day of the
Week or Christian Sabbath was now observed, seems very plain: and whether the
Jewish Sabbath should be observed also, was the question. And those who were
for continuing Circumcision and the Mosaic Ceremonies, were doubtless for that
also. And the Apostles Rule was for a mutual condescension (as to the Jews) for
each to follow their own sentiments therein, without censuring one another.

But as to the Gentiles, he seems to be of another mind; And therefore to the
Galatians, who were most of their Gentile-Christians, he would not so much as
allow the practice of Circumcision (which to the Jews he did;) and tells them
that if they be Circumcised Christ profits them nothing; and he that is
Circumcised is debtor to the whole Law, Gal. 5. 2, 3. For it was a renouncing
Christ who had made them Free; putting themselves under the Jewish Yoke, to
which (even before) they were not subject.

And therefore to these he speaks more warmly, Gal. 1. 6, 7. I marvel that you
are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace of Christ, unto
another Gospel: Which is not another, (or, there being no other Gospel (...),
where as there is not any other Gospel;) only there be some that trouble you,
and would pervert the Gospel of Christ. And such are those who would bring on
them a new Yoke, (by making that a Duty which God had not made so.) Where he
presses them to keep close to the Gospel of Christ, as by him delivered
(without any connection of Moses's Law,) there being indeed no other Gospel but
that; and they who teach them otherwise, do pervert the Gospel; the true Gospel
of Christ, including no obligation to the Jewish Law; either as to Circumcision
or the difference of meats, or other particulars of that Law; as he argues, in
the second, third and fourth Chapters; showing that even those who were before
under it, are now freed from it, and they much more who were never under it.
And thereupon Chap. 4. 9, 10, 11. he rebukes them severely, that after they had
known God (or rather were known of God) they should turn again to the weak and
beggarly rudiments or elements. Ye observe (says he) days and months and times
and years, I am afraid of you lest I have bestowed upon you labor in vain.

It Is not indeed here said in particular, what those days were, that are here
meant; yet it is most likely (and scarce to be doubted) to be meant of the
Jewish Sabbath. For though other Observation of Times be here reckoned up
(there being the same reason of all) yet there was no occasion for the others,
in Galatia. For the Jews themselves did not think themselves obliged (nor do
the Jews at this day) to the observation of their other Feasts or Fasts out of
their own land. But to that of Circumcision, and of the Jewish Sabbath, and the
distinction of Meats, they thought themselves obliged even out of their own
land. And of such we must understand this to the Galatians. These being the
things there in question; not those other, which were confined to the land of
Canaan.

But he objects here, that though Days be mentioned, yet not Sabbath days; and
fancies it might be meant of some other days; not of Sabbaths. To gratify him
therefore in this also, I will proceed to that of Colos. 2. 16. Where Sabbaths
are expressly named.

To the Colossians, who were also Christian Gentiles, he pursues the same
notions; Least any one should beguile them with enticing words, Col. 2. 4.
(thereby to bring them under the Mosaic Law:) He bids them Beware lest any
spoil them through Philosophy and vain deceit. Whereby, I suppose, he means the
Mosaic doctrines or Philosophy of the Jews, (which Clemens Alexandrinus does
all along call (...) in contradistinction to that of the Greeks,) after the
traditions of men, after the rudiments (or elements) of the world, and not
after Christ, ver, 8. and that particularly of Circumcision ver. 11. (in the
room of which, Baptism is come; ver. 12.) Christ, by his Death having blotted
out the handwriting of ordinances (meaning the Jewish Law) and took it out af
the way, nailing it to his Cross, ver. 14. and (amongst other things) Let no
man therefore judge you in meat or in drink (as if some were now clean others
unclean, as under the Mosaic Law,) or in respect of an holy day, ((...) a
Festival) or of the new Moon, or of the Sabbath days* (...), ver. 16. Where by
Sabbath must be meant the Jewish Sabbath; the day which in common speech was
understood by the word Sabbath.

For this, he has two or three evasions. He does commonly press hard in other
places, that by Sabbath is to be understood the Jews Seventh-day Sabbath, and
no other day. (The holy Spirit does call the Seventh-day, the Sabbath, (and no
other day of the week) both in the Old and in the New Testament throughout, p.
46. And, I think, he is not much out therein; that it does, usually, so signify
where it does not come with some intimation to direct us to some other sense.
And why it should not be thought so to signify here, I see no reason. For
though I take our Christian Sabbath to fall as properly under the word Sabbath
in the Fourth Commandment, as that of the Jews* yet the word, in common use,
having by this time become the proper name of that Day which the Jews so
called, it was necessary (to avoid confusion) to give the Christian Sabbath
another name; as that of the Lords Day, or the first day of the week. And
consequently that the Sabbaths here mentioned, are to be understood (according
to the then use of the word) of those Sabbaths. Not as if all days of Holy Rest
where hereby forbidden; but only the nicety of confining it particularly to
that day which was then (in common speech) so called.

But he would not have it here understood of the Seventh-day Sabbath (as every
where else) but some other Ceremonial Sabbaths; but what those are, he does not
tell us.

That there were some other Feasts observed by the Jews, which, in the Old
Testament, are sometimes called Sabbaths (but very seldom,) I do not deny: nor
that those come under the general Words in this place. But those do not seem to
be here principally intended, because it is manifest to be understood of the
Sabbath there in dispute. Now there was no occasion of a dispute concerning the
observance of those other Sabbaths, amongst the Gentiles, out of the Holy Land.
These observations being not thought obligatory, even to the Jews, but in their
own Land only. And it is expressly provided, Deuteronomy. 16. that these were not to
be kept in any place promiscuously; not within any of the Gates which the Lord
thy God gives thee; But in the place which the Lord thy God shall choose to
place his name there. So of the Passover, ver. 5, 6. So of the Feast of
Pentecost, ver. 11. So of the Feast of Tabernacles, ver. 15. And of altogether,
ver. 16. And therefore, not out of their own Land. I do not deny but that they
might, in private houses, eat the Paschal Lamb, (as Christ did, with his
Disciples,) but not Sacrifice the Passover. For it was to be sacrificed in the
Temple only; and the Feast of the Passover to be there solemnly kept. Not in
private houses; and much less out of their own Land.

Nor do I remember, that any where in all the New Testament, the word Sabbath
is used for any such Sabbaths: Nor can reasonably be supposed to be here meant
of those Feasts, because it is put in contradistinction to them. Let no man
judge you in respect of a Feast, of the New Mood, or of the Sabbaths. Which yet
I do not understand as if no Sabbath might now be kept, but that the Obligation
to that Sabbath was now at an end.

Another evasion is this, He would have (...) ( Sabbata) in the plural number,
to signify Weeks, not Sabbath Days. The Sabbath Day being called, in the
singular number, (...) ( Sabbatum.) For he will rather play at small game than
stand out. If we should allow him this, it would not advance his purpose at
all. For if the business of Weeks be at an end, (that we are no longer to
distribute our time into Weeks,) than that of the Sabbath much more, which he
would have to be the seventh day of the Week.

But suppose we do allow that one Sabbath is to be called Sabbatum what are we
to call two or more Sabbaths? Must not they be Sabbata? And if this be his
meaning, then are we not to observe such Sabbaths any longer.

But what must we then say to Mat. 28. 1. (...), which we render In the end of
the Sabbath, meaning thereby the Seventh day Sabbath then past, (...), as it
began to draw toward the first day of the Week: must we read it, at the end
the Sabbaths (because (...) is in the plural number,) when the Sabbaths
(meaning the Seventh-day Sabbaths) were now at an end, and the First Day
Sabbath coming on in their place? If that reading please him; it will serve us
as well.

But he is mistaken in his criticism. It Is true that (...) in the plural number
seems to be sometime put for a Week (but not Weeks, that I know of, as he would
have it.) And so it is commonly taken to be where we find (...), for the first
day of the Week (but may as well be rendered, the first day after the Sabbath.)
And so is (...) in the singular, as Luke 18. 12. (...), I fast twice in the
week, I suppose he would not have us render it I fast twice on the Sabbath day
(though it be in the singular number,) as if he did fast twice upon one day.
But thus rather, I keep two Fasts to one Sabbath; which is the same in sense
with, I fast twice in the Week* In like manner as the Olympiad, may be taken
sometime for that particular year on which were the Olympic Games (which were
wont to return every fifth year inclusively, that is, as we use to speak the
fourth year after the last Olympic;) sometime for the interval of four years
from the end of one Olympic to the end of the next following. So here,
Sabbatum may be sometime taken strictly for the Sabbath Day, and sometime for
the whole septiduum or week from Sabbath to Sabbath.

And so is Sabbata (in the plural number) taken also for a Sabbath Day; Thus I
take it to be here, ( Mat. 28. 1.) (...) when the Sabbath Day was ended; in the
same sense with that of Mark 16. 1. (...) (speaking of the very same time) when
the Sabbath was past. And in like manner, Matthew. 12. 1. At that time Jesus went
on the Sabbath day through the Corn, (...) ( Sabbatis) in the plural number.
And so it is in Mark 2. 23. (...). Yet it is meant but of one day, as appears
by the parallel place (where the same is again related Luke 6. 1. (...). And so
Mat. 12. 5, 10, 12. Mar. 3. 4. Luke 4. 31. Luke 6. 2, 9. And (...) in the
Septuagint is commonly put for the Sabbath Day. I will not say. Allways
(because I have not examined it) but in all the places which I consulted. And
even in the body of the Ten Commandments Exodus 20. 8. (...). ( Remember the day
of the Sabbaths; in the plural number*) And again ver. 10. (...). ( but the
seventh day Sabbaths to the Lord thy God;) So Ex. 16. 13. (...). ( the Sabbaths
a holy Rest unto the Lord, to morrow.) And Levit. 23. 3. six days shall work be
done, but the seventh is (...) the Sabbaths of Rest; ye shall do no work
therein, (...) it is the Sabbaths of the Lord. Which are the signal places
wherein the Sabbath is commanded. And the like very often (if not always) in
the Septuagint, whose language the New Testament does usually follow. So that
his criticism comes to nothing, but only to show how careless he is of what he
says if at least he may seem to say somewhat. (Such is that when he tells us p.
136. that God who has reserved a Tenth of our Substance, has reserved But a
Seventh of Time. As though he thought a tenth part to be more than a seventh
part. And many such negligences, which I spare to mention.)

But whether we render it Sabbath Day or Sabbath Days the sense is still the
same. And the Apostles design in all these places seems to be this, that though
to the Jews, to whom it had once been a Law, he does allow a liberty (till they
should be better satisfied) for each to follow his own judgment (without
censuring others) as well in this of the Jewish Sabbath, as in the business of
Circumcision, and the abstinence from Meats, and their other Rites; yet he
would by no means suffer these to be brought upon the Gentiles as a new Yoke to
which before they had not been subject.

I say as a new Yoke to which they had not been subject. For though I do admit
that by natural light, or the Law of Nature, man ought to allow a competent
time for the solemn service of God; and, by a positive Law, that it should be
at least one day in seven, that is, after six days of Labor, the seventh to be
a day of Rest; and so much to be intended in the Fourth Commandment. Yet, I do
not think it to be so determined to this day in order, as to be unchangable to
after Ages.

We can be no ways sure, that the seventh day in order from the first raining
of Manna, Ex. 16. was the seventh in order from the Creation. And as they did
observe it then in order from thence; so when Christ, or his Apostles by
direction from him, did put it into a new order, this new order does as well
suit the words of the Fourth Commandment as that former.

I do the rather say that this to the Gentiles is a new Yoke, because I find
this to be given as a sign, a covenant, or distinctive mark given to the Jews,
as Gods peculiar People, in contradistinction to other Nations; just as
Circumcision was. So Exodus 31. 13. My Sabbaths ye shall keep, for it is a Sign
between me and you throughout your generations, and ver. 16. The Children of
Israel shall keep the Sabbath, to observe the Sabbath throughout their
generations for a perpetual Covenant, and ver. 17. It is a Sign between me and
the Children of Israel for ever. So Ezekiel. 20. 12. I gave them my Sabbaths to be
a Sign between me and them; and ver. 20. They shall be a Sign between me and
you, that ye may know that I am the Lord your God. Just as it is said of
Circumcision, Genesis 17. 7. I will establish my Covenant between me and thee
(says God to Abraham) and thy seed after thee, for an Everlasting Covenant, to
be a God unto thee and thy seed after thee: and ver. 10, 11. This is my
Covenant which ye shall keep between me and you, and thy seed after thee, every
male-child among you shall be Circumcised, and it shall be a Token of the
Covenant between me and you: and ver. 13. My Covenant shall be in your flesh an
everlasting Covenant, (not as if Circumcision were to be for ever obligatory;
but rebus sic stantibus, so long as things continued in that estate.) And so it
is called Romans 4. 11. He received the Sign of Circumcision, a Seal of the
Righteousness of Faith. And such was the Blood of the Paschal Lamb on the
Doorposts of the house, Ex. 12. 7. to be a distinctive mark between the
Israelites and the Egyptians; as ver. 13. The blood shall be to you for a Token
upon the houses where you are, and when I see the blood I will pass over you.
And so Ex. 11. 5, 6, 7. That ye may know how that the Lord does put a
Distinction between the Egyptians and Israel.

And our Author himself, page 26. does press the same, and puts great weight
upon it, that this Seventh-day Sabbath is often called a Sign for ever between
him and them, and a perpetual Covenant, to Distinguish his people from others;
that is, the people of the Jews from other Nations. And so to be a Sign for
Ever, as Circumcision is an Everlasting Covenant.

Now whatsoever was a Distinctive Mark of the People of Israel, from other
Nations, as was that of Circumcision, the Passover, and the
Seventh-day Sabbath, was at an end and to cease when the partition wall was
broken down between Jew and Gentile, when Christ had made both one, and
abolished in his flesh the Enmity, (even the law of Commandments contained in
Ordinances,) to make of twain One new man; to reconcile both in One body by the
Cross, having slain the Enmity thereby, Ephesians. 2. 14, 15, 16. Or as it is Col. 2.
14. Having blotted out the handwriting of Ordinances which was against us, and
was contrary to us, (as separating us Gentiles from the Jews, and so excluding
us out of Gods Visible Church,) and nailing it to his Cross. From whence he
there infers, ver. 16. Let no man Therefore judge you in meat or drink, or in
respect of a holy day (a Festival) or of Sabbaths, (the proper name, at that
time, of the Seventh-day Sabbath:) which things are a shadow of things to come,
but the body is of Christ; these being but shadows or empty things, whereas it
is the body, (the Substance) that Christ regards. (...), those are but shadow,
but it is the Body that Christ looks at. That is (in our language) those are
only Circumstantials, but it is substance or the Substantials of Religion that
Christ and Christianity respects. And, as it is merely Circumstantial (and does
not at all influence Religion) whether in the Temple or other place God be
worshipped ( Ioh. 4. 21.) So, whether on this or another day, a Sabbath be kept.

If therefore those Sabbaths (as is showed) were distinctive Marks or Signs of
Gods peculiar Covenant or Contract with the Church of Israel as their peculiar
God, in contradistinction to other Nations; then it is manifest that those other
Nations did not at all keep a Sabbath, or not on that Day; (else how could this
be a distinctive Mark?) and therefore to bring this now upon the Gentiles, was
to bring upon them a new Yoke.

I add further, that this Jewish Sabbath (as is showed before) seems to be, not
a Continuation of a former Sabbath from the Creation, (which I doubt was either
not observed at all, or had long before this time been forgot,) but rather a
New Institution or Restitution after their coming out of Egypt (from a new
Epoch) at Marah; where God is said to have made a Statute and an Ordinance,
Exodus 15. 25. to which Commandment and Statute if they would hearken diligently
and give Ear, he would not bring upon them the Diseases which he had brought
upon Egypt, For (says he) I am the Lord that heals thee, ver. 26. Whereupon
follows (in the next Chapter) a sabbath to be observed on the seventh-day from
the first raining of Manna, (not from the first Creation.) And with reference
to their Rest or Refreshing after their Labor or Bondage in Egypt; (as was
that of the Passover, to their being passed-over, when the firstborn of the
Egyptians were slain.) For so he says, Exodus 31. 13. My Sabbath shall ye keep,
for it is a Sign between me and you, that ye may know that I am the Lord that
does sanctifiy you (or separate you to my self as a peculiar people, a holy
people;) and ver. 16, 17. The Children of Israel shall keep my Sabbaths ((...))
for a perpetual Covenant; It is a Sign between Me and the Children of Israel
for ever; for in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, and on the Seventh
Day he Rested and was Refreshed. Not that God was Wearied with his Work, and
needed Refreshment; but he does parallel his Rest after his Work of Creation,
with their Refreshment after their Labor in Egypt.

And that God had a particular respect to their Rest and Refreshment from their
Labor and Bondage in Egypt; is farther evident, not only from the General
Preface to all the Commandments, ( I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out
of the Land of Egypt, out of the house of Bondage;) but from the Close of this
Fourth Commandment, as it is repeated in Deuteronomy. 5. 12, 13, 14, 15. (somewhat
different from what is in Exodus 20.) where, (instead of For in six days the
Lord made Heaven and Earth, etc. Exodus 20. 11.) we have ( Deuteronomy. 5. 15.) And
remember that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt, and that the Lord thy
God brought thee out thence, through a mighty hand, and a stretched out arm;
therefore the Lord thy God commanded thee to keep the Sabbath Day. Which shows
that this Sabbath, had a particular respect to that deliverance.

Now as God by Moses did, upon a New occasion (of their Rest from their Labor
in Egypt) give a New Epoch or Beginning to a Circulation of Sabbaths, to be
reckoned from thence, in imitation of his own Resting from the Work of
Creation; Not by the Fourth Commandment (for that speaks indifferently as to
any Circulation,) but by this Ordinance at Marah, or at Elim (for it is this
determines the Circulation to the seventh day after the raining of Manna;) So
might Christ as well (by himself or his Apostles) six another Epoch from his
Resurrection; (as we have reason to think he did;) and this Equally within the
prospect of the Fourth Commandment. This Rest from the Egyptian Bondage, being
as much a shadow, of what Christ regards as the substance; as was the escaping
of the Egyptian Destruction, of which the Passover was the Memorial. And
accordingly this Circulation equally to cease with that of the Passover, at
the coming of Christ; notwithstanding the continuance of the Fourth
Commandment, in a New Circulation from another Epoch. It is not indeed
expressly said that Christ Bid his Apostles so to do: But as Moses is presumed
to do what he did by Gods direction; so the Apostles by Christ's direction; to
whom he gave Commandments for that purpose, Act. 1. 2, 3.

As to what he says so often; that not one Iott or Tittle of the Law (meaning
that of the Decalogue) is destroyed, but does still continue in force: This, as
to the substance of the Duty, I grant. But if his meaning be, that there is not
a Word or Letter therein which does not as literally belong to Us Now, as it
did Then to Israel: I cannot assent to it. For it cannot be said of all Us who
are under that Law, that God has Brought us out of the land of Egypt, out of
the house of Bondage; or that We are to expect long life, in the land (of
Canaan) which he Gave Them.

If he say that our deliverance from spiritual bondage is equivalent to theirs
from Egypt, and our land the same to us as Canaan was to them: I grant it. But
so is our Lords Day equivalent to their Seventh-day Sabbath, and Christ the
true Manna (more than) equivalent to that of theirs, from the raining of which
they reckoned their Jewish Sabbaths.

As to what he says of Mat. 24. 20. Pray that your flight be not in the Winter,
nor on the Sabbath Day; which he thinks to be understood of the Jewish Sabbath,
38 years after Christ's Resurrection. Perhaps it may. For the obstinate Jews,
(who would not in their day understand the things that belonged to their peace,
but rejected Christ,) did no doubt continue to observe their Jewish Sabbath,
and thought themselves obliged so to do: And it would then be as great an
Affliction to them, as if their Sabbath were yet in force: But no more a sin to
fly on that day, than to fly in the Winter. It would be so to the Christians,
if put to flight on the Christian Sabbath (for the case would be the like of
both) and they might as well Pray against it: That is, Against their Flight on
the Christian Sabbath; as the Jews on the Jewish Sabbath. This therefore makes
nothing at all to his purpose. He might as well argue from hence, that it were
a sin to labor in Winter; as, on the Jewish Sabbath.

He has many other little excursions, as little to the purpose, with which I
shall not trouble my self or you; having fully answered what seems to me to
have any appearance of Argument.

But he takes great pleasure to expose the Name of Sunday. Yet I do not find
any more fond of using it, than he. Not, that he would be thought to like the
Word, but because he thinks it a Reproach. If he do not like that name, he may
call it as we do, the Lords Day, the Christian Sabbath, or (if he think these
too good names for it) he may call it the First day of the Week.

But why not as angry with the Monday? or other of the Week days? If on Monday
the Heathens (as he would have us think) did worship the Moon, as the Sun on
Sunday, why is he not as angry with that? It is as much Idolatry to worship the
Moon on Monday, as the Sun on Sunday. True. But that does not concern the
Christians Sabbath (which is what he has a mind to reproach) and therefore he
speaks little of the other, and but seldom: But Sunday is to be snubbed upon
every occasion.

He would not have a Sabbath upon Sunday, because he says, on that day they
worshipped the Sun. But why upon Saturday if on that day (as he would have us
think) they worshipped Saturn?

Now it is true that some of the Heathen did worship the Sun, and the Moon, and
the Host of Heaven. But that they did worship the Sun more upon Sunday, than
they did upon Monday or Tuesday, is more than I know, or he can prove. He tells
us, Verstegan says, that the Heathen Saxons did so. But Verstegan is too young
an Author to settle this upon his own Authority; unless he can bring Vouchers
for it more ancient than himself. It was, I suppose, a Fansy of Verstegan Then
(as it is of our Author Now;) But I do not remember that he cites any Author
ancienter than himself. And though some others may say the like; Yet I look
upon it but as a plausible conjecture, without any good foundation in History.
And even the Heathen Suxons are too late for his purpose.

He tells us, p. 88. The Heathen Nations long before Christ's Birth did offer
Sacrifice to the Sun, and worship it as a God upon Sunday. His proof is from
Job 31. 26, 27, 28. If I beheld the Sun when it shined, or the Moon walking in
brightness, and my heart has been secretly enticed, or my mouth has kissed my
hand, this were an iniquity to be punished by the Judges* for I should have
denied the Lord above.

But what is all this to Sunday? It may perhaps be a disclaimer of worshipping
the Sun; but says nothing of Sunday.

Does our Author think the name of Sunday to be as old as Job's times? If Job
had said, If I have worshipped the Sun upon Sunday, or the Moon upon Monday, and
not the Lord upon Saturday; it had been to his purpose: But here is nothing of
that. Not a word of what day it was on which they worshipped the Sun.

But I would not have him lay too great a load upon Sunday. For Hesiod tells us
(as was said before) that in his time (one of the oldest of the Heathen
Writers, though younger than Job) the Seventh day was Sun-day, not the First.
And he has nothing to show (more than the bare Name of Sunday) to make us
believe that those of the Heathen, who worshipped the Sun, did confine that
worship to this day of the Week; or, Did more worship it on this day than on
others.

I do not certainly know how Ancient those Names are of Saturday, Sunday,
Monday, etc. nor upon what occasion they were first taken up, (nor is it much
to our purpose.)

The most ancient Heathen Writer whom I know to have mentioned them is Dio
Cassius, who lived about the Year of our Lord 230. Who speaking of the
Destruction of Jerusalem and the Temple, tells us that the Jews had such a
reverence for Saturn's day, as that they would not Labor on that day for their
Defense; which the Romans understanding, did on that day assault them, and
prevailed. (Against their Temple and Sabbath both at once.) Not as if the Jews
did then call it Saturn's day, (nor am I sure that any other did then so call
it,) for they called it their Sabbath Day; But it was that day of the Week
which, in Dio's time, was called Saturday.

But Dio speaks of it as a new Thing so to call the Days of the Week, and which
the Ancient Greeks (he tells us) knew not. ('It Was therefore not very Ancient.)
And therefore he supposes the Romans to have taken it up from the Egyptians.
Not the Old Egyptians of Moses's time, but rather from those about the time of
Ptolomy; not of King Ptolomy, but of Claudius Ptolomaeus the Astronomer (or
perhaps somewhat earlier) when Astronomy there flourished, and from whom the
Romans had it.

In a Christian Writer, I find it earlier than Dio; in Justin Martyr's Apology,
written about the Year of Christ 150. who mentions (...), the Day of the Sun,
as the Christian Sabbath. And Tertullian in his Apology, mentions Saturday and
Sunday. And it may perhaps be found in Writers earlier than these, Though I do
not at present meet with it. Nor do I think it worth the while to make any
great search about it. I grant, that when Christianity was spread among the
Gentiles* and, with it, the Christian Sabbath; they did (in order to the
observing that Sabbath) distinguish their time into Weeks, and thereupon gave
Names to each Day. I grant also that the Jews did, before, so distinguish their
Time: but I do not find that any other Nation did so. If any think, that All
nations did so distinguish, and every Nation, all the World over, call the days
by those Names by which they are now called: This I take to be but a
Presumption, without proof.

But when ever those names were first taken up, I do not think they were taken
from the number of their Gods (for then they must have had a great many more
days in their Week than Seven, if each of their Gods must have a peculiar day:)
But from the number of the Planets, which were then reckoned to be Seven, and
in this order Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercury, Luna. Though we now
know the Planets to be more than Seven. (For the Satellites of Jupiter and
Saturn are as much Planets as our Moon; but were not then known.) Nor were the
Seven Planets always reckoned in the same order; but some had been thought to
be above the Sun, which, before these names were given, were accounted to be
below it. And therefore these Names must be at least so late. And certainly not
so old as Job's time.

I take them not to be older than what are called the Planetary Hours, but to
take their Rise from thence, and the Order of the Names to be thence
determined. For having divided the Day into 24 Hours; Beginning with Saturn,
the highest of the Planets, they assigned to him the First hour of one day,
which thence they called Saturn's day; the Second hour to Jupiter, the Third to
Mars, and so in order till they came to the Eighth hour which falls to Saturn's
turn again, and so again to the Fifteenth, and the Two and Twentieth; and then
the Three and Twentieth to Jupiter, the Four and Twentieth to Mars, and the
next hour, being the first of the next day, to Sol. Which day does thence take
the name of Sol or Sunday (next in order after Saturn.) And, in like manner
proceeding, the Eighth, Fifteenth, and Two and Twentieth hour of that day will
fall again to Sol, the Three and Twentieth to Venus, the Four and Twentieth to
Mercury; and then the first hour of the next day to Luna, thence called Monday
(next after Sunday.) And, in like manner, the first hour of the following day
to Mars; of the next to Mercury; the next to Jupiter, the next to Venus; and
then again to Saturn; and so onward as before. And this I take to be the true
account of those Names, and in that Order: Saturday, Sunday, Monday, after
which (in the Latin Denomination) follow the days of Mars, Mercury, Jupiter,
and Venus.

But some of our Ancestors the Saxons, thought fit (as is supposed) to put-in
the Names of Twisco, Woden, Thor, Frea, (some of their Princes) instead of
Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, and Venus, (as Julius and Augustus, amongst the Romans,
gave their Names to the Months formerly called Quintilis and Sextilis.) From
which Saxon Princes we have the Names of Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and
Friday: the other days retaining the Names of their respective Planets as they
did before.

This account (from the order of the Planetary Hours) Dio gives us of the Names
of the Weekdays, and of their Order. Why so called, and why in this Order.

He tells us of another account from the Principles of Harmonicks. Because
Dia-tessaron (which we call a Fourth) is Reputed a Concord in Music; therefore
they might, beginning with Saturn (skipping two, Jupiter and Mars,) take the
Fourth Sol: then (skipping the two next Venus and Mercury) take Luna: And then
(skipping Saturn and Jupiter) take Mars: Then (skipping Sol and Venus) take
Mercury: Then (skipping Luna and Saturn) take Jupiter: Then (skipping Mars and
Sol) take Venus: Then (skipping Mercury and Luna) take Saturn; and so onward as
before. But this account seems more Forced, and the former more Natural. Which
therefore I take to be the true ground of this Order.

But either way, depending upon the order of the Planets as they were then
accounted when these Names were given to the Weekdays, it is at least so far
evident that they cannot be older than since the Planets were accounted to be
placed in this order. And therefore not so old as when Venus or Mercury or both
of them were thought to be above the Sun. (For this would quite disturb the
Order.) And therefore, certainly, not so old as Job's time.

Whether on each of these Days they did worship those respective Planets, as so
many Gods, I cannot say; nor do I think it.

Nor do I think that each of those Planets have any more Government of their
respective Hours, or Days, than of others. For I take the whole foundation as
well of These, as of the other parts of Judicial Astrology, to be purely
Precarious; and assigned only at pleasure, by those whose business it was to
amuse credulous people, and thereby to make a Gain of them.

But, whatever were the occasion of the first imposing; these are now the known
Names of those days. (And we need no more scruple the use of these Names; than
to talk of Pope Pius, Clemens, Boniface, and Innocent; though possibly the
Persons so called, had none of those good Qualities.) In like manner as we have
a Spring near Oxford which we call Aristotle's Well; not that we think
Aristotle was ever there, or was Lord of the place, and much less that he was
wont to be there Worshipped; but we so call it as being now the proper name of
the place (imposed at pleasure) by which it is known. And so for the days of
the Week; whatever were the occasion of the first imposing, they now signify no
more than the proper distinctive names by which the days are known.

And why we may not continue so to call them, I know not. We are told Act. 17.
19, 22. of Paul's being at Areopagus or Mars-hill, because that was the known
name of the place, without scrupling the reason why it was so called (whether,
because Mars had been there worshipped, or for what other reason.) And Act. 28.
11. (...) a Ship designed by Castor and Pollux, or (...), without scrupling the
reason of that name, or what relation these Stars had to Jupiter, so as to be
called his Lads. And when Paul 1 Cor. 8. allows them without Scruple to eat of
things offered in Sacrifice to Idols, even though they knew, or had reason to
presume them so to be, (unless when they might be suspected to do it with
respect to the Idol) as the Apostle argues at large 1 Cor. 8. and again Chap.
10. No doubt we may as lawfully make use of proper Names (whereby persons,
times, or places be commonly known) without scrupling the occasion of their
first imposition.

And I would desire those Gentlemen (who are so over scrupulous where there is
no just occasion, and make it their business to throw Scruples and cast
Stumbling Blocks before others,) to consider seriously, whose Work they be
doing all that while; and whether it be not as truly and properly superstition
to represent and quarrel with things as unlawful and sinful, which in their own
nature are not so; as it is to introduce things under a pretense of holiness
which have in them no such thing. And whether this be not to dote about
questions and strife of words* Whether these be not of those foolish and
unlearned questions which we are advised to avoid; knowing that they gender
strifes; and to avoid foolish questions, and genealogies and contentions about
the law, for they are unprofitable and vain; and instead thereof to mind those
things that are good and profitable to men; to follow righteousness, faith,
charity, peace, etc. as we are directed, 1 Timothy 6. 4, 5. 2 Timothy 2. 22, 23. Tit.
3. 8, 9.

They do not consider how much the studying and prosecuting these foolish
questions, and needless Scrupulosities, does eat out the power of Godliness and
true Piety, and the substantials of Religion, while we busy our selves about
these shadows; about little circumstances which do not at all influence the
Substance of spiritual Worship.

There be so many necessary duties, and indubitable truths, in the serious
practice of Piety and Godliness, that we need not trouble the heads of men (and
make it our business so to do) with doubtful disputations.

It seems to be the design of the New Testament to take us off from the
Circumstantials and Scrupulosities of Religion (which commonly produce strifes
and contentions to no purpose) and put us upon worshipping God in Spirit and in
Truth.

Si Deus est Animus, nobis ut carmina dicunt,
Hic tibi praecipue sit pura Mente colendus*
Was well enough said of the Poet; and is a good Paraphrase on that, God is a
Spirit and will be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth. I have been told long
since of a Grave Divine, who when asked, Why he did not Preach against Long
hair (which was at that time more Offensive than now it is,) gave this Answer;
If he could but Preach Jesus Christ into their Hearts; he should not much
concern himself for their Hair.

This Author tells us, p. 49. that our Liberty Gal. 5. 1. does eminently
consist in a Freedom not only from the Ceremonial Law of old, but also in a
Liberty not to be entangled with a new yoke of men's devices. I take needless
Scrupulosities to be such; the making of more Sins than God has made; the
making or pretending of those things to be Sins which are no sins, and putting
a religious Necessity upon things which are matters of mere Prudence and
Discretion. Like those 1 Timothy 4. 3. Forbidding to Marry, or (as I would rather
render it) Bidding not to Marry; and, to abstain from Meats, etc. Forbidding
things as Unlawful which are not so; is alike Superstitious as to Impose things
as holy which are not Holy: and equally contrary to the Liberty there intended.

Whether the days be called Saturday, Sunday, Monday, or Alpha, Beta, Gamma, is
all one to me, (I take them as I find them:) I think we ought not to foment
quarrels upon such trifles; and we sin if we do so.

Whether to meet once, or twice, or thrice, on a Sabbath Day, (if so as is most
for edification and the real service of God,) is merely prudential in this or
that place, without laying a new religious yoke where God leaves it to
Prudence. And if, in Prudentials, things be not managed sometimes with so much
Prudence as we think they might, we must be content to bear with such
Imprudences as we cannot help; and better so, than to pull-on greater
Inconveniences.

Whether to begin the Sabbath at Six or Ten or Twelve a Clock on
Saturday-night, is a thing (I think) not worth contending about* (so that it be
religiously observed as to the Substantials of it,) and for which we ought not
to disturb the Church where we live, but to follow righteousness, charity,
peace; and avoid foolish questions which gender strife.

And I should not think it much more, whether on this or that day, so the
Sabbath be well kept: and I would by no means, on that account, give a
disturbance to a Church where it is peaceably settled: It Is less material When,
than How, a Sabbath be kept. And, in many cases, it must be unavoidably left to
Prudence, whether this or that day be called the First or Seventh day of the
Week. We are in such cases to study the things that make for Peace, and
wherewith one may edify another. Romans 14. 19. The fruits of the spirit are
love, joy, peace, etc. but variance, emulation, wrath, strife, are fruits of
the flesh: Gal. 5. 20, 21.

To study and spin out Disputes into too fine a Thread (like that of a Spider
out of her own Bowels) is but to pervert the Simplicity of the Gospel of
Christ; to make that Abstruse and Difficult, which the Scripture would have
Plain and Easy: in Speculatives as well as Practicals. We should mind the
substantials of spiritual worship; and not dote upon circumstantials further
than as they do really advance the Substance. Refuse profane and old-wives
fables, and exercise thy self rather unto Godliness; for bodily exercise
profits little, 1 Timothy 4. 7, 8. Such are those Col. 2. 20, 21. Touch not,
taste not, handle not, (and others of like nature) all which perish in the
using, (there is no real advantage does ac^rew from the use of them; it is but
labor lost;) or (...) they are but mischievous in their use.

We complain of the Papists (and deservedly) for loading their Worship with a
multitude of Ceremonies and mimical Gestures; the number of which would be a
Burden, even though singly they were Tolerable. Being so many Diversions of
the mind from Attending the spirituality of the Service. But they have some
reason for it. For when much of their Devotion is either to be spoken so low as
not to be Heard, or in such a Language as not to be understood, they have need
of somewhat to gratify the Eye, when the Ear is not Edified.

And it is almost the same mischief, when men's Minds are amused with Nice
Speculations and needless Scrupulosities, whereby they are Diverted from the
Substantials of Serious Religion.

Yet I would not so be understood, as if no care were to be had of Corporeal
Worship, or the necessary Circumstances attending it. (For God expects the
Worship of the Body as well as the Soul, and Religious Actions must have their
Circumstances, as Time, Place, Gesture, and the like, as well as other
Actions.) But these Circumstantials should be considered as Circumstances (not
as the substance of the Worship;) and as Prudentials; so to be managed (as in
all other actions) as may, with Decency and Convenience, best advance the
spiritual Worship; and may be varied according as the diversity of times and
places may require. Not to lay the Weight of Divine Institution upon such
little things. As if, because Paul Kneeled down and Prayed (Act. 20. 36.)
therefore it were unlawful to use any other Gesture in Praying; Or as if,
because Christ bids, when thou Prayest, enter into thy Closet and shut the door
(Mat. 6. 6.) therefore we may not pray in the Chamber* Parlour, Dining Room, or
Chapel: Or, because Christ did Celebrate the Lords Supper, at Night, in an
Upper-room, to Men only, and but Twelve, and to those Sitting or Lying;
therefore we may not do it at Noon or Morning, in a Low-room, to Women as well
as Men, in greater Numbers, or in some other Gesture. For though such
Circumstances may be Lawful, and sometimes Advisable when convenient; yet to
put a Religious Necessity upon them, as of Divine Institution, looks like a
piece of Superstition.

And if we consider seriously how great a mischief many times some needless
Scruples do create to the Church of God; how great a matter a little fire
kindles; and how great hindrance to real Piety; it might justly make us wary
how we add Fuel to such a Flame, and rather bear with some things we think
amiss, (but may perhaps not be so) than by attempting to remove a supposed Evil
create a greater Mischief.

As to the present point in question; I have said so much upon the whole, as I
think might satisfy the Gentleman if he well consider it. Yet I know, when men
have once espoused a notion of which they are fond; and have so long pored upon
it as to rivet it in their mind; catching at every little thing that may seem
to favor it, and slighting whatever makes against it; (as we find our Author
does very often;) And that hardly any thing can be said so plain, as that there
be nothing to be cavilled at, by one who is minded so to do; And that when God
has declared his will as plainly as he thinks fit to do, if men will not be
contented with reasonable evidence, he is not obliged to gratify their humors:

When (I say) we consider this; It looks somewhat like what Solomon tells us
Prove. 18. 19. of a Brother offended, harder to be won than a strong City; and I
must leave the success to God* who so teaches as none like him.

He remits us to two Writers on this Subject, in defense of the Christian
Sabbath, Mr. Shepherd and Mr. Hughs (whom I have not read, nor have them at
hand,) and Two others whom he names not (nor know I well whom he means, for
more than two have since written;) who, he thinks, do tacitly retract somewhat
that those before had granted. And diverse (...) have written on this Subject*
though I have scarce consulted any of them. And particularly I have not seen
what is written by Dr. Young or Mr. Warren, whom I find cited in a late Book of
G. T. which came out since this was Written and part of it printed. It is very
possible, that some of those may have said much of what I now say, or that I
may now say somewhat of what they have said before. But, in this, there is no
hurt. If in some particulars I vary from some of them; it is not because I
slight them, or out of a desire to contradict them, but freely to speak my own
thoughts as they do theirs. Nor is it to be expected that all Writers on the
same Subject should agree in every particular, (Nor is he to make advantage of
it; For p. 3. he owns it is so also with those who are for the seventh day:)
But as to the main (I presume) we do well enough agree.

I have been a great deal longer than I did intend when I first began to write.

I shall give you a brief Sum of what I have said to this purpose, as to both
Questions. (For the Question is double, though it seem to be but one.)

First concerning the Jewish Sabbath, Whether that be Antiquated and at an end.
Secondly, concerning the Christian Sabbath, Whether there be sufficient ground
for this to succeed in the place thereof.

As to the first; I agree with him in many things which he prosecutes at large,
though not peculiar to his Question; As, That Our Lord Jesus Christ is God;
that he is the Lord Jehovah, the God who made the World, who rested the seventh
day, who brought Israel out of Egypt, and gave the Law on Mount Sinai: For
there is no other God.

But, this I say, he did as God (in Union with the Father and Holy Ghost;) not
as Christ (God and Man) our Mediator and Redeemer. For he was not then Man; nor
was there occasion of a Mediator and Redeemer before the fall.

I agree also that the Decalogue (or Ten Commandments) is Obligatory to us
Gentiles; (as being for the substance of it, a Law before it was so delivered
on Mount Sinai.) And that the Fourth Commandment concerning the Sabbath is one
of them; which requires after six days of Labor, the seventh day to be a
Sabbath or day of Holy Rest. And our Christian Sabbath is such.

But it does not say, the seventh in course from the Creation, nor does it
appear that the Jewish Sabbath was such, but rather the Seventh day from the
first raining of Manna.

I do agree also that God himself did rest on the Seventh day from the
Creation, Genesis 2. that is, He did cease to Create.

But I do not there find, that Man did so rest, or that there was any express
command for him so to do on that day; much less for ever after, on every
Seventh day in course from the Creation. How much may be thought to be employed
in those words, he blessed and sanctified it, I will not dispute; However, it
is but by Implication not by any express command; such as our Author demands
for the Christian Sabbath.

Nor do I find that ever it was observed by Man till after the Israelites
coming out of Egypt, or expressly commanded so to be.

Nor do I find that any other Nation (beside the Jews) did anciently so much as
divide their time by Weeks. Since the times of Christianity they have: But that
they did so, long before that time, I do not find.

I do agree also that after Isreal's coming out of Egypt they did observe a
Sabbath, Exodus 16.

But it was from a new command, (at Marah or Elim) which appeared New to them,
not a continuation of a constant practice; and it was from a new beginning (the
Seventh day from the first raining of Manna,) and as a distinctive sign or
token, of Gods being their God in a special manner, as contradistir guished to
other nations; (as himself owns p. 26. and 28.) and as a memorial of their
Refreshing after their Bondage and Labor in Egypt, and feeding them with Bread
from Heaven.

I do presume also that, they did, from this first raining of Manna continue a
circulation of Weeks for a long time, and perhaps till the time of our Savior.

Yet we are not sure but that it might be intermitted in the seventy years of
the Babylonish Captivity, and the day forgotten; and then restored anew by
Nehemiah (from a new beginning) Neh. 13. as he restored the Feast of
Tabernacles (Chap. 8.) which had been intermitted from the days of Joshua the
son of Nun to that day. But I rather think, the memory was preserved (by
Tradition) during those seventy years.

I agree also that the Church of the Jews was the most visible Church of God,
but I am loath to say (with him, p. 79.) it was the whole visible Church; For I
presume there might be many Good men of other Nations, who worshipped the true
God (of whom we have no History,) though not joined to the Jewish Church, nor
were (that I know of) obliged so to be. Such was Melchizedek (whoever he were)
not of the seed of Abraham, much less of Israel. And such was Job, and his
Friends from diverse Countries (of whom, were it not for the story of Job, we
should have had no knowledge,) nor are we to think these were the only persons
of those Countries who worshipped the true God. And how many such were in other
Nations, we cannot tell. Who might, if they had opportunity, join as Proselites
with the Jewish Church, when established. But I do not think they were
necessarily obliged so to do, or to keep the same Sabbath with them.

For I take it to be true, even before Christ's coming, that God is no respecter
of persons; but in every nation, he that fears him and works righteousness,
is accepted with him. Act. 10. 34, 35. Whether Jew or Greek, Romans 2. 10, 11. 1
Pet. 1. 17. Which are but Quotations from Deuteronomy. 10. 19.

Nor do I find that any Nation, except the Jews, did observe the Jewish
Sabbath. But I rather take it to be a distinctive sign of them from other
Nations, Ex. 31. 13, 17. as Circumcision and the Passover were; which, when
the wall of partition was taken away, ceased also.

Yet, as to what was Moral in them (the Circumcision of the heart being pointed
at by that of the Flesh; and the old leaven of malice and wickedness to be put
away instead of that of Bread; and a rest from Sin of more respect with God
than that from Labor;) we have instead thereof, Baptism, in the room of
Circumcision; the Lords Supper, in the room of the Passover; and the Lords Day
or Christian Sabbath, instead of the Jewish. And, as that took date from the
raining of Manna after their deliverance from Egypt; so ours from the
Resurrection of Christ, the true Manna.

I agree also that the Apostle, and other Christians, even after Christ's
Resurrection, did go to the Temple and the Jewish Synagogues on their Sabbath
days (and did there assist at Prayers, and Reading the Law, and other services
common to Jews and Christians) on a like account as when we now meet to hear a
Sermon, or keep a Fast or Thanksgiving on a Weekday.

But so they did as to Circumcision, and other Jewish Rites. As when Paul
circumcised Timothy, and joined in the Jewish Rites of Purification, Act. 21.
on account of those believing Jews who were yet zealous of the Law: To testify
to them that he had been misrepresented by those who said he did teach the Jews
which are among the Gentiles to forsake Moses, and that they ought not to
circumcise their Children, nor to walk after the Customs. Whereas indeed he
taught that Gentiles ought so to forbear, (as being a new yoke to which before
they were not subject,) but as to the Jews which were amongst the Gentiles he
did allow them (if not yet satisfied of their Christian Liberty) so to
practice. For he puts a great difference between the Gentiles, and the Jews
among the Gentiles; of which I doubt our Author does not take notice; else he
would not tell us ( p. 39.) of Paul's writing one thing, and practicing
another. He preached and wrote against Circumcision as to the Gentiles; but
allowed it to the Jews; and himself practiced it, As to Timothy (a Jew) but not
as to Titus who was no Jew. And the like we may say as to the Jewish Sabbath on
their Seventh day.

As to what Services were peculiarly Christian (as breaking of Bread) they did
it not at the Temple or Synagogues, but (...) at home, or from house to house,
Act. 2. 46. and on another day, the first day of the Week, Act. 20. 7.

Now this is all that he has to urge, for the Jewish Sabbath in particular:
which he cannot show to be commanded to all the World (but rather to them in
particular in contradistinction to the rest of the World,) nor that it was a
Seventh day from the Creation, but from the first raining of Manna. For the
Fourth Commandment says nothing of this Sabbath in particular, but only of
the seventh day after six days of labor.

As to that Imperious demand, p. 40, 48, 64. Where is there any such Power
recorded in Scripture to be given to any Man or Men whatsoever, after Christ
had said It is finished, to alter the Seventh-day Sabbath instituted by our
Lord Jesus Christ? I doubt he has forgotten that the same God who gave the Law
of the Ten Commandments, gave also the Ceremonial Law; and if it were the Lord
Jesus Christ who gave the one, it was he that gave the other also. And will he
then ask Where is there any power recorded in scripture to be given to any man
or number of men to abolish Circumcision and the rest of the Mosaic Rites
instituted by the Lord Jesus Christ? I know no such power recorded in Scripture
to be given, as to Circumcision and the rest, more than as to the Jewish
Sabbath. And we find them both put together Col. 2. 11, 16. Or will he say,
Where is any Power recorded in Scripture to be given to any Man or Men, (after
Christ had said It is finished,) to appoint Elders and Deacons and other
Officers in the Christian Church, and give Orders concerning it, which Christ
(before he so said,) had not given? Yet we know Circumcision was abolished, and
such Officers and Orders given. So that all this is but Flourish.

As to that of Christ having said It is finished; whatever be meant by that, we
know that the whole Order and Constitution of the Christian Church was settled
after that time: And whatever else be signified by it, it is not meant that
there was nothing to be done further concerning it; For, if so, to what purpose
did Christ give Commandments to his Apostles, of things pertaining to the
Kingdom of God after his Resurrection, if nothing were to be further done?

And if we consider the Apostles deportment; We do not find them any where
insist Authoritatively upon a Power given them from Christ, to Abrogate
Circumcision or the like, and thereupon to proceed pro imperio. But they Argue
it from the nature of the thing, That what was Typical of Christ, was at an end
now Christ is come; That what was Distinctive of the Jews from other Nations,
was now to cease when the partition wall was broken down; That what were but
shadows as to the Substantials of Religion, were now to pass away, as beggarly
Rudiments, Christ regarding the Body or Substance not the Shadows; (...), these
are but shadows in comparison of what Christ came to settle, (...), but it is
the Body (the Substance) that Christ respects, Col. 2. 17.

They do not Command, but Argue. They do no where pretend that God or Christ
had given them Authority to Abrogate a Law which God had made: But Argue (from
the nature of the thing) that the Law was ceased; and was not intended to
Oblige longer: That the Law was now Antiquated or Expired when the End for
which it was made was attained: That the Types were at an End, when the Thing
Typified was Exhibited: That the Distinctive Marks were now no more of Use,
when Jews and Gentiles were United: That the Elements or Rudiments ((...))
which God (for reasons best known to himself) thought fit for the Training-up
of his Church while as in a State of Minority (wherein a Child though Heir of
All does little differ from a Servant) should now cease when it comes to full
Age, Gal. 4. And to the same purpose Heb. 8. He argues that the Old Covenant
was at an end when a Better Covenant was come in the room; citing that of Ier.
31. Behold the days come, says the Lord, when I will make a New Covenant with
the house of Israel and with the house of Judah: Not according to the Covenant
which I made with their Fathers when I led them out of the land of Egypt, For
this is the Covenant that I will make, That I will put my laws into their Mind,
and write them in their Hearts. Meaning, instead of an outward Ceremonial
Service, he would establish a service more Spiritual. From whence he concludes
the Antiquation of the Former: In that he says a New Covenant, he has made
the first Old: Now that which Decays and waxes Old, is ready to Vanish away*
They do not claim a Power, to Abolish a Law of Gods making; But prove by
Argument, that these Laws are Antiquated or Expired; as not being intended, by
the Lawmakers, to bind longer than till such a time. As Romans 7. The Woman is
bound by the Law to her Husband as long as he lives; But if the husband be
Dead, she is free from the Law: Not that the Law is Abolished; but the Case is
Altered.

And it is from these Considerations that he Argues against Circumcision Col.
2. 11. and the Jewish Sabbath, ver. 16. For as to the Substantials of the
Service, provided a Sabbath be duly kept, it is much one whether on the Seventh
or the First day. Now these (Substantials) are (he tells us p. 83.) a lively
spiritual Converse with the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, in private Duties and
public Ordinances (where they can be had,) and in a Holy Rest all that day,
saving emergent cases of Necessity and Mercy. Which may be equally done on
either day.

But as to those who were not satisfied with these Arguments; (if they were
such as were before under those Commands) he does not urge his Authority; He
leaves them to practice according to their own judgment (but without censuring
others) till they shall be better satisfied, as in Romans 14. But as to the
Gentiles, who had never been under these Laws, the case was otherwise. Which
makes him argue otherwise with the (Gentile) Galatians, Ephesians, and
Colossians, than with the Christian Jews at Rome.

And as to his Question, p. 47. When, where, and by whom, it was taken away, I
say Then, there, and by the same, who took away Circumcision and the other
Mosaic Rites. That is, Fundamentally by Christ at his death who nailed them to
his Cross, after which they ceased to be Obligatory; But Executively and
Practically by his Apostles, and the Christian Church, according as they did
(leisurably and in time) come to understand their Liberty.

All which we are to presume they did according to such directions as Christ
gave them. For (as this Author observes p. 80.) Paul, in those Primitive times,
when the Ceremonial Law was fresh in memory, and the Gospel newly preached, had
much a do t^^e move the first converted Jews from Circumcision and other
Ceremonials, (and so from their Jewish Sabbath;) therefore these things were to
wear off by degrees, and not to be torn from them all at once.

And this I think is enough (to a person not prejudiced) as to the Removal of
the (then) Jewish Sabbath; appointed by Moses after their coming out of Egypt,
on the seventh day from the first raining of Manna, and not given to all the
world, but to be a distinctive sign of them from other Nations.

Now as to the other Point in Question, the Observation of the Lords day: I
would ground that originally on the Fourth Commandment; which does appoint a
Seventh day of Holy Rest, after Six days of Ordinary Labor. Which does
directly concern the Substantials of Worship (that a Sabbath be kept and God
thus served), but whether on this or that day of the Seven, is merely
Circumstantial, and (as Paul calls it) a Shadow, in comparison of the Body or
Substance, which is, he tells us, what Christ respects.

But then as to that, Why the First day rather than another? I answer, First,
Here was a much more memorable Accident, of Christ's Resurrection; than was that
of Raining Manna, from whence the Jewish Sabbath takes its date, as the Seventh
day from it (not from the Creation) or that of the Quails the Night before,
(the first day that God fed them by Miracle from Heaven,) And therefore stands
as fair for beginning such a Circulation of Weeks and Sabbaths.

We are told Ier. 16. 14, 15. and Ier. 23, 7, 8. Behold the days come (says
the Lord) that it shall no more be said, The Lord lives that brought up the
Children of Israel out of the land of Egypt; But, The Lordliveth that brought
up the Children of Israel out of the North Country. Not, that the former
deliverance was to be forgotten; but a greater than it did make it
(comparatively) to disappear (as when the light of the Sun does obscure that of
the Moon and Stars;) And so here, the Resurrection of Christ to be commemorated
paramount to that of former Mercies.

Next, in pursuance of this Occasion, we find our Savior did on that day of
his Resurrection, appear to Mary Magdalen and the other Women, declaring to
them the Doctrine of the Resurrection* then, to the two Disciples going to
Emmaus, Preaching to them (at large) the same Doctrine, and Celebrating with
them the Lords Supper; and afterward (the same day) to those assembled at
Jerusalem (with other Sabbatical works) and solemnly Blessing that Convention.
And if our Author by blessing the Seventh day Genesis 2. would have us understand
an Institution or Command to observe it; We have as much here; Christ joined in
this Assembly, and Blessed it. For so much is intimated in that his solemn
Benediction (a first and second time, Ioh. 20. 19, 21.) Peace be unto you; and
he Breathed on them saying, Receive ye the Holy Ghost.

He did so a second time on the same day the next Week; he Assembled with them
(in Religious Services) and Blessed them.

He did (according to his Promise made on that First day of his Resurrection)
send on them that miraculous Effusion of the Holy Ghost on the day of
Pentecost, which being the Fiftieth day from his Resurrection, was therefore
the first day of the week as was that of the Resurrection. On which day of
Pentecost we find them also otherwise exercised in Religious Employments, and
attested further by a miraculous conversion of three thousand souls.

We find St. Paul at Troas Act. 20. Preaching to the Disciples assembled (as it
seems their manner was) on the first day of the week to break bread; that is,
to celebrate the Lords Supper.

That such Assemblies were wont to be at Corinth, on the first day of the Week,
the Apostle presumes, or takes for granted; and gives direction for a
Collection to be then made, 1 Cor. 16.

And he had so done before, as he there signifies, to the Churches of Galatia;
presuming or taking for granted, that they also did so use to meet on the first
day of the Week.

And we have no reason to doubt but that such Meetings were wont to be in other
Churches. We cannot doubt but that other of the Apostles did disperse
themselves in other parts of the World, though we have not a like account of
their Travels, as we have of Paul's recorded by St. Luke: But we are to presume
(though it be not recorded) that their Doctrine and Practice was consonant to
his; and that accordingly they had such weekly meetings on the Lords Day as
these Churches had of whom we have the History.

Hence that day had the name given of the Lords day, (...), as we find it
called Rev. 1. 10. (as that of the Sacrament is called (...) the Lords Supper,
1 Cor. 11. 20.) which name it retains to this day, and for such purpose.

And all this, I think, is sufficient for us to continue our Observation of the
same day. I am sure it is much more than he can show for his seventh-day Sabbath
for more than two thousand five hundred years from the first Creation.

It is not necessary that we have express words of Command Recorded. We have no
Record in Scripture of such express words of Command for the Seventh-day
Sabbath, till after Isreal's coming out of Egypt; nor for the Worshipping of God
by Sacrifice; nor for other things which yet were Duties before any Record of
such express words of Command. It is enough if we can otherwise Collect it to
be Gods Will, according to the best light we have.

If this Gentleman think himself obliged to keep the Jewish Sabbath also: this
does not hurt us. This, I think, was the case of the Christian Jews at first. I
do not much question but that they did, as other Christians, observe the Lords
Day. The doubt was, whether they were not to observe also the Jewish Sabbath as
before they did. And these Believers who were yet zealous of the Law, and
thought themselves obliged, together with Christianity, to observe the Law of
Moses, did no doubt think themselves equally obliged to the Jewish Sabbath.
Those who thought themselves obliged to be Baptized, and to be Circumcised
also, thought themselves in like manner obliged to observe the Lords day and
also the Jewish Sabbath. And (till they should be better satified) the Apostles
permit ( the Jews) so to do.

If this do not satisfy him; I have yet two Expedients for him.

1. Let him begin his Week on Monday* and then Sunday will be the Seventh day.
Whether the Seventh in course from the Creation, I cannot tell; nor can any Man
living inform me. But it will at least be the Seventh day of His Week. 2. If he
be not satisfied with this: My next Expedient is thus. Let him take a Voyage
round the World, as Sir Francis Drake did. Going out of the Atlantic Ocean
Westward by the Streights of Magellan to the East Indies; and then, from the
East, returning by the Cape of Good Hope (the usual way) homeward. And take
with him as many as please of those who are of his mind. And let them keep
their Saturday-Sabbath all the way. When they come home to England, they will
find their Saturday to fall upon our Sunday; and they may thenceforth continue
to observe their Saturday-Sabbath on the same day with us. Which is the second
Expedient.
If you ask, How this can be? I will make it very plain, that so it will be,
and so it must be. For, Supposing the Earth to be Round, and the Sun moving
from East to West; you must allow that it comes sooner to the Eastern parts
than to the Western. It will sooner be Noon in Holland than in England, and
sooner here than in Ireland.

If you ask, How much sooner? We say, that Fifteen Degrees of Longitude
Westward, makes it an Hour later. As if he Embark about Dover, Yarmouth, or
other Port on the East Side of England, and Sail as far Westward as the West
of Ireland (or a little farther) it will be an Hour later, and not be Noon
there till it be One a Clock at the place where he Embarked. And so in
proportion, an Hour for every Fifteen degrees. And accordingly, when he has
gone round the whole Circle of Three hundred and Sixty Degrees, (that is Four
and twenty times Fifteen,) it will be later by Four and twenty hours* That is,
it will be but Saturday-noon with him, when it is Sundaynoon with those who
staid here. That is, His Saturday will be Our Sunday. And thenceforth his
Saturday-Sabbath will be the same day with our Sunday-Sabbath ever after.

And this, I think, should fully satisfy him. For he tells us, p. 39. The
variety of the time of the Sunrising or setting in different Climates does no
way disturb; for that a day longer, or shorter is still a day, and but a day*

Most certain it is he who shall have thus Sailed round the World will have had
one day fewer than those who staid here. So it was with Sir Francis Drake and
his Company: And so it has been with all who have taken such a Voyage, (as
many have done, for it is not a rare case:) and so will be to any who shall so
do.

What he would resolve upon this case, or what he thinks Sir Francis Drake was
to do when this happened; I cannot tell.

If he would go on to reckon the days according as they had happened to him in
his Voyage; then this Expedient must fully satisfy him. For then he keeps his
Saturday-Sabbath on our Sunday.

If he thinks the account should be rectified when or before he comes home, and
call the days thenceforth as he finds those to do that staid here, what shall
be come of that day he has lost? and which day of the Week shall he reckon
that to be?

And When must he rectify that account? when he comes home, or somewhere by the
way? For it would be just the same, if, before he come at England, he should
have landed in France or Spain, or on the Coast of Africa, or even at the
East Indies; and all the way from thence, he would still be a day behind them.
And so he would be with every Ship that in his way he should meet with. If he
and such other Ship meet at the Isle of St. Helens to take fresh water, his
Saturday will be their Sunday; and on which of the two days are they to keep
their Sabbath? or must they keep it one on the one day, and the other on the
other?

If he say that the account is to be rectified by the way (before he comes
home) then Where? or When? and by What rule? For when ever he does so rectify
it, he must then begin to call Sunday what just before he was to call Saturday.

If he say, This must be left to Discretion, when, and where: Then must it be
matter of discretion (and not determined by the Fourth Commandment) on which of
the two days in question the Sabbath shall be kept.

But then here will again come in our amazing demand (as p. 48, 86, 87.) What
man or men, without an high Usurpation of the Divine Authority, contrary to the
First Commandment shall, with pretended good intentions, assume an authority of
their own heads, to appoint (for this or that place; suppose the Streights of
Magellan) what day shall be the Lords holy Sabbath? Who, but our Lord Jesus
Christ, that is Lord of the Sabbath, has power to institute a Sabbath day? If
the Church or any part thereof be once admitted to have such Power, what Bolts
or Locks will be strong enough for such a Door, to keep it from letting in upon
the Churches of Christ what soever pleases those in Power?

I shall not much trouble my self to answer all this Warmth. But (when that is
over) if at or near the Streights of Magellan (a place, I think, not inhabited,
or not by Christian,) a Colony be planted by some from hence, and some from the
East Indies; those who come thither from hence will (according to their
account) call that Saturday, which those who come thither from the other side
will (according to their account) call Sunday: Must they have no Sabbath at
all? (that is against the Fourth Commandment:) Or must they by consent agree
upon the day? (this I should think, if he would give me leave:) Or must they
keep it some upon one day some on the other? This I would by no means advise,
if it may be avoided: Because it would be a manifest confusion and disorder;
And they would not both (if either) be the Seventh-day in course from the
Creation: And which of them is so, is not possible for any man to know. And it
would be more for common Edification that they do agree upon a common day. And
not much matter, whether of the Two.

This Gentleman, if he can consider of it calmly, I am apt to think will be of
the same mind; and think it better to have such a Sabbath than none at all; and
that the little circumstance, whether on this or that day, should be
disregarded in comparison of the Substantials of the Duty.

There be many things which the Word of God or the Divine Law does determine in
Thesi, which when in Hypothesi they come in practice, will require the
intervention of Prudentials or Humane Laws. The Eighth Commandment says, I must
not Steal, or take unduly from my Neighbor what is His: But, What is Mine, and
what is my Neighbors, will depend much upon Humane Laws; and, what shall be
reputed a Trespass on my Neighbors land; or, a forfeiture of his right. The
Seventh Commandment says, Thou shall not commit Adultery: But it will depend
much upon Humane Law, what shall be reputed a Good Marriage. The Sixth
Commandment says Thou shall not Kill: But it will much depend upon Humane Law
what shall be reputed Self-defense, or a Just War, or a Forfeiture of Life. The
Fifth Commandment requires us to Honor and Obey our Parents; But, in many
cases, it is Humane Law that is to determine, who is to be reputed the Father.
If a Widow be left whith Child by a former Husband, and marry another before
that Child be born (which sometime happens;) 'twill be a point in Law, not in
Divinity, to whether of the Two Fathers this Son shall be Heir. And if my
Father require me to part with what Estate is my own, 'twill be a point in Law,
how far I am required to obey such a Command. (And the like as to other
Superiors, as well as Natural Parents.) And those Laws which seem Absolute (as
Thou shall not Kill, Thou shall not Steal, etc.) Have yet their Tacit
Limitations implied. For no man doubts but there are cases wherein to Kill may
be lawful; as in Self-defense, in a just War, and for Capital Crimes; And in
such cases, to take from our Neighbor what was His. And, notwithstanding the
Command of Honor thy Father and Mother, or that of Children obey your Parents
in all things; there may things happen, wherein we are not obliged to do what
they bid us. And in all such cases there is room for Prudence to interpose.
Not, to Abrogate or Repeal a Law of God; But to judge what is the true Intent
of that Law. So not withstanding that Command of the Sabbath, In it thou shall
do no manner of work; yet our Savior tells us, The Priests in the Temple
profane the Sabbath and are blameless; and against the Pharisees superstitious
rigor he argues, not only from his own Authority ( The Son of Man is Lord of
the Sabbath Day) But from the Reason of the Law, The Sabbath was made for Man,
and not Man for the Sabbath; and consequently is so to be understood as may be
for the Good of Man (spiritual and bodily) not for his Hurt. And our Author
allows the emergent cases of Necessity and Mercy; And no man doubts but that if
a House be on Fire, we may Labor to quench it. In all which cases Prudence may
be used, but must not (upon that pretense) be Abused. Not as if it were left to
our Prudence, whether or no the Law of God shall be Obeyed; But, what is, in
such cases, the true Intendment of the Law of God. And there needs no other
Locks or Bolts (as our Author speaks) to confine Prudence in such cases, than
in all other Prudential Acts. So when the Fourth Commandment requires us to
keep holy the Sabathday; it may yet, in many cases, depend much upon Prudence
or Humane Laws, which day shall be reputed the Sabbath. And if this Author tell
us, it must be the Seventh in course from the Creation; We are never a whit the
nearer. For though he take great pleasure, on all occasions, to exclaim against
Tradition; yet he must admit a great deal of Tradition to intervene before he
can prove this or that day to be a Seventh in course from the Creation.

I am apt to think also, that when he has well considered the case of Sr.
Francis Drake (and many more since that time, who sailing round the world, as
he did, have lost a day,) he will come to one of these two Resolutions: Either
that when he comes back to England he must continue to call that Saturday which
on his account was so; (and then his Saturday-Sabbath will be the same with our
Sunday:) Or else that his account must be somewhere rectified in his Voyage by
skipping a day; and then and there beginning to call Sunday what, just before,
he was to call Saturday.

Now because there is nothing in Nature to determine where this must be; nor is
there any thing of divine Institution (that I know of) to determine where it
shall be; It seems to me to be Prudential, or most rational, (if nothing
intervene to counterbalance it,) to be at what we call the first Meridian, from
whence we reckon the Degrees of Longitude, Eastward, 1, 2, 3, etc. and so
onward till we come round to 360, at the same Meridian again; and thence begin
to reckon onward 1, 2, 3, etc. as before, for another round.

This first Meridian, in Ptolemy's time, was accounted to be about the Western
part of the African shore; as being the most Western part of the World then
known. Of later times, Geographers have been pleased to remove it more West,
about the Islands called Azores, or the Flemish Islands. But all agree to place
it between our Continent and that of America. And if from that Meridian, from
whence we reckon the beginning of Longitude, we reckon also the beginning of
Days; then the last of Saturday must there end, and the first of Sunday must
there begin. And therefore at that Meridian the sailers round the World should
rectify their account, calling it Saturday on the one side of it, and Sunday on
the other; that being the latest of Saturday, and the soonest of Sunday.

He will tell me perhaps, that, by this account, if We keep our Sabbath on
Sunday, those in New England must be said to keep theirs on Monday, as being on
the other side of that Meridian. And it is true, it would so follow. And
therefore I did interpose, if nothing else do intervene to counterbalance it.
And this is what I did at first intimate, as disputable, whether we and they in
New England are to be said to keep our Sabbath on the same day.

But it is the same case as to the whole Continent of America. And the same
resolution will reach all.

And therefore, the thing being once settled by the common consent of all, I
would by no means advise to change the day.

For the placing the first Meridian is purely Arbitrary. It might as well have
been placed beyond America, (if men had so pleased, and that America had been
known in Ptolemy's time) as on this side: (And we might have numbered our
Degrees of Longitude Westward, as now we do Eastward:) And may be so reputed
now, if men so please (as it is now reputed about 10 or 15 degrees more to the
Westward than it was in Ptolemy's days.)

And it is purely Arbitrary, where to begin to change the name of the day which
is to be so called; whether at the First Meridian, or elsewhere.

And consequently it is purely Arbitrary or Discretional, whether in America
such day shall be called Sunday or Monday. There is nothing in the fourth
Commandment, nor in the Word of God, to determine it.

But it so happening, that America has been peopled from Europe, traveling
Westward from hence (without taking notice that we cross the first Meridian,)
we have reckoned the days (and so named them) according as they appeared to
those upon their Voyage who went thither. Whereas if it had been peopled (I
mean, as to the Christians there) from Asia and the East Indies (by people
coming thence to the other side of America) what there is now called Sunday,
would (for the like reason) have been called Monday: and the Fourth Commandment
equally observed either way.

And upon a like account Christians in the East Indies, and in China and Iapan,
traveling Eastward from hence thither, do call their days there according as
they appeared to fall out to them in the course of their Voyage.

Now it is true, that some part of the day which we here call Sunday, is
coincident with some part of what is so called in Iapan, and also some part of
our Sunday (though not the same part) is coincident with part of theirs in
America. But very little of theirs in the East of Iapan, with theirs in the
West of America. About Eleven a clock at night in the one (or yet later) before
it begins to be one a clock in the morning in the other, (scarce an hour in
common) according to our ancient Maps. (Our later Maps make it somewhat more,
as if it might be Ten at night in the one, when it begins to be Two in the
morning at the other.) Yet these pass for the same sunday. And it is well enough
so to reckon.

But it is Prudentially so: Because the chief Trade and intercourse of America,
is with Europe; not with Asia. And therefore it is considered as lying West
from Europe; rather than as East from Iapan. And accordingly it is so placed in
our Maps. And though we continue to reckon our Longitude as from a Meridian
between Us and America, yet the account of our days we begin as from a Meridian
beyond it, between America and Asia.

Which is not said to raise new scruples, (as if I would advise an alteration
of a received computation; which is well enough as it is; and I know not how to
mend it:) But to show there is an unavoidable Necessity of leaving much to
Prudential considerations, What day shall be reputed sunday, and what the
sabbath, in this or that place. And therefore it cannot reasonably be thought
the design of the fourth Commandment to confine us to such Circumstantial
Niceties, which do not at all influence the substantials of Worship.

The fourth Commandment requires the seventh day of Holy Rest, after six days
of ordinary Labor. But of a Seventh day in course from the Creation to be so
observed, it says nothing: Nor is it possible for us to know. The Jews
observed a seventh day in course from the first raining of Manna; but I do not
know how that concerns us; or, if it did, how we shall know which is that day?
(for this Gentleman will not allow Tradition to be a good proof.) We observe a
seventh day in course from what (we think) the Apostles did observe. If we
mistake our reckoning (which I think we do not) it is not a Culpable Ignorance;
for it is according to the best Light we have. This day we are in possession
of, and the Christian Church has so been for many Hundred years. And he that
would dispossess us of it, must show a better Title. (The old rule is,
Possidentis potior est ratio.) To change merely for change sake, is Foolish. If
he would lay a Divine Necessity on us to observe the Jewish Sabbath from the
first raining of Manna (if at least that be the day by them observed in our
Saviors time;) he must make it clear to us, which is that day (by a better
argument, if he can, than Tradition:) And, that we are of necessity obliged to
that day; which was (himself acknowledges) a distinctive sign of them from
other Nations, as Circumcision also was. And if this distinctive mark (when the
partition wall is broken down) do as much cease as that did: It Is as truly
superstition now to put a necessity upon it, as upon Circumcision. Which though
the Apostles would, for a while, permit to the Jews; (to whom it had once been
a Law) till they should be better satisfied; Yet would by no means allow to the
Gentiles, to whom it had not before been a Law. And I think the case is just
the same of the Jewish Sabbath as contradistinguished to the Lords day.

I am Yours, etc.

FINIS.

