CONO-CUNEUS: OR, THE SHIPWRIGHT'S CIRCULAR WEDGE.

THAT IS, A Body resembling in part a CONUS, in part a CUNEUS, Geometrically
considered.

By JOHN WALLIS, D. D. Professor of Geometry in the University of Oxford, and a
Member of the Royal Society, LONDON.

IN A LETTER TO THE HONORABLE Sir ROBERT MORAY, Knight.

LONDON: Printed by John Playford, for Richard Davis, Bookseller, in the
University of OXFORD, 1684.

TO THE HONORABLE Sir Robert Moray, Knight.
SIR,
SInce I came home from London, I have taken some time to consider of those
Solids and Lines made by the Sections thereof; proposed to Consideration (to my
Lord Brouncker and your self, at your Lodgings, where I was also present) by
Mr. Pett, one of His Majesty's Commissioners for the Navy, and an excellent
Shipwright.

The Bodies proposed to consideration were all of this form. On a plain Base,
which was the Quadrant of a Circle, (like that of a Quadrantal Cone or
Cylinder) stood an erect Solid, whose Altitude (being arbitrary) was there
double to the Radius of that Quadrant; and from every Point of its Perimeter,
straight Lines drawn to the Vertex, met there, not in a Point (as is the Apex
of a Cone), nor in a parallel Quadrant (as in a Quadrantal Cylinder), but in a
straight Line or sharp Edge, like that of a Wedge or Cuneus. On which
consideration, I thought fit to give it the name of Cono-Cuneus, as having the
Base of a Cone, and the Vertex of a Cuneus.

By the various Sections of this Solid, in several Positions, he did (rightly)
conceive, that diverse new Lines must arise, in great variety, different from
those arising from the Section of a Cone. Some of which he supposed might be of
good use in the Building of Ships; in order to which it was, that he proposed
them to Consideration

Now because he judged it troublesome (as indeed it would be) first to form such
Solids, and then cut them by Plains in such Positions as he des^red; he had
(for avoiding that trouble) ingeniously contrived this Expedient. He caused
diverse Boards, of a good solid Wood, to be exactly planed, some of an equal
thickness, some meeting in a sharp edge; those of the former, he caused to be
glewed together in a parallel Position; those of the latter sort, he caused so
to be glewed together, as that their sharp edges met in one common Angle. And
having thus formed several Solids, of Boards thus glewed together, he then
caused them to be wrought into such a form as that before described: Which
being done, he then caused the Glue to be dissolved in warm Water, whereby the
several Boards, falling asunder, did exhibit, in their several faces, the
respective Sections of those Solids. And such were those he showed us; which
being put together, made up such Solids; and taken asunder, showed the several
Sections of them.

I do not intend at all to disparage the ingenuity of that Contrivance, which
was indeed very handsome, and neatly performed, but do withal suppose, that it
would not be unpleasing to your self, or him, to see those Lines described in
Plano, which would arise by such Section of the Solid.

That therefore is the work of these Papers, to represent the true nature of
such Lines, and the ways to draw them, without the actual Section of a Solid.

Which I have the rather undertaken, because this is a Solid which I do not
know that any other have before considered. And because this may be a Pattern;
according to which, other Solids of like nature may be in like manner
considered if there shall be occasion.

If beside these Sections which he has already considered, there be any other
Sections of this or other the like Solids which he shall conceive useful to his
purpose; the same may in like manner be represented (without the actual Section
of such Solids) by Lines thus described in a Plain.

But which of them may be most advantageous to his design, I do not pretend to
understand so well, nor can with so much certainty affirm; as, that I am,

SIR, Your very humble Servant, Oxon, Apr. 7. 1662. JOHN WALLIS.

CONO-CUNEUS OR, THE SHIPWRIGHT'S CIRCULAR WEDGE.
The Sections of a CONO-CUNEUS.
1. ON a Rectangle CDBA, Fig. 1. erect at Right Angles the Quadrant of a Circle
CQD; and joining QA, complete the Rectangled Triangle CQA. Supposing then from
every Point of the Quadrantal Arch DQ, to their respective Points in the
straight Line BA, in Plains parallel to the Triangle CQA, the straight Lines Sa
to be drawn, completing a Curve Superficies DSQAaB; the Solid thus contained,
I call a Cono-Cuneus.

2. It differs from a Quadrantal Cone, in this only; That what is here a
straight Line AB, is there a single Point; all the Lines drawn from the Points
S, meeting there at the Point A.

3. It differs in this from a Wedge, or Cuneus; That what is here a Quadrant
CQD, is there a Rectangle.

4. It differs in this from a Quadrantal Cylinder; That what is here a straight
Line AB, is there a Quadrant, equal and parallel to CQD.

5. This Solid, being cut by Plains in different Positions, will produce, in
the Curve Surface DQAB, great variety of Lines. As for Example:

6. First; If it be cut by RSa, a Plain parallel to the Triangle CQA, the Line
Sa is (by construction) a straight Line; and therefore, the Hypothenuse of a
Right-angled Triangle SRa.

7. And consequently, this Cono-Cuneus is equal to half a Quadrantal Cylinder
of the same Base and Altitude: For every of the Triangles SRa in the
Cono-Cuneus, being half the respective Rectangle in the Cylinder, the whole of
That will be equal to the half of This.

8. The Quantities therein I thus design in Species.

^ Fig. 1.


9. These Triangles; (if made by Plains set at equal distances) projected on
the Plain CQA to which they are parallel, will appear as in the first
Projection, Fig. 16. which is thus drawn: Having drawn a Triangle ACQ, like and
equal to that in the Solid, and CQD the Quadrant of a Circle, let CD be divided
into any number of equal parts at the Points R; from every of which, the
Ordinates RS being drawn, take equal thereunto, in the Line CQ, the Lines Cs,
or Rs; then joining As, the Triangles sRA or sCA in this Plain, represent the
like Triangles SRA in the Solid.

10. And if we suppose the Solid to be continued downward, beyond its
Quadrantal Base, these Triangles must be so continued also: And the like, if we
suppose it to be continued upward, (after a decussation in AB) as in opposite
Cones.

11. The Quantities, in this Projection, I design thus, in Species.

^ Fig. 16.


12. In Numbers thus; (putting R = 1. A = 2.)

CR. Cs. As. 0. 1. 2.236+ 0.125 0.992+ 2.233- 0.25 0.968+ 2.222+ 0.375 0.927-
2.204+ 0.5 0.866+ 2.179+ 0.625 0.781- 2.147- 0.75 0.661+ 2.106+ 0.875 0.484+
2.058- 1. 0. 2.

13. Secondly; If it be cut by Edq, a Plain parallel to the Quadrantal Base
CDQ, Fig. 1. the Curve Line dsq will be an Ellipse: For (supposing this Plain
to be cut in rs by RSa, any of those Triangles parallel to CQA;) then is, As AC
to AE, or aR to ar; So CQ to Eq, and RS to rs. And consequently (the Ordinates
rs being proportional to RS the Ordinates of a Circle) Edq will be the Quadrant
of an Ellipse, as CDQ is of a Circle.

14. The Quantities I thus design in Species.

^ Fig. 1.


15. These Ellipses (if cut off by Plains set at equal distances) projected on
the Quadrant CDQ (to which they are parallel) will appear as in the second
Projection, Fig. 17. which is thus drawn: Having drawn a Quadrant CDQ equal to
that in the Solid, let CQ be divided into any number of equal parts at the
Points q, and every of the Ordinates RS (parallel thereunto) at the Points s;
through which, if we draw the Ellipses Dsq, these in the Plain will represent
the like Ellipses dsq in the Solid.

16. If the Solid be supposed to be continued downward below its Quadrantal
Base CDQ, the parallel Sections will yet be Ellipses: But with this difference;
CD, which is now half the longest Diameter, will then be half the shortest
Diameter of the Ellipse, (such as are those in Fig. 17. beyond the Circular
Quadrant DQ:) And if the Solid be continued upward, after a decussation in AB,
the like Ellipses will occur in the opposite Solid as in this.

17. The Quantities in this Projection I thus design in Species.

^ Fig. 17.


18. In Numbers thus; (putting R = 1, A = 2.)

EQ. rs. rs. rs. 0.25 0.242+ 0.217- 0.165+ 0.5 0.484+ 0.433+ 0.331- 0.75 0.726+
0.650- 0.496+ 1. 0.968+ 0.866+ 0.661+ 1.25 1.210+ 1.083- 0.827- 1.5 1.452+
1.299+ 0.992+ 1.75 1.694+ 1.516- 1.157+ 2. 1.936+ 1.732+ 1.323-

19. Thirdly; If it be cut by cSsq, a Plain parallel to the Rectangle CDBA,
Fig. 2. the Curve Line will have this property: Drawing the Triangles as in the
Scheme, it is, As SR (the Ordinate from any Point S in the Arch SQ) to sr, or
S^ (the Ordinate from S, where the Plain cSq cuts the Quadrantal Arch): So is
aR or AC (the whole height), to ar or as (the distance of the Point s from the
Plain Aaa parallel to the Quadrant CDQ). Because aRS, ars, are like Triangles.

20. The Quantities I thus design in Species.

^ Fig. 2.


21. These Curve Lines (if made by Plains at equal distances) projected on the
Rectangle CDBA (to which they are parallel), will appear as in the third
Projection, Fig. 18. which is thus made: Having drawn a Rectangle CDBA (like
and equal to that in the Solid), and the Quadrant CDQ; divide CQ into any
number of equal parts at the Points c, and draw the Sines or Ordinates cS, with
the Co-sines SP: Then supposing from the several Points R in the Line ^D, the
Lines Rsa parallel to CA, (cutting the Quadrant QUOTH at S, and AB at a:) And
therein, As RS to PS; So AC (= aR) to as: The Curve Lines qsP in this Plain,
represent their Respectives qsS in the Solids. Where note, That as the Lines
Ssss in the former Projection, so are the Lines asss in this cut into equal
parts.

22. As the Solid may be continued downwards at pleasure, beyond its Quadrantal
Base CDQ; so may these Curve Lines qsP, in like manner, be so continued
infinitely: And they will then be Assymptotes, each to other; and to the
straight Line BD so continued. And if the Solid be continued upward after a
decussation in AB, the same Plains will cut off in the opposite Solid opposite
Sections like to these.

23. The Quantities in this Projection I thus design in Species. Fig. 18.


24. In Numbers thus; (putting R=1, A=2.)

A q. a s. a s. a s. a s. I. 0.5 0.516+ 0.577+ 0.756- Infin. II. 1. 1.033-
1.155- 1.512- Infin. III. 1.5 1.549+ 1.732+ 2.268- Infin. IV. 2. 2.064- 2.310-
3.024- Infin.

25. Fourthly; If it be cut by a Plain CQD, Fig. 3. perpendicular to the
Rectangle CDBA, and passing by the Center C and any Point d in the Side DB, the
Curve Line will have this property:. Cutting this Plain in r s (by any of the
Triangles RSa, parallel to CQA); then is, As AC or aR, to a r; So RS, to r s.
The length of a r being first found in this manner: As CD to CR, or Cd to C r;
So is dD to r R: Which subducted from the whole height, (or added thereunto, if
we suppose r to be taken in the continuation of dC beyond C) gives the length
of a r.

26. The Quantities of this Section I thus design in Species. Fig. 3, 4.


27. But if it be cut by a Plain CQb, Fig. 4. which passing by CQ, cuts any
Point b (in the Side AB) before it come at d in the Side DB produced; the Curve
Line b s Q will have this property: Cutting this Plain, as before, in r s, by
any of the Triangles RSa parallel to CQA; then is, As bA to ba; or, As bC to b
r; or, As AC (or aR) to a r: So RS to r s.

28. In Species, thus: Fig. 4.


29. Or else, continuing Cb till it cut DB (continued) in d, the Proportions
will be as before, at 25, 26.

30. But with this difference; That the Curve Q s bd will cut its Axis at b,
and meet with it again at d, (the part bd being on the other side of the Axis,
and of the Plain ABDC, in the opposite Solid.) And accordingly (R r being in
this case greater than aR) the Quantities a r, and r s, will be Negative
Quantities; a r falling beyond the Vertex AB, which was supposed short of it;
and r s below the Plain ABDC, which was supposed above it.

31. In both these cases (whether Cd cut or cut not the Vertex AB) the Lines dC
continued (answering to a suitable continuation of the Solid) will again meet
with their Axes continued at d (as far beyond C, as d is on this side it). But
the Ordinates in this continuation will be greater than those of dC; because
from CD upward the Solid grows thinner, but thicker from CD downward. And
accordingly, a r, which between AB and CD is less than aR, (and above AB, a
Negative Quantity;) the same below CD becomes greater than aR; (dC cutting* DC
at C:) For there it is a r = aR - R r; here it is a r = aR + R r.

32. These Curves, in both cases, (when Cd cuts or cuts not the Line AB)
supposing the Side DB divided into equal parts by the Lines Cd, (if projected
on one and the same Plain) will appear as in the fourth Projection, Fig. 19.
Where the Axes dC being continued to d, are then (to avoid confusion in the
Figure) removed from their proper place in the Plain ABDC, and set off in the
same straight Line AC continued; and the Ordinates r s applied to them in that
Position, in such proportion to RS, as a r is to aR or AC: And moreover, they
are so distributed, some on the one side, some on the other side of AD, to
prevent the confusion which might arise in the Figure, if so many Curves should
all intersect one another in the same Point D, beside another intersection
afterward.

33. The Quantities in this Projection, I thus design in Species. Fig. 19.


34. In Numbers (putting R = 1, A = 2,) the Semi-axes to the six Curves
described (whereof the first is the circumference of a Circle) are these:

I. CD II. Cd. III. Cd. IV. Cd. V. Cd. VI. Cd. 1. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 1.11803 1.41421
1.80278 2.23607 2.69258

And the Ordinates, supposing the Semi-axes divided into four parts, are these:

I. RS. II. r s. III. r s. IV. r s. V. r s. VI. r s. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0.661+
0.537+ 0.413+ 0.289+ 0.165+ 0.041+ 0.866+ 0.758- 0.650- 0.541+ 0.433+ 0.325-
0.968+ 0.908- 0.847- 0.787- 0.726+ 0.666- 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 0.968+ 1.029-
1.089- 1.150- 1.210+ 1.271- 0.866+ 0.974+ 1.083- 1.194+ 1.299+ 1.407+ 0.661+
0.785+ 0.909+ 1.033+ 1.158- 1.282- 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0.

Or if (for a more accurate describing of the Curves) the Semi-axes be divided
into 16 equal parts (and the whole Axes into 32), the Ordinates thereunto
appertaining are these.

I. RS. II. r s. III. r s. IV. r s. V. r s. VI. r s. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0.3481
0.2665 0.1849 0.1033 0.0217 -0.0598 0.4841 0.3782 0.2723 0.1664 0.0605 -0.0454
0.5830 0.4645 0.3461 0.2277 0.1093 -0.0091 0.6614 0.5374 0.4134 0.2894 0.1654
+0.0413 0.7262 0.6014 0.4765 0.3517 0.2269 0.1021 0.7806 0.6586 0.5367 0.4147
0.2921 0.1702 0.8268 0.7105 0.5943 0.4780 0.3617 0.2454 0.8660 0.7578 0.6495
0.5413 0.4330 0.3248 0.8992 0.8009 0.7025 0.6042 0.5058 0.4074 0.9270 0.8401
0.7532 0.6663 0.5794 0.4925 0.9499 0.8757 0.8015 0.7273 0.6531 0.5789 0.9682
0.9077 0.8472 0.7867 0.7262 0.6657 0.9823 0.9362 0.8902 0.8441 0.7981 0.7520
0.9922 0.9612 0.9301 0.8991 0.8681 0.8371 0.9980 0.9824 0.9668 0.9513 0.9357
0.9201 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 0.9980 1.0136 1.0292 1.0448 1.0604 1.0760 0.9922
1.0232 1.0542 1.0852 1.1162 1.1472 0.9823 1.0283 1.0743 1.1204 1.1664 1.2125
0.9682 1.0288 1.0893 1.1498 1.2103 1.2708 0.9499 1.0241 1.0983 1.1726 1.2468
1.3210 0.9270 1.0139 1.1008 1.1877 1.2746 1.3616 0.8992 0.9976 1.0959 1.1943
1.2926 1.3910 0.8660 0.9743 1.0825 1.1908 1.2990 1.4073 0.8268 0.9431 1.0593
1.1756 1.2919 1.4081 0.7806 0.9026 1.0246 1.1465 1.2679 1.3899 0.7262 0.8510
0.9758 1.1006 1.2254 1.3502 0.6614 0.7854 0.9095 1.0335 1.1575 1.2815 0.5830
0.7014 0.8198 0.9382 1.0566 1.1750 0.4841 0.5900 0.6959 0.8018 0.9077 1.0136
0.3481 0.4297 0.5112 0.5928 0.6744 0.7560 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0.

35. Fifthly; If it be cut by a Plain Ds qc, (Fig. 5.) passing through D, and
perpendicular to the Rectangle ABD, cutting AC in any Point c, and AQ in q; the
Curve Line D s q will have this property: Cutting this Plain by any of the
Triangles RSa in rs, it will be, As AC, or aR, to RS; So ar to a s. The length
of a r being first found thus: As DC to DR, or Dc to Dr; So is Cc to Rr: Which
subducted from aR, leaves a r = aR - Rr; and here DR = DC - CR: But if Dc be
supposed to be continued beyond c, and consequently R fall beyond c, then is DR
= DC + CR.

36. The Quantities of this Section I thus design in Species. Fig. 5, 6.


37. But if this Plain (passing by D) cut any Point b in the Line AB, before it
come at c in the continuation of CA, (Fig. 6.) the Curve ^^^e will have this
property: Cutting this Plain (as before) in r s, by any of the Triangles RSa
parallel to CQA, then is, As bB to ba; or, As bD to b r; or, As BD (or aR) to a
r: So is RS to r s.

38. In Species, thus: Fig. 6.


39. Or else, continuing Db till it cut CA (continued) in c, the Proportions
will be as before, at 35, 36.

40. But with this difference; That the Curve Ds bq will cut its Axis at b,
(the part bq being on the other side of the Axis, and of the Plain ABDC, in the
opposite Solid.) And accordingly (Rr being in this case greater than aR) the
Quantities ar, and rs, will be Negative Quantities; ar falling beyond the
Vertex AB, (which was supposed short of it) and rs below the Plain ABDC, which
was supposed above it.

41. In both these cases (whether Dc cut or cut not the Vertex AB) the Curve
Lines Dsc continued (answering to a suitable continuation of the Solid) will
again meet with their Axes (continued) at d (as far beyond c, as D is on this
side it). And if, in the mean time, the Axis D d cut the Vertex BA, or its
continuation* beyond A, the Curve will, in the same point, cut its Axis, and
(passing thenceforth on the other side) meet with it again at d.

42. These Curves, in both cases, (whether Dc cut or cut not the Line BA, or
its continuation) supposing the Line CA divided into equal parts by the Lines
Dc, (projected on the same Plain) will appear as in the fifth Projection, Fig.
20. Where the Lines Dc being continued to d, are (to avoid confusion in the
Figure) removed from their proper place in the Plain ABDC, and all set off in
the same straight Line CA continued; and the Lines rs are applied to them as
Ordinates (in this Position) in such proportion to RS, as ar is to aR.

43. The Quantities in this Projection I thus design in Species.

^ Fig. 20.


44. In Numbers (putting R = 1, A = 2,) the Semi-axes of the six Curves
described, Dc, are of the same length with Cd, 34. And the Ordinates, supposing
the Semi-axes divided into four equal parts, are these:

I. RS. II. rs. III. rs. IV. rs. V. rs. VI. rs. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0.661 0.620
0.579 0.537 0.496 0.455 0.866 0.758 0.650 0.541 0.433 0.325 0.968 0.787 0.605
0.424 0.242 0.061 1. 0.75 0.5 0.25 0. -0.25 0.968 0.666 0.363 0.6^0 -0.212
-0.545 0.866 0.541 0.217 -0.108 -0.433 -0.758 0.661 0.372 0.083 -0.207 -0.496
-0.785 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0.

Or (for a more accurate describing the Curves) dividing the Semi-axe into 16
parts (and the whole Axis into 32), the Ordinates will be these.

I. RS. II. rs. III. rs. IV. rs. V. rs. VI. rs. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0.3481 0.3426
0.3372 0.3318 0.3263 0.3209 0.4841 0.4690 0.4539 0.4387 0.4236 0.4085 0.5830
0.5556 0.5283 0.5010 0.4736 0.4461 0.6614 0.6^01 0.5787 0.5374 0.4960 0.4547
0.7262 0.6696 0.6130 0.5564 0.4998 0.4452 0.7806 0.7075 0.6343 0.5611 0.4880
0.4148 0.8268 0.7364 0.6459 0.5555 0.4651 0.3747 0.8660 0.7578 0.6495 0.5413
0.4330 0.3248 0.8992 0.7728 0.6463 0.5199 0.3934 0.2670 0.9270 0.7822 0.6373
0.4925 0.3476 0.2028 0.9499 0.7866 0.6234 0.4601 0.2969 0.1336 0.9682 0.7867
0.6052 0.4236 0.2421 0.0605 0.9823 0.7827 0.5832 0.3837 0.1842 -0.0153 0.9922
0.7750 0.5581 0.3411 0.1240 -0.0930 0.9980 0.7641 0.5302 0.2963 0.0624 -0.1715
1. 0.75 0*5 0.25 0. -0.25 0.9980 0.7329 0.4678 0.2027 -0.0624 -0.3275 0.9922
0.7131 0.4341 0.1550 -0.1240 -0.4031 0.9823 0.6906 0.3990 0.1074 -0.1842
-0.4758 0.9682 0.6657 0.3631 0.0605 -0.2421 -0.5446 0.9499 0.6382 0.3265 0.0148
-0.2969 -0.6085 0.9270 0.6084 0.2897 -0.0290 -0.3476 -0.6663 0.8992 0.5761
0.2529 -0.0713 -0.3934 -0.7166 0.8660 0.5413 0.2165 -0.1083 -0.4330 -0.7578
0.8268 0.5038 0.1809 -0.1421 -0.4651 -0.7880 0.7806 0.4635 0.1463 -0.1708
-0.4880 -0.8051 0.7262 0.4197 0.1132 -0.^933 -0.4998 -0.8043 0.6614 0.3721
0.0827 -0.2^^7 -0.4^60 -0.7854 0.5830 0.3188 0.0546 -0.2095 -0.4736 -0.7378
0.4841 0.2572 0.0303 -0.1967 -0.4236 -0.6505 0.3481 0.1795 0.0109 -0.1577
-0.3263 -0.4949 0. 0. 0. -0. -0. -0.

45. Sixthly; If it be cut by a Plain Bqc, passing through B ( Fig. 7.)
perpendicular to the Rectangle ABDC, and cutting the Side AC in c, (and any of
the Triangles RSa in rs) the Curve Line will have this property: As AC, or aR,
to ar; So is RS, to rs. The length of ar being first found thus: As BA to Ba,
or Bc to Br; So is Ac to ar.

46. In Species, thus:

^ Fig. 7.


47. But if this Plain (passing by B) cut the Line DC in any Point P, before it
come at c in the continuation of AC, the Curve Line will have this property:
Cutting the same Plain (as before) by any of the Triangles RSa parallel to CQA,
it will be, As DP to DR; or, As BP to Br; or, aR (=AC) to ar; So RS to rs.

48. In Species, thus:

^ Fig. 7.


49. Or else, continuing DP till it cut AC (continued) in c, the Proportions
will be as before at 45, 46.

50. But in this Section, the Curve does not cut its Axis at P (as in the two
Sections last mentioned at b), but continues on the same side of it, till it
meet again (if it be continued) at b. And (in case of such continuation)
instead of DR = R-c, it will be DR = R+c, where the Point R is beyond the Line
AC: And, in like manner, if after Bc have cut AC in c, it cut the continuation
of AB in P, then, instead of DP = R-C, it will be DP = R+C.

51. In both cases (whether Bc cut AC above or below the Point C) the Curve
Lines Bsc continued (answering to a suitable continuation of the Solid) will
again meet with their Axes (continued) at^b, as far beyond c as B is on this
side it; but continues all on the same side of its Axis, without cutting it in
the way, as in the two last mentioned Sections.

52. In both cases (whether Bc cut or cut not DC) the Curve Lines Bscb
transferred to one and the same Plain, (supposing the Line AC divided into
equal parts at the Points c) will appear as in the sixth Projection, Fig. 21.
where the Lines Bc are continued to b, and then (to avoid confusion in the
Figure) removed from their proper place in the Plain ABDC, and all set off in
the same straight Line AC (continued), and the Lines rs applied to them as
Ordinates (in this Position) in such proportion to RS, as ar to aR.

53. The Quantities in this Projection, I thus design in Species.

^ Fig. 21.


54. In Numbers (putting R = 1, A = 2,) the Semi-axes of the five Curves
described, Bc, are of the same length with Cd, and Dc, 34, 44. save that the
first of those (which is the circumference of a Circle) is here omitted;
(instead of which, in this case, we should have a straight Line, coincident
with its Axe BA.)

I. Bc. II. Bc. III. Bc. IV. Bc. V. Bc. 1.11803 1.41421 1.80278 2.23607 2.69258

And the Ordinates, supposing the Semi-axis divided into four parts, are these:

I. rs. II. rs. III. rs. IV. rs. V. rs. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0.041 0.083 0.124 0.165
0.207 0.108 0.217 0.325 0.433 0.541 0.182 0.363 0.545 0.726 0.908 0.25 0.5 0.75
1. 1.25 0.303 0.605 0.908 1.210 1.513 0.325 0.650 0.974 1.299 1.624 0.289 0.579
0.868 1.157 1.447 0. 0. 0. 0. 0.

Or (for a more accurate describing the Curve) dividing the Semi-axe into 16
parts (and the whole Axe into 32), the Ordinates will be these:

I. rs. II. rs. III. rs. IV. rs. V. rs. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0.0054 0.0109 0.0163
0.0218 0.0272 0.0151 0.0303 0.0454 0.0605 0.0756 0.0273 0.0547 0.0820 0.1093
0.1366 0.0414 0.0827 0.1241 0.1654 0.2068 0.0566 0.1132 0.1698 0.2264 0.2830
0.0732 0.1463 0.2195 0.2927 0.3658 0.0904 0.1809 0.2713 0.3617 0.4521 0.1083
0.2165 0.3248 0.4330 0.5413 0.1265 0.2529 0.3794 0.5058 0.6323 0.1448 0.2897
0.4345 0.5794 0.7242 0.1633 0.3265 0.4898 0.6531 0.8163 0.1815 0.3631 0.5446
0.7262 0.9077 0.1995 0.3990 0.5986 0.7981 0.9976 0.2170 0.4341 0.6511 0.8681
1.0852 0.2339 0.4678 0.7018 0.9357 1.1696 0.25 0.5 0.75 1. 1.25 0.2651 0.5302
0.7953 1.0604 1.3255 0.2790 0.5581 0.8371 1.1162 1.3952 0.2916 0.5832 0.8748
1.1664 1.4581 0.3026 0.6052 0.9077 1.2103 1.5129 0.3117 0.6234 0.9351 1.2468
1.5585 0.3187 0.6373 0.9560 1.2747 1.5933 0.323^ 0.6463 0.9695 1.2926 1.6158
0.3248 0.6495 0.9743 1.2990 1.6238 0.3230 0.6459 0.9689 1.2919 1.6148 0.3171
0.6343 0.9514 1.2686 1.5857 0.3065 0.6130 0.9195 1.2260 1.5325 0.2894 0.5787
0.8681 1.1575 1.4468 0.2641 0.5283 0.7925 1.0566 1.3208 0.2269 0.4539 0.6808
0.9077 1.1347 0.1686 0.3372 0.5058 0.6744 0.8430 0. 0. 0. 0. 0.

55. Seventhly; If it be cut by a Plain A s d, passing through A ( Fig. 8.)
perpendicular to the Rectangle ABDC, and cutting the Side BD in d, (and any of
the Triangles RSa in rs) the Curve Line d s A will have this property: As AC,
or aR, to a r; So is RS, to rs. And a r is thus found: As AB to Aa, or AD to A
r; So is Bd to a r.

56. In Species, thus:

^ Fig. 8.


57. But if this Plain (passing by A) cut the Line CD in any Point P before it
come at d in the continuation of BD, ( Fig. 9.) the Curve Line will have this
property: Cutting the same Plain (as before) by any of the Triangles RSa
parallel to CQA, it will be, As CP to CR; or, As AP to A r; or, aR (=AC) to a
r; So RS to rs.

58. In Species, thus:

^ Fig. 9.


59. Or else, continuing AP till it cut BD (continued) in d, the Proportions
will be as before at 55, 56.

60. In this Section, the Curve Line d s A cuts not its Axis at P (as in the
fourth and fifth Section at b), but continues on the same side of it (above the
Plain ABDC) till it meet with it at A; but (supposing the Solid to be farther
continued in the opposite Position) cuts it at A, and thenceforth continues on
the other side of it (below the Plain ABDC continued) till it meet again at d.
And (in case of such continuation) instead of CR = + c, we shall have CR = - c;
(because now R falls on the contrary side of C, in the continuation of DC:) And
consequently the Ordinates beyond A (being on the contrary side) to be
interpreted Negatively (with the sign --) as those on this side, Affirmatively,
with the sign +.

61. In both cases (whether Ad cut or cut not the Line CD as at P; that is,
whether the Point d fall above or below D;) the Curve Lines dsA continued
(answering to a suitable continuation of the Solid) cutting their Axis at A,
will again meet with it (continued) at d, as far beyond A as d is on this side
of it: And the Ordinates beyond A will be just the same as on this side, but
with contrary signs + -.

62. And the Curve Lines dsAd transferred to one and the same Plain, (supposing
the Line BD divided into equal parts at the Points d) will appear as in the
seventh Projection, Fig. 22. Where the Lines dA are continued to d, and then
(to avoid confusion in the Figure) removed from their proper place in the Plain
ABDC, and all set off in the straight Line AC (continued), and the Lines ds
applied to them as Ordinates (in this Position) in such proportion to RS, as a
r is to aR.

63. The Quantities in this Projection I thus design in Species.

^ Fig. 22.


64. In Numbers (putting R=1, A=2,) the Semi-axes of the five Curves described,
Ad, are of the same length with BC, 54.

I. Ad. II. Ad. III. Ad. IV. Ad. V. Ad. 1.11803 1.41421 1.80278 1.23607 2.69258

And the Ordinates, supposing the Semi-axis divided into four equal parts, are
these:

I. rs. II. rs. III. rs. IV. rs. V. rs. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0.124 0.248 0.372 0.496
0.620 0.108 0.217 0.325 0.433 0.523 0.061 0.121 0.182 0.242 0.303 +/-0. +/-0.
+/-0. +/-0. +/-0.303 -0.061 -0.121 -0.182 -0.242 -0.523 -0.108 -0.217 -0.325
-0.433 -0.620 -0.124 -0.248 -0.372 -0.496 -0. -0. -0. -0.

Or (for a more accurate describing the Curve) dividing the Semi-axis into 16
parts (and the whole Axis into 32), the Ordinates will be these:

I. rs. II. rs. III. rs. IV. rs. V. rs. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0.0816 0.1632 0.2447
0.3263 0.4079 0.1059 0.2118 0.3177 0.4236 0.5295 0.1184 0.2368 0.3552 0.4737
0.5921 0.1240 0.2480 0.3720 0.4960 0.6200 0.1250 0.2499 0.3749 0.4998 0.6248
0.1220 0.2440 0.3660 0.4880 0.6099 0.1163 0.2325 0.3488 0.4651 0.5814 0.1083
0.2165 0.3248 0.4330 0.5413 0.0984 0.1967 0.2951 0.3934 0.4918 0.0869 0.1738
0.2607 0.3476 0.4345 0.0742 0.1484 0.2226 0.2969 0.3711 0.0605 0.1210 0.1815
0.2421 0.3026 0.0460 0.0921 0.1383 0.1842 0.2302 0.0310 0.0620 0.0930 0.1240
0.1550 0.0156 0.0312 0.0468 0.0624 0.0780 +/-0. +/-0. +/-0. +/-0. +/-0. -0.0156
-0.0312 -0.0468 -0.0624 -0.0780 -0.0310 -0.0620 -0.0930 -0.1240 -0.1550 -0.0460
-0.0921 -0.1383 -0.1842 -0.2302 -0.0605 -0.1210 -0.1815 -0.2421 -0.3026 -0.0742
-0.1484 -0.2226 -0.2969 -0.3711 -0.0869 -0.1738 -0.2607 -0.3476 -0.4345 -0.0984
-0.1967 -0.2951 -0.3934 -0.4918 -0.1083 -0.2165 -0.3248 -0.4330 -0.5413 -0.1163
-0.2325 -0.3488 -0.4651 -0.5814 -0.1220 -0.2440 -0.3660 -0.4880 -0.6099 -0.1250
-0.2499 -0.3749 -0.4998 -0.6248 -0.1240 -0.2480 -0.3720 -0.4960 -0.6200 -0.1184
-0.2368 -0.3552 -0.4737 -0.5921 -0.1059 -0.2118 -0.3177 -0.4236 -0.5295 -0.0816
-0.1632 -0.2447 -0.3263 -0.4079 -0. -0. -0. -0. -0.

65. There are many other Sections which may be made of the same Solid; but
these being all that were proposed to be considered, I shall stay here.

66. But these four last mentioned (and diverse others, though somewhat
different from them) do all fall under one General, as so many Particulars of
it: For the better consideration of which, I shall complete the Body (or at
least the half of it) which is here but Quadrantal; and imagine it farther to be
continued downward (below its Circular Base) so far as shall be necessary; and
continued upward (after an intersection in the Line AB) in like manner, as
opposite Cones are wont to be considered.

67. Supposing then ( Fig. 10.) on the Center C, and Diameter DD, a Circle
described DSQD; and CQ perpendicular to the Diameter DCD, dividing the
Semicircle DQD into two Quadrants; and (at Right Angles to the Plain of the
Circle) a Rectangle DDBb, divided into two equal parts by the straight Line CA;
(and therefore, joining QA, the Triangle CQA will be at Right Angles to both
the Plains:) And from every Point S in the Perimeter of the Circle, to the
respective Points a in the Line Bb (in Plains parallel to ACQ) the straight
Lines Sa to be drawn, completing on either side of the Rectangle a Curve
Superficies DSDBb: These with the Circle contain a Solid, which I call a
Cono-Cuneus, made up of four such quadrantal Solids as are above described at
1. which Solid (and its Opposite, made by a decussation in the Line Bb) we
suppose to be continued as far as is necessary.

68. If this Solid be cut by a Plain at Right-Angles, to the Rectangle DDBb,
the Section of that Plain, with this Rectangle, will be either parallel to BD,
(and then the Section will be a Right-angled Triangle, as in our first Case,
6.) or parallel to DD; (and then the Section will be an Ellipse, as in our
second Case, 13.) or at lest will obliquely cut the two opposite Sides bD, BD,
(produced, if need be) in d, d; which Line dd I call, the Diameter of the Curve
Line, made by the Section of the Solid.

69. And, under this last case, fall the four last of these beforementioned,
(the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh) as appears by the Scheme: Where Cd, CB,
Cb, answer the fourth Case; Db, Dc, DA, answer the fifth Case; Bc, BC, Br,
answer the sixth case; and Ad, AD, Ar, answer the seventh Case. But the Curves
answering these Diameters I have omitted, to avoid confusion in the Figure.

70. Now a Point being assigned ( Fig. 11.) in any of the Diameters dd, the
Ordinate, or perpendicular height of the Curve over that Point, is thus found
Geometrically: By the Point assigned r, suppose arR drawn parallel to BD,
cutting bB in a, and DD in R; on which, suppose a Perpendicular Plain erected,
cutting the Semicircle DSD in RS, and the Solid in a RSa Right-lined Triangle;
wherein rs being drawn parallel to RS, will be Perpendicular to the Plain of
the Rectangle, as is the Line RS: And therefore s is that Point of the
Curve-Super^icies which is over the Point r, (through which therefore the
Curve-Line passes, whose Axis pas^eth through r:) And therefore rs is the
Ordinate to that Point of the Axis or Diameter dd.

71. Therefore the Point r being given, a and R be known also; and
consequently, RS the Ordinate or Right-Sine belonging to the Point R, in the
Semicircle DSD: Then, because a RS, ars, are like Triangles, As aR is to ar, So
is RS to rs.

72. Having thus found as many of the Points s as shall be thought necessary, a
Curve-Line regularly drawn by them is that Curve to which dd is the Axis.

73. The Arithmetical Calculation may be thus performed: Supposing DD to be
divided into any number of equal parts at the Points R, the Lines Ra (produced
if need be) will divide dd into the same number of equal parts at the Points r:
And if, from d, be drawn de parallel to Dd, cutting Db in e, and re from the
Points r, the Parallels re will cut de into the same number of equal parts.

74. Supposing then (for the more convenient calculation) DD = D, DR = d, de =
O, de = o, (and therefore dd = ^radic;: D2+O2, and dp =: d2+o2 bD = A (the
Altitude of bB above the Base), and db = a (the Altitude of bB the Vertex of
the Solid, above d the lower Vertex of the Curve-Line); then is eb = a-O, eb =
a-o, the Altitudes of bB above e, e, or d, r; (and therefore, when O, o, happen
to be greater than a, the Quantities a-O, a-o, are Negatives; and consequently,
e, e, above the Vertex bB, in the opposite Solid) and RD = D- d; and therefore
RS =:D2- d2. (a mean Proportional between DR, RD; that is, between d, D-d.)

75. Then, because a RS, ars, are like Triangles, (whether r be higher or lower
than bB;) As aR, or bD, is to ar, or be; So is RS to rs: That is, As A to a-o;
So ^, to:dD-d2 Which is therefore the length of rs.

76. If therefore, in a Plain, a Line equal to dd, be divided at r into so many
Parts as is supposed; and on every of the Points r, wherein it is so divided,
be erected Perpendiculars equal to the Lines rs thus found respectively
(observing still, that the Negative Quantities are to be applied on the
contrary part of the Line thus drawn); the Curve-Line drawn by the Points s in
the Plain, agrees with that in the Solid made by the Section thereof: And may
be therefore described without an actual cutting of the Solid, and may be
fitted to any proportion of the Height to the Base of the Solid; and in
whatsoever position the Diameter dd be supposed to cut the Rectangle DDBb in
that Solid.

77. This Calculation ^itted to the Circular Base DSD, may with the same case
be applied to a Parabola, Hyperbola, or other Curve-Line whatever, whose Axis
is DD, and Vertex D; if instead of:dD-d2, (which is here the Ordinate in the
Circle) we put the Ordinate of that other Curve-Line: As ^, if a Parabola; ^,
if an Hyperbola; (supposing D the Transverse Diameter, and L the Latus Rectum);
and the like in other Curves.

78. And for this reason, I chose to design the Point R by its distance from D,
rather than from C, forward and backward; and r by its distance from d, rather
than from c; which otherwise might as conveniently be done.

79. But if we should so design it, and put c = RC (and consequently ^; and a =
Ac, the Altitude at c; and o the difference of Altitudes at r from that at c;
then is a r = a - o for the Points r in cd above the Point c, but a r = a + o
for those below it in c d: And accordingly ^.

80. But if we put a = Bd, (the Altitude of B above d, the higher Vertex of the
Curve, which therefore will be a Negative Quantity when B falls below d) and o,
the difference of Altitude from that at d, the process will be the same as
before, save that then, instead of a - o, we must put a + o = a r (and
consequently ^ And the like if d were the Vertex of a Parabola, or Hyperbola,
or other Curve, whose Axis d d slopeth downward.

81. If it be desired rather to find Instrumentally, than by Calculation, the
several Ordinates r s, to any Diameter D D, in any such Solid, and in any
Position assigned; it may be very easily performed in this manner.

82. First; Let any straight Line, at pleasure, LM ( Fig. 12.) be divided at
the Points r, into any number of unequal parts, as a Line of Ordinates at equal
distances in the Quadrant of a Circle; (in like manner, as the Line CQ is
divided at the Points S in the first Projection, Fig. 16.) and on the other
side of M, let l M be so divided also into the same number of Parts; and on the
several Points r, M, erect Perpendiculars, continued both ways as far as shall
be needful. Which general Construction is applicable to any case at pleasure;
and being once drawn, may successively be applied to many.

83. Then (supposing, in the Solid proposed, Fig. 11. d E, parallel to D D,
cutting AC in E; and Eq, parallel to CQ, cutting AQ in q;) set off, in the
Perpendicular at M, Fig. 12. a Line ME equal to that Eq in the Solid, and draw
the straight Lines E l, EL; which Lines will cut off, in the other Parallels,
the Lines r S, equal to the Ordinates of that Ellipse in the Solid, ( Fig. 11.)
whose Axis is d E; (^uch as are R s in the second Projection, Fig. 17.)

84. In like manner, (supposing, in the Solid, Fig. 11. de parallel to D D,
cutting CA, or the continuation thereof, in e; and e q, parallel to CQ, cutting
QA, or the continuation thereof, in q;) set off in the Perpendicular at M, (
Fig. 12, 13.) a Line M e equal to e q; (on the same side of l ML with ME, or on
the contrary, according as d and d are on the same, or opposite Sides B b;) and
draw the straight Lines e l, e L; which Lines will cut off, in the other
Parallels, the Lines r s, equal to the Ordinates of that Ellipse in the Solid,
whose Axis is e d.

85. Then (dividing E e into as many equal parts at the Points o, as are the
unequal parts in l L) from every of the Points o, draw straight Lines to l or L
respectively; which Lines will cut off, in the respective Parallels, r S, (the
first in the first, the second in the second, etc. numbering the Points o from
E, and the Parallels from l;) the Lines r s, equal to the desired Ordinates of
the Curve proposed.

86. Lastly; Drawing a straight Line d d ( Fig. 14, 15.) equal to that in the
Solid (the Diameter of the Curve proposed); and dividing it in the Points r
into as many equal parts, as are the unequal parts in l L; and to each Point of
Division, applying at Right Angles the Lines r s, equal to those upon the Line
l L (on the same or contrary sides of d d, as those are of l L); and, by the
Points s, drawing the Curve-Line which they direct: This Curve-Line is the same
with that which is made by the Section of the Solid proposed, by a Plain on the
Line d d at Right-Angles to the Rectangle D DB b.

87. The same may be performed by one of the Triangles l ME, Fig. 13. reckoning
the Parallels therein twice over, (the Ordinates in each Quadrant being the
same) and dividing E e into as many parts as before.

88. If the Base D SD be an Ellipse, this process will be the same as in a
Circle; but if it be a Parabola, Hyperbola, or other the like Curve, the Line l
L, which is now divided as a Line of Ordinates at equal distances in a Circle,
must then be divided as such a Line of Ordinates of that Parabola, Hyperbola,
or other Curve, whose Axis is D D: And then the rest of the Operation pursued
with very little alteration.

89. In the whole Progress, I have still supposed the Parallelogram ABDC to be
Rectangular, and the Quadrant CDQ at Right-Angles with that Plain, and the
Triangles ACQ, a RS, at Right-Angles to both of them (and consequently, the
Body to be Erect, not Scalene); and the Plain cutting this Body, to be also at
Right-Angles with that Parallelogram. But in case any of what we suppose to be
Rectangular, should be Oblique, the Sections will be somewhat different from
these described, in like manner, as the Sections of Scalene Cones, or the
Oblique Sections of Erect Cones, differ from the Right Sections of Right Cones.
But of these cases, I intend not here to discourse farther, contenting my self
with the Perpendicular Sections of these Erect Solids.

FINIS.
Fig. X.


Fig. XI.


Fig. XII.


Fig. XIII.


Fig. XIV.


Fig. XV.


Fig. XVI. Project. 1.a


Fig. XVII. Project. 2.


Fig. XVIII. Project. 3.


Fig. XIX. Project. 4.a


Fig. XX. Project. 5.a


Fig. XXI. Project. 6.


Fig. XXII. Project. 7.a



