A LETTER FROM NEW ENGLAND Concerning their CUSTOMS, MANNERS, AND RELIGION.

Written upon occasion of a Report about a Quo Warranto Brought against that
GOVERNMENT.

LONDON, Printed for Randolph Tailor near Stationers Hall, 1682.

A LETTER FROM New England, etc.
SIR,
I Received yours, and since that we are informed that a Quo Warranto is
framing against the Government of this place; whether true or false I desire
you to send word. I doubt not but in the mean time several of your Dissenters
will think it a little hard, that their Brethren should be perfecuted afar off,
as they cry out they are at home; but if they knew, or upon knowledge
considered, what a sort of People the Inhabitants of this Colony are, I believe
the very worst of your Enthusiasts and Hypocrites would not claim any Kindred
with them.

I think it great reason that the King should make Inquiry into their
Authority, when they live altogether as if they denied his, and impose
Arbitrary Laws on all Trafiques hither, without respect to their Fellow
Subjects; and most certainly the King has good grounds to suspect their
Obedience to him, when they live in such a continual course of Debauchery, that
by their Actions one would think they were Atheists, and as exempt from the
Superintendency of God, as they fancy themselves unaccountable to any Power, by
being a Constitution within themselves.

As to their Religion, I cannot perfectly distinguish it by name, it being a
Hodgpodg of all Heresies and Errors mixed together, he only Cement being
Hypocrisy and Dissimulation; and nothing keeps 'em Friends, but only the fear
of exposing one another Knavery. An Elder is a Mungrel begot by a Jack
Presbyter upon the body of an Independent Sister. As for the Rabble, their
only Religion lies in ch^ating all they deal with, and now and then to be
cheated themselves by their Pastors for Conscience sake. In a word, both
Teacher and Flock are like Watermen, that look one way and row another; their
Eyes are always fixed upon Heaven, while they tread the paths to Hell; and have
continually God in their mouths, but the Devil in their hearts and actions.
Notwithstanding all their noise and clamor against Persecution, and the
reasonableness for a Toleration in Tender Consciences, you may expect more
mercy from a Turk in his revenge, or fairer dealing from a Jew in his trade.

I have seen them whip several of the Anabaptist Principle in one day at the
Gun, (the usual Whipping place here) only for serving God according to their
way, as if they would allow no body else to be in the wrong but themselves.

The Quakers are here a very suffering Generation, and hardly one of the Yea
and Nay Persuasion, but has been abused severely, and three of the most
obstinate were tied up; nothing but their Religion being laid to their charge.
I would fain know what a bawling about Persecution, free exercise for the
Godly, and Liberty and Property, would have been in England with you, if such
things were acted amongst you as are here daily.

But the most unparalleled Instance of all is, that though they profess
themselves Protestants, their hatred is most generally against those few
persons that are according to the Church of England; and if any man has the
courage to own himself of that Communion, they will slily threaten him, and study
to trepan him into some breach of their Laws, and so make him either fine, or
perhaps inflict a bodily punishment. They exact three pounds a year of such
persons for not frequenting their Conventicles; and if they come to inhabit
with their Families, unless the Man or his Wife be a Member of their Church,
they very charitably deny Baptism to their Children, looking upon all but their
own dear Cubs as the Seed of Pagans and Infidels.

I wonder by what Authority they thus Lord it over their Fellow Subjects, it
being directly contrary to the Kings intent, and the Charter of the place; all
Persuasions being allowed by Royal Leave, it being looked upon as a Situation
designed for Trade, not the propagation of their particular Religion.

They have all their Government within themselves in a particular manner; they
choose their own Officers, and have a Court which consists of Eighteen
Magistrates, which they call a Court of Justice. These sit as Judges in all
matters that tend to the Execution of the Laws, which are always made by a
Court of a General Assembly, which consists not only of the Court of Justice,
but of a Deputy chose out of each respective Town belonging to the Masatheusets
Colony. By this General Assembly all Taxes are laid on the People, Laws
enacted, etc. Amongst the rest they have a Law, which lays an Imposition on all
Goods whatsoever here imported from England, which in my opinion is quite
contrary to the Laws of England, an Act of Parliament being expressly to the
contrary; and certainly they usurp that power, whereby they claim any thing
from English Goods, that have paid His Majesty's Customs at English Ports; and
how they came invested with this Prerogative, I believe they will be put to it
to give an account.

I know several have been forced to pay one Penny the Pound, and no redress
could be had, they being both Judges and Exactors into the bargain.

They have several good and wholesome Laws as in other places, as against
Adultery, Fornication, Cheating, Drunkenness, and Buggery; but considering
their Actions, all their Laws look but like Scarecrows, or for fashions sake.
In their practice they outgo the most notorious of Offenders; Messalina was
chaste in comparison of their lewd and repeated Fornications and Adulteries.
For Lying and Cheating they outvie Judas, and all the false Merchants in Hell;
and the worst of Drunkards may here find Potcompanions enough, for all their
pretenses to Sobriety. In a word, no Sect of Men upon the face of the earth are
so unmannerly, in their outward disclaiming against Vices in particular, and
more punctual in the practice of all in general.

The Chastity of the People may be guessed at by the number of Delinquents in
that kind; there hardly passes a Court Day but four or five are convened for
Fornication or Adultery, and Convictions in this nature are very frequent;
after which the fair Convict is sometimes turned over to a Lay Elder, for
chastisement for her former sin, and the commission of a new one.

Now most certainly if Justice finds out so many Transgressors in this kind,
how many must the private ones amount to? I may without being uncharitable
think, they include a great part of the Town; for private sins (as these are)
seldom fall under public censure, or at least not so often as more open ones.

Mr. A -- s Wife has been most notorious, and disgraced the whole Herd, by
putting the Horns on her Husband, and their Head-leader the old Pastor; who
poor man, though he has the Gift of Sanctifying in the Spirit, fails much in
Satisfying the Flesh; which gives occasion to his sweet Spouse to straggle
abroad for an Help meet, and once particularly was caught, having been at the
Tavern almost all night with a Person well known here, and returning home to
the old Gentleman, was encountered by the Watch, to whom (adding one time to
another) she pretended she bad been upon the search for her Husband, but the
Watch smok'd the business, and out of a sense of their own Failings, and her
Credit, dismissed her home, not willing to make her a public Example, lest the
wicked should rejoice, and the uncircumcized triumph at the sweet downfall of a
Daughter of Zion.

I could name you several others, as my Lady S -- ff, my Lady P -- e, and young
pretty Mrs. S --, Daughter to a great Member; Mrs. C -- y, Mrs. T -- r, Mrs. B
-- ll, Mrs. F -- n, Mrs. R -- t, Mrs. S -- h, Mrs. M -- s, and Mrs. J -- n; all
which are Well-willers to the Mathematics, and can tell how to adorn their
Husbands Heads with a Forked Coat of Arms.

And yet further to prove to you how agreeable this sweet sin of Leachery is to
them, I shall give you one Instance more, of one who formerly had murdered her
Infant here, which was thrown into the Town Dock; the Infant being taken up,
the Magistrates immediately gave order for the search of all the Women in the
Town, to see if thereby they could find out the Murderess; now in this search,
though the Murderess could not be found out, yet several of the Religious that
went under the denomination of Maids were found with Child.

In short, though this Town has but three Conventicles in it, the North, the
South, and the old one; yet few places of greater extent abounds with more
Pimps, Procurers, Panders, etc. than this does; and the lewdest of 'em all is
one M -- le.

For Cheating and Lying our Inhabitants are (I believe) singular by themselves,
and the Villainies that are committed that way are without number. They make a
sport of it here, look upon Cheating as a commendable piece of Ingenuity, and
brag of those vile Actions which others are ashamed of, commending him that has
the most skill to commit a piece of Roguery.

There was one H -- n L -- tt, a true Chip of the old Block, (Son to a Person
notoriously known for his dutiful Declaration, in saying, that rather than this
People should comply with the Kings Power, he would sell the Country to the King of
Spain, in imitation of his Fathers Virtues) being dispatched into the West
Indies with a Cargo of Goods, to dispose of them as Factor. This Fellow
thinking himself secure amongst the ignorant Indians, proceeds in his old
method, and accordingly makes sale of Twelve Barrels of Flower, at a rate
certain by the Hundred weight, and in four or five days the Indian comes for
the Goods; but no sooner had my Rogue L -- tt got his Chapmans backside, but
he causes the Flower to be repackt, and then filled the Barrels with Stone; by
which means he increased his store to such a quantity, that he damaged the
Indian Thirty Pieces of Eight. But he being afterward found out, was sued and
forced to pay for his Knavery; and if it had not been for very earnest and
importunate Solicitations made on his behalf to the Governor, he had most
certainly disgraced the Pilory.

Another Cheat which he committed was thus, and in his own Country too: He
agrees with a Countryman for a Horse, and was to pay Four Pounds of Masathuset
Money, and that to become due upon the Day of Election for Magistrates, which
is held yearly. He understanding that the Country man could not read, makes the
Bill under his Hand to be payable at the Day of the Resurrection of the
Magistrates, willing belike to take time enough to pay his Debts, or else in
good hopes the Magistrates had no share in that Day. The Countryman however
sues him, and with much trouble and charge recovers his Money.

This Fellow since his Father died is reduced to a Morsel of Bread, and in so
low a condition, that he pimps to most of the Whores in Boston. Sometimes he
threatens to prosecute Strangers for debauching a Sister or a Cousin, etc. but
sometimes after all his blustering he will be contented with Half a Crown. He
has his Mates as bad as he is, and many a Shopkeeper and Tradesman as bad as
himself; who are so damnably addicted to Lying and Cheating, that it is
dangerous for a Stranger to trade amongst them, without peril of being
inevitably ruined.

In whatever any one deals with them, he shall be certainly overreached either
in goodness or value; so that it would be the wisdom of Foreiners to deal with
none but the Factors here, who generally bear a good conscience. And yet
amongst them, all are not honest neither: I will instance only in one, who as
I have been credibly informed, having a Warehouse burned down not worth to him
above 80 l. and though he lost not much by the Fire, yet the Good Man had the
conscience to charge his Correspondents some Hundreds of Pounds for the loss of
their Goods.

In short, Sir, these Bostonians enrich themselves by the ruin of Strangers,
and (like ravenous Birds of Prey) strive who shall fasten his Talons first upon
them. But all these things you must know, Sir, pass under the notion of
Self-preservation and Christian Policy.

As to their Drunkenness, though they have a Law against it, yet they are so
addicted to it, that they doubt whether it is a sin or no, and seldom go to bed
without muddy brains. If you come into the company of one in such a condition,
you have an infallible Mark to know him by, which is this, you shall hear
nothing proceed from his mouth but Scripture Phrase, and when he can hardly
speak any thing, he is clearly for Canting. Hence it comes that they are so
silly and extravagant in their Prayers and Ejaculations:

Lord, (says one) I thank thee that thou have thus enriched thy Servant; what
am I, or what is my Fathers Family, that thou should thus regard me? How
have thou filled thy Servants Cup, nay it runs over to two hundred pounds? Thou
have given thy Servant as good an House as the Worshipful Mr. T -- g thy humble
Servant, nay almost as good an House as the Honorable the Governor, but there
is not so many Bricks, O Lord.

Lord, (says another) I beseech thee give me this Cloth; thou have promised
that all such as belong to the Election of thy Grace shall not want; I
challenge thee therefore on thy promise, thou know (O Lord) I want a Coat, a
Pair of Breeches and a Doublet; it is true (O Lord) the Cloth is none of mine
own, but persuade the man (O Lord) to give it me.

Lord, (says a third) thou know the pride of these people, and that it is
for the pride of the people that thou have brought upon us all these Judgments:
O Lord, it is for the pride of the people I say, O Lord if thou will not
believe me, do but look upon my Cupboards Head, and there are a Pair of Shoes
with long Toes to them.

I wonder with what impudence these people can pretend to Religion; nay a
fourth went further, and in the midst of his Devotion forsooth, when some Milk
that was on the fire boiled over, he left his Prayers and cursed his Boy,
crying, God damn him for a Son of a Whore, did he not see the Milk boil over?

Another was at his Exercise, and a Customer knocked at the door for a
Penyworth of Nails; the Brother sends the Boy to the door, to enquire who it
was; he returns and tells him, ^t was a Customer for a Penyworth of Nails: ask
him (says the Good Man) if he will join with us in prayer; he goes and returns
with a No: why then (says the Good Man) serve him John, serve him. But of these
profane Mixtures we have abundance, there being hardly a Shopkeeper in the
whole Town without a tang of this Leven.

A sixth Instance I shall give you of a Lay Elder, one W -- ll, as he prayed in
the old Conventicle: Lord, (says he) thy mercies have been to us manifold, for
behold formerly it was but a mere Bog and a Swamp, where our stately Townhouse
stands; yea (Lord) the Sea and the Tide came up where now our Boys play at
Football.

Now pray (Sir) let me see what the Brethren can say to these things, and what
Scripture they have for their Warrant. Now as to the sin of Buggery, which
though it be one of the highest nature, yet there be some of the Brethren that
do love to embrace their likeness, (to wit a Beast;) choosing rather to have
familiarity with a Beast or a handsome Boy, than use their own Wives.

Whereof take a sad Example of an ancient united Member to his Church, in his
respective habitation, who lived at New Haven; he was so extremely brutish,
that he buggered no less than five several Creatures, a Mare, a Cow, a Sheep, a
Sow, and a Bitch. His Wife caught him one day buggering a Sow in the Backside,
and threatened him with Justice; but he menacing her with Death, scared her, and
so escaped that time, and went on in his Villainy; till he was detected by two
of his Neighbors, who brought him to Justice for the same, where he confessed
the buggering the five several Creatures before mentioned, and was accordingly
executed.

I had not given you the trouble of so long a Letter, nor raked in such a
Dunghill of Filth, but that this sort of People are apt to say, Stand off, for I
am more holy than thou; and under that cloud shall perpetrate the most horrid
Crimes that ever Hell spawned; as Murder, Adultery, Lying, Cheating,
Drunkenness, and Buggery; all which are but Failings in a Brother or Sister:
though if a wicked man ( alias an honest man) should chance to commit the least
of these Crimes, straight ways all the Volleys of D^mnation, that the envious
mouth of an Hypocrite can discharge on him, shall be his lot.

Of things and persons though I could write much more, yet I shall make an end
with a Relation of a severe piece of Justice, done by one that is in Commission
for the Peace; A Vintner in Boston put up a new Sign called The Rose and Crown,
with two Naked Boys being Supporters, and their Nudities Pendent: the sight
disturbed one Justice S -- r, who commanded it down; and away were the Boys
sent to the Carvers to be dismembered: but the unlucky Dog of a Carver sent
them back again two chopping Girls with Merkins exposed. This enraged the
Justice more, and the Sign was summoned before the wise Court, where they
gravely determined (to keep the Girls from blushing) they should have Roses
clapped upon their Merkins; which is the original of our new Proverb, Under the
Rose a Merkin. Sir, I shall trouble you no more at present, only that I am

Yours, J. W.

FINIS.

